Produced by Al Haines


RISEN FROM THE RANKS,

OR,

HARRY WALTON'S SUCCESS.


BY

HORATIO ALGER, JR.,


AUTHOR OF "RAGGED DICK," "TATTERED TOM," "LUCK AND PLUCK,"
"BRAVE AND BOLD" SERIES.


1874.


To

THOMAS E. BARRY,

of the

BOSTON BAR,

THIS VOLUME

INSCRIBED WITH FRIENDLY REGARD


PREFACE.

"Risen from the Ranks" contains the further
history of Harry Walton, who was first
introduced to the public in the pages of "Bound to
Rise."  Those who are interested in learning
how far he made good the promise of his
boyhood, may here find their curiosity gratified.
For the benefit of those who may only read the
present volume, a synopsis of Harry's previous
life is given in the first chapter.

In describing Harry's rise from the ranks I
have studiously avoided the extraordinary
incidents and pieces of good luck, which the story
writer has always at command, being desirous
of presenting my hero's career as one which may
be imitated by the thousands of boys similarly
placed, who, like him, are anxious to rise from
the ranks.  It is my hope that this story,
suggested in part by the career of an eminent
American editor, may afford encouragement to
such boys, and teach them that "where there is
a will there is always a way."

New York, October 1874.


RISEN FROM THE RANKS;

OR,

HARRY WALTON'S SUCCESS.


CHAPTER I.

HARRY WALTON.

"I am sorry to part with you, Harry," said Professor Henderson.  "You
have been a very satisfactory and efficient assistant, and I shall
miss you."

"Thank you, sir," said Harry.  "I have tried to be faithful to your
interests."

"You have been so," said the Professor emphatically.  "I have had
perfect confidence in you, and this has relieved me of a great deal
of anxiety.  It would have been very easy for one in your position to
cheat me out of a considerable sum of money."

"It was no credit to me to resist such a temptation as that," said
Harry.

"I am glad to hear you say so, but it shows your inexperience
nevertheless.  Money is the great tempter nowadays.  Consider how
many defalcations and breaches of trust we read of daily in
confidential positions, and we are forced to conclude that honesty is
a rarer virtue than we like to think it.  I have every reason to
believe that my assistant last winter purloined, at the least, a
hundred dollars, but I was unable to prove it, and submitted to the
loss.  It may be the same next winter.  Can't I induce you to change
your resolution, and remain in my employ?  I will advance your pay."

"Thank you, Professor Henderson," said Harry gratefully.  "I
appreciate your offer, even if I do not accept it.  But I have made
up mind to learn the printing business."

"You are to enter the office of the 'Centreville Gazette,' I believe."

"Yes, sir."

"How much pay will you get?"

"I shall receive my board the first month, and for the next six
months have agreed to take two dollars a week and board."

"That won't pay your expenses."

"It must," said Harry, firmly.

"You have laid up some money while with me, haven't you!"

"Yes, sir; I have fifty dollars in my pocket-book, besides having
given eighty dollars at home."

"That is doing well, but you won't be able to lay up anything for the
next year."

"Perhaps not in money, but I shall be gaining the knowledge of a good
trade."

"And you like that better than remaining with me, and learning my
business?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, perhaps you are right.  I don't fancy being a magician myself;
but I am too old to change.  I like moving round, and I make a good
living for my family.  Besides I contribute to the innocent amusement
of the public, and earn my money fairly."

"I agree with you, sir," said Harry.  "I think yours is a useful
employment, but it would not suit everybody.  Ever since I read the
life of Benjamin Franklin, I have wanted to learn to be a printer."

"It is an excellent business, no doubt, and if you have made up your
mind I will not dissuade you.  When you have a paper of your own, you
can give your old friend, Professor Henderson, an occasional puff."

"I shall be glad to do that," said Harry, smiling, "but I shall have
to wait some time first."

"How old are you now?"

"Sixteen."

"Then you may qualify yourself for an editor in five or six years.  I
advise you to try it at any rate.  The editor in America is a man of
influence."

"I do look forward to it," said Harry, seriously.  "I should not be
satisfied to remain a journeyman all my life, nor even the half of
it."

"I sympathize with your ambition, Harry," said the Professor,
earnestly, "and I wish you the best success.  Let me hear from you
occasionally."

"I should be very glad to write you, sir."

"I see the stage is at the door, and I must bid you good-by.  When
you have a vacation, if you get a chance to come our way, Mrs.
Henderson and myself will be glad to receive a visit from you.
Good-by!" And with a hearty shake of the hand, Professor Henderson
bade farewell to his late assistant.

Those who have read "Bound to Rise," and are thus familiar with Harry
Walton's early history, will need no explanation of the preceding
conversation.  But for the benefit of new readers, I will
recapitulate briefly the leading events in the history of the boy of
sixteen who is to be our hero.

Harry Walton was the oldest son of a poor New Hampshire farmer, who
found great difficulty is wresting from his few sterile acres a
living for his family.  Nearly a year before, he had lost his only
cow by a prevalent disease, and being without money, was compelled to
buy another of Squire Green, a rich but mean neighbor, on a six
months' note, on very unfavorable terms.  As it required great
economy to make both ends meet, there seemed no possible chance of
his being able to meet the note at maturity.  Beside, Mr. Walton was
to forfeit ten dollars if he did not have the principal and interest
ready for Squire Green.   The hard-hearted creditor was mean enough
to take advantage of his poor neighbor's necessities, and there was
not the slightest chance of his receding from his unreasonable
demand.  Under these circumstances Harry, the oldest boy, asked his
father's permission to go out into the world and earn his own living.
He hoped not only to do this, but to save something toward paying his
father's note.  His ambition had been kindled by reading the life of
Benjamin Franklin, which had been awarded to him as a school prize.
He did not expect to emulate Franklin, but he thought that by
imitating him he might attain an honorable position in the community.

Harry's request was not at first favorably received.  To send a boy
out into the world to earn his own living is a hazardous experiment,
and fathers are less sanguine than their sons.  Their experience
suggests difficulties and obstacles of which the inexperienced youth
knows and possesses nothing.  But in the present case Mr. Walton
reflected that the little farming town in which he lived offered
small inducements for a boy to remain there, unless he was content to
be a farmer, and this required capital.  His farm was too small for
himself, and of course he could not give Harry a part when be came of
age.  On the whole, therefore, Harry's plan of becoming a mechanic
seemed not so bad a one after all.  So permission was accorded, and
our hero, with his little bundle of clothes, left the paternal roof,
and went out in quest of employment.

After some adventures Harry obtained employment in a shoe-shop as
pegger.  A few weeks sufficed to make him a good workman, and he was
then able to earn three dollars a week and board.  Out of this sum be
hoped to save enough to pay the note held by Squire Green against his
father, but there were two unforeseen obstacles.  He had the
misfortune to lose his pocket-book, which was picked up by an
unprincipled young man, by name Luke Harrison, also a shoemaker, who
was always in pecuniary difficulties, though he earned much higher
wages than Harry.  Luke was unable to resist the temptation, and
appropriated the money to his own use.  This Harry ascertained after
a while, but thus far had succeeded in obtaining the restitution of
but a small portion of his hard-earned savings.  The second obstacle
was a sudden depression in the shoe trade which threw him out of
work.  More than most occupations the shoe business is liable to
these sudden fluctuations and suspensions, and the most industrious
and ambitious workman is often compelled to spend in his enforced
weeks of idleness all that he had been able to save when employed,
and thus at the end of the year finds himself, through no fault of
his own, no better off than at the beginning.  Finding himself out of
work, our hero visited other shoe establishments in the hope of
employment.  But his search was in vain.  Chance in this emergency
made him acquainted with Professor Henderson, a well-known magician
and conjurer, whose custom it was to travel, through the fall and
winter, from town to town, giving public exhibitions of his skill.
He was in want of an assistant, to sell tickets and help him
generally, and he offered the position to our hero, at a salary of
five dollars a week.  It is needless to say that the position was
gladly accepted.  It was not the business that Harry preferred, but
he reasoned justly that it was honorable, and was far better than
remaining idle.  He found Professor Henderson as he called himself, a
considerate and agreeable employer, and as may be inferred from the
conversation with which this chapter begins, his services were very
satisfactory.  At the close of the six months, he had the
satisfaction of paying the note which his father had given, and so of
disappointing the selfish schemes of the grasping creditor.

This was not all.  He met with an adventure while travelling for the
Professor, in which a highwayman who undertook to rob him, came off
second best, and he was thus enabled to add fifty dollars to his
savings.  His financial condition at the opening of the present story
has already been set forth.

Though I have necessarily omitted many interesting details, to be
found in "Bound to Rise," I have given the reader all the information
required to enable him to understand the narrative of Harry's
subsequent fortunes.


CHAPTER 11.

THE PRINTING OFFICE.

Jotham Anderson, editor and publisher of the "Centreville Gazette,"
was sitting at his desk penning an editorial paragraph, when the
office door opened, and Harry Walton entered.

"Good-morning, Mr. Anderson," said our hero, removing his hat.

"Good-morning, my friend.  I believe you have the advantage of me,"
replied the editor.

Our hero was taken aback.  It didn't occur to him that the engagement
was a far less important event to the publisher than to himself.  He
began to be afraid that the place had not been kept open for him.

"My name is Harry Walton," he explained.  "I was travelling with
Prof. Henderson last winter, and called here to get some bills
printed."

"Oh yes, I remember you now.  I agreed to take you into the office,"
said the editor, to Harry's great relief.

"Yes, air."

"You haven't changed your mind, then?--You still want to be a
printer?"

"Yes, sir."

"You have left the Professor, I suppose."

"I left him yesterday."

"What did he pay you?"

"Five dollars a week.  He offered me six, if I would stay with him."

"Of course you know that I can't pay you any such wages at present."

"Yes, sir.  You agreed to give me my board the first month, and two
dollars a week for six months afterward."

"That is all you will be worth to me at first.  It is a good deal
less than you would earn with Professor Henderson."

"I know that, sir; but I am willing to come for that."

"Good.  I see you are in earnest about printing, and that is a good
sign.  I wanted you to understand just what you had to expect, so
that you need not be disappointed."

"I sha'n't be disappointed, sir," said Harry confidently.  "I have
made up my mind to be a printer, and if you didn't receive me into
your office, I would try to get in somewhere else."

"Then no more need be said.  When do you want to begin?"

"I am ready any time."

"Where is your trunk?"

"At the tavern."

"You can have it brought over to my house whenever you please.  The
hotel-keeper will send it over for you.  He is our expressman.  Come
into the house now, and I will introduce you to my wife."

The editor's home was just across the street from his printing
office.  Followed by Harry he crossed the street, opened the front
door, and led the way into the sitting-room, where a pleasant-looking
lady of middle age was seated.

"My dear," he said, "I bring you a new boarder."

She looked at Harry inquiringly.

"This young man," her husband explained, "is going into the office to
learn printing.  I have taken a contract to make a second Benjamin
Franklin of him."

"Then you'll do more for him than you have been able to do for
yourself," said Mrs. Anderson, smiling.

"You are inclined to be severe, Mrs. Anderson, but I fear you are
correct.  However, I can be like a guide-post, which points the way
which it does not travel.  Can you show Harry Walton--for that is his
name--where you propose to put him?"

"I am afraid I must give you a room in the attic," said Mrs.
Anderson.  "Our house is small, and all the chambers on the second
floor are occupied."

"I am not at all particular," said Harry.  "I have not been
accustomed to elegant accommodations."

"If you will follow me upstairs, I will show you your room."

Pausing on the third landing, Mrs. Anderson found the door of a small
but comfortable bed-room.  There was no carpet on the floor, but it
was painted yellow, and scrupulously clean.  A bed, two chairs, a
bureau and wash-stand completed the list of furniture.

"I shall like this room very well," said our hero.

"There is a closet," said the lady, pointing to a door in the corner.
"It is large enough to contain your trunk, if you choose to put it in
there.  I hope you don't smoke."

"Oh, no, indeed," said Harry, laughing.  "I haven't got so far along
as that."

"Mr. Anderson's last apprentice--he is a journeyman now--was a
smoker.  He not only scented up the room, but as he was very careless
about lights, I was continually alarmed lest he should set the house
on fire.  Finally, I got so nervous that I asked him to board
somewhere else."

"Is he working for Mr. Anderson now?"

"Yes; you probably saw him in the office."

"I saw two young men at the case."

"The one I speak of is the youngest.  His name is John Clapp."

"There is no danger of my smoking.  I don't think it would do me any
good.  Besides, it is expensive, and I can't afford it."

"I see we think alike," said Mrs. Anderson, smiling.  "I am sure we
will get along well together."

"I shall try not to give you any trouble," said our hero, and his
tone, which was evidently sincere, impressed Mrs. Anderson still more
favorably.

"You won't find me very hard to suit, I hope.  I suppose you will be
here to supper?"

"If it will he quite convenient.  My trunk is at the tavern, and I
could stay there till morning, if you wished."

"Oh, no, come at once.  Take possession of the room now, if you like,
and leave an order to have your trunk brought here."

"Thank you.  What is your hour for supper?"

"Half-past five."

"Thank you.  I will go over and speak to Mr. Anderson a minute."

The editor looked up as Harry reappeared.

"Well, have you settled arrangements with Mrs. Anderson?" he asked.

"Yes, sir, I believe so."

"I hope you like your room."

"It is very comfortable.  It won't take me long to feel at home
there."

"Did she ask you whether you smoked?"

"Yes, sir."

"I thought she would.  That's where Clapp and she fell out."

Harry's attention was drawn to a thin, sallow young man of about
twenty, who stood at a case on the opposite side of the room.

"Mrs. Anderson was afraid I would set the house on fire," said the
young man thus referred to.

"Yes, she felt nervous about it.  However, it is not surprising.  An
uncle of hers lost his house in that way.  I suppose you don't smoke,
Walton?"

"No, sir."

"Clapp smokes for his health.  You see how stout and robust he is,"
said the editor, a little satirically.

"It doesn't do me any harm," said Clapp, a little testily.

"Oh, well, I don't interfere with you, though I think you would be
better off if you should give up the habit.  Ferguson don't smoke."

This was the other compositor, a man of thirty, whose case was not
far distant from Clapp's.

"I can't afford it," said Ferguson; "nor could Clapp, if he had a
wife and two young children to support."

"Smoking doesn't cost much," said the younger journeyman.

"So you think; but did you ever reckon it up?"

"No."

"Don't you keep any accounts?"

"No; I spend when I need to, and I can always tell how much I have
left.  What's the use of keeping accounts?"

"You can tell how you stand."

"I can tell that without taking so much trouble."

"You see we must all agree to disagree," said Mr. Anderson.  "I am
afraid Clapp isn't going to be a second Benjamin Franklin."

"Who is?" asked Clapp.

"Our young friend here," said the editor.

"Oh, is he?" queried the other with a sneer.  "It'll be a great honor
I'm sure, to have him in the office."

"Come, no chaffing, Clapp," said Mr. Anderson.

Harry hastened to disclaim the charge, for Clapp's sneer affected him
disagreeably.

"I admire Franklin," he said, "but there isn't much danger of my
turning out a second edition of him."

"Professional already, I see, Walton," said the editor.

"When shall I go to work, Mr. Anderson?"

"Whenever you are ready."

"I am ready now."

"You are prompt."

"You won't be in such a hurry to go to work a week hence," said Clapp.

"I think I shall," said Harry.  "I am anxious to learn as fast as
possible."

"Oh, I forgot.  You want to become a second Franklin."

"I sha'n't like him," thought our hero.  "He seems to try to make
himself disagreeable."

"Mr. Ferguson will give you some instruction, and set you to work,"
said his employer.

Harry was glad that it was from the older journeyman that he was to
receive his first lesson, and not from the younger.


CHAPTER III.

HARRY STUMBLES UPON AN ACQUAINTANCE.

After supper Harry went round to the tavern to see about his trunk.
A group of young men were in the bar-room, some of whom looked up as
he entered.  Among these was Luke Harrison, who was surprised and by
no means pleased to see his creditor.  Harry recognized him at the
same instant, and said, "How are you, Luke?"

"Is that you, Walton?" said Luke.  "What brings you to Centreville?
Professor Henderson isn't here, is he?"

"No; I have left him."

"Oh, you're out of a job, are you?" asked Luke, in a tone of
satisfaction, for we are apt to dislike those whom we have injured,
and for this reason he felt by no means friendly.

"No, I'm not," said Harry, quietly.  "I've found work in Centreville."

"Gone back to pegging, have you?  Whose shop are you in?"

"I am in a different business."

"You don't say!  What is it?" asked Luke, with some curiosity.

"I'm in the office of the 'Centreville Gazette.'  I'm going to learn
the printing business."

"You are?  Why, I've got a friend in the office,--John Clapp.  He
never told me about your being there."

"He didn't know I was coming.  I only went to work this afternoon."

"So you are the printer's devil?" said Luke, with a slight sneer.

"I believe so," answered our hero, quietly.

"Do you get good pay?"

"Not much at first.  However, I can get along with what money I have,
_and what is due me_."

Luke Harrison understood the last allusion, and turned away abruptly.
He had no wish to pay up the money which he owed Harry, and for this
reason was sorry to see him in the village.  He feared, if the
conversation were continued, Harry would be asking for the money, and
this would be disagreeable.

At this moment John Clapp entered the bar-room.  He nodded slightly
to Harry, but walked up to Luke, and greeted him cordially.  There
were many points of resemblance between them, and this drew them into
habits of intimacy.

"Will you have something to drink, Harrison?" said Clapp.

"I don't mind if I do," answered Luke, with alacrity.

They walked up to the bar, and they were soon pledging each other in
a fiery fluid which was not very likely to benefit either of them.
Meanwhile Harry gave directions about his trunk, and left the room.

"So you've got a new 'devil' in your office," said Luke, after
draining his glass.

"Yes.  He came this afternoon.  How did you hear?"

"He told me."

"Do you know him?" asked Clapp, in some surprise.

"Yes.  I know him as well as I want to."

"What sort of a fellow is he?"

"Oh, he's a sneak--one of your pious chaps, that 'wants to be an
angel, and with the angels stand.'"

"Then he's made a mistake in turning 'devil,'" said Clapp.

"Good for you!" said Luke, laughing.  "You're unusually brilliant
to-night, Clapp."

"So he's a saint, is he?"

"He set up for one; but I don't like his style myself.  He's as mean
as dirt.  Why I knew him several months, and he never offered to
treat in all that time.  He's as much afraid of spending a cent as if
it were a dollar."

"He won't have many dollars to spend just at present.  He's working
for his board."

"Oh, he's got money saved up," said Luke.  "Fellows like him hang on
to a cent when they get it.  I once asked him to lend me a few
dollars, just for a day or two, but he wouldn't do it.  I hate such
mean fellows."

"So do I.  Will you have a cigar?"

"I'll treat this time," said Luke, who thought it polite to take his
turn in treating once to his companion's four or five times.

"Thank you.  From what you say, I am sorry Anderson has taken the
fellow into the office."

"You needn't have much to say to him."

"I shan't trouble myself much about him.  I didn't like his looks
when I first set eyes on him.  I suppose old Mother Anderson will
like him.  She couldn't abide my smoking, and he won't trouble her
that way."

"So; he's too mean to buy the cigars."

"He said he couldn't afford it."

"That's what it comes to.  By the way, Clapp, when shall we take
another ride?"

"I can get away nest Monday afternoon, at three."

"All right.  I'll manage to get off at the same time.  We'll go to
Whiston and take supper at the hotel.  It does a fellow good to get
off now and then.  It won't cost more than five dollars apiece
altogether."

"We'll get the carriage charged.  The fact is, I'm little low on
funds."

"So am I, but it won't matter.  Griffin will wait for his pay."

While Harry's character waa being so unfavorably discussed, he was
taking a walk by himself, observing with interest the main features
of his new home.  He had been here before with Professor Henderson,
but had been too much occupied at that time to get a very clear idea
of Centreville, nor had it then the interest for him which it had
acquired since.  He went upon a hill overlooking the village, and
obtained an excellent view from its summit.  It was a pleasant,
well-built village of perhaps three thousand inhabitants, with
outlying farms and farm-houses.  Along the principal streets the
dwellings and stores were closely built, so as to make it seem quite
city-like.  It was the shire town of the county, and being the
largest place in the neighborhood, country people for miles around
traded at its stores.  Farmers' wives came to Centreville to make
purchases, just as ladies living within a radius of thirty miles
visit New York and Boston, for a similar purpose.  Altogether,
therefore, Centreville was quite a lively place, and a town of
considerable local importance.  The fact that it had a weekly paper
of its own, contributed to bring it into notice.  Nor was that all.
Situated on a little hillock was a building with a belfry, which
might have been taken for a church but for a play-ground near by,
which indicated that it had a different character.  It was in fact
the Prescott Academy, so called from the name of its founder, who had
endowed it with a fund of ten thousand dollars, besides erecting the
building at his own expense on land bought for the purpose.  This
academy also had a local reputation, and its benefits were not
confined to the children of Centreville.  There were about twenty
pupils from other towns who boarded with the Principal or elsewhere
in the town, and made up the whole number of students in
attendance--about eighty on an average.

Standing on the eminence referred to, Harry's attention was drawn to
the Academy, and he could not help forming the wish that he, too,
might share in its advantages.

"There is so much to learn, and I know so little," he thought.

But he did not brood over the poverty which prevented him from
gratifying his desire.  He knew it would do no good, and he also
reflected that knowledge may be acquired in a printing office as well
as within the walls of an academy or college.

"As soon as I get well settled," he said to himself, "I mean to get
some books and study a little every day.  That is the way Franklin
did.  I never can be an editor, that's certain, without knowing more
than I do now.  Before I am qualified to teach others, I must know
something myself."

Looking at the village which lay below him, Harry was disposed to
congratulate himself on his new residence.

"It looks like a pleasant place," he said to himself, "and when I get
a little acquainted, I shall enjoy myself very well, I am sure.  Of
course I shall feel rather lonely just at first."

He was so engrossed by his thoughts that he did not take heed to his
steps, and was only reminded of his abstraction by his foot suddenly
coming in contact with a boy who was lying under a tree, and pitching
headfirst over him.

"Holloa!" exclaimed the latter, "what are you about?  You didn't take
me for a foot-ball, did you?"

"I beg your pardon," said Harry, jumping up in some confusion.  "I
was so busy thinking that I didn't see you.  I hope I didn't hurt
you."

"Nothing serious.  Didn't you hurt yourself?"

"I bumped my head a little, but it only struck the earth.  If it had
been a stone, it might have been different.  I had no idea there was
any one up here except myself."

"It was very kind of you to bow so low to a perfect stranger," said
the other, his eyes twinkling humorously.  "I suppose it would only
be polite for me to follow your example."

"I'll excuse you," said Harry laughing.

"Thank you.  That takes a great burden off my mind.  I don't like to
be outdone in politeness, but really I shouldn't like to tumble over
you.  My head may be softer than yours.  There's one thing clear.  We
ought to know each other.  As you've taken the trouble to come up
here, and stumble over me, I really feel as if we ought to strike up
a friendship.  What do you say?"

"With all my heart," said our hero.


CHAPTER IV.

OSCAR VINCENT.

"Allow me to introduce myself," said the stranger boy.  "My name is
Oscar Vincent, from Boston, at present a student at the Prescott
Academy, at your service."

As he spoke, he doffed his hat and bowed, showing a profusion of
chestnut hair, a broad, open brow, and an attractive face, lighted up
by a pleasant smile.

Harry felt drawn to him by a feeling which was not long in ripening
into friendship.

Imitating the other's frankness, he also took off his hat and
replied,--

"Let me introduce myself, in turn, as Harry Walton, junior apprentice
in the office of the 'Centreville Gazette,' sometimes profanely
called 'printer's devil.'"

"Good!" said Oscar, laughing.  "How do you like the business?"

"I think I shall like it, but I have only just started in it.  I went
into the office for the first time to-day."

"I have an uncle who started as you are doing," said Oscar.  "He is
now chief editor of a daily paper in Boston."

"Is he?" said Harry, with interest.  "Did he find it hard to rise?"

"He is a hard worker.  I have heard him say that he used to sit up
late of nights during his apprenticeship, studying and improving
himself."

"That is what I mean to do," said Harry.

"I don't think he was as lazy as his nephew," said Oscar.  "I am
afraid if I had been in his place I should have remained in it."

"Are you lazy?" asked Harry, smiling at the other's frankness.

"A little so; that is, I don't improve my opportunities as I might.
Father wants to make a lawyer of me so he has put me here, and I am
preparing for Harvard."

"I envy you," said Harry.  "There is nothing I should like so much as
entering college."

"I daresay I shall like it tolerably well," said Oscar; "but I don't
_hanker_ after it, as the boy said after swallowing a dose of castor
oil.  I'll tell you what I should like better--"

"What?" asked Harry, as the other paused.

"I should like to enter the Naval Academy, and qualify myself for the
naval service.  I always liked the sea."

"Doesn't your father approve of your doing this?"

"He wouldn't mind my entering the navy as an officer, but he is not
willing to have me enter the merchant service."

"Then why doesn't he send you to the Naval Academy?"

"Because I can't enter without receiving the appointment from a
member of Congress.  Our member can only appoint one, and there is no
vacancy.  So, as I can't go where I want to, I am preparing for
Harvard."

"Are you studying Latin and Greek?"

"Yes."

"Have you studied them long?"

"About two years.  I was looking over my Greek lesson when you
playfully tumbled over me."

"Will you let me look at your book?  I never saw a Greek book."

"I sometimes wish I never had," said Oscar; "but that's when I am
lazy."

Harry opened the book--a Greek reader--in the middle of an extract
from Xenophon, and looked with some awe at the unintelligible letters.

"Can you read it?  Can you understand what it means?" he asked,
looking up from the book.

"So-so."

"You must know a great deal."

Oscar laughed.

"I wonder what Dr. Burton would say if he heard you," he said.

"Who is he?"

"Principal of our Academy.   He gave me a blowing up for my ignorance
to-day, because I missed an irregular Greek verb.  I'm not exactly a
dunce, but I don't think I shall ever be a Greek professor."

"If you speak of yourself that way, what will you think of me?  I
don't know a word of Latin, of Greek, or any language except my own."

"Because you have had no chance to learn.  There's one language I
know more about than Latin or Greek."

"English?"

"I mean French; I spent a year at a French boarding-school, three
years since."

"What!  Have you been in France?"

"Yes; an uncle of mine--in fact, the editor--was going over, and
urged father to send me.  I learned considerable French, but not much
else.  I can speak and understand it pretty well."

"How I wish I had had your advantages," said Harry.  "How did you
like your French schoolmates?"

"They wouldn't come near me at first.  Because I was an American they
thought I carried a revolver and a dirk-knife, and was dangerous.
That is their idea of American boys.  When they found I was tame, and
carried no deadly weapons, they ventured to speak with me, and after
that we got along pretty well."

"How soon do you expect to go to college?"

"A year from next summer.  I suppose I shall be ready by that time.
You are going to stay in town, I suppose?"

"Yes, if I keep my place."

"Oh, you'll do that.  Then we can see something of each other.  You
must come up to my room, and see me.  Come almost any evening."

"I should like to.  Do you live in Dr. Barton's family?"

"No, I hope not."

"Why not?"

"Oh, the Doctor has a way of looking after the fellows that room in
the house, and of keeping them at work all the time.  That wouldn't
suit me.  I board at Mrs. Greyson's, at the south-east corner of the
church common.  Have you got anything to do this evening?"

"Nothing in particular."

"Then come round and take a look at my den, or sanctum I ought to
call it; as I am talking to a member of the editorial profession."

"Not quite yet," said Harry, smiling.

"Oh, well that'll come in due time.  Will you come?"

"Sha'n't I be disturbing you?"

"Not a bit.  My Greek lesson is about finished, and that's all I've
got to do this evening.  Come round, and we will sit over the fire,
and chat like old friends."

"Thank you, Oscar," said Harry, irresistibly attracted by his bright
and lively acquaintance, "I shall enjoy calling.  I have made no
acquaintances yet, and I feel lonely."

"I have got over that," said Oscar.  "I am used to being away from
home and don't mind it."

The two boys walked together to Oscar's boarding-place.  It was a
large house, of considerable pretension for a village, and Oscar's
room was large and handsomely furnished.  But what attracted Harry's
attention was not the furniture, but a collection of over a hundred
books, ranged on shelves at one end of the room.  In his father's
house it had always been so difficult to obtain the necessaries of
life that books had necessarily been regarded as superfluities, and
beyond a dozen volumes which Harry had read and re-read, he was
compelled to depend on such as he could borrow.  Here again his
privileges were scanty, for most of the neighbors were as poorly
supplied as his father.

"What a fine library you have, Oscar!" he exclaimed.

"I have a few books," said Oscar.  "My father filled a couple of
boxes, and sent me.  He has a large library."

"This seems a large library to me," said Harry.  "My father likes
reading, but he is poor, and cannot afford to buy books."

He said that in a matter-of-fact tone, without the least attempt to
conceal what many boys would have been tempted to hide.  Oscar noted
this, and liked his new friend the better for it.

"Yes," he said, "books cost money, and one hasn't always the money to
spare."

"Have you read all these books?"

"Not more than half of them.  I like reading better than studying, I
am afraid.  I am reading the Waverley novels now.  Have you read any
of them?"

"So; I never saw any of them before."

"If you see anything you would like to read, I will lend it to you
with pleasure," said Oscar, noticing the interest with which Harry
regarded the books.

"Will you?" said Harry, eagerly.  "I can't tell you how much obliged
I am.  I will take good care of it."

"Oh, I am sure of that.  Here, try Ivanhoe.  I've just read it, and
it's tip-top."

"Thank you; I will take it on your recommendation.  What a nice room
you have!"

"Yes, it's pretty comfortable.  Father told me to fix it up to suit
me.  He said he wouldn't mind the expense if I would only study."

"I should think anybody might study in such a room as this, and with
such a fine collection of books."

"I'm rather lazy sometimes," said Oscar, "but I shall turn over a new
leaf some of these days, and astonish everybody.  To-night, as I have
no studying to do, I'll tell you what we'll do.  Did you ever pop
corn?"

"Sometimes."

"I've got some corn here, and Ma'am Greyson has a popper.  Stay here
alone a minute, and I'll run down and get it."

Oscar ran down stairs, and speedily returned with a corn-popper.

"Now we'll have a jolly time," said he.  "Draw up that arm-chair, and
make yourself at home.  If Xenophon, or Virgil, or any of those Greek
and Latin chaps call, we'll tell 'em we are transacting important
business and can't be disturbed.  What do you say?"

"They won't be apt to call on me," said Harry.  I haven't the
pleasure of knowing them."

"It isn't always a pleasure, I can assure you, Harry.  Pass over the
corn-popper."


CHAPTER  V.

A YOUNG F. F. B.

As the two boys sat in front of the fire, popping and eating the
corn, and chatting of one thing and another, their acquaintance
improved rapidly.  Harry learned that Oscar's father was a Boston
merchant, in the Calcutta trade, with a counting-room on Long Wharf.
Oscar was a year older than himself, and the oldest child.  He had a
sister of thirteen, named Florence, and a younger brother, Charlie,
now ten.  They lived on Beacon Street, opposite the Common.  Though
Harry had never lived in Boston, be knew that this was a fashionable
street, and he had no difficulty in inferring that Mr. Vincent was a
rich man.  He felt what a wide gulf there was socially between
himself and Oscar; one the son of a very poor country farmer, the
other the son of a merchant prince.  But nothing in Oscar's manner
indicated the faintest feeling of superiority, and this pleased
Harry.  I may as well say, however, that our hero was not one to show
any foolish subserviency to a richer boy; he thought mainly of
Oscar's superiority in knowledge; and although the latter was far
ahead of Harry on this score, he was not one to boast of it.

Harry, in return for Oscar's confidence, acquainted him with his own
adventures since he had started out to earn his own living.  Oscar
was most interested in his apprenticeship to the ventriloquist.

"It must have been jolly fun," he said.   "I shouldn't mind
travelling round with him myself.  Can you perform any tricks?"

"A few," said Harry.

"Show me some, that's a good fellow."

"If you won't show others.  Professor Henderson wouldn't like to have
his tricks generally known.  I could show more if I had the articles
he uses.  But I can do some without."

"Go ahead, Professor.  I'm all attention."

Not having served an apprenticeship to a magician, as Harry did, I
will not undertake to describe the few simple tricks which he had
picked up, and now exhibited for the entertainment of his companion.
It is enough to say that they were quite satisfactory, and that Oscar
professed his intention to puzzle his Boston friends with them, when
his vacation arrived.

About half-past eight, a knock was heard at the door.

"Come in!" called out Oscar.

The door was opened, and a boy about his own age entered.   His name
was Fitzgerald Fletcher.  He was also a Boston boy, and the son of a
retail merchant, doing business on Washington street.  His father
lived handsomely, and was supposed to be rich.  At any rate
Fitzgerald supposed him to be so, and was very proud of the fact.  He
generally let any new acquaintances understand very speedily that his
father was a man of property, and that his family moved in the first
circles of Boston Society.  He cultivated the acquaintance of those
boys who belonged to rich families, and did not fail to show the
superiority which he felt to those of less abundant means.  For
example, he liked to be considered intimate with Oscar, as the social
position of Mr. Vincent was higher than that of his own family.  It
gave him an excuse also for calling on Oscar in Boston.  He had tried
to ingratiate himself also with Oscar's sister Florence, but had only
disgusted her with his airs, so that he could not flatter himself
with his success in this direction.  Oscar had very little liking for
him, but as school-fellows they often met, and Fitzgerald often
called upon him.  On such occasions he treated him politely enough,
for it was not in his nature to be rude without cause.

Fitz was elaborately dressed, feeling that handsome clothes would
help convey the impression of wealth, which he was anxious to
establish.  In particular he paid attention to his neckties, of which
he boasted a greater variety than any of his school-mates.  It was
not a lofty ambition, but, such as it was, he was able to gratify it.

"How are you, Fitz?" said Oscar, when he saw who was his visitor.
"Draw up a chair to the fire, and make yourself comfortable."

"Thank you, Oscar," said Fitzgerald, leisurely drawing off a pair of
kid gloves; "I thought I would drop in and see you."

"All right!  Will you have some popped corn?"

"No, thank you," answered Fitzgerald, shrugging his shoulders.  "I
don't fancy the article."

"Don't you?  Then you don't know what's good."

"Fancy passing round popped corn at a party in Boston," said the
other.  "How people would stare!"

"Would they?  I don't know about that.  I think some would be more
sensible and eat.  But, I beg your pardon, I haven't introduced you
to my friend, Harry Walton.  Harry, this is a classmate of mine.
Fitzgerald Fletcher, Esq., of Boston."

Fitzgerald did not appear to perceive that the title Esq. was
sportively added to his name.  He took it seriously, and was pleased
with it, as a recognition of his social superiority.  He bowed
ceremoniously to our hero, and said, formally, "I am pleased to make
your acquaintance, Mr. Walton."

"Thank you, Mr. Fletcher," replied Harry, bowing in turn.

"I wonder who he is," thought Fitzgerald.

He had no idea of the true position of our young hero, or he would
not have wasted so much politeness upon him.  The fact was, that
Harry was well dressed, having on the suit which had been given him
by a friend from the city.  It was therefore fashionably cut, and had
been so well kept as still to be in very good condition.  It occurred
to Fitz--to give him the short name he received from his
school-fellows--that it might be a Boston friend of Oscar's, just
entering the Academy.  This might account for his not having met him
before.  Perhaps he was from an aristocratic Boston family.  His
intimacy with Oscar rendered it probable, and it might be well to
cultivate his acquaintance.  On this hint he spoke.

"Are you about to enter the Academy, Mr. Walton?"

"No; I should like to do so, but cannot."

"You are one of Oscar's friends from the city, I suppose, then?"

"Oh no; I am living in Centreville."

"Who can he be?" thought Fitz.  With considerable less cordiality in
his manner, he continued, impelled by curiosity,--

"I don't think I have met you before."

"No: I have only just come to the village."

Oscar understood thoroughly the bewilderment of his visitor, and
enjoyed it.  He knew the weakness of Fitz, and he could imagine how
his feelings would change when be ascertained the real position of
Harry.

"My friend," he explained, "is connected with the 'Centreville
Gazette.'"

"In what capacity?" asked Fitz, in surprise.

"He is profanely termed the 'printer's devil.' Isn't that so, Harry?"

"I believe you are right," said our hero, smiling.  He had a
suspicion that this relation would shock his new acquaintance.

"Indeed!" ejaculated Fitz, pursing up his lips, and, I was about to
say, turning up his nose, but nature had saved him the little trouble
of doing that.

"What in the world brings him here, then?" he thought; but there was
no need of saying it, for both Oscar and Harry read it in his manner.
"Strange that Oscar Vincent, from one of the first families of
Boston, should demean himself by keeping company with a low printer
boy!"

"Harry and I have had a jolly time popping corn this evening!" said
Oscar, choosing to ignore his school-mate's changed manner.

"Indeed!  I can't see what fun there is in it."

"Oh, you've got no taste.  Has he, Harry?"

"His taste differs from ours," said our hero, politely.

"I should think so," remarked Fitz, with significant emphasis.  "Was
that all you had to amuse yourself?"

In using the singular pronoun, he expressly ignored the presence of
the young printer.

"No, that wasn't all.  My friend Harry has been amusing me with some
tricks which he learned while he was travelling round with Professor
Henderson, the ventriloquist and magician."

"Really, he is quite accomplished," said Fitz, with a covert sneer.
"Pretty company Oscar has taken up with!" he thought.  "How long were
you in the circus business?" he asked, turning to Harry.

"I never was in the circus business."

"Excuse me.  I should say, travelling about with the ventriloquist."

"About three months.  I was with him when he performed here last
winter."

"Ah! indeed.  I didn't go.   My father doesn't approve of my
attending such common performances.  I only attend first-class
theatres, and the Italian opera."

"That's foolish," said Oscar.  "You miss a good deal of fun, then.  I
went to Professor Henderson's entertainment, and I now remember
seeing you there, Harry.  You took money at the door, didn't you?"

"Yes."

"Now I understand what made your face seem so familiar to me, when I
saw it this afternoon.  By the way, I have never been into a printing
office.  If I come round to yours, will you show me round?"

"I should be very glad to, Oscar, but perhaps you had better wait
till I have been there a little while, and learned the ropes.  I know
very little about it yet."

"Won't you come too, Fitz?" asked Oscar.

"You must really excuse me," drawled Fitz.  "I have heard that a
printing office is a very dirty place.  I should be afraid of soiling
my clothes."

"Especially that stunning cravat."

"Do you like it?  I flatter myself it's something a little extra,"
said Fitz, who was always gratified by a compliment to his cravats.

"Then you won't go?"

"I haven't the slightest curiosity about such a place, I assure you."

"Then I shall have to go alone.  Let me know when you are ready to
receive me, Harry."

"I won't forget, Oscar."

"I wonder he allows such a low fellow to call him by his first name,"
thought Fitz.  "Really, he has no proper pride."

"Well," he said, rising, "I must be going."

"What's your hurry, Fitz?"

"I've got to write a letter home this evening.  Besides, I haven't
finished my Greek.  Good-evening, Oscar."

"Good-evening, Fitz."

"Good-evening, Mr. Fletcher," said Harry.

"Evening!" ejaculated Fitz, briefly; and without a look at the low
"printer-boy," he closed the door and went down stairs.


CHAPTER VI.

OSCAR BECOMES A PROFESSOR

"I am afraid your friend won't thank you for introducing me to him,"
said Harry, after Fitz had left the room.

"Fitz is a snob," said Oscar.  "He makes himself ridiculous by
putting on airs, and assuming to be more than he is.  His father is
in a good business, and may be rich--I don't know about that--but
that isn't much to boast of."

"I don't think we shall be very intimate," said Harry, smiling.
"Evidently a printer's apprentice is something very low in his eyes."

"When you are an influential editor he will be willing to recognize
you.  Let that stimulate your ambition."

"It isn't easy for a half-educated boy to rise to such a position.  I
feel that I know very little."

"If I can help you any, Harry, I shall be very glad to do it.  I'm
not much of a scholar, but I can help you a little.  For instance, if
you wanted to learn French, I could hear your lessons, and correct
your exercises."

"Will you?" said Harry, eagerly.  "There is nothing I should like
better."

"Then I'll tell you what I'll do.  You shall buy a French grammar,
and come to my room two evenings a week, and recite what you get time
to study at home."

"Won't it give you a great deal of trouble, Oscar?"

"Not a bit of it; I shall rather like it.  Until you can buy a
grammar, I will lend you mine.  I'll set you a lesson out of it now."

He took from the book-shelves a French grammar, and inviting Harry to
sit down beside him, gave him some necessary explanations as to the
pronunciation of words according to the first lesson.

"It seems easy," said Harry.  "I can take more than that."

"It is the easiest of the modern languages, to us at least, on
account of its having so many words similar to ours."

"What evening shall I come, Oscar?"

"Tuesday and Friday will suit me as well as any.  And remember,
Harry, I mean to be very strict in discipline.  And, by the way, how
will it do to call myself Professor?"

"I'll call you Professor if you want me to."

"We'll leave all high titles to Fitz, and I won't use the rod any
oftener than it is absolutely necessary."

"All right, Professor Vincent," said Harry laughing, "I'll endeavor
to behave with propriety."

"I wonder what they would say at home," said Oscar, "if they knew I
had taken up the profession of teacher.  Strange as it may seem to
you, Harry, I have the reputation in the home-circle of being
decidedly lazy.  How do you account for it?"

"Great men are seldom appreciated."

"You hit the nail on the head that time--glad I am not the nail, by
the way.  Henceforth I will submit with resignation to injustice and
misconstruction, since I am only meeting with the common fate of
great men."

"What time is it, Oscar?"

"Nearly ten."

"Then I will bid you good-night," and Harry rose to go.  "I can't
tell how much I am obliged to you for your kind offer."

"Just postpone thanks till you find out whether I am a good teacher
or not."

"I am sure of that."

"I am not so sure, but I will do what I can for you.  Good-night.
I'll expect you Friday evening.  I shall see Fitz to-morrow.  Shall I
give him your love?"

"Never mind!" said Harry, smiling.  "I'm afraid it wouldn't be
appreciated."

"Perhaps not."

As Harry left his lively companion, he felt that he had been most
fortunate in securing his friendship--not only that he found him very
agreeable and attractive, but he was likely to be of great use to him
in promoting his plans of self-education.  He had too much good sense
not to perceive that the only chance he had of rising to an
influential position lay in qualifying himself for it, by enlarging
his limited knowledge and improving his mind.

"I have made a good beginning," he thought.  "After I have learned
something of French, I will take up Latin, and I think Oscar will be
willing to help me in that too."

The next morning he commenced work in the printing office.  With a
few hints from Ferguson, he soon comprehended what he had to do, and
made very rapid progress.

"You're getting on fast, Harry," said Ferguson approvingly.

"I like it," said our hero.  "I am glad I decided to be a printer."

"I wish I wasn't one," grumbled Clapp, the younger journeyman.

"Don't you like it?"

"Not much.  It's hard work and poor pay.  I just wish I was in my
brother's shoes.  He is a bookkeeper in Boston, with a salary of
twelve hundred a year, while I am plodding along on fifteen dollars
week."

"You may do better some day," said Ferguson.

"Don't see any chance of it."

"If I were in your place, I would save up part of my salary, and by
and by have an office, and perhaps a paper of my own."

"Why don't you do it, then?" sneered Clapp.

"Because I have a family to support from my earnings--you have only
yourself."

"It doesn't help me any; I can't save anything out of fifteen dollars
a week."

"You mean you won't," said Ferguson quietly.

"No I don't.  I mean I can't."

"How do you expect I get along, then?  I have a wife and two children
to support, and only get two dollars a week more than you."

"Perhaps you get into debt."

"No; I owe no man a dollar," said Ferguson emphatically.  "That isn't
all.  I save two dollars a week; so that I actually support four on
fifteen dollars a week--your salary.  What do you say to that?"

"I don't want to be mean," said Clapp.

"Nor I.  I mean to live comfortably, but of course I have to be
economical."

"Oh, hang economy!" said Clapp impatiently.  "The old man used to
lecture me about economy till I got sick of hearing the word."

"It is a good thing, for all that," persisted Ferguson.  "You'll
think so some day, even if you don't now."

"I guess you mean to run opposition to young Franklin, over there,"
sneered Clapp, indicating Harry, who had listened to the discussion
with not a little interest.

"I think he and I will agree together pretty well," said Ferguson,
smiling.  "Franklin's a good man to imitate."

"If there are going to be two Franklins in the office, it will be
time for me to clear out," returned Clapp.

"You can do better."

"How is that?"

"Become Franklin No. 3."

"You don't catch me imitating any old fogy like that.  As far as I
know anything about him, he was a mean, stingy old curmudgeon!"
exclaimed Clapp with irritation.

"That's rather strong language, Clapp," said Mr. Anderson, looking up
from his desk with a smile.  "It doesn't correspond with the general
estimate of Franklin's character."

"I don't care," said Clapp doggedly, "I wouldn't be like Franklin if
I could.  I have too much self-respect."

Ferguson laughed, and Harry wanted to, but feared he should offend
the younger journeyman, who evidently had worked himself into a bad
humor.

"I don't think you're in any danger," said Ferguson, who did not mind
his fellow-workman's little ebullitions of temper.

Clapp scowled, but did not deign to reply, partly, perhaps, because
he knew that there was nothing to say.

From the outset Ferguson took a fancy to the young apprentice.

"He's got good, solid ideas," said he to Mr. Anderson, when Harry was
absent.  "He isn't so thoughtless as most boys of his age.  He looks
ahead."

"I think you are right in your judgment of him," said Mr. Anderson.
"He promises to be a faithful workman."

"He promises more than that," said Ferguson.  "Mark my words, Mr.
Anderson; that boy is going to make his mark some day."

"It is a little too soon to say that, isn't it?"

"No; I judge from what I see.  He is industrious and ambitious, and
is bound to succeed.  The world will hear of him yet."

Mr. Anderson smiled.  He liked what he had seen of his new
apprentice, but he thought Ferguson altogether too sanguine.

"He's a good, faithful boy," he admitted, "but it takes more than
that to rise to distinction.  If all the smart boys turned out smart
men, they'd be a drug in the market."

But Ferguson held to his own opinion, notwithstanding.  Time will
show which was right.

The next day Ferguson said, "Harry, come round to my house, and take
tea to-night.  I've spoken to my wife about you, and she wants to see
you."

"Thank you, Mr. Ferguson," said Harry.  "I shall be very glad to
come."

"I'll wait till you are ready, and you can walk along with me."

"All right; I will be ready in five minutes."

They set out together for Ferguson's modest home, which was about
half a mile distant.  As they passed up the village street Harry's
attention was drawn to two boys who were approaching them.  One he
recognized at once as Fitzgerald Fletcher.  He had an even more
stunning necktie than when Harry first met him, and sported a jaunty
little cane, which he swung in his neatly gloved hand.

"I wonder if he'll notice me," thought Harry.  "At any rate, I won't
be wanting in politeness."

"Good-afternoon, Mr. Fletcher," he said, as they met.

Fitzgerald stared at him superciliously, and made the slightest
possible nod.

"Who is that?" asked Ferguson.

"It is a boy who has great contempt for printers' devils and low
apprentices," answered Harry.  "I was introduced to him two evenings
ago, but he evidently doesn't care about keeping up the acquaintance."

"Who is that, Fitz?" asked his companion in turn.

"It's a low fellow--a printer's devil," answered Fitz, shortly.

"How do you happen to know him?"

"Oscar Vincent introduced him to me.  Oscar's a queer fellow.  He
belongs to one of the first families in Boston--one of my set, you
know, and yet he actually invited that boy to his room."

"He's rather a good-looking boy--the printer."

"Think so?" drawled Fitz.  "He's low--all apprentices are.  I mean to
keep him at a distance."


CHAPTER VII.

A PLEASANT EVENING.

"This is my house," said Ferguson, pausing at the gate.

Harry looked at it with interest.

It was a cottage, containing four rooms, and a kitchen in the ell
part.  There was a plot of about a quarter of an acre connected with
it.  Everything about it was neat, though very unpretentious.

"It isn't a palace," said Ferguson, "but," he added cheerfully, "it's
a happy home, and from all I've read, that is more than can be said
of some palaces.  Step right in and make yourself at home."

They entered a tiny entry, and Mrs. Ferguson opened the door of the
sitting-room.  She was a pleasant-looking woman, and her face wore a
smile st welcome.

"Hannah," said Ferguson, "this is our new apprentice, Harry Walton."

"I am glad to see you," she said, offering her hand.  "My husband has
spoken of you.  You are quite welcome, if you can put up with humble
fare."

"That is what I have always been accustomed to," said Harry,
beginning to feel quite at home.

"Where are the children, Hannah?"

Two children, a boy and a girl, of six and four years respectively,
bounded into the room and answered for themselves.  They looked shyly
at Harry, but before many minutes their shyness had worn off, and the
little girl was sitting on his knee, while the boy stood beside him.
Harry was fond of children, and readily adapted himself to his young
acquaintances.

Supper was soon ready--a plain meal, but one that Harry enjoyed.  He
could not help comparing Ferguson's plain, but pleasant home, with
Clapp's mode of life.

The latter spent on himself as much as sufficed his fellow-workman to
support a wife and two children, yet it was easy to see which found
the best enjoyment in life.

"How do you like your new business?" asked Mrs. Ferguson, as she
handed Harry a cup of tea.

"I like all but the name," said our hero, smiling.

"I wonder how the name came to be applied to a printer's apprentice
any more than to any other apprentice," said Mrs. Ferguson.

"I never heard," said her husband.  "It seems to me to be a libel
upon our trade.  But there is one comfort.  If you stick to the
business, you'll outgrow the name."

"That is lucky; I shouldn't like to be called the wife of a ----.  I
won't pronounce the word lest the children should catch it."

"What is it, mother?" asked Willie, with his mouth full.

"It isn't necessary for you to know, my boy."

"Do you know Mr. Clapp?" asked Harry.

"I have seen him, but never spoke with him."

"I never asked him round to tea," said Ferguson.

"I don't think he would enjoy it any better than I.  His tastes are
very different from mine, and his views of life are equally
different."

"I should think so," said Harry.

"Now I think you and I would agree very well.  Clapp dislikes the
business, and only sticks to it because he must get his living in
some way.  As for me, if I had a sum of money, say five thousand
dollars, I would still remain a printer, but in that case I would
probably buy out a paper, or start one, and be a publisher, as well
as a printer."

"That's just what I should like," said Harry.

"Who knows but we may be able to go into partnership some day, and
carry out our plan."

"I would like it," said Harry; "but I am afraid it will be a good
while before we can raise the five thousand dollars."

"We don't need as much.  Mr. Anderson started on a capital of a
thousand dollars, and now he is in comfortable circumstances."

"Then there's hopes for us."

"At any rate I cherish hopes of doing better some day.  I shouldn't
like always to be a journeyman.  I manage to save up a hundred
dollars a year.  How much have we in the savings bank, Hannah?"

"Between four and five hundred dollars, with interest."

"It has taken me four years to save it up.  In five more, if nothing
happens, I should be worth a thousand dollars.  Journeymen printers
don't get rich very fast."

"I hope to have saved up something myself, in five years," said Harry.

"Then our plan may come to pass, after all.  You shall be editor, and
I publisher."

"I should think you would prefer to be an editor," said his wife.

"I am diffident of my powers in the line of composition," said
Ferguson.  "I shouldn't be afraid to undertake local items, but when
it comes to an elaborate editorial, I should rather leave it in other
hands."

"I always liked writing," said Harry.  "Of course I have only had a
school-boy's practice, but I mean to practise more in my leisure
hours."

"Suppose you write a poem for the 'Gazette,' Walton."

Harry smiled.

"I am not ambitious enough for that," he replied.  "I will try plain
prose."

"Do so," said Ferguson, earnestly.  "Our plan may come to something
after all, if we wait patiently.  It will do no harm to prepare
yourself as well as you can.  After a while you might write something
for the 'Gazette.'  I think Mr. Anderson would put it in."

"Shall I sign it P. D.?" asked Harry.

"P. D. stands for Doctor of Philosophy."

"I don't aspire to such a learned title.  P. D. also stands for
Printer's Devil."

"I see.  Well, joking aside, I advise you to improve yourself in
writing."

"I will.  That is the way Franklin did."

"I remember.  He wrote an article, and slipped it under the door of
the printing office, not caring to have it known that he was the
author."

"Shall I give you a piece of pie, Mr. Walton?" said Mrs. Ferguson.

"Thank you.".

"Me too," said Willie, extending his plate.

"Willie is always fond of pie," said his father, "In a printing
office _pi_ is not such a favorite."

When supper was over, Mr. Ferguson showed Harry a small collection of
books, about twenty-five in number, neatly arranged on shelves.

"It isn't much of a library," he said, "but a few books are better
than none.  I should like to buy as many every year; but books are
expensive, and the outlay would make too great an inroad upon my
small surplus."

"I always thought I should like a library," said Harry, "but my
father is very poor, and has fewer books than you.  As for me, I have
but one book besides the school-books I studied, and that I gained as
a school prize--The Life of Franklin."

"If one has few books he is apt to prize them more," said Ferguson,
"and is apt to profit by them more."

"Have you read the History of China?" asked Harry, who had been
looking over his friend's books.

"No; I have never seen it."

"Why, there it is," said our hero, "In two volumes."

"Take it down," said Ferguson, laughing.

Harry did so, and to his surprise it opened in his hands, and
revealed a checker-board.

"You see appearances are deceitful.  Can you play checkers?"

"I never tried."

"You will easily learn.  Shall I teach you the game?"

"I wish you would."

They sat down; and Harry soon became interested in the game, which
requires a certain degree of thought and foresight.

"You will make a good player after a while," said his companion.
"You must come in often and play with me."

"Thank you, I should like to do so.  It may not be often, for I am
taking lessons in French, and I want to get on as fast as possible."

"I did not know there was any one in the village who gave lessons in
French."

"Oh, he's not a professional teacher.  Oscar Vincent, one of the
Academy boys, is teaching me.  I am to take two lessons a week, on
Tuesday and Friday evenings."

"Indeed, that is a good arrangement.  How did it come about?"

Harry related the particulars of his meeting with Oscar.

"He's a capital fellow," he concluded.  "Very different from another
boy I met in his room.  I pointed him out to you in the street.
Oscar seems to be rich, but he doesn't put on any airs, and he
treated me very kindly."

"That is to his credit.  It's the sham aristocrats that put on most
airs.   I believe you will make somebody, Walton.  You have lost no
time in getting to work."

"I have no time to lose.  I wish I was in Oscar's place.  He is
preparing for Harvard, and has nothing to do but to learn."

"I heard a lecturer once who said that the printing office is the
poor man's college, and he gave a great many instances of printers
who had risen high in the world, particularly in our own country."

"Well, that is encouraging.  I should like to have heard the lecture."

"I begin to think, Harry, that I should have done well to follow your
example.  When I was in your position, I might have studied too, but
I didn't realize the importance as I do now.  I read some useful
books, to be sure, but that isn't like studying."

"It isn't too late now."

Ferguson shook his head.

"Now I have a wife and children," he said.  "I am away from them
during the day, and the evening I like to pass socially with them."

"Perhaps you would like to be divorced," said his wife, smiling.
"Then you would get time for study."

"I doubt if that would make me as happy, Hannah.  I am not ready to
part with you just yet.  But our young friend here is not quite old
enough to be married, and there is nothing to prevent his pursuing
his studies.  So, Harry, go on, and prepare yourself for your
editorial duties."

Harry smiled thoughtfully.  For the first time he had formed definite
plans for his future.  Why should not Ferguson's plans be realized?

"If I live long enough," he said to himself, "I will be an editor,
and exert some influence in the world."

At ten o'clock he bade good-night to Mr. and Mrs. Ferguson, feeling
that he had passed a pleasant and what might prove a profitable
evening.


CHAPTER VIII.

FLETCHER'S VIEWS ON SOCIAL POSITION.

"You are getting on finely, Harry," said Oscar Vincent, a fortnight
later.  "You do credit to my teaching.  As you have been over all the
regular verbs now, I will give you a lesson in translating."

"I shall find that interesting," said Harry, with satisfaction.

"Here is a French Reader," said Oscar, taking one down from the
shelves.  "It has a dictionary at the end.  I won't give you a
lesson.  You may take as much as you have time for, and at the same
time three or four of the irregular verbs.  You are going about three
times as fast as I did when I commenced French."

"Perhaps I have a better teacher than you had," said Harry, smiling.

"I shouldn't wonder," said Oscar.  "That explains it to my
satisfaction.  Well, now the lesson is over, sit down and we'll have
a chat.  Oh, by the way, there's one thing I want to speak to you
about.  We've got a debating society at our school.  It is called
'The Clionian Society.'  Most of the students belong to it.  How
would you like to join?"

"I should like it very much.  Do you think they would admit me?"

"I don't see why not.  I'll propose you at the next meeting, Thursday
evening.  Then the nomination will lie over a week, and be acted upon
at the next meeting."

"I wish you would.  I never belonged to a debating society, but I
should like to learn to speak."

"It's nothing when you're used to it.  It's only the first time you
know, that troubles you.  By Jove!  I remember how my knees trembled
when I first got up and said Mr. President.  I felt as if all eyes
were upon me, and I wanted to sink through the floor.  Now I can get
up and chatter with the best of them.  I don't mean that I can make
an eloquent speech or anything of that kind, but I can talk at a
minute's notice on almost any subject."

"I wish I could."

"Oh, you can, after you've tried a few times.  Well, then, it's
settled.  I'll propose you at the next meeting."

"How lucky I am to have fallen in with you, Oscar."

"I know what you mean.  I'm your guide, philosopher, and friend, and
all that sort of thing.  I hope you'll have proper veneration for me.
It's rather a new character for me.  Would you believe it, Harry,--at
home I am regarded as a rattle-brained chap, instead of the dignified
Professor that you know me to be.  Isn't it a shame?"

"Great men are seldom appreciated at home, Oscar."

"I know that.  I shall have to get a certificate from you, certifying
to my being a steady and erudite young man."

"I'll give it with the greatest pleasure."

"Holloa, there's a knock.  Come in!" shouted Oscar.

The door opened, and Fitzgerald Fletcher entered the room.

"How are you, Fitz?" said Oscar.  "Sit down and make yourself
comfortable.  You know my friend, Harry Walton, I believe?"

"I believe I had the honor to meet him here one evening," said
Fitzgerald stiffly, slightly emphasizing the word "honor."

"I hope you are well, Mr. Fletcher," said Harry, more amused than
disturbed by the manner of the aristocratic visitor.

"Thank you, my health is good," said Fitzgerald with equal stiffness,
and forthwith turned to Oscar, not deigning to devote any more
attention to Harry.

Our hero had intended to remain a short time longer, but, under the
circumstances, as Oscar's attention would be occupied by Fletcher,
with whom he was not on intimate terms, he thought he might spend the
evening more profitably at home in study.

"If you'll excuse me, Oscar," he said, rising, "I will leave you now,
as I have something to do this evening."

"If you insist upon it, Harry, I will excuse you.  Come round Friday
evening."

"Thank you."

"Do you have to work at the printing office in the evening?" Fletcher
deigned to inquire.

"No; I have some studying to do."

"Reading and spelling, I suppose," sneered Fletcher.

"I am studying French."

"Indeed!" returned Fletcher, rather surprised.  "How can you study it
without a teacher?"

"I have a teacher."

"Who is it?"

"Professor Vincent," said Harry, smiling.

"You didn't know that I had developed into a French Professor, did
you, Fitz?  Well, it's so, and whether it's the superior teaching or
not, I can't say, but my scholar is getting on famously."

"It must be a great bore to teach," said Fletcher.

"Not at all.  I like it."

"Every one to his taste," said Fitzgerald unpleasantly.

"Good-night, Oscar.  Good-night, Mr. Fletcher," said Harry, and made
his exit.

"You're a strange fellow, Oscar," said Fletcher, after Harry's
departure.

"Very likely, but what particular strangeness do you refer to now?"

"No one but you would think of giving lessons to a printer's devil."

"I don't know about that."

"No one, I mean, that holds your position in society."

"I don't know that I hold any particular position in society."

"Your family live on Beacon Street, and move in the first circles.  I
am sure my mother would be disgusted if I should demean myself so far
as to give lessons to any vulgar apprentice."

"I don't propose to give lessons to any vulgar apprentice."

"You know whom I mean.  This Walton is only a printer's devil."

"I don't know that that is any objection to him.  It isn't morally
wrong to be a printer's devil, is it?"

"What a queer fellow you are, Oscar.  Of course I don't mean that.  I
daresay he's well enough in his place, though he seems to be very
forward and presuming, but you know that he's not your equal."

"He is not my equal in knowledge, but I shouldn't be surprised if he
would be some time.  You'd be astonished to see how fast he gets on."

"I daresay.  But I mean in social position."

"It seems to me you can't think of anything but social position."

"Well, it's worth thinking about."

"No doubt, as far as it is deserved.  But when it is founded on
nothing but money, I wouldn't give much for it."

"Of course we all know that the higher classes are more refined--"

"Than printers' devils and vulgar apprentices, I suppose," put in
Oscar, laughing,

"Yes."

"Well, if refinement consists in wearing kid gloves and stunning
neckties, I suppose the higher classes, as you call them, are more
refined."

"Do you mean me?" demanded Fletcher, who was noted for the character
of his neckties.

"Well, I can't say I don't.  I suppose you regard yourself as a
representative of the higher classes, don't you?"

"To be sure I do," said Fletcher, complacently.

"So I supposed.  Then you see I had a right to refer to you.  Now
listen to my prediction.  Twenty-five years from now, the boy whom
you look down upon as a vulgar apprentice will occupy a high
position, and you will be glad to number him among your
acquaintances."

"Speak for yourself, Oscar," said Fletcher, scornfully.

"I speak for both of us."

"Then I say I hope I can command better associates than this friend
of yours."

"You may, but I doubt it."

"You seem to be carried away by him," said Fitzgerald, pettishly.  "I
don't see anything very wonderful about him, except dirty hands."

"Then you have seen more than I have."

"Of course a fellow who meddles with printer's ink must have dirty
hands.  Faugh!" said Fletcher, turning up his nose.

At the same time he regarded complacently his own fingers, which he
carefully kept aloof from anything that would soil or mar their
aristocratic whiteness.

"The fact is, Fitz," said Oscar, argumentatively, "our upper ten, as
we call them, spring from just such beginnings as my friend Harry
Walton.  My own father commenced life in a printing office.  But, as
you say, he occupies a high position at present."

"Really!" said Fletcher, a little taken aback, for he knew that
Vincent's father ranked higher than his own.

"I daresay your own ancestors were not always patricians."

Fletcher winced.  He knew well enough that his father commenced life
as a boy in a country grocery, but in the mutations of fortune had
risen to be the proprietor of a large dry-goods store on Washington
Street.  None of the family cared to look back to the beginning of
his career.  They overlooked the fact that it was creditable to him
to have risen from the ranks, though the rise was only in wealth, for
Mr. Fletcher was a purse-proud parvenu, who owed all the
consideration he enjoyed to his commercial position.  Fitz liked to
have it understood that he was of patrician lineage, and carefully
ignored the little grocery, and certain country relations who
occasionally paid a visit to their wealthy relatives, in spite of the
rather frigid welcome they received.

"Oh, I suppose there are exceptions," Fletcher admitted reluctantly.
"Your father was smart."

"So is Harry Walton.  I know what he is aiming at, and I predict that
he will be an influential editor some day."

"Have you got your Greek lesson?" asked Fletcher, abruptly, who did
not relish the course the conversation had taken.

"Yes."

"Then I want you to translate a passage for me.  I couldn't make it
out."

"All right."

Half an hour later Fletcher left Vincent's room.

"What a snob he is!" thought Oscar.

And Oscar was right.


CHAPTER IX.

THE CLIONIAN SOCIETY.

On Thursday evening the main school of the Academy building was
lighted up, and groups of boys, varying in age from thirteen to
nineteen, were standing in different parts of the room.  These were
members of the Clionian Society, whose weekly meeting was about to
take place.

At eight o'clock precisely the President took his place at the
teacher's desk, with the Secretary at his side, and rapped for order.
The presiding officer was Alfred DeWitt, a member of the Senior
Class, and now nearly ready for college.  The Secretary was a member
of the same class, by name George Sanborn.

"The Secretary will read the minutes of the last meeting," said the
President, when order had been obtained.

George Sanborn rose and read his report, which was accepted.

"Are any committees prepared to report?" asked the President.

The Finance Committee reported through its chairman, recommending
that the fee for admission be established at one dollar, and that
each member be assessed twenty-five cents monthly.

"Mr. President," said Fitzgerald Fletcher, rising to his feet, "I
would like to say a word in reference to this report."

"Mr. Fletcher has the floor."

"Then, Mr. President, I wish to say that I disagree with the Report
of the Committee.  I think a dollar is altogether too small.  It
ought to be at least three dollars, and I myself should prefer five
dollars.  Again, sir, the Committee has recommended for the monthly
assessment the ridiculously small sum of twenty-five cents.  I think
it ought to be a dollar."

"Mr. President, I should like to ask the gentleman his reason," said
Henry Fairbanks, Chairman of the Finance Committee.  "Why should we
tax the members to such an extent, when the sums reported are
sufficient to defray the ordinary expenses of the Society, and to
leave a small surplus besides?"

"Mr. President," returned Fletcher, "I will answer the gentleman.  We
don't want to throw open the Society to every one that can raise a
dollar.  We want to have an exclusive society."

"Mr. President," said Oscar Vincent, rising, "I should like to ask
the gentleman for how many he is speaking.  He certainly is not
speaking for me.  I don't want the Society to be exclusive.  There
are not many who can afford to pay the exorbitant sums which he
desires fixed for admission fee and for monthly assessments, and I
for one am not willing to exclude any good fellow who desires to
become one of us, but does not boast as heavy a purse as the
gentleman who has just spoken."

These remarks of Oscar were greeted with applause, general enough to
show that the opinions of nearly all were with him.

"Mr. President," said Henry Fairbanks, "though I am opposed to the
gentleman's suggestion, (does he offer it as an amendment?) I have no
possible objection to his individually paying the increased rates
which he recommends, and I am sure the Treasurer will gladly receive
them."

Laughter and applause greeted this hit, and Fletcher once more arose,
somewhat vexed at the reception of his suggestion.

"I don't choose--" he commenced.

"The gentleman will address the chair," interrupted the President.

"Mr. President, I don't choose to pay more than the other members,
though I can do it without inconvenience.  But, as I said, I don't
believe in being too democratic.  I am not in favor of admitting
anybody and everybody into the Society."

"Mr. President," said James Hooper, "I congratulate the gentleman on
the flourishing state of his finances.  For my own part, I am not
ashamed to say that I cannot afford to pay a dollar a month
assessment, and, were it required, I should be obliged to offer my
resignation."

"So much the better," thought Fitzgerald, for, as Hooper was poor,
and went coarsely clothed, he looked down upon him.  Fortunately for
himself he did not give utterance to his thought.

"Does Mr. Fletcher put his recommendation into the form of an
amendment?" asked, the President.

"I do."

"Be kind enough to state it, then."

Fletcher did so, but as no one seconded it, no action was of course
taken.

"Nominations for membership are now in order," said the President.

"I should like to propose my friend Henry Walton."

"Who is Henry Walton?" asked a member.

"Mr. President, may I answer the gentleman?" asked Fitzgerald
Fletcher, rising to his feet.

"As the nominee is not to be voted upon this evening, it is not in
order."

"Mr. President," said Oscar, "I should be glad to have the gentleman
report his information."

"Mr. Fletcher may speak if he desires it, but as the name will be
referred to the Committee on Nominations, it is hardly necessary."

"Mr. President, I merely wish to inform the Society, that Mr. Walton
occupies the dignified position of printer's devil in the office of
the 'Centreville Gazette.'"

"Mr. President," said Oscar, "may I ask the indulgence of the Society
long enough to say that I am quite aware of the fact.  I will add
that Mr. Walton is a young man of excellent abilities, and I am
confident will prove an accession to the Society."

"I cannot permit further remarks on a matter which will come in due
course before the Committee on Nominations," said the President.

"The next business in order is the debate."

Of the debate, and the further proceedings, I shall not speak, as
they are of no special interest.  But after the meeting was over,
groups of members discussed matters which had come up during the
evening.  Fletcher approached Oscar Vincent, and said, "I can't see,
Oscar, why you are trying to get that printer's devil into our
Society."

"Because he's a good fellow, and smart enough to do us credit."

"If there were any bootblacks in Centreville I suppose you'd be
proposing them?" said Fletcher with a sneer.

"I might, if they were as smart as my friend Walton."

"You are not very particular about your friends," said Fletcher in
the same tone.

"I don't ask them to open their pocket-books, and show me how much
money they have."

"I prefer to associate with gentlemen."

"So do I."

"Yet you associate with that printer's devil."

"I consider him a gentleman."

Fletcher laughed scornfully.

"You have strange ideas of a gentleman," he said.

"I hold the same," said James Hooper, who had come up in time to hear
the last portion of the conversation.  "I don't think a full purse is
the only or the chief qualification of a gentleman.  If labor is to
be a disqualification, then I must resign all claims to be considered
a gentleman, as I worked on a farm for two years before coming to
school, and in that way earned the money to pay my expenses here."

Fletcher turned up his nose, but did not reply.

Hooper was a good scholar and influential in the Society, but in
Fletcher's eyes he was unworthy of consideration.

"Look here, Fletcher,--what makes you so confoundedly exclusive is
your ideas?" asked Henry Fairbanks.

"Because I respect myself," said Fletcher in rather a surly tone.

"Then you have one admirer," said Fairbanks.

"What do you mean by that?" asked Fletcher, suspiciously.

"Nothing out of the way.  I believe in self-respect, but I don't see
how it is going to be endangered by the admission of Oscar's friend
to the Society."

"Am I expected to associate on equal terms with a printer's devil?"

"I can't answer for you.  As for me, if he is a good fellow, I shall
welcome him to our ranks.  Some of our most eminent men have been
apprenticed to the trade of printer.  I believe, after all, it is the
name that has prejudiced you."

"No it isn't.  I have seen him."

"Henry Walton?"

"Yes."

"Where?"

"In Oscar's room."

"Well?"

"I don't like his appearance."

"What's the matter with his appearance?" asked Oscar.

"He looks low."

"That's where I must decidedly contradict you, Fitz, and I shall
appeal confidently to the members of the Society when they come to
know him, as they soon will, for I am sure no one else shares your
ridiculous prejudices.  Harry Walton, in my opinion, is a true
gentleman, without reference to his purse, and he is bound to rise
hereafter, take my word for it."

"There's plenty of room for him to rise," said Fletcher with a sneer.

"That is true not only of him, but of all of us, I take it."

"Do you refer to me?"

"Oh no," said Oscar with sarcasm.  "I am quite aware that you are at
the pinnacle of eminence, even if you do flunk in Greek occasionally."

Fitzgerald had failed in the Greek recitation during the day, and
that in school parlance is sometimes termed a "flunk."  He bit his
lip in mortification at this reference, and walked away, leaving
Oscar master of the situation.

"You had the best of him there, Vincent," said George Sanborn.  "He
has gone off in disgust."

"I like to see Fletcher taken down," said Henry Fairbanks.  "I never
saw a fellow put on so many airs.  He is altogether too aristocratic
to associate with ordinary people."

"Yes," said Oscar, "he has a foolish pride, which I hope he will some
time get rid of."

"He ought to have been born in England, and not in a republic."

"If he had been born in England, he would have been unhappy unless he
had belonged to the nobility," said Alfred DeWitt.

"Look here, boys," said Tom Carver, "what do you say to mortifying
Fitz's pride?"

"Have you got a plan in view, Tom?  If so, out with it."

"Yes: you know the pedler that comes into town about once a month to
buy up rags, and sell his tinwares."

"I have seen him.  Well, what of him?"

"He is coming early next week.  Some of us will see him privately,
and post him up as to Fitz's relations and position, and hire him to
come up to school, and inquire for Fitz, representing himself as his
cousin.  Of course Fitz will deny it indignantly, but he will persist
and show that he knows all about the family."

"Good!  Splendid!" exclaimed the boys laughing.  "Won't Fitz be
raving?"

"There's no doubt about that.   Well, boys, I'll arrange it all, if
you'll authorize me."

"Go ahead, Tom.  You can draw upon us for the necessary funds."

Fletcher had retired to his room, angry at the opposition his
proposal had received, and without any warning of the humiliation
which awaited him.


CHAPTER X.

THE TIN-PEDLER.

Those of my readers who live in large cities are probably not
familiar with the travelling tin-pedler, who makes his appearance at
frequent intervals in the country towns and villages of New England.
His stock of tinware embraces a large variety of articles for
culinary purposes, ranging from milk-pans to nutmeg-graters.  These
are contained in a wagon of large capacity, in shape like a box, on
which he sits enthroned a merchant prince.  Unlike most traders, he
receives little money, most of his transactions being in the form of
a barter, whereby be exchanges his merchandise for rags, white and
colored, which have accumulated in the household, and are gladly
traded off for bright tinware.  Behind the cart usually depend two
immense bags, one for white, the other for colored rags, which, in
time, are sold to paper manufacturers.  It may be that the very paper
on which this description is printed, was manufactured from rags so
collected.

Abner Bickford was the proprietor of such an establishment as I have
described.  No one, at first sight, would have hesitated to class him
as a Yankee.  He was long in the limbs, and long in the face, with a
shrewd twinkle in the eye, a long nose, and the expression of a man
who respected himself and feared nobody.  He was unpolished, in his
manners, and knew little of books, but he belonged to the same
resolute and hardy type of men who in years past sprang to arms, and
fought bravely for an idea.  He was strong in his manhood, and would
have stood unabashed before a king.  Such was the man who was to
mortify the pride of Fitzgerald Fletcher.

Tom Carver watched for his arrival in Centreville, and walking up to
his cart, accosted him.

"Good-morning, Mr. Bickford."

"Good-mornin', young man.  You've got the advantage of me.  I never
saw you before as I know of."

"I am Tom Carver, at your service."

"Glad to know you.  Where do you live?  Maybe your wife would like
some tinware this mornin'?" said Abner, relaxing his gaunt features
into a smile.

"She didn't say anything about it when I came out," said Tom,
entering into the joke.

"Maybe you'd like a tin-dipper for your youngest boy?"

"Maybe I would, if you've got any to give away."

"I see you've cut your eye-teeth.  Is there anything else I can do
for you?  I'm in for a trade."

"I don't know, unless I sell myself for rags."

"Anything for a trade.  I'll give you two cents a pound."

"That's too cheap.  I came to ask your help in a trick we boys want
to play on one of our number."

"Sho! you don't say so.  That aint exactly in my line."

"I'll tell you all about it.  There's a chap at our school--the
Academy, you know--who's awfully stuck up.  He's all the time
bragging about belonging to a first family in Boston, and turning up
his nose at poorer boys.  We want to mortify him."

"Just so!" said Abner, nodding.  "Drive ahead!"

"Well, we thought if you'd call at the school and ask after him, and
pretend he was a cousin of yours, and all that, it would make him
mad."

"Oh, I see," said Abner, nodding, "he wouldn't like to own a
tin-pedler for his cousin."

"No," said Tom; "he wants us to think all his relations are rich.  I
wouldn't mind at all myself," he added, it suddenly occurring to him
that Abner's feelings might be hurt.

"Good!" said Abner, "I see you aint one of the stuck-up kind.  I've
got some relations in Boston myself, that are rich and stuck up.  I
never go near 'em.  What's the name of this chap you're talkin'
about?"

"Fletcher--Fitzgerald Fletcher."

"Fletcher!" repeated Abner.  "Whew! well, that's a joke!"

"What's a joke?" asked Tom, rather surprised.

"Why, he _is_ my relation--a sort of second cousin.  Why, my mother
and his father are own cousins.  So, don't you see we're second
cousins?"

"That's splendid!" exclaimed Tom.  "I can hardly believe it."

"It's so.  My mother's name was Fletcher--Roxanna Fletcher--afore she
married.  Jim Fletcher--this boy's father--used to work in my
grandfather's store, up to Hampton, but he got kinder discontented,
and went off to Boston, where he's been lucky, and they do say he's
mighty rich now.  I never go nigh him, 'cause I know he looks down on
his country cousins, and I don't believe in pokin' my nose in where I
aint wanted."

"Then you are really and truly Fitz's cousin?"

"If that's the boy's name.  Seems to me it's a kinder queer one.  I
s'pose it's a fust-claas name.  Sounds rather stuck up."

"Won't the boys roar when they hear about it!  Are you willing to
enter into our plan?"

"Well," said Abner, "I'll do it.  I can't abide folks that's stuck
up.  I'd rather own a cousin like you."

"Thank you, Mr. Bickford."

"When do you want me to come round?"

"How long do you stay in town?"

"Well, I expect to stop overnight at the tavern; I can't get through
in one day."

"Then come round to the Academy to-morrow morning, about half-past
eight.  School don't begin till nine, but the boys will be playing
ball alongside.  Then we'll give you an introduction to your cousin."

"That'll suit me well enough.  I'll come."

Tom Carver returned in triumph, and communicated to the other boys
the arrangement be had made with Mr. Bickford, and his unexpected
discovery of the genuine relationship that existed between Fitz and
the tin-pedler.  His communication was listened to with great
delight, and no little hilarity, and the boys discussed the probable
effect of the projected meeting.

"Fitz will be perfectly raving," said Henry Fairbanks.  "There's
nothing that will take down his pride so much."

"He'll deny the relationship, probably," said Oscar.

"How can he?"

"He'll do it.  See if he don't.  It would be death to all his
aristocratic claims to admit it."

"Suppose it were yourself, Oscar?"

"I'd say, 'How are you, cousin?  How's the the business?'" answered
Oscar, promptly.

"I believe you would, Oscar.  There's nothing of the snob about you."

"I hope not."

"Yet your family stands as high as Fletcher's."

"That's a point I leave to others to discuss," said Oscar.  "My
father is universally respected, I am sure, but he rose from the
ranks.  He was once a printer's devil, like my friend Harry Walton.
Wouldn't it be ridiculous in me to turn up my nose at Walton, just
because be stands now where my father did thirty years ago?  It would
be the same thing as sneering at father."

"Give us your hand, Oscar," said Henry Fairbanks.  "You've got no
nonsense about you--I like you."

"I'm not sure whether your compliment is deserved, Henry," said
Oscar, "but if I have any nonsense it isn't of that kind."

"Do you believe Fitz has any suspicion that he has a cousin in the
tin business?"

"No; I don't believe he has.  He must know he has poor relations,
living in the country, but he probably thinks as little as possible
about them.  As long as they don't intrude themselves upon his
greatness, I suppose he is satisfied."

"And as long as no one suspects that he has any connection with such
plebeians."

"Of course."

"What sort of a man is this tin-pedler, Tom?" asked Oscar.

"He's a pretty sharp fellow--not educated, or polished, you know, but
he seems to have some sensible ideas.  He said he had never seen the
Fletchers; because he didn't want to poke his nose in where he wasn't
wanted.  He showed his good sense also by saying that he had rather
have me for a cousin than Fitz."

"That isn't a very high compliment--I'd say the same myself."

"Thank you, Oscar.  Your compliment exalts me.  You won't mind my
strutting a little."

And Tom humorously threw back his head, and strutted about with mock
pride.

"To be sure," said Oscar, "you don't belong to one of the first
families of Boston, like our friend, Fitz."

"No, I belong to one of the second families.  You can't blame me, for
I can't help it."

"No, I won't blame you, but of course I consider you low."

"I am afraid, Tom, I haven't got any cousins in the tin trade, like
Fitz."

"Poor Fitz! he little dreams of his impending trial.  If he did, I am
afraid he wouldn't sleep a wink to-night."

"I wish I thought as much of myself as Fitz does," said Henry
Fairbanks.  "You can see by his dignified pace, and the way he tosses
his head, how well satisfied he is with being Fitzgerald Fletcher,
Esq."

"I'll bet five cents he won't strut round so much to-morrow
afternoon," said Tom, "after his interview with his new cousin.  But
hush, boys!  Not a word more of this.  There's Fitz coming up the
hill.  I wouldn't have him suspect what's going on, or he might
defeat our plans by staying away."


CHAPTER XI.

FITZ AND HIS COUSIN.

The next morning at eight the boys began to gather in the field
beside the Seminary.  They began to play ball, but took little
interest in the game, compared with the "tragedy in real life," as
Tom jocosely called it, which was expected soon to come off.

Fitz appeared upon the scene early.  In fact one of the boys called
for him, and induced him to come round to school earlier than usual.
Significant glances were exchanged when he made his appearance, but
Fitz suspected nothing, and was quite unaware that he was attracting
more attention than usual.

Punctually at half-past eight, Abner Bickford with his tin-cart
appeared in the street, and with a twitch of the rein began to ascend
the Academy Hill.

"Look there," said Tom Carver, "the tin-pedler's coming up the hill.
Wonder if he expects to sell any of his wares to us boys.  Do you
know him, Fitz?"

"I!" answered Fitzgerald with a scornful look, "what should I know of
a tin-pedler?"

Tom's mouth twitched, and his eyes danced with the anticipation of
fun.

By this time Mr. Bickford had brought his horse to a halt, and
jumping from his box, approached the group of boys, who suspended
their game.

"We don't want any tinware," said one of the boys, who was not in the
secret.

"Want to know!  Perhaps you haven't got tin enough to pay for it.
Never mind, I'll buy you for old rags, at two cents a pound."

"He has you there, Harvey," said Tom Carver.  "Can I do anything for
you, sir?"

"Is your name Fletcher?" asked Abner, not appearing to recognize Tom.

"Why, he wants you, Fitz!" said Harvey, in surprise.

"This gentleman's name is Fletcher," said Tom, placing his hand on
the shoulder of the astonished Fitzgerald.

"Not Fitz Fletcher?" said Abner, interrogatively.

"My name is Fitzgerald Fletcher," said the young Bostonian,
haughtily, "but I am at a loss to understand why you should desire to
see me."

Abner advanced with hand extended, his face lighted up with an
expansive grin.

"Why, Cousin Fitz," he said heartily, "do you mean to say you don't
know me?"

"Sir," said Fitzgerald, drawing back, "you are entirely mistaken in
the person.  I don't know you."

"I guess it's you that are mistaken, Fitz," said the pedler,
familiarly; "why, don't you remember Cousin Abner, that used to trot
you on his knee when you was a baby?  Give us your hand, in memory of
old times."

"You must be crazy," said Fitzgerald, his cheeks red with
indignation, and all the more exasperated because he saw significant
smiles on the faces of his school-companions.

"I s'pose you was too young to remember me," said Abner.  "I haint
seen you for ten years."

"Sir," said Fitz, wrathfully, "you are trying to impose upon me.  I
am a native of Boston."

"Of course you be," said the imperturbable pedler.  "Cousin
Jim--that's your father--went to Boston when he was a boy, and they
do say he's worked his way up to be a mighty rich man.  Your father
is rich, aint he?"

"My father is wealthy, and always was," said Fitzgerald.

"No he wasn't, Cousin Fitz," said Abner.  "When he was a boy, he used
to work in grandfather's store up to Hampton; but he got sort of
discontented and went to Boston.  Did you ever hear him tell of his
cousin Roxanna?  That's my mother."

"I see that you mean to insult me, fellow," said Fitz, pale with
passion.  "I don't know what your object is, in pretending that I am
your relation.  If you want any pecuniary help--"

"Hear the boy talk!" said the pedler, bursting into a horse laugh.
"Abner Bickford don't want no pecuniary help, as you call it.  My
tin-cart'll keep me, I guess."

"You needn't claim relationship with me," said Fitzgerald,
scornfully; "I haven't any low relations."

"That's so," said Abner, emphatically; "but I aint sure whether I can
say that for myself."

"Do you mean to insult me?"

"How can I?  I was talkin' of my relations.  You say you aint one of
'em."

"I am not."

"Then you needn't go for to put on the coat.  But you're out of your
reckoning, I guess.  I remember your mother very well.  She was Susan
Baker."

"Is that true, Fitz?"

"Ye--es," answered Fitz, reluctantly.

"I told you so," said the pedler, triumphantly.

"Perhaps he is your cousin, after all," said Henry Fairbanks.

"I tell you he isn't," said Fletcher, impetuously.

"How should he know your mother's name, then, Fitz?" asked Tom.

"Some of you fellows told him," said Fitzgerald.

"I can say, for one, that I never knew it," said Tom.

"Nor I."

"Nor I."

"We used to call her Sukey Baker," said Abner.  "She used to go to
the deestrict school along of Mother.  They was in the same class.  I
haven't seen your mother since you was a baby.  How many children has
she got?"

"I must decline answering your impertinent questions." said
Fitzgerald, desperately.  He began to entertain, for the first time,
the horrible suspicion that the pedler's story might be true--that he
might after all be his cousin.  But he resolved that he never would
admit it--NEVER!  Where would be his pretentious claims to
aristocracy--where his pride--if this humiliating discovery were
made?  Judging of his school-fellows and himself, he feared that they
would look down upon him.

"You seem kind o' riled to find that I am your cousin," said Abner.
"Now, Fitz, that's foolish.  I aint rich, to be sure, but I'm
respectable.  I don't drink nor chew, and I've got five hundred
dollars laid away in the bank."

"You're welcome to your five hundred dollars," said Fitz, in what was
meant to be a tone of withering sarcasm.

"Am I?  Well, I'd orter be, considerin' I earned it by hard work.
Seems to me you've got high notions, Fitz.  Your mother was kind of
flighty, and I've heard mine say Cousin Jim--that's your father--was
mighty sot up by gettin' rich.  But seems to me you ought not to deny
your own flesh and blood."

"I don't know who you refer to, sir."

"Why, you don't seem to want to own me as your cousin."

"Of course not.  You're only a common tin-pedler."

"Well, I know I'm a tin-pedler, but that don't change my bein' your
cousin."

"I wish my father was here to expose your falsehood."

"Hold on there!" said Abner.  "You're goin' a leetle too far.  I
don't let no man, nor boy neither, charge me with lyin', if he is my
cousin, I don't stand that, nohow."

There was something in Abner's tone which convinced Fitzgerald that
he was in earnest, and that he himself must take care not to go too
far.

"I don't wish to have anything more to say to you," said Fitz."

"I say, boys," said Abner, turning to the crowd who had now formed a
circle around the cousins, "I leave it to you if it aint mean for
Fitz to treat me in that way.  If he was to come to my house, that
aint the way I'd treat him."

"Come, Fitz," said Tom, "you are not behaving right.  I would not
treat my cousin that way."

"He isn't my cousin, and you know it," said Fitz, stamping with rage.

"I wish I wasn't," said Abner.  "If I could have my pick, I'd rather
have him," indicating Tom.  "But blood can't be wiped out.  We're
cousins, even if we don't like it."

"Are you quite sure you are right about this relationship?" asked
Henry Fairbanks, gravely.  "Fitz, here, says he belongs to one of the
first families of Boston."

"Well, I belong to one of the first families of Hampton," said Abner,
with a grin.  "Nobody don't look down on me, I guess."

"You hear that, Fitz," said Oscar.  "Be sensible, and shake hands
with your cousin."

"Yes, shake hands with your cousin!" echoed the boys.

"You all seem to want to insult me," said Fitz, sullenly.

"Not I," said Oscar, "and I'll prove it--will you shake hands with
me, sir?"

"That I will," said Abner, heartily.  "I can see that you're a young
gentleman, and I wish I could say as much for my cousin, Fitz."

Oscar's example was followed by the rest of the boys, who advanced in
turn, and shook hands with the tin-pedler.

"Now Fitz, it's your turn," said Tom.

"I decline," said Fitz, holding his hands behind his back.

"How much he looks like his marm did when she was young," said Abner.
"Well, boys, I can't stop no longer.  I didn't think Cousin Fitz
would be so stuck up, just because his father's made some money.
Good-mornin'!"

"Three cheers for Fitz's cousin!" shouted Tom.

They were given with a will, and Mr. Bickford made acknowledgment by
a nod and a grin.

"Remember me to your mother when you write, Cousin Fitz," he said at
parting.

Fitz was too angry to reply.  He walked off sullenly, deeply
mortified and humiliated, and for weeks afterward nothing would more
surely throw him into a rage than any allusion to his cousin the
tin-pedler.  One good effect, however, followed.  He did not venture
to allude to the social position of his family in presence of his
school-mates, and found it politic to lay aside some of his airs of
superiority.


CHAPTER XII.

HARRY JOINS THE CLIONIAN SOCIETY.

A week later Harry Walton received the following note:--

        "Centreville, May 16th, 18--,
  "Dear Sir: At the last meeting of the Clionian
  Society you were elected a member.  The next meeting
  will be held on Thursday evening, in the Academy
  building.
    "Yours truly,
      "GEORGE SANBORN,
          "Secretary.
    "MR. HARRY WALTON."

Our hero read this letter with satisfaction.  It would be pleasant
for him to become acquainted with the Academy students, but he
thought most of the advantages which his membership would afford him
in the way of writing and speaking.  He had never attempted to
debate, and dreaded attempting it for the first time; but he knew
that nothing desirable would be accomplished without effort, and he
was willing to make that effort.

"What have you there, Walton?" asked Clapp, noticing the letter which
he held in his hand.

"You can read it if you like," said Harry.

"Humph!" said Clapp; "so you are getting in with the Academy boys?"

"Why shouldn't he?" said Ferguson.

"Oh, they're a stuck-up set."

"I don't find them so--that is, with one exception," said Harry.

"They are mostly the sones of rich men, and look down on those who
have to work for a living."

Clapp was of a jealous and envious disposition, and he was always
fancying slights where they were not intended.

"If I thought so," said Harry, "I would not join the Society, but as
they have elected me, I shall become a member, and see how things
turn out."

"It is a good plan, Harry," said Ferguson.  "It will be a great
advantage to you."

"I wish I had a chance to attend the Academy for a couple of years,"
said our hero, thoughtfully.

"I don't," said Clapp.  "What's the good of studying Latin and Greek,
and all that rigmarole?  It won't bring you money, will it?"

"Yes," said Ferguson.  "Education will make a man more competent to
earn money, at any rate in many cases.  I have a cousin, who used to
go to school with me, but his father was able to send him to college.
He is now a lawyer in Boston, making four or five times my income.
But it isn't for the money alone that an education is worth having.
There is a pleasure in being educated."

"So I think," said Harry.

"I don't see it," said Clapp.  "I wouldn't be a bookworm for anybody.
There's Walton learning French.  What good is it ever going to do
him?"

"I can tell you better by and by, when I know a little more," said
Harry.  "I am only a beginner now."

"Dr. Franklin would never have become distinguished if he had been
satisfied with what he knew as an apprentice," said Ferguson.

"Oh, if you're going to bring up Franklin again, I've got through,"
said Clapp with a sneer.  "I forgot that Walton was trying to be a
second Franklin."

"I don't see much chance of it," said Harry, good-humoredly.  "I
should like to be if I could."

Clapp seemed to be in an ill-humor, and the conversation was not
continued.  He had been up late the night before with Luke Harrison,
and both had drank more than was good for them.  In consequence,
Clapp had a severe headache, and this did not improve his temper.


"Come round Thursday evening, Harry," said Oscar Vincent, "and go to
the Society with me.  I will introduce you to the fellows.  It will
be less awkward, you know."

"Thank you, Oscar.  I shall be glad to accept your escort."

When Thursday evening came, Oscar and Harry entered the Society hall
arm in arm.  Oscar led his companion up to the Secretary and
introduced him.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Walton," said he.  "Will you sign your
name to the Constitution?  That is all the formality we require."

"Except a slight pecuniary disbursement," added Oscar.

"How much is the entrance fee?" asked Harry.

"One dollar.  You win pay that to the Treasurer."

Oscar next introduced our hero to the President, and some of the
leading members, all of whom welcomed him cordially.

"Good-evening, Mr. Fletcher," said Harry, observing that young
gentleman near him.

"Good-evening, sir," said Fletcher stiffly, and turned on his heel
without offering his hand.

"Fletcher don't feel well," whispered Oscar.  "He had a visit from a
poor relation the other day--a tin-pedler--and it gave such a shock
to his sensitive system that he hasn't recovered from it yet."

"I didn't imagine Mr. Fletcher had such a plebeian relative," said
Harry.

"Nor did any of us.  The interview was rich.  It amused us all, but
what was sport to us was death to poor Fitz.  You have only to make
the most distant allusion to a tin-pedler in his hearing, and he will
become furious."

"Then I will be careful."

"Oh, it won't do any harm.  The fact was, the boy was getting too
overbearing, and putting on altogether too many airs.  The lesson
will do him good, or ought to."

Here the Society was called to order, and Oscar and Harry took their
seats.

The exercises proceeded in regular order until the President
announced a declamation by Fitzgerald Fletcher.

"Mr. President," said Fletcher, rising, "I must ask to be excused.  I
have not had time to prepare a declamation."

"Mr. President," said Tom Carver, "under the circumstances I hope you
will excuse Mr. Fletcher, as during the last week he has had an
addition to his family."

There was a chorus of laughter, loud and long, at this sally.  All
were amused except Fletcher himself, who looked flushed and provoked.

"Mr. Fletcher is excused," said the President, unable to refrain from
smiling.  "Will any member volunteer to speak in his place?  It will
be a pity to have our exercises incomplete."

Fletcher was angry, and wanted to be revenged on somebody.  A bright
idea came to him.  He would place the "printer's devil," whose
admission to the Society he resented, in an awkward position.  He
rose with a malicious smile upon his face.

"Mr. President," he said, "doubtless Mr. Walton, the new member who
has done us the _honor_ to join our society, will be willing to
supply my place."

"We shall certainly be glad to hear a declamation from Mr. Walton,
though it is hardly fair to call upon him at such short notice."

"Can't you speak something, Harry?" whispered Oscar.  "Don't do it,
unless you are sure you can get through."

Harry started in surprise when his name was first mentioned, but he
quickly resolved to accept his duty.  He had a high reputation at
home for speaking, and he had recently learned a spirited poem,
familiar, no doubt, to many of my young readers, called "Shamus
O'Brien."  It is the story of an Irish volunteer, who was arrested
for participating in the Irish rebellion of '98, and is by turns
spirited and pathetic.  Harry had rehearsed it to himself only the
night before, and he had confidence in a strong and retentive memory.
At the President's invitation he rose to his feet, and said, "Mr.
President, I will do as well as I can, but I hope the members of the
Society will make allowance for me, as I have had no time for special
preparation."

All eyes were fixed with interest upon our hero, as he advanced to
the platform, and, bowing composedly, commenced his declamation.  It
was not long before that interest increased, as Harry proceeded in
his recitation.  He lost all diffidence, forgot the audience, and
entered thoroughly into the spirit of the piece.  Especially when, in
the trial scene, Shamus is called upon to plead guilty or not guilty,
Harry surpassed himself, and spoke with a spirit and fire which
brought down the house.  This is the passage:--

  "My lord, if you ask me, if in my life-time
  I thought any treason, or did any crime,
  That should call to my cheek, as I stand alone here,
  The hot blush of shame, or the coldness of fear,
  Though I stood by the grave to receive my death-blow,
  Before God and the world I would answer you, no!
  But if you would ask me, as I think it like,
  If in the rebellion I carried a pike,
  An' fought for ould Ireland from the first to the close,
  An' shed the heart's blood of her bitterest foes,
  I answer you, _yes_; and I tell you again,
  Though I stand here to perish, it's my glory that then
  In her cause I was willing my veins should run dhry,
  An' that now for her sake I am ready to die."

After the applause had subsided, Harry proceeded, and at the
conclusion of the declamation, when he bowed modestly and left the
platform, the hall fairly shook with the stamping, in which all
joined except Fletcher, who sat scowling with dissatisfaction at a
result so different from his hopes.  He had expected to bring
discomfiture to our hero.  Instead, he had given him an opportunity
to achieve a memorable triumph.

"You did yourself credit, old boy!" said Oscar, seizing and wringing
the hand of Harry, as the latter resumed his seat.  "Why, you ought
to go on the stage!"

"Thank you," said Harry; "I am glad I got through well."

"Isn't Fitz mad, though?  He thought you'd break down.  Look at him!"

Harry looked over to Fletcher, who, with a sour expression, was
sitting upright, and looking straight before him.

"He don't look happy, does he?" whispered Oscar, comically.

Harry came near laughing aloud, but luckily for Fletcher's peace of
mind, succeeded in restraining himself.

"He won't call you up again in a hurry; see if he does," continued
Oscar.

"I am sure we have all been gratified by Mr. Walton's spirited
declamation," said the President, rising.  "We congratulate ourselves
upon adding so fine a speaker to our society, and hope often to have
the pleasure of hearing him declaim."

There was a fresh outbreak of applause, after which the other
exercises followed.  When the meeting was over the members of the
Society crowded around Harry, and congratulated him on his success.
These congratulations he received so modestly, as to confirm the
favorable impression he had made by his declamation.

"By Jove! old fellow," said Oscar, as they were walking home, "I am
beginning to be proud of you.  You are doing great credit to your
teacher."

"Thank you, Professor," said Harry.  "Don't compliment me too much,
or I may become vain, and put on airs."

"If you do, I'll get Fitz to call, and remind you that you are only a
printer's devil, after all."


CHAPTER XIII.

VACATION BEGINS AT THE ACADEMY.

Not long after his election as a member of the Clionian Society, the
summer term of the Prescott Academy closed.  The examination took
place about the tenth of June, and a vacation followed, lasting till
the first day of September.  Of course, the Clionian Society, which
was composed of Academy students, suspended its meetings for the same
length of time.  Indeed, the last meeting for the season took place
during the first week in June, as the evenings were too short and too
warm, and the weather was not favorable to oratory.  At the last
meeting, an election was held of officers to serve for the following
term.  The same President and Vice-President were chosen; but as the
Secretary declined to serve another term, Harry Walton, considerably
to his surprise, found himself elected in his place.

Fitzgerald Fletcher did not vote for him.  Indeed, he expressed it as
his opinion that it was a shame to elect a "printer's devil"
Secretary of the Society.

"Why is it?" said Oscar.  "Printing is a department of literature,
and the Clionian is a literary society, isn't it?"

"Of course it is a literary society, but a printer's devil is not
literary."

"He's as literary as a tin-pedler," said Tom Carver, maliciously.

Fletcher turned red, but managed to say, "And what does that prove?"

"We don't object to you because you are connected with the tin
business."

"Do you mean to insult me?" demanded Fletcher, angrily.  "What have I
to do with the tin business?"

"Oh, I beg pardon, it's your cousin that's in it."

"I deny the relationship," said Fletcher, "and I will thank you not
to refer again to that vulgar pedler."

"Really, Fitz, you speak rather roughly, considering he's your
cousin.  But as to Harry Walton, he's a fine fellow, and he has an
excellent handwriting, and I was very glad to vote for him."

Fitzgerald walked away, not a little disgusted, as well at the
allusion to the tin-pedler, as at the success of Harry Walton in
obtaining an office to which he had himself secretly aspired.  He had
fancied that it would sound well to put "Secretary of the Clionian
Society" after his name, and would give him increased consequence at
home.  As to the tin-pedler, it would have relieved his mind to hear
that Mr. Bickford had been carried off suddenly by an apoplectic fit,
and notwithstanding the tie of kindred, he would not have taken the
trouble to put on mourning in his honor.

Harry Walton sat in Oscar Vincent's room, on the last evening of the
term.  He had just finished reciting the last French lesson in which
he would have Oscar's assistance for some time to come.

"You have made excellent progress," said Oscar.  "It is only two
months since you began French, and now you take a long lesson in
translation."

"That is because I have so good a teacher.  But do you think I can
get along without help during the summer?"

"No doubt of it.  You may find some difficulties, but those you can
mark, and I will explain when I come back.  Or I'll tell you what is
still better.  Write to me, and I'll answer.  Shall I write in
French?"

"I wish you would, Oscar."

"Then I will.  I'm rather lazy with the pen, but I can find time for
you.  Besides, it will be a good way for me to keep up my French."

"Shall you be in Boston all summer, Oscar?"

"No; our family has a summer residence at Nahant, a sea-shore place
twelve miles from Boston.  Then I hope father will let me travel
about a little on my own account.  I want to go to Saratoga and Lake
George."

"That would be splendid."

"I wish you could go with me, Harry."

"Thank you, Oscar, but perhaps you can secure Fletcher's company.
That will be much better than that of a 'printer's devil' like
myself."

"It may show bad taste, but I should prefer your company,
notwithstanding your low employment."

"Thank you, Oscar.  I am much obliged."

"Fitz has been hinting to me how nice it would be for us to go off
somewhere together, but I don't see it in that light.  I asked him
why he didn't secure board with his cousin, the tin-pedler, but that
made him angry, and he walked away in disgust.  But I can't help
pitying you a little, Harry."

"Why?  On account of my occupation?"

"Partly.  All these warm summer days, you have got to be working at
the case, while I can lounge in the shade, or travel for pleasure.
Sha'n't you have a vacation?"

"I don't expect any.  I don't think I could well be spared.  However,
I don't mind it.  I hope to do good deal of studying while you are
gone."

"And I sha'n't do any."

"Neither would I, perhaps, in your position.  But there's a good deal
of difference between us.  You are a Latin and Greek scholar, and can
talk French, while I am at the bottom of the ladder.  I have no time
to lose."

"You have begun to mount the ladder, Harry.  Don't be discouraged.
You can climb up."

"But I must work for it.  I haven't got high enough up to stop and
rest.  But there is one question I want to ask you, before you go."

"What is it?"

"What French book would you recommend after I have finished this
Reader?  I am nearly through now."

"Telemaque will be a good book to take next.  It is easy and
interesting.  Have you got a French dictionary?"

"No; but I can buy one."

"You can use mine while I am gone.  You may as well have it as not.
I have no copy of Telemaque, but I will send you one from Boston."

"Agreed, provided you will let me pay you for it."

"So I would, if I had to buy one.  But I have got an old copy, not
very ornamental, but complete.  I will send it through the mail."

"Thank you, Oscar.  How kind you are!"

"Don't flatter me, Harry.  The favors you refer to are but trifles.
I will ask a favor of you in return."

"I wish you would."

"Then help me pack my trunk.  There's nothing I detest so much.
Generally I tumble things in helter-skelter, and get a good scolding
from mother for doing it, when she inspects my trunk."

"I'll save you the trouble, then.  Bring what you want to carry home,
and pile it on the floor, and I'll do the packing."

"A thousand thanks, as the French say.  It takes a load off my mind.
By the way, here's a lot of my photographs.  Would you like one to
remember your professor by?"

"Very much, Oscar."

"Then take your choice.  They don't do justice to my beauty, which is
of a stunning description, as you are aware, nor do they convey an
idea of the lofty intellect which sits enthroned behind my classic
brow; but such as they are, you are welcome to one."

"Any one would think, to hear you, that you had no end of
self-conceit, Oscar," said Harry, laughing.

"How do you know that I haven't?  Most people think they are
beautiful.  A photographer told my sister that he was once visited by
a frightfully homely man from the the country, who wanted his 'picter
took.'  When the result was placed before him, he seemed
dissatisfied.  'Don't you think it like?' said the artist.--'Well,
ye-es,' he answered slowly, 'but it hasn't got my sweet expression
about the mouth!'"

"Very good," said Harry, laughing; "that's what's the matter with
your picture."

"Precisely.  I am glad your artistic eye detects what is wanting.
But, hold! there's a knock.  It's Fitz, I'll bet a hat."

"Come in!" he cried, and Fletcher walked in.

"Good-evening, Fletcher," said Oscar.  "You see I'm packing, or
rather Walton is packing.  He's a capital packer."

"Indeed!" sneered Fletcher.  "I was not aware that Mr. Walton was in
that line of business.  What are his terms?"

"I refer you to him."

"What do you charge for packing trunks, Mr. Walton?"

"I think fifty cents would be about right," answered Harry, with
perfect gravity.  "Can you give me a job, Mr. Fletcher?"

"I might, if I had known it in time, though I am particular who
handles my things."

"Walton is careful, and I can vouch for his honesty," said Oscar,
carrying out the joke.  "His wages in the printing office are not
large, and he would be glad to make a little extra money."

"It must be very inconvenient to be poor," said Fletcher, with a
supercilious glance at our hero, who was kneeling before Oscar's
trunk.

"It is," answered Harry, quietly, "but as long as work is to be had I
shall not complain."

"To be sure!" said Fletcher.  "My father is wealthy, and I shall not
have to work."

"Suppose he should fail?" suggested Oscar.

"That is a very improbable supposition," said Fletcher, loftily.

"But not impossible?"

"Nothing is impossible."

"Of course.  I say, Fitz, if such a thing should happen, you've got
something to fall back upon."

"To what do you refer?"

"Mr. Bickford could give you an interest in the tin business."

"Good-evening!" said Fletcher, not relishing the allusion.

"Good-evening!  Of course I shall see you in the city."

"I suppose I ought not to tease Fitz," said Oscar, after his visitor
had departed, "but I enjoy seeing how disgusted he looks."

In due time the trunk was packed, and Harry, not without regret, took
leave of his friend for the summer.


CHAPTER XIV.

HARRY BECOMES AN AUTHOR.

The closing of the Academy made quite a difference in the life of
Centreville.  The number of boarding scholars was about thirty, and
these, though few in number, were often seen in the street and at the
postoffice, and their withdrawal left a vacancy.  Harry Walton felt
quite lonely at first; but there is no cure for loneliness like
occupation, and he had plenty of that.  The greater part of the day
was spent in the printing office, while his evenings and early
mornings were occupied in study and reading.  He had become very much
interested in French, in which he found himself advancing rapidly.
Occasionally he took tea at Mr. Ferguson's, and this he always
enjoyed; for, as I have already said, he and Ferguson held very
similar views on many important subjects.  One evening, at the house
of the latter, he saw a file of weekly papers, which proved, on
examination, to be back numbers of the "Weekly Standard," a literary
paper issued in Boston.

"I take the paper for my family," said Ferguson.  "It contains quite
a variety of reading matter, stories, sketches and essays."

"It seems quite interesting," said Harry.

"Yes, it is.  I will lend you some of the back numbers, if you like."

"I would like it.  My father never took a literary paper; his means
were so limited that he could not afford it."

"I think it is a good investment.  There are few papers from which
you cannot obtain in a year more than the worth of the subscription.
Besides, if you are going to be an editor, it will be useful for you
to become familiar with the manner in which such papers are
conducted."

When Harry went home he took a dozen copies of the paper, and sat up
late reading them.  While thus engaged an idea struck him.  It was
this: Could not he write something which would be accepted for
publication in the "Standard"?  It was his great ambition to learn to
write for the press, and he felt that he was old enough to commence.

"If I don't succeed the first time, I can try again," he reflected.

The more he thought of it, the more he liked the plan.  It is very
possible that he was influenced by the example of Franklin, who,
while yet a boy in his teens, contributed articles to his brother's
paper though at the time the authorship was not suspected.  Finally
he decided to commence writing as soon as he could think of a
suitable subject.  This he found was not easy.  He could think of
plenty of subjects of which he was not qualified to write, or in
which he felt little interest; but he rightly decided that he could
succeed better with something that had a bearing upon his own
experience or hopes for the future.

Finally he decided to write on Ambition.

I do not propose to introduce Harry's essay in these pages, but will
give a general idea of it, as tending to show his views of life.

He began by defining ambition as a desire for superiority, by which
most men were more or less affected, though it manifested itself in
very different ways, according to the character of him with whom it
was found.  Here I will quote a passage, as a specimen of Harry's
style and mode of expression.

"There are some who denounce ambition as wholly bad and to be avoided
by all; but I think we ought to make a distinction between true and
false ambition.  The desire of superiority is an honorable motive, if
it leads to honorable exertion.  I will mention Napoleon as an
illustration of false ambition, which is selfish in itself, and has
brought misery and ruin, to prosperous nations.  Again, there are
some who are ambitious to dress better than their neighbors, and
their principal thoughts are centred upon the tie of their cravat, or
the cut of their coat, if young men; or upon the richness and style
of their dresses, if they belong to the other sex.  Beau Brummel is a
noted instance of this kind of ambition.  It is said that fully half
of his time was devoted to his toilet, and the other half to
displaying it in the streets, or in society.  Now this is a very low
form of ambition, and it is wrong to indulge it, because it is a
waste of time which could be much better employed."

Harry now proceeded to describe what he regarded as a true and
praiseworthy ambition.  He defined it as a desire to excel in what
would be of service to the human race, and he instanced his old
Franklin, who, induced by an honorable ambition, worked his way up to
a high civil station, as well as a commanding position in the
scientific world.  He mentioned Columbus as ambitious to extend the
limits of geographical knowledge, and made a brief reference to the
difficulties and discouragements over which he triumphed on the way
to success.  He closed by an appeal to boys and young men to direct
their ambition into worthy channels, so that even if they could not
leave behind a great name, they might at least lead useful lives, and
in dying have the satisfaction of thinking that they done some
service to the race.

This will give a very fair idea of Harry's essay.  There was nothing
remarkable about it, and no striking originality in the ideas, but it
was very creditably expressed for a boy of his years, and did even
more credit to his good judgment, since it was an unfolding of the
principles by which he meant to guide his own life.

It must not be supposed that our hero was a genius, and that he wrote
his essay without difficulty.  It occupied him two evenings to write
it, and he employed the third in revising and copying it.  It covered
about five pages of manuscript, and, according to his estimate, would
fill about two-thirds of a long column in the "Standard."

After preparing it, the next thing was to find a _nom de plume_, for
he shrank from signing his own name.  After long consideration, he at
last decided upon Franklin, and this was the name he signed to his
maiden contribution to the press.

He carried it to the post-office one afternoon, after his work in the
printing office was over, and dropped it unobserved into the
letter-box.  He did not want the postmaster to learn his secret, as
he would have done had he received it directly from him, and noted
the address on the envelope.

For the rest of the week, Harry went about his work weighed down with
his important secret--a secret which he had not even shared with
Ferguson.  If the essay was declined, as he thought it might very
possibly be, he did not want any one to know it.  If it were
accepted, and printed, it would be time enough then to make it known.
But there were few minutes in which his mind was not on his literary
venture.  His preoccupation was observed by his fellow-workmen in the
office, and he was rallied upon it, good-naturedly, by Ferguson, but
in a different spirit by Clapp.

"It seems to me you are unusually silent, Harry," said Ferguson.
"You're not in love, are you?"

"Not that I know of," said Harry, smiling.  "It's rather too early
yet."

"I've known boys of your age to fancy themselves in love."

"He is is more likely thinking up some great discovery," said Clapp,
sneering.  "You know he's a second Franklin."

"Thank you for the compliment," said our hero, good-humoredly, "but I
don't deserve it.  I don't expect to make any great discovery at
present."

"I suppose you expect to set the river on fire, some day," said
Clapp, sarcastically.

"I am afraid it wouldn't do much good to try," said Harry, who was
too sensible to take offence.  "It isn't so easily done."

"I suppose some day we shall be proud of having been in the same
office with so great a man," pursued Clapp.

"Really, Clapp, you're rather hard on our young friend," said
Ferguson.  "He doesn't put on any airs of superiority, or pretend to
anything uncommon."

"He's very kind--such an intellect as he's got, too!" said Clapp.

"I'm glad you found it out," said Harry.  "I haven't a very high idea
of my intellect yet.  I wish I had more reason to do so."

Finding that he had failed in his attempt to provoke Harry by his
ridicule, Clapp desisted, but he disliked him none the less.

The fact was, that Clapp was getting into a bad way.  He had no high
aim in life, and cared chiefly for the pleasure of the present
moment.  He had found Luke Harrison a congenial companion, and they
had been associated in more than one excess.  The morning previous,
Clapp had entered the printing office so evidently under the
influence of liquor, that he had been sharply reprimanded by Mr.
Anderson.

"I don't choose to interfere with your mode of life, unwise and
ruinous as I may consider it," he said, "as long as it does not
interfere with your discharge of duty.  But to-day you are clearly
incapacitated for labor, and I have a right to complain.  If it
happens again, I shall be obliged to look for another journeyman."

Clapp did not care to leave his place just at present, for he had no
money saved up, and was even somewhat in debt, and it might be some
time before he got another place.  So he rather sullenly agreed to be
more careful in future, and did not go to work till the afternoon.
But though circumstances compelled him to submit, it put him in bad
humor, and made him more disposed to sneer than ever.  He had an
unreasoning prejudice against Harry, which was stimulated by Luke
Harrison, who had this very sufficient reason for hating our hero,
that he had succeeded in injuring him.  As an old proverb has it "We
are slow to forgive those whom we have injured."


CHAPTER XV.

A LITERARY DEBUT.

Harry waited eagerly for the next issue of the "Weekly Standard." It
was received by Mr. Anderson in exchange for the "Centreville
Gazette," and usually came to hand on Saturday morning.  Harry was
likely to obtain the first chance of examining the paper, as he was
ordinarily sent to the post-office on the arrival of the morning mail.

His hands trembled as he unfolded the paper and hurriedly scanned the
contents.  But he looked in vain for his essay on Ambition.  There
was not even a reference to it.  He was disappointed, but he soon
became hopeful again.

"I couldn't expect it to appear so soon," he reflected.  "These city
weeklies have to be printed some days in advance.  It may appear yet."

So he was left in suspense another week, hopeful and doubtful by
turns of the success of his first offering for the press.  He was
rallied from time to time on his silence in the office, but he
continued to keep his secret.  If his contribution was slighted, no
one should know it but himself.

At last another Saturday morning came around and again he set out for
the post-office.  Again he opened the paper with trembling fingers,
and eagerly scanned the well-filled columns.  This time his search
was rewarded.  There, on the first column of the last page, in all
the glory of print, was his treasured essay!

A flash of pleasure tinged his cheek, and his heart beat rapidly, as
he read his first printed production.  It is a great event in the
life of a literary novice, when he first sees himself.  Even Byron
says,--

  "'Tis pleasant, sure, to see one's self in print."

To our young hero the essay read remarkably well--better than he had
expected; but then, very likely he was prejudiced in its favor.  He
read it through three times on his way back to the printing office,
and each time felt better satisfied.

"I wonder if any of the readers will think it was written by a boy?"
thought Harry.  Probably many did so suspect, for, as I have said,
though the thoughts were good and sensible, the article was only
moderately well expressed.  A practised critic would readily have
detected marks of immaturity, although it was a very creditable
production for a boy of sixteen.

"Shall I tell Ferguson?" thought Harry.

On the whole he concluded to remain silent just at present.  He knew
Ferguson took the paper, and waited to see if he would make any
remark about it.

"I should like to hear him speak of it, without knowing that I was
the writer," thought our hero.

Just before he reached the office, he discovered with satisfaction
the following editorial reference to his article:--

"We print in another column an essay on 'ambition' by a new
contributor.  It contains some good ideas, and we especially commend
it to the perusal of our young readers.  We hope to hear from
'Franklin' again."

"That's good," thought Harry.  "I am glad the editor likes it.  I
shall write again as soon as possible."

"What makes you look so bright, Harry?" asked Ferguson, as he
re-entered the office.  "Has any one left you a fortune?"

"Not that I know of," said Harry.  "Do I look happier than usual?"

"So it seems to me."

Harry was spared answering this question, for Clapp struck in,
grumbling, as usual: "I wish somebody'd leave me a fortune.  You
wouldn't see me here long."

"What would you do?" asked his fellow-workman.

"Cut work to begin with.  I'd go to Europe and have a jolly time."

"You can do that without a fortune."

"I should like to know how?"

"Be economical, and you can save enough in three years to pay for a
short trip.  Bayard Taylor was gone two years, and only spent five
hundred dollars."

"Oh, hang economy!" drawled Clapp.  "It don't suit me.  I should like
to know how a feller's going to economize on fifteen dollars a week."

"I could."

"Oh, no doubt," sneered Clapp, "but a man can't starve."

"Come round and take supper with me, some night," said Ferguson,
good-humoredly, "and you can judge for yourself whether I believe in
starving."

Clapp didn't reply to this invitation.  He would not have enjoyed a
quiet evening with his fellow-workman.  An evening at billiards or
cards, accompanied by bets on the games, would have been much more to
his mind.

"Who is Bayard Taylor, that made such a cheap tour in Europe?" asked
Harry, soon afterward.

"A young journalist who had a great desire to travel.  He has lately
published an account of his tour.  I don't buy many books, but I
bought that.  Would you like to read it?"

"Very much."

"You can have it any time."

"Thank you."

On Monday, a very agreeable surprise awaited Harry.

"I am out of copy," he said, going up to Mr. Anderson's table.

"Here's a selection for the first page," said Mr. Anderson.  "Cut it
in two, and give part of it to Clapp."

Could Harry believe his eyes!  It was his own article on ambition,
and it was to be reproduced in the "Gazette."  Next to the delight of
seeing one's self in print for the first time, is the delight of
seeing that first article copied.  It is a mark of appreciation which
cannot be mistaken.

Still Harry said nothing, but, with a manner as unconcerned as
possible, handed the lower half of the essay to Clapp to set up.  The
signature "Franklin" had been cut off, and the name of the paper from
which the essay had been cut was substituted.

"Wouldn't Clapp feel disgusted," thought Harry, "if he knew that he
was setting up an article of mine.  I believe he would have a fit."

He was too considerate to expose his fellow-workman to such a
contingency, and went about his work in silence.

That evening he wrote to the publisher of the "Standard," inclosing
the price of two copies of the last number, which he desired should
be sent to him by mail.  He wished to keep one himself, and the other
he intended to forward to his father, who, he knew, would sympathize
with him in his success as well as his aspirations.  He accompanied
the paper by a letter in which he said,--

"I want to improve in writing as much as, I can.  I want to be
something more than a printer, sometime.  I shall try to qualify
myself for an editor; for an editor can exert a good deal of
influence in the community.  I hope you will approve my plans."

In due time Harry received the following reply:--


"My dear son:--I am indeed pleased and proud to hear of your success,
not that it is a great matter in itself, but because I think it shows
that you are in earnest in your determination to win an honorable
position by honorable labor.  I am sorry that my narrow means have
not permitted me to give you those advantages which wealthy fathers
can bestow upon their sons.  I should like to have sent you to
college and given you an opportunity afterward of studying for a
profession.  I think your natural abilities would have justified such
an outlay.  But, alas! poverty has always held me back.  It shuts out
you, as it has shut out me, from the chance of culture.  Your
college, my boy, must be the printing office.  If you make the best
of that, you will find that it is no mean instructor.  Not Franklin
alone, but many of our most eminent and influential men have
graduated from it.

"You will be glad to hear that we are all well.  I have sold the cow
which I bought of Squire Green, and got another in her place that
proves to be much better.  We all send much love, and your mother
wishes me to say that she misses you very much, as indeed we all do.
But we know that you are better off in Centreville than you would be
at home, and that helps to make us contented.  Don't forget to write
every week.

  "Your affectionate father,
    "HIRAM WALTON.

"P. S.--If you print any more articles, we shall be interested to
read them."


Harry read this letter with eager interest.  He felt glad that his
father was pleased with him, and it stimulated him to increased
exertions.

"Poor father!" he said to himself.  "He has led a hard life,
cultivating that rocky little farm.  It has been hard work and poor
pay with him.  I hope there is something better in store for him.  If
I ever get rich, or even well off, I will take care that he has an
easier time."

After the next issue of the "Gazette" had appeared, Harry informed
Ferguson in confidence that he was the author of the article on
Ambition.

"I congratulate you, Harry," said his friend.  "It is an excellent
essay, well thought out, and well expressed.  I don't wonder, now you
tell me of it.  It sounds like you.  Without knowing the authorship,
I asked Clapp his opinion of it."

"What did he say?"

"Are you sure it won't hurt your feelings?"

"It may; but I shall get over it.  Go ahead."

"He said it was rubbish."

Harry laughed.

"He would be confirmed in his decision, if he knew that I wrote it,"
he said.

"No doubt.  But don't let that discourage you.  Keep on writing by
all means, and you'll become an editor in time."


CHAPTER XVI.

FERDINAND B. KENSINGTON.

It has already been mentioned that John Clapp and Luke Harrison were
intimate.  Though their occupations differed, one being a printer and
the other a shoemaker, they had similar tastes, and took similar
views of life.  Both were discontented with the lot which Fortune had
assigned them.  To work at the case, or the shoe-bench, seemed
equally irksome, and they often lamented to each other the hard
necessity which compelled them to it.  Suppose we listen to their
conversation, as they walked up the village street, one evening about
this time, smoking cigars.

"I say, Luke," said John Clapp, "I've got tired of this kind of life.
Here I've been in the office a year, and I'm not a cent richer than
when I entered it, besides working like a dog all the while."

"Just my case," said Luke.  "I've been shoe-makin' ever since I was
fourteen, and I'll be blest if I can show five dollars, to save my
life."

"What's worse," said Clapp, "there isn't any prospect of anything
better in my case.  What's a feller to do on fifteen dollars a week?"

"Won't old Anderson raise your wages?"

"Not he!  He thinks I ought to get rich on what he pays me now," and
Clapp laughed scornfully.  "If I were like Ferguson, I might.  He
never spends a cent without taking twenty-four hours to think it over
beforehand."

My readers, who are familiar with Mr. Ferguson's views and ways of
life, will at once see that this was unjust, but justice cannot be
expected from an angry and discontented man.

"Just so," said Luke.  "If a feller was to live on bread and water,
and get along with one suit of clothes a year, he might save
something, but that aint _my_ style."

"Nor mine."

"It's strange how lucky some men are," said Luke.  "They get rich
without tryin'.  I never was lucky.  I bought a ticket in a lottery
once, but of course I didn't draw anything.  Just my luck!"

"So did I," said Clapp, "but I fared no better.  It seemed as if
Fortune had a spite against me.  Here I am twenty-five years old, and
all I'm worth is two dollars and a half, and I owe more than that to
the tailor."

"You're as rich as I am," said Luke.  "I only get fourteen dollars a
week.  That's less than you do."

"A dollar more or less don't amount to much," said Clapp.  "I'll tell
you what it is, Luke," he resumed after a pause, "I'm getting sick of
Centreville."

"So am I," said Luke, "but it don't make much difference.  If I had
fifty dollars, I'd go off and try my luck somewhere else, but I'll
have to wait till I'm gray-headed before I get as much as that."

"Can't you borrow it?"

"Who'd lend it to me?"

"I don't know.  If I did, I'd go in for borrowing myself.  I wish
there was some way of my getting to California."

"California!" repeated Luke with interest.  "What would you do there?"

"I'd go to the mines."

"Do you think there's money to be made there?"

"I know there is," said Clapp, emphatically.

"How do you know it?"

"There's an old school-mate of mine--Ralph Smith--went out there two
years ago.  Last week he returned home--I heard it in a letter--and
how much do you think he brought with him?"

"How much?"

"Eight thousand dollars!"

"Eight thousand dollars!  He didn't make it all at the mines, did he?"

"Yes, he did.  When he went out there, he had just money enough to
pay his passage.  Now, after only two years, he can lay off and live
like a gentleman."

"He's been lucky, and no mistake."

"You bet he has.  But we might be as lucky if we were only out there."

"Ay, there's the rub.  A fellow can't travel for nothing."

At this point in their conversation, a well-dressed young man,
evidently a stranger in the village, met them, and stopping, asked
politely for a light.

This Clapp afforded him.

"You are a stranger in the village?" he said, with some curiosity.

"Yes, I was never here before.  I come from New York."

"Indeed!  If I lived in New York I'd stay there, and not come to such
a beastly place as Centreville."

"Do you live here?" asked the stranger.

"Yes."

"I wonder you live in such a beastly place," he said, with a smile.

"You wouldn't, if you knew the reason."

"What is the reason?"

"I can't get away."

The stranger laughed.

"Cruel parents?" he asked.

"Not much," said Clapp.  "The plain reason is, that I haven't got
money enough to get me out of town."

"It's the same with me," said Luke Harrison.

"Gentlemen, we are well met," said the stranger.  "I'm hard up
myself."

"You don't look like it," said Luke, glancing at his rather flashy
attire.

"These clothes are not paid for," said the stranger, laughing; "and
what's more, I don't think they are likely to be.  But, I take it,
you gentlemen are better off than I in one respect.  You've got
situations--something to do."

"Yes, but on starvation pay," said Clapp.  "I'm in the office of the
'Centreville Gazette.'"

"And I'm in a shoemaker's shop.  It's a beastly business for a young
man of spirit," said Luke.

"Well, I'm a gentleman at large, living on my wits, and pretty poor
living it is sometimes," said the stranger.  "As I think we'll agree
together pretty well, I'm glad I've met you.  We ought to know each
other better.  There's my card."

He drew from his pocket a highly glazed piece of pasteboard, bearing
the name,

    FREDERICK B. KENSINGTON.

"I haven't any cards with me," said Clapp, "but my name is John
Clapp."

"And mine is Luke Harrison," said the bearer of that appellation.

"I'm proud to know you, gentlemen.   If you have no objection, we'll
walk on together."

To this Clapp and Luke acceded readily.  Indeed, they were rather
proud of being seen in company with a young man so dashing in manner,
and fashionably dressed, though in a pecuniary way their new
acquaintance, by his own confession, was scarcely as well off as
themselves.

"Where are you staying, Mr. Kensington?" said Clapp.

"At the hotel.  It's a poor place.  No style."

"Of course not.  I can't help wondering, Mr. Kensington, what can
bring you to such a one-horse place as this."

"I don't mind telling you, then.  The fact is, I've got an old aunt
living about two miles from here.  She's alone in the world--got
neither chick nor child--and is worth at least ten thousand dollars.
Do you see?"

"I think I do," said Clapp.  "You want to come in for a share of the
stamps."

"Yes; I want to see if I can't get something out of the old girl,"
said Kensington, carelessly.

"Do you think the chance is good?"

"I don't know.  I hear she's pretty tight-fisted.  But I've run on
here on the chance of doing something.  If she will only make me her
heir, and give me five hundred dollars in hand, I'll go to
California, and see what'll turn up."

"California!" repeated John Clapp and Luke in unison.

"Yes; were you ever there?"

"No; but we were talking of going there just as you came up," said
John.  "An old school-mate of mine has just returned from there with
eight thousand dollars in gold."

"Lucky fellow!  That's the kind of haul I'd like to make."

"Do you know how much it costs to go out there?"

"The prices are down just at present.  You can go for a hundred
dollars--second cabin."

"It might as well be a thousand!" said Luke.  "Clapp and I can't
raise a hundred dollars apiece to save our lives."

"I'll tell you what," said Kensington.  "You two fellows are just the
company I'd like.  If I can raise five hundred dollars out of the old
girl, I'll take you along with me, and you can pay me after you get
out there."

John Clapp and Luke Harrison were astounded at this liberal offer
from a perfect stranger, but they had no motives of delicacy about
accepting it.  They grasped the hand of their new friend, and assured
him that nothing would suit them so well.

"All right!" said Kensington.  "Then it's agreed.  Now, boys, suppose
we go round to the tavern, and ratify our compact by a drink."

"I say amen to that," answered Clapp, "but I insist on standing
treat."

"Just as you say," said Kensington.  "Come along."

It was late when the three parted company.  Luke and John Clapp were
delighted with their new friend, and, as they staggered home with
uncertain steps, they indulged in bright visions of future prosperity.


CHAPTER XVII.

AUNT DEBORAH.

Miss Deborah Kensington sat in an old-fashioned rocking-chair covered
with a cheap print, industriously engaged in footing a stocking.  She
was a maiden lady of about sixty, with a thin face, thick seamed with
wrinkles, a prominent nose, bridged by spectacles, sharp gray eyes,
and thin lips.   She was a shrewd New England woman, who knew very
well how to take care of and increase the property which she had
inherited.  Her nephew had been correctly informed as to her being
close-fisted.  All her establishment was carried on with due regard
to economy, and though her income in the eyes of a city man would be
counted small, she saved half of it every year, thus increasing her
accumulations.

As she sat placidly knitting, an interruption came in the shape of a
knock at the front door.

"I'll go myself," she said, rising, and laying down the stocking.
"Hannah's out in the back room, and won't hear.  I hope it aint Mrs.
Smith, come to borrow some butter.  She aint returned that last
half-pound she borrowed.  She seems to think her neighbors have got
to support her."

These thoughts were in her mind as she opened the door.  But no Mrs.
Smith presented her figure to the old lady's gaze.  She saw instead,
with considerable surprise, a stylish young man with a book under his
arm.  She jumped to the conclusion that he was a book-pedler, having
been annoyed by several persistent specimens of that class of
travelling merchants.

"If you've got books to sell," she said, opening the attack, "you may
as well go away.  I aint got no money to throw away."

Mr. Ferdinand B. Kensington--for he was the young man in
question--laughed heartily, while the old lady stared at him half
amazed, half angry.

"I don't see what there is to laugh at," said she, offended.

"I was laughing at the idea of my being taken for a book-pedler."

"Well, aint you one?" she retorted.  "If you aint, what be you?"

"Aunt Deborah, don't you know me?" asked the young man, familiarly.

"Who are you that calls me aunt?" demanded the old lady, puzzled.

"I'm your brother Henry's son.  My name is Ferdinand."

"You don't say so!" ejaculated the old lady.  "Why, I'd never 'ave
thought it.  I aint seen you since you was a little boy."

"This don't look as if I was a little boy, aunt," said the young man,
touching his luxuriant whiskers.

"How time passes, I do declare!" said Deborah.  "Well, come in, and
we'll talk over old times.  Where did you come from?"

"From the city of New York.  That's where I've been living for some
time."

"You don't say!  Well, what brings you this way?"

"To see you, Aunt Deborah.  It's so long since I've seen you that I
thought I'd like to come."

"I'm glad to see you, Ferdinand," said the old lady, flattered by
such a degree of dutiful attention from a fine-looking young man.
"So your poor father's dead?"

"Yes, aunt, he's been dead three years."

"I suppose he didn't leave much.  He wasn't very forehanded."

"No, aunt; he left next to nothing."

"Well, it didn't matter much, seein' as you was the only child, and
big enough to take care of yourself."

"Still, aunt, it would have been comfortable if he had left me a few
thousand dollars."

"Aint you doin' well?  You look as if you was," said Deborah,
surveying critically her nephew's good clothes.

"Well, I've been earning a fair salary, but it's very expensive
living in a great city like New York."

"Humph! that's accordin' as you manage.  If you live snug, you can
get along there cheap as well as anywhere, I reckon.  What was you
doin'?"

"I was a salesman for A. T. Stewart, our leading dry-goods merchant."

"What pay did you get?"

"A thousand dollars a year."

"Why, that's a fine salary.  You'd ought to save up a good deal."

"You don't realize how much it costs to live in New York, aunt.  Of
course, if I lived here, I could live on half the sum, but I have to
pay high prices for everything in New York."

"You don't need to spend such a sight on dress," said Deborah,
disapprovingly.

"I beg your pardon, Aunt Deborah; that's where you are mistaken.  The
store-keepers in New York expect you to dress tip-top and look
genteel, so as to do credit to them.  If it hadn't been for that, I
shouldn't have spent half so much for dress.  Then, board's very
expensive."

"You can get boarded here for two dollars and a half a week," said
Aunt Deborah.

"Two dollars and a half!  Why, I never paid less than eight dollars a
week in the city, and you can only get poor board for that."

"The boarding-houses must make a great deal of money," said Deborah.
"If I was younger, I'd maybe go to New York, and keep one myself."

"You're rich, aunt.  You don't need to do that."

"Who told you I was rich?" said the old lady, quickly.

"Why, you've only got yourself to take care of, and you own this
farm, don't you?"

"Yes, but farmin' don't pay much."

"I always heard you were pretty comfortable."

"So I am," said the old lady, "and maybe I save something; but my
income aint as great as yours."

"You have only yourself to look after, and it is cheap living in
Centreville."

"I don't fling money away.  I don't spend quarter as much as you on
dress."

Looking at the old lady'a faded bombazine dress, Ferdinand was very
ready to believe this.

"You don't have to dress here, I suppose," he answered.  "But, aunt,
we won't talk about money matters just yet.  It was funny you took me
for a book-pedler."

"It was that book you had, that made me think so."

"It's a book I brought as a present to you, Aunt Deborah."

"You don't say!" said the old lady, gratified.  "What is it?  Let me
look at it."

"It's a copy of 'Pilgrim's Progress,' illustrated.  I knew you
wouldn't like the trashy books they write nowadays, so I brought you
this."

"Really, Ferdinand, you're very considerate," said Aunt Deborah,
turning over the leaves with manifest pleasure.  "It's a good book,
and I shall be glad to have it.  Where are you stoppin'?"

"At the hotel in the village."

"You must come and stay here.  You can get 'em to send round your
things any time."

"Thank you, aunt, I shall be delighted to do so.  It seems so
pleasant to see you again after so many years.  You don't look any
older than when I saw you last."

Miss Deborah knew very well that she did look older, but still she
was pleased by the compliment.  Is there any one who does not like to
receive the same assurance?

"I'm afraid your eyes aint very sharp, Ferdinand," she said.  "I feel
I'm gettin' old.  Why, I'm sixty-one, come October."

"Are you?  I shouldn't call you over fifty, from your looks, aunt.
Really I shouldn't."

"I'm afraid you tell fibs sometimes," said Aunt Deborah, but she said
it very graciously, and surveyed her nephew very kindly.  "Heigh ho!
it's a good while since your poor father and I were children
together, and went to the school-house on the hill.  Now he's gone,
and I'm left alone."

"Not alone, aunt.  If he is dead, you have got a nephew."

"Well, Ferdinand, I'm glad to see you, and I shall be glad to have
you pay me a good long visit.  But how can you be away from your
place so long?  Did Mr. Stewart give you a vacation?"

"No, aunt; I left him."

"For good?"

"Yes."

"Left a place where you was gettin' a thousand dollars a year!" said
the old lady in accents of strong disapproval.

"Yes, aunt."

"Then I think you was very foolish," said Deborah with emphasis.

"Perhaps you won't, when you know why I left it."

"Why did you?"

"Because I could do better."

"Better than a thousand dollars a year!" said Deborah with surprise.

"Yes, I am offered two thousand dollars in San Francisco."

"You don't say!" ejaculated Deborah, letting her stocking drop in
sheer amazement.

"Yes, I do.  It's a positive fact."

"You must be a smart clerk!"

"Well, it isn't for me to say," said Ferdinand, laughing.

"When be you goin' out?"

"In a week, but I thought I must come and bid you good-by first."

"I'm real glad to see you, Ferdinand," said Aunt Deborah, the more
warmly because she considered him so prosperous that she would have
no call to help him.  But here she was destined to find herself
mistaken.


CHAPTER XVIII.

AUNT AND NEPHEW.

"I don't think I can come here till to-morrow, Aunt Deborah," said
Ferdinand, a little later.  "I'll stay at the hotel to-night, and
come round with my baggage in the morning."

"Very well, nephew, but now you're here, you must stay to tea."

"Thank you, aunt, I will."

"I little thought this mornin', I should have Henry's son to tea,"
said Aunt Deborah, half to herself.  "You don't look any like him,
Ferdinand."

"No, I don't think I do."

"It's curis too, for you was his very picter when you was a boy."

"I've changed a good deal since then, Aunt Deborah," said her nephew,
a little uneasily.

"So you have, to be sure.  Now there's your hair used to be almost
black, now it's brown.  Really I can't account for it," and Aunt
Deborah surveyed the young man over her spectacles.

"You've got a good memory, aunt," said Ferdinand with a forced laugh.

"Now ef your hair had grown darker, I shouldn't have wondered,"
pursued Aunt Deborah; "but it aint often black turns to brown."

"That's so, aunt, but I can explain it," said Ferdinand, after a
slight pause.

"How was it?"

"You know the French barbers can change your hair to any shade you
want."

"Can they?"

"Yes, to be sure.  Now--don't laugh at me, aunt--a young lady I used
to like didn't fancy dark hair, so I went to a French barber, and he
changed the color for me in three months."

"You don't say!"

"Fact, aunt; but he made me pay him well too."

"How much did you give him?"

"Fifty dollars, aunt."

"That's what I call wasteful," said Aunt Deborah, disapprovingly.

"Couldn't you be satisfied with the nat'ral color of your hair?  To
my mind black's handsomer than brown."

"You're right, aunt.  I wouldn't have done it if it hadn't been for
Miss Percival."

"Are you engaged to her?"

"No, Aunt Deborah.  The fact was, I found she wasn't domestic, and
didn't know anything about keeping house, but only cared for dress,
so I drew off, and she's married to somebody else now."

"I'm glad to hear it," said Deborah, emphatically.  "The jade!  She
wouldn't have been a proper wife for you.  You want some good girl
that's willin' to go into the kitchen, and look after things, and not
carry all she's worth on her back."

"I agree with you, aunt," said Ferdinand, who thought it politic, in
view of the request he meant to make by and by, to agree with hie
aunt in her views of what a wife should be.

Aunt Deborah began to regard her nephew as quite a sensible young
man, and to look upon him with complacency.

"I wish, Ferdinand," she said, "you liked farmin'."

"Why, aunt?"

"You could stay here, and manage my farm for me."

"Heaven forbid!" thought the young man with a shudder.  "I should be
bored to death.  Does the old lady think I would put on a frock and
overalls, and go out and plough, or hoe potatoes?"

"It's a good, healthy business," pursued Aunt Deborah, unconscious of
the thoughts which were passing through her nephew's mind, "and you
wouldn't have to spend much for dress.  Then I'm gittin' old, and
though I don't want to make no promises, I'd very likely will it to
you, ef I was satisfied with the way you managed."

"You're very kind, aunt," said Ferdinand, "but I'm afraid I wasn't
cut out for farming.  You know I never lived in the country."

"Why, yes, you did," said the old lady.  "You was born in the
country, and lived there till you was ten years old."

"To be sure," said Ferdinand, hastily, "but I was too young then to
take notice of farming.   What does a boy of ten know of such things?"

"To be sure.  You're right there."

"The fact is, Aunt Deborah, some men are born to be farmers, and some
are born to be traders.  Now, I've got a talent for trading.  That's
the reason I've got such a good offer from San Francisco."

"How did you get it?  Did you know the man?"

"He used to be in business in New York.  He was the first man I
worked for, and he knew what I was.  San Francisco is full of money,
and traders make more than they do here.  That's the reason he can
afford to offer me so large a salary."

"When did he send for you?"

"I got the letter last week."

"Have you got it with you?"

"No, aunt; I may have it at the hotel," said the young man,
hesitating, "but I am not certain."

"Well, it's a good offer.  There isn't nobody in Centreville gets so
large a salary."

"No, I suppose not.  They don't need it, as it is cheap living here."

"I hope when you get out there, Ferdinand, you'll save up money.
You'd ought to save two-thirds of your pay."

"I will try to, aunt."

"You'll be wantin' to get married bimeby, and then it'll be
convenient to have some money to begin with."

"To be sure, aunt.   I see you know how to manage."

"I was always considered a good manager," said Deborah, complacently.
"Ef your poor father had had _my_ faculty, he wouldn't have died as
poor as he did, I can tell you."

"What a conceited old woman she is, with her faculty!" thought
Ferdinand, but what he said was quite different.

"I wish he had had, aunt.  It would have been better for me."

"Well, you ought to get along, with your prospects."

"Little the old woman knows what my real prospects are!" thought the
young man.

"Of course I ought," he said.

"Excuse me a few minutes, nephew," said Aunt Deborah, gathering up
her knitting and rising from her chair.  "I must go out and see about
tea.  Maybe you'd like to read that nice book you brought."

"No, I thank you, aunt.  I think I'll take a little walk round your
place, if you'll allow me."

"Sartin, Ferdinand.  Only come back in half an hour; tea'll be ready
then."

"Yea, aunt, I'll remember."

So while Deborah was in the kitchen, Ferdinand took a walk in the
fields, laughing to himself from time to time, as if something amused
him.

He returned in due time, and sat down to supper Aunt Deborah had
provided her best, and, though the dishes were plain, they were quite
palatable.

When supper was over, the young man said,--

"Now, aunt, I think I will be getting back to the hotel."

"You'll come over in the morning, Ferdinand, and fetch your trunk?"

"Yes, aunt.  Good-night."

"Good-night."

"Well," thought the young man, as he tramped back to the hotel.
"I've opened the campaign, and made, I believe, a favorable
impression.  But what a pack of lies I have had to tell, to be sure!
The old lady came near catching me once or twice, particularly about
the color of my hair.  It was a lucky thought, that about the French
barber.  It deceived the poor old soul.  I don't think she could ever
have been very handsome.  If she was she must have changed fearfully."

In the evening, John Clapp and Luke Harrison came round to the hotel
to see him.

"Have you been to see your aunt?" asked Clapp.

"Yes, I took tea there."

"Have a good time?"

"Oh, I played the dutiful nephew to perfection.  The old lady thinks
a sight of me."

"How did you do it?"

"I agreed with all she said, told her how young she looked, and
humbugged her generally."

Clapp laughed.

"The best part of the joke is--will you promise to keep dark?"

"Of course."

"Don't breathe it to a living soul, you two fellows.  _She isn't my
aunt of all_!"

"Isn't your aunt?"

"No, her true nephew is in New York--I know him.--but I know enough
of family matters to gull the old lady, and, I hope, raise a few
hundred dollars out of her."

This was a joke which Luke and Clapp could appreciate, and they
laughed heartily at the deception which was being practised on simple
Aunt Deborah, particularly when Ferdinand explained how he got over
the difficulty of having different colored hair from the real owner
of the name he assumed.

"We must have a drink on that," said Luke.  "Walk up, gentlemen."

"I'm agreeable," said Ferdinand.

"And I," said Clapp.  "Never refuse a good offer, say I."

Poor Aunt Deborah!  She little dreamed that she was the dupe of a
designing adventurer who bore no relationship to her.


CHAPTER XIX.

THE ROMANCE OF A RING.

Ferdinand B. Kensington, as he called himself, removed the next
morning to the house of Aunt Deborah.  The latter received him very
cordially, partly because it was a pleasant relief to her solitude to
have a lively and active young man in the house, partly because she
was not forced to look upon him as a poor relation in need of
pecuniary assistance.  She even felt considerable respect for the
prospective recipient of an income of two thousand dollars, which in
her eyes was a magnificent salary.

Ferdinand, on his part, spared no pains to make himself agreeable to
the old lady, whom he had a mercenary object in pleasing.  Finding
that she was curious to hear about the great city, which to her was
as unknown as London or Paris, be gratified her by long accounts,
chiefly of as imaginative character, to which she listened greedily.
These included some personal adventures, in all of which he figured
very creditably.

Here is a specimen.

"By the way, Aunt Deborah," he said, casually, "have you noticed this
ring on my middle finger?"

"No, I didn't notice it before, Ferdinand.  It's very handsome."

"I should think it ought to be, Aunt Deborah," said the young man.

"Why?"

"It cost enough to be handsome."

"How much did it cost?" asked the old lady, not without curiosity.

"Guess."

"I aint no judge of such things; I've only got this plain gold ring.
Yours has got some sort of a stone in it."

"That stone is a diamond, Aunt Deborah!"

"You don't say so!  Let me look at it.  It aint got no color.  Looks
like glass."

"It's very expensive, though.  How much do you think it cost?"

"Well, maybe five dollars."

"Five dollars!" ejaculated the young man.  "Why, what can you be
thinking of, Aunt Deborah?"

"I shouldn't have guessed so much," said the old lady,
misunderstanding him, "only you said it was expensive."

"So it is.  Five dollars would be nothing at all."

"You don't say it cost more?"

"A great deal more."

"Did it cost ten dollars?"

"More."

"Fifteen?"

"I see, aunt, you have no idea of the cost of diamond rings!  You may
believe me or not, but that ring cost six hundred and fifty dollars."

"What!" almost screamed Aunt Deborah, letting fall her knitting in
her surprise.

"It's true."

"Six hundred and fifty dollars for a little piece of gold and glass!"
ejaculated the old lady.

"Diamond, aunt, not glass."

"Well, it don't look a bit better'n glass, and I do say," proceeded
Deborah, with energy, "that it's a sin and a shame to pay so much
money for a ring.  Why, it was more than half your year's salary,
Ferdinand."

"I agree with you, aunt; it would have been very foolish and wrong
for a young man on a small salary like mine to buy so expensive a
ring as this.  I hope, Aunt Deborah, I have inherited too much of
your good sense to do that."

"Then where did you get it?" asked the old lady, moderating her tone.

"It was given to me."

"Given to you!  Who would give you such a costly present?"

"A rich man whose life I once saved, Aunt Deborah."

"You don't say so, Ferdinand!" said Aunt Deborah, interested.  "Tell
me all about it."

"So I will, aunt, though I don't often speak of it," said Ferdinand,
modestly.  "It seems like boasting, you know, and I never like to do
that.  But this is the way it happened.

"Now for a good tough lie!" said Ferdinand to himself, as the old
lady suspended her work, and bent forward with eager attention.

"You know, of course, that New York and Brooklyn are on opposite
sides of the river, and that people have to go across in ferry-boats."

"Yes, I've heard that, Ferdinand."

"I'm glad of that, because now you'll know that my story is correct.
Well, one summer I boarded over in Brooklyn--on the Heights--and used
to cross the ferry morning and night.  It was the Wall street ferry,
and a great many bankers and rich merchants used to cross daily also.
One of these was a Mr. Clayton, a wholesale dry-goods merchant,
immensely rich, whom I knew by sight, though I had never spoken to
him.  It was one Thursday morning--I remember even the day of the
week--when the boat was unusually full.  Mr. Clayton was leaning
against the side-railing talking to a friend, when all at once the
railing gave way, and he fell backward into the water, which
immediately swallowed him up."

"Merciful man!" ejaculated Aunt Deborah, intensely interested.  "Go
on, Ferdinand."

"Of course there was a scene of confusion and excitement," continued
Ferdinand, dramatically.  'Man overboard!  Who will save him?' said
more than one.  'I will,' I exclaimed, and in an instant I had sprang
over the railing into the boiling current."

"Weren't you frightened to death?" asked the old lady.  "Could you
swim?"

"Of course I could.   More than once I have swum all the way from New
York to Brooklyn.  I caught Mr. Clayton by the collar, as he was
sinking for the third time, and shouted to a boatman near by to come
to my help.  Well, there isn't much more to tell.  We were taken on
board the boat, and rowed to shore.  Mr. Clayton recovered his senses
so far as to realize that I had saved his life.

"'What is your name, young man?' he asked, grasping my hand.

"'Ferdinand B. Kensington,' I answered modestly.

"'You have saved my life,' he said warmly.

"'I am very glad of it,' said I.

"'You have shown wonderful bravery."

"'Oh no,' I answered.  'I know how to swim, and I wasn't going to see
you drown before my eyes.'

"'I shall never cease to be grateful to you.'

"'Oh, don't think of it,' said I.

"'But I must think of it,' he answered.  'But for you I should now be
a senseless corpse lying in the bottom of the river,' and he
shuddered.

"'Mr. Clayton,' said I, 'let me advise you to get home as soon as
possible, or you will catch your death of cold.'

"'So will you,' he said.  'You must come with me.'

"He insisted, so I went, and was handsomely treated, you may depend.
Mr. Clayton gave me a new suit of clothes, and the next morning he
took me to Tiffany's--that's the best jeweller in New York--and
bought me this diamond ring.  He first offered me money, but I felt
delicate about taking money for such a service, and told him so.  So
he bought me this ring."

"Well, I declare!" ejaculated Aunt Deborah.

"That was an adventure.  But it seems to me, Ferdinand, I would have
taken the money."

"As to that, aunt, I can sell this ring, if ever I get hard up, but I
hope I sha'n't be obliged to."

"You certainly behaved very well, Ferdinand.  Do you ever see Mr.
Clayton now?"

"Sometimes, but I don't seek his society, for fear he would think I
wanted to get something more out of him."

"How much money do you think he'd have given you?" asked Aunt
Deborah, who was of a practical nature.

"A thousand dollars, perhaps more."

"Seems to me I would have taken it."

"If I had, people would have said that's why I jumped into the water,
whereas I wasn't thinking anything about getting a reward.  So now,
aunt, you won't think it very strange that I wear such an expensive
ring."

"Of course it makes a difference, as you didn't buy it yourself.  I
don't see how folks can be such fools as to throw away hundreds of
dollars for such a trifle."

"Well, aunt, everybody isn't as sensible and practical as you.  Now I
agree with you; I think it's very foolish.  Still I'm glad I've got
the ring, because I can turn it into money when I need to.  Only, you
see, I don't like to part with a gift, although I don't think Mr.
Clayton would blame me."

"Of course he wouldn't, Ferdinand.  But I don't see why you should
need money when you're goin' to get such a handsome salary in San
Francisco."

"To be sure, aunt, but there's something else.  However, I won't
speak of it to-day.  To-morrow I may want to ask your advice on a
matter of business."

"I'll advise you the best I can, Ferdinand," said the flattered
spinster.

"You see, aunt, you're so clear-headed, I shall place great
dependence on your advice.  But I think I'll take a little walk now,
just to stretch my limbs."

"I've made good progress," said the young man to himself, as he
lounged over the farm.  "The old lady swallows it all.  To-morrow
must come my grand stroke.  I thought I wouldn't propose it to-day,
for fear she'd suspect the ring story."


CHAPTER XX.

A BUSINESS TRANSACTION.

Ferdinand found life at the farm-house rather slow, nor did he
particularly enjoy the society of the spinster whom he called aunt.
But he was playing for a valuable stake, and meant to play out his
game.

"Strike while the iron is hot!" said he to himself; "That's a good
rule; but how shall I know when it is hot?  However, I must risk
something, and take my chances with the old lady."

Aunt Deborah herself hastened his action.  Her curiosity had been
aroused by Ferdinand's intimation that he wished her advice on a
matter of business, and the next morning, after breakfast, she said,
"Ferdinand, what was that you wanted to consult me about?  You may as
well tell me now as any time."

"Here goes, then!" thought the young man.

"I'll tell you, aunt.  You know I am offered a large salary in San
Francisco?"

"Yes, you told me so."

"And, as you said the other day, I can lay up half my salary, and in
time become a rich man."

"To be sure you can."

"But there is one difficulty in the way."

"What is that?"

"I must go out there."

"Of course you must," said the old lady, who did not yet see the
point.

"And unfortunately it costs considerable money."

"Haven't you got enough money to pay your fare out there?"

"No, aunt; it is very expensive living in New York, and I was unable
to save anything from my salary."

"How much does it cost to go out there?"

"About two hundred and fifty dollars."

"That's a good deal of money."

"So it is; but it will be a great deal better to pay it than to lose
so good a place."

"I hope," said the old lady, sharply, "you don't expect me to pay
your expenses out there."

"My dear aunt," said Ferdinand, hastily, "how can you suspect such a
thing?"

"Then what do you propose to do?" asked the spinster, somewhat
relieved.

"I wanted to ask your advice."

"Sell your ring.  It's worth over six hundred dollars."

"Very true; but I should hardly like to part with it.  I'll tell you
what I have thought of.  It cost six hundred and fifty dollars.  I
will give it as security to any one who will lend me five hundred
dollars, with permission to sell it if I fail to pay up the note in
six months.  By the way, aunt, why can't you accommodate me in this
matter?  You will lose nothing, and I will pay handsome interest."

"How do you know I have the money?"

"I don't know; but I think you must have.  But, although I am your
nephew, I wouldn't think of asking you to lend me money without
security.  Business is business, so I say."

"Very true, Ferdinand."

"I ask nothing on the score of relationship, but I will make a
business proposal."

"I don't believe the ring would fetch over six hundred dollars."

"It would bring just about that.  The other fifty dollars represent
the profit.  Now, aunt, I'll make you a regular business proposal.
If you'll lend me five hundred dollars, I'll give you my note for
five hundred and fifty, bearing interest at six per cent., payable in
six months, or, to make all sure, say in a year.  I place the ring in
your hands, with leave to sell it at the end of that time if I fail
to carry out my agreement.  But I sha'n't if I keep my health."

The old lady was attracted by the idea of making a bonus of fifty
dollars, but she was cautious, and averse to parting with her money.

"I don't know what to say, Ferdinand," she replied.  "Five hundred
dollars is a good deal of money."

"So it is, aunt.  Well, I don't know but I can offer you a little
better terms.  Give me four hundred and seventy-five, and I'll give
you a note for five hundred and fifty.  You can't make as much
interest anywhere else."

"I'd like to accommodate you," said the old lady, hesitating, for,
like most avaricious persons, she was captivated by the prospect of
making extra-legal interest.

"I know you would.  Aunt Deborah, but I don't want to ask the money
as a favor.  It is a strictly business transaction."

"I am afraid I couldn't spare more than four hundred and fifty."

"Very well, I won't dispute about the extra twenty-five dollars.
Considering how much income I'm going to get, it isn't of any great
importance."

"And you'll give me a note for five hundred and fifty?"

"Yes, certainly."

"I don't know as I ought to take so much interest."

"It's worth that to me, for though, of course, I could raise it by
selling the ring, I don't like to do that."

"Well, I don't know but I'll do it.  I'll get some ink, and you can
write me the due bill."

"Why, Aunt Deborah, you haven't got the money here, have you?"

"Yes, I've got it in the house.  A man paid up a mortgage last week,
and I haven't yet invested the money.  I meant to put it in the
savings bank."

"You wouldn't get but six per cent there.  Now the bonus I offer you
will be equal to about twenty per cent."

"And you really feel able to pay so much?"

"Yes, aunt; as I told you, it will be worth more than that to me."

"Well, Ferdinand, we'll settle the matter now.  I'll go and get the
money, and you shall give me the note and the ring."

"Triumph!" said the young man to himself, when the old lady had left
the room.  "You're badly sold, Aunt Deborah, but it's a good job for
me.  I didn't think I would have so little trouble."

Within fifteen minutes the money was handed over, and Aunt Deborah
took charge of the note and the valuable diamond ring.

"Be careful of the ring, Aunt Deborah," said Ferdinand.  "Remember, I
expect to redeem it again."

"I'll take good care of it, nephew, never fear!"

"If it were a little smaller, you could wear it, yourself."

"How would Deborah Kensington look with a diamond ring?  The
neighbors would think I was crazy.  No: I'll keep it in a safe place,
but I won't wear it."

"Now, Aunt Deborah, I must speak about other arrangements.  Don't you
think it would be well to start for San Francisco as soon as
possible?  You know I enter upon my duties as soon as I get there."

"Yes, Ferdinand, I think you ought to."

"I wish I could spare the time to spend a week with you, aunt; but
business is business, and my motto is, business before pleasure."

"And very proper, too, Ferdinand," said the old lady, approvingly.

"So I think I had better leave Centreville tomorrow."

"May be you had.  You must write and let me know when you get there,
and how you like your place."

"So I will, and I shall be glad to know that you take an interest in
me.  Now, aunt, as I have some errands to do, I will walk to the
village and come back about the middle of the afternoon."

"Won't you be back to dinner?"

"No, I think not, aunt."

"Very well, Ferdinand.  Come as soon as you can."

Half an hour later, Ferdinand entered the office of the "Centreville
Gazette."

"How do you do, Mr. Kensington?" said Clapp, eagerly.  "Anything new?"

"I should like to speak with you a moment in private, Mr. Clapp."

"All right!"

Clapp put on his coat, and went outside, shutting the door behind him.

"Well," said Ferdinand, "I've succeeded."

"Have you got the money?"

"Yes, but not quite as much as I anticipated."

"Can't you carry out your plan?" asked Clapp, soberly, fearing he was
to be left out in the cold.

"I've formed a new one.  Instead of going to California, which is
very expensive, we'll go out West, say to St. Louis, and try our
fortune there.  What do you say?"

"I'm agreed.  Can Luke go too?"

"Yes.  I'll take you both out there, and lend you fifty dollars each
besides, and you shall pay me back as soon as you are able.  Will you
let your friend know?"

"Yes, I'll undertake that; but when do you propose to start?"

"To-morrow morning."

"Whew!  That's short notice."

"I want to get away as soon as possible, for fear the old lady should
change her mind, and want her money back."

"That's where you're right."

"Of course you must give up your situation at once, as there is short
time to get ready."

"No trouble about that," said Clapp.  "I've hated the business for a
long time, and shall be only too glad to leave.  It's the same with
Luke.  He won't shed many tears at leaving Centreville."

"Well, we'll all meet this evening at the hotel.  I depend upon your
both being ready to start in the morning."

"All right, I'll let Luke know."

It may be thought singular that Ferdinand should have made so liberal
an offer to two comparative strangers; but, to do the young man
justice, though he had plenty of faults, he was disposed to be
generous when he had money, though he was not particular how he
obtained it.  Clapp and Luke Harrison he recognized as congenial
spirits, and he was willing to sacrifice something to obtain their
companionship.  How long his fancy was likely to last was perhaps
doubtful; but for the present he was eager to associate them with his
own plans.


CHAPTER XXI.

HARRY IS PROMOTED.

Clapp re-entered the printing office highly elated.

"Mr. Anderson," said he to the editor, "I am going to leave you."

Ferguson and Harry Walton looked up in surprise, and Mr. Anderson
asked,--

"Have you got another place?"

"No; I am going West."

"Indeed!  How long have you had that in view?"

"Not long.  I am going with Mr. Kensington."

"The one who just called on you?"

"Yes."

"How soon do you want to leave?"

"Now."

"That is rather short notice."

"I know it, but I leave town to-morrow morning."

"Well, I wish you success.  Here is the money I owe you."

"Sha'n't we see you again, Clapp?" asked Ferguson.

"Yes; I'll just look in and say good-by.  Now I must go home and get
ready."

"Well, Ferguson," said Mr. Andersen, after Clapp's departure, "that
is rather sudden."

"So I think."

"How can we get along with only two hands?"

"Very well, sir.  I'm willing to work a little longer, and Harry here
is a pretty quick compositor now.  The fact is, there isn't enough
work for three."

"Then you think I needn't hire another journeyman?"

"No."

"If you both work harder I must increase your wages, and then I shall
save money."

"I sha'n't object to that," said Ferguson, smiling.

"Nor I," said Harry.

"I was intending at any rate to raise Harry's wages, as I find he
does nearly as much as a journeyman.  Hereafter I will give you five
dollars a week besides your board."

"Oh, thank you, sir!" said Harry, overjoyed at his good fortune.

"As for you, Ferguson, if you will give me an hour more daily, I will
add three dollars a week to your pay."

"Thank you, sir.  I think I can afford now to give Mrs. Ferguson the
new bonnet she was asking for this morning."

"I don't want to overwork you two, but if that arrangement proves
satisfactory, we will continue it."

"I suppose you will be buying your wife a new bonnet too; eh, Harry?"
said Ferguson.

"I may buy myself a new hat.  Luke Harrison turned up his nose at my
old one the other day."

"What will Luke do without Clapp?  They were always together."

"Perhaps he is going too."

"I don't know where he will raise the money, nor Clapp either, for
that matter."

"Perhaps their new friend furnishes the money."

"If he does, he is indeed a friend."

"Well, it has turned out to our advantage, at any rate, Harry.
Suppose you celebrate it by coming round and taking supper with me?"

"With the greatest pleasure."

Harry was indeed made happy by his promotion.  Having been employed
for some months on board-wages, he had been compelled to trench upon
the small stock of money which he had saved up when in the employ of
Prof. Henderson, and he had been unable to send any money to his
father, whose circumstances were straitened, and who found it very
hard to make both ends meet.  That evening he wrote a letter to his
father, in which he inclosed ten dollars remaining to him from his
fund of savings, at the same time informing him of his promotion.  A
few days later, he received the following reply:--


"MY DEAR SON:

"Your letter has given me great satisfaction, for I conclude from
your promotion that you have done your duty faithfully, and won the
approbation of your employer.  The wages you now earn will amply pay
your expenses, while you may reasonably hope that they will be still
further increased, as you become more skilful and experienced.  I am
glad to hear that you are using your leisure hours to such good
purpose, and are trying daily to improve your education.  In this way
you may hope in time to qualify yourself for the position of an
editor, which is an honorable and influential profession, to which I
should be proud to have you belong.

"The money which you so considerately inclose comes at the right
time.  Your brother needs some new clothes, and this will enable me
to provide them.  We all send love, and hope to hear from you often.

  "Your affectionate father,
    "HIRAM WALTON."


Harry's promotion took place just before the beginning of September.
During the next week the fall term of the Prescott Academy commenced,
and the village streets again became lively with returning students.
Harry was busy at the case, when Oscar Vincent entered the printing
office, and greeted him warmly.

"How are you, Oscar?" said Harry, his face lighting up with pleasure.
"I am glad to see you back.  I would shake hands, but I am afraid you
wouldn't like it," and Harry displayed his hands soiled with
printer's ink.

"Well, we'll shake hands in spirit, then, Harry.  How have you passed
the time?"

"I have been very busy, Oscar."

"And I have been very lazy.  I have scarcely opened a book, that is,
a study-book, during the vacation.  How much have you done in French?"

"I have nearly finished Telemachus."

"You have!  Then you have done splendidly.  By the way, Harry, I
received the paper you sent, containing your essay.  It does you
credit, my boy."

Mr. Anderson, who was sitting at his desk, caught the last words.

"What is that, Harry?" he asked.  "Have you been writing for the
papers?"

Harry blushed.

"Yes, sir," he replied.  "I have written two or three articles for
the 'Boston Weekly Standard.'"

"Indeed!  I should like to see them."

"You republished one of them in the 'Gazette,' Mr. Anderson," said
Ferguson.

"What do you refer to?"

"Don't you remember an article on 'Ambition,' which you inserted some
weeks ago?"

"Yes, it was a good article.  Did you write it, Walton?"

"Yes, air."

"Why didn't you tell me of it?"

"He was too bashful," said Ferguson.

"I am glad to know that you can write," said the editor.  "I shall
call upon you for assistance, in getting up paragraphs occasionally."

"I shall be very glad to do what I can," said Harry, gratified.

"Harry is learning to be an editor," said Ferguson.

"I will give him a chance for practice, then," and Mr. Anderson
returned to his exchanges.

"By the way, Oscar," said Harry, "I am not a printer's devil any
longer.  I am promoted to be a journeyman."

"I congratulate you, Harry, but what will Fitz do now?  He used to
take so much pleasure in speaking of you as a printer's devil."

"I am sorry to deprive him of that pleasure.  Did you see much of him
in vacation, Oscar?"

"I used to meet him almost every day walking down Washington Street,
swinging a light cane, and wearing a stunning necktie, as usual."

"Is he coming back this term?"

"Yes, he came on the same train with me.  Hasn't he called to pay his
respects to you?"

"No," answered Harry, with a smile.  "He hasn't done me that honor.
He probably expects me to make the first call."

"Well, Harry, I suppose you will be on hand next week, when the
Clionian holds its first meeting?"

"Yes, I will be there."

"And don't forget to call at my room before that time.  I want to
examine you in French, and see how much progress you have made."

"Thank you, Oscar."

"Now I must be going.  I have got a tough Greek lesson to prepare for
to-morrow.  I suppose it will take me twice as long as usual.  It is
always hard to get to work again after a long vacation.  So
good-morning, and don't forget to call at my room soon--say to-morrow
evening."

"I will come."

"What a gentlemanly fellow your friend is!" said Ferguson.

"What is his name, Harry?" asked Mr. Anderson.

"Oscar Vincent.  His father is an editor in Boston."

"What! the son of John Vincent?" said Mr. Anderson, surprised.

"Yes, sir; do you know his father?"

"Only by reputation.  He is a man of great ability."

"Oscar is a smart fellow, too, but not a hard student."

"I shall be glad to have you bring him round to the house some
evening, Harry.  I shall be glad to become better acquainted with
him."

"Thank you, sir.  I will give him the invitation."

It is very possible that Harry rose in the estimation of his
employer, from his intimacy with the son of a man who stood so high
in his own profession.  At all events, Harry found himself from this
time treated with greater respect and consideration than before, and
Mr. Anderson often called upon him to write paragraphs upon local
matters, so that his position might be regarded except as to pay, as
that of an assistant editor.


CHAPTER XXII.

MISS DEBORAH'S EYES ARE OPENED.

Aunt Deborah felt that she had done a good stroke of business.  She
had lent Ferdinand four hundred and fifty dollars, and received in
return a note for five hundred and fifty, secured by a diamond ring
worth even more.  She plumed herself on her shrewdness, though at
times she felt a little twinge at the idea of the exorbitant interest
which she had exacted from so near a relative.

"But he said the money was worth that to him," she said to herself in
extenuation, "and he's goin' to get two thousand dollars a year.  I
didn't want to lend the money, I'd rather have had it in the savings
bank, but I did it to obleege him."

By such casuistry Aunt Deborah quieted her conscience, and carefully
put the ring away among her bonds and mortgages.

"Who'd think a little ring like that should be worth so much?" she
said to herself.  "It's clear waste of money.  But then Ferdinand
didn't buy it.  It was give to him, and a very foolish gift it was
too.  Railly, it makes me nervous to have it to take care of.  It's
so little it might get lost easy."

Aunt Deborah plumed herself upon her shrewdness.  It was not easy to
get the advantage of her in a bargain, and yet she had accepted the
ring as security for a considerable loan without once questioning its
genuineness.  She relied implicitly upon her nephew's assurance of
its genuineness, just as she had relied upon his assertion of
relationship.  But the time was soon coming when she was to be
undeceived.

One day, a neighbor stopped his horse in front of her house, and
jumping out of his wagon, walked up to the door and knocked.

"Good-morning, Mr. Simpson," said the old lady, answering the knock
herself; "won't you come in?"

"Thank you, Miss Deborah, I can't stop this morning.  I was at the
post-office just now, when I saw there was a letter for you, and
thought I'd bring it along."

"A letter for me!" said Aunt Deborah in some surprise, for her
correspondence was very limited.  "Who's it from?"

"It is post-marked New York," said Mr. Simpson.

"I don't know no one in New York," said the old lady, fumbling in her
pockets for her spectacles.

"Maybe it's one of your old beaux," said Mr. Simpson, humorously, a
joke which brought a grim smile to the face of the old spinster.
"But I must be goin'.  If it's an offer of marriage, don't forget to
invite me to the wedding."

Aunt Deborah went into the house, and seating herself in her
accustomed place, carefully opened the letter.  She turned over the
page, and glanced at the signature.  To her astonishment it was
signed,

  "Your affectionate nephew,
    "FERDINAND B. KENSINGTON."

"Ferdinand!" she exclaimed in surprise.  "Why, I thought he was in
Californy by this time.  How could he write from New York?  I s'pose
he'll explain.  I hope he didn't lose the money I lent him."

The first sentence in the letter was destined to surprise Miss
Deborah yet more.

"Dear aunt," it commenced, "it is so many years since we have met,
that I am afraid you have forgotten me."

"So many years!" repeated Miss Deborah in bewilderment.  "What on
earth can Ferdinand mean?  Why, it's only five weeks yesterday since
he was here.  He must be crazy."

She resumed reading.

"I have often had it in mind to make you a little visit, but I have
been so engrossed by business that I have been unable to get away.  I
am a salesman for A. T. Stewart, whom you must have heard of, as he
is the largest retail dealer in the city.  I have been three years in
his employ, and have been promoted by degrees, till I now receive
quite a good salary, until--and that is the news I have to write
you--I have felt justifed in getting married.  My wedding is fixed
for next week, Thursday.  I should be very glad if you could attend,
though I suppose you would consider it a long journey.  But at any
rate I can assure you that I should be delighted to see you present
on the occasion, and so would Maria.  If you can't come, write to me,
at any rate, in memory of old times.  It is just possible that during
our bridal tour--we are to go to the White Mountains for a week--we
shall call on you.  Let me know if it will be convenient for you to
receive us for a day.

  "Your affectionate nephew,
    "FERDINAND B. KENSINGTON."


Miss Deborah read this letter like one dazed.  She had to read it a
second time before she could comprehend its purport.

"Ferdinand going to be married!  He never said a word about it when
he was here.  And he don't say a word about Californy.  Then again he
says he hasn't seen me for years.  Merciful man!  I see it now--the
other fellow was an impostor!" exclaimed Miss Deborah, jumping, to
her feet in excitement.  "What did he want to deceive an old woman
for?"

It flashed upon her at once.  He came after money, and he had
succeeded only too well.  He had carried away four hundred and fifty
dollars with him.  True, he had left a note, and security.  But
another terrible suspicion had entered the old lady's mind; the ring
might not be genuine.

"I must know at once," exclaimed the disturbed spinster.  "I'll go
over to Brandon, to the jeweller's, and inquire.  If it's paste,
then, Deborah Kensington, you're the biggest fool in Centreville."

Miss Deborah summoned Abner, her farm servant from the field, and
ordered him instantly to harness the horse, as she wanted to go to
Brandon.

"Do you want me to go with you?" asked Abner.

"To be sure, I can't drive so fur, and take care of the horse."

"It'll interrupt the work," objected Abner.

"Never mind about the work," said Deborah, impatiently.  "I must go
right off.  It's on very important business."

"Wouldn't it be best to go after dinner?"

"No, we'll get some dinner over there, at the tavern."

"What's got into the old woman?" thought Abner.  "It isn't like her
to spend money at a tavern for dinner, when she might as well dine at
home.  Interruptin' the work, too!  However, it's her business!"

Deborah was ready and waiting when the horse drove up the door.  She
got in, and they set out.  Abner tried to open a conversation, but he
found Miss Deborah strangely unsocial.  She appeared to take no
interest in the details of farm work of which he spoke.

"Something's on her mind, I guess," thought Abner; and, as we know,
he was right.

In her hand Deborah clutched the ring, of whose genuineness she had
come to entertain such painful doubts.  It might be genuine, she
tried to hope, even if it came from an impostor; but her hope was
small.  She felt a presentiment that it would prove as false as the
man from whom she received it.  As for the story of the manner in
which he became possessed of it, doubtless that was as false as the
rest.

"How blind I was!" groaned Deborah in secret.  "I saw he didn't look
like the family.  What a goose I was to believe that story about his
changin' the color of his hair!  I was an old fool, and that's all
about it."

"Drive to the jeweller's," said Miss Deborah, when they reached
Brandon.

In some surprise, Abner complied.

Deborah got out of the wagon hastily and entered the store.

"What can I do for you, Miss Kensington?" asked the jeweller, who
recognized the old lady.

"I want to show you a ring," said Aunt Deborah, abruptly.  "Tell me
what it's worth."

She produced the ring which the false Ferdinand had intrusted to her.

The jeweller scanned it closely.

"It's a good imitation of a diamond ring," he said.

"Imitation!" gasped Deborah.

"Yes; you didn't think it was genuine?"

"What's it worth?"

"The value of the gold.  That appears to be genuine.  It may be worth
three dollars."

"Three dollars!" ejaculated Deborah.  "He told me it cost six hundred
and fifty."

"Whoever told you that was trying to deceive you."

"You're sure about its being imitation, are you?"

"There can be no doubt about it."

"That's what I thought," muttered the old lady, her face pale and
rigid.  "Is there anything to pay?"

"Oh, no; I am glad to be of service to you."

"Good-afternoon, then," said Deborah, abruptly, and she left the
store.

"Drive home, Abner, as quick as you can," she said.

"I haven't had any dinner," Abner remarked, "You said you'd get some
at the tavern."

"Did I?  Well, drive over there.  I'm not hungry myself, but I'll pay
for some dinner for you."

Poor Aunt Deborah! it was not the loss alone that troubled her,
though she was fond of money; but it was humiliating to think that
she had fallen such an easy prey to a designing adventurer.  In her
present bitter mood, she would gladly have ridden fifty miles to see
the false Ferdinand hanged.


CHAPTER XXIII.

THE PLOT AGAINST FLETCHER.

The intimacy between Harry and Oscar Vincent continued, and, as
during the former term, the latter volunteered to continue giving
French lessons to our hero.  These were now partly of a
conversational character, and, as Harry was thoroughly in earnest, it
was not long before he was able to speak quite creditably.

About the first of November, Fitzgerald Fletcher left the Prescott
Academy, and returned to his home in Boston.  It was not because he
had finished his education, but because he felt that he was not
appreciated by his fellow-students.  He had been ambitious to be
elected to an official position in the Clionian Society, but his
aspirations were not gratified.  He might have accepted this
disappointment, and borne it as well as he could, had it not been
aggravated by the elevation of Harry Walton to the presidency.  To be
only a common member, while a boy so far his social inferior was
President, was more than Fitzgerald could stand.  He was so incensed
that upon the announcement of the vote he immediately rose to a point
of order.

"Mr. President," he said warmly, "I must protest against this
election.  Walton is not a member of the Prescott Academy, and it is
unconstitutional to elect him President."

"Will the gentleman point out the constitutional clause which has
been violated by Walton's election?" said Oscar Vincent.

"Mr. President," said Fletcher, "this Society was founded by students
of the Prescott Academy; and the offices should be confined to the
members of the school."

Harry Walton rose and said: "Mr. President, my election has been a
great surprise to myself.  I had no idea that any one had thought of
me for the position.  I feel highly complimented by your kindness,
and deeply grateful for it; but there is something in what Mr.
Fletcher says.  You have kindly allowed me to share in the benefits
of the Society, and that satisfies me.  I think it will be well for
you to make another choice as President."

"I will put it to vote," said the presiding officer.  "Those who are
ready to accept Mr. Walton's resignation will signify it in the usual
way."

Fletcher raised his hand, but he was alone.

"Those who are opposed," said the President.

Every other hand except Harry's was now raised.

"Mr. Walton, your resignation is not accepted," said the presiding
officer.  "I call upon you to assume the duties of your new position."

Harry rose, and, modestly advanced to the chair.  "I have already
thanked you, gentlemen," he said, "for the honor you have conferred
upon me in selecting me as your presiding officer.  I have only to
add that I will discharge its duties to the best of my ability."

All applauded except Fletcher.  He sat with an unpleasant scowl upon
his face, and waited for the result of the balloting for
Vice-President and Secretary.  Had he been elected to either
position, the Clionian would probably have retained his illustrious
name upon its roll.  But as these honors were conferred upon other
members, he formed the heroic resolution no longer to remain a member.

"Mr. President," he said, when the last vote was announced, "I desire
to terminate my connection with this Society."

"I hope Mr. Fletcher will reconsider his determination," said Harry
from the chair.

"I would like to inquire the gentleman's reasons," said Tom Carver.

"I don't like the way in which the Society is managed," said
Fletcher.  "I predict that it will soon disband."

"I don't see any signs of it," said Oscar.  "If the gentleman is
really sincere, he should not desert the Clionian in the hour of
danger."

"I insist upon my resignation," said Fletcher.

"I move that it be accepted," said Tom Carver.

"Second the motion," said the boy who sat next him.

The resignation was unanimously accepted.  Fletcher ought to have
felt gratified at the prompt granting of his request, but he was not.
He had intended to strike dismay into the Society by his proposal to
withdraw, but there was no consternation visible.  Apparently they
were willing to let him go.

He rose from his seat mortified and wrathful.

"Gentlemen," he said, "you have complied with my request, and I am
deeply grateful.  I no longer consider it an honor to belong to the
Clionian.  I trust your new President may succeed as well in his new
office as he has in the capacity of a printer's devil."

Fletcher was unable to proceed, being interrupted by a storm of
hisses, in the midst of which he hurriedly made his exit.

"He wanted to be President himself--that's what's the matter," said
Tom Carver in a whisper to his neighbor.  "But he couldn't blame us
for not wanting to have him."

Other members of the Society came to the same conclusion, and it was
generally said that Fletcher had done himself no good by his
undignified resentment.  His parting taunt levelled at Harry was
regarded as mean and ungenerous, and only strengthened the sentiment
in favor of our hero who bore his honors modestly.  In fact Tom
Carver, who was fond of fun, conceived a project for mortifying
Fletcher, and readily obtained the co-operation of his classmates.

It must be premised that Fitz was vain of his reading and
declamation.  He had a secret suspicion that, if he should choose to
devote his talents to the stage, he would make a second Booth.  This
self-conceit of his made it the more easy to play off the following
joke upon him.

A fortnight later, the young ladies of the village proposed to hold a
Fair to raise funds for some public object.  At the head of the
committee of arrangements was a sister of the doctor's wife, named
Pauline Clinton.  This will explain the following letter which,
Fletcher received the succeeding day:--


"FITZGERALD FLETCHER, ESQ.--Dear Sir: Understanding that you are a
superior reader, we should be glad of your assistance in lending
_eclat_ to the Fair which we propose to hold on the evening of the
29th.  Will you be kind enough to occupy twenty minutes by reading
such selections as in your opinion will be of popular interest?  It
is desirable that you should let me know as soon as possible what
pieces you have selected, that they may be printed on the programme.

  "Yours respectfully,
    "PAULINE CLINTON,
      "(for the Committee)."


This note reached Fletcher at a time when he was still smarting from
his disappointment in obtaining promotion from the Clionian Society.
He read it with a flushed and triumphant face.  He never thought of
questioning its genuineness.  Was it not true that he was a superior
reader?  What more natural than that he should be invited to give
_eclat_ to the Fair by the exercise of his talents!  He felt it to be
a deserved compliment.  It was a greater honor to be solicited to
give a public reading than to be elected President of the Clionian
Society.

"They won't laugh at me now," thought Fletcher.

He immediately started for Oscar's room to make known his new honors.

"How are you, Fitz?" said Oscar, who was in the secret, and guessed
the errand on which he came.

"Very well, thank you, Oscar,"  answered Fletcher, in a stately
manner.

"Anything new with you?" asked Oscar, carelessly.

"Not much," said Fletcher.  "There's a note I just received.

"Whew!" exclaimed Oscar, in affected astonishment.  "Are you going to
accept?"

"I suppose I ought to oblige them," said Fletcher.  "It won't be much
trouble to me, you know."

"To be sure; it's in a good cause.  But how did they hear of your
reading?"

"Oh, there are no secrets in a small village like this," said
Fletcher.

"It's certainly a great compliment.  Has anybody else been invited to
read?"

"I think not," said Fletcher, proudly.  "They rely upon me."

"Couldn't you get a chance for me?  It would be quite an honor, and I
should like it for the sake of the family."

"I shouldn't feel at liberty to interfere with their arrangements,"
said Fletcher, who didn't wish to share the glory with any one.
"Besides, you don't read well enough."

"Well, I suppose I must give it up," said Oscar, in a tone of
resignation.  "By the way, what have you decided to read?"

"I haven't quite made up my mind," said Fletcher, in a tone of
importance.  "I have only just received the invitation, you know."

"Haven't you answered it yet?"

"No; but I shall as soon as I go home.  Good-night, Oscar."

"Good-night, Fitz."

"How mad Fitz will be when he finds he has been sold!" said Oscar to
himself.  "But he deserves it for treating Harry so meanly."


CHAPTER XXIV.

READING UNDER DIFFICULTIES.

On reaching home, Fletcher looked over his "Speaker," and selected
three poems which he thought he could read with best effect.  The
selection made, he sat down to his desk, and wrote a reply to the
invitation, as follows:--


"MISS PAULINE CLINTON: I hasten to acknowledge your polite invitation
to occupy twenty minutes in reading choice selections at your
approaching Fair.  I have paid much attention to reading, and hope to
be able to give pleasure to the large numbers who will doubtless
honor the occasion with their presence.  I have selected three
poems,--Poe's Raven, the Battle of Ivry, by Macaulay, and Marco
Bozarris, by Halleck.  I shall be much pleased if my humble efforts
add _eclat_ to the occasion.

  "Yours, very respectfully,
    "FITZGERALD FLETCHER."


"There," said Fletcher, reading his letter through with satisfaction.
"I think that will do.  It is high-toned and dignified, and shows
that I am highly cultured and refined.  I will copy it off, and mail
it."

Fletcher saw his letter deposited in the post-office, and returned to
his room.

"I ought to practise reading these poems, so as to do it up
handsomely," he said.  "I suppose I shall get a good notice in the
'Gazette.'  If I do, I will buy a dozen papers, and send to my
friends.  They will see that I am a person of consequence in
Centreville, even if I didn't get elected to any office in the high
and mighty Clionian Society."

I am sorry that I cannot reproduce the withering sarcasm which
Fletcher put into his tone in the last sentence.

When Demosthenes was practising oratory, he sought the sea-shore; but
Fitzgerald repaired instead to a piece of woods about half a mile
distant.  It was rather an unfortunate selection, as will appear.

It so happened that Tom Carver and Hiram Huntley were strolling about
the woods, when they espied Fletcher approaching with an open book in
his hand.

"Hiram," said Tom, "there's fun coming.  There's Fitz Fletcher with
his 'Speaker' in his hand.  He's going to practise reading in the
woods.  Let us hide, and hear the fun."

"I'm in for it," said Hiram, "but where will be the best place to
hide?"

"Here in this hollow tree.  He'll be very apt to halt here."

"All right!  Go ahead, I'll follow."

They quickly concealed themselves in the tree, unobserved by
Fletcher, whose eyes were on his book.

About ten feet from the tree he paused.

"I guess this'll be a good place," he said aloud.  "There's no one to
disturb me here.  Now, which shall I begin with?  I think I'll try
The Raven.  But first it may be well to practise an appropriate
little speech.  Something like this:"--

Fletcher made a low bow to the assembled trees, cleared his throat,
and commenced,--

"Ladies and Gentlemen: It gives me great pleasure to appear before
you this evening, in compliance with the request of the committee,
who have thought that my humble efforts would give _eclat_ to the
fair.  I am not a professional reader, but I have ever found pleasure
in reciting the noble productions of our best authors, and I hope to
give you pleasure."

"That'll do, I think," said Fletcher, complacently.  "Now I'll try
The Raven."

In a deep, sepulchral tone, Fletcher read the first verse, which is
quoted below:--

  "Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered weak and weary,
  Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore,
  While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
  As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
  ''Tis some visitor,' I muttered, 'tapping at my chamber door--
  Only this and nothing more.'"

Was it fancy, or did Fletcher really hear a slow, measured tapping
near him--upon one of the trees, as it seemed?  He started, and
looked nervously; but the noise stopped, and he decided that he had
been deceived, since no one was visible.

The boys within the tree made no other demonstration till Fletcher
had read the following verse:--

  "Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
  Soon again I heard a tapping, something louder than before.
  'Surely,' said I, 'surely that is something at my window lattice;
  Let me see then what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
  Let my heart be still a moment, and this mystery explore;
  'Tis the wind, and nothing more.'"

Here an indescribable, unearthly noise was heard from the interior of
the tree, like the wailing of some discontented ghost.

"Good  heavens! what's that?" ejaculated Fletcher, turning pale, and
looking nervously around him.

It was growing late, and the branches above him, partially stripped
of their leaves, rustled in the wind.  Fletcher was somewhat nervous,
and the weird character of the poem probably increased this feeling,
and made him very uncomfortable.  He summoned up courage enough,
however, to go on, though his voice shook a little.  He was permitted
to go on without interruption to the end.  Those who are familiar
with the poem, know that it becomes more and more wild and weird as
it draws to the conclusion.  This, with his gloomy surroundings, had
its effect upon the mind of Fletcher.  Scarcely had he uttered the
last words, when a burst of wild and sepulchral laughter was heard
within a few feet of him.  A cry of fear proceeded from Fletcher,
and, clutching his book, he ran at wild speed from the enchanted
spot, not daring to look behind him.  Indeed, he never stopped
running till he passed out of the shadow of the woods, and was well
on his way homeward.

Tom Carver and Hiram crept out from their place of concealment.  They
threw themselves on the ground, and roared with laughter.

"I never had such fun in my life," said Tom.

"Nor I."

"I wonder what Fitz thought."

"That the wood was enchanted, probably; he left in a hurry."

"Yes; he stood not on the order of his going, but went at once."

"I wish I could have seen him.  We must have made a fearful noise."

"I was almost frightened myself.  He must be almost home by this
time."

"When do you think he'll find out about the trick?"

"About the invitation?  Not till he gets a letter from Miss Clinton,
telling him it is all a mistake.  He will be terribly mortified."

Meanwhile Fletcher reached home, tired and out of breath.  His
temporary fear was over, but he was quite at sea as to the cause of
the noises he had heard.  He could not suspect any of his
school-fellows, for no one was visible, nor had he any idea that any
were in the wood at the time.

"I wonder if it was an animal," he reflected.  "It was a fearful
noise.  I must find some other place to practise reading in.  I
wouldn't go to that wood again for fifty dollars."

But Fletcher's readings were not destined to be long continued.  When
he got home from school the next day, he found the following note,
which had been left for him during the forenoon:--


"MR. FITZGERALD FLETCHER,--Dear Sir: I beg to thank you for your kind
proposal to read at our Fair; but I think there must be some mistake
in the matter, as we have never contemplated having any readings, nor
have I written to you on the subject, as you intimate.  I fear that
we shall not have time to spare for such a feature, though, under
other circumstances, it might be attractive.  In behalf of the
committee, I beg to tender thanks for your kind proposal.

  "Yours respectfully,
    "PAULINE CLINTON."

Fletcher read this letter with feelings which can better be imagined
than described.  He had already written home in the most boastful
manner about the invitation he had received, and he knew that before
he could contradict it, it would have been generally reported by his
gratified parents to his city friends.  And now he would be compelled
to explain that he had been duped, besides enduring the jeers of
those who had planned the trick.

This was more than he could endure.  He formed a sudden resolution.
He would feign illness, and go home the next day.  He could let it be
inferred that it was sickness alone which had compelled him to give
up the idea of appearing as a public reader.

Fitz immediately acted upon his decision, and the next day found him
on the way to Boston.  He never returned to the Prescott Academy as a
student.


CHAPTER XXV.

AN INVITATION TO BOSTON.

Harry was doubly glad that he was now in receipt of a moderate
salary.  He welcomed it as an evidence that he was rising in the
estimation of his employer, which was of itself satisfactory, and
also because in his circumstances the money was likely to be useful.

"Five dollars a week!" said Harry to himself.  "Half of that ought to
be enough to pay for my clothes and miscellaneous expenses, and the
rest I will give to father.  It will help him take care of the rest
of the family."

Our hero at once made this proposal by letter.  This is a paragraph
from his father's letter in reply:--


"I am glad, my dear son, to find you so considerate and dutiful, as
your offer indicates.  I have indeed had a hard time in supporting my
family, and have not always been able to give them the comforts I
desired.  Perhaps it is my own fault in part.  I am afraid I have not
the faculty of getting along and making money that many others have.
But I have had an unexpected stroke of good fortune.  Last evening a
letter reached your mother, stating that her cousin Nancy had
recently died at St. Albans, Vermont, and that, in accordance with
her will, your mother is to receive a legacy of four thousand
dollars.  With your mother's consent, one-fourth of this is to be
devoted to the purchase of the ten acres adjoining my little farm,
and the balance will be so invested as to yield us an annual income
of one hundred and eighty dollars.  Many would think this a small
addition to an income, but it will enable us to live much more
comfortably.  You remember the ten-acre lot to the east of us,
belonging to the heirs of Reuben Todd.  It is excellent land, well
adapted for cultivation, and will fully double the value of my farm.

"You see, therefore, my dear son, that a new era of prosperity has
opened for us.  I am now relieved from the care and anxiety which for
years have oppressed me, and feel sure of a comfortable support.
Instead of accepting the half of your salary, I desire you, if
possible, to save it, depositing in some reliable savings
institution.  If you do this every year till you are twenty-one, you
will have a little capital to start you in business, and will be able
to lead a more prosperous career than your father.  Knowing you as
well as I do, I do not feel it necessary to caution you against
unnecessary expenditures.  I will only remind you that extravagance
is comparative, and that what would be only reasonable expenditure
for one richer than yourself would be imprudent in you."


Harry read this letter with great joy.  He was warmly attached to the
little home circle, and the thought that they were comparatively
provided for gave him fresh courage.  He decided to adopt his
father's suggestion, and the very next week deposited three dollars
in the savings bank.

"That is to begin an account," he thought.  "If I can only keep that
up, I shall feel quite rich at the end of a year."

Several weeks rolled by, and Thanksgiving approached.

Harry was toiling at his case one day, when Oscar Vincent entered the
office.

"Hard at work, I see, Harry," he said.

"Yes," said Harry; "I can't afford to be idle."

"I want you to be idle for three days," said Oscar.

Harry looked up in surprise.

"How is that?" he asked.

"You know we have a vacation from Wednesday to Monday at the Academy."

"Over Thanksgiving?"

"Yes."

"Well, I am going home to spend that time, and I want you to go with
me."

"What, to Boston?" asked Harry, startled, for to him, inexperienced
as he was, that seemed a very long journey.

"Yes.  Father and mother gave me permission to invite you.  Shall I
show you the letter?"

"I'll take it for granted, Oscar, but I am afraid I can't go."

"Nonsense!  What's to prevent?"

"In the first place, Mr. Anderson can't spare me."

"Ask him."

"What's that?" asked the editor, hearing his name mentioned.

"I have invited Harry to spend the Thanksgiving vacation with me in
Boston, and he is afraid you can't spare him?"

"Does your father sanction your invitation?"

"Yes, he wrote me this morning--that is, I got the letter this
morning--telling me to ask Harry to come."

Now the country editor had a great respect for the city editor, who
was indeed known by reputation throughout New England as a man of
influence and ability, and he felt disposed to accede to any request
of his.

So he said pleasantly, "Of course, Harry, we shall miss you, but if
Mr. Ferguson is disposed to do a little additional work, we will get
along till Monday.  What do you say, Mr. Ferguson?"

"I shall be very glad to oblige Harry," said the older workman, "and
I hope he will have a good time."

"That settles the question, Harry," said Oscar, joyfully.  "So all
you've got to do is to pack up and be ready to start to-morrow
morning.  It's Tuesday, you know, already."

Harry hesitated, and Oscar observed it.

"Well, what's the matter now?" he said; "out with it."

"I'll tell you, Oscar," said Harry, coloring a little.  "Your father
is a rich man, and lives handsomely.  I haven't any clothes good
enough to wear on a visit to your house."

"Oh, hang your clothes!" said Oscar, impetuously.  "It isn't your
clothes we invite.  It's yourself."

"Still, Oscar--"

"Come, I see you think I am like Fitz Fletcher, after all.  Say you
think me a snob, and done with it."

"But I don't," said Harry, smiling.

"Then don't make any more ridiculous objections.  Don't you think
they are ridiculous, Mr. Ferguson?"

"They wouldn't be in some places," said Ferguson, "but here I think
they are out of place.  I feel sure you are right, and that you value
Harry more than the clothes he wears."

"Well, Harry, do you surrender at discretion?" said Oscar.  "You see
Ferguson is on my side."

"I suppose I shall have to," said Harry, "as long as you are not
ashamed of me."

"None of that, Harry."

"I'll go."

"The first sensible words you've spoken this morning."

"I want to tell you how much I appreciate your kindness, Oscar," said
Harry, earnestly.

"Why shouldn't I be kind to my friend?"

"Even if he was once a printer's devil."

"Very true.  It is a great objection, but still I will overlook it.
By the way, there is one inducement I didn't mention."

"What is that?"

"We may very likely see Fitz in the city.  He is studying at home
now, I hear.  Who knows but he may get up a great party in your
honor?"

"Do you think it likely?" asked Harry, smiling.

"It might not happen to occur to him, I admit.  Still, if we made him
a ceremonious call--"

"I am afraid he might send word that he was not at home."

"That would be a loss to him, no doubt.  However, we will leave time
to settle that question.  Be sure to be on hand in time for the
morning train."

"All right, Oscar."

Harry had all the love of new scenes natural to a boy of sixteen.  He
had heard so much of Boston that he felt a strong curiosity to see
it.  Besides, was not that the city where the "Weekly Standard" was
printed, the paper in which he had already appeared as an author?  In
connection with this, I must here divulge a secret of Harry's.  He
was ambitious not only to contribute to the literary papers, but to
be paid for his contributions.  He judged that essays were not very
marketable, and he had therefore in his leisure moments written a
humorous sketch, entitled "The Tin Pedler's Daughter."  I shall not
give any idea of the plot here; I will only say that it was really
humorous, and did not betray as much of the novice as might have been
expected.  Harry had copied it out in his best hand, and resolved to
carry it to Boston, and offer it in person to the editor of the
"Standard" with an effort, if accepted, to obtain compensation for it.


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE VINCENTS AT HOME.

When Harry rather bashfully imparted to Oscar his plans respecting
the manuscript, the latter entered enthusiastically into them, and at
once requested the privilege of reading the story.  Harry awaited his
judgment with some anxiety.

"Why, Harry, this is capital," said Oscar, looking up from the
perusal.

"Do you really think so, Oscar?"

"If I didn't think so, I wouldn't say so."

"I thought you might say so out of friendship."

"I don't say it is the best I ever read, mind you, but I have read a
good many that are worse.  I think you managed the _denouement_
(you're a French scholar, so I'll venture on the word) admirably."

"I only hope the editor of the 'Standard' will think so."

"If he doesn't, there are other papers in Boston; the 'Argus' for
instance."

"I'll try the 'Standard' first, because I have already written for
it."

"All right.  Don't you want me to go to the office with you?"

"I wish you would.  I shall be bashful."

"I am not troubled that way.  Besides, my father's name is well
known, and I'll take care to mention it.  Sometimes influence goes
farther than merit, you know."

"I should like to increase my income by writing for the city papers.
Even if I only made fifty dollars a year, it would all be clear gain."

Harry's desire was natural.  He had no idea how many shared it.
Every editor of a successful weekly could give information on this
subject.  Certainly there is no dearth of aspiring young
writers--Scotts and Shakspeares in embryo--in our country, and if all
that were written for publication succeeded in getting into print,
the world would scarcely contain the books and papers which would
pour in uncounted thousands from the groaning press.

When the two boys arrived in Boston they took a carriage to Oscar's
house.  It was situated on Beacon Street, not far from the Common,--a
handsome brick house with a swell front, such as they used to build
in Boston.  No one of the family was in, and Oscar and Harry went up
at once to the room of the former, which they were to share together.
It was luxuriously furnished, so Harry thought, but then our hero had
been always accustomed to the plainness of a country home.

"Now, old fellow, make yourself at home," said Oscar.  "You can get
yourself up for dinner.  There's water and towels, and a brush."

"I don't expect to look very magnificent," said Harry.  "You must
tell your mother I am from the country."

"I would make you an offer if I dared," said Oscar.

"I am always open to a good offer."

"It's this: I'm one size larger than you, and my last year's suits
are in that wardrobe.  If any will fit you, they are yours."

"Thank you, Oscar," said Harry; "I'll accept your offer to-morrow."

"Why not to-day?"

"You may not understand me, but when I first appear before your
family, I don't want to wear false colors."

"I understand," said Oscar, with instinctive delicacy.

An hour later, the bell rang for dinner.

Harry went down, and was introduced to his friend's mother and
sister.  The former was a true lady, refined and kindly, and her
smile made our hero feel quite at home.

"I am glad to meet you, Mr.  Walton," she said.  "Oscar has spoken of
you frequently."

With Oscar's sister Maud--a beautiful girl two years younger than
himself--Harry felt a little more bashful; but the young lady soon
entered into an animated conversation with him.

"Do you often come to Boston, Mr. Walton?" she asked.

"This is my first visit," said Harry.

"Then I dare say Oscar will play all sorts of tricks upon you.  We
had a cousin visit us from the country, and the poor fellow had a
hard time."

"Yes," said Oscar, laughing, "I used to leave him at a street corner,
and dodge into a doorway.  It was amusing to see his perplexity when
he looked about, and couldn't find me."

"Shall you try that on me?" asked Harry.

"Very likely."

"Then I'll be prepared."

"You might tie him with a rope, Mr. Walton," said Maud, "and keep
firm hold."

"I will, if Oscar consents."

"I will see about it.  But here is my father.  Father, this is my
friend, Harry Walton."

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Walton," said Mr. Vincent.  "Then you
belong to my profession?"

"I hope to, some time, sir; but I am only a printer as yet."

"You are yet to rise from the ranks.  I know all about that.  I was
once a compositor."

Harry looked at the editor with great respect.  He was stout,
squarely built, with a massive head and a thoughtful expression.  His
appearance was up to Harry's anticipations.  He felt that he would be
prouder to be Mr. Vincent than any man in Boston, He could hardly
believe that this man, who controlled so influential an organ, and
was so honored in the community, was once a printer boy like himself.

"What paper are you connected with?" asked Mr. Vincent.

"The 'Centreville Gazette.'"

"I have seen it.  It is quite a respectable paper."

"But how different," thought Harry, "from a great city daily!"

"Let us go out to dinner," said Mr. Vincent, consulting his watch.
"I have an engagement immediately afterward."

At table Harry sat between Maud and Oscar.  If at first he felt a
little bashful, the feeling soon wore away.  The dinner hour passed
very pleasantly.  Mr. Vincent chatted very agreeably about men and
things.  There is no one better qualified to shine in this kind of
conversation than the editor of a city daily, who is compelled to be
exceptionally well informed.  Harry listened with such interest that
he almost forgot to eat, till Oscar charged him with want of appetite.

"I must leave in haste," said Mr. Vincent, when dinner was over.
"Oscar, I take it for granted that you will take care of your friend."

"Certainly, father.  I shall look upon myself as his guardian,
adviser and friend."

"You are not very well fitted to be a mentor, Oscar," said Maud.

"Why not, young lady?"

"You need a guardian yourself.  You are young and frivolous."

"And you, I suppose, are old and judicious."

"Thank you.  I will own to the last, and the first will come in time."

"Isn't it singular, Harry, that my sister should have so much
conceit, whereas I am remarkably modest?"

"I never discovered it, Oscar," said Harry, smiling.

"That is right, Mr. Walton," said Maud.  "I see you are on my side.
Look after my brother, Mr. Walton.  He needs an experienced friend."

"I am afraid I don't answer the description, Miss Maud."

"I don't doubt you will prove competent.  I wish you a pleasant walk."

"My sister's a jolly girl, don't you think so?" asked Oscar, as Maud
left the room.

"That isn't exactly what I should say of her, but I can describe her
as even more attractive than her brother."

"You couldn't pay her a higher compliment.  But come; we'll take a
walk on the Common."

They were soon on the Common, dear to every Bostonian, and sauntered
along the walks, under the pleasant shade of the stately elms.

"Look there," said Oscar, suddenly; "isn't that Fitz Fletcher?"

"Yes," said Harry, "but he doesn't see us."

"We'll join him.  How are you, Fitz?"

"Glad to see you, Oscar," said Fletcher, extending a gloved band,
while in the other he tossed a light cane.  "When did you arrive?"

"Only this morning; but you don't see Harry Walton."

Fletcher arched his brows in surprise, and said coldly, "Indeed, I
was not aware Mr. Walton was in the city."

"He is visiting me," said Oscar.

Fletcher looked surprised.  He knew the Vincents stood high socially,
and it seemed extraordinary that they should receive a printer's
devil as a guest.

"Have you given up the printing business?" he asked superciliously.

"No; I only have a little vacation from it."

"Ah, indeed!  It's a very dirty business.  I would as soon be a
chimney-sweep."

"Each to his taste, Fitz," said Oscar.  "If you have a taste for
chimneys, I hope your father won't interfere."

"I haven't a taste for such a low business," said Fletcher,
haughtily.  "I should like it as well as being a printer's devil
though."

"Would you?  At any rate, if you take it up, you'll be sure to be
well _sooted_."

Fletcher did not laugh at the joke.  He never could see any wit in
jokes directed at himself.

"How long are you going to stay at that beastly school?" he asked.

"I am not staying at any beastly school."

"I mean the Academy."

"Till I am ready for college.  Where are you studying?"

"I recite to a private tutor."

"Well, we shall meet at 'Harvard' if we are lucky enough to get in."

Fletcher rather hoped Oscar would invite him to call at his house,
for he liked to visit a family of high social position; but he waited
in vain.

"What a fool Oscar makes of himself about that country clod-hopper!"
thought the stylish young man, as he walked away.  "The idea of
associating with a printer's devil!  I hope I know what is due to
myself better."


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE OFFICE OF THE "STANDARD."

On the day after Thanksgiving, Harry brought out from his carpet-bag
his manuscript story, and started with Oscar for the office of the
"Weekly Standard." He bought the last copy of the paper, and thus
ascertained the location of the office.

Oscar turned the last page, and ran through a sketch of about the
same length as Harry's.

"Yours is fully as good as this, Harry," he said.

"The editor may not think so."

"Then he ought to."

"This story is by one of his regular contributors, Kenella Kent."

"You'll have to take a name yourself,--a _nom de plume_, I mean."

"I have written so far over the name of Franklin."

"That will do very well for essays, but is not appropriate for
stories."

"Suppose you suggest a name, Oscar."

"How will 'Fitz Fletcher' do?"

"Mr. Fletcher would not permit me to take such a liberty."

"And you wouldn't want to take it."

"Not much."

"Let me see.  I suppose I must task my invention, then.  How will Old
Nick do?"

"People would think you wrote the story."

"A fair hit.  Hold on, I've got just the name.  Frank Lynn."

"I thought you objected to that name."

"You don't understand me.  I mean two names, not one.  Frank Lynn!
Don't you see?"

"Yes, it's a good plan.  I'll adopt it."

"Who knows but you may make the name illustrious, Harry?"

"If I do, I'll dedicate my first boot to Oscar Vincent."

"Shake hands on that.  I accept the dedication with mingled feelings
of gratitude and pleasure."

"Better wait till you get it," said Harry, laughing.  "Don't count
your chickens before they're hatched."

"The first egg is laid, and that's something.  But here we are at the
office."

It was a building containing a large number of offices.  The names of
the respective occupants were printed on slips of black tin at the
entrance.  From this, Harry found that the office of the "Weekly
Standard" was located at No. 6.

"My heart begins to beat, Oscar," said Harry, naturally excited in
anticipation of an interview with one who could open the gates of
authorship to him.

"Does it?" asked Oscar.  "Mine has been beating for a number of
years."

"You are too matter-of-fact for me, Oscar.  If it was your own story,
you might feel differently."

"Shall I pass it off as my own, and make the negotiation?"

Harry was half tempted to say yes, but it occurred to him that this
might prove an embarrassment in the future, and he declined the
proposal.

They climbed rather a dark, and not very elegant staircase, and found
themselves before No. 6.

Harry knocked, or was about to do so, when a young lady with long
ringlets, and a roll of manuscript in her hand, who had followed them
upstairs advanced confidently, and, opening the door, went in.  The
two boys followed, thinking the ceremony of knocking needless.

They found themselves in a large room, one corner of which was
partitioned off for the editor's sanctum.  A middle-aged man was
directing papers in the larger room, while piles of papers were
ranged on shelves at the sides of the apartment.

The two boys hesitated to advance, but the young lady in ringlets
went on, and entered the office through the open door.

"We'll wait till she is through," said Harry.

It was easy to hear the conversation that passed between the young
lady and the editor, whom they could not see.

"Good-morning, Mr. Houghton," she said.

"Good-morning.  Take a seat, please," said the editor, pleasantly.
"Are you one of our contributors?"

"No, sir, not yet," answered the young lady, "but I would become so."

"We are not engaging any new contributors at present, but still if
you have brought anything for examination you may leave it."

"I am not wholly unknown to fame," said the young lady, with an air
of consequence.  "You have probably heard of Prunella Prune."

"Possibly, but I don't at present recall it.  We editors meet with so
many names, you know.  What is the character of your articles?"

"I am a poetess, sir, and I also write stories."

"Poetry is a drug in the market.  We have twice as much offered us as
we can accept.  Still we are always glad to welcome really
meritorious poems."

"I trust my humble efforts will please you," said Prunella.  "I have
here some lines to a nightingale, which have been very much praised
in our village.  Shall I read them?"

"If you wish," said the editor, by no means cheerfully.

Miss Prune raised her voice, and commenced:--

  "O star-eyed Nightingale,
  How nobly thou dost sail
  Through the air!
  No other bird can compare
  With the tuneful song
  Which to thee doth belong.
  I sit and hear thee sing,
  While with tireless wing
    Thou dost fly.
  And it makes me feel so sad,
  It makes me feel so bad,
    I know not why,
  And I heave so many sighs,
  O warbler of the skies!"

"Is there much more?" asked the editor.

"That is the first verse.  There are fifteen more," said Prunella.

"Then I think I shall not have time at present to hear you read it
all.  You may leave it, and I will look it over at my leisure."

"If it suits you," said Prunella, "how much will it be worth?"

"I don't understand."

"How much would you be willing to pay for it?"

"Oh, we never pay for poems," said Mr. Houghton.

"Why not?" asked Miss Prune, evidently disappointed.

"Our contributors are kind enough to send them gratuitously."

"Is that fostering American talent?" demanded Prunella, indignantly.

"American poetical talent doesn't require fostering, judging from the
loads of poems which are sent in to us."

"You pay for stories, I presume?"

"Yes, we pay for good, popular stories."

"I have one here," said Prunella, untying her manuscript, "which I
should like to read to you."

"You may read the first paragraph, if you please.  I haven't time to
hear more.  What is the title?"

"'The Bandit's Bride.'  This is the way it opens:--

"'The night was tempestuous.  Lightnings flashed in the cerulean sky,
and the deep-voiced thunder rolled from one end of the firmament to
the other.  It was a landscape in Spain.  From a rocky defile gayly
pranced forth a masked cavalier, Roderigo di Lima, a famous bandit
chief.

"'"Ha! ha!" he laughed in demoniac glee, "the night is well fitted to
my purpose.  Ere it passes, Isabella Gomez shall be mine."'"

"I think that will do," said Mr. Houghton, hastily.  "I am afraid
that style won't suit our readers."

"Why not?" demanded Prunella, sharply.  "I can assure you, sir, that
it has been praised by _excellent_ judges in our village."

"It is too exciting for our readers.  You had better carry it to 'The
Weekly Corsair.'"

"Do they pay well for contributions?"

"I really can't say.  How much do you expect?"

"This story will make about five columns.  I think twenty-five
dollars will be about right."

"I am afraid you will be disappointed.  We can't afford to pay such
prices, and the 'Corsair' has a smaller circulation than our paper."

"How much do you pay?"

"Two dollars a column."

"I expected more," said Prunella, "but I will write for you at that
price."

"Send us something suited to our paper, and we will pay for it at
that price."

"I will write you a story to-morrow.  Good-morning, sir."

"Good-morning, Miss Prune."

The young lady with ringlets sailed out of the editor's room, and
Oscar, nudging Harry, said, "Now it is our turn.  Come along.  Follow
me, and don't be frightened."


CHAPTER XXVIII.

ACCEPTED.

The editor of the "Standard" looked with some surprise at the two
boys.  As editor, he was not accustomed to receive such young
visitors.  He was courteous, however, and said, pleasantly:--

"What can I do for you, young gentlemen?"

"Are you the editor of the 'Standard'?" asked Harry, diffidently.

"I am.  Do you wish to subscribe?"

"I have already written something for your paper," Harry continued.

"Indeed!" said the editor.  "Was it poetry or prose?"

Harry felt flattered by the question.  To be mistaken for a poet he
felt to be very complimentary.  If he had known how much trash weekly
found its way to the "Standard" office, under the guise of poetry, he
would have felt less flattered.

"I have written some essays over the name of 'Franklin,'" he hastened
to say.

"Ah, yes, I remember, and very sensible essays too.  You are young to
write."

"Yes, sir; I hope to improve as I grow older."

By this time Oscar felt impelled to speak for his friend.  It seemed
to him that Harry was too modest.

"My friend is assistant editor of a New Hampshire paper,--'The
Centreville Gazette,'" he announced.

"Indeed!" said the editor, looking surprised.  "He is certainly young
for an editor."

"My friend is not quite right," said Harry, hastily.  "I am one of
the compositors on that paper."

"But you write editorial paragraphs," said Oscar.

"Yes, unimportant ones."

"And are you, too, an editor?" asked the editor of the "Standard,"
addressing Oscar with a smile.

"Not exactly," said Oscar; "but I am an editor's son.  Perhaps you
are acquainted with my father,--John Vincent of this city."

"Are you his son?" said the editor, respectfully.  "I know your
father slightly.  He is one of our ablest journalists."

"Thank you, sir."

"I am very glad to receive a visit from you, and should be glad to
print anything from your pen."

"I am not sure about that," said Oscar, smiling.  "If I have a talent
for writing, it hasn't developed itself yet.  But my friend here
takes to it as naturally as a duck takes to water."

"Have you brought me another essay, Mr. 'Franklin'?" asked the
editor, turning to Harry.  "I address you by your _nom de plume_, not
knowing your real name."

"Permit me to introduce my friend, Harry Walton," said Oscar.
"Harry, where is your story?"

"I have brought you in a story," said Harry, blushing.  "It is my
first attempt, and may not suit you, but I shall be glad if you will
take the trouble to examine it."

"With pleasure," said the editor.  "Is it long?"

"About two columns.  It is of a humorous character."

The editor reached out his hand, and, taking the manuscript, unrolled
it.  He read the first few lines, and they seemed to strike his
attention.

"If you will amuse yourselves for a few minutes, I will read it at
once," he said.  "I don't often do it, but I will break over my
custom this time."

"Thank you, sir," said Harry.

"There are some of my exchanges," said the editor, pointing to a pile
on the floor.  "You may find something to interest you in some of
them."

They picked up some papers, and began to read.  But Harry could not
help thinking of the verdict that was to be pronounced on his
manuscript.  Upon that a great deal hinged.  If he could feel that he
was able to produce anything that would command compensation, however
small, it would make him proud and happy.  He tried, as he gazed
furtively over his paper at the editor's face, to anticipate his
decision, but the latter was too much accustomed to reading
manuscript to show the impression made upon him.

Fifteen minutes passed, and he looked up.

"Well, Mr. Walton," he said, "your first attempt is a success."

Harry's face brightened.

"May I ask if the plot is original?"

"It is so far as I know, sir.  I don't think I ever read anything
like it."

"Of course there are some faults in the construction, and the
dialogue might be amended here and there.  But it is very creditable,
and I will use it in the 'Standard' if you desire it."

"I do, sir."

"And how much are you willing to pay for it?" Oscar struck in.

The editor hesitated.

"It is not our custom to pay novices just at first," he said.  "If
Mr. Walton keeps on writing, he would soon command compensation."

Harry would not have dared to press the matter, but Oscar was not so
diffident.  Indeed, it is easier to be bold in a friend's cause than
one's own.

"Don't you think it is worth being paid for, if it is worth
printing?" he persisted.

"Upon that principle, we should feel obliged to pay for poetry," said
the editor.

"Oh," said Oscar, "poets don't need money.  They live on flowers and
dew-drops."

The editor smiled.

"You think prose-writers require something more substantial?"

"Yes, sir."

"I will tell you how the matter stands," said the editor.  "Mr.
Walton is a beginner.  He has his reputation to make.  When it is
made he will be worth a fair price to me, or any of my brother
editors."

"I see," said Oscar; "but his story must be worth something.  It will
fill up two columns.  If you didn't print it, you would have to pay
somebody for writing these two columns."

"You have some reason in what you say.  Still our ordinary rule is
based on justice.  A distinction should be made between new
contributors and old favorites."

"Yes, sir.  Pay the first smaller sums."

If the speaker had not been John Vincent's son, it would have been
doubtful if his reasoning would have prevailed.  As it was, the
editor yielded.

"I may break over my rule in the case of your friend," said the
editor; "but he must be satisfied with a very small sum for the
present."

"Anything will satisfy me, sir," said Harry, eagerly.

"Your story will fill two columns.  I commonly pay two dollars a
column for such articles, if by practised writers.  I will give you
half that."

"Thank you, sir.  I accept it," said Harry, promptly.

"In a year or so I may see my way clear to paying you more, Mr.
Walton; but you must consider that I give you the opportunity of
winning popularity, and regard this as part of your compensation, at
present."

"I am quite satisfied, sir," said Harry, his heart fluttering with
joy and triumph.  "May I write you some more sketches?"

"I shall be happy to receive and examine them; but you must not be
disappointed if from time to time I reject your manuscripts."

"No, sir; I will take it as a hint that they need improving."

"I will revise my friend's stories, sir," said Oscar, humorously,
"and give him such hints as my knowledge of the world may suggest."

"No doubt such suggestions from so mature a friend will materially
benefit them," said the editor, smiling.

He opened his pocket-book, and, drawing out a two-dollar bill, handed
it to Harry.

"I shall hope to pay you often," he said, "for similar contributions."

"Thank you, sir," said Harry.

Feeling that their business was at an end, the boys withdrew.  As
they reached the foot of the stairs, Oscar took off his cap, and
bowed low.

"Mr. Lynn, I congratulate you," he said.

"I can't tell you how glad I feel, Oscar," said Harry, his face
radiant.

"Let me suggest that you owe me a commission for impressing upon the
editor the propriety of paying you."

"How much do you ask?"

"An ice-cream will be satisfactory."

"All right."

"Come round to Copeland's then.  We'll celebrate your success in a
becoming manner."


CHAPTER XXIX.

MRS. CLINTON'S PARTY.

When Oscar and Harry reached home they were met by Maud, who
flourished in her hand what appeared to be a note.

"What is it, Maud?" asked Oscar.  "A love-letter for me?"

"Don't flatter yourself, Oscar.  No girl would be so foolish as to
write you a love-letter.  It is an invitation to a party on Saturday
evening."

"Where?"

"At Mrs. Clinton's."

"I think I will decline," said Oscar.  "I wouldn't like to leave
Harry alone."

"Oh, he is included too.  Mrs. Clinton heard of his being here, and
expressly included him in the invitation."

"That alters the case.  You'll go, Harry, won't you?"

"I am afraid I shouldn't know how to behave at a fashionable party,"
said Harry.

"Oh, you've only got to make me your model," said Oscar, "and you'll
be all right."

"Did you ever see such conceit, Mr. Walton?" said Maud.

"It reminds me of Fletcher," said Harry.

"Fitz Fletcher?  By the way, he will probably be there.  His family
are acquainted with the Clintons."

"Yes, he is invited," said Maud.

"Good!  Then there's promise of fun," said Oscar.  "You'll see Fitz
with his best company manners on."

"I am afraid he won't enjoy meeting me there," said Harry.

"Probably not."

"I don't see why," said Maud.

"Shall I tell, Harry?"

"Certainly."

"To begin with, Fletcher regards himself as infinitely superior to
Walton here, because his father is rich, and Walton's poor.  Again,
Harry is a printer, and works for a living, which Fitz considers
degrading.  Besides all this, Harry was elected President of our
Debating Society,--an office which Fitz wanted."

"I hope" said Maud, "that Mr. Fletcher's dislike does not affect your
peace of mind, Mr. Walton."

"Not materially," said Harry, laughing.

"By the way, Maud," said Oscar, "did I ever tell you how Fletcher's
pride was mortified at school by our discovering his relationship to
a tin-pedler?"

"No, tell me about it."

The story, already familiar to the reader, was graphically told by
Oscar, and served to amuse his sister.

"He deserved the mortification," she said.  "I shall remember it if
he shows any of his arrogance at the party."

"Fletcher rather admires Maud," said Oscar, after his sister had gone
out of the room; "but the favor isn't reciprocated.  If he undertakes
to say anything to her against you, she will take him down, depend
upon it."

Saturday evening came, and Harry, with Oscar and his sister, started
for the party.  Our hero, having confessed his inability to dance,
had been diligently instructed in the Lancers by Oscar, so that he
felt some confidence in being able to get through without any serious
blunder.

"Of course you must dance, Harry," he said.  "You don't want to be a
wall-flower."

"I may have to be," said Harry.  "I shall know none of the young
ladies except your sister."

"Maud will dance the first Lancers with you, and I will get you a
partner for the second."

"You may dispose of me as you like, Oscar."

"Wisely said.  Don't forget that I am your Mentor."

When they entered the brilliantly lighted parlors, they were already
half full.  Oscar introduced his friend to Mrs. Clinton.

"I am glad to see you here, Mr. Walton," said the hostess,
graciously.  "Oscar, I depend upon you to introduce your friend to
some of the young ladies."

"You forget my diffidence, Mrs. Clinton."

"I didn't know you were troubled in that way.'"

"See how I am misjudged.  I am painfully bashful."

"You hide it well," said the hostess, with a smile.

"Escort my sister to a seat, Harry," said Oscar.  "By the way, you
two will dance in the first Lancers."

"If Miss Maud will accept so awkward a partner," said Harry.

"Oh, yes, Mr. Walton.  I'll give you a hint if you are going wrong."

Five minutes later Fletcher touched Oscar on the shoulder.

"Oscar, where is your sister?" he asked.

"There," said Oscar, pointing her out.

Fletcher, who was rather near-sighted, did not at first notice that
Harry Walton was sitting beside the young lady.

He advanced, and made a magnificent bow, on which he rather prided
himself.

"Good-evening, Miss Vincent," he said.

"Good-evening, Mr. Fletcher."

"I am very glad you have favored the party with your presence."

"Thank you, Mr. Fletcher.  Don't turn my head with your compliments."

"May I hope you will favor me with your hand in the first Lancers?"

"I am sorry, Mr. Fletcher, but I am engaged to Mr. Walton.  I believe
you are acquainted with him."

Fletcher for the first time observed our hero, and his face wore a
look of mingled annoyance and scorn.

"I have met the gentleman," he said, haughtily.

"Mr. Fletcher and I have met frequently," said Harry, pleasantly.

"I didn't expect to meet you _here_," said Fletcher with marked
emphasis.

"Probably not," said Harry.  "My invitation is due to my being a
friend of Oscar's."

"I was not aware that you danced," said Fletcher who was rather
curious on the subject.

"I don't--much."

"Where did you learn--in the printing office?"

"No, in the city."

"Ah!  Indeed!"

Fletcher thought he had wasted time enough on our hero, and turned
again to Maud.

"May I have the pleasure of your hand in the second dance?" he asked.

"I will put you down for that, if you desire it."

"Thank you."

It so happened that when Harry and Maud took the floor, they found
Fletcher their _vis-a-vis_.  Perhaps it was this that made Harry more
emulous to get through without making any blunders.  At any rate, he
succeeded, and no one in the set suspected that it was his first
appearance in public as a dancer.

Fletcher was puzzled.  He had hoped that Harry would make himself
ridiculous, and throw the set into confusion.  But the dance passed
off smoothly, and in due time Fletcher led out Maud.  If he had known
his own interest, he would have kept silent about Harry, but he had
little discretion.

"I was rather surprised to see Walton here," he began.

"Didn't you know he was in the city?

"Yes, I met him with Oscar."

"Then why were you surprised?"

"Because his social position does not entitle him to appear in such a
company.  When I first knew him, he was only a printer's apprentice."

Fletcher wanted to say printer's devil, but did not venture to do so
in presence of a young lady.

"He will rise higher than that."

"I dare say," said Fletcher, with a sneer, "he will rise in time to
be a journeyman with a salary of fifteen dollars a week."

"If I am not mistaken in Mr. Walton, he will rise much higher than
that.  Many of our prominent men have sprung from beginnings like
his."

"It must be rather a trial to him to come here.  His father is a
day-laborer, I believe, and of course he has never been accustomed to
any refinement or polish."

"I don't detect the absence of either," said Maud, quietly.

"Do you believe in throwing down all social distinctions, and meeting
the sons of laborers on equal terms?"

"As to that," said Maud, meeting her partner's glance, "I am rather
democratic.  I could even meet the son of a tin-pedler on equal
terms, provided he were a gentleman."

The blood rushed to Fletcher's cheeks.

"A tin-pedler!" he ejaculated.

"Yes!  Suppose you were the son, or relation, of a tin-pedler, why
should I consider that?  It would make you neither better nor worse."

"I have no connection with tin-pedlers," said Fletcher, hastily.
"Who told you I had?"

"I only made a supposition, Mr. Fletcher."

But Fletcher thought otherwise.  He was sure that Maud had heard of
his mortification at school, and it disturbed him not a little, for,
in spite of her assurance, he felt that she believed the story, and
it annoyed him so much that he did not venture to make any other
reference to Harry.

"Poor Fitz!" said Oscar, when on their way home Maud gave an account
of their conversation, "I am afraid he will murder the tin-pedler
some time, to get rid of such an odious relationship."


CHAPTER XXX.

TWO LETTERS FROM THE WEST.

The vacation was over all too soon, yet, brief as it was, Harry
looked back upon it with great satisfaction.  He had been kindly
received in the family of a man who stood high in the profession
which he was ambitious to enter; he had gratified his curiosity to
see the chief city of New England; and, by no means least, he had
secured a position as paid contributor for the "Standard."

"I suppose you will be writing another story soon," said Oscar.

"Yes," said Harry, "I have got the plan of one already."

"If you should write more than you can get into the 'Standard,' you
had better send something to the 'Weekly Argus.'"

"I will; but I will wait till the 'Standard' prints my first sketch,
so that I can refer to that in writing to the 'Argus.'"

"Perhaps you are right.  There's one advantage to not presenting
yourself.  They won't know you're only a boy."

"Unless they judge so from my style."

"I don't think they would infer it from that.  By the way, Harry,
suppose my father could find an opening for you as a reporter on his
paper,--would you be willing to accept it?"

"I am not sure whether it would be best for me," said Harry, slowly,
"even if I were qualified."

"There is more chance to rise on a city paper."

"I don't know.  If I stay here I may before many years control a
paper of my own.  Then, if I want to go into politics, there would be
more chance in the country than in the city."

"Would you like to go into politics?"

"I am rather too young to decide about that; but if I could be of
service in that way, I don't see why I should not desire it."

"Well, Harry, I think you are going the right way to work."

"I hope so.  I don't want to be promoted till I am fit for it.  I am
going to work hard for the next two or three years."

"I wish I were as industrious as you are, Harry."

"And I wish I knew as much as you do, Oscar."

"Say no more, or we shall be forming a Mutual Admiration Society,"
said Oscar, laughing.

Harry received a cordial welcome back to the printing office.  Mr.
Anderson asked him many questions about Mr. Vincent; and our hero
felt that his employer regarded him with increased consideration, on
account of his acquaintance with the great city editor.  This
consideration was still farther increased when Mr. Anderson learned
our hero's engagement by the "Weekly Standard."

Three weeks later, the "Standard" published Harry's sketch, and
accepted another, at the same price.  Before this latter was printed,
Harry wrote a third sketch, which he called "Phineas Popkin's
Engagement."  This he inclosed to the "Weekly Argus," with a letter
in which he referred to his engagement by the "Standard." In reply he
received the following letter:--


  "BOSTON, Jan., 18--,

"MR. FRANK LYNN,--Dear Sir: We enclose three dollars for your
sketch,--'Phineas Popkin's Engagement.'  We shall be glad to receive
other sketches, of similar character and length, and, if accepted, we
will pay the same price therefor.

  "I. B. FITCH & Co."


This was highly satisfactory to Harry.  He was now an accepted
contributor to two weekly papers, and the addition to his income
would be likely to reach a hundred dollars a year.  All this he would
be able to lay up, and as much or more from his salary on the
"Gazette."  He felt on the high road to success.  Seeing that his
young compositor was meeting with success and appreciation abroad,
Mr. Anderson called upon him more frequently to write paragraphs for
the "Gazette."  Though this work was gratuitous, Harry willingly
undertook it.  He felt that in this way he was preparing himself for
the career to which he steadily looked forward.  Present
compensation, he justly reasoned, was of small importance, compared
with the chance of improvement.  In this view, Ferguson, who proved
to be a very judicious friend, fully concurred.  Indeed Harry and he
became more intimate than before, if that were possible, and they
felt that Clapp's departure was by no means to be regretted.  They
were remarking this one day, when Mr. Anderson, who had been
examining his mail, looked up suddenly, and said, "What do you think,
Mr. Ferguson?  I've got a letter from Clapp."

"A letter from Clapp?  Where is he?" inquired Ferguson, with interest.

"This letter is dated at St. Louis.  He doesn't appear to be doing
very well."

"I thought he was going to California."

"So he represented.  But here is the letter." Ferguson took it, and,
after reading, handed it to Harry.

It ran thus:--


  "ST. LOUIS, April 4, 18--.

"JOTHAM ANDERSON, ESQ.,--Dear Sir: Perhaps you will be surprised to
hear from me, but I feel as if I would like to hear from Centreville,
where I worked so long.  The man that induced me and Harrison to come
out here left us in the lurch three days after we reached St. Louis.
He said he was going on to San Francisco, and he had only money
enough to pay his own expenses.  As Luke and I were not provided with
money, we had a pretty hard time at first, and had to pawn some of
our clothes, or we should have starved.  Finally I got a job in the
'Democrat' office, and a week after, Luke got something to do, though
it didn't pay very well.  So we scratched along as well as we could.
Part of the time since we have been out of work, and we haven't found
'coming West' all that it was cracked up to be.

"Are Ferguson and Harry Walton still working for you?  I should like
to come back to the 'Gazette' office, and take my old place; but I
haven't got five dollars ahead to pay my travelling expenses.  If you
will send me out thirty dollars, I will come right on, and work it
out after I come back.  Hoping for an early reply, I am,

  "Yours respectfully,
    "HENRY CLAPP."


"Are you going to send out the money, Mr. Anderson?" asked Ferguson.

"Not I.  Now that Walton has got well learnt, I don't need another
workman.  I shall respectfully decline his offer."

Both Harry and Ferguson were glad to hear this, for they felt that
Clapp's presence would be far from making the office more agreeable.

"Here's a letter for you, Walton, also post-marked St. Louis," said
Mr. Anderson, just afterward.

Harry took it with surprise, and opened it at once.

"It's from Luke Harrison," he said, looking at the signature.

"Does he want you to send him thirty dollars?" asked Ferguson.

"Listen and I will read the letter."


"DEAR HARRY," it commenced, "you will perhaps think it strange that I
have written to you; but we used to be good friends.  I write to tell
you that I don't like this place.  I haven't got along well, and I
want to get back.  Now I am going to ask of you a favor.  Will you
lend me thirty or forty dollars, to pay my fare home?  I will pay you
back in a month or two months sure, after I get to work.  I will also
pay you the few dollars which I borrowed some time ago.  I ought to
have done it before, but I was thoughtless, and I kept putting it
off.  Now, Harry, I know you have the money, and you can lend it to
me just as well as not, and I'll be sure to pay it back before you
need it.  Just get a post-office order, and send it to Luke Harrison,
17 R---- Street, St. Louis, and I'll be sure to get it.  Give my
respects to Mr. Anderson, and also to Mr. Ferguson.

  "Your friend,
    "LUKE HARRISON."


"There is a chance for a first-class investment, Harry," said
Ferguson.

"Do you want to join me in it?"

"No, I would rather pay the money to have 'your friend' keep away."

"I don't want to be unkind or disobliging," said Harry, "but I don't
feel like giving Luke this money.  I know he would never pay me back."

"Say no, then."

"I will.  Luke will be mad, but I can't help it."

So both Mr. Anderson and Harry wrote declining to lend.  The latter,
in return, received a letter from Luke, denouncing him as a "mean,
miserly hunks;" but even this did not cause him to regret his
decision.


CHAPTER XXXI.

ONE STEP UPWARD.

In real life the incidents that call for notice do not occur daily.
Months and years pass, sometimes, where the course of life is quiet
and uneventful.  So it was with Harry Walton.  He went to his daily
work with unfailing regularity, devoted a large part of his leisure
to reading and study, or writing sketches for the Boston papers, and
found himself growing steadily wiser and better informed.  His
account in the savings-bank grew slowly, but steadily; and on his
nineteenth birthday, when we propose to look in upon him again, he
was worth five hundred dollars.

Some of my readers who are favored by fortune may regard this as a
small sum.  It is small in itself, but it was not small for a youth
in Harry's position to have saved from his small earnings.  But of
greater value than the sum itself was the habit of self-denial and
saving which our hero had formed.  He had started in the right way,
and made a beginning which was likely to lead to prosperity in the
end.  It had not been altogether easy to save this sum.  Harry's
income had always been small, and he might, without incurring the
charge of excessive extravagance, have spent the whole.  He had
denied himself on many occasions, where most boys of his age would
have yielded to the temptation of spending money for pleasure or
personal gratification; but he had been rewarded by the thought that
he was getting on in the world.

"This is my birthday, Mr. Ferguson," he said, as he entered the
printing-office on that particular morning.

"Is it?" asked Ferguson, looking up from his case with interest.
"How venerable are you, may I ask?"

"I don't feel very venerable as yet," said Harry, with a smile.  "I
am nineteen."

"You were sixteen when you entered the office."

"As printer's devil--yes."

"You have learned the business pretty thoroughly.  You are as good a
workman as I now, though I am fifteen years older."

"You are too modest, Mr. Ferguson."

"No, it is quite true.  You are as rapid and accurate as I am, and
you ought to receive as high pay."

"That will come in time.  You know I make something by writing for
the papers."

"That's extra work.  How much did you make in that way last year?"

"I can tell you, because I figured it up last night.  It was one
hundred and twenty-five dollars, and I put every cent into the
savings-bank."

"That is quite an addition to your income."

"I shall make more this year.  I am to receive two dollars a column,
hereafter, for my sketches."

"I congratulate you, Harry,--the more heartily, because I think you
deserve it.  Your recent sketches show quite an improvement over
those you wrote a year ago."

"Do you really think so?" said Harry, with evident pleasure.

"I have no hesitation in saying so.  You write with greater ease than
formerly, and your style is less that of a novice."

"So I have hoped and thought; but of course I was prejudiced in my
own favor."

"You may rely upon it.  Indeed, your increased pay is proof of it.
Did you ask it?"

"The increase?  No, the editor of the 'Standard' wrote me voluntarily
that he considered my contributions worth the additional amount."

"That must be very pleasant.  I tell you what, Harry, I've a great
mind to set up opposition to you in the story line."

"Do so," said Harry, smiling.

"I would if I had the slightest particle of imagination; but the fact
is, I'm too practical and matter-of-fact.  Besides, I never had any
talent for writing of any kind.  Some time I may become publisher of
a village paper like this; but farther than that I don't aspire."

"We are to be partners in that, you know, Ferguson."

"That may be, for a time; but you will rise higher than that, Harry."

"I am afraid you overrate me."

"No; I have observed you closely in the time we have been together,
and I have long felt that you are destined to rise from the ranks in
which I am content to remain.  Haven't you ever felt so, yourself,
Harry?"

Harry's cheek flushed, and his eye lighted up.

"I won't deny that I have such thoughts sometimes," he said; "but it
may end in that."

"It often does end in that; but it is only where ambition is not
accompanied by faithful work.  Now you are always at work.  You are
doing what you can to help fortune, and the end will be that fortune
will help you."

"I hope so, at any rate," said Harry, thoughtfully.  "I should like
to fill an honorable position, and do some work by which I might be
known in after years."

"Why not?  The boys and young men of to-day are hereafter to fill the
highest positions in the community and State.  Why may not the lot
fall to you?"

"I will try, at any rate, to qualify myself.  Then if
responsibilities come, I will try to discharge them."

The conversation was here interrupted by the entrance of Mr.
Anderson, the editor of the "Gazette."  He was not as well or strong
as when we first made his acquaintance.  Then he seemed robust
enough, but now he was thinner, and moved with slower gait.  It was
not easy to say what had undermined his strength, for he had had no
severe fit of sickness; but certainly he was in appearance several
years older than when Harry entered the office.

"How do you feel this morning, Mr. Anderson?" asked Ferguson.

"I feel weak and languid, and indisposed to exertion of any kind."

"You need some change."

"That is precisely what I have thought myself.  The doctor advises
change of scene, and this very morning I had a letter from a brother
in Wisconsin, asking me to come out and visit him."

"I have no doubt it would do you good."

"So it would.  But how can I go?  I can't take the paper with me,"
said Mr. Andersen, rather despondently.

"No; but you can leave Harry to edit it in your absence."

"Mr. Ferguson!" exclaimed Harry, startled by the proposition.

"Harry as editor!" repeated Mr. Anderson.

"Yes; why not?  He is a practised writer.  For more than two years he
has written for two Boston papers."

"But he is so young.  How old are you, Harry?" asked the editor.

"Nineteen to-day, sir."

"Nineteen.  That's very young for an editor."

"Very true; but, after all, it isn't so much the age as the
qualifications, is it, Mr. Anderson?"

"True," said the editor, meditatively.  "Harry, do you think you
could edit the paper for two or three months?"

"I think I could," said Harry, with modest confidence.  His heart
beat high at the thought of the important position which was likely
to be opened to him; and plans of what he would do to make the paper
interesting already began to be formed in his mind.

"It never occurred to me before, but I really think you could," said
the editor, "and that would remove every obstacle to my going.  By
the way, Harry, you would have to find a new boarding-place, for Mrs.
Anderson would accompany me, and we should shut up the house."

"Perhaps Ferguson would take me in?" said Harry.

"I should be glad to do so; but I don't know that my humble fare
would be good enough for an editor."

Harry smiled.  "I won't put on airs," he said, "till my commission is
made out."

"I am afraid that I can't offer high pay for your services in that
capacity," said Mr.  Anderson.

"I shall charge nothing, sir," said Harry, "but thank you for the
opportunity of entering, if only for a short time, a profession to
which it is my ambition to belong."

After a brief consultation with his wife, Mr. Anderson appointed
Harry editor pro tem., and began to make arrangements for his
journey.  Harry's weekly wages were raised to fifteen dollars, out of
which he waa to pay Ferguson four dollars a week for board.

So our hero found himself, at nineteen, the editor of an old
established paper, which, though published in a country village, was
not without its share of influence in the county and State.


CHAPTER XXXII.

THE YOUNG EDITOR.

The next number of the Centreville "Gazette" contained the following
notice from the pen of Mr. Anderson:--

"For the first time since our connection with the 'Gazette,' we
purpose taking a brief respite from our duties.  The state of our
health renders a vacation desirable, and an opportune invitation from
a brother at the West has been accepted.  Our absence may extend to
two or three months.  In the interim we have committed the editorial
management to Mr. Harry Walton, who has been connected with the
paper, in a different capacity, for nearly three years.  Though Mr.
Walton is a very young man, he has already acquired a reputation, as
contributor to papers of high standing in Boston, and we feel assured
that our subscribers will have no reason to complain of the temporary
change in the editorship."

"The old man has given you quite a handsome notice, Harry," said
Ferguson.

"I hope I shall deserve it," said Harry; "but I begin now to realize
that I am young to assume such responsible duties.  It would have
seemed more appropriate for you to undertake them."

"I can't write well enough, Harry.  I like to read, but I can't
produce.  In regard to the business management I feel competent to
advise."

"I shall certainly be guided by your advice, Ferguson."

As it may interest the reader, we will raise the curtain and show our
young hero in the capacity of editor.  The time is ten days after Mr.
Anderson's absence.  Harry was accustomed to do his work as
compositor in the forenoon and the early part of the afternoon.  From
three to five he occupied the editorial chair, read letters, wrote
paragraphs, and saw visitors.  He had just seated himself, when a man
entered the office and looked about him inquisitively.

"I would like to see the editor," he said.

"I am the editor," said Harry, with dignity.

The visitor looked surprised.

"You are the youngest-looking editor I have met," he said.  "Have you
filled the office long?"

"Not long," said Harry.  "Can I do anything for you?"

"Yes, sir, you can.  First let me introduce myself.  I am Dr.
Theophilus Peabody."

"Will you be seated, Dr. Peabody?"

"You have probably heard of me before," said the visitor.

"I can't say that I have."

"I am surprised at that," said the doctor, rather disgusted to find
himself unknown.  "You must have heard of Peabody's Unfailing
Panacea."

"I am afraid I have not."

"You are young," said Dr. Peabody, compassionately; "that accounts
for it.  Peabody's Panacea, let me tell you, sir, is the great remedy
of the age.  It has effected more cures, relieved more pain, soothed
more aching bosoms, and done more good, than any other medicine in
existence."

"It must be a satisfaction to you to have conferred such a blessing
on mankind," said Harry, inclined to laugh at the doctor's
magniloquent style.

"It is.  I consider myself one of the benefactors of mankind; but,
sir, the medicine has not yet been fully introduced.  There are
thousands, who groan on beds of pain, who are ignorant that for the
small sum of fifty cents they could be restored to health and
activity."

"That's a pity."

"It is a pity, Mr. ----"

"Walton."

"Mr. Walton,--I have called, sir, to ask you to co-operate with me in
making it known to the world, so far as your influence extends."

"Is your medicine a liquid?"

"No, sir; it is in the form of pills, twenty-four in a box.  Let me
show you."

The doctor opened a wooden box, and displayed a collection of very
unwholesome-looking brown pills.

"Try one, sir; it won't do you any harm."

"Thank you; I would rather not.  I don't like pills.  What will they
cure?"

"What won't they cure?  I've got a list of fifty-nine diseases in my
circular, all of which are relieved by Peabody's Panacea.  They may
cure more; in fact, I've been told of a consumptive patient who was
considerably relieved by a single box.  You won't try one?"

"I would rather not."

"Well, here is my circular, containing accounts of remarkable cures
performed.  Permit me to present you a box."

"Thank you," said Harry, dubiously.

"You'll probably be sick before long," said the doctor, cheerfully,
"and then the pills will come handy."

"Doctor," said Ferguson, gravely, "I find my hair getting thin on top
of the head.  Do you think the panacea would restore it?"

"Yes," said the doctor, unexpectedly.  "I had a case, in Portsmouth,
of a gentleman whose head was as smooth as a billiard-ball.  He took
the pills for another complaint, and was surprised, in the course of
three weeks, to find young hair sprouting all over the bald spot.
Can't I sell you half-a-dozen boxes?  You may have half a dozen for
two dollars and a half."

Ferguson, who of course had been in jest, found it hard to forbear
laughing, especially when Harry joined the doctor in urging him to
purchase.

"Not to-day," he answered.  "I can try Mr. Walton's box, and if it
helps me I can order some more."

"You may not be able to get it, then," said the doctor, persuasively.
"I may not be in Centreville."

"If the panacea is well known, I can surely get it without
difficulty."

"Not so cheap as I will sell it."

"I won't take any to-day," said Ferguson, decisively.

"You haven't told me what I can do for you," said Harry, who found
the doctor's call rather long.

"I would like you to insert my circular to your paper.  It won't take
more than two columns."

"We shall be happy to insert it at regular advertising rates."

"I thought," said Dr. Peabody, disappointed, "that you might do it
gratuitously, as I had given you a box."

"We don't do business on such terms," said Harry.  "I think I had
better return the box."

"No, keep it," said the doctor.  "You will be willing to notice it,
doubtless."

Harry rapidly penned this paragraph, and read it aloud:--

"Dr. Theophilus Peabody has left with us a box of his Unfailing
Panacea, which he claims will cure a large variety of diseases."

"Couldn't you give a list of the diseases?" insinuated the doctor.

"There are fifty-nine, you said?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then I am afraid we must decline."

Harry resumed his writing, and the doctor took his leave, looking far
from satisfied.

"Here, Ferguson," said Harry, after the visitor had retired, "take
the pills, and much good may they do you.  Better take one now for
the growth of your hair."

It was fortunate that Dr. Peabody did not hear the merriment that
followed, or he would have given up the editorial staff of the
Centreville "Gazette" as maliciously disposed to underrate his
favorite medicine.

"Who wouldn't be an editor?" said Harry.

"I notice," said Ferguson, "that pill-tenders and blacking
manufacturers are most liberal to the editorial profession.  I only
wish jewellers and piano manufacturers were as free with their
manufactures.  I would like a good gold watch, and I shall soon want
a piano for my daughter."

"You may depend upon it, Ferguson, when such gifts come in, that I
shall claim them as editorial perquisites."

"We won't quarrel about them till they come, Harry."

Our hero here opened a bulky communication.

"What is that?" asked Ferguson.

"An essay on 'The Immortality of the Soul,'--covers fifteen pages
foolscap.  What shall I do with it?"

"Publish it in a supplement with Dr. Peabody's circular."

"I am not sure but the circular would be more interesting reading."

"From whom does the essay come?"

"It is signed 'L. S.'"

"Then it is by Lemuel Snodgrass, a retired schoolteacher, who fancies
himself a great writer."

"He'll be offended if I don't print it, won't he?"

"I'll tell you how to get over that.  Say, in an editorial paragraph,
'We have received a thoughtful essay from 'L. S.', on 'The
Immortality of the Soul.' We regret that its length precludes our
publishing it in the 'Gazette.'  We would suggest to the author to
print it in a pamphlet.'  That suggestion will be regarded as
complimentary, and we may get the job of printing it."

"I see you are shrewd, Ferguson.  I will follow your advice."


CHAPTER XXXIII.

AN UNEXPECTED PROPOSAL.

During his temporary editorship, Harry did not feel at liberty to
make any decided changes in the character or arrangement of the
paper; but he was ambitious to improve it, as far as he was able, in
its different departments.  Mr. Anderson had become rather indolent
in the collection of local news, merely publishing such items as were
voluntarily contributed.  Harry, after his day's work was over, made
a little tour of the village, gathering any news that he thought
would be of interest to the public.  Moreover he made arrangements to
obtain news of a similar nature from neighboring villages, and the
result was, that in the course of a month he made the "Gazette" much
more readable.

"Really, the 'Gazette' gives a good deal more news than it used to,"
was a common remark.

It was probably in consequence of this improvement that new
subscriptions began to come in, not from Centreville alone, but from
towns in the neighborhood.  This gratified and encouraged Harry, who
now felt that he was on the right tack.

There was another department to which he devoted considerable
attention.  This was a condensed summary of news from all parts of
the world, giving the preference and the largest space, of course, to
American news.  He aimed to supply those who did not take a daily
paper with a brief record of events, such as they would not be
likely, otherwise, to hear of.  Of course all this work added to his
labors as compositor; and his occasional sketches for Boston papers
absorbed a large share of his time.  Indeed, he had very little left
at his disposal for rest and recreation.

"I am afraid you are working too hard, Harry," said Ferguson.  "You
are doing Mr. Anderson's work better than he ever did it, and your
own too."

"I enjoy it," said Harry.  "I work hard I know, but I feel paid by
the satisfaction of finding that my labors are appreciated."

"When Mr. Anderson gets back, he will find it necessary to employ you
as assistant editor, for it won't do to let the paper get back to its
former dulness."

"I will accept," said Harry, "if he makes the offer.  I feel more and
more that I must be an editor."

"You are certainly showing yourself competent for the position."

"I have only made a beginning," said our hero, modestly.  "In time I
think I could make a satisfactory paper."

One day, about two months after Mr. Anderson's departure, Ferguson
and Harry were surprised, and not altogether agreeably, by the
entrance of John Clapp and Luke Harrison.  They looked far from
prosperous.  In fact, both of them were decidedly seedy.  Going West
had not effected an improvement in their fortunes.

"Is that you, Clapp?" asked Ferguson.  "Where did you come from?"

"From St. Louis."

"Then you didn't feel inclined to stay there?"

"Not I.  It's a beastly place.  I came near starving."

Clapp would have found any place beastly where a fair day's work was
required for fair wages, and my young readers in St. Louis,
therefore, need not heed his disparaging remarks.

"How was it with you, Luke?" asked Harry.  "Do you like the West no
better than Clapp?"

"You don't catch me out there again," said Luke.  "It isn't what it's
cracked up to be.  We had the hardest work in getting money enough to
get us back."

As Luke did not mention the kind of hard work by which the money was
obtained, I may state here that an evening's luck at the faro table
had supplied them with money enough to pay the fare to Boston by
railway; otherwise another year might have found them still in St.
Louis.

"Hard work doesn't suit your constitution, does it?" said Ferguson,
slyly.

"I can work as well as anybody," said Luke; "but I haven't had the
luck of some people."

"You were lucky enough to have your fare paid to the West for you."

"Yes, and when we got there, the rascal left us to shift for
ourselves.  That aint much luck."

"I've always had to shift for myself, and always expect to," was the
reply.

"Oh, you're a model!" sneered Clapp.  "You always were as sober and
steady as a deacon.  I wonder they didn't make you one."

"And Walton there is one of the same sort," said Luke.  "I say,
Harry, it was real mean in you not to send me the money I wrote for.
You hadn't it, had you?"

"Yes," said Harry, firmly; "but I worked hard for it, and I didn't
feel like giving it away."

"Who asked you to give it away?  I only wanted to borrow it."

"That's the same thing--with you.  You were not likely to repay it
again."

"Do you mean to insult me?" blustered Luke.

"No, I never insult anybody.  I only tell the truth.  You know, Luke
Harrison, whether I have reason for what I say."

"I wouldn't leave a friend to suffer when I had plenty of money in my
pocket," said Luke, with an injured air.  "If you had been a
different sort of fellow I would have asked you for five dollars to
keep me along till I can get work.  I've come back with empty
pockets."

"I'll lend you five dollars if you need it," said Harry, who judged
from Luke's appearance that he told the truth.

"Will you?" said Luke, brightening up.  "That's a good fellow.  I'll
pay you just as soon as I can."

Harry did not place much reliance on this assurance; but he felt that
he could afford the loss of five dollars, if loss it should prove,
and it might prevent Luke's obtaining the money in a more
questionable way.

"Where's Mr. Anderson?" asked Clapp, looking round the office.

"He's been in Michigan for a couple of months."

"You don't say so!  Why, who runs the paper?"

"Ferguson and I," said Harry.

"I mean who edits it?"

"Harry does that," said his fellow-workman.

"Whew!" ejaculated Clapp, in surprise.  "Why, but two years ago you
was only a printer's devil!"

"He's risen from the ranks," said Ferguson, "and I can say with truth
that the 'Gazette' has never been better than since it has been under
his charge."

"How much does old Anderson pay you for taking his place?" asked
Luke, who was quite as much surprised as Clapp.

"I don't ask anything extra.  He pays me fifteen dollars a week as
compositor."

"You're doing well," said Luke, enviously.  "Got a big pile of money
laid up, haven't you?"

"I have something in the bank."

"Harry writes stories for the Boston papers, also," said Ferguson.
"He makes a hundred or two that way."

"Some folks are born to luck," said Clapp, discontentedly.  "Here am
I, six or eight years older, out of a place, and without a cent to
fall back upon.  I wish I was one of your lucky ones."

"You might have had a few hundred dollars, at any rate," said
Ferguson, "if you hadn't chosen to spend all your money when you were
earning good wages."

"A man must have a little enjoyment.  We can't drudge all the time."

"It's better to do that than to be where you are now."

But Clapp was not to be convinced that he was himself to blame for
his present disagreeable position.  He laid the blame on fortune,
like thousands of others.  He could not see that Harry's good luck
was the legitimate consequence of industry and frugality.

After a while the two left the office.  They decided to seek their
old boarding-house, and remain there for a week, waiting for
something to turn up.

The next day Harry received the following letter from Mr. Anderson:--


"DEAR WALTON:  My brother urges me to settle permanently at the West.
I am offered a partnership in a paper in this vicinity, and my health
has much improved here.  The West seems the place for me.  My only
embarrassment is the paper.  If I could dispose of the 'Gazette' for
two thousand dollars cash, I could see my way clear to remove.  Why
can't you and Ferguson buy it?  The numbers which you have sent me
show that you are quite capable of filling the post of editor; and
you and Ferguson can do the mechanical part.  I think it will be a
good chance for you.  Write me at once whether there us any
likelihood of your purchasing.

  "Your friend,
    "JOTHAM ANDERSON."


Harry's face flushed eagerly as he read this letter, Nothing would
suit him better than to make this arrangement, if only he could
provide the purchase money.  But this was likely to present a
difficulty.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

A FRIEND IN NEED.

Harry at once showed Ferguson the letter he had received.

"What are you going to do about it?" asked his friend.

"I should like to buy the paper, but I don't see how I can.  Mr.
Anderson wants two thousand dollars cash."

"How much have you got?"

"Only five hundred."

"I have seven hundred and fifty," said Ferguson, thoughtfully.

Harry's face brightened.

"Why can't we go into partnership?" he asked.

"That is what we spoke of once," said Ferguson, "and it would suit me
perfectly; but there is a difficulty.  Your money and mine added
together will not be enough."

"Perhaps Mr. Anderson would take a mortgage on the establishment for
the balance."

"I don't think so.  He says expressly that he wants cash."

Harry looked disturbed.

"Do you think any one would lend us the money on the same terms?" he
asked, after a while.

"Squire Trevor is the only man in the village likely to have money to
lend.  There he is in the street now.  Run down, Harry, and ask him
to step in a minute."

Our hero seized his hat, and did as requested.  He returned
immediately, followed by Squire Trevor, a stout, puffy little man,
reputed shrewd and a capitalist.

"Excuse our calling you in, Squire Trevor," said Ferguson, "but we
want to consult you on a matter of business.  Harry, just show the
squire Mr. Anderson's letter."

The squire read it deliberately.

"Do you want my advice?" he said, looking up from the perusal.  "Buy
the paper.  It is worth what Anderson asks for it."

"So I think, but there is a difficulty.  Harry and I can only raise
twelve hundred dollars or so between us."

"Give a note for the balance.  You'll be able to pay it off in two
years, if you prosper."

"I am afraid that won't do.  Mr. Anderson wants cash.  Can't you lend
us the money, Squire Trevor?" continued Ferguson, bluntly.

The village capitalist shook his head.

"If you had asked me last week I could have obliged you," he said;
"but I was in Boston day before yesterday, and bought some railway
stock which is likely to enhance in value.  That leaves me short."

"Then you couldn't manage it?" said Ferguson, soberly.

"Not at present," said the squire, decidedly.

"Then we must write to Mr. Anderson, offering what we have, and a
mortgage to secure the rest."

"That will be your best course."

"He may agree to our terms," said Harry, hopefully, after their
visitor had left the office.

"We will hope so, at all events."

A letter was at once despatched, and in a week the answer was
received.

"I am sorry," Mr. Anderson wrote, "to decline your proposals, but, I
have immediate need of the whole sum which I ask for the paper.  If I
cannot obtain it, I shall come back to Centreville, though I would
prefer to remain here."

Upon the receipt of this letter, Ferguson gave up his work for the
forenoon, and made a tour of the Village, calling upon all who he
thought were likely to have money to lend.  He had small expectation
of success, but felt that he ought to try everywhere before giving up
so good a chance.

While he was absent, Harry had a welcome visitor.  It was no other
than Professor Henderson, the magician, in whose employ he had spent
three months some years before, as related in "Bound to Rise."

"Take a seat, professor," said Harry, cordially.  "I am delighted to
see you."

"How you have grown, Harry!" said the professor.  "Why, I should
hardly have known you!"

"We haven't met since I left you to enter this office."

"No; it is nearly three years.  How do you like the business?"

"Very much indeed."

"Are you doing well?"

"I receive fifteen dollars a week."

"That is good.  What are your prospects for the future?"

"They would be excellent if I had a little more capital."

"I don't see how you need capital, as a journeyman printer."

"I have a chance to buy out the paper."

"But who would edit it?"

"I would."

"You!" said the magician, rather incredulously.

"I have been the editor for the last two months."

"You--a boy!"

"I am nineteen, professor."

"I shouldn't have dreamed of editing a paper at nineteen; or, indeed,
as old as I am now."

Harry laughed.

"You are too modest, professor.  Let me show you our last two issues."

The professor took out his glasses, and sat down, not without
considerable curiosity, to read a paper edited by one who only three
years before had been his assistant.

"Did you write this article?" he asked, after a pause, pointing to
the leader in the last issue of the "Gazette."

"Yes, sir."

"Then, by Jove, you can write.  Why, it's worthy of a man of twice
your age!"

"Thank you, professor," said Harry, gratified.

"Where did you learn to write?"

Harry gave his old employer some account of his literary experiences,
mentioning his connection with the two Boston weekly papers.

"You ought to be an editor," said the professor.  "If you can do as
much at nineteen, you have a bright future before you."

"That depends a little on circumstances.  If I only could buy this
paper, I would try to win reputation as well as money."

"What is your difficulty?"

"The want of money."

"How much do you need?"

"Eight hundred dollars."

"Is that all the price such a paper commands?"

"No.  The price is two thousand dollars; but Ferguson and I can raise
twelve hundred between us."

"Do you consider it good property?"

"Mr. Anderson made a comfortable living out of it, besides paying for
office work.  We should have this advantage, that we should be our
own compositors."

"That would give you considerable to do, if you were editor also."

"I shouldn't mind," said Harry, "if I only had a paper of my own.  I
think I should be willing to work night and day."

"What are your chances of raising the sum you need?"

"Very small.  Ferguson has gone out at this moment to see if he can
find any one willing to lend; but we don't expect success."

"Why don't you apply to me?" asked the professor.

"I didn't know if you had the money to spare."

"I might conjure up some.  Presto!--change!--you know.  We professors
of magic can find money anywhere."

"But you need some to work with.  I have been behind the scenes,"
said Harry, smiling.

"But you don't know all my secrets, for all that.  In sober earnest,
I haven't been practising magic these twenty-five years for nothing.
I can lend you the money you want, and I will."

Harry seized his hand, and shook it with delight.

"How can I express my gratitude?" he said.

"By sending me your paper gratis, and paying me seven per cent.
interest on my money."

"Agreed.  Anything more?"

"Yes.  I am to give an exhibition in the village to-morrow night.
You must give me a good puff."

"With the greatest pleasure.  I'll write it now."

"Before it takes place?  I see you are following the example of some
of the city dailies."

"And I'll print you some handbills for nothing."

"Good.  When do you want the money?  Will next week do?"

"Yes.  Mr. Anderson won't expect the money before."

Here Ferguson entered the efface.  Harry made a signal of silence to
the professor, whom he introduced.  Then he said:--

"Well, Ferguson, what luck?"

"None at all," answered his fellow-compositor, evidently dispirited.
"Nobody seems to have any money.  We shall have to give up our plan."

"I don't mean to give it up."

"Then perhaps you'll tell me where to find the money."

"I will."

"You don't mean to say--" began Ferguson, eagerly.

"Yes, I do.  I mean to say that the money is found."

"Where?"

"Prof. Henderson has agreed to let us have it."

"Is that true?" said Ferguson, bewildered.

"I believe so," said the professor, smiling.  "Harry has juggled the
money out of me,--you know he used to be in the business,--and you
can make your bargain as soon as you like."

It is hardly necessary to say that Prof. Henderson got an excellent
notice in the next number of the Centreville "Gazette;" and it is my
opinion that he deserved it.


CHAPTER XXXV.

FLETCHER'S OPINION OF HARRY WALTON.

In two weeks all the business arrangements were completed, and
Ferguson and Harry became joint proprietors of the "Centreville
Gazette," the latter being sole editor.  The change was received with
favor in the village, as Harry had, as editor pro tem. for two
months, shown his competence for the position.  It gave him
prominence also in town, and, though only nineteen, he already was
classed with the minister, the doctor and the lawyer.  It helped him
also with the weekly papers to which he contributed in Boston, and
his pay was once more raised, while his sketches were more frequently
printed.  Now this was all very pleasant, but it was not long before
our hero found himself overburdened with work.

"What is the matter Harry?  You look pale," said Ferguson, one
morning.

"I have a bad headache, and am feeling out of sorts."

"I don't wonder at it.  You are working too hard."

"I don't know about that."

"I do.  You do nearly as much as I, as a compositor.  Then you do all
the editorial work, besides writing sketches for the Boston papers."

"How can I get along with less?  The paper must be edited, and I
shouldn't like giving up writing for the Boston papers."

"I'll tell you what to do.  Take a boy and train him up as a printer.
After a while he will relieve you almost wholly, while, by the time
he commands good wages, we shall be able to pay them."

"It is a good idea, Ferguson.  Do you know of any boy that wants to
learn printing?"

"Haven't you got a younger brother?"

"The very thing," said Harry, briskly.  "Father wrote to me last week
that he should like to get something for ----."

"Better write and offer him a place in the office."

"I will."

The letter was written at once.  An immediate answer was received, of
a favorable nature.  The boy was glad to leave home, and the father
was pleased to have him under the charge of his older brother.

After he had become editor, and part proprietor of the "Gazette,"
Harry wrote to Oscar Vincent to announce his promotion.  Though Oscar
had been in college now nearly two years, and they seldom met, the
two were as warm friends as ever, and from time to time exchanged
letters.

This was Oscar's reply:--


  "HARVARD COLLEGE, June 10.

"DEAR MR. EDITOR: I suppose that's the proper way to address you now.
I congratulate you with all my heart on your brilliant success and
rapid advancement.  Here you are at nineteen, while I am only a
rattle-brained sophomore.  I don't mind being called that, by the
way, for at least it credits me with the possession of brains.  Not
that I am doing so very badly.  I am probably in the first third of
the class, and that implies respectable scholarship here.

"But you--I can hardly realize that you, whom I knew only two or
three years since as a printer's apprentice (I won't use Fletcher's
word), have lifted yourself to the responsible position of sole
editor.  Truly you have risen from the ranks!

"Speaking of Fletcher, by the way, you know he is my classmate.  He
occupies an honorable position somewhere near the foot of the class,
where he is likely to stay, unless he receives from the faculty leave
of absence for an unlimited period.  I met him yesterday, swinging
his little cane, and looking as dandified as he used to.

"'Hallo! Fletcher,' said I, 'I've just got a letter from a friend of
yours.'

"'Who is it?' he asked.

"'Harry Walton.'

"'He never was a friend of mine,' said Fitz, turning up his
delicately chiselled nose,--'the beggarly printer's devil!'

"I hope you won't feel sensitive about the manner in which Fitz spoke
of you.

"'You've made two mistakes,' said I.  'He's neither a beggar nor a
printer's devil.'

"'He used to be,' retorted Fitz.

"'The last, not the first.  You'll be glad to hear that he's getting
on well.'

"'Has he had his wages raised twenty-five cents a week?' sneered Fitz.

"'He has lost his place,' said I.

"Fletcher actually looked happy, but I dashed his happiness by
adding, 'but he's got a better one.'

"'What's that?' he snarled.

"'He has bought out the paper of Mr. Anderson, and is now sole editor
and part proprietor.'

"'A boy like him buy a paper, without a cent of money and no
education!'

"'You are mistaken.  He had several hundred dollars, and as a writer
he is considerably ahead of either of us.'

"'He'll run the paper into the ground,' said Fitz, prophetically.

"'If he does, it'll only be to give it firmer root.'

"'You are crazy about that country lout,' said Fitz.  'It isn't much
to edit a little village paper like that, after all.'

"So you see what your friend Fitz thinks about it.  As you may be in
danger of having your vanity fed by compliments from other sources, I
thought I would offset them by the candid opinion of a disinterested
and impartial scholar like Fitz.

"I told my father of the step you have taken.  'Oscar,' said he,
'that boy is going to succeed.  He shows the right spirit.  I would
have given him a place on my paper, but very likely he does better to
stay where he is.'

"Perhaps you noticed the handsome notice he gave you in his paper
yesterday.  I really think he has a higher opinion of your talents
than of mine; which, of course, shows singular lack of
discrimination.  However, you're my friend, and I won't make a fuss
about it.

"I am cramming for the summer examinations and hot work I find it, I
can tell you.  This summer I am going to Niagara, and shall return by
way of the St. Lawrence and Montreal, seeing the Thousand Islands,
the rapids, and so on.  I may send you a letter or two for the
'Gazette,' if you will give me a puff in your editorial columns."


These letters were actually written, and, being very lively and
readable, Harry felt quite justified in referring to them in a
complimentary way.  Fletcher's depreciation of him troubled him very
little.

"It will make me neither worse nor better," he reflected.  "The time
will come, I hope, when I shall have risen high enough to be wholly
indifferent to such ill-natured sneers."

His brother arrived in due time, and was set to work as Harry himself
had been three years before.  He was not as smart as Harry, nor was
he ever likely to rise as high; but he worked satisfactorily, and
made good progress, so that in six months he was able to relieve
Harry of half his labors as compositor.  This, enabled him to give
more time to his editorial duties.  Both boarded at Ferguson's, where
they had a comfortable home and good, plain fare.

Meanwhile, Harry was acknowledged by all to have improved the paper,
and the most satisfactory evidence of the popular approval of his
efforts came in an increased subscription list, and this, of course,
made the paper more profitable.  At the end of twelve months, the two
partners had paid off the money borrowed from Professor Henderson,
and owned the paper without incumbrance.

"A pretty good year's work, Harry," said Ferguson, cheerfully.

"Yes," said Harry; "but we'll do still better next year."


CHAPTER XXXVI.

CONCLUSION.

I have thus traced in detail the steps by which Harry Walton ascended
from the condition of a poor farmer's son to the influential position
of editor of a weekly newspaper.  I call to mind now, however, that
he is no longer a boy, and his future career will be of less interest
to my young readers.  Yet I hope they may be interested to hear,
though not in detail, by what successive steps he rose still higher
in position and influence.

Harry was approaching his twenty-first birthday when he was waited
upon by a deputation of citizens from a neighboring town, inviting
him to deliver a Fourth of July oration.  He was at first disposed,
out of modesty, to decline; but, on consultation with Ferguson,
decided to accept and do his best.  He was ambitious to produce a
good impression, and his experience in the Debating Society gave him
a moderate degree of confidence and self-reliance.  When the time
came he fully satisfied public expectation.  I do not say that his
oration was a model of eloquence, for that could not have been
expected of one whose advantages had been limited, and one for whom I
have never claimed extraordinary genius.  But it certainly was well
written and well delivered, and very creditable to the young orator.
The favor with which it was received may have had something to do in
influencing the people of Centreville to nominate and elect him, to
the New Hampshire Legislature a few months later.

He entered that body, the youngest member in it.  But his long
connection with a Debating Society, and the experience he had gained
in parliamentary proceedings, enabled him at once to become a useful
working Member.  He was successively re-elected for several years,
during which he showed such practical ability that he obtained a
State reputation.  At twenty-eight he received a nomination for
Congress, and was elected by a close vote.  During all this time he
remained in charge of the Centreville "Gazette," but of course had
long relinquished the task of a compositor into his brother's hands.
He had no foolish ideas about this work being beneath him; but he
felt that he could employ his time more profitably in other ways.
Under his judicious management, the "Gazette" attained a circulation
and influence that it had never before reached.  The income derived
from it was double that which it yielded in the days of his
predecessor; and both he and Ferguson were enabled to lay by a few
hundred dollars every year.  But Harry had never sought wealth.  He
was content with a comfortable support and a competence.  He liked
influence and the popular respect, and he was gratified by the
important trusts which he received.  He was ambitious, but it was a
creditable and honorable ambition.  He sought to promote the public
welfare, and advance the public interests, both as a speaker and as a
writer; and though sometimes misrepresented, the people on the whole
did him justice.

A few weeks after he had taken his seat in Congress, a young man was
ushered into his private room.  Looking up, he saw a man of about his
own age, dressed with some attempt at style, but on the whole wearing
a look of faded gentility.

"Mr. Walton," said the visitor, with some hesitation.

"That is my name.  Won't you take a seat?"

The visitor sat down, but appeared ill at ease.  He nervously fumbled
at his hat, and did not speak.

"Can I do anything for you?" asked Harry, at length.

"I see you don't know me," said the stranger.

"I can't say I recall your features; but then I see a great many
persons."

"I went to school at the Prescott Academy, when you were in the
office of the Centreville 'Gazette.'"

Harry looked more closely, and exclaimed, in astonished recognition,
"Fitzgerald Fletcher!"

"Yes," said the other, flushing with mortification, "I am Fitzgerald
Fletcher."

"I am glad to see you," said Harry, cordially, forgetting the old
antagonism that had existed between them.

He rose and offered his hand, which Fletcher took with an air of
relief, for he had felt uncertain of his reception.

"You have prospered wonderfully," said Fletcher, with a shade of envy.

"Yes," said Harry, smiling.  "I was a printer's devil when you knew
me; but I never meant to stay in that position.  I have risen from
the ranks."

"I haven't," said Fletcher, bitterly.

"Have you been unfortunate?  Tell me about it, if you don't mind,"
said Harry, sympathetically.

"My father failed three years ago," said Fletcher, "and I found
myself adrift with nothing to do, and no money to fall back upon.  I
have drifted about since then; but now I am out of employment.  I
came to you to-day to see if you will exert your influence to get me
a government clerkship, even of the lowest class.  You may rest
assured, Mr. Walton, that I need it."

Was this the proud Fitzgerald Fletcher, suing, for the means of
supporting himself, to one whom, as a boy, he had despised and looked
down upon?  Surely, the world is full of strange changes and
mutations of fortune.  Here was a chance for Harry to triumph over
his old enemy; but he never thought of doing it.  Instead, he was
filled with sympathy for one who, unlike himself, had gone down in
the social scale, and he cordially promised to see what he could do
for Fletcher, and that without delay.

On inquiry, he found that Fletcher was qualified to discharge the
duties of a clerk, and secured his appointment to a clerkship in the
Treasury Department, on a salary of twelve hundred dollars a year.
It was an income which Fletcher would once have regarded as wholly
insufficient for his needs; but adversity had made him humble, and he
thankfully accepted it.  He holds the position still, discharging the
duties satisfactorily.  He is glad to claim the Hon. Harry Walton
among his acquaintances, and never sneers at him now as a "printer's
devil."

Oscar Vincent spent several years abroad, after graduation, acting as
foreign correspondent of his father's paper.  He is now his father's
junior partner, and is not only respected for his ability, but a
general favorite in society, on account of his sunny disposition and
cordial good nature.  He keeps up his intimacy with Harry Walton.
Indeed, there is good reason for this, since Harry, four years since,
married his sister Maud, and the two friends are brothers-in-law.

Harry's parents are still living, no longer weighed down by poverty,
as when we first made their acquaintance.  The legacy which came so
opportunely improved their condition, and provided them with comforts
to which they had long been strangers.  But their chief satisfaction
comes from Harry's unlooked-for success in life.  Their past life of
poverty and privation is all forgotten in their gratitude for this
great happiness.



The next and concluding volume of this series will be

  HERBERT CARTER'S LEGACY.