President Arthur; course before his Presidency; qualities
revealed afterward; curious circumstances of his nomination. 
Reform of the Civil Service.  My article in the ``North American
Review.''  Renewal of my acquaintance with Mr. Evarts; his witty
stories.  My efforts to interest Senator Platt in civil-service
reform; his slow progress in this respect.  Wayne MacVeagh; Judge
Biddle's remark at his table on American feeling regarding
capital punishment.  Great defeat of the Republican party in
1882.  Judge Folger's unfortunate campaign.  Election of Mr.
Cleveland.  My address on ``The New Germany'' at New York. 
Meeting with General McDowell, the injustice of popular judgment
upon him.  Revelation of Tammany frauds.  Grover Cleveland, his
early life; his visit to the University; impression made upon me
by him.  Senator Morrill's visit; tribute paid him by the
University authorities.  My address at Yale on ``The Message of
the Nineteenth Century to the Twentieth.''  Addresses by Carl
Schurz and myself at the funeral of Edward Lasker.  Election as a
delegate at large to the National Republican Convention at
Chicago, 1884.  Difficulties regarding Mr. Blaine; vain efforts
to nominate another candidate; George William Curtis and his
characteristics; tyranny over the Convention by the gallery mob;
nomination of Blaine and Logan.  Nomination of Mr. Cleveland by
the Democrats.  Tyranny by the Chicago mob at that convention
also.  Open letter to Theodore Roosevelt in favor of Mr. Blaine. 
Private letter to Mr. Blaine in favor of a reform of the Civil
Service.  His acceptance of its suggestions.  Wretched character
of the campaign.  Presidency of the Republican mass meeting at
Syracuse; experience with a Kentucky orator.  Election of Mr.
Cleveland.


CHAPTER XIII.  HENDRICKS, JOHN SHERMAN, BANCROFT,
AND OTHERS--1884-1891

Renewal of my acquaintance with Mr. Cleveland at Washington. 
Meeting with Mr. Blaine; his fascinating qualities; his
self-control.  William Walter Phelps; his arguments regarding the
treatment of Congressional speakers by the press.  Senator
Randall Gibson; meeting at his house with Vice-President
Hendricks; evident disappointment of the Vice-President; his view
of civil-service reform; defense of it by Senator Butler of South
Carolina; reminiscences of odd senators by Senator Jones of
Florida; Gibson's opinion of John Sherman.  President Cleveland's
mode of treating office-beggars and the like; Senator Sawyer's
story; Secretary Fairchild's remark; Senators Sherman and Vance. 
Secretary Bayard's criticism of applicants for office.  Senator
Butler's remark on secession.  Renewal of my acquaintance with
George Bancroft.  Goldwin Smith in Washington; his favorable
opinion of American crowds.  Chief Justice Waite.  General
Sheridan; his account of the battle of Gravelotte; discussion
between Sheridan and Goldwin Smith regarding sundry points in
military history.  General Schenck; his reminiscences of Corwin
Everett, and others.  Resignation of my presidency at Cornell,
1885.  President Cleveland's tender of an Interstate Railway
commissionership, my declination.  Departure for Europe.  Am
tendered nomination for Congress; my discussion of the matter in
London with President Porter of Yale and others; declination. 
Visit to Washington under the administration of General Harrison,
January, 1891; presentation of proposals to him regarding
civil-service reform; his speech in reply.


CHAPTER XIV.  MCKINLEY AND ROOSEVELT--1891-1904

Candidacy for the governorship of New York; Mr. Platt's relation
to it; my reluctance and opposition; decision of the Rochester
Convention in favor of Mr. Fassett; natural reasons for this. 
Lectures at Stanford University.  Visit to Mexico and California
with Mr. Andrew Carnegie and his party.  President Harrison
tenders me the position of minister to Russia; my retention in
office by Mr. Cleveland.  My stay in Italy 1894-1895.  President
Cleveland appoints me upon the Venezuelan Boundary Commission,
December, 1895.  Presidential campaign of 1896.  My unexpected
part in it; nomination of Mr. Bryan by Democrats; publication of
my open letter to sundry Democrats, republication of my ``Paper
Money Inflation in France,'' and its circulation as a campaign
document; election of Mr. McKinley.  My address before the State
Universities of Wisconsin and Minnesota; strongly favorable
impression made upon me by them; meeting with Mr. Ignatius
Donnelly, his public address to me in the State House of
Minnesota.  My addresses at Harvard, Yale, and elsewhere.  Am
appointed by President McKinley ambassador to Germany; question
of my asking sanction of Mr. Platt; how settled.  Renomination of
McKinley with Mr. Roosevelt as Vice-President.  I revisit
America; day with Mr. Roosevelt, visits to Washington; my
impressions of President McKinley; his conversation; his
coolness; tributes from his Cabinet; Secretary Hay's testimony,
Mr. McKinley's refusal to make speeches during his second
campaign; his reasons; his re<e:>lection; how received in Europe. 
His assassination; receipt of the news in Germany and Great
Britain.  My second visit to America; sadness, mournful
reflections at White House; conversations with President
Roosevelt; message given me by him for the Emperor; its playful
ending.  The two rulers compared.


PART III--AS UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR
CHAPTER XV.  LIFE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN--1857-1864

Early ideals.  Gradual changes in these.  Attractions of
journalism then and now.  New views of life opened to me at Paris
and Berlin.  Dreams of aiding the beginnings of a better system
of university education in the United States.  Shortcomings of
American instruction, especially regarding history, political
science, and literature, at that period.  My article on
``German Instruction in General History'' in ``The New
Englander.''  Influence of Stanley's ``Life of Arnold.''  Turning
point in my life at the Yale Commencement of 1856; Dr. Wayland's
speech.  Election to the professorship of history and English
literature at the University of Michigan; my first work in it;
sundry efforts toward reforms, text-books, social relations with
students; use of the Abb<e'> Bautain's book.  My courses of
lectures; President Tappan's advice on extemporaneous speaking;
publication of my syllabus; ensuing relations with Charles
Sumner.  Growth and use of my private historical library. 
Character of my students.  Necessity for hard work. 
Student discussions.


CHAPTER XVI.  UNIVERSITY LIFE IN THE WEST--
1857-1864

Some difficulties; youthfulness; struggle against various
combinations, my victory; an enemy made a friend.  Lectures
throughout Michigan; main purpose in these; a storm aroused;
vigorous attack upon my politico-economical views; happy results;
revenge upon my assailant; discussion in a County Court House. 
Breadth and strength then given to my ideas regarding university
education.  President Tappan.  Henry Simmons Frieze.  Brunnow. 
Chief Justice Cooley.  Judge Campbell.  Distinguishing feature of
the University of Michigan in those days.  Dr. Tappan's good
sense in administration; one typical example.  Unworthy treatment
of him by the Legislature; some causes of this.  Opposition to
the State University by the small sectarian colleges.  Dr.
Tappan's prophecy to sundry demagogues; its fulfilment.  Sundry
defects of his qualities; the ``Winchell War,'' ``Armed
Neutrality.''  Retirement of President Tappan; its painful
circumstances; amends made later by the citizens of Michigan. 
The little city of Ann Arbor; origin of its name.  Recreations,
tree planting on the campus; results of this.  Exodus of students
into the Civil War.  Lectures continued after my resignation.  My
affectionate relations with the institution.


PART IV--AS UNIVERSITY PRESIDENT
CHAPTER XVII.  EVOLUTION OF ``THE CORNELL IDEA''--
1850-1865

Development of my ideas on university organization at Hobart
College, at Yale, and abroad.  Their further evolution at the
University of Michigan.  President Tappan's influence.  My plan
of a university at Syracuse.  Discussions with George William
Curtis.  Proposal to Gerrit Smith; its failure.  A new
opportunity opens.


CHAPTER XVIII.  EZRA CORNELL--1864-1874

Ezra Cornell.  My first impressions regarding him.  His public
library.  Temporary estrangement between us; regarding the Land
Grant Fund. Our conversation regarding his intended gift.  The
State Agricultural College and the ``People's College''; his
final proposal.  Drafting of the Cornell University Charter.  His
foresight.  His views of university education.  Struggle for the
charter in the Legislature; our efforts to overcome the coalition
against us; bitter attacks on him; final struggle in the
Assembly, Senate, and before the Board of Regents.  Mr. Cornell's
location of the endowment lands.  He nominates me to the
University Presidency.  His constant liberality and labors.  His
previous life; growth of his fortune; his noble use of it; sundry
original ways of his; his enjoyment of the university in its
early days; his mixture of idealism and common sense.  First
celebration of Founder's Day.  His resistance to unreason. 
Bitter attacks upon him in sundry newspapers and in the
Legislature; the investigation; his triumph.  His minor
characteristics; the motto ``True and Firm'' on his house.  His
last days and hours.  His political ideas.  His quaint sayings;
intellectual and moral characteristics; equanimity; religious
convictions.


CHAPTER XIX.  ORGANIZATION OF CORNELL UNIVERSITY--
1865-1868

Virtual Presidency of Cornell during two years before my actual
election.  Division of labor between Mr. Cornell and myself.  My
success in thwarting efforts to scatter the Land Grant Fund, and
in impressing three points on the Legislature.  Support given by
Horace Greeley to the third of these.  Judge Folger's opposition. 
Sudden death of Dr. Willard and its effects.  Our compromise with
Judge Folger.  The founding of Willard Asylum.  Continued
opposition to us.  Election to the Presidency of the University. 
Pressure of my own business.  Presentation of my ``Plan of
Organization.'' Selection of Professors; difficulty of such
selection in those days as compared with these; system suggested;
system adopted.  Resident and non- resident professorships. 
Erection of university buildings; difficulty arising from a
requirement of our charter; general building plan adopted. 
My visit to European technical institutions; choice of foreign
professors; purchases of books, apparatus, etc.


CHAPTER XX.  THE FIRST YEARS OF CORNELL UNIVERSITY--
1868-1870

Formal opening of the University October 7, 1868.  Difficulties,
mishaps, calamities, obstacles.  Effect of these on Mr. Cornell
and myself.  Opening ceremonies of the morning; Mr. Cornell's
speech and my own; effect of Mr. Cornell's broken health upon me.
The first ringing of the chime; effect of George W. Curtis's
oration; my realization of our difficulties; Mr. Cornell's
physical condition; inadequacy of our resources; impossibility of
selling lands; our necessary unreadiness; haste compelled by our
charter.  Mr. Cornell's letter to the ``New York Tribune''
regarding student labor.  Dreamers and schemers.  Efforts by
``hack'' politicians.  Attacks by the press, denominational and
secular.  Friction in the University machinery.  Difficulty of
the students in choosing courses; improvement in these days
consequent upon improvement of schools.  My reprint of John
Foster's ``Essay on Decision of Character''; its good effects. 
Compensations; character of the students; few infractions of
discipline; causes of this; effects of liberty of choice between
courses of study.  My success in preventing the use of the
faculty as policemen; the Campus Bridge case.  Sundry trials of
students by the faculty; the Dundee Lecture case; the ``Mock
Programme'' case; a suspension of class officers; revelation in
all this of a spirit of justice among students.  Athletics and
their effects.  Boating; General Grant's remark to me on the
Springfield regatta; Cornell's double success at Saratoga; letter
from a Princeton graduate.  General improvement in American
university students during the second half of the nineteenth
century.


CHAPTER XXI.  DIFFICULTIES AND DANGERS AT CORNELL--
1868-1872

Questions regarding courses of instruction.  Evils of the old
system of assigning them entirely to resident professors. 
Literary instruction at Yale; George William Curtis and John
Lord.  Our general scheme.  The Arts Course; clinching it into
our system; purchase of the Anthon Library; charges against us on
this score; our vindication.  The courses in literature, science
and philosophy; influence of one of Herbert Spencer's ideas upon
the formation of all these; influence of my own experience. 
Professor Wilder; his services against fustian and ``tall talk.''
The course in literature; use made of it in promoting the general
culture of students.  Technical departments; Civil Engineering;
incidental question of creed in electing a professor to it. 
Department of Agriculture; its difficulties; three professors who
tided it through.  Department of Mechanic Arts; its peculiar
difficulties and dangers; Mr. Cornell's view regarding college
shop work for bread winning; necessity for practical work in
connection with theoretical; mode of bringing about this
connection.  Mr. Sibley's gift.  Delay in recognition of our
success. Department of Architecture; origin of my ideas on this
subject; the Trustees accept my architectural library and
establish the Department.


CHAPTER XXII.  FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF UNIVERSITY
COURSES-1870-1872

Establishment of Laboratories.  Governor Cleveland's visit. 
Department of Electrical Engineering; its origin.  Department of
Political Science and History.  Influence of my legislative
experience upon it; my report on the Paris Exposition, and
address at Johns Hopkins; a beginning made; excellent work done
by Frank Sanborn.  Provision for Political Economy; presentation
of both sides of controverted questions.  Instruction in History;
my own part in it; its growth; George Lincoln Burr called into
it; lectures by Goldwin Smith, Freeman, Froude, and others. 
Instruction in American History; calling of George W. Greene and
Theodore Dwight as Non-Resident, and finally of Moses Coit Tyler
as Resident Professor.  Difficulties in some of these
Departments.  Reaction, ``The Oscillatory Law of Human
Progress.''  ``Joe'' Sheldon's ``Professorship of Horse Sense''
needed.  First gift of a building--McGraw Hall.  Curious passage
in a speech at the laying of its corner-stone.  Military
Instruction; peculiar clause regarding it in our Charter; our
broad construction of it; my reasons for this.  The Conferring of
Degrees; abuse at sundry American institutions in conferring
honorary degrees why Cornell University confers none.  Regular
Degrees; theory originally proposed; theory adopted; recent
change in practice.


CHAPTER XXIII.  ``CO-EDUCATION'' AND AN UNSECTARIAN
PULPIT--1871-1904

