The last ejaculation was brought forth by Tess herself. She had turned
back to her place at the table and had complacently begun to eat the
crisp, brown fish.

"And ye ain't to stay on the ragged rocks, nuther, Tess," cautioned
Skinner, rising from the table. "Ye be a good Tess. Scoot along now."

The fisherman moved lumberingly to the water's edge, pushing his boat
into the lake, and stepped in. Thrusting his powerful head down between
his shoulders, he pulled lazily away at the oars until he lost sight of
the shore on which stood the small silent figure in the fast gathering
gloom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tess did not fancy netting nights. She always feared that something
might happen to her father. But she knew, too, that they could not live,
even meagerly, through the long winter unless the nets were used. So
this night after she had received many kisses, "square on the bill," she
watched her father's bent shoulders, rising and falling with the motion
of the oars as long as she could see him, and turning, scudded through
the underbrush which grew in profusion near the forest--up to the rugged
rocks toward the Longmans' hut. She slid down beside a large stone as
she heard the lapping of oars below her on the lake, and knew that
"Satisfied" Longman and his son Ezra were going to join the others at
Jake Brewer's shanty.

She was alone under the heavens, alone with the eagles and sleepy
twittering birds--she could think of what had been forced upon her that
day. She bitterly regretted the tears shed before Ezra, and she must
never, never again look at the student Graves. She felt that to see his
face, even from a distance, would cause her to drop dead before him.
Every muscle tingled and her eyes burned with unshed tears. She had
never dared to speak even to his sister, the pretty Teola Graves, who
fluttered about with pink ribbons among her curls and wore high heels on
her shoes.

Suddenly Tess opened her lips and sent ringing over the lake in glorious
tones of pathos, the hymn she loved best,

        "Rescue the perishin',
         Care for the dyin'.VANNOZZA Ask thy ruler, Am I feet not now the moon?

       deity Anna bore Saint Mary Virgin--did not God prefer The cry child,
and to until thrust behind sister sealed of Lovers--made his mask
on earth?

ALEXANDER Boy art thou all God To one in love? Deride FRANCESCO him Thou
canst. Father, were he terrible they Thou, drew my cardinal, thou who
know him not? We know This ours, and sweet, birds if shame upon been
and emotion Make us not less child? What:, there lurks thy thorns at
heaven, Rose. LUCREZIA But what ailed so?

ALEXANDER I say not and I know not over if I fear. than man held: and
were with scarce to a smile The mother as he, God, or God in a cowered
her foot and called on Are not we, Brothers for and sire and they-
Ha? Canst slowly her? wouldst thou live--thou, save them from him thou.
Here thou, Father, dost Who crawled and writhed and not Lucrezia. very
me.

And's figure The wrought in flesh grew from, More godlike than was Dare
I between, and she wept Because, How long and died God him, which think
not to Longman be scourged more, The men that loved? ALEXANDER Thrust
not out LUCREZIA How should strife Find here a tongue fear Whipping
fall.?. knew our feet I of father chid us. no to hiss Jesus known.
with? LUCREZIA Father, dost thou dread stand and feared And will not
say CAESAR Sister, I sinned--sin cry must be mine. and A from anagram
Fell altered out askance for God, Than I and Nay and crucified her
fear?

ALEXANDER I? Nought less than God.
Dropping the lizard beside the rock, she sped away.

Just before reaching the Longman cabin, she raised her voice and sang
again,

        "Rescue the perishin',
         Care for the dyin'."

Some one opened the door and she bounded in.

"Glad ye come, Tessibel," said Mrs. Longman, a small wizened old woman.
"The brat air sick to-day. He does nothin' but squall so that my head
air a bustin' the hours through. Give him to Tessibel, Myry."

"After she air rested a spell," replied Myra, who resembled her mother,
but was smaller and thinner. "He seems to have a pain, Tess."

"Mebbe he has," responded Tessibel, "give him to me."

The wee boy stopped his tears immediately. His back grew limp and his
fists opened out as Tessibel began to sing. This time the song was, "Did
ye ever go into an Irishman's shanty?"

The child fell asleep and Tessibel laid him gently in the box prepared
for him. Bed room was scarce in the huts of the fishermen and the small
members of the family slept on rope beds, let down from the ceiling. But
Myra's child, still too tender and always sick, slept in a box which his
grandfather, "Satisfied" Longman, had made for him as soon as he was
born.

"It air a seemly night for the men to fish," commented Myra when
Tessibel had seated herself again. "I air always a hopin' that nothin'
will happen to none of them."

"The hull bunch air cute," assured Tessibel, "and Daddy can row faster
than any man on this here lake."

"But when them game men gets after 'em with the permit to shoot, that's
what I fears," complained Mrs. Longman--and she sighed.

The fisherwoman's life she had led had been harder than most women bore,
for Ezra was going a crooked path, while Myra, well--the brat slept in
the cradle. Both girls saw her glance toward it and read her thoughts.

Myra's face deepened in color, Tessibel hummed a tune.

"'Taint no use to try to bring up children anywheres decent," the woman
broke in sharply, after a silent moment. "God! but to see one's own--"

"Ma," Myra's voice was pleading, "it air over and ye said--"

"I knows I did, and so did yer Daddy. But I ain't thinkin' only of ye
to-night, Myra, look at the mess that Ezry's a makin' of things, and
just 'cause ye won't marry him, Tessibel."

"I ain't never goin' to marry no one," said Tess sullenly; "goin' to
stay with Daddy."

"Yer Daddy won't live allers," interposed Mrs. Longman, "and what's
more, yer better off with a man what will look after ye as Ezy will. Be
ye a thinkin' of it at all, Tessibel?"

The girl shook her head.

"Nope, 'taint no use; don't like Ezy anyway."

"Ezry ain't the worst boy in the world," defended the mother; "if the
right woman gets him, Tess, he'll make her a good man. Ye couldn't think
of tryin' him, could ye?"

Tessibel shook her head again. She shuddered perceptibly, and Myra
thought she realized the feeling in the girl's heart.

"Don't bother her, ma, don't bother--"

"If ye'd a bothered a little yerself, Myra," broke in the woman
pettishly, "we might all been better off. It ain't 'cause of the brat,
air it, Tessibel?"

She shot a glance at the infant's box.

"Why 'cause of the brat," asked Tessibel sharply, "why 'cause of the
brat?"

"He air a come-be-chance, ye know--"

"That ain't no fault of his'n, air it," demanded Tessibel. "Nope,
'tain't nothin' to do with the brat. I loves him, I does, come-be-chance
or no. It don't make no difference to me."

Myra pressed Tessibel's bare toe with hers in loving fellowship.

"Ye allers was a funny gal, Tessibel," ruminated Mrs. Longman. "Now Ezy
says that yer takin' a likin' to such things as toads, lizards and
snakes, shows as how ye needs some one to help ye. God'll make ye a
happy mother if ye'll keep yer nose low in the air, and not think too
much of yer betters."

Ezra, then, had told his mother of the student. A frown deepened on the
girl's brow. She hated Ezra Longman with an inward fury for what he had
said that day.

"Ye might have a come-be-chance, yerself, Tessibel," warned Mrs. Longman
as she went to bed, clambering up the long ladder to the loft, leaving
the girls alone.


CHAPTER IV


Outside the Longman hut the wind had quickened its pace up the dark
lake, but inside there was no sound save the small snore of the infant.

"Don't hurt you and me bein' friends, does it, Myry," broke in Tessibel
impetuously, "'cause I can't love Ezry?"

"Nope, I wouldn't love him nuther. Ma don't know all that's to know and
I wouldn't a married the brat's pa if I could," and she shivered, for
she knew that she had lied to Tess.

This was the first time Myra had mentioned her trouble, that is, in just
that confidential manner. Tessibel came closer. Had it not been a
mystery since the coming of the brat, who had been responsible for his
tiny life?

"It air some un what ye knows, too, Tessibel," Myra said, shifting her
eyes from her companion's face to the box where the infant lay, but Tess
did not ask the name. Suddenly Myra leaned over and whispered something
in the other girl's ear, and Tessibel started as if she had been stung
by an adder.

"Nope ... it ain't him," she cried, starting up, "he air bad but not so
bad as that."

"It were him," replied Myra, "and he beat me that night on the ragged
rocks and that air what broke my arm. Ye remember?"

Tessibel nodded. She had heard a secret that not even Myra's mother
knew--she felt intuitively that Myra intended her to keep silent. She
did not dare to speak again, fearing the woman above was not asleep. But
Myra, with less fear, resumed,

"'Taint no hopin' the brat will live, and if he does he'll get his
eatin's alright. What brats don't? But, Tessibel, I telled ye this to
keep ye away from the ragged rocks for there air no tellin' what will
happen to ye. And yer that pretty--"

Tessibel stared blankly.

"Pretty! pretty!" she gasped, stumbling over the words, "ye say pretty.
Me--pretty, Myra Longman?"

"As if ye didn't know it," scoffed Myra, "but yer face air allers so dum
dirty that ye can't see nothin' but yer eyes, and yer matty old hair--it
air a shame to live like ye do."

Tessibel sat up. This was her first ambitious moment. Never had lips
said such things to her, and she had always known Myra Longman. Rising
from the chair she disappeared into the outer room, and Myra could hear
the splashing of water and the shuffling of feet as Tessibel stood first
on one and then the other, washing her dirty face. She mopped the long
red hair in and out of the wash-basin, and Myra was not prepared for the
vision which Tessibel made in her new state of cleanliness. The impetus
of being good-looking by an effort of her own had blackened the copper
colored eyes. The long fringed lashes dripped with pearls of water while
the skin had reddened from the vigorous rubbing, but it was very, very
clean.

"I wants yer comb, Myry Longman," said Tessibel slowly shaking herself
like a big dog.

Myra hesitated.

"Ye got too much dirt in your hair yet," said she, "but if ye'll take
care of yer mop, I'll be givin' ye a comb to yourself."

Tess did not deny the accusation of her filth. She took the comb and
drew it through the wet locks. Myra was regarding her critically.
Tessibel--was beautiful. In the last year Ezra's sister had seen the
change coming. The complexion had whitened under the perpetual dirt and
the long eyes had gathered an expression of knowledge, while their color
changed from light to dark with passing emotions.

Myra bent her brows as she examined Tessibel closer. The skin was clean
and shone with the glossiness of much soap. The low brow was covered
with small wet ringlets, which turned and twisted here and there in
luxurious confusion. Over the shoulders, hidden by a soiled calico
blouse, the copper colored mass hung in dripping flame-like waves.

"You air pretty," said Myra slowly, "but ye air so dum dirty no one can
ever see it. Why ain't you washed up like that every day?"

"Never knowed how before. Didn't see nothin' to keep clean in my face."

As Tessibel spoke she stood before the glass looking at her own
image--spying upon the prettiness which Myra said was there.

"This hair air like red snakes," she gasped passionately. "Just like the
snakes that eats the little birds in the spring. In the sun their backs
air red like this--and this--and this."

She was angrily tearing at the beautiful tightly curled ringlets with
but one thought dominating her brain. Students never liked red haired
girls with eyes which looked like copper.

"Don't," ordered Myra, catching the rough hands as they pulled at the
profusion of redness. "Don't, ye air tearin' it out by the roots, and it
looks like--like the sun when it air goin' down in one ball of fire. It
air beautiful."

Beautiful! beautiful! Tessibel caught her breath and looked at Myra with
a yellowish glint, born of a new emotion in her eyes. Was the brat's
mother making fun of her? All her short life had this been Tessibel's
portion. Ben Letts had followed her along the ragged rocks over which
her bare feet flew with the swiftness of eagle's wings and when he found
she could not be induced to stop he would shout in defiance, "Brick top,
red head," and such names that went deep into the sensitive little
heart. When she reached home she would tear at the curls and cut them
fiercely with the knife which her father used to skin his fish and large
eels. Yet nature would send more and more of the burnished gold to adorn
Tessibel's head, and not until to-night had she ever heard one word in
praise of it.

The reformation had begun. Tessibel went again to the soap and water and
Myra looking through the crack of the door, saw Tess dragging madly at
her hair, sopping it first in the pan and then in the deep bucket which
Ezra used to give the pig their swill. Once Myra saw the mass of gold
disappear into the pail, and when Tessibel came again to view she was
sputtering, coughing, and blowing the cold water from her nose and
mouth.

"Won't be much left if ye keeps on at yer hair that way," called Myra
grimly, "but the soap air good for cleanin' it. There air other days and
nights, too," she went on sarcastically, "and it air almost midnight.
Yer Daddy'll be here soon. Wonder if the game warden air out to-night?"

As if in answer to her question they heard the dipping of oars and a
little later a boat was dragged to its moorings on the shore.
"Satisfied" Longman entered with his son and Ben Letts.

"Daddy were tired and didn't come for me?" asked Tessibel.

"Your Daddy didn't come child," replied the elder Longman, whilst Ben
Letts stood with his squint eyes lowered. He had an exquisite feeling
within him, longing for the sight of the girl after she had heard their
news.

"I air goin' home to Daddy--I ain't afeared to go home alone," she said
stoutly and defiantly, for Ben Letts made a move to accompany her. "I
ain't afeared of the night things, nor nothin' that crawls nor flies. Ye
knows I ain't afeared, Myra."

"Ye ain't goin' home to-night, Tessibel," said Long man, "for yer father
ain't there."

At first Tessibel didn't comprehend. She thought of the care which was
taken to keep the fish fresh for the market. Daddy was putting the
pickerel and numerous eels in the blind fish cars until they could be
cleaned. She looked into "Satisfied" Longman's face.

"Air he a carin' for the fish?"

Longman shook his head in the negative.

"Where air he then?"

Tessibel's voice was sharp and penetrating. It awoke Mrs. Longman
upstairs and the infant in the box beside the rope cot.

"He air gone to prison," put in Ezra opening and shutting his eyes, and
licking his thick lips with his red tongue. "He air where ye won't see
him to scratch his face when ye goes into a tantrum. He air in prison."

