Produced by David Widger


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           AUGUST & SEPTEMBER
                                 1664

August 1st.  Up, my mind very light from my last night's accounts, and so
up and with Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen to St. James's,
where among other things having prepared with some industry every man a
part this morning and no sooner (for fear they should either consider of
it or discourse of it one to another) Mr. Coventry did move the Duke and
obtain it that one of the clerkes of the Clerke of the Acts should have an
addition of L30 a year, as Mr. Turner hath, which I am glad of, that I may
give T. Hater L20 and keep L10 towards a boy's keeping.  Thence Mr.
Coventry and I to the Attorney's chamber at the Temple, but not being
there we parted, and I home, and there with great joy told T. Hater what I
had done, with which the poor wretch was very glad, though his modesty
would not suffer him to say much.  So to the Coffee-house, and there all
the house full of the victory Generall Soushe

     [General Soushe was Louis Ratuit, Comte de Souches.  The battle was
     fought at Lewenz (or Leva), in Hungary.--B.]

(who is a Frenchman, a soldier of fortune, commanding part of the German
army) hath had against the Turke; killing 4,000 men, and taking most
extraordinary spoil.  Thence taking up Harman and his wife, carried them
to Anthony Joyce's, where we had my venison in a pasty well done; but,
Lord! to see how much they made of, it, as if they had never eat any
before, and very merry we were, but Will most troublesomely so, and I find
he and his wife have a most wretched life one with another, but we took no
notice, but were very merry as I could be in such company.  But Mrs.
Harman is a very pretty-humoured wretch, whom I could love with all my
heart, being so good and innocent company.  Thence to Westminster to Mr.
Blagrave's, and there, after singing a thing or two over, I spoke to him
about a woman for my wife, and he offered me his kinswoman, which I was
glad of, but she is not at present well, but however I hope to have her.
Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and thence with Mr. Coventry, who
appointed to meet me there, and with him to the Attorney General, and
there with Sir Ph. Warwicke consulted of a new commission to be had
through the Broad Seale to enable us to make this contract for Tangier
victualling.  So home, and there talked long with Will about the young
woman of his family which he spoke of for to live with my wife, but though
she hath very many good qualitys, yet being a neighbour's child and young
and not very staid, I dare not venture of having her, because of her being
able to spread any report of our family upon any discontent among the
heart of our neighbours.  So that my dependance is upon Mr. Blagrave, and
so home to supper and to bed.  Last night, at 12 o'clock, I was waked
with knocking at Sir W. Pen's door; and what was it but people's running
up and down to bring him word that his brother,

     [George Penn, the elder brother of Sir W. Penn, was a wealthy
     merchant at San Lucar, the port of Seville.  He was seized as a
     heretic by the Holy Office, and cast into a dungeon eight feet
     square and dark as the grave.  There he remained three years, every
     month being scourged to make him confess his crimes.  At last, after
     being twice put to the rack, he offered to confess whatever they
     would suggest.  His property, L12,000, was then confiscated, his
     wife, a Catholic, taken from him, and he was banished from Spain for
     ever.--M. B.]

who hath been a good while, it seems, sicke, is dead.

2nd.  At the office all the morning.  At noon dined, and then to, the
'Change, and there walked two hours or more with Sir W. Warren, who after
much discourse in general of Sir W. Batten's dealings, he fell to talk how
every body must live by their places, and that he was willing, if I
desired it, that I should go shares with him in anything that he deals in.
He told me again and again, too, that he confesses himself my debtor too
for my service and friendship to him in his present great contract of
masts, and that between this and Christmas he shall be in stocke and will
pay it me.  This I like well, but do not desire to become a merchant, and,
therefore, put it off, but desired time to think of it.  Thence to the
King's play-house, and there saw "Bartholomew Fayre," which do still
please me; and is, as it is acted, the best comedy in the world, I
believe.  I chanced to sit by Tom Killigrew, who tells me that he is
setting up a Nursery; that is, is going to build a house in Moorefields,
wherein he will have common plays acted.  But four operas it shall have in
the year, to act six weeks at a time; where we shall have the best scenes
and machines, the best musique, and every thing as magnificent as is in
Christendome; and to that end hath sent for voices and painters and other
persons from Italy.  Thence homeward called upon my Lord Marlborough, and
so home and to my office, and then to Sir W. Pen, and with him and our
fellow officers and servants of the house and none else to Church to lay
his brother in the ground, wherein nothing handsome at all, but that he
lays him under the Communion table in the chancel, about nine at night?
So home and to bed.

3rd.  Up betimes and set some joyners on work to new lay my floor in our
wardrobe, which I intend to make a room for musique.  Thence abroad to
Westminster, among other things to Mr. Blagrave's, and there had his
consent for his kinswoman to come to be with my wife for her woman, at
which I am well pleased and hope she may do well.  Thence to White Hall to
meet with Sir G. Carteret about hiring some ground to make our mast docke
at Deptford, but being Council morning failed, but met with Mr. Coventry,
and he and I discoursed of the likeliness of a Dutch warr, which I think
is very likely now, for the Dutch do prepare a fleet to oppose us at
Guinny, and he do think we shall, though neither of us have a mind to it,
fall into it of a sudden, and yet the plague do increase among them, and
is got into their fleet, and Opdam's own ship, which makes it strange they
should be so high.  Thence to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, and
down by water to Woolwich to the rope yard, and there visited Mrs.
Falconer, who tells me odd stories of how Sir W. Pen was rewarded by her
husband with a gold watch (but seems not certain of what Sir W. Batten
told me, of his daughter having a life given her in L80 per ann.) for his
helping him to his place, and yet cost him L150 to Mr. Coventry besides.
He did much advise it seems Mr. Falconer not to marry again, expressing
that he would have him make his daughter his heire, or words to that
purpose, and that that makes him, she thinks, so cold in giving her any
satisfaction, and that W. Boddam hath publickly said, since he came down
thither to be clerke of the ropeyard, that it hath this week cost him
L100, and would be glad that it would cost him but half as much more for
the place, and that he was better before than now, and that if he had been
to have bought it, he would not have given so much for it.  Now I am sure
that Mr. Coventry hath again and again said that he would take nothing,
but would give all his part in it freely to him, that so the widow might
have something.  What the meaning of this is I know not, but that Sir W.
Pen do get something by it.  Thence to the Dockeyard, and there saw the
new ship in great forwardness.  So home and to supper, and then to the
office, where late, Mr. Bland and I talking about Tangier business, and so
home to bed.

4th.  Up betimes and to the office, fitting myself against a great dispute
about the East India Company, which spent afterwards with us all the
morning.  At noon dined with Sir W. Pen, a piece of beef only, and I
counterfeited a friendship and mirth which I cannot have with him, yet out
with him by his coach, and he did carry me to a play and pay for me at the
King's house, which is "The Rivall Ladys," a very innocent and most pretty
witty play.  I was much pleased with it, and it being given me, I look
upon it as no breach to my oathe.  Here we hear that Clun, one of their
best actors, was, the last night, going out of towne (after he had acted
the Alchymist, wherein was one of his best parts that he acts) to his
country-house, set upon and murdered; one of the rogues taken, an Irish
fellow.  It seems most cruelly butchered and bound.  The house will have a
great miss of him.  Thence visited my Lady Sandwich, who tells me my Lord
FitzHarding is to be made a Marquis.  Thence home to my office late, and
so to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up very betimes and set my plaisterer to work about whiting and
colouring my musique roome, which having with great pleasure seen done,
about ten o'clock I dressed myself, and so mounted upon a very pretty
mare, sent me by Sir W. Warren, according to his promise yesterday.  And
so through the City, not a little proud, God knows, to be seen upon so
pretty a beast, and to my cozen W. Joyce's, who presently mounted too, and
he and I out of towne toward Highgate; in the way, at Kentish-towne,
showing me the place and manner of Clun's being killed and laid in a
ditch, and yet was not killed by any wounds, having only one in his arm,
but bled to death through his struggling.  He told me, also, the manner of
it, of his going home so late [from] drinking with his whore, and manner
of having it found out.  Thence forward to Barnett, and there drank, and
so by night to Stevenage, it raining a little, but not much, and there to
my great trouble, find that my wife was not come, nor any Stamford coach
gone down this week, so that she cannot come.  So vexed and weary, and not
thoroughly out of pain neither in my old parts, I after supper to bed, and
after a little sleep, W. Joyce comes in his shirt into my chamber, with a
note and a messenger from my wife, that she was come by Yorke coach to
Bigglesworth, and would be with us to-morrow morning.  So, mightily
pleased at her discreete action in this business, I with peace to sleep
again till next morning.  So up, and

6th.  Here lay Deane Honiwood last night.  I met and talked with him this
morning, and a simple priest he is, though a good, well-meaning man. W.
Joyce and I to a game at bowles on the green there till eight o'clock, and
then comes my wife in the coach, and a coach full of women, only one man
riding by, gone down last night to meet a sister of his coming to town.
So very joyful drank there, not 'lighting, and we mounted and away with
them to Welling, and there 'light, and dined very well and merry and glad
to see my poor-wife.  Here very merry as being weary I could be, and after
dinner, out again, and to London.  In our way all the way the mightiest
merry, at a couple of young gentlemen, come down to meet the same
gentlewoman, that ever I was in my life, and so W. Joyce too, to see how
one of them was horsed upon a hard-trotting sorrell horse, and both of
them soundly weary and galled.  But it is not to be set down how merry we
were all the way.  We 'light in Holborne, and by another coach my wife and
mayde home, and I by horseback, and found all things well and most mighty
neate and clean.  So, after welcoming my wife a little, to the office, and
so home to supper, and then weary and not very well to bed.

7th (Lord's day).  Lay long caressing my wife and talking, she telling me
sad stories of the ill, improvident, disquiett, and sluttish manner that
my father and mother and Pall live in the country, which troubles me
mightily, and I must seek to remedy it.  So up and ready, and my wife
also, and then down and I showed my wife, to her great admiration and joy,
Mr. Gauden's present of plate, the two flaggons, which indeed are so noble
that I hardly can think that they are yet mine.  So blessing God for it,
we down to dinner mighty pleasant, and so up after dinner for a while, and
I then to White Hall, walked thither, having at home met with a letter of
Captain Cooke's, with which he had sent a boy for me to see, whom he did
intend to recommend to me.  I therefore went and there met and spoke with
him.  He gives me great hopes of the boy, which pleases me, and at
Chappell I there met Mr. Blagrave, who gives a report of the boy, and he
showed me him, and I spoke to him, and the boy seems a good willing boy to
come to me, and I hope will do well.  I am to speak to Mr. Townsend to
hasten his clothes for him, and then he is to come.  So I walked homeward
and met with Mr. Spong, and he with me as far as the Old Exchange talking
of many ingenuous things, musique, and at last of glasses, and I find him
still the same ingenuous man that ever he was, and do among other fine
things tell me that by his microscope of his owne making he do discover
that the wings of a moth is made just as the feathers of the wing of a
bird, and that most plainly and certainly. While we were talking came by
several poor creatures carried by, by constables, for being at a
conventicle.  They go like lambs, without any resistance.  I would to God
they would either conform, or be more wise, and not be catched!  Thence
parted with him, mightily pleased with his company, and away homeward,
calling at Dan Rawlinson, and supped there with my uncle Wight, and then
home and eat again for form sake with her, and then to prayers and to bed.

8th.  Up and abroad with Sir W. Batten, by coach to St. James's, where by
the way he did tell me how Sir J. Minnes would many times arrogate to
himself the doing of that that all the Board have equal share in, and more
that to himself which he hath had nothing to do in, and particularly the
late paper given in by him to the Duke, the translation of a Dutch print
concerning the quarrel between us and them, which he did give as his own
when it was Sir Richard Ford's wholly.  Also he told me how Sir W. Pen (it
falling in our discourse touching Mrs. Falconer) was at first very great
for Mr. Coventry to  bring him in guests, and that at high rates for
places, and very open was he to me therein.  After business done with the
Duke, I home to the Coffee-house, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
to hang up my fine pictures in my dining  room, which makes it very
pretty, and so my wife and I abroad to the King's play-house, she giving
me her time of the last month, she having not seen any then; so my vowe is
not broke at all, it costing me no more money than it would have done upon
her, had she gone both her times that were due to her.  Here we saw
"Flora's Figarys."  I never saw it before, and by the most ingenuous
performance of the young jade Flora, it seemed as pretty a pleasant play
as ever I saw in my life.  So home to supper, and then to my office late,
Mr. Andrews and I to talk about our victualling commission, and then he
being gone I to set down my four days past journalls and expenses, and so
home to bed.

9th.  Up, and to my office, and there we sat all the morning, at noon
home, and there by appointment Mr. Blagrave came and dined with me, and
brought a friend of his of the Chappell with him.  Very merry at dinner,
and then up to my chamber and there we sung a Psalm or two of Lawes's,
then he and I a little talke by ourselves of his kinswoman that is to come
to live with my wife, who is to come about ten days hence, and I hope will
do well.  They gone I to my office, and there my head being a little
troubled with the little wine I drank, though mixed with beer, but it may
be a little more than I used to do, and yet I cannot say so, I went home
and spent the afternoon with my wife talking, and then in the evening a
little to my office, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day comes the
newes that the Emperour hath beat the Turke;

     [This was the battle of St. Gothard, in which the Turks were
     defeated with great slaughter by the imperial forces under
     Montecuculli, assisted by the confederates from the Rhine, and by
     forty troops of French cavalry under Coligni.  St. Gothard is in
     Hungary, on the river Raab, near the frontier of Styria; it is about
     one hundred and twenty miles south of Vienna, and thirty east of
     Gratz.  The battle took place on the 9th Moharrem, A.H. 1075, or
     23rd July, A.D. 1664 (old style), which is that used by Pepys.--B.]

killed the Grand Vizier and several great Bassas, with an army of 80,000
men killed and routed; with some considerable loss of his own side, having
lost three generals, and the French forces all cut off almost. Which is
thought as good a service to the Emperour as beating the Turke almost, for
had they conquered they would have been as troublesome to him.

     [The fact is, the Germans were beaten by the Turks, and the French
     won the battle for them.--B.]

10th.  Up, and, being ready, abroad to do several small businesses, among
others to find out one to engrave my tables upon my new sliding rule with
silver plates, it being so small that Browne that made it cannot get one
to do it.  So I find out Cocker, the famous writing-master, and get him to
do it, and I set an hour by him to see him design it all; and strange it
is to see him with his natural eyes to cut so small at his first designing
it, and read it all over, without any missing, when for my life I could
not, with my best skill, read one word or letter of it; but it is use.
But he says that the best light for his life to do a very small thing by
(contrary to Chaucer's words to the Sun, "that he should lend his light to
them that small seals grave"), it should be by an artificial light of a
candle, set to advantage, as he could do it.  I find the fellow, by his
discourse, very ingenuous; and among other things, a great admirer and
well read in all our English poets, and undertakes to judge of them all,
and that not impertinently.  Well pleased with his company and better with
his judgement upon my Rule, I left him and home, whither Mr. Deane by
agreement came to me and dined with me, and by chance Gunner Batters's
wife.  After dinner Deane and I [had] great discourse again about my Lord
Chancellor's timber, out of which I wish I may get well. Thence I to
Cocker's again, and sat by him with good discourse again for an hour or
two, and then left him, and by agreement with Captain Silas Taylor (my old
acquaintance at the Exchequer) to the Post Officer to hear some instrument
musique of Mr. Berchenshaw's before my Lord Brunkard and Sir Robert
Murray.  I must confess, whether it be that I hear it but seldom, or that
really voice is better, but so it is that I found no pleasure at all in
it, and methought two voyces were worth twenty of it. So home to my office
a while, and then to supper and to bed.

11th.  Up, and through pain, to my great grief forced to wear my gowne to
keep my legs warm.  At the office all the morning, and there a high
dispute against Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen about the breadth of canvas
again, they being for the making of it narrower, I and Mr. Coventry and
Sir J. Minnes for the keeping it broader.  So home to dinner, and by and
by comes Mr. Creed, lately come from the Downes, and dined with me. I show
him a good countenance, but love him not for his base ingratitude to me.
However, abroad, carried my wife to buy things at the New Exchange, and so
to my Lady Sandwich's, and there merry, talking with her a great while,
and so home, whither comes Cocker with my rule, which he hath engraved to
admiration, for goodness and smallness of work: it cost me 14s. the doing,
and mightily pleased I am with it.  By and by, he gone, comes Mr. Moore
and staid talking with me a great while about my Lord's businesses, which
I fear will be in a bad condition for his family if my Lord should
miscarry at sea.  He gone, I late to my office, and cannot forbear
admiring and consulting my new rule, and so home to supper and to bed.
This day, for a wager before the King, my Lords of Castlehaven and Arran
(a son of my Lord of Ormond's), they two alone did run down and kill a
stoute bucke in St. James's parke.

12th.  Up, and all the morning busy at the office with Sir W. Warren about
a great contract for New England masts, where I was very hard with him,
even to the making him angry, but I thought it fit to do it as well as
just for my owne [and] the King's behalf.  At noon to the 'Change a
little, and so to dinner and then out by coach, setting my wife and mayde
down, going to Stevens the silversmith to change some old silver lace and
to go buy new silke lace for a petticoat; I to White Hall and did much
business at a Tangier Committee; where, among other things, speaking about
propriety of the houses there, and how we ought to let the Portugeses I
have right done them, as many of them as continue, or did sell the houses
while they were in possession, and something further in their favour, the
Duke in an anger I never observed in him before, did cry, says he, "All
the world rides us, and I think we shall never ride anybody."  Thence
home, and, though late, yet Pedro being there, he sang a song and parted.
I did give him 5s., but find it burdensome and so will break up the
meeting.  At night is brought home our poor Fancy, which to my great grief
continues lame still, so that I wish she had not been brought ever home
again, for it troubles me to see her.

13th.  Up, and before I went to the office comes my Taylor with a coate I
have made to wear within doors, purposely to come no lower than my knees,
for by my wearing a gowne within doors comes all my tenderness about my
legs.  There comes also Mr. Reeve, with a microscope and scotoscope.

     [An optical instrument used to enable objects to be seen in the
     dark.  The name is derived from the Greek.]

For the first I did give him L5 10s., a great price, but a most curious
bauble it is, and he says, as good, nay, the best he knows in England, and
he makes the best in the world.  The other he gives me, and is of value;
and a curious curiosity it is to look objects in a darke room with.
Mightly pleased with this I to the office, where all the morning. There
offered by Sir W. Pen his coach to go to Epsum and carry my wife, I stept
out and bade my wife make her ready, but being not very well and other
things advising me to the contrary, I did forbear going, and so Mr. Creed
dining with me I got him to give my wife and me a play this afternoon,
lending him money to do it, which is a fallacy that I have found now once,
to avoyde my vowe with, but never to be more practised I swear, and to the
new play, at the Duke's house, of "Henry the Fifth;" a most noble play,
writ by my Lord Orrery; wherein Betterton, Harris, and Ianthe's parts are
most incomparably wrote and done, and the whole play the most full of
height and raptures of wit and sense, that ever I heard; having but one
incongruity, or what did, not please me in it, that is, that King Harry
promises to plead for Tudor to their Mistresse, Princesse Katherine of
France, more than when it comes to it he seems to do; and Tudor refused by
her with some kind of indignity, not with a difficulty and honour that it
ought to have been done in to him.  Thence home and to my office, wrote by
the post, and then to read a little in Dr. Power's book of discovery by
the Microscope to enable me a little how to use and what to expect from my
glasse.  So to supper and to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  After long lying discoursing with my wife, I up, and
comes Mr. Holliard to see me, who concurs with me that my pain is nothing
but cold in my legs breeding wind, and got only by my using to wear a
gowne, and that I am not at all troubled with any ulcer, but my thickness
of water comes from my overheat in my back.  He gone, comes Mr. Herbert,
Mr. Honiwood's man, and dined with me, a very honest, plain, well-meaning
man, I think him to be; and by his discourse and manner of life, the true
embleme of an old ordinary serving-man.  After dinner up to my chamber and
made an end of Dr. Power's booke of the Microscope, very fine and to my
content, and then my wife and I with great pleasure, but with great
difficulty before we could come to find the manner of seeing any thing by
my microscope.  At last did with good content, though not so much as I
expect when I come to understand it better.  By and by comes W. Joyce, in
his silke suit, and cloake lined with velvett: staid talking with me, and
I very merry at it.  He supped with me; but a cunning, crafty fellow he
is, and dangerous to displease, for his tongue spares nobody.  After
supper I up to read a little, and then to bed.

15th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to St. James's, and there did
our business with the Duke, who tells us more and more signs of a Dutch
warr, and how we must presently set out a fleete for Guinny, for the Dutch
are doing so, and there I believe the warr will begin.  Thence home with
him again, in our way he talking of his cures abroad, while he was with
the King as a doctor, and above all men the pox.  And among others, Sir J.
Denham he told me he had cured, after it was come to an ulcer all over his
face, to a miracle.  To the Coffee-house I, and so to the 'Change a
little, and then home to dinner with Creed, whom I met at the
Coffee-house, and after dinner by coach set him down at the Temple, and I
and my wife to Mr. Blagrave's.  They being none of them at home; I to the
Hall, leaving her there, and thence to the Trumpett, whither came Mrs.
Lane, and there begins a sad story how her husband, as I feared, proves
not worth a farthing, and that she is with child and undone, if I do not
get him a place.  I had my pleasure here of her, and she, like an impudent
jade, depends upon my kindness to her husband, but I will have no more to
do with her, let her brew as she has baked, seeing she would not take my
counsel about Hawly.  After drinking we parted, and I to Blagrave's, and
there discoursed with Mrs. Blagrave about her kinswoman, who it seems is
sickly even to frantiqueness sometimes, and among other things chiefly
from love and melancholy upon the death of her servant,--[Servant =
lover.]--insomuch that she telling us all most simply and innocently I
fear she will not be able to come to us with any pleasure, which I am
sorry for, for I think she would have pleased us very well. In comes he,
and so to sing a song and his niece with us, but she sings very meanly.
So through the Hall and thence by coach home, calling by the way at
Charing Crosse, and there saw the great Dutchman that is come over, under
whose arm I went with my hat on, and could not reach higher than his
eye-browes with the tip of my fingers, reaching as high as I could.  He is
a comely and well-made man, and his wife a very little, but pretty comely
Dutch woman.  It is true, he wears pretty high-heeled shoes, but not very
high, and do generally wear a turbant, which makes him show yet taller
than really he is, though he is very tall, as I have said before.  Home to
my office, and then to supper, and then to my office again late, and so
home to bed, my wife and I troubled that we do not speed better in this
business of her woman.

16th.  Wakened about two o'clock this morning with the noise of thunder,
which lasted for an houre, with such continued lightnings, not flashes,
but flames, that all the sky and ayre was light; and that for a great
while, not a minute's space between new flames all the time; such a thing
as I never did see, nor could have believed had ever been in nature.  And
being put into a great sweat with it, could not sleep till all was over.
And that accompanied with such a storm of rain as I never heard in my
life.  I expected to find my house in the morning overflowed with the rain
breaking in, and that much hurt must needs have been done in the city with
this lightning; but I find not one drop of rain in my house, nor any newes
of hurt done.  But it seems it has been here and all up and down the
countrie hereabouts the like tempest, Sir W. Batten saying much of the
greatness thereof at Epsum.  Up and all the morning at the office. At noon
busy at the 'Change about one business or other, and thence home to
dinner, and so to my office all the afternoon very busy, and so to supper
anon, and then to my office again a while, collecting observations out of
Dr. Power's booke of Microscopes, and so home to bed, very stormy weather
to-night for winde.  This day we had newes that my Lady Pen is landed and
coming hither, so that I hope the family will be in better order and more
neate than it hath been.

17th.  Up, and going to Sir W. Batten to speak to him about business, he
did give me three, bottles of his Epsum water, which I drank and it
wrought well with me, and did give me many good stools, and I found myself
mightily cooled with them and refreshed.  Thence I to Mr. Honiwood and my
father's old house, but he was gone out, and there I staid talking with
his man Herbert, who tells me how Langford and his wife are very
foul-mouthed people, and will speak very ill of my father, calling him old
rogue in reference to the hard penniworths he sold him of his goods when
the rogue need not have bought any of them.  So that I am resolved he
shall get no more money by me, but it vexes me to think that my father
should be said to go away in debt himself, but that I will cause to be
remedied whatever comes of it.  Thence to my Lord Crew, and there with him
a little while.  Before dinner talked of the Dutch war, and find that he
do much doubt that we shall fall into it without the money or consent of
Parliament, that is expected or the reason of it that is fit to have for
every warr.  Dined with him, and after dinner talked with Sir Thomas Crew,
who told me how Mr. Edward Montagu is for ever blown up, and now quite out
with his father again; to whom he pretended that his going down was, not
that he was cast out of the Court, but that he had leave to be absent a
month; but now he finds the truth.  Thence to my Lady Sandwich, where by
agreement my wife dined, and after talking with her I carried my wife to
Mr. Pierce's and left her there, and so to Captain Cooke's, but he was not
at home, but I there spoke with my boy Tom Edwards, and directed him to go
to Mr. Townsend (with whom I was in the morning) to have measure taken of
his clothes to be made him there out of the Wardrobe, which will be so
done, and then I think he will come to me. Thence to White Hall, and after
long staying there was no Committee of the Fishery as was expected.  Here
I walked long with Mr. Pierce, who tells me the King do still sup every
night with my Lady Castlemayne, who he believes has lately slunk a great
belly away, for from very big she is come to be down again.  Thence to
Mrs. Pierce's, and with her and my wife to see Mrs. Clarke, where with him
and her very merry discoursing of the late play of Henry the 5th, which
they conclude the best that ever was made, but confess with me that
Tudor's being dismissed in the manner he is is a great blemish to the
play.  I am mightily pleased with the Doctor, for he is the only man I
know that I could learn to pronounce by, which he do the best that ever I
heard any man.  Thence home and to the office late, and so to supper and
to bed.  My Lady Pen came hither first to-night to Sir W. Pen's lodgings.

18th.  Lay too long in bed, till 8 o'clock, then up and Mr. Reeve came and
brought an anchor and a very fair loadstone.  He would have had me bought
it, and a good stone it is, but when he saw that I would not buy it he
said he [would] leave it for me to sell for him.  By and by he comes to
tell me that he had present occasion for L6 to make up a sum, and that he
would pay me in a day or two, but I had the unusual wit to deny him, and
so by and by we parted, and I to the office, where busy all the morning
sitting.  Dined alone at home, my wife going to-day to dine with Mrs.
Pierce, and thence with her and.  Mrs. Clerke to see a new play, "The
Court Secret."  I busy all the afternoon, toward evening to Westminster,
and there in the Hall a while, and then to my barber, willing to have any
opportunity to speak to Jane, but wanted it.  So to Mrs. Pierces, who was
come home, and she and Mrs. Clerke busy at cards, so my wife being gone
home, I home, calling by the way at the Wardrobe and met Mr. Townsend, Mr.
Moore and others at the Taverne thereby, and thither I to them and spoke
with Mr. Townsend about my boy's clothes, which he says shall be soon
done, and then I hope I shall be settled when I have one in the house that
is musicall.  So home and to supper, and then a little to my office, and
then home to bed.  My wife says the play she saw is the worst that ever
she saw in her life.

19th.  Up and to the office, where Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Pen and I sat
all the morning hiring of ships to go to Guinny, where we believe the warr
with Holland will first break out.  At noon dined at home, and after
dinner my wife and I to Sir W. Pen's, to see his Lady, the first time, who
is a well-looked, fat, short, old Dutchwoman, but one that hath been
heretofore pretty handsome, and is now very discreet, and, I believe, hath
more wit than her husband.  Here we staid talking a good while, and very
well pleased I was with the old woman at first visit.  So away home, and I
to my office, my wife to go see my aunt Wight, newly come to town. Creed
came to me, and he and I out, among other things, to look out a man to
make a case, for to keep my stone, that I was cut of, in, and he to buy
Daniel's history,  which he did, but I missed of my end.  So parted upon
Ludgate Hill, and I home and to the office, where busy till supper, and
home to supper to a good dish of fritters, which I bespoke, and were done
much to my mind.  Then to the office a while again, and so home to bed.
The newes of the Emperour's victory over the Turkes is by some doubted,
but by most confessed to be very small (though great) of what was talked,
which was 80,000 men to be killed and taken of the Turke's side.

20th.  Up and to the office a while, but this day the Parliament meeting
only to be adjourned to November (which was done, accordingly), we did not
meet, and so I forth to bespeak a case to be made to keep my stone in,
which will cost me 25s.  Thence I walked to Cheapside, there to see the
effect of a fire there this morning, since four o'clock; which I find in
the house of Mr. Bois, that married Dr. Fuller's niece, who are both out
of towne, leaving only a mayde and man in towne.  It begun in their house,
and hath burned much and many houses backward, though none forward; and
that in the great uniform pile of buildings in the middle of Cheapside.  I
am very sorry for them, for the Doctor's sake.  Thence to the 'Change, and
so home to dinner.  And thence to Sir W. Batten's, whither Sir Richard
Ford came, the Sheriffe, who hath been at this fire all the while; and he
tells me, upon my question, that he and the Mayor were there, as it is
their dutys to be, not only to keep the peace, but they have power of
commanding the pulling down of any house or houses, to defend the whole
City.  By and by comes in the Common Cryer of the City to speak with him;
and when he was gone, says he, "You may see by this man the constitution
of the Magistracy of this City; that this fellow's place, I dare give him
(if he will be true to me) L1000 for his profits every year, and expect to
get L500 more to myself thereby.  When," says he, "I in myself am forced
to spend many times as much."  By and by came Mr. Coventry, and so we met
at the office, to hire ships for Guinny, and that done broke up.  I to Sir
W. Batten's, there to discourse with Mrs. Falconer, who hath been with Sir
W. Pen this evening, after Mr. Coventry had promised her half what W.
Bodham had given him for his place, but Sir W. Pen, though he knows that,
and that Mr. Bodham hath said that his place hath cost him L100 and would
L100 more, yet is he so high against the poor woman that he will not hear
to give her a farthing, but it seems do listen after a lease where he
expects Mr. Falconer hath put in his daughter's life, and he is afraid
that that is not done, and did tell Mrs. Falconer that he would see it and
know what is done therein in spite of her, when, poor wretch, she neither
do nor can hinder him the knowing it.  Mr. Coventry knows of this business
of the lease, and I believe do think of it as well as I.  But the poor
woman is gone home without any hope, but only Mr. Coventry's own
nobleness.  So I to my office and wrote many letters, and so to supper and
to bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Waked about 4 o'clock with my wife, having a
looseness, and peoples coming in the yard to the pump to draw water
several times, so that fear of this day's fire made me fearful, and called
Besse and sent her down to see, and it was Griffin's maid for water to
wash her house.  So to sleep again, and then lay talking till 9 o'clock.
So up and drunk three bottles of Epsum water, which wrought well with me.
I all the morning and most of the afternoon after dinner putting papers to
rights in my chamber, and the like in the evening till night at my office,
and renewing and writing fair over my vowes.  So home to supper, prayers,
and to bed.  Mr. Coventry told us the Duke was gone ill of a fit of an
ague to bed; so we sent this morning to see how he do.

     [Elizabeth Falkener, wife of John Falkener, announced to Pepys the
     death of "her dear and loving husband" in a letter dated July 19th,
     1664 "begs interest that she may be in something considered by the
     person succeeding her husband in his employment, which has
     occasioned great expenses." ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic,
     1663-64, p. 646)]

22nd.  Up and abroad, doing very many errands to my great content which
lay as burdens upon my mind and memory.  Home to dinner, and so to White
Hall, setting down my wife at her father's, and I to the Tangier
Committee, where several businesses I did to my mind, and with hopes
thereby to get something.  So to Westminster Hall, where by appointment I
had made I met with Dr. Tom Pepys, but avoided all discourse of difference
with him, though much against my will, and he like a doating coxcomb as he
is, said he could not but demand his money, and that he would have his
right, and that let all anger be forgot, and such sorry stuff, nothing to
my mind, but only I obtained this satisfaction, that he told me about
Sturbridge last was 12 months or 2 years he was at Brampton, and there my
father did tell him that what he had done for my brother in giving him his
goods and setting him up as he had done was upon condition that he should
give my brother John L20 per ann., which he charged upon my father, he
tells me in answer, as a great deal of hard measure that he should expect
that with him that had a brother so able as I am to do that for him.  This
is all that he says he can say as to my father's acknowledging that he had
given Tom his goods.  He says his brother Roger will take his oath that my
father hath given him thanks for his counsel for his giving of Tom his
goods and setting him up in the manner that he hath done, but the former
part of this he did not speak fully so bad nor as certain what he could
say.  So we walked together to my cozen Joyce's, where my wife staid for
me, and then I home and her by coach, and so to my office, then to supper
and to bed.

23rd.  Lay long talking with my wife, and angry awhile about her desiring
to have a French mayde all of a sudden, which I took to arise from
yesterday's being with her mother.  But that went over and friends again,
and so she be well qualitied, I care not much whether she be French or no,
so a Protestant.  Thence to the office, and at noon to the 'Change, where
very busy getting ships for Guinny and for Tangier.  So home to dinner,
and then abroad all the afternoon doing several errands, to comply with my
oath of ending many businesses before Bartholomew's day, which is two days
hence.  Among others I went into New Bridewell, in my way to Mr. Cole, and
there I saw the new model, and it is very handsome. Several at work, among
others, one pretty whore brought in last night, which works very lazily.
I did give them 6d. to drink, and so away.  To Graye's Inn, but missed Mr.
Cole, and so homeward called at Harman's, and there bespoke some chairs
for a room, and so home, and busy late, and then to supper and to bed.
The Dutch East India Fleete are now come home safe, which we are sorry
for.  Our Fleets on both sides are hastening out to Guinny.

24th.  Up by six o'clock, and to my office with Tom Hater dispatching
business in haste.  At nine o'clock to White Hall about Mr. Maes's
business at the Council, which stands in an ill condition still.  Thence
to Graye's Inn, but missed of Mr. Cole the lawyer, and so walked home,
calling among the joyners in Wood Streete to buy a table and bade in many
places, but did not buy it till I come home to see the place where it is
to stand, to judge how big it must be.  So after 'Change home and a good
dinner, and then to White Hall to a Committee of the Fishery, where my
Lord Craven and Mr. Gray mightily against Mr. Creed's being joined in the
warrant for Secretary with Mr. Duke.  However I did get it put off till
the Duke of Yorke was there, and so broke up doing nothing.  So walked
home, first to the Wardrobe, and there saw one suit of clothes made for my
boy and linen set out, and I think to have him the latter end of this
week, and so home, Mr. Creed walking the greatest part of the way with me
advising what to do in his case about his being Secretary to us in
conjunction with Duke, which I did give him the best I could, and so home
and to my office, where very much business, and then home to supper and to
bed.

25th.  Up and to the office after I had spoke to my taylor, Langford (who
came to me about some work), desiring to know whether he knew of any debts
that my father did owe of his own in the City.  He tells me, "No, not
any."  I did on purpose try him because of what words he and his wife have
said of him (as Herbert told me the other day), and further did desire
him, that if he knew of any or could hear of any that he should bid them
come to me, and I would pay them, for I would not that because he do not
pay my brother's debts that therefore he should be thought to deny the
payment of his owne.  All the morning at the office busy.  At noon to the
'Change, among other things busy to get a little by the hire of a ship for
Tangier.  So home to dinner, and after dinner comes Mr. Cooke to see me;
it is true he was kind to me at sea in carrying messages to and fro to my
wife from sea, but I did do him kindnesses too, and therefore I matter not
much to compliment or make any regard of his thinking me to slight him as
I do for his folly about my brother Tom's mistress.  After dinner and some
talk with him, I to my office; there busy, till by and by Jacke Noble came
to me to tell me that he had Cave in prison, and that he would give me and
my father good security that neither we nor any of our family should be
troubled with the child; for he could prove that he was fully satisfied
for him; and that if the worst came to the worst, the parish must keep it;
that Cave did bring the child to his house, but they got it carried back
again, and that thereupon he put him in prison.  When he saw that I would
not pay him the money, nor made anything of being secured against the
child, he then said that then he must go to law, not himself, but come in
as a witness for Cave against us.  I could have told him that he could
bear witness that Cave is satisfied, or else there is no money due to
himself; but I let alone any such discourse, only getting as much out of
him as I could.  I perceive he is a rogue, and hath inquired into
everything and consulted with Dr. Pepys, and that he thinks as Dr. Pepys
told him that my father if he could would not pay a farthing of the debts,
and yet I made him confess that in all his lifetime he never knew my
father to be asked for money twice, nay, not once, all the time he lived
with him, and that for his own debts he believed he would do so still, but
he meant only for those of Tom.  He said now that Randall and his wife and
the midwife could prove from my brother's own mouth that the child was
his, and that Tom had told them the circumstances of time, upon November
5th at night, that he got it on her.  I offered him if he would secure my
father against being forced to pay the money again I would pay him, which
at first he would do, give his own security, and when I asked more than
his own he told me yes he would, and those able men, subsidy men, but when
we came by and by to discourse of it again he would not then do it, but
said he would take his course, and joyne with Cave and release him, and so
we parted.  However, this vexed me so as I could not be quiet, but took
coach to go speak with Mr. Cole, but met him not within, so back, buying a
table by the way, and at my office late, and then home to supper and to
bed, my mind disordered about this roguish business--in every thing else,
I thank God, well at ease.

26th.  Up by 5 o'clock, which I have not been many a day, and down by
water to Deptford, and there took in Mr. Pumpfield the rope-maker, and
down with him to Woolwich to view Clothier's cordage, which I found bad
and stopped the receipt of it.  Thence to the ropeyard, and there among
other things discoursed with Mrs. Falconer, who tells me that she has
found the writing, and Sir W. Pen's daughter is not put into the lease for
her life as he expected, and I am glad of it.  Thence to the Dockyarde,
and there saw the new ship in very great forwardness, and so by water to
Deptford a little, and so home and shifting myself, to the 'Change, and
there did business, and thence down by water to White Hall, by the way, at
the Three Cranes, putting into an alehouse and eat a bit of bread and
cheese.  There I could not get into the Parke, and so was fain to stay in
the gallery over the gate to look to the passage into the Parke, into
which the King hath forbid of late anybody's coming, to watch his coming
that had appointed me to come, which he did by and by with his lady and
went to Guardener's Lane, and there instead of meeting with one that was
handsome and could play well, as they told me, she is the ugliest beast
and plays so basely as I never heard anybody, so that I should loathe her
being in my house.  However, she took us by and by and showed us indeed
some pictures at one Hiseman's, a picture drawer, a Dutchman, which is
said to exceed Lilly, and indeed there is both of the Queenes and Mayds of
Honour (particularly Mrs. Stewart's in a buff doublet like a soldier) as
good pictures, I think, as ever I saw.  The Queene is drawn in one like a
shepherdess, in the other like St. Katharin, most like and most admirably.
I was mightily pleased with this sight indeed, and so back again to their
lodgings, where I left them, but before I went this mare that carried me,
whose name I know not but that they call him Sir John, a pitiful fellow,
whose face I have long known but upon what score I know not, but he could
have the confidence to ask me to lay down money for him to renew the lease
of his house, which I did give eare to there because I was there receiving
a civility from him, but shall not part with my money.  There I left them,
and I by water home, where at my office busy late, then home to supper,
and so to bed.  This day my wife tells me Mr. Pen,

     [William Penn, afterwards the famous Quaker.  P. Gibson, writing to
     him in March, 1711-12, says: "I remember your honour very well,
     when you newly came out of France and wore pantaloon breeches"]

Sir William's son, is come back from France, and come to visit her.  A
most modish person, grown, she says, a fine gentleman.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and there almost made my bargain about a ship for Tangier, which
will bring me in a little profit with Captain Taylor.  Off the 'Change
with Mr. Cutler and Sir W. Rider to Cutler's house, and there had a very
good dinner, and two or three pretty young ladies of their relations
there.  Thence to my case-maker for my stone case, and had it to my mind,
and cost me 24s., which is a great deale of money, but it is well done and
pleases me.  So doing some other small errands I home, and there find my
boy, Tom Edwards, come, sent me by Captain Cooke, having been bred in the
King's Chappell these four years.  I propose to make a clerke of him, and
if he deserves well, to do well by him.  Spent much of the afternoon to
set his chamber in order, and then to the office leaving him at home, and
late at night after all business was done I called Will and told him my
reason of taking a boy, and that it is of necessity, not out of any
unkindness to him, nor should be to his injury, and then talked about his
landlord's daughter to come to my wife, and I think it will be.  So home
and find my boy a very schoole boy, that talks innocently and
impertinently, but at present it is a sport to us, and in a little time he
will leave it.  So sent him to bed, he saying that he used to go to bed at
eight o'clock, and then all of us to bed, myself pretty well pleased with
my choice of a boy.  All the newes this day is, that the Dutch are, with
twenty-two sayle of ships of warr, crewsing up and down about Ostend; at
which we are alarmed.  My Lord Sandwich is come back into the Downes with
only eight sayle, which is or may be a prey to the Dutch, if they knew our
weakness and inability to set out any more speedily.

28th (Lord's day).  Up the first time I have had great while.  Home to
dined, and with my boy alone to church anybody to attend me to church a
dinner, and there met Creed, who, and we merry together, as his learning
is such and judgment that I cannot but be pleased with it.  After dinner I
took him to church, into our gallery, with me, but slept the best part of
the sermon, which was a most silly one.  So he and I to walk to the
'Change a while, talking from one pleasant discourse to another, and so
home, and thither came my uncle Wight and aunt, and supped with us mighty
merry.  And Creed lay with us all night, and so to bed, very merry to
think how Mr. Holliard (who came in this evening to see me) makes nothing,
but proving as a most clear thing that Rome is Antichrist.

29th.  Up betimes, intending to do business at my office, by 5 o'clock,
but going out met at my door Mr. Hughes come to speak with me about office
business, and told me that as he came this morning from Deptford he left
the King's yarde a-fire.  So I presently took a boat and down, and there
found, by God's providence, the fire out; but if there had been any wind
it must have burned all our stores, which is a most dreadfull
consideration.  But leaving all things well I home, and out abroad doing
many errands, Mr. Creed also out, and my wife to her mother's, and Creed
and I met at my Lady Sandwich's and there dined; but my Lady is become as
handsome, I think, as ever she was; and so good and discreet a woman I
know not in the world.  After dinner I to Westminster to Jervas's a while,
and so doing many errands by the way, and necessary ones, I home, and
thither came the woman with her mother which our Will recommends to my
wife.  I like her well, and I think will please us.  My wife and they
agreed, and she is to come the next week.  At which I am very well
contented, for then I hope we shall be settled, but I must remember that,
never since I was housekeeper, I ever lived so quietly, without any noise
or one angry word almost, as I have done since my present mayds Besse,
Jane, and Susan came and were together.  Now I have taken a boy and am
taking a woman, I pray God we may not be worse, but I will observe it.
After being at my office a while, home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up and to the office, where sat long, and at noon to dinner at
home; after dinner comes Mr. Pen to visit me, and staid an houre talking
with me.  I perceive something of learning he hath got, but a great deale,
if not too much, of the vanity of the French garbe and affected manner of
speech and gait.  I fear all real profit he hath made of his travel will
signify little.  So, he gone, I to my office and there very busy till late
at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

31st.  Up by five o'clock and to my office, where T. Hater and Will met
me, and so we dispatched a great deal of my business as to the ordering my
papers and books which were behindhand.  All the morning very busy at my
office.  At noon home to dinner, and there my wife hath got me some pretty
good oysters, which is very soon and the soonest, I think, I ever eat any.
After dinner I up to hear my boy play upon a lute, which I have this day
borrowed of Mr. Hunt; and indeed the boy would, with little practice, play
very well upon the lute, which pleases me well.  So by coach to the
Tangier Committee, and there have another small business by which I may
get a little small matter of money.  Staid but little there, and so home
and to my office, where late casting up my monthly accounts, and, blessed
be God!  find myself worth L1020, which is still the most I ever was
worth.  So home and to bed.  Prince Rupert I hear this day is to go to
command this fleete going to Guinny against the Dutch.  I doubt few will
be pleased with his going, being accounted an unhappy' man.  My mind at
good rest, only my father's troubles with Dr. Pepys and my brother Tom's
creditors in general do trouble me.  I have got a new boy that understands
musique well, as coming to me from the King's Chappell, and I hope will
prove a good boy, and my wife and I are upon having a woman, which for her
content I am contented to venture upon the charge of again, and she is one
that our' Will finds out for us, and understands a little musique, and I
think will please us well, only her friends live too near us.  Pretty well
in health, since I left off wearing of a gowne within doors all day, and
then go out with my legs into the cold, which brought me daily pain.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               SEPTEMBER
                                 1664

Sept.  1st.  A sad rainy night, up and to the office, where busy all the
morning.  At noon to the 'Change and thence brought Mr. Pierce, the
Surgeon, and Creed, and dined very merry and handsomely; but my wife not
being well of those she not with us; and we cut up the great cake
Moorcocke lately sent us, which is very good.  They gone I to my office,
and there very busy till late at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up very betimes and walked (my boy with me) to Mr. Cole's, and after
long waiting below, he being under the barber's hands, I spoke with him,
and he did give me much hopes of getting my debt that my brother owed me,
and also that things would go well with my father.  But going to his
attorney's, that he directed me to, they tell me both that though I could
bring my father to a confession of a judgment, yet he knowing that there
are specialties out against him he is bound to plead his knowledge of them
to me before he pays me, or else he must do it in his own wrong. I took a
great deal of pains this morning in the thorough understanding hereof, and
hope that I know the truth of our case, though it be but bad, yet better
than to run spending money and all to no purpose.  However, I will inquire
a little more.  Walked home, doing very many errands by the way to my
great content, and at the 'Change met and spoke with several persons about
serving us with pieces of eight at Tangier.  So home to dinner above
stairs, my wife not being well of those in bed.  I dined by her bedside,
but I got her to rise and abroad with me by coach to Bartholomew Fayre,
and our boy with us, and there shewed them and myself the dancing on the
ropes, and several other the best shows; but pretty it is to see how our
boy carries himself so innocently clownish as would make one laugh.  Here
till late and dark, then up and down, to buy combes for my wife to give
her mayds, and then by coach home, and there at the office set down my
day's work, and then home to bed.

3rd.  I have had a bad night's rest to-night, not sleeping well, as my
wife observed, and once or twice she did wake me, and I thought myself to
be mightily bit with fleas, and in the morning she chid her mayds for not
looking the fleas a-days.  But, when I rose, I found that it is only the
change of the weather from hot to cold, which, as I was two winters ago,
do stop my pores, and so my blood tingles and itches all day all over my
body, and so continued to-day all the day long just as I was then, and if
it continues to be so cold I fear I must come to the same pass, but
sweating cured me then, and I hope, and am told, will this also.  At the
office sat all the morning, dined at home, and after dinner to White Hall,
to the Fishing Committee, but not above four of us met, which could do
nothing, and a sad thing it is to see so great a work so ill followed, for
at this pace it can come to any thing at first sight.  Mr. Hill came to
tell me that he had got a gentlewoman for my wife, one Mrs. Ferrabosco,
that sings most admirably.  I seemed glad of it; but I hear she is too
gallant for me, and I am not sorry that I misse her.  Thence to the
office, setting some papers right, and so home to supper and to bed, after
prayers.

5th.  Up and to St. James's, and there did our business with the Duke;
where all our discourse of warr in the highest measure.  Prince Rupert was
with us; who is fitting himself to go to sea in the Heneretta.  And
afterwards in White Hall I met him and Mr. Gray, and he spoke to me, and
in other discourse, says he, "God damn me, I can answer but for one ship,
and in that I will do my part; for it is not in that as in an army, where
a man can command every thing."  By and by to a Committee for the Fishery,
the Duke of Yorke there, where, after Duke was made Secretary, we fell to
name a Committee, whereof I was willing to be one, because I would have my
hand in the business, to understand it and be known in doing something in
it; and so, after cutting out work for the Committee, we rose, and I to my
wife to Unthanke's, and with her from shop to shop, laying out near L10
this morning in clothes for her.  And so I to the 'Change, where a while,
and so home and to dinner, and thither came W. Bowyer and dined with us;
but strange to see how he could not endure onyons in sauce to lamb, but
was overcome with the sight of it, and so-was forced to make his dinner of
an egg or two.  He tells us how Mrs. Lane is undone, by her marrying so
bad, and desires to speak with me, which I know is wholly to get me to do
something for her to get her husband a place, which he is in no wise fit
for.  After dinner down to Woolwich with a gaily, and then to Deptford,
and so home, all the way reading Sir J. Suck[l]ing's "Aglaura," which,
methinks, is but a mean play; nothing of design in it.  Coming home it is
strange to see how I was troubled to find my wife, but in a necessary
compliment, expecting Mr. Pen to see her, who had been there and was by
her people denied, which, he having been three times, she thought not fit
he should be any more.  But yet even this did raise my jealousy presently
and much vex me. However, he did not come, which pleased me, and I to
supper, and to the office till 9 o'clock or thereabouts, and so home to
bed.  My aunt James had been here to-day with Kate Joyce twice to see us.
The second time my wife was at home, and they it seems are going down to
Brampton, which I am sorry for, for the charge that my father will be put
to.  But it must be borne with, and my mother has a mind to see them, but
I do condemn myself mightily for my pride and contempt of my aunt and
kindred that are not so high as myself, that I have not seen her all this
while, nor invited her all this while.

6th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, then to my office and there waited, thinking to have had Bagwell's
wife come to me about business, that I might have talked with her, but she
came not.  So I to White Hall by coach with Mr. Andrews, and there I got
his contract for the victualling of Tangier signed and sealed by us there,
so that all the business is well over, and I hope to have made a good
business of it and to receive L100 by it the next weeke, for which God be
praised!  Thence to W. Joyce's and Anthony's, to invite them to dinner to
meet my aunt James at my house, and the rather because they are all to go
down to my father the next weeke, and so I would be a little kind to them
before they go.  So home, having called upon Doll, our pretty 'Change
woman, for a pair of gloves trimmed with yellow ribbon, to [match the]
petticoate my wife bought yesterday, which cost me 20s.; but she is so
pretty, that, God forgive me!  I could not think it too much--which is a
strange slavery that I stand in to beauty, that I value nothing near it.
So going home, and my coach stopping in Newgate Market over against a
poulterer's shop, I took occasion to buy a rabbit, but it proved a deadly
old one when I came to eat it, as I did do after an hour being at my
office, and after supper again there till past 11 at night.  So home,, and
to bed.  This day Mr. Coventry did tell us how the Duke did receive the
Dutch Embassador the other day; by telling him that, whereas they think us
in jest, he believes that the Prince (Rupert) which goes in this fleete to
Guinny  will soon tell them that we are in earnest, and that he himself
will do the like here, in the head of the fleete here at home, and that
for the meschants, which he told the Duke there were in England, which did
hope to do themselves good by the King's being at warr, says he, the
English have ever united all this private difference to attend foraigne,
and that Cromwell, notwithstanding the meschants in his time, which were
the Cavaliers, did never find them interrupt him in his foraigne
businesses, and that he did not doubt but to live to see the Dutch as
fearfull of provoking the English, under the government of a King, as he
remembers them to have been under that of a Coquin.  I writ all this story
to my Lord Sandwich tonight into the Downes, it being very good and true,
word for word from Mr. Coventry to-day.

7th.  Lay long to-day, pleasantly discoursing with my wife about the
dinner we are to have for the Joyces, a day or two hence.  Then up and
with Mr. Margetts to Limehouse to see his ground and ropeyarde there,
which is very fine, and I believe we shall employ it for the Navy, for the
King's grounds are not sufficient to supply our defence if a warr comes.
Thence back to the 'Change, where great talke of the forwardnesse of the
Dutch, which puts us all to a stand, and particularly myself for my Lord
Sandwich, to think him to lie where he is for a sacrifice, if they should
begin with us.  So home and Creed with me, and to dinner, and after dinner
I out to my office, taking in Bagwell's wife, who I knew waited for me,
but company came to me so soon that I could have no discourse with her, as
I intended, of pleasure.  So anon abroad with Creed walked to Bartholomew
Fayre, this being the last day, and there saw the best dancing on the
ropes that I think I ever saw in my life, and so all say, and so by coach
home, where I find my wife hath had her head dressed by her woman, Mercer,
which is to come to her to-morrow, but my wife being to go to a
christening tomorrow, she came to do her head up to-night.  So a while to
my office, and then to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, and I by water down to Woolwich by a galley, and back again in the
evening.  All haste made in setting out this Guinny fleete, but yet not
such as will ever do the King's business if we come to a warr.  My wife
this afternoon being very well dressed by her new woman, Mary Mercer, a
decayed merchant's daughter that our Will helps us to, did go to the
christening of Mrs. Mills, the parson's wife's child, where she never was
before.  After I was come home Mr. Povey came to me and took me out to
supper to Mr. Bland's, who is making now all haste to be gone for Tangier.
Here pretty merry, and good discourse, fain to admire the knowledge and
experience of Mrs. Bland, who I think as good a merchant as her husband.
I went home and there find Mercer, whose person I like well, and I think
will do well, at least I hope so.  So to my office a while and then to
bed.

9th.  Up, and to put things in order against dinner.  I out and bought
several things, among others, a dozen of silver salts; home, and to the
office, where some of us met a little, and then home, and at noon comes my
company, namely, Anthony and Will Joyce and their wives, my aunt James
newly come out of Wales, and my cozen Sarah Gyles.  Her husband did not
come, and by her I did understand afterwards, that it was because he was
not yet able to pay me the 40s. she had borrowed a year ago of me.

     [Pepys would have been more proud of his cousin had he anticipated
     her husband's becoming a knight, for she was probably the same
     person whose burial is recorded in the register of St. Helen's,
     Bishopsgate, September 4th, 1704: "Dame Sarah Gyles, widow, relict
     of Sir John Gyles."--B.]

I was as merry as I could, giving them a good dinner; but W. Joyce did so
talk, that he made every body else dumb, but only laugh at him.  I forgot
there was Mr. Harman and his wife, my aunt, a very good harmlesse woman.
All their talke is of her and my two she-cozen Joyces and Will's little
boy Will (who was also here to-day), down to Brampton to my father's next
week, which will be trouble and charge to them, but however my father and
mother desire to see them, and so let them.  They eyed mightily my great
cupboard of plate, I this day putting my two flaggons upon my table; and
indeed it is a fine sight, and better than ever I did hope to see of my
owne.  Mercer dined with us at table, this being her first dinner in my
house.  After dinner left them and to White Hall, where a small Tangier
Committee, and so back again home, and there my wife and Mercer and Tom
and I sat till eleven at night, singing and fiddling, and a great joy it
is to see me master of so much pleasure in my house, that it is and will
be still, I hope, a constant pleasure to me to be at home.  The girle
plays pretty well upon the harpsicon, but only ordinary tunes, but hath a
good hand; sings a little, but hath a good voyce and eare.  My boy, a
brave boy, sings finely, and is the most pleasant boy at present, while
his ignorant boy's tricks last, that ever I saw.  So to supper, and with
great pleasure to bed.

10th.  Up and to the office, where we sate all the morning, and I much
troubled to think what the end of our great sluggishness will be, for we
do nothing in this office like people able to carry on a warr.  We must be
put out, or other people put in.  Dined at home, and then my wife and I
and Mercer to the Duke's house, and there saw "The Rivalls," which is no
excellent play, but good acting in it; especially Gosnell comes and sings
and dances finely, but, for all that, fell out of the key, so that the
musique could not play to her afterwards, and so did Harris also go out of
the tune to agree with her.  Thence home and late writing letters, and
this night I received, by Will, L105, the first-fruits of my endeavours in
the late contract for victualling of Tangier, for which God be praised!
for I can with a safe conscience say that I have therein saved the King
L5000 per annum, and yet got myself a hope of L300 per annum without the
least wrong to the King.  So to supper and to bed.

11th (Lord's day).  Up and to church in the best manner I have gone a good
while, that is to say, with my wife, and her woman, Mercer, along with us,
and Tom, my boy, waiting on us.  A dull sermon.  Home, dined, left my wife
to go to church alone, and I walked in haste being late to the Abbey at
Westminster, according to promise to meet Jane Welsh, and there wearily
walked, expecting her till 6 o'clock from three, but no Jane came, which
vexed me, only part of it I spent with Mr. Blagrave walking in the Abbey,
he telling me the whole government and discipline of White Hall Chappell,
and the caution now used against admitting any debauched persons, which I
was glad to hear, though he tells me there are persons bad enough.  Thence
going home went by Jarvis's, and there stood Jane at the door, and so I
took her in and drank with her, her master and mistress being out of
doors.  She told me how she could not come to me this afternoon, but
promised another time.  So I walked home contented with my speaking with
her, and walked to my uncle Wight's, where they were all at supper, and
among others comes fair Mrs. Margarett Wight, who indeed is very pretty.
So after supper home to prayers and to bed.  This afternoon, it seems, Sir
J. Minnes fell sicke at church, and going down the gallery stairs fell
down dead, but came to himself again and is pretty well.

12th.  Up, and to my cozen Anthony Joyce's, and there took leave of my
aunt James, and both cozens, their wives, who are this day going down to
my father's by coach.  I did give my Aunt 20s., to carry as a token to my
mother, and 10s.  to Pall.  Thence by coach to St. James's, and there did
our business as usual with the Duke; and saw him with great pleasure play
with his little girle,--[Afterwards Queen Mary II.]--like an ordinary
private father of a child.  Thence walked to Jervas's, where I took Jane
in the shop alone, and there heard of her, her master and mistress were
going out.  So I went away and came again half an hour after.  In the
meantime went to the Abbey, and there went in to see the tombs with great
pleasure.  Back again to Jane, and there upstairs and drank with her, and
staid two hours with her kissing her, but nothing more.  Anon took boat
and by water to the Neat Houses over against Fox Hall to have seen
Greatorex dive, which Jervas and his wife were gone to see, and there I
found them (and did it the rather for a pretence for my having been so
long at their house), but being disappointed of some necessaries to do it
I staid not, but back to Jane, but she would not go out with me.  So I to
Mr. Creed's lodgings, and with him walked up and down in the New Exchange,
talking mightily of the convenience and necessity of a man's wearing good
clothes, and so after eating a messe of creame I took leave of him, he
walking with me as far as Fleete Conduit, he offering me upon my request
to put out some money for me into Backewell's hands at 6 per cent.
interest, which he seldom gives, which I will consider of, being doubtful
of trusting any of these great dealers because of their mortality, but
then the convenience of having one's money, at an houre's call is very
great.  Thence to my uncle Wight's, and there supped with my wife, having
given them a brave barrel of oysters of Povy's giving me. So home and to
bed.

13th.  Up and, to the office, where sat busy all morning, dined at home
and after dinner to Fishmonger's Hall, where we met the first time upon
the Fishery Committee, and many good things discoursed of concerning
making of farthings, which was proposed as a way of raising money for this
business, and then that of lotterys,

     [Among the State Papers is a "Statement of Articles in the Covenant
     proposed by the Commissioners for the Royal Fishing to, Sir Ant.
     Desmarces & Co.  in reference to the regulation of lotteries; which
     are very unreasonable, and of the objections thereto" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," Domestic, 1663-64, p.  576.)]

but with great confusion; but I hope we shall fall into greater order. So
home again and to my office, where after doing business home and to a
little musique, after supper, and so to bed.

14th.  Up, and wanting some things that should be laid ready for my
dressing myself I was angry, and one thing after another made my wife give
Besse warning to be gone, which the jade, whether out of fear or
ill-nature or simplicity I know not, but she took it and asked leave to go
forth to look a place, and did, which vexed me to the heart, she being as
good a natured wench as ever we shall have, but only forgetful.  At the
office all the morning and at noon to the 'Change, and there went off with
Sir W. Warren and took occasion to desire him to lend me L100, which he
said he would let the have with all his heart presently, as he had
promised me a little while ago to give me for my pains in his two great
contracts for masts L100, and that this should be it.  To which end I did
move it to him, and by this means I hope to be, possessed of the L100
presently within 2 or 3 days.  So home to dinner, and then to the office,
and down to Blackwall by water to view a place found out for laying of
masts, and I think it will be most proper.  So home and there find Mr. Pen
come to visit my wife, and staid with them till sent for to Mr. Bland's,
whither by appointment I was to go to supper, and against my will left
them together, but, God knows, without any reason of fear in my conscience
of any evil between them, but such is my natural folly.  Being thither
come they would needs have my wife, and so Mr. Bland and his wife (the
first time she was ever at my house or my wife at hers) very civilly went
forth and brought her and W. Pen, and there Mr. Povy and we supped nobly
and very merry, it being to take leave of Mr. Bland, who is upon going
soon to Tangier.  So late home and to bed.

15th.  At the office all the morning, then to the 'Change, and so home to
dinner, where Luellin dined with us, and after dinner many people came in
and kept me all the afternoon, among other the Master and Wardens of
Chyrurgeon's Hall, who staid arguing their cause with me; I did give them
the best answer I could, and after their being two hours with me parted,
and I to my office to do business, which is much on my hands, and so late
home to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning very busy
putting papers to rights.  And among other things Mr. Gauden coming to me,
I had a good opportunity to speak to him about his present, which hitherto
hath been a burden: to me, that I could not do it, because I was doubtfull
that he meant it as a temptation to me to stand by him in the business of
Tangier victualling; but he clears me it was not, and that he values me
and my proceedings therein very highly, being but what became me, and that
what he did was for my old kindnesses to him in dispatching of his
business, which I was glad to hear, and with my heart in good rest and
great joy parted, and to my business again.  At noon to the 'Change, where
by appointment I met Sir W. Warren, and afterwards to the Sun taverne,
where he brought to me, being all alone; L100 in a bag, which I offered
him to give him my receipt for, but he told me, no, it was my owne, which
he had a little while since promised me and was glad that (as I had told
him two days since) it would now do me courtesy; and so most kindly he did
give it me, and I as joyfully, even out of myself, carried it home in a
coach, he himself expressly taking care that nobody might see this
business done, though I was willing enough to have carried a servant with
me to have received it, but he advised me to do it myself. So home with it
and to dinner; after dinner I forth with my boy to buy severall things,
stools and andirons and candlesticks, &c., household stuff, and walked to
the mathematical instrument maker in Moorefields and bought a large pair
of compasses, and there met Mr. Pargiter, and he would needs have me drink
a cup of horse-radish ale, which he and a friend of his troubled with the
stone have been drinking of, which we did and then walked into the fields
as far almost as Sir G. Whitmore's, all the way talking of Russia, which,
he says, is a sad place; and, though Moscow is a very great city, yet it
is from the distance between house and house, and few people compared with
this, and poor, sorry houses, the Emperor himself living in a wooden
house, his exercise only flying a hawk at pigeons and carrying pigeons ten
or twelve miles off and then laying wagers which pigeon shall come soonest
home to her house.  All the winter within doors, some few playing at
chesse, but most drinking their time away.  Women live very slavishly
there, and it seems in the Emperor's court no room hath above two or three
windows, and those the greatest not a yard wide or high, for warmth in
winter time; and that the general cure for all diseases there is their
sweating houses, or people that are poor they get into their ovens, being
heated, and there lie.  Little learning among things of any sort.  Not a
man that speaks Latin, unless the Secretary of State by chance.  Mr.
Pargiter and I walked to the 'Change together and there parted, and so I
to buy more things and then home, and after a little at my office, home to
supper and to bed.  This day old Hardwicke came and redeemed a watch he
had left with me in pawne for 40s. seven years ago, and I let him gave it.
Great talk that the Dutch will certainly be out this week, and will sail
directly to Guinny, being convoyed out of the Channel with 42 sail of
ships.

17th.  Up and to the office, where Mr. Coventry very angry to see things
go so coldly as they do, and I must needs say it makes me fearful every
day of having some change of the office, and the truth is, I am of late a
little guilty of being remiss myself of what I used to be, but I hope I
shall come to my old pass again, my family being now settled again. Dined
at home, and to the office, where late busy in setting all my businesses
in order, and I did a very great and a very contenting afternoon's work.
This day my aunt Wight sent my wife a new scarfe, with a compliment for
the many favours she had received of her, which is the several things we
have sent her.  I am glad enough of it, for I see my uncle is so given up
to the Wights that I hope for little more of them. So home to supper and
to bed.

18th (Lord's day).  Up and to church all of us.  At noon comes Anthony and
W. Joyce (their wives being in the country with my father) and dined with
me very merry as I can be in such company.  After dinner walked to
Westminster (tiring them by the way, and so left them, Anthony in
Cheapside and the other in the Strand), and there spent all the afternoon
in the Cloysters as I had agreed with Jane Welsh, but she came not, which
vexed me, staying till 5 o'clock, and then walked homeward, and by coach
to the old Exchange, and thence to my aunt Wight's, and invited her and my
uncle to supper, and so home, and by and by they came, and we eat a brave
barrel of oysters Mr. Povy sent me this morning, and very merry at supper,
and so to prayers and to bed.  Last night it seems my aunt Wight did send
my wife a new scarfe, laced, as a token for her many givings to her.  It
is true now and then we give them some toys, as oranges, &c., but my aime
is to get myself something more from my uncle's favour than this.

19th.  Up, my wife and I having a little anger about her woman already,
she thinking that I take too much care of her at table to mind her (my
wife) of cutting for her, but it soon over, and so up and with Sir W.
Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, and there did our business with the
Duke, and thence homeward straight, calling at the Coffee-house, and there
had very good discourse with Sir----Blunt and Dr. Whistler about Egypt and
other things.  So home to dinner, my wife having put on to-day her winter
new suit of moyre, which is handsome, and so after dinner I did give her
L15 to lay out in linen and necessaries for the house and to buy a suit
for Pall, and I myself to White Hall to a Tangier Committee, where
Colonell Reames hath brought us so full and methodical an account of all
matters there, that I never have nor hope to see the like of any publique
business while I live again.  The Committee up, I to Westminster to
Jervas's, and spoke with Jane; who I find cold and not so desirous of a
meeting as before, and it is no matter, I shall be the freer from the
inconvenience that might follow thereof, besides offending God Almighty
and neglecting my business.  So by coach home and to my office, where
late, and so to supper and to bed.  I met with Dr. Pierce to-day, who,
speaking of Dr. Frazier's being so earnest to have such a one (one
Collins) go chyrurgeon to the Prince's person will have him go in his
terms and with so much money put into his hands, he tells me (when I was
wondering that Frazier should order things with the Prince in that
confident manner) that Frazier is so great with my Lady Castlemayne, and
Stewart, and all the ladies at Court, in helping to slip their calfes when
there is occasion, and with the great men in curing of their claps that he
can do what he please with the King, in spite of any man, and upon the
same score with the Prince; they all having more or less occasion to make
use of him.  Sir G. Carteret tells me this afternoon that the Dutch are
not yet ready to set out; and by that means do lose a good wind which
would carry them out and keep us in, and moreover he says that they begin
to boggle in the business, and he thinks may offer terms of peace for all
this, and seems to argue that it will be well for the King too, and I pray
God send it.  Colonell Reames did, among other things, this day tell me
how it is clear that, if my Lord Tiviott had lived, he would have quite
undone Tangier, or designed himself to be master of it.  He did put the
King upon most great, chargeable, and unnecessary works there, and took
the course industriously to deter, all other merchants but himself to deal
there, and to make both King and all others pay what he pleased for all
that was brought thither.

20th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, at noon to the
'Change, and there met by appointment with Captain Poyntz, who hath some
place, or title to a place, belonging to gameing, and so I discoursed with
him about the business of our improving of the Lotterys, to the King's
benefit, and that of the Fishery, and had some light from him in the
business, and shall, he says, have more in writing from him.  So home to
dinner and then abroad to the Fishing Committee at Fishmongers' Hall, and
there sat and did some business considerable, and so up and home, and
there late at my office doing much business, and I find with great delight
that I am come to my good temper of business again.  God continue me in
it.  So home to supper, it being washing day, and to bed.

21st.  Up, and by coach to Mr. Povy's, and there got him to signe the
payment of Captain Tayler's bills for the remainder of freight for the
Eagle, wherein I shall be gainer about L30, thence with him to Westminster
by coach to Houseman's [Huysman] the great picture drawer, and saw again
very fine pictures, and have his promise, for Mr. Povy's sake, to take
pains in what picture I shall set him about, and I think to have my
wife's.  But it is a strange thing to observe and fit for me to remember
that I am at no time so unwilling to part with money as when I am
concerned in the getting of it most, as I thank God of late I have got
more in this month, viz. near 0250, than ever I did in half a year before
in my life, I think.  Thence to White Hall with him, and so walked to the
old Exchange and back to Povy's to dinner, where great and good company;
among others Sir John Skeffington, whom I knew at Magdalen College, a
fellow-commoner, my fellow-pupil, but one with whom I had no great
acquaintance, he being then, God knows, much above me.  Here I was afresh
delighted with Mr. Povy's house and pictures of perspective, being strange
things to think how they do delude one's eye, that methinks it would make
a man doubtful of swearing that ever he saw any thing.  Thence with him to
St. James's, and so to White Hall to a Tangier Committee, and hope I have
light of another opportunity of getting a little money if Sir W. Warren
will use me kindly for deales to Tangier, and with the hopes went joyfully
home, and there received Captain Tayler's money, received by Will to-day,
out of which (as I said above) I shall get above L30. So with great
comfort to bed, after supper.  By discourse this day I have great hopes
from Mr. Coventry that the Dutch and we shall not fall out.

22nd.  Up and at the office all the morning.  To the 'Change at noon, and
among other things discoursed with Sir William Warren what I might do to
get a little money by carrying of deales to Tangier, and told him the
opportunity I have there of doing it, and he did give me some advice,
though not so good as he would have done at any other time of the year,
but such as I hope to make good use of, and get a little money by.  So to
Sir G. Carteret's to dinner, and he and I and Captain Cocke all alone, and
good discourse, and thence to a Committee of Tangier at White Hall, and so
home, where I found my wife not well, and she tells me she thinks she is
with child, but I neither believe nor desire it.  But God's will be done!
So to my office late, and home to supper and to bed; having got a strange
cold in my head, by flinging off my hat at dinner, and sitting with the
wind in my neck.

     [In Lord Clarendon's Essay, "On the decay of respect paid to Age,"
     he says that in his younger days he never kept his hat on before
     those older than himself, except at dinner.--B.]

23rd.  My cold and pain in my head increasing, and the palate of my mouth
falling, I was in great pain all night.  My wife also was not well, so
that a mayd was fain to sit up by her all night.  Lay long in the morning,
at last up, and amongst others comes Mr. Fuller, that was the wit of
Cambridge, and Praevaricator

     [At the Commencement (Comitia Majora) in July, the Praevaricator, or
     Varier, held a similar position to the Tripos at the Comitia Minora.
     He was so named from varying the question which he proposed, either
     by a play upon the words or by the transposition of the terms in
     which it was expressed.  Under the pretence of maintaining some
     philosophical question, he poured out a medley of absurd jokes and
     'personal ridicule, which gradually led to the abolition of the
     office.  In Thoresby's "Diary" we read, "Tuesday, July 6th.  The
     Praevaricator's speech was smart and ingenious, attended with
     vollies of hurras" (see Wordsworth's "University Life in the
     Eighteenth Century ").--M. B.]

in my time, and staid all the morning with me discoursing, and his
business to get a man discharged, which I did do for him.  Dined with
little heart at noon, in the afternoon against my will to the office,
where Sir G. Carteret and we met about an order of the Council for the
hiring him a house, giving him L1000 fine, and L70 per annum for it. Here
Sir J. Minnes took occasion, in the most childish and most unbeseeming
manner, to reproach us all, but most himself, that he was not valued as
Comptroller among us, nor did anything but only set his hand to paper,
which is but too true; and every body had a palace, and he no house to lie
in, and wished he had but as much to build him a house with, as we have
laid out in carved worke.  It was to no end to oppose, but all bore it,
and after laughed at him for it.  So home, and late reading "The Siege of
Rhodes" to my wife, and then to bed, my head being in great pain and my
palate still down.

24th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy, then home to
dinner, and so after dinner comes one Phillips, who is concerned in the
Lottery, and from him I collected much concerning that business.  I
carried him in my way to White Hall and set him down at Somersett House.
Among other things he told me that Monsieur Du Puy, that is so great a man
at the Duke of Yorke's, and this man's great opponent, is a knave and by
quality but a tailor.  To the Tangier Committee, and there I opposed
Colonell Legg's estimate of supplies of provisions to be sent to Tangier
till all were ashamed of it, and he fain after all his good husbandry and
seeming ignorance and joy to have the King's money saved, yet afterwards
he discovered all his design to be to keep the furnishing of these things
to the officers of the Ordnance, but Mr. Coventry seconded me, and between
us we shall save the King some money in the year.  In one business of
deales in L520, I offer to save L172, and yet purpose getting money, to
myself by it.  So home and to my office, and business being done home to
supper and so to bed, my head and throat being still out of order
mightily.  This night Prior of Brampton came and paid me L40, and I find
this poor painful man is the only thriving and purchasing man in the town
almost.  We were told to-day of a Dutch ship of 3 or 400 tons, where all
the men were dead of the plague, and the ship cast ashore at Gottenburgh.

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and my throat being yet very sore, and, my head
out of order, we went not to church, but I spent all the morning reading
of "The Madd Lovers,"  a very good play, and at noon comes Harman and his
wife, whom I sent for to meet the Joyces, but they came not.  It seems
Will has got a fall off his horse and broke his face.  However, we were as
merry as I could in their company, and we had a good chine of beef, but I
had no taste nor stomach through my cold, and therefore little pleased
with my dinner.  It raining, they sat talking with us all the afternoon.
So anon they went away; and then I to read another play, "The Custome of
the Country," which is a very poor one, methinks.  Then to supper,
prayers, and bed.

26th.  Up pretty well again, but my mouth very scabby, my cold being going
away, so that I was forced to wear a great black patch, but that would not
do much good, but it happens we did not go to the Duke to-day, and so I
staid at home busy all the morning.  At noon, after dinner, to the
'Change, and thence home to my office again, where busy, well employed
till 10 at night, and so home to supper and to bed, my mind a little
troubled that I have not of late kept up myself so briske in business; but
mind my ease a little too much and my family upon the coming of Mercer and
Tom.  So that I have not kept company, nor appeared very active with Mr.
Coventry, but now I resolve to settle to it again, not that I have idled
all my time, but as to my ease something.  So I have looked a little too
much after Tangier and the Fishery, and that in the sight of Mr. Coventry,
but I have good reason to love myself for serving Tangier, for it is one
of the best flowers in my garden.

27th.  Lay long, sleeping, it raining and blowing very hard.  Then up and
to the office, my mouth still being scabby and a patch on it.  At the
office all the morning.  At noon dined at home, and so after dinner
(Lewellin dining with me and in my way talking about Deering) to the
Fishing Committee, and had there very many fine things argued, and I hope
some good will cone of it.  So home, where my wife having (after all her
merry discourse of being with child) her months upon her is gone to bed. I
to my office very late doing business, then home to supper and to bed.
To-night Mr. T. Trice and Piggot came to see me, and desire my going down
to Brampton Court, where for Piggot's sake, for whom it is necessary, I
should go, I would be glad to go, and will, contrary to my purpose,
endeavour it, but having now almost L1000, if not above, in my house, I
know not what to do with it, and that will trouble my mind to leave in the
house, and I not at home.

28th.  Up and by water with Mr. Tucker down to Woolwich, first to do
several businesses of the King's, then on board Captain Fisher's ship,
which we hire to carry goods to Tangier.  All the way going and coming I
reading and discoursing over some papers of his which he, poor man, having
some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit, did at the King's
first coming over make proposals of, ordering in a new manner the whole
revenue of the kingdom, but, God knows, a most weak thing; however, one
paper I keep wherein he do state the main branches of the publick revenue
fit to consider and remember.  So home, very cold, and fearfull of having
got some pain, but, thanks be to God!  I was well after it.  So to dinner,
and after dinner by coach to White Hall, thinking to have met at a
Committee of Tangier, but nobody being there but my Lord Rutherford, he
would needs carry me and another Scotch Lord to a play, and so we saw,
coming late, part of "The Generall," my Lord Orrery's (Broghill) second
play; but, Lord! to see how no more either in words, sense, or design, it
is to his "Harry the 5th" is not imaginable, and so poorly acted, though
in finer clothes, is strange.  And here I must confess breach of a vowe in
appearance, but I not desiring it, but against my will, and my oathe being
to go neither at my own charge nor at another's, as I had done by becoming
liable to give them another, as I am to Sir W. Pen and Mr. Creed; but here
I neither know which of them paid for me, nor, if I did, am I obliged ever
to return the like, or did it by desire or with any willingness.  So that
with a safe conscience I do think my oathe is not broke and judge God
Almighty will not think it other wise.  Thence to W. Joyce's, and there
found my aunt and cozen Mary come home from my father's with great
pleasure and content, and thence to Kate's and found her also mighty
pleased with her journey and their good usage of them, and so home,
troubled in my conscience at my being at a play.  But at home I found
Mercer playing on her Vyall, which is a pretty instrument, and so I to the
Vyall and singing till late, and so to bed.  My mind at a great losse how
to go down to Brampton this weeke, to satisfy Piggott; but what with the
fears of my house, my money, my wife, and my office, I know not how in the
world to think of it, Tom Hater being out of towne, and I having near
L1000 in my house.

29th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, dined at home and
Creed with me; after dinner I to Sir G. Carteret, and with him to his new
house he is taking in Broad Streete, and there surveyed all the rooms and
bounds, in order to the drawing up a lease thereof; and that done, Mr.
Cutler, his landlord, took me up and down, and showed me all his ground
and house, which is extraordinary great, he having bought all the
Augustine Fryers, and many, many a L1000 he hath and will bury there. So
home to my business, clearing my papers and preparing my accounts against
tomorrow for a monthly and a great auditt.  So to supper and to bed.
Fresh newes come of our beating the Dutch at Guinny quite out of all their
castles almost, which will make them quite mad here at home sure.  And Sir
G. Carteret did tell me, that the King do joy mightily at it; but asked
him laughing, "But," says he, "how shall I do to answer this to the
Embassador when he comes?"  Nay they say that we have beat them out of the
New Netherlands too;

     [Captain (afterwards Sir Robert) Holmes' expedition to attack the
     Dutch settlements in Africa eventuated in an important exploit.
     Holmes suddenly left the coast of Africa, sailed across the
     Atlantic, and reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to
     English rule, under the title of New York.  "The short and true
     state of the matter is this: the country mentioned was part of the
     province of Virginia, and, as there is no settling an extensive
     country at once, a few Swedes crept in there, who surrendered the
     plantations they could not defend to the Dutch, who, having bought
     the charts and papers of one Hudson, a seaman, who, by the
     commission from the crown of England, discovered a river, to which
     he gave his name, conceited they had purchased a province.
     Sometimes, when we had strength in those parts, they were English
     subjects; at others, when that strength declined, they were subjects
     of the United Provinces.  However, upon King Charles's claim the
     States disowned the title, but resumed it during our confusions.  On
     March 12th, 1663-64, Charles II. granted it to the Duke of York
     .  .  . The King sent Holmes, when he returned, to the Tower, and did
     not discharge him; till he made it evidently appear that he had not
     infringed the law of nations ".  (Campbell's "Naval History," vol.
     ii, p., 89).  How little did the King or Holmes himself foresee
     the effects of the capture,--B.]

so that we have been doing them mischief for a great while in several
parts of the world; without publique knowledge or reason.  Their fleete
for Guinny is now, they say, ready, and abroad, and will be going this
week.  Coming home to-night, I did go to examine my wife's house accounts,
and finding things that seemed somewhat doubtful, I was angry though she
did make it pretty plain, but confessed that when she do misse a sum, she
do add something to other things to make it, and, upon my being very
angry, she do protest she will here lay up something for herself to buy
her a necklace with, which madded me and do still trouble me, for I fear
she will forget by degrees the way of living cheap and under a sense of
want.

30th.  Up, and all day, both morning and afternoon, at my accounts, it
being a great month, both for profit and layings out, the last being L89
for kitchen and clothes for myself and wife, and a few extraordinaries for
the house; and my profits, besides salary, L239; so that I have this
weeke, notwithstanding great layings out, and preparations for laying out,
which I make as paid this month, my balance to come to L1203, for which
the Lord's name be praised!  Dined at home at noon, staying long looking
for Kate Joyce and my aunt James and Mary, but they came not.  So my wife
abroad to see them, and took Mary Joyce to a play.  Then in the evening
came and sat working by me at the office, and late home to supper and to
bed, with my heart in good rest for this day's work, though troubled to
think that my last month's negligence besides the making me neglect
business and spend money, and lessen myself both as to business and the
world and myself, I am fain to preserve my vowe by paying 20s. dry--[ Dry
= hard, as "hard cash." ]--money into the poor's box, because I had not
fulfilled all my memorandums and paid all my petty debts and received all
my petty credits, of the last month, but I trust in God I shall do so no
more.