Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


The Three Commanders, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________

This is the third in the tetralogy commencing "The Three Midshipmen" and
ending with "The Three Admirals," so the three principal characters will
have been familiar to Kingston's youthful readers.  As with the other
books it is a very good introduction to Naval life in the middle of the
nineteenth century, but there are other things we can learn from this
book, as well.

The action soon after the start moves to East Africa, where we see how
the anti-slave trade was pursued. The British were against slavery, but
the Portuguese, the Americans, the Arabs, and some of the East African
states were getting on with it whenever the British backs were turned.

Then we move to the Crimea, where we get a very good view of the naval
participation in that war.  If you want to know more about the Crimea,
you should definitely read this book.

Finally we move to the Pacific, to Sydney and to Hawaii.  Here again it
is interesting, particularly with regard to the volcanoes of the Hawaii
group of islands.

________________________________________________________________________

THE THREE COMMANDERS, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.


CHAPTER ONE.

MURRAY'S HIGHLAND HOME--A VISIT FROM ADMIRAL TRITON--ADAIR AND HIS
NEPHEW APPEAR--MURRAY APPOINTED TO THE OPAL, ADAIR FIRST LIEUTENANT--
PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE--ADMIRAL TRITON AND MRS DEBORAH INVITE MRS
MURRAY TO STAY AT SOUTHSEA--THE OPAL AND HER CREW--A POETICAL
LIEUTENANT--PARTING BETWEEN MISS ROGERS AND ADAIR--THE OPAL SAILS FOR
THE EAST COAST OF AFRICA.

Alick Murray had not over-praised the Highland home of which he had so
often spoken when far away across the wide ocean.  The house,
substantially built in a style suited to that clime, stood some way up
the side of a hill which rose abruptly from the waters of Loch Etive, on
the north side of which it was situated.  To the west the hills were
comparatively low, the shores alternately widening and contracting, and
projecting in numerous promontories.  The higher grounds were clothed
with heath and wood, while level spaces below were diversified by
cultivated fields.  To the east of the house, up the loch, the scenery
assumed a character much more striking and grand.  Far as the eye could
reach appeared a succession of lofty and barren mountains, rising sheer
out of the water, on the calm surface of which their fantastic forms
were reflected as in a mirror.  Across the loch the lofty summit of Ben
Cruachan appeared towering to the sky.  The scenery immediately
surrounding Murray's domain of Bercaldine was of extreme beauty.  At
some little distance the hill, rising abruptly, was covered with oak,
ash, birch, and alder, producing a rich tone of colouring; the rowan and
hawthorn trees mingling their snowy blossoms or coral berries with the
foliage of the more gigantic natives of the forest, while the dark
purple heath, in tufted wreaths, and numerous wild-flowers, were
interspersed amid the rich sward and underwood along the shore beneath.
Behind the house were shrubberies and a well-cultivated kitchen-garden,
sheltered on either side by a thick belt of pines; while in front a
lawn, also protected by shrubberies from the keen winds which blew down
from the mountain heights, sloped towards the loch, with a gravel walk
leading to the landing-place.  Murray had added a broad verandah to the
front of the house, to remind himself and Stella of Don Antonio's
residence in Trinidad, where they had first met.  Indeed, in some of its
features, the scenery recalled to their memories the views they had
enjoyed in that lovely island; and though they confessed that Trinidad
carried off the palm of beauty, yet they both loved far better their own
Highland home.

It was a lovely summer day, and Stella was sitting in the verandah with
a small stranger, whom her faithful black maiden, Polly, had just placed
in her lap.  She was fully employed in bestowing on him those marks of
affection which a loving mother delights in affording to her first-born.
Alick stood by her side, watching her and their child with looks of
fond pride.  He had just come in from the garden, which it was one of
his chief occupations to tend, and had taken off his gardening gloves,
that he might pat his child's cheek and tickle its chin to make it coo
and smile.  He might have been excused if he was proud of his boy, for
he was a noble little fellow,--a "braw chiel," as he was pronounced to
be by his grand-aunt, Mistress Tibbie Mactavish, who had presided at his
birth,--and likely to do no discredit to the name of Murray.

"The cutter ought to have been back by this time," said Alick at length,
looking at his watch; "Archie has had a fair tide from Oban, and a
leading wind up the loch.  I hope that he has not managed to run the
_Stella_ ashore.  Ben Snatchblock knows the coast, and he himself should
be pretty well acquainted with it."

"Perhaps Mr Adair did not arrive at the time expected, and Archie
would, of course, wait for him," observed Stella.

"That may be the case," said Alick, taking the telescope from a bracket
on the wall, and looking through it down the loch.  "There is no sail in
sight like her, but I see a four-oared boat, which has just passed Bunaw
Ferry, pulling up the loch.  Can Adair by any means have missed the
cutter, and be making his way alone to us?"

"Probably she contains a party of tourists on an excursion," said
Stella.

"She is, at all events, steering for Bercaldine," observed Murray; "if
she does not bring Paddy Adair, you will have the opportunity of
exhibiting the small Alick to some other visitor.  I will go down to the
pier to receive him, whoever he is, with due honour."  Saying this,
Murray, having bestowed a kiss on his wife's brow, and given another
tickle to his baby's chin, which produced an additional coo of delight,
hurried down to the landing-place, towards which the boat was rapidly
approaching.  He had his telescope in his hand.  He stopped on the way
to take another look through it.

"It is not Terence, but--who do you think?--our old friend, Admiral
Triton!" he shouted out, as he looked back to his wife; and then hurried
on to the landing-place, that he might be there before the admiral could
step ashore.  In a few minutes he was receiving the old man's hearty
grasp of the hand, as he helped him out of the boat.

"I had long promised to pay a visit to some friends in the Highlands,
and I determined to make a trip a few miles farther and take you by
surprise, for I knew that I should be welcome at whatever time I might
arrive," said the admiral.

"Indeed you are, my dear sir," answered Murray; "most sincerely I say
it.  We are flattered by your visit."

"Give me your arm, my boy, for I don't walk up hill as easily as I used
to do a few years back," said the admiral, leaning somewhat heavily on
the young commander as he stumped along with his timber toe.  "Stay! by
the bye, I must dismiss my crew," he exclaimed, stopping short.

"Let them come up to the house first, admiral," said Murray; "they would
consider otherwise that we were forgetful of Highland hospitality at
Bercaldine.  You will find your way up to the kitchen, my lads, by
yonder path," he added, turning round to the boatmen.  "The cook will
have a snack for you before you pull back to Oban."

The men touched their bonnets, and gratefully grinned their assent to
the laird's proposal, as they tumbled out of the boat; while Murray
conducted Admiral Triton by the centre path, which led through the
grounds to the house.

Mrs Murray, having deposited the wee Alick in the arms of Polly, stood
ready to receive them.

"I am delighted to see you looking so bright and blooming, my dear Mrs
Murray!" exclaimed the old admiral, shaking her warmly by the hand; "it
shows that the Highland air agrees with you, notwithstanding your long
sojourn in the West Indies."

"Except in being more bracing, the climate differs but little from that
to which I was accustomed in the north of Ireland till I grew up; and I
was scarcely long enough in the West Indies to become acclimatised,"
answered Stella, and a shade passed over her countenance as she
recollected the trying scenes she had gone through during the time to
which the admiral referred.

He observed it, and changed the subject.  "And so you are expecting to
see our old shipmate, Terence Adair?" he remarked, as he sat himself
down in a chair which Murray placed for him.  "I shall be heartily glad
to shake him by the hand again, and to talk over old times.  I haven't
forgot his making me carry his portmanteau for him, the rogue!" and the
admiral chuckled and laughed, and told Stella the story while he rubbed
his hands.  "I made him pay, though.  He thought he was going to do me
out of that, but I was too sharp for him.  Ha! ha! ha!" and he laughed
till the tears ran down his cheeks.  He was becoming more garrulous than
before--another sign of advancing age, which Murray was sorry to
observe.  He told many of his old anecdotes, laughing as heartily at
them as ever.  He was interrupted by the appearance of Polly, who had
been watching for an opportunity of introducing the baby, which she now
brought to its mamma.

The admiral started up on seeing it.  "What!  I hadn't heard of this
small stranger!" he exclaimed; "is it a boy or a girl?  A fine little
creature, at all events!  I congratulate you, my dear Mrs Murray, with
all my heart.  A sailor's wife is all the better for a few small ones to
occupy her thoughts when her `guid mon,' as you call him in Scotland, is
away from home; though I suppose you have no intention of letting Murray
go to sea again just yet?"

"I hope not, indeed," answered Stella, turning pale at the thought.
"There are numberless officers who have nothing to do on shore, and he
has plenty to occupy him."

"But he ought to take a trip to sea, to prevent himself from growing
rusty," said the admiral.  "We want the best officers to command Her
Majesty's ships, and he is among them.  You will not contradict me on
that point?"

"I am sure he is," said Stella, with a sigh.

"Then, in case the Admiralty require his services, you will not dissuade
him from accepting an appointment?"

"Oh, admiral, are they going to send him to sea?" exclaimed Stella
suddenly.

"Not that I know of," answered the admiral.  "I have not been let into
their secret intentions, and I don't wish to act the part of a bird of
ill-omen; though I confess that, were he to have the offer of a ship, I
should advise him to accept it."

Stella's lips quivered.  She had thought herself very heroic, and that
she should be ready to sacrifice her husband for the good of his
country; but when it came to the point, she could not bear the idea of
parting from him.

Alick had gone round to see that the boat's crew were attended to.  On
coming back, he took another glance through his telescope down the loch.
"Here comes the _Stella_; we shall soon have Terence Adair with us!" he
exclaimed.

"What brought him home?" asked the admiral.  "Surely he went out with
Jack Rogers to India?"

"He got an ugly wound in cutting out a piratical junk in the Indian
seas," said Murray.  "It was a near thing for him, and the doctors
insisted on his returning home as the only chance of saving his life; so
he wrote me word in a few lines.  But he is not much addicted to
letter-writing; I, therefore, know no particulars.  He will give us the
account when he arrives."

Murray stood watching the cutter, while the admiral continued talking to
Stella.  The little craft, a vessel of about twelve tons, had been built
by the young commander soon after he settled at Bercaldine.  What naval
officer, who has the means in his power, would fail of possessing a
vessel of some sort?  She was not only a pleasure-yacht, but was useful
as a despatch-boat to bring the necessary stores for the house from
Oban, and served also for fishing in summer and for wild-fowl shooting
in winter.  She was a trim yacht, notwithstanding her multifarious
employments.  Ben Snatchblock, who acted as master, with a stout lad as
his crew, was justly proud of her.  He boasted that nothing under canvas
could beat her, either on a wind or going free, and that in heavy
weather she was as lively as a duck.  Not a better seaboat could be
found between the mainland and the Hebrides.  Indeed, she had often been
pretty severely tried; and on one occasion Murray had had the
satisfaction of preserving the crew of a wreck on a dangerous reef, when
no other craft was at hand to render them assistance.  He had, of
course, named his yacht the _Stella_; for what other name could he have
thought of giving her?  He now watched her with the interest which every
seaman feels for the vessel he owns, as, close-hauled, she stood up the
loch.  Now a breeze headed her, and she had to make a couple of tacks or
more to weather a point.  Now she met a baffling wind, and it seemed
impossible that she would do it.  "Keep her close, Archie!" exclaimed
Murray, as if addressing his cousin; "now keep her full again and shoot
her up round the point.  That will do it, lad.  Capital!  Another tack
and you will have the wind off the shore; that is only a flaw.  Put her
about again.  With two more tacks you will do it."

The breeze freshening and proving steady, in a short time the _Stella_
was near enough to enable Murray to distinguish Terence Adair and
another person, in addition to those who had gone away in the yacht.  As
the jib and foresail were taken off her, she shot up to the buoy.
Murray hastened down to the landing-place, in time to meet Adair and the
stranger, whom Archie pulled on shore in the punt.

Adair sprang to land with much more agility than the old admiral had
exhibited, and was warmly greeted by Murray.  "As you told me that
Archie was staying with you, I brought that broth of a boy, my nephew,
Gerald Desmond, to bear him company and to help keep him out of
mischief," exclaimed Adair, turning round and pointing to his nephew,
who hung back till his uncle had offered some explanation as to the
cause of his appearance uninvited.

"Desmond, you have grown such a strapping fellow that I didn't recognise
you," said Murray, putting out his hand.  "You are welcome to
Bercaldine, and we can easily stow you away in some odd corner or other,
notwithstanding your inches.  Will you come up to the house with us, or
will you wait for Archie?"

"I will wait for Archie, sir, thank you," answered Gerald; and Murray
and Adair walked on.

"We have had sad times at Ballymacree," said the latter, speaking in a
much graver tone than usual for him.  "Gerald only arrived a couple of
weeks ago.  Although he has grown so much, the climate of the China seas
has played havoc with his constitution, and I didn't like to leave him
in a house of mourning.  His mother died while he was away, and my poor
sister Kathleen caught cold, and went off in a rapid consumption a few
days after he arrived."

"Your sister Kathleen! to whom Rogers was engaged!" exclaimed Murray; "I
am truly sorry to hear it.  What a blow for him, too, poor fellow!  You
said nothing about this in your letter, though I saw that you were in
mourning."

"Faith, I hadn't the heart to do so," answered Terence.  "I knew that
I'd have to tell you all about it, and so I thought it better just to
ask the question whether I might come and see you, without saying more,
knowing very surely what your answer would be, if I didn't get it--which
I didn't, seeing I left home before it arrived; but I suppose it's all
right, as Archie said that you were expecting me?"

"Of course, my dear fellow," said Murray.  "Poor Jack!  Have you written
to him?"

"No, but Kathleen did, while she had strength to hold a pen; and her
mother put in a few words to tell him that all was over.  On my life, I
couldn't have done it.  Things have gone badly, too, at Ballymacree in
other respects.  The old place must go, after all; and it will break my
father's heart, I am very certain.  If we had had a good rattling war,
and I had picked up lots of prize-money, I might have saved it.  But
that is not to be thought of.  And then, my dear Murray, a little
private affair of my own, which has put me out sadly.  I wrote, when I
first came home, to Lady Rogers, asking leave to pay a visit at
Halliburton Hall.  I got an answer from Sir John, very kind and very
polite.  At the same time, he gave me to understand that he considered
it better I should not make my appearance there; in other words, that I
wasn't wanted.  I fancied that Lucy had begun to care for me, and so
Jack thought, I suspect, from what he said when I confessed to him that
I was over head and ears in love with his sweet little sister, and had
for her sake kept my heart intact, notwithstanding the fascinations of
all the charming creatures we met with in the West Indies.  So in truth,
Murray, I am about as miserable a fellow as any in the three kingdoms
just now."

"I am very sorry to hear what you tell me," answered Alick.  "We will do
our best to cheer you up; and our old friend, Admiral Triton, who
arrived a couple of hours ago, will, I am very sure, lend a hand in the
good work."

Terence, having unloaded his heart of his griefs, had considerably
regained his usual spirits by the time he had got up to the house, and
had shaken hands with Stella and the admiral.  While he was talking to
the latter, Murray hinted to his wife not to ask questions about his
family or the Rogers', telling her briefly what had occurred.  The
admiral immediately attacked Terence about the old story of the
portmanteau, and that led him into a whole series of yarns, laughing so
heartily himself at them, that Adair was compelled to laugh also.

"You must give me a cruise in the _Stella_ to-morrow, Murray," he said;
"she will be far the best style of locomotion for me, for these
mountains of yours don't suit me--and yet I should like to see something
of the magnificent scenery surrounding you."  The proposal was at once
agreed to, and Stella said that she should like to go also.

Archie and Desmond now arrived, and paid their respects to the admiral.
Desmond was introduced in due form to the young heir of Bercaldine.

"Faith, Mrs Murray, he'll be after making a fine young midshipman one
of these days," said Gerald, patting the baby's cheek.  "Won't you just
let Archie and me take him to sea with us next time we go afloat?  We'll
watch over him as carefully as any she-nurse can do on shore, and teach
him all manner of tricks."

"I daresay you would," said Stella, laughing.  "His nautical experiences
must be confined at present to a cruise on board the yacht now and then
in fine weather, though I don't forget the good care you took of Master
Spider on board the _Supplejack_.  By the bye, what became of your pet,
may I ask?"

"Tom Rogers and I took him with us on board the _Niobe_.  He was making
immense strides in civilisation, having taken to sleeping in a hammock
under bedclothes, and learned to drink tea in a teacup, when he was lost
at sea in a gale of wind rounding the Cape.  Tom tried to write a poem
to his memory, but broke down, declaring that his feelings overcame him;
though in truth he couldn't manage to make even the two first lines
rhyme, so that that might have had something to do in the matter."

While Gerald was rattling on, Archie produced the letter-bag, which he
had hitherto forgotten to give to Commander Murray.  It contained
several letters for him, as also others forwarded by his navy agent to
Lieutenant Adair.  Among them were two long, official-looking
despatches, with the words, "On Her Majesty's Service," printed outside.
Murray looked somewhat grave as he read his; at the same time, an
expression arising from gratified pride appeared on his countenance.

Terence tore his letter open.  "They don't intend to let me rest on
shore, at all events.  I expected to have my promotion, however; but
instead, their lordships send me off to sea again.  I am appointed to
the _Opal_, just commissioned at Portsmouth, as first lieutenant.  I
ought to be highly flattered; and, Desmond, my boy, you are to go with
me."

"The best thing that could happen to you; I congratulate you," said the
admiral.  "And what news does your despatch contain?" he continued, to
Murray.  Without answering, Alick put the letter into the admiral's
hands, and, taking his wife's arm, led her into the garden, where they
were concealed from sight by the shrubbery.

"It will be a blow to her," said the admiral, as he glanced over the
official document; "still it is flattering to Murray, and, unless he has
resolved to give up the service altogether, I could not wish him better
luck.  You and your old shipmate are not to be parted, Adair.  He is
appointed to the command of the _Opal_, and I have a notion that she
will be stationed at the Cape, and probably sent to the East Coast of
Africa, where there is work to be done, and prize-money to be picked up,
not to be got every day in these piping times of peace.  It is no easy
matter, however, to catch those slippery Arab slavers, so you mustn't
count your hens before they are hatched.  Still, the _Opal_ is a fast
craft, and if any man can do what is to be done, Murray will do it."

"At all events, I am delighted to hear that I am to serve with him.  I
was anxious to be off to sea as soon as possible, and it makes amends to
me for my disappointment in not getting my promotion."

"I say, Archie, I suppose that you will be appointed to the same craft?"
exclaimed Desmond.

"Nae doot about it, mon," answered Archie; "I've a notion it's the doing
of our cousin, Admiral McAlpine, who returned home not long ago from the
West Indies, and would of course have been looking after our interests,
for he is a very kind man."

"I suspect that Mrs Murray considers it a very cruel kindness,"
observed the admiral; "but every sailor's wife must be prepared to be
parted from her husband, and to make the most of him when he is on
shore."

"He is a lucky fellow who has got a wife to be parted from," said
Terence, thinking of Lucy; "at all events, when he is away, he can look
forward to the happiness of being again united to her, instead of having
to come home, as is the lot of some of us, without anyone who cares for
him to give him a welcome; so the favours of Heaven are very fairly
divided, and in my opinion Murray has the best of it, though it may give
him and his wife a severe pang to part from each other."

"Here they come, and we shall learn how they have settled the matter,"
observed the admiral; "but as duty has ever been my friend Murray's
guiding star, I am very sure that he will not allow his inclination to
prevent him from acting as he thinks right, and, unless I am mistaken as
to his wife's character, she will not utter a word to prevent him."

No one would have supposed from the countenances of Alick and Stella how
much their hearts were agitated.  "I am sorry, admiral, we must give up
our projected cruise for to-morrow, and cut yours and Adair's visit
short, as we shall have much to do in preparing to leave Bercaldine,
though I must beg you to stay as long as we remain," said Alick, quite
calmly.  "We must treat you without ceremony; and I know, Adair, that
you and Desmond will lend a hand in setting things in order for our
departure."

"Then you have made your mind up to accept the command of the _Opal_,"
said the admiral.  "I said it would be so; I was sure of it.  I must
compliment Mrs Murray, for there are some wives, who don't love their
husbands a jot the better, who would have turned the scale the other
way.  Duty, my lads, duty should carry everything before it," continued
the admiral, turning to the midshipmen.  "Learn a lesson from your
superiors, and never let anything induce you to swerve from duty!"

Murray, of course, had an immense amount of work to get through.  It was
at once settled that Stella should accompany him to Portsmouth, and
should take up her residence in the neighbourhood during his absence.
Bercaldine was to be let, and a tenant had to be found, arrangements
made with the factor and grieve, and other retainers; various articles
to be stored up, and others to be carried with them; the _Stella_ to be
laid up, and the horses to be sold.

A couple of days thus passed rapidly away, and, all working with a will,
the party were ready to start.  The rays of the sun, just rising above
the lofty summits of the hills, glanced down the loch as they assembled
on the landing-place with their dependents, and every cotter on the
estate from far and near, who had come to bid them farewell.  Many a
tear was shed by the females of the family, as Mrs Murray, the baby and
Polly, with the gentlemen of the party, embarked on board the _Stella_,
which was to convey them to Oban.  The men waved their bonnets, and
uttered a prayer in Gaelic that the laird and his good wife and the
"bairn" might be brought back to them in safety.

Sail was made, and the little craft glided away from her moorings with a
fair breeze down the loch.  Mrs Murray looked with fond regret at the
lovely home she was leaving, though no longer the home it had been to
her without her husband.  The admiral, of course, did his best to keep
up her spirits, and whatever Alick might have felt, he was as cheerful
as if they were merely making a day's excursion.  The scenery around the
home he loved so well looked even more attractive than ever.  On the
port hand Ben Cruachan rose proudly amid the assemblage of craggy
heights which extended to the eastward along the shores of the loch.
The ruins of Ardchattan Priory, covered with luxuriant ivy, and
o'er-canopied by lofty trees, soon came in sight on the starboard side.

"The monks of old, wise in their generation, chose pleasant places for
their residences," observed the admiral, pointing to the ruins.

"They must have been of great benefit to the surrounding population in
those turbulent times," said Mrs Murray.  "I have sometimes thought
that it would be well if they still existed in districts where no landed
proprietors live to look after the people."

"Very well in theory, my dear madam," said the admiral; "but we must
take into consideration what human nature really is.  Monks in many
instances proved themselves to be arrant knaves, and among every
assemblage of mortals such will ever be found in time to leaven the
whole mass.  These and friaries and convents were not abolished a day
too soon; and, advanced as the present generation esteems itself, I am
very sure that if we were to shut up a dozen men together, picked from
among the most learned and enlightened students at our universities, or
the same number of the most charming women to be found, and insist on
their living as celibates to the end of their days, and devoting
themselves to a certain routine of strict forms and ceremonies, they
would very soon come to loggerheads, and do more harm to themselves and
others than they could possibly do good.  The wisest men in all the
nations of Europe have seen the necessity of abolishing the conventual
system, and I cannot suppose that English men and women are more likely
to be holy and immaculate than the people of other countries.  The whole
thing is an illusion; and I am very sure that the system, if, as
according to the wishes of some, it should again prevail in England,
would only tend to the corruption of those who are beguiled by it, and
to the dishonour of true religion."

"You are right, admiral, and certainly my wife does not advocate the
re-establishment of monasteries in this country," remarked Alick.

"Oh no, no!  I was thinking rather of the past," said Stella; "and
probably, if we could look into the interior of convents in their best
days, we should see much to grieve and shock us."

The tide was on the ebb, and as the cutter passed through the narrows at
Connel Ferry, she pitched and tossed in the turbulent current, here
forming a perfect race, in a way which put a stop to further
conversation.  The breeze being steady, she, however, with Murray's
skilful handling, ran through and glided forward on her course.  Now
Dunstaffnage Castle, standing on a slight elevation near the shore, came
in sight--a picturesque ruin, its high walls and round towers rising
boldly against the sky.  Farther on appeared Dunolly Castle--an
ivy-clad, square keep, in former times the seat of the Macdougals of
Lorne; and now the cutter entered the bay of Oban, with the long island
of Kerrera on the right, and brought up amid a fleet of small craft and
coasters.  A steamer on her way to Glasgow was waiting for passengers,
and the party had just time to get on board before she began paddling on
to the southward.

"You will take good care of the craft, Dougal," said Ben Snatchblock, as
he handed over his command to the old Highland skipper, into whose
charge Murray had given the yacht: "cover her over carefully, and keep
the sun from her in summer and the snow in winter, and we'll have many a
cruise in her yet when we come back from the East Indies."

"Dinna fash ye, mon; she'll no' take harm under my charge," said Dougal.

"Dougal has been somewhat jealous of Ben on account of his having been
appointed to the yacht instead of himself," remarked Alick.

Glasgow was reached before nightfall, and the next morning the whole
party started by train for the south.  Admiral Triton insisted on
accompanying his friends to Portsmouth.  "My sister Deborah and I have
taken a house on Southsea Common for three years, and you and your wife
and bairn must be our guests, and we have a room for Archie till it is
time for him to take up his berth on board.  You will cheer us up, and
we old people want companionship, for I can't get about as I once did;
and the young fellows fight shy of me and don't laugh at my yarns, as
you and Jack used to do; and I say, Murray, if you want to do me a
favour, you will let your wife stay on as our guest.  The boy will be a
great amusement to us both.  We'll not spoil him, depend on that.  I
then can come and go as I like.  And when I am away, she'll help to keep
my good sister alive and cheerful.  When Deb hasn't me to look after,
she's apt to get out of spirits, and to be thinking about her own
ailments--fancied more than real, for she is as hearty as she can expect
to be at her age; while, if she has a guest and a little child to occupy
her thoughts, she'll be perfectly happy and contented; so, you see,
you'll be doing her and me the greatest possible favour.  Don't say no,
but settle the matter at once."

Murray, of course, thanked the admiral very heartily.  He was sure that
the invitation was given from the kindest of motives, and he fully
believed that Stella would contribute greatly to the happiness of the
old man and his sister, who, without kith or kin, required someone to
solace them in their declining years.  He seemed truly grateful when
Murray, after talking the matter over with Stella, accepted his kind
proposal.

"She mustn't consider herself a mere visitor, but must be as much at
home as if Deb were only her housekeeper--that is just what Deb will
like.  And I must be looked upon as their visitor when I come back from
paying a visit to any of my friends who are still willing to receive me;
though the only people on whom I can now depend to give me a hearty
welcome are Sir John and Lady Rogers; they don't get tired of my yarns,
and Sir John laughs at them as heartily as he did many a long year ago."

So the matter was settled; and, on reaching Portsmouth, Murray and
Stella accompanied the admiral to his very comfortable house at
Southsea, at the entrance door of which Mrs Deborah Triton--she had
taken brevet rank--stood with smiling countenance ready to receive them.
It overlooked Spithead and the Isle of Wight, with the Solent
stretching away to the westward; the entrance to Portsmouth harbour,
with steamers and vessels of all sizes running constantly in and out,
being seen at no great distance off across the common.  But Sister Deb,
as the admiral generally called her, is more worthy of a description
than the house.  She was remarkably like her brother, except that she
had two feet, whereas he lacked one; and that her still plump face was
free from the weather-beaten stains contracted by his honest countenance
during his days afloat.  Her figure was short and round, exhibiting
freedom from care--it was such, indeed, as only a good-natured person
could possess; but her face was the index of her mind and heart.  That
bore an unmistakable expression of kindness, gentleness, and
good-temper, which perfect faith in the simple truths of Christianity
could alone give.  Murray felt perfectly confident that his wife and
child would be in good keeping during his absence, and his heart felt
lightened of one of its chief cares.

Next morning, Murray, accompanied by Archie, went on board the _Opal_,
which, having just been brought out of dock, lay alongside the hulk.
She was still in the hands of the riggers', who, busy as bees, swarmed
in every part, rattling down the rigging, swaying up the topmasts, and
getting the yards across.  Her appearance in that condition was not
attractive; but as he surveyed her with a seaman's eye, he felt
satisfied that she was a fast craft, and well calculated for the service
on which she was to be sent.

"I have no wish to command a steamer, but I cannot help fancying that a
pair of paddles would be more likely to catch the Arab dhows we are to
go in search of than is the fastest craft under canvas," he observed to
Adair, whom he found on board.

They at once set to work to collect a crew, in which business Ben
Snatchblock was especially active.  Ben a few days afterwards received,
to his satisfaction, his warrant as boatswain, his zeal being
considerably enlivened thereby.  He, before long, managed to pick up a
number of prime hands from among his old shipmates, on whom he could
thoroughly depend.  The gunner and carpenter joined the same day he got
his warrant.  The former, Timothy Ebbs, was a little man, but he had a
big voice and a prodigious pair of black whiskers, which, sticking out
on either side of his face, gave him a sufficiently ferocious aspect to
inspire ship-boys and other young members of the crew with the necessary
amount of awe; while the able seamen respected him for his tried courage
and undoubted nautical experience.  Adair was very glad to find that Jos
Green was appointed as master, as he had known him well when he was
second master of the _Tudor_, in the West Indies, and a more merry,
kind-hearted, better-disposed fellow never stepped.  Jos, it was said,
never went anywhere without finding friends, or came away without having
made fresh ones.  Adair, Archie, and Gerald, with all the officers who
had as yet been appointed to the corvette, took up their quarters on
board, and the work of fitting out made rapid progress.

"I wonder whom we shall have for our second lieutenant?" said Gerald, as
they were sitting in the berth; "an old shipmate or a new one?  I hope
we may get a good sort of a fellow.  I should like to have old Higson.
What a good-natured chap he was!"

"That was when he was first promoted; he may have grown rusty by this
time, at not getting another step," observed Archie.  "He is older than
the captain, and yet junior to Mr Adair."

On going on deck soon afterwards, an officer came up the side, who
introduced himself to Terence as Lieutenant Frank Mildmay, come to join
the _Opal_ as second lieutenant.  No two persons could be more
dissimilar than the first and second lieutenants of the corvette.  He
had a smooth face with pink cheeks, whiskers curled to a nicety, and
hair carefully brushed.  His figure was slight and refined, and he wore
lilac kid gloves, his appearance being certainly somewhat effeminate;
indeed, he looked as if he had just come out of a bandbox.

"He'll never set the Thames on fire," observed Paddy Desmond to Archie.
"Faith, the men will be after calling him Mr _Mildman_, unless he
condescends to dip those delicate paws of his into the tar-bucket."

The men probably looked on their second lieutenant with much the same
feelings as did the two midshipmen; while he, regardless of what they
thought of him, accompanied Adair into the gun-room to make himself
acquainted with the rest of his messmates.  The remainder of the
gun-room officers and midshipmen joined the next day, and, the
complement of the crew being made up, the corvette, casting off from the
hulk, took up her moorings in the middle of the harbour.  Of the
new-comers, two small midshipmen, who had never before been to sea,
Paddy Desmond immediately designated one "Billy Blueblazes," in
consequence of his boasting that he was related to an admiral of that
name, while the other was allowed to retain his proper appellation of
"Dicky Duff," Paddy declaring that it required no reformation.  An old
mate who was always grumbling, and two young one who had just passed
their examination, with an assistant-surgeon, two clerks, and a master's
assistant, made up the mess; and pretty closely stowed they were in the
narrow confines of the berth.  The only other person worthy of note was
the third warrant-officer, the carpenter, who rejoiced in the
designation of Caractacus Chessle, the name of the British hero having
been bestowed on him by his father, who had once on a time been a
stage-player.  He was as tall and bulky as the gunner was short and
wiry; indeed, the three warrant-officers formed a strange contrast with
each other.

Murray frequently came on board to see how things were getting on, but
never interfered with Adair's arrangements.  He was sometimes
accompanied by Admiral Triton, who seemed to take almost as much
interest as he did in fitting out the ship.  The sails were now bent,
and Murray waited in daily expectation of receiving his sailing orders.
Meantime, the kind admiral and his sister were moved with the thoughts
of poor Stella's approaching bereavement, and, knowing nothing of
Adair's attachment, he got Deb to write to Lady Rogers, inviting one of
her daughters to pay them a visit, and assist in taking care of Mrs
Murray.  As it happened, he said nothing of the first lieutenant of the
_Opal_, and Sir John and her ladyship, supposing that Adair was at
Ballymacree, made no objection to Lucy's accepting the invitation.  She
accordingly, much to Murray's satisfaction, arrived the very day the
ship was ready for sea.  It so fell out that Adair, who had managed to
escape from his multifarious duties, and was not aware of her coming,
called to pay a farewell visit at the house.  He was ushered into the
drawing-room, where a lady was seated with a book in her hand, though
her eyes were oftener cast over the blue ocean than at its pages.

The servant announced his name; the lady rose from her seat, and gazed
at him with a look in which surprise was mingled with pleasure, a rich
blush suffusing her countenance.  "Mr Adair!" she exclaimed, holding
out her hand, which Terence took, and seemed very unwilling to
relinquish.  Nor did she withdraw it.

"I thought you were at Ballymacree," she said.  "I was very sorry that
papa thought it right not to accept your proposal to pay us a visit at
Halliburton while Jack was absent, but, believe me, he did not intend to
be unkind."

"I felt that, though it made me very unhappy," answered Terence; "but
did you wish me to come?"

"Yes," said Lucy, "I should have been very glad to see you; I should not
be speaking the truth if I did not say so."

"Then, if I get my promotion and come back with lots of prize-money, may
I hope--"

"Pray don't speak about that," answered Lucy, growing agitated; "I can
make no promise without papa's sanction, and I have already said enough
to show that I am not indifferent to you."

Terence was an Irishman, and Irishmen are not wont to be bashful, but at
that moment Alick and Stella entered the room, not failing to remark the
confusion their appearance created.  Terence, of course, explained that
he had called, not expecting to see Miss Rogers, but had come to pay his
respects to Mrs Murray.  She tried to send her husband out of the room,
intending to follow, but he would not take the hint; and Terence, who
had but a short time to spare, was compelled at length to pay his adieux
without eliciting the promise he wished from Lucy.  She looked very
sorry when he had gone, but probably was the better able, from sympathy,
to afford consolation to poor Stella, when the moment for her parting
with her husband arrived.  That moment came the very next day.  It need
not be dwelt on.  Stella's lot was that which numberless wives of naval
officers have to endure; but, though widely shared, her grief was not
the less poignant as she watched with tearful eyes through the admiral's
spy-glass the corvette under all sail standing down the Solent.


CHAPTER TWO.

CROSSING THE EQUATOR--BILLY BLUEBLAZES LOOKS OUT FOR THE LINE, BUT DOES
NOT SEE IT--HE AND GERALD MASTHEADED--TRISTAN D'ACUNHA: JOS GREEN, AS
USUAL, "MEETS WITH A FRIEND"--THE OPAL AT THE CAPE--SAILS FOR
MADAGASCAR--COMMODORE DOUCE OF THE RADIANT--A BOAT EXPEDITION UP THE
ANGOXA RIVER--THE SLAVERS' STRONGHOLD--MILDMAY'S SONNET INTERRUPTED BY
THE GUNS OF THE FORT--ATTACK ON THE SLAVE-DHOWS--THE COMMODORE IS LANDED
BY TOM BASHAN--CAPTURE OF THE FORT--CROSSING THE BAR.

Her Majesty's corvette _Opal_, under all sail, was slowly gliding across
the line, for which Dicky Duff and Billy Blueblazes were eagerly looking
out, Paddy Desmond having assured them that if they watched fast enough
they would be sure to see it.  Mr Mildmay, being addicted to poetry,
was busily engaged in writing a sonnet on the subject, which, however,
did not corroborate Gerald's statement, as it began, "Ideal cincture
which surrounds the globe;" but as he was interrupted by Ben
Snatchblock's pipe summoning the crew to exercise at the guns, the
second line was not written, when Jos Green caught sight of the
manuscript which he had left on the gun-room table.

"I say, Desmond, Dicky and I have been looking out this last hour or
more for the line, and haven't sighted it yet," said Billy.

"Of course not; and you never will on deck.  You should go to the
fore-topgallant-masthead; you will see it clearly from thence, if you
keep your eyes open wide enough; but if not, you have no chance."

"But if we do, we shall miss Neptune's visit.  I suppose he'll be on
board us before long?" answered Billy.

"Of course he will, if he doesn't happen to be otherwise engaged; but he
has plenty of work on hand just now, and is just as likely as not paying
a visit to some other ship away to the eastward.  You see, he can't be
everywhere at the same time.  Or maybe his children have got the measles
or whooping-cough, and of course he wouldn't like to leave them,
especially if his wife happens to be out marketing.  He's a domestic old
fellow, and the best of husbands and fathers.  So you youngsters mustn't
depend on seeing him; and lucky for you, too; for his barber would be
after shaving your chins off, seeing you've nothing else round your
faces for him to operate on."

Paddy, the rogue, knew very well that the commander did not intend to
allow the once usual frolics and gambols to take place; the
time-honoured custom having, of late years, been generally abandoned on
board Her Majesty's ships of war, as has the barbarous custom of burning
Guy Fawkes been given up on shore by the more enlightened of our times;
albeit the fifth of November and the lesson it teaches should never be
forgotten.

The two midshipmen, who mustered a binocular between them, thus
instigated by Paddy, made their way aloft, where, for their own
pleasure, they remained looking out for Mr Mildmay's "ideal cincture"
with the utmost patience, though they would have grumbled greatly had
they been ordered up for punishment.  At length they were espied by the
first lieutenant.  "What are you two youngsters doing up there aloft?"
he shouted.

"Looking for the line, sir," was the answer, in Billy's shrill voice.

"Then remain till you see it, or till I call you down!" cried Adair.  "I
say, Gerald, you've been after bamboozling those youngsters," he added,
as he caught sight of a broad grin on his nephew's face.  "Go up to the
main-topgallant-masthead, and assist them in looking out for the line.
Perhaps you will sight it sooner than they will, and it will help you to
correct your day's work."

Gerald, pulling a long face, began to ascend the rigging, greatly to the
amusement of Archie and his other messmates.

"I say, Adair, you're somewhat hard upon the youngsters," observed the
commander, who had just then come on deck.  "You remember that Rogers
and you and I thought ourselves severely dealt with when we three had to
grace the mastheads of the old _Racer_."

"Faith, but I think we were rightly punished, and that's the reason I
sent Desmond aloft, and allowed the other youngsters to remain where
they had gone of their own accord."

"You forget that the sun is somewhat hot, and they may come down by the
run and knock their brains out; so don't you think it would be better to
call them down presently, and give Master Gerald a lecture on the
impropriety of playing on the credulity of his younger messmates?"

Of course Adair did as the commander wished, though he had some
difficulty in keeping his countenance when he called up the three
youngsters before him to receive his lecture.

"Remember, Master Desmond, if you begin by bamboozling, you may end by
practising more serious deceptions on your fellows; so let me advise you
in future to restrain your propensity in that direction," he wound up by
saying, with as grave a countenance as he could command.  He then
informed the youngsters that the line was only imaginary, to denote the
sun's course round the globe.

"An `ideal cincture,' you will understand, youngsters," observed the
master, who had heard Adair's remarks, giving at the same time a nod to
Mr Mildmay, who blushed an acknowledgment of being the author of the
poetical simile.

The two youngsters were very greatly disappointed when they found that
they had got some way to the south of the line without having made
acquaintance with Neptune and his charming family.

Rio was at length reached, and Gerald and Archie had time to pay visits,
in company with the good-natured master, to many of the localities with
which they were acquainted when there before, though unable to get up
the harbour, as they wished to call on the officious old magistrate, the
Juiz da Fora who had imprisoned them and Higson.  They remained,
however, only long enough to take in a stock of fresh provisions and
water, and then steered eastward across the Atlantic to the Cape of Good
Hope.

About sixteen days after leaving Rio, land was sighted.

"What, have we got to the Cape already?" exclaimed Desmond, who heard
the cry from aloft.

"No, my lad; if you had been attending to your day's work you wouldn't
have asked the question," answered Green.  "The land ahead is the island
of Tristan d'Acunha, not the most delectable of spots for the residents,
though I believe there are some on it.  We are going to put in to get
some more fresh mutton and beef, with any vegetables they are able to
spare."

"Hands shorten sail and bring ship to an anchor!" shouted Adair soon
afterwards, and the corvette brought up before a green slope, spotted
with small whitewashed buildings, the hill becoming more rough and
craggy till it reached an elevation of eight thousand feet above the
sea.  The other side of the island, as they afterwards discovered, rose
sheer out of the water in a vast precipice to the summit.  Between the
anchorage and the shore was a prodigious mass of enormous seaweeds,
inside of which the water was perfectly calm, forming a safe harbour for
small craft.  Off it appeared two small islands, known as Inaccessible
and Nightingale.  To the latter, Billy and Dicky Duff were anxious to go
and catch some of the birds, from which, as they were informed by the
irrepressible Paddy Desmond, the island took its name.  Its feathered
inhabitants are, however, only the wild sea-fowl which seek their prey
from among the denizens of the ocean.

"You will not find any friends here, Jos, I suppose?" said Adair to the
master.

"It is possible, as I have never been off the place before," answered
Jos; "but still I am never surprised at meeting someone who knows me.
Once, when pulling up the Nun, in Africa, on the first visit I paid to
that delectable stream, as I happened to be remarking that I had no
friends there, at all events, a black, who had swum off from the shore,
put his head over the bows and exclaimed, `Massa Green, glad to see you.
What! sure you 'member Jiggery Pop, who served aboard the _Frisky_, at
the Cape?'  And sure enough I remembered Jiggery well, seeing that I had
once picked him out of the water when he was near drowning, and he had
served me the same good turn."

While Jos was narrating this anecdote, a boat, pulled by half a dozen
stout seamen in blue and red shirts, was coming off from the shore to
the ship.  Without ceremony they stepped on board, when one of them,
coming aft, touched his hat to the master.  "You'll remember me, sir.
Served with you aboard the _Pantaloon_.  I'm Jerry Bird."

"Glad to see you, Jerry; you saved me from being cut down when we had
that affair out in the Pacific."

"No, sir, I think it was t'other way," said Jerry; "I haven't forgotten
it, I can tell you, sir."

"Well, it was one or the other," observed Green.  "Tell me what brought
you to this out-of-the-way place?"

"Couldn't help it, sir--ship cast ashore, and I was the only one to get
to land alive, and have been living here ever since; but, if so be the
captain will ship me aboard, I'll enter at once."

As Jerry was a prime hand, the offer was not likely to be refused, and
he was entered accordingly.

A boat with several officers visited the shore, making their way, not
without difficulty, through the floating breakwater of seaweed.  The
inhabitants, consisting of about forty men, women, and children,
gathered on the beach to welcome them in front of their little
stone-boxes of dwellings which were scattered about here and there.
They appeared to be a primitive race, the descendants of two old
men-of-war's men, who, having been discharged from the service at the
end of the last century, had lived there ever since with wives whom they
had brought from the Cape, their respective children and grandchildren
having intermarried.  Their wealth consisted in bullocks and flocks of
sheep, which, having increased in the same proportion as their owners,
were now very numerous.  Their carcases, as well as the skins and wool,
were exchanged for such luxuries as they required with the skippers of
ships calling off their island.  Here the old patriarchs, with their
families, had dwelt for well-nigh half a century or more, knowing little
of what was going forward in the world, and by the world unknown.

The _Opal_, having supplied herself with a stock of fresh provisions,
once more weighed anchor, carrying off Green's old shipmate, Jerry Bird,
who seemed heartily glad to get away from his friends, whom he described
in no very flattering colours.  After a run of twelve days, the _Opal_
came in sight of the Cape, but it was night before she dropped her
anchor in Simon's Bay.  Dark masses of land were seen towering above her
mastheads, and rows of light streaming from the maindeck ports of two
frigates, between which she took up her berth; while the sound of bugles
coming across the water betokened the neighbourhood of troopships, with
redcoats on board, bound out to India, or returning home.  It reminded
those whose thoughts were with the loved ones in Old England, to lose no
time in sitting down to their desks.  Of course the commander wrote to
his wife, and Adair humbly requested that he might be allowed to enclose
a letter to Lucy, in case, as he observed, she might still be staying
with Mrs Deborah Triton.  They both also wrote to the kind old admiral.

As the morning broke, a ship was seen standing out of the harbour, and a
boat sent with a well-filled letter-bag to overtake her.  How hard the
crew pulled! for they knew by the commander's manner that he intended
that letter-bag to be put on board.  They did it, however,--as British
seamen generally do whatever they are ordered,--though at no small
expenditure of muscular strength, and, of course, received, well
pleased, a glass of grog on their return on board.

The _Opal_ remained but a short time at the Cape.  Murray received
orders to follow the _Radiant_, one of the frigates seen on the night of
her arrival, to the Mozambique Channel, as soon as she had filled up
with water and other stores.

The corvette made but a short stay, and again sailed for Saint
Augustine's Bay, at the southern end of Madagascar, which island was
sighted in little more than a fortnight.  The _Radiant_ was found at
anchor in the bay, Commodore Douce, who commanded her, having put in to
water the ship.

Murray went on board to pay his respects and receive his orders, and
numerous visits were exchanged between the two ships.  The commodore, a
remarkably small man with a fiery countenance, overshadowed by a
prodigious cocked hat, was walking the deck with hasty strides as Murray
came up the side.

"I have been expecting you here for three days, at least, Commander
Murray," he exclaimed, as Alick made his bow.  "There is work to be
done, and the sooner it is done the better.  I have received notice that
a piratical band of Arabs, who have long had possession of a strong fort
up the river Angoxa, have a number of barracoons full of slaves and
several dhows lying under the protection of their guns.  I have resolved
to make a dash up the river to cut out the vessels, capture the slaves,
and destroy the fort."

"I am very glad to hear it, sir," answered Murray, "and will send my
boats on shore to procure water immediately, so that we may be ready to
sail with as little delay as possible.  The men, when they hear the
object, will work with a will, you may depend on that, commodore; and I
trust that the crew of the _Opal_ is not to be surpassed in smartness by
that of any other ship in commission.  I think that you will acknowledge
that when you have an opportunity of judging."

"Well, well, you brought to in very good style, I must confess that,"
answered the commodore, who, though inclined to be irascible, was
quickly appeased.  "When you send your boats on shore, let the officers
in command keep an eye on the natives, and take care that none of the
crew stray.  The people about here are treacherous rascals, and would
murder anyone they could catch hold of without any provocation.  I'll
send three of the frigate's boats to assist you, and order the crew of
one of them to remain on guard while the others are filling the casks."

The news which Murray took when he returned on board made everyone
alive.  In a few minutes the boats were ready to shove off.  The
brown-skinned natives kept hovering about all the time, seeing the
sailors engaged in filling the casks; and it was very evident that, had
they dared, they would have treated their visitors as the commodore had
thought probable.  Not long before, in the bay, a short distance to the
northward, the inhabitants had murdered an officer and boat's crew,
without, as far as could be ascertained, the slightest provocation.
Murray was therefore thankful when his boats returned safely on board.

Leaving Saint Augustine's Bay, the frigate and corvette sailed across
the Mozambique Channel, and came to an anchor off the mouth of the
Angoxa.  During the passage, every possible preparation was made for the
intended expedition; the firearms were looked to, cutlasses sharpened;
the surgeons packed up their instruments, bandages, and medicines.  The
Arabs were not fellows to yield without a determined struggle, and some
sharp fighting was expected.  About midway across the channel, a thin
wreath of smoke was observed to the southward.  "A steamer in sight,
standing this way, sir," reported Adair to the commander.  "The
commodore has made the signal to heave-to."

In a short time the steamer got near enough to allow her number to be
made out.  "The _Busy Bee_" reported Archie, who was acting as
signal-midshipman.  The commodore directed her to join company; her
boats would be an important addition to the proposed expedition.  The
three vessels now stood on to the mouth of the river, off which they
brought up, for the depth of water on the bar was not sufficient to
allow even the _Busy Bee_ to enter.  The boats were therefore
immediately lowered, those considering themselves most fortunate who had
to go in them; and it was hoped that by pulling up at once the Arabs
might be taken by surprise.  The frigate sent four boats, the corvette
three, and the steamer two of her paddle-box boats and a gig.  The
larger boats were armed with guns in their bows, capable of carrying
shell, grape, and canister, as well as round-shot.  The crews were
provided with muskets, pistols, and cutlasses; and all formed a pretty
strong body, against which the Arabs were not likely to make any
effectual stand.  All hands were in high spirits--there is nothing Jack
enjoys so much as an expedition on shore, whether for fighting or for a
game of cricket.  Provisions for three days were stowed away in the
boats, with plenty of ammunition, and numerous articles, including pots
and pans for cooking, blanket-frocks and trousers, blankets and other
means for making themselves comfortable at night.  The surgeons did not
forget a supply of quinine to mix with the men's grog, the only way in
which they could be induced to swallow the extract, albeit the only
reliable preventive for fever.

Jos Green was much disappointed at being compelled to remain in charge
of the corvette.  "I fully expected to find some old friend or other
among the Arabs or captured slaves; however, give my kind regards to
anyone who knows me, and say I shall be happy to see them on board," he
exclaimed, as Terence went down the side.

Murray went in his gig, accompanied by Archie; Adair had command of the
pinnace, a mate and Desmond going with him; Mr Mildmay commanded the
cutter, accompanied by Billy Blueblazes; and Dicky Duff was in the
boatswain's boat.  The commodore led the expedition in his own gig, in
the stem of which sat, as coxswain, Tom Bashan, noted as the biggest man
in the fleet--even the carpenter of the _Opal_ looked but of ordinary
size alongside him.  He had followed Captain Douce from ship to ship,
and had often rendered his commander essential service, when the little
man might otherwise have come to serious grief.  Bashan had the
affection for his chief which a nurse entertains for the child under her
charge, and considered it his especial duty, as far as he had power, to
keep him out of harm--not that the commodore ever suspected that his
subordinate entertained such a notion; he always spoke of him as an
honest, harmless fellow, who knew his duty and did it.

The bar being tolerably smooth, the boats crossed without any accident,
the crews giving way with a will up the river.  The tide was flowing, so
they made rapid progress.

"This is something like our expedition up the San Juan de Nicaragua,"
observed Desmond to Adair.  "Except that we had white fellows to fight
instead of Arabs, and a hot stream to pull against instead of having the
tide with us."

"The tide will turn before long," answered Adair; "and if the boats get
aground we may find these same Arabs rather tough customers.  However,
we must look out to avoid the contingency, and if we can take the
fellows by surprise, we may manage to get hold of a good number of
slaves."

The tide before long, as Adair predicted, began to ebb, and the boats
made much slower progress than before.  It was nearly nightfall when
they got up to Monkey Island, inside of which the commodore ordered them
to anchor; the boats being brought up close together, the awnings were
spread, the mainbrace spliced, and other preparations made for passing
the night.  An extra allowance was served out to induce the men to
swallow the quinine mixed with it; for though some made wry faces, their
love of grog induced them to overcome their objection to the bitter
taste.

After the grog, songs were sung alternately by the crew of each boat,
the commodore, who had nothing of the martinet about him, being always
ready to encourage his men to amuse themselves harmlessly; and they were
yet too far off from the fort to run any risk of their approach being
betrayed by their voices.

"Sweethearts and wives," sung out a voice from one of the boats, and was
taken up by the rest, as the last drop of grog was drained.  Murray and
Adair drank the toast heartily, though in a less demonstrative manner
than their companions, who possibly might have been very little troubled
with the thoughts of either wives or sweethearts.  No one for the time
dwelt on the somewhat serious work on which they were likely to be
engaged the next day.  At length, each man looked out for the softest
plank he could find, and turned in to sleep, the officers enjoying no
more luxurious couches than their inferiors; to some poor fellows it
might be the last rest they were to take here below.

A look-out, however, was kept, in case any of the Arab dhows should slip
down the river.  Two of the gigs were sent alternately ahead to watch
for any craft which might come in sight.  None, however, were seen, and
just as the first streaks of daylight appeared in the sky, the commodore
gave the order to "pipe to breakfast."  Fires were lighted on the
island, and cocoa and coffee warmed up, while another dose of quinine
was served out to each man.

The operation did not take long, and once more the flotilla advanced,
the tide carrying them rapidly up the river.  About noon, as the sun was
beating down with tremendous force, Angoxa came in sight, with, as the
commodore had expected from the information he had received, several
dhows at anchor before it under the protection of its guns.  Directly
the boats rounded the last point, which had before concealed their
approach, the red flag was hoisted above the fort, and at the same time
the loud sounds of the beating of tom-toms and drums commenced,
continuing incessantly, as if to intimidate the English tars and induce
them to pull back again to their ships.

The men laughed.  "What a row them niggers do kick up!  I wonder whether
they think we're going back frightened by all their tom-tomming.  We'll
show them presently that we've got some chaps aboard which will bark not
a little louder and do a precious deal more harm," exclaimed Ben
Snatchblock, who accompanied Mr Mildmay in one of the _Opal's_ boats.
That young officer took things very coolly.  He was observed with his
notebook jotting down his thoughts, but whether in the form of a
poetical effusion or not, Billy Blueblazes, who was beside him, could
not ascertain, though he tried hard to do so.

"The great Wolfe recited poetry when about to die in the arms of victory
on the heights of Abraham," observed Mr Mildmay to the midshipman; "do
you recall the lines to your memory, Billy?  What were they?"

"I think, sir, they were something about `the curfew tolling the knell
of parting day,' but I can never recollect more of the poem."

"Ah! so they were--let me see," and the lieutenant bit the end of his
pencil.  "`As Britain's tars who plough the mighty deep.'"

"`Sheep' or `sleep' come in rhyme with `deep,'" suggested Billy.

"Be silent--I want a grander term," said the lieutenant.  "`Where waves
on waves in wild confusion leap'--that's fine isn't it?"

"Yes, sir," said Billy.  "We're up an African river, and are going to
lick a lot of blackamoors; you'll have a difficulty in bringing
blackamoor into your lines, I've a notion."

"Of course I should call them Arabs, their proper designation, when I
get as far," replied Mr Mildmay.

Just then the boat grounded, as did several others near her, and there
the whole flotilla lay in sight of the fort, outside of which appeared a
number of barracoons, but whether full of slaves or not it was
impossible to say.  The unavoidable delay of the leading boats enabled
the others to overtake them; and as the tide rose, their crews shoved
them over the shoals, and once more they advanced in line abreast.
Their progress was slow; again several of the larger boats grounded, and
the whole, consequently, had to wait till the rising tide floated them.
The next time they grounded, the Arabs seemed to have discovered that
they were within range of the eight guns mounted on the fort, as well
indeed as the muskets of the large party sent out along the bank.  The
latter, as well as the guns in the fort, now began blazing away, shot
and bullets flying thickly over and around the boats.  Mr Mildmay at
this juncture thought it as well to put his notebook into his pocket.
The boats' guns, however, were not to be idle; the commander gave the
order to fire, and immediately they opened with spherical case-shot,
grape and canister, the former thrown with great accuracy into the
middle of the fort, while the latter quickly sent some of the swarthy
heroes under shelter, and put the greater number to flight.  Several of
the men in the boats had been hit, which excited the eagerness of the
crews to get at the foe.  The first thing, however, to be done was to
destroy the dhows.  As the boats worked their way up over the shoals
towards them, a hot fire was opened from those lowest down.  This was
quite sufficient to show their character, and the marines and
small-armed men began peppering away at every Arab turban or cap of
which they could catch sight, while the shells and grape prevented the
enemy from returning to their guns in the fort.  The tide, rushing in
more rapidly than before, quickly enabled the smaller boats, led by
Adair, to get up to the dhows.  He was the first on board the largest, a
craft of a hundred tons or more.  Her crew, having had no time to
escape, fought desperately.  Some were cut down, and the rest driven
overboard, not a human being remaining alive on board.  She was at once
set on fire, and the rest of the dhows were attacked in the same manner
in succession.  On board, some resistance was offered, but the crews of
others, leaping overboard, attempted to save themselves by swimming to
the shore.  As there was no object in carrying any of them off, they
were all burned, there being no doubt of their piratical character.

Though the guns in the fort were for the time silenced, they were still
capable of mischief, and the commodore wisely resolved entirely to
destroy the hornets' nest.  "We must land, Commander Murray, and drive
the enemy into the woods, burn their stockade, spike their guns, and
tumble them into the river," he shouted.  The first part of the
business, on which the rest depended, was not so easily accomplished.
The banks shelved so gradually that the boats grounded when still some
twenty yards or more from the shore.  The rising of the tide would in
time carry them nearer; but in the interval they were exposed to a
galling fire from the enemy, who were under shelter both in the fort and
in several other spots along the bank; while, in all probability, before
the fighting on shore was over the tide would again ebb and leave the
boats high and dry, exposed to the attacks of the numerous bands who
were gathering on the spot in the hope of wreaking their vengeance on
their foes.  Still the plucky little commodore, in spite of all risks,
was determined to carry his plan into execution.  The commanders of the
boats received orders to sweep round in line, run their bows as far up
as they could, and while the enemy were driven from the banks by showers
of grape and canister, the marines and small-armed men were to land and
attack them with the bayonet should they attempt to make a stand.

The order was quickly obeyed; the guns from the larger boats sent forth
so deadly a shower of missiles that the Arabs, who were coming down in
force to dispute their landing, took to flight, leaving many dead and
wounded.  The difficulty was now to get on shore; the bottom was likely
to be muddy, the water tolerably deep.  Murray and Adair, with their
boats' crews, were among the first to gain a footing on dry land.  The
commodore was eager to be up with them, but, at the same time, was very
unwilling to get wet.  Tom Bashan, having stepped out into the mud,
received orders from his chief to lift him on his shoulders and carry
him on shore.  Tom, who had his musket in his right hand, did as he was
ordered by taking the little commodore up with his left arm and placing
him behind his back, where the brave leader of the expedition sat, his
head just above Tom's grinning countenance, while he waved his sword
with no little risk of cutting off his coxswain's nose, shouting in his
eagerness, "On, my lads! on! form on the beach as you land--skirmishers
to the front.  Now let the brown-skinned rascals see what British
sailors are made of!"

The marines, who had landed by the time the commodore had been deposited
by Tom on the ground, formed in good order, with parties of bluejackets
on either flank.  The Arabs appeared to be taken completely by surprise,
never apparently supposing that the British would leave their boats.
They had halted at some distance, and looked a formidable body, ten
times more numerous than those who were about to attack them; while the
commodore, nothing daunted, waving his sword and dashing forward,
shouted, "Charge, my lads! charge!"

The British bayonets gleamed brightly in the sun, as, with steady tramp,
the line of redcoats and bluejackets advanced at the charge.  The Arabs
fired a round, the scimitars of their leaders flashing for a few
seconds, and then, unable to face the bristling wall of bayonets, their
courage gave way, and they fled helter-skelter for safety towards the
neighbouring woods.  The English pursued them for some distance, firing
as they advanced, and halting only to give sufficient time to reload.
If they advanced too far, as the fort was yet unsubdued, there was a
risk of a sally being made from it and the boats being destroyed.  The
commodore, carried away by his ardour, had already gone farther than was
wise.  Discovering his error, he ordered his followers to fall back as
rapidly as possible on the boats.

Just then a strong body of men were seen issuing from the fort.  Not a
moment was to be lost, or they might reach the boats.  The commodore was
pretty well blown by his recent exercise, but, putting forth all his
strength, he led his men back even faster than they had come.  As soon
as the enemy saw their approach, they hastily retreated within the
stockades.

"Now, my lads," cried the commodore, "we have the last part of the
business to accomplish.  Before a quarter of an hour is over, we must be
inside that fort.  I know that you can do it, and will do it."

The men replied by a loud cheer, and advanced, in high spirits at their
previous success, towards the stockades.  The Arabs, who had seen their
friends beaten, lost heart from the first; and though they defended the
stockades for some minutes with considerable bravery, they quickly took
to flight as the bluejackets came tumbling down over their heads,
cutlass in hand.  In a few minutes the place was won, the garrison
escaping by a western gate, as the English forced their way in over the
eastern side.  The commodore's first impulse was to follow the enemy,
but there were still too many people in the fort to make such a
proceeding safe.  The non-combatants, women and children, received
orders to take themselves off with such of their personal property as
they could carry, an act of leniency which surprised them not a little.
In a short time not a single inhabitant remained behind.

The guns were then spiked and dragged to a part of the fort directly
over the stream, into which they were tumbled, and from whence it would
give the Arabs no small amount of trouble to fish them out again.  The
place was next set on fire in every direction, when the party, each man
carrying such booty as he had managed to pick up, left the fort to the
destruction awaiting it.  The flames spread amid the wooden and
thatch-roof buildings, till the surrounding stockades caught fire, and
the whole hornets' nest was one sea of flame.

The barracoons, from which the slaves had, as it was expected, been
removed, were treated in the same manner, when the commodore, highly
satisfied with the result of the expedition, ordered the men to embark.
To get the heavy boats afloat, however, was no easy matter; the tide had
already begun to ebb; it seemed very doubtful whether they could be got
off, till the crews, putting their shoulders under the gunwales, lifted
them by sheer strength into deeper water.  Before a single man attempted
to get on board, the gallant commodore, who, though not afraid of the
hottest fire, had an especial dread of getting wet, was again carried
for some distance on Bashan's shoulders, till he was safely deposited in
the sternsheets of his boat, where the giant, with dripping clothes,
followed him.

Further delay would have been dangerous, as, the channel being unknown,
the boats might at any moment get aground, and be left there by the
rapidly-falling tide.  It was, besides, important, for the sake of the
wounded men, to return as soon as possible to the ships.  Although not a
man had been hit on shore, either when attacking the enemy in the open
or storming the fort, during the first part of the day several
casualties had occurred; two poor fellows had been killed, and six
others had been wounded, one very severely.  Excepting, however, on
board the boat in which the dead bodies lay, the men were in as high
spirits as usual, exulting in the success of the expedition.  Now and
then they restrained their mirth, as first one and then another of the
boats grounded, and there seemed a probability that the rest would share
their fate.  They, however, were got off, and the flotilla continued its
course down the stream, one boat following the other in line.

They reached their anchorage inside Monkey Island soon after darkness
came on.  Though the water was here of sufficient depth, even at low
tide, to allow the boats to keep afloat, and, the dhows having been
destroyed, they could not be assailed from above, still their dangers
and difficulties were not over; for, should their position be
discovered, a force might gather on the banks, and cause them
considerable annoyance.  During the night, therefore, the men were
ordered to keep their arms by their sides, ready for instant use--it
being impossible to say at what moment they might be attacked.

The bar, also, had to be crossed.  It was sufficiently smooth when they
came over it, but how it would be on their return was the question.
Those who had before been on the coast declared that they had frequently
seen a surf breaking over it in which even a lifeboat could scarcely
live.

"Faith, Archie, we've had a jolly day of it," remarked Desmond, whose
boat was lying alongside that of the commander of the _Opal_; "if this
is the sort of fun we're generally to have, I'm mighty glad we came out
here."

"Small fun for the poor fellows who have been shot," answered Archie; "I
hear one of them groaning terribly; the sooner we get back to the ships
the better for them."

"Faith, it isn't pleasant to have a shot through one, and I hope that
won't be our lot," said Desmond.  "I only wish Tom Rogers was with us.
From what I hear, the boats of the squadron are constantly sent away on
separate cruises to look after slavers, and it would be capital if we
could get sent off on a cruise together--much more amusing than having
to stick on board the ship with the humdrum, everyday routine of watches
and musters and divisions."

To this, of course, Archie agreed.  The youngsters, forgetting that
their commander was close to them, were chattering away in somewhat loud
voices, when Murray ordered them to knock off talking, and to turn in
and go to sleep.  The night passed away quietly, and all hoped to get on
board their respective ships at an early hour the next morning.

After the men had breakfasted on the island, the squadron of boats, led
by their gallant commodore, pulled down with the ebb towards the mouth
of the river, up which a stiffish breeze was blowing, just sufficient to
ripple over the surface of the water glittering in the rays of the
rising sun.  On either hand rose a forest of tall trees, their feathery
tops defined against the clear blue sky.  In a short time the ships
could be discerned in the offing, rolling their masts ominously from
side to side, while ahead rose a threatening wall of white foam,
extending directly across the river's mouth.  The crew of the
commodore's boat ceased pulling, and the other boats as they came up
followed their example.

"Here we are, caught like mice in a trap, gentlemen!" exclaimed Adair,
as Murray and the commander of the _Busy Bee_ came up alongside him.

"It will be madness to attempt forcing the boats through yonder
breakers; the largest would be swamped directly she got among them,"
observed Murray.  "It's now nearly low tide; but perhaps at the top of
high-water they may prove less formidable, and we may be able to get
out.  We shall, at all events, have to wait till then."

As the boats, during this conversation, had been carried somewhat close
to the dangerous breakers, the commodore ordered them to pull round and
to make their way some little distance up the river, where the men could
lie on their oars and wait for an opportunity of crossing the bar.  Many
an eye was turned towards the shore, where a game of leap-frog or some
other amusement could be indulged in, but not a spot appeared on which
they could land.  The sun rose higher and higher in the sky, his rays
beating down on their heads and blistering their noses and cheeks, while
the stock of water and other liquids which had been brought rapidly
diminished.

"I hope that we shall be able to get out when the tide rises," said
Desmond to Adair; "if not, I've a notion that we shall be pretty hard
pressed."

"So have I," said Adair; "but it is possible that the bar may remain in
its present state for several days together, and, if so, we shall have
to forage on shore for whatever food we can pick up.  It may not be so
easy to find pure water, though."

"For my part, I should be ready to drink ditch-water," exclaimed
Desmond; "I never felt so thirsty in my life."

Many others were in the same condition as Paddy, but no one complained.
A small quantity only remained, which was willingly given up for the use
of the poor wounded men, who of course suffered greatly.  Hour after
hour passed by, and anxious eyes were cast at the white wall of surf,
which cut them off from the blue ocean beyond; its summit, dancing and
leaping, glittered brightly in the sun's rays.

At length, the tide rising, the breakers appeared to decrease somewhat
in height.  "I think, sir, that I could carry my gig through," said
Murray, "and, if so, the heavier boats may be able to follow."

"You may make the attempt, provided all your people can swim, for your
boat may be swamped," said the commodore; "but as the tide is rising,
you will be drifted back, and we must be ready to pick you up."

"All my boat's crew are good swimmers," said Murray, "but I hope they
will not be compelled to exercise their powers."

Murray, having placed the remainder of the stores, with all unnecessary
weight, on board the larger boats, prepared to make the bold attempt;
Adair and Snatchblock following him, as close as they could venture, to
the inner line of breakers.  Standing up and surveying the bar for some
minutes, he at length selected a part where the rollers which came in
from the ocean appeared to break with less violence than on either hand.

"Give way, my lads," he cried suddenly; and the crew bending to their
oars, the boat shot quickly up the foaming side of the first of the
formidable watery hills which had to be passed before the open sea could
be gained.  His progress was watched with intense eagerness by those in
the other boats.  Now she was lost to sight, as she sank into a valley
on the farther side of the inner roller; now she rose to the foaming
summit of the next.

"He'll do it!" cried the little commodore, standing up in the
sternsheets, that he might the better watch the progress of the young
commander's boat, and clapping his hands like a midshipman.  The more
dangerous part of the bar, however, had not yet been reached; still
Murray continued his course.  Now the summit of another roller was
gained, the white foam hissing and sparkling over the boat, and almost
concealing her from sight.

"She's capsized after all, and they'll have a hard swim of it," shouted
someone.

"No, she isn't," cried another voice; "I see her bows rising up on the
outer roller.  In another minute she'll be clear of them."

"Bravo! well done!" exclaimed the commodore, dancing with delight;
"she's through it, and will soon be on board the _Busy Bee_."

The officer in charge of the steamer, it should be said, not finding the
boats at the time expected, had, according to orders, got up steam and
stood in to ascertain what had become of them.

"Now, my lads," cried the commodore, "what the gig has done we can do.
I'll bring up the rear, and be ready to help any boat which may meet
with an accident.  The post of most danger is the post of honour, which
I claim for myself; for those in the last boat will have less chance of
being rescued than any of the rest."

Adair was the next to attempt the hazardous experiment.  His boat was
half filled, but he got through without being swamped, and the water was
baled out.  The rest in succession followed, each officer waiting for a
favourable opportunity to steer through the line of surf.


CHAPTER THREE.

MOZAMBIQUE--VISIT TO THE GOVERNOR--HAMED, THE INTERPRETER--ESCAPE OF A
SLAVE TO THE OPAL--PREPARATIONS FOR SHARP WORK--A SLAVE DHOW IN SIGHT--
HER WRECK--ADAIR AFTER HER THROUGH THE BREAKERS--SEVERAL OF THE SLAVES
RESCUED--BEN SNATCHBLOCK ATTEMPTS TO COMFORT THEM--HIS EFFORTS NOT
APPRECIATED--RETURN TO THE SHIP--HORRIBLE STATE OF THE RESCUED BLACKS.

While the frigate stood to the northward, and the _Busy Bee_ buzzed
across to Madagascar, the _Opal_ stood for Mozambique, where Murray had
to obtain an interpreter, to pick up all possible information regarding
the movements of slavers.  Two days afterwards the corvette came to an
anchor off the chief settlement of the Portuguese on that coast.

The town stands on an island, about a mile and a half in length,
situated on a deep inlet of the sea, into which several small rivers
fall.  The harbour is of considerable size, its entrance guarded by a
fort, beyond which appeared an avenue of trees on a gentle slope, then a
collection of flat-roofed whitewashed houses, then the palace of the
Portuguese governor, with pink walls, and a considerably dilapidated
cathedral, below which a stone pier, with buttresses of a sugar-loaf
form, runs out into the sea.

"Not a very attractive-looking place," observed Terence to his brother
lieutenant, as they viewed it from the ship.

"Yet it speaks of the bygone magnificence of the once proud Lusitanian,"
answered the poet.  "I must write some lines on the subject.  The place
is not without interest."

"Those dhows, and low, dark, piratical-looking schooners, have
considerably more interest to us, however," said Adair; "they are not
employed in any honest calling, depend on that; and there lie two
Spaniards and a Yankee.  If they have no slaves on board, they will have
before long, and we must do our best to catch them.  We must depend on
our own wits, though, for it's impossible to get any correct information
from the Portuguese officers--they are most of them as arrant
slave-dealers as the Arabs themselves.  That man-of-war schooner, for
instance, is much more likely to help the slavers to escape than to
assist us in catching them, and is very likely often employed in
bringing off a cargo of ebony from the shore."

The schooner he pointed at was a handsome vessel, with a thoroughly
piratical look about her.  However, she formed a strong contrast to the
Arab dhows by which she was surrounded.  They were of all sizes, the
largest measuring, perhaps, three hundred and fifty tons.

"If I had to describe a dhow, I should say that her shape was like half
a well-formed pear, cut longitudinally," observed Adair, looking towards
the large craft over the quarter, which lay at some little distance, and
was preparing apparently to put to sea.  "See, her bow sinks deeply in
the water, while the stern floats lightly upon it.  Large as that craft
is, she is only partially decked.  She has cross-beams, however, to
preserve her shape, and on them are laid flat strips of bamboo, which
enable the crew to make their way from one end to the other.  At the
afterpart she has a large house, lightly built, the roof of which forms
a poop, while the interior serves, I have no doubt, for the cabin of the
skipper, and probably for his wives and children, as well as his
passengers and the whole of his crew.  She has a heavy, rough spar for a
mast, tapering towards the head and raking forward.  The sail which they
are now just hoisting is, in shape, like a right-angled triangle, with a
parallelogram below its base; the hypothenuse or head of the sail is
secured to a yard, like an enormous fishing-rod; the halyards are
secured to it about a third of the way from the butt-end, and it is
hoisted close up to the head of the mast.  A tackle brings down the
lower end of the yard to the deck, and serves to balance the lofty
tapering point, while the sheet is secured to the lower after-corner of
the sail.  Though many of the smaller dhows have only one mast, that big
fellow has two, with a sail of the same shape as the first, but more
diminutive.  The larger sail is of preposterous proportions, and it
seems wonderful that she can carry it without being capsized.  It
appears to be formed of a strong soft cotton canvas, of extreme
whiteness.  Those vessels don't tack, but when beating to windward wear
by putting up the helm and taking the sheet round before the yard and
bringing it aft again on the other side; the deepest part of the dhow
being, as you see, under the foremast, it forms a pivot round which the
shallow stern, obeying the helm, rapidly turns.  Clumsy as they look, I
hear that these craft are wonderfully fast, and, with the wind free,
will put us on our mettle to overhaul them."

"I should like to judge for myself on that point," observed Mildmay.
"Fellows who have allowed prizes to escape them always declare that the
craft they have chased is faster than anything afloat."

"I hope we shall have the chance before long," said Adair; "we must keep
a bright lookout from the ship and try to do what we can.  The commander
intends running down the coast, and then despatching all the boats which
can be spared to look into the creeks and harbours, and other
hiding-places in which any slavers are likely to take shelter.  I should
like to go on such an expedition myself, if the commander can spare me,
shouldn't you?"

"No, thank you," answered Mildmay; "I've no fancy for going away and
sleeping in an open boat, without a change of linen or any of the
necessaries of life."

"Well, then, I'll leave you to do my duty on board, and volunteer to
command the first expedition sent away," said Adair; "you'll take good
care of the ship in the meantime."

"Ah, yes!--though I have never aspired to the post of first
lieutenant,--to oblige you," said Mildmay.

"Thank you," answered Adair, laughing.

In the afternoon the captain and lieutenants went to pay their respects
to the Portuguese governor, and Desmond and Archie were invited to
accompany them.  Landing on the stone pier before described, they made
their way along the narrow, dirty streets, which literally swarmed with
slaves.  There were faces of every form, if not of colour, for all were
black as jet; their faces disfigured in every variety of manner, some
with lip-rings, others with rings in their noses, and some with pieces
of bone stuck spritsail fashion through the cartilage.  Some, instead of
bone, wore brass-headed nails, while many had pieces of bone through
their ears.  The faces of others were fearfully gashed, a yellow dust
filling up the grooves.

Mozambique, indeed, is the chief slave-mart of the Portuguese, and
thousands of unhappy beings are kidnapped and brought there from all
parts of the interior, ready to be shipped to any country where
slave-labour is in demand.

The English officers found the Portuguese governor seated in a broad
verandah, in an easy chair, smoking a cigar, and enjoying the
sea-breeze, while sheltered from the hot sun.  He received them
courteously, begging them to be seated, and ordering coffee and
cigarettes, which were immediately brought by his slaves, the latter
accompanied by a plate of hot charcoal, from which to light them.  He
expressed himself gratified by their visit, and assured them that his
great desire was to put down the slave-trade; but, shrugging his
shoulders, he acknowledged that it was no easy matter.  "In spite of all
I can do," he added, sighing, "my subordinates will indulge in it.  What
can be expected?  They do not like the country, and are naturally in a
hurry to make their fortunes and get away again.  It is a second nature
to the Arabs, and their chief mode of existing; and as long as the
French and Brazilians and Cubans will buy slaves, what can prevent it?
The former, to be sure, ship them as emigrants and free Africans, though
not a negro would leave his country if he could help it."

The governor was so frank, and apparently so sincere in his offers of
assistance, that Murray told him one of his chief objects in coming to
Mozambique was to obtain an interpreter who could thoroughly be trusted.

"I know the man for you," said the governor; "though not a beauty, he is
worthy of confidence--knows the whole coast and the tricks of the
slave-dealers, and would obtain for you all the information you require.
I'll give directions to have him sent on board, and you can there make
any arrangements you think fit."

Murray having thanked the governor for his courtesy, he and his party
took a walk round the island.  "Faith, for my part, I'd rather be first
lieutenant of the _Opal_ than governor-general of all the Portuguese
settlements in the East put together," exclaimed Adair; "for of all the
undetectable places I ever set foot in, this surpasses them in its
abominations."

Soon after they returned on board, an individual, who announced himself
as the interpreter sent by the governor-general of Mozambique to serve
on board Her Majesty's warship, came up the side.

"And what's your name, my fine fellow?" asked Murray, as he eyed the
unattractive personage.  The governor had certainly not belied him when
he described him as destitute of good looks.  On the top of his grisly
head he wore a large white turban.  His colour might once have been
brown, but it was now as black as that of a negro, frightfully scarred
and marked all over.  He had but one eye, and that was a blinker, which
twisted and turned in every direction when he spoke, except at the
person whom he was addressing.  His lips were thick, his nostrils
extended--indeed, his countenance partook more of the negro than of the
Arab type.  His feet were enormous, with toes widely spread.  He wore a
loose jacket, striped with blue, over a dirty cotton coat reaching to
his knees, and huge blue baggy trousers.

"Me Haggis ben Hamed at your sarvice, Senor Capitan," he answered,
making a salaam; "me undertake show where you find all the slaves on the
coast, and ebbery big ship and dhow that sails."

"And what payment do you expect for rendering us these services?" asked
Murray.

"Forty pesados for one month, sar; eighty, if I take one dhow; and
hundred and sixty, if I help you to one big ship."

"Pretty heavy payment, Master Hamed," observed Murray.

"Ah, Senor Capitan, you not take one vessel without my help--you see,"
answered the interpreter, drawing himself up and looking very important.
Murray suspected that he was right, and finally agreed to pay the
reward demanded.  From that moment Hamed was installed on board.

As a fair breeze blew out of the harbour, Murray was in a hurry to be
off.  The pilot, however, asserted that he could not venture to take out
the ship except during broad daylight.  The _Opal_ had therefore to wait
till the next morning.  The pilot accordingly took his departure,
promising to come off again at an early hour.  Some time after sunset,
Adair and the master were walking the deck, discussing the plan of their
proposed boat excursion, to which the commander had agreed, when, as
they turned aft, they caught sight of the dark figure of a man who had
just climbed over the taffrail, and now stood quaking and shivering
before them.

"Where do you come from, my friend?" asked Jos; but the stranger did not
reply, except by an increased chattering of his teeth, though he put up
his hand in an attitude of supplication.

"Well, no one wishes to hurt you," said Green; "come forward and let us
see what you are like," and he called to the quartermaster to bring a
lantern.  The stranger, gaining courage from the master's kind tone of
voice, followed him and Adair.  He was evidently greatly exhausted.

"Bring a cup of hot coffee and some biscuit; it will restore the poor
wretch, and help him to tell us what he wants," said the master.

After taking the food and liquid, the negro speedily revived, and,
drawing his finger across his throat, with the addition of other signs,
he intimated that his master was about to kill him, when he made his
escape; and it was evident that he must have swum a distance of two
miles or more at the risk of his life, to put himself under the
protection of the British flag.  His name, he intimated, was Pango; and
that his master, if he should recapture him, would carry him off and
kill him.  Hamed, on being summoned, interrogated the black; and from
the account he gave, Adair and Green were convinced that they had
clearly understood Pango's pantomimic language.

The commander, who had not turned in, on coming on deck and hearing the
case, promised poor Pango that he should be protected; and to do so
effectually, at once entered him on the ship's books.  The negro
expressed his gratitude by every means in his power, and, being taken
below by Ben Snatchblock the boatswain, was speedily, to his delight and
satisfaction, rigged out in seaman's duck trousers and shirt.  He was,
notwithstanding, far from being at ease, dreading lest the tyrannical
master from whom he had fled should discover his place of retreat, and
claim him.  Hamed, however, made him understand that he now belonged to
the ship, and that all on board would fight for him with their big guns
and small-arms, and go to the bottom rather than give him up.  On
comprehending this, he showed his joy by capering and singing, and
making a variety of demonstrative gestures, signifying that if his
former owner came to look for him, he would get more than he bargained
for.  At length he stopped, and a shade of melancholy came over his
countenance.  Hamed, who, in spite of his ugliness, possessed some of
the better feelings of human nature, asked him what was the matter.

He sighed, and said that he had a brother on shore who was as badly off
as he had been, and that he should now be parted from him for ever, as
he could never venture back to Mozambique, or set his foot on shore in
the neighbourhood, lest he should be kidnapped and carried back to a
worse bondage than that from which he had escaped.

Hamed, of course, could give him little hope of rescuing his brother,
and advised him to turn in and be thankful that he himself had escaped.
Notwithstanding poor Pango's fears, no one appeared to claim him, and
the next morning he was seen among the men forward, lending a hand at
all sorts of jobs, evidently anxious to make himself useful.

The pilot at length came off, announcing that the tide and wind would
now serve for taking out the ship.  "Hands shorten in cable!" shouted
Ben Snatchblock, his pipe sounding shrilly along the decks.  Pango
remained forward, concealing himself behind the foremast, though he
every now and then took a glance at the ill-favoured pilot, a big,
cut-throat, piratical-looking individual, who was standing aft near the
master, while his boat hung on alongside the quarter.

Sail was made, the anchor lifted, and the ship was gathering way, when a
black sprang out of the boat alongside through a port, and tried to hide
himself under one of the midship guns.  The savage-looking pilot espied
him, and ordered him back into the boat.  Instead of obeying, he clung
tightly to the gun.  "Remove the man and put him back into the boat,"
said the commander; "but do not handle him roughly."  Now, as the poor
black clung with might and main to the gun, and shrieked loudly for
mercy, the latter order prevented the seamen from executing the former.

"The nigger won't let go, sir," shouted the master-at-arms, Ned Lizard,
"unless we cut off his hands and feet--might as well try to haul a
cuttle-fish from a rock without leaving its feelers behind it."

"Let him alone, then," said Murray; and, turning to the pilot, he
intimated that he must take his man himself if he wanted him, but that
he must, in the meantime, look out not to run the ship on shore.

The pilot accordingly continued at his post, every now and then glaring
savagely at the poor negro, and uttering a growl signifying that he
would very soon have him in his power.  Blackie still clung fast to the
gun, casting a piteous look at the good-natured countenances of the
seamen, imploring them to help him, which it was evident they would be
very ready to do.

At length the ship was in the open sea, and the pilot, who had received
his payment, was in a hurry to return.  Approaching his slave, he
ordered him to get into the boat; the latter only replied by piteous
shrieks and cries, clinging as tightly as before to the gun with arms
and legs, while he seized the tackle in his jaws.

"Tell the pilot, Hamed, that he must carry off the gun and all, if he
wants the man; but take him by force he must not," said Adair.

No sooner had Hamed interpreted this than the pilot, drawing his dagger,
would have plunged it into the back of the miserable slave, had not the
master-at-arms seized his arm, exclaiming, "No, no, my fine fellow;
we'll have none of that sort of thing on board here.  If you want the
man, as the lieutenant says, you must take him by fair means; and, if
not, you must let him stay.  Tell him, Hamed, if he tries that trick
again, he'll be run up to the fore-yardarm there before he is many hours
older."

The pilot stamped and swore all sorts of Mohammedan oaths, which might
have shocked even the ears of the prophet, and appealed to the
commander, who intimated, in return, that if the slave sought the
protection of the British flag, it would be granted him, and that it was
very evident he had no desire to go back to Mozambique.  At last
Mustapha saw that he must make up his mind to lose his slave, and,
casting a last ferocious look at him, as much as to say, "If I ever
catch you on shore, my fine fellow, your skin and bones will part
company," he lowered himself down into the boat.

Blackie peered through the port till he saw that she had actually let go
and was dropping astern, when he jumped up, and the next instant, Pango,
coming from his hiding-place, rushed aft, and the two blacks, throwing
their arms round each other, burst into tears of joy.  The last runaway
was no other than Pango's brother, who was forthwith christened Bango.
Not forgetting the pilot, they together ran aft, and waved their hands
triumphantly at him, as the ship, increasing her speed, left the boat
astern, he shouting and grinning with mad and impotent rage.

The corvette stood down the coast, a bright look-out being kept both for
native dhows and square-rigged vessels, of which not a few Brazilians,
Spaniards, and Americans were known to be engaged in the nefarious
traffic.  The carpenters had been busy fitting the boats, raising the
gunwales of the smaller ones, and adding false keels to the larger, to
enable them the better to carry sail; and all hands guessed that
something was to be done, but what it was the commander kept to himself,
or made known only to his lieutenants.

In spite of the utmost vigilance of the look-outs, not a vessel had been
seen, till one morning, just at daybreak, as the ship was standing in
for the land, the wind being to the southward, a dhow was discovered
coming up before it, her canvas of snowy whiteness glittering in the
rays of the rising sun.  The commander, who was on deck, in a moment
gave the order to lower the lifeboat; and Adair, with Ben Snatchblock
and Desmond, leaped into her and pulled away for the coast, so as to
intercept the dhow should she attempt to pass ahead of the corvette.

"We've caught the dhow in a trap, at all events," observed Adair, "for
she's no chance with the ship on a wind.  She is certain to try and run
for it close inshore, when we shall as certainly catch her.  Give way,
my lads! she hasn't seen us as yet, and stands on with a flowing sheet,
thinking that she has a good chance of slipping between the corvette and
the land."

The wind being light, the corvette was making but little way through the
water, and had a breeze come off the land, the dhow would have had a
fair chance of escaping, had it not been for the boat ready to intercept
her.  The dhow, under her immense spread of canvas, glided on rapidly;
and her Arab captain was probably congratulating himself on the prospect
of escaping from his powerful foe, when he caught sight of the boat
lying in wait for him.  Heavy rollers broke on the shore, sending the
surf flying up many yards over the beach.  The dhow was seen suddenly to
put up her helm and to steer directly for the shore.

"Good heavens!" cried Adair; "the Arab isn't going to attempt to carry
his vessel through those breakers?"

"He is, though, sir," observed Snatchblock.  "It's a pretty sure sign
that he has got a cargo of slaves aboard.  Poor beings! not many of them
will reach the beach alive."

Adair immediately steered the boat towards the dhow, though he had
little hope of reaching her in time to prevent her from running on
destruction.  Several shots were fired to make her heave-to, but the
Arab crew heeded them not; and Adair had got almost within a cable's
length of the breakers when the doomed vessel was seen plunging in their
midst, to be cast in a few seconds on the shingly beach.

Wildly the sea broke over her, and almost as if by magic, her bulky
hull, melting away, exposed to view a hundred or more black forms
struggling in the water, endeavouring to make their way to dry land.
Some of the unfortunate beings succeeded, but others were carried back
into the surf, and, hurled over and over, were lost to sight, none of
them being drifted out as far as the boat.

All this time Adair was pulling in towards the breakers.  He saw that
the Arab crew, who had been the first to reach the shore, were urging on
the blacks to run towards a thick wood, the outer edge of which was a
few hundred yards only from the beach.

"I think we can do it," he said to Snatchblock; "I have been through
worse breakers than those in a less buoyant boat than ours.  If we don't
manage to get on shore, the Arabs will carry off every one of the
slaves."

"She'll go through it, sir," answered Snatchblock, looking round at the
breakers.

"We might save some of the poor wretches, at all events.  Give way, my
lads!" cried Adair, and the boat, urged forward by the stout arms of the
crew, was speedily in the midst of the breakers.  The sea struck her
abaft, and washed clean over her from stern to stem; and had not
Snatchblock aided Adair in hauling away on the yoke-line, she must have
broached-to.  A lifeboat alone could have existed amid those heavy
breakers.

The next instant another sea struck her, washing over her whole length,
and covering everyone in her; but as it went right over the bows, only a
few inches of water remained.  A third time she was deluged, and then
down she sank, it seemed, into comparatively smooth water, and glided up
easily on to the shelving beach.

The firearms, having been fortunately covered up, were fit for use.
Calling to his men to follow, two only being left in the boat, Adair set
off in pursuit of the Arabs and their captives.  It seemed extraordinary
that the latter should have been willing to run off when friends were at
hand eager to rescue them from captivity, but they were evidently as
eager to escape as their masters.  The Arabs, seeing only a small number
of Englishmen, would probably, as soon as they had gained the shelter of
the wood, have turned round and fired, and Adair fully expected to be
attacked.  Fortunately, in their hurry to escape from the dhow, they had
left their muskets behind them, and their only chance of safety was by
flight.  How the slaves, when they found them unarmed and in their
power, might be inclined to treat them was a different question.

Several black forms were still seen running as fast as their legs could
carry them towards the bush, and Adair and Desmond, who kept ahead, came
up with two young men, looking more like skeletons than living beings.
As they caught them by the arm, the poor wretches sank down on the
ground, shrieking with terror.  Snatchblock and the men caught three
more, but it was no easy matter to induce them to run to the beach.  Not
one Arab was to be seen, and the remainder of the blacks disappeared
among the thick bushes, where it would have been next to madness for so
small a party to have followed them, not knowing what enemies might be
lurking near at hand.  After some persuasion the blacks were induced to
come back to the beach, though trembling in every limb from terror and
weakness as they walked along.  Here four small children were found in
the same emaciated condition as their elders, and one unhappy woman, to
whom one of the children appeared to belong; she had injured her foot in
landing, and had been unable to run away.  From her cries and shrieks it
was evident that she believed some dreadful fate was about to befall
her.  How many poor creatures had been lost in the surf it was
impossible to say, and, as Hamed had not accompanied them, no
information could be gained from the blacks.

Adair, indeed, had now to consider how they were to get off again.  As
from the higher ground on which he stood he looked over the wide belt of
foaming breakers, it seemed almost impossible that the boat, buoyant as
she was, could be forced through them.  Even Snatchblock eyed them
anxiously.  "We may do it, sir," he remarked, "if there comes a lull; if
not, we shall have to wait here till the sea goes down.  The worst is
the want of grub and water, and we are not likely to find either in
these parts, I've a notion, unless some wild beast or other comes to
have a look at us; then we may give him a shot, and try what his flesh
tastes like."

The day was by this time drawing on.  As not a particle of food or a
drop of water had been brought in the boat, all hands were excessively
hungry and thirsty.  It was dangerous to separate, though, in search of
provisions, as it was more than possible that the Arabs might instigate
the natives to attack them.  Snatchblock and Desmond, however,
volunteered to go, taking different directions, each accompanied by one
man.  For the sake of the poor blacks, who seemed literally perishing
from starvation, Adair would willingly have consented, but it would be
far better, he thought, if possible, to get off to the ship.  Anxiously
he watched the long line of breakers, but they extended up and down the
coast as far as the eye could reach, without an opening through which
the boat might possibly pass.  Another hour or more went by; no shade
was to be obtained except at a distance, under the trees of the forest;
and Adair considered that it would be dangerous to venture so far from
the shore, as the natives might then have the opportunity of stealing on
them unawares.  They accordingly sat down on the beach watching the
breakers, in the hopes, as the tide rose, that their violence might
decrease, and an opening appear through which the boat might be forced.
The rays of the sun struck down on their heads with terrific force,
quickly drying their drenched clothes; but they would gladly have
remained wet as they were, could they have found a few yards of shade
beneath a neighbouring tree or rock.

The wretched blacks sat with stolid looks, as if totally unconscious
that their liberators wished to benefit them.  Every now and then, when
they fancied that they were not observed, they cast frightened glances
at the sailors.  "I don't know what the poor niggers are thinking of,"
observed Snatchblock; "maybe they fancy that we're going to eat them,
though it would be a hard matter to scrape enough off the bones of all
of them to feed a young dog.  I wish I knew something of their lingo,
I'd try to make them understand that when we get on board we'll give
them a good blow-out, and that in a week or two they'll not know
themselves.  I say, Sambo! we not want to mangy you, old chap," he
added, to the black nearest him, and making significant signs; "we want
to put some honest beef and pork flesh on that carcass of yours and fill
you out, boy; then you dance and sing, and become as merry as a
cricket."

The black certainly did not understand what was said, and probably
misunderstood his pantomimic gestures.  One of them, the farthest off
from the men, had been sitting with his head sunk down between his bent
knees, apparently utterly unable to move; turning his head over his
shoulder, he suddenly started up, and, before anyone could seize him,
darted off towards the wood.

"Come back, you silly fellow!" cried Desmond, who, with two of the men,
rose to follow him; but before they had got many paces, a large party of
natives armed with bows, arrows, and spears, accompanied by several of
the Arab crew, rushed out from among the trees, uttering threatening
shouts, as if to intimidate the Englishmen.

"Stand to your arms, my lads," cried Adair; "we must not let those
fellows get near us, or we may be overpowered by numbers."  Still the
natives came on, some flourishing their spears, and others preparing
their bows to shoot.  Adair lifted his rifle.  "Don't any of you fire
till I tell you," he said to his men, while he took aim so as to strike
the ground a few yards in front of the headmost of the party.  No one
was hit, but they knew enough of the effect of firearms to be aware that
another bullet might find a billet in one of their bodies.  Springing
back, the foremost tumbling the rear-ranks over, they threw themselves
flat on the ground, and began to creep away towards the shelter of the
bush.  Adair, shouting to them, pointed to his own rifle and to the
muskets of his men, intimating that if they ventured to advance, they
would have to receive their contents.

The hint, apparently, had the desired effect; for, though the Arabs
seemed to be doing their utmost to induce the blacks to attack the
strangers, they remained carefully hiding themselves among the trees.
As, however, they might at any moment rush forward, the seamen kept
their muskets ready for instant service, with a watchful eye on their
movements.  In the meantime, the black who had escaped had joined them.
What account he had given of the white men it was impossible to say.
One thing was certain, that the presence of the natives would prevent
any attempt to go in search of food and water, and that if they could
not get off, their sufferings from thirst and hunger would become
serious.  With increased anxiety, Adair cast his eye over the foaming
rollers, both up and down the coast.  The breeze blew strong as ever,
and not a break appeared in that long line of glittering surf.  The
party were literally hemmed in, almost without hope of escape.  They
might have beaten off the natives, and made their way into the interior
till they could fall in with some game and a stream of water, but then
they would have had to leave the boat and the blacks unprotected.
Still, to starve where they were was not to be thought of.

"Faith, I'm growing fearfully peckish," exclaimed Desmond; "if you'll
let me, sir, we'll try and get hold of one of those fellows, and make
him order the rest to bring us some grub; if the sea won't go down, it's
the only chance we have."

Snatchblock was of Desmond's opinion, and of course the men were ready
to follow them.  Still, Adair was unwilling to run the risk of being
overpowered.  "No, no," he answered; "we can hold out some time longer,
and if at last we find it impossible to get off, we can but do as you
propose."

"I think, sir, the sea is going somewhat down," said Snatchblock, at
length; "we might get through just a little to the right there.  See,
sir, some of the rollers come in with only just a slight top to them,
and if we take the right moment, we may get through."

"We can but try it," cried Adair.  "Lift the poor blacks into the boat;
they'll not add much to her weight.  Be smart about it, my lads,
though."

The negroes seemed very unwilling to move, and shrieked out as if they
were about to be put to death; but they were but as infants in the arms
of the stout seamen.  The woman clung to her child as she was lifted
with it into the sternsheets.  The men were carried next, and placed at
the bottom of the boat with the little children between them.  She was
then run off into the smooth water inside the breakers, the crew jumping
into her; but each time the water receded, she struck on the hard coral
beneath, her admirable construction alone preventing her from being
stove in.  The oars were got out, and the boat pulled along till the
spot Snatchblock observed was reached.  Her head was then put to the
sea.

"Give way, my lads," cried Adair, he and Desmond holding on to one
yoke-line, while the boatswain held the other, their eyes eagerly cast
towards the foaming breakers, amid which they were about to force their
way.  The crew put forth all their strength.  The first breaker was
past.  Though they bent to their oars like true British seamen, the
second, as it came thundering on, hurled them back; and it required all
the skill of Adair and his companions to manage the boat till they
reached the smooth water.

"Never say die, lads!" cried Adair, after waiting a few minutes to allow
the men to recover their strength; "we'll try it again; if the
ash-sticks hold, your muscles will, I am sure."

"Ay, ay, sir!" answered the crew; "we're ready."

"Then give way."  The attempt was made as before, but again a mighty
roller dashed back the boat, and sent her nearly up to the beach.  Still
Adair was unwilling to abandon the attempt.  He waited as before,
allowing the boat to remain where there was just water to float her.

"I am afraid we shall have, after all, to haul up the boat, and sleep on
the beach without our suppers," he observed to Snatchblock; "we can
easily keep the natives at bay, and must hope for smoother water in the
morning."

"If it must be so, it must," answered the boatswain, standing up,
however, as he spoke, and looking seaward.  "We'll tackle them this
time, sir," he exclaimed suddenly; "the outer line of breakers has gone
down since we shoved off."

Adair stood up.  "Yes, we'll not be driven back again, lads; never
fear!" he cried, dropping into his seat.  The crew, with a hearty shout,
bent to their oars, and the boat, urged by their strong arms, bravely
breasted the foaming rollers.  The first and second were past; the third
came on hissing and roaring; the boat still advanced; its heavy curling
crest swept her from stem to stern, but she held her way, and was ready
when another came on to meet it boldly.  Over it she went, throwing out
the water which she had taken in, and in another minute was dancing
merrily on the heaving seas outside the breakers.

Adair looked anxiously to see whether any of his sable passengers, young
or old, had been washed away.  In spite of the risk they had run, all
were safe.  The poor mother had grasped her child, and the men the other
young ones.  The sun was by this time sinking behind the land; the crew
pulled away with right good will towards the corvette, which could be
seen at a distance of three miles or so.  She was standing away from the
land to get a good offing during the night.  "They've seen the state of
the surf, and have thought we couldn't get through it, or maybe that we
were lost," observed Snatchblock.

"Shure, it'll be the greater pleasure to them when we come back," said
Desmond.  "Mr Mildmay will be mighty glad to find that he hasn't to do
duty as first lieutenant, though I don't know what old Sandford may wish
in his heart of hearts.  He might not object to be made acting
lieutenant."  Sandford was the senior mate on board.

"Had he thought that any accident had happened to us, the commander
would have sent in a boat to ascertain the fact," said Adair.

Darkness was rapidly coming on, and by degrees the canvas of the
corvette became shrouded in the mists of night.  Adair, however, had
taken her bearings, and by the help of the stars was able to steer
directly for her.  Still Desmond, who had become perfectly ravenous,
could not help wishing that the commander, instead of keeping off the
coast, had stood in nearer to pick them up.

The men, however, pulled away cheerily, encouraged with the thoughts of
a good hot supper and a quiet snooze till the next morning.  After some
time, a bright light burst forth, sending a lurid glare across the
ocean.

"There's the corvette," cried Snatchblock; "they hadn't forgotten us.
We'll be snug on board before many minutes are over."

At last the boat reached the ship's side, and eager hands were stretched
out to lift the emaciated creatures they had brought off on board.  The
doctor took charge of them, and administered some weak broth, while the
rest of the party hurried below to obtain the more substantial viands of
which they stood so much in need.

On Hamed's questioning the liberated slaves, it was discovered that
Snatchblock had been right in his suspicions that the Arabs had told
them, in order to induce them to escape on shore, that if captured by
the white men they would be cooked and eaten.  They stated that the dhow
had been crammed full of slaves, many of whom had been drowned in their
attempt to reach the shore, while it was probable that a still larger
number would perish before they were again put on board another
slave-ship by their cruel masters.  Had anything been necessary to
induce the officers and crew of the _Opal_ to exert themselves in
putting down the horrible traffic, the state of these poor negroes, and
the account they gave, would have been sufficient to stir them up.  One
of the men and two of the children, notwithstanding all the care taken
of them, died before morning.  The rest quickly recovered, their skins
filling out perceptibly every day with the good food they received.


CHAPTER FOUR.

ORDERED AGAIN TO ANGOXA--ISLAND OF MAFAMALE--SEINE FISHING--DESMOND'S
VICTORY OVER THE FISH--THE CARPENTER TRIES HIS HAND, BUT CATCHES A
TARTAR--LIFE ON THE ISLAND--JERRY BIRD'S "KETTLER"--SECOND BOAT
EXPEDITION--LIGHTNING IN THE TROPICS--UP THE RIVER--CAPTURE AND BURNING
OF A DHOW--LAND FOR PROVISIONS--TREACHERY OF NATIVES--ADAIR AND DESMOND
MADE PRISONERS--ADAIR TURNS THE TABLES ON THE OLD CHIEF.

The corvette lay becalmed, lapping her sides in the shining water, as
the glass-like undulations under her keel rolled her now to starboard
and now to port, the sun striking down and making the pitch bubble up
out of the seams of her deck.  No sail was in sight, but still a bright
look-out was kept.  In case any slaver bringing up a breeze might
attempt to slip by inshore of her, the boats were in readiness to shove
off in chase.

"A steamer to the nor'ard, sir," shouted the look-out to the second
lieutenant, who reported the same to the commander.  All hands were
quickly up on deck.  She was probably a British cruiser, perhaps
bringing news for them--a mail _via_ the Isthmus of Suez and the Red
Sea.

At last, after various conjectures as to what she was, the _Busy Bee_
made her number, and paddled up in a way which made the crew wish that
they possessed similar means of locomotion.  She blew off her steam when
close to them, and a boat from her side brought her commander on board.
He was the bearer of despatches from the commodore.

Murray called Adair into his cabin.  "The commodore has received
information that the Arabs are rebuilding the fort we destroyed," he
said, "and so I suppose that we shall have to go up the river to do the
work over again.  He has directed me in the meantime to station two of
our boats, with one from the _Busy Bee_, to be joined shortly by a
fourth from the frigate, at the island of Mafamale, which is about seven
miles from the mouth of the river.  I may select the officer to command
the expedition, and if you wish to go, I will appoint you, with Jos
Green and Desmond and Gordon.  You will look out for dhows either going
up to, or coming down from Angoxa, and for others running along the
coast, which are certain to pass between the island and the mainland.
The corvette and the steamer will in the meantime stand down the coast,
and the dhows seeing us will hope to get to Zanzibar without
interruption.  The plan seems to be a good one, and I trust that we
shall be able to strike a more effectual blow at the slave-trade than
the commodore has hitherto been able to give it."

Terence, who had been wishing for this sort of work, gladly accepted
Murray's offer.  The corvette stood on till she came off the island,
when the pinnace and barge, well fitted for the duties they were at once
to engage in, were got out.  The _Busy Bee_ landed a couple of water
tanks, for not a drop of the necessary fluid was to be found on the
island; while she and the corvette sent three months' provisions on
shore, with tents, arms, and ammunition.

With three hearty cheers from the crews, responded to by their
respective ships, the boats shoved off and pulled away for the island,
to become their headquarters for the next three months.  Its appearance
was not over-attractive, for it was low and sandy, scarcely more than
two miles in circumference, with a small forest of Casuarina trees on
the highest part, bordered by a belt of thin grass.

One of the first boats sent on shore contained a large seine, and Jos
Green was directed to haul it as soon as possible for the purpose of
supplying the ship's company with fresh fish.  All hands were well
pleased to hear the order, and the men destined for that object quickly
transmogrified themselves into fishermen with blue jerseys, tarry
trousers, and red caps, looking more like lawless pirates than
well-conducted men-of-war's men.  Two of the smaller boats under the
command of the master, who was accompanied by Desmond and Archie, then
pulled in.  On the north side of the island was a shelving beach, where
the water was perfectly smooth and not a rock or stone to be found.  It
was just such a beach as to satisfy all the requirements of men-of-war's
men, capable at the same time of supplying sand for holy-stoning the
decks, and to afford admirable ground for hauling the seine.

The net was quickly run out, forming a wide semicircle, and surrounding,
no doubt, vast numbers of fish, as they could be seen of various forms
and sizes sporting in the clear water.  The boats being hauled up, the
work of hauling the net began.  Just at that juncture several officers
who had before landed came across the island to see the fun, and
immediately all hands tailed on to the hauling-lines.  As the net drew
nearer and nearer to the land, innumerable specimens of the finny tribe
could be seen leaping and springing about, mutually surprised at finding
themselves brought unexpectedly in such near proximity to each other and
to the shore; evidently thinking that it was time to make a dash for the
more open water.  Vain were the attempts of those who foolishly fancied
by swimming slow and concealing themselves they might the more surely
effect their escape.  The bolder fish, who, leaping high, cleared the
encircling net, were alone successful, some enormous fellows setting the
example.  Others attempted to follow them.

"We shall have them all getting off if we don't bear a hand," cried
Green; "haul away, my lads."

"Better be after them and hook them out," exclaimed Desmond, suiting the
action to the word, and plunging in amid the struggling fish.  Archie
could not resist doing the same, and presently every officer, including
the commander and Adair, were up to their knees in the water, each
trying to seize one or more of the monsters, who, it was evident, would,
if they attempted it, clear a passage for themselves through the meshes.
Desmond had fixed upon two, and down he went upon hands and knees,
endeavouring to kill the creatures leaping, wriggling, and struggling to
get free.  As he did so, one of them, making a bolt between his legs,
toppled him over on his nose, where he lay kicking and plunging,
scarcely to be distinguished from the fish surrounding him.  He quickly,
however, got his head above water, as he did so, spluttering out,
"Arrah, the baste!  I haven't let him go, though," and, kneeling on the
creature, he managed to work his hands under its gills, when, holding it
up, he dragged it triumphantly to the shore.

One of the smaller youngsters, Billy Blueblazes, upon trying to follow
his example, was literally dragged off his feet, and, had not Archie
seized him and the fish which he held by the gills, might very possibly
have been drowned.

The shouting and laughing and hallooing which arose on all sides would
alone have been sufficient to drive the unfortunate fish out of their
minds, as officers and men were plunging about here and there grasping
at the larger fish right and left.  At length the greater number of the
monsters who had failed to escape having been captured, the men drew the
seine high up on the beach, with some hundreds of fish, most, if not all
of them, as Green declared, excellent eating.  As soon as they had been
rendered incapable of effecting their escape, the seine was again
carried out; and though it might have been supposed that the fish would
have avoided the spot, as many as at the first haul were speedily drawn
to land, when a similar scene was enacted, and, all hands being
thoroughly wet, everyone not required for tailing on at the
hauling-lines plunged in as before.  Among the most adventurous was the
carpenter, who in his eagerness rushed forward till the water was up to
his armpits; when, fancying he saw a fish of unusual size, and desirous
of gaining the honour of bringing it to shore, he plunged down his hand.
Scarcely had he done so, when, with a shout which might have reached
almost to the ship, he drew it up again, exclaiming, "Bear a hand,
mates, and help me to get rid of this imp of Satan.  I'm blessed if I
thought such creatures lived in the ocean."

He uttered this as he staggered towards the shore, when it was seen that
his whole arm, which he held at full length, was grasped by the dark
slimy tentacles of a monster which, with a beak resembling that of a
bird, was attempting to strike him in the face; had the creature got
hold of a smaller person, it might have succeeded in doing so.  Desmond
and Billy Blueblazes were at first inclined to laugh, till they got
closer to the hideous creature.  Several of the men with their knives
open hurried forward to the assistance of the carpenter, who bravely
kept his arms stretched out till they succeeded in cutting off its head;
but even then those powerful tentacles retained so much vitality that it
was necessary to remove them one by one.  The carpenter's arm was almost
paralysed, and he complained of considerable pain and irritation.

His adventure, however, did not prevent the rest of the party from
continuing their chase of the larger fish, though they kept a bright
look-out not to be caught by crabs, or to avoid catching hold of a
squid.  Though, as before, some escaped, the second haul was almost as
productive as the first.  The boats, being loaded with the fish,
returned to the ship.

The shore party then set to work to prepare for their Robinson Crusoe
life, while the _Opal_ stood away to the northward.  Tents were set up,
a hut for the blacksmith's forge, and another for the carpenter close to
the beach, before which a coral reef made a secure harbour for the
boats.  A third hut was built near the camp for the cook--not that any
skilled one belonged to the party.  The magazine was wisely placed at a
distance, in case a spark from the kitchen or a tobacco-pipe might
chance to find its way to the gunpowder.  Everyone was in high spirits
and supremely happy.  As soon as the work of the day was over, the men
took to playing leap-frog, diversified by bowls and quoits, which had
been brought on shore.  The officers had not forgotten foils and
boxing-gloves, as well as books and writing-desks and drawing materials.
All was not play, however; the arms had to be cleaned every morning,
the men inspected, and a bright look-out kept from dawn to sunset, and
even at night, when the moon afforded sufficient light to distinguish a
sail at any distance gliding over the dark waters.  For this purpose a
platform was erected between the summits of two trees, which grew
conveniently close together at the west end of the island, with steps
cut in the trunk of one of them, a man-rope hanging from the top making
it an easy matter to get up.

Jerry Bird, Green's old shipmate, the man who had been taken off from
Tristan d'Acunha, was the wit of the party.  He was the cook the first
day.  "Now, my boys, I'll give you a treat," he exclaimed, as he carried
off the various provisions served out by the storekeeper; "don't suppose
that I have lived among savages for no end of years without learning a
trick or two."  The fire was lighted, and Jerry put on a huge kettle to
boil.  He was soon busily plucking a couple of the fowls which had been
obtained from the last place at which the ship had touched.  It was
naturally supposed that there was to be roast fowl for dinner.  While
the rest of the party went in various directions,--some to collect
oysters, which clung to the rocks, with hammers and tomahawks to break
them off; others to the look-out man up the tree; and some to lie down
and read under the shade of the tents,--Jerry proceeded with his
culinary operations.  A frying-pan and a ladle served him instead of a
gong.  When dinner was ready, he commenced a loud clanging, which
sounded from one end of the island to the other.  The hungry party soon
collected.  There were rows of plates, with knives and forks and basins
with spoons laid out in order, while Jerry stood, ladle in hand, before
his kettle, stirring away with might and main.

"Here, Tim, stand by with a plate and basin, and take the officers their
dinner," he said.  Tim Curran was one of the ship's boys who did duty as
officers' servant.

As Jerry ladled out the contents of the kettle, it was seen to contain
every article with which he had been furnished; the fowls and beef cut
up into small bits; peas, biscuit, flour, preserved vegetables, emitting
a most savoury odour.  No one had cause to complain, for Jerry had added
a seasoning which all acknowledged to be superior to anything they had
ever tasted.

"I knew you'd like my `kettler,'" he observed, with a self-satisfied
air, as he sat down with his messmates, who gathered round him.

The rogue had wisely beforehand consulted Adair, who had approved of his
proposal on the subject, and so excellent was his "kettler" pronounced,
that from henceforward it was the everyday meal of the party; and though
others tried to surpass him when their turn came, they all confessed
that they could never do it, and it was voted that it was unequalled by
the best Scotch hotch-potch, which it much resembled.

They were not long, however, allowed to lead so pleasant a life on
shore.  Adair sent off one of the boats across the channel to the
mainland to be in readiness to pounce down on any dhows creeping up on
that side, while he himself went away in the pinnace to the southward,
accompanied by Gerald and Archie, leaving Jos Green in command of the
island.  Jerry Bird formed one of the crew, so the party on shore lost
their cook.  Pango also, one of the escaped slaves, went as interpreter,
he having by this time acquired enough English to make himself
understood and to understand what was said to him.  The boat was
provisioned for three weeks, and Adair hoped, by getting fresh food and
vegetables from the shore, to be able to stay out longer if necessary.
He had on board several articles for barter, and, in addition, a store
of empty beer-bottles, for which he had heard the natives have an
especial fancy.

Adair's intention was to examine every opening and indentation in the
coast in which a slave dhow could take shelter.  He accordingly steered
for the mainland, towards the first bay to the south of Angoxa, into
which it was possible one of the hoped-for prizes might have crept
during the night.  On reaching the bay, however, no vessel was to be
seen, and the pinnace accordingly stood out again with a light breeze,
which enabled her to stand down the coast.  The day was passed much as
men-of-war's men are accustomed to spend their time on boat expeditions;
the meals were cooked in one pot, common to officers and men, whether
"kettler" for dinner or chocolate for breakfast and supper.  Pipes were
smoked, yarns spun, songs sung, journals written up, and now and then,
though not often, books were read.  Regular watches were of course kept,
and, as a rule, everyone took as much sleep as he could get.  The life,
as all agreed, was pleasant enough while the weather was fine, but it
would be pleasanter to catch a few dhows, send them as prizes into port,
and restore the negroes found on board to liberty.

"Faith, I wonder whether we ever shall catch one of those rascals,"
exclaimed Desmond, beginning to lose patience when, after three days at
sea, not a single dhow had been caught sight of.

"No fear, Gerald," observed Archie; "they'll be dropping into our jaws
before long if we keep them wide enough open."

At night the boat was sometimes hove-to, or when the wind was light kept
slowly gliding on over the calm surface of the deep.  One night Archie
Gordon had the middle watch.  Scarce a breath filled the sails; the
ocean was like glass; not a cloud dimmed the sky, from which the stars
shone forth with a brilliancy which afforded light almost equal to that
of the full moon; every star, reflected in the mirror-like deep, gave it
the appearance of being spangled and streaked with gold.  Suddenly there
burst forth over the land so vivid a flash of lightning that rocks and
trees and the distant hills for a moment stood out in such bold relief,
that Archie could not help fancying that the boat had been carried by
some unknown current close to the beach.  With a cry of surprise he
aroused his companions.

"Is anything the matter?" asked Adair, starting up.

"Arrah, what's in the wind now?" exclaimed Gerald, echoing the question.

"The whole country seems on fire," answered Archie.  "I can by no means
make it out."  As he spoke, another flash lighted up, as brilliantly as
during the brightest sunshine, the distant hills and wide expanse of
ocean.  The flashes continued bursting forth in rapid succession,
lasting fully ten seconds, with even a less interval between them.  Not
the slightest sound of distant thunder was heard; silence reigned over
the ocean.  Even the men, who had roused up their companions to gaze at
the wondrous spectacle, uttered not a word.  A slight flapping of the
sail against the mast, as a catspaw caught it, or an increased ripple of
the water against the bows, alone struck the ear.

These brilliant phenomena lasted the greater part of the night.

"It's very fine," exclaimed Jerry Bird at last; "but to my mind a sound
snooze is more to the purpose than straining our eyes out by winking at
it, seeing we can't say what work may be cut out for us to-morrow; and
so I'm going to turn in."

His example was followed by the rest of the watch below, though the more
sentimental of the officers continued gazing at it for some time longer.
Adair wished that Lucy Rogers could enjoy it with him.

"I say, Archie, wouldn't Mr Mildmay now be after writing a
splendiferous sonnet if he was here?" whispered Desmond.

"Can't you try your hand, Gerald?" said Archie.

"Not I; I'm no poet.  I can make a very good line to begin with, but
when I come to the second, I can never manage to fit the words in
properly."

"Just try now," said Archie.  Thus encouraged, Desmond at length
exclaimed--

"`The lightnings flashing o'er the boundless deep--'"

"Very good," said Archie.

Gerald repeated the line several times.  "`Arouse the seamen from their
"something" sleep,'" he added.  "I'll get Mr Mildmay to put in a proper
word instead of `something,' for it's more than I can be after doing."

"Hold your tongues, youngsters!" exclaimed Adair, whose thoughts had
been far away till they were brought back by his nephew's voice.  "Turn
in and get some sleep instead of chattering nonsense."

The midshipmen, obeying, coiled themselves in the sternsheets, while
Adair, who took the helm, sat indulging in a mood to which he had
hitherto been a stranger.

The morning came, and soon after breakfast, as the boat was running
along the coast, the entrance to a river, apparently of some size, was
discovered.  The sea was tolerably calm on the bar, and as it appeared a
likely place for slavers to ship their cargoes, Adair resolved to run in
and explore it thoroughly.  The wind carried them close up to the mouth,
when, it failing altogether, the oars were got out, and the crew pulled
away lustily, in the hopes of at length finding a slaver which they
could make their lawful prize.  At this time, however, the Sultan of
Zanzibar issued licences to no inconsiderable number of vessels, on the
pretence that they were engaged in bringing him negroes to work on his
plantations; although, were his island ten times the size that it really
is, he could not have employed one-tenth of the blacks carried off to
slavery.  On this flimsy pretext they might therefore find a dhow full
of blacks, and yet not be able to capture her.  This, of course, was
often the cause of great disappointment to the crews engaged in the
suppression of the slave-trade.

A belt of mangrove trees running far into the water being passed, a long
reach of the river was opened up, with a large dhow at the farther end
of it, lying at anchor in mid-stream, apparently ready to sail.  The
crew of the pinnace could not restrain a shout of satisfaction.  In
spite of the hot sun beating down on their heads, they eagerly bent to
their oars in the hopes of soon being on board her.  As they approached,
they saw that her sails were unbent, so that she could not have been on
the point of putting to sea.  On getting still nearer, about twenty
fierce-looking Arabs popped their heads over the side, and in loud
voices, with threatening gestures, ordered the boat to keep off,
intimating that if she did not, they would fire into her.  That she
possessed the power of doing mischief was evident, as a three-pounder
gun was seen mounted on a sort of raised deck in her bow.

Neither Adair nor his crew were likely to be deterred by the menaces of
the piratical-looking fellows from boarding the dhow.  With a loud cheer
they dashed alongside, and quickly scrambled on her deck, cutting down
several of the more daring of the band, who, not knowing what English
seamen were made of, ventured to oppose them.  A fine-looking old
fellow, with a long white beard, who proved to be the Arab captain,
exchanged a few passes with Adair, who, however, quickly disarmed him,
and tumbled him head over heels into the hold, while the rest of his men
leaped below to escape from their daring assailants.  On following them,
Adair found, to his disappointment, that there were no slaves on board.
The Arab crew having been secured, Adair ordered his men to bend the
sail, while he and Desmond, accompanied by Jerry Bird, searched the
vessel to ascertain whether she had anything on board by which she could
be legally condemned.  Besides the three-pounder gun, a number of
muskets, spears, and swords were found on board, with a supply of water
and a large quantity of rice, in addition to which her hold was fitted
with three tiers of bamboo decks, which could be intended for no other
purpose than for the stowage of slaves.

Adair pointed this out to the old skipper, and made him understand that
he considered the vessel his lawful prize.

"It is the will of Allah," answered the captain, who made no attempt to
show either papers or colours, so it was considered evident that he did
not possess them.

"There are whole hosts of people collecting on shore, sir," shouted
Archie; "many of them are armed, and by the signs they are making they
don't seem in a friendly mood.  They've got, too, plenty of canoes, and
it looks very much as if they intended to come off and attack us."

Adair hurried on deck, and could not help being of Archie's opinion.
"Be sharp there with the sail," he cried.

"It's more than we can manage to bend it, sir," answered Jerry Bird;
"for there's not a bit of rope-yarn or stuff of any kind we can find to
do instead."

Adair and Desmond, stepping forward to lend a hand, found that the men
were right.  The blacks on shore, increasing in numbers, were already
uttering most terrific shouts and cries, and had begun to launch their
canoes.  It would be impossible to defend the dhow without running the
risk of losing the boat.  Adair had no wish to bring on an encounter
with the savages.

"We must burn the craft and make the best of our way out of the river,"
he exclaimed.  "Get the prisoners into the boat, and we will then set
the dhow on fire, and prevent her, at all events, from taking on board
another cargo of ebony."

While the men were carrying out his orders, the old Arab captain, who
had been left at liberty, came up to him, and made signs that there was
some object of great value in the hold which he was anxious to recover.
In his eagerness, as with half bent body he stretched out his hands, he
seized Adair by the beard, tears actually running down his eyes.

"Can he have his wife or children stowed away anywhere?" suggested
Desmond.

"It may be, but we must not let them be burned, at all events," said
Adair.  "Well, old fellow, go and bring them up," he added, making a
significant gesture.  The Arab, however, did not comprehend him, and at
length, pulling out a piece of gold, he made signs that he had a box or
bag full of such pieces stowed away.

"Faith, it's myself will go and help ye hunt for them," cried Desmond,
about to accompany the old Arab, who was hurrying below.

"Stay," exclaimed Adair; "there is not a moment to spare.  See, the
canoes are coming off, and we shall be surrounded presently.  I suspect
it is only a trick after all, that he may induce us to remain till the
tables are turned.  Here, tumble the old fellow into the boat, and set
the dhow on fire fore and aft."

While the men obeyed this order, Archie and Gerald, who had been
lighting some bundles of tow, threw one of them down forward among the
other combustible materials, while another was placed aft; and another,
still larger, which Desmond ignited, was let drop into the hold.  A
thick smoke, followed by flames, immediately burst forth, showing that
the craft had been effectually set on fire.

A good-sized canoe was floating alongside the dhow.  "We will have her,"
said Desmond; "make her fast astern.  She'll assist us in landing the
prisoners, and be useful afterwards."

A whole fleet of canoes, full of shrieking savages, was now coming off
towards the dhow.  "Give them a shot from the six-pounder," said Adair,
putting the boat's head round; "it will teach them that they had better
not follow us."  The missile went flying over the water, just ahead of
the canoes.  It appeared to have had the desired effect, for some ceased
paddling, and others went back as fast as they could make way towards
the shore; while the pinnace, with the canoe in tow, proceeded down the
harbour.

Night had now come on; the flames, which rose from every portion of the
burning dhow, their glare extending down the river and casting a ruddy
light against the tall trees on either side, enabled them, without
difficulty, to make their way towards the ocean.  The cut-throat-looking
Arabs, with their venerable captain, appeared to be very uneasy in their
minds, not knowing what was to be done with them; perhaps supposing that
their captors were carrying them out to sea to drown in deep water.
They were evidently much relieved when, a point some little way down the
river being reached, Adair intimated to them that they were forthwith to
be put on shore.  As many as the canoe would hold were tumbled into her,
and they, being quickly landed, she returned for another cargo.  The old
skipper was the last.  As he gazed at his burning vessel, he wrung his
hands, mourning his hard fate.

"Very hard for you," observed Archie; "but it would have been harder for
the unfortunate blacks you would have carried off into slavery."

During this time the natives, gaining courage, were coming down the
river in vast numbers, beating their tom-toms and shouting and
shrieking.  They could be easily beaten off, provided they were not
allowed to get too near; but Adair had no wish to shed blood, and
therefore, having completely destroyed the dhow and got rid of the
prisoners, he stood on down the river.  The bar was fortunately as
smooth as when they entered, and running out, the pinnace, with the
captured canoe, was soon in the open sea.  The latter was light enough
to take on board should bad weather come on; but, as she would
inconveniently occupy much space, she was allowed, while the sea
remained calm, to tow astern.

"Well, we've done something," said Desmond, as, the boat having got a
good offing, all hands were piped to supper; "only I wish we'd got hold
of that box of gold."

"I very much doubt the existence of the box of gold," said Adair; "the
object of the old Arab was to delay us till his friends could come to
his assistance, and cut our throats.  However, if I am right, he acted
his part to admiration."

The pinnace continued her cruise.  Happily the weather remained fine,
and no one had to complain of hardship, though all hands would have been
glad to get a run on shore, instead of being cramped up day after day in
the boat.  As their water was, however, running short, they at length
stood into a small bay which offered a safe landing-place.  The canoe
was found very useful in conveying them on shore, while the pinnace
brought up a short distance from the beach.  Several natives came down,
who appeared friendly, and showed Adair and Desmond, who had landed, a
spring of water where the casks could, without difficulty, be filled and
rolled down to the canoe.  While four of the men remained in the boat
with Archie, the rest brought the casks on shore, and all went on well.
A supply of water was taken on board, and trifling presents, as an
acknowledgment of the services they had rendered, given to those who
appeared to be the leading men among the natives.  Hands were shaken,
and the party embarked.

"We must mark this spot," observed Adair, as they once more made sail;
"the natives appear to be good sort of fellows, and we'll pay them
another visit on our way northward."

The balmy weather which had hitherto prevailed was not to continue.  The
south-west monsoon had begun to blow, and the sea got up, washing over
the bows and flying-deck, and giving ample occupation to all hands in
baling out the water as fast as it broke on board.  It was impossible to
spread the usual awning drawn over the boat in ordinary rainy weather,
or when at anchor, as it would have been blown away in an instant; and
all that could be done was to keep her jogging on under close-reefed
sails.  It was somewhat trying work, as the fire could not be lighted to
cook, and the party had therefore to subsist on raw salt pork and
biscuit, washed down with cold grog.  Everyone, of course, was wet to
the skin; but when the sun again burst forth, their clothes were
speedily dried.  The boat behaved admirably, rising over the seas like a
duck.  Two days the gale lasted, and then the weather again cleared.

"If we get any more downpours, I don't intend to let my clothes get
wet," said Desmond.

"How are you going to prevent that?" asked Archie.

"Why, by stowing them away in the locker and jumping overboard,"
answered Desmond.  "It's the wisest plan, depend on it.  That's the way
the nigger boatmen manage in the West Indies, and it will answer here
just as well."

"Not if it is blowing hard, as it has just been doing," said Archie.

"No," replied Gerald; "but if it's tolerably calm, we can easily get on
board again when the rain is over."

Adair, who had heard of the plan being adopted by other boats' crews,
had no objection; and the next day, when the clouds again gathered and
sent down a deluge, such as only falls in the tropics, all hands, with
the exception of two, who remained to take care of the boat, stripped
off their clothes and jumped overboard, swimming about and amusing
themselves till the rain was over.  They did the same half a dozen times
during the day, whenever a torrent descended from the clouds, and then
again clambering on board, after rubbing themselves over, put on their
dry garments.  The only wonder was that no one was carried off by a
shark, but probably, as they were splashing about and making a loud
noise all the time they were in the water, the savage monsters were kept
at a distance.

The weather again permanently cleared up.  Several dhows were chased and
overtaken.  The first they boarded had, in addition to her brown-skinned
Arab crew, an equal number of black seamen, who were pulling and hauling
and making themselves very busy; while she also had a large party of
black passengers, who sat ranged round the deck mute as statues, dressed
up in Arab costume, each man having with him two or three wives and
several children.

The captain, or "negoda," as he was called by the Arabs, met Adair with
a smiling countenance as he stepped on board, and expressed himself in
choice Arabic as highly delighted to see the English officer.

"Well, my friend, who are all those black fellows there?" asked Adair,
pointing to the negroes, who were jumping about and tumbling over each
other as they ran from side to side.

The negoda or skipper made signs as if hauling on a rope.  "Oh, they are
your crew, are they?" said Adair; on which the skipper nodded his head
as if he had really understood the question.

"And who are those ladies and gentlemen seated so comfortably on the
deck?" continued Adair.  The skipper signified that they were coming
from some place in the South, and bound to Mozambique or Zanzibar to
join their relatives.  He did this by pronouncing the names of those
places, talking away all the time, and transferring a piece of money
from one hand to the other, as if to show that they had paid their
passages.

"Now let me see your papers," said Adair, moving his hand as if holding
a pen and writing.  The Arabs being accustomed to signs, the negoda at
once understood him, and produced from a case some documents written in
Arabic characters, which were about as comprehensible to the English
officer as the words which the voluble skipper was pouring forth into
his ear.  The papers might be, for what he could tell, bills of sale for
the negroes on board, or directions to the skipper how to avoid the
English boats and cruisers, with the hint, should he find himself strong
enough, to knock every Briton he could fall in with on the head.  Adair,
it is true, had his suspicions that all was not right, but how to
ascertain this was the question.

Pango, who knew the true state of the case, was evidently very much
troubled in his mind on the subject; but in vain he tried to explain his
ideas while he sat in the boat, wriggling and twisting his body, and
making such extraordinary grimaces as he tried to get out his words,
that the rest of the crew burst into fits of laughter, which effectually
prevented him from giving the information he possessed.

Had Hamed come in the boat, the case would have been different, and
Adair resolved, if possible, not to go cruising again without the
interpreter.

The skipper had no objection to his examining the vessel, though he
seemed highly pleased on seeing his visitors about to take their
departure.  He and several of his crew shook them warmly by the hands,
and showed an especial eagerness to assist them into the boat.

As the dhow stood away to the northward, both Gerald and Archie declared
that they heard shouts of laughter proceeding from her; but Adair was of
opinion that the Arabs were not wont to indulge in such exhibitions of
hilarity, though he had very strong suspicions that he had been
humbugged.

The southern limits he had designed for the cruise having been reached,
Adair put the boat's head to the northward, intending, as before, to
search all the inlets and creeks; for although no birds had been
entrapped on their previous visit, some might be caught on a second.  He
was half inclined to suppose that the slave-trade could not be carried
on to the extent which was reported, for so many of the dhows boarded
had no slaves or fittings for the reception of slaves, while others were
carrying only black passengers, seized with the desire apparently to see
the world.  Adair was sorely puzzled.  "I wish we had brought Hamed with
us," he repeated for the twentieth time; "he would have cleared up the
difficulty, and enabled us to obtain more information than we are likely
now to pick up."

As they were again in want of water, by the time they came off the
pretty little village where they had before been received in so friendly
a manner, he determined to pay it another visit.  The pinnace was
accordingly steered into the bay, and anchored a short distance from the
shore.  Adair and Desmond landed in the canoe, accompanied by two men
and as many breakers as she could carry.  While the two men paddled back
for more, he and his nephew walked up to the village.  The
primitive-looking palm-leaved thatched huts were picturesquely situated
an eighth of a mile or so from the beach, under the shade of a grove of
lofty cocoanut-trees.  The chief man, with a party of his followers,
came out to meet them, and invited them into the principal hut, used
apparently as a guest-house.  The chief made signs that the women were
preparing food, and begged their guests to rest till it was ready.
Adair was inclined to accept the invitation.

"There seem to be a good many of the fellows collected, considering the
size of the village, and I see that they are all armed," observed
Desmond; "the chief, too, is evidently mighty eager for us to go into
the hut.  They may be very honest, but they may mean mischief."

"I am inclined to agree with you," answered Adair; "we must be on our
guard, at all events, though I don't suppose they will venture to commit
any act of violence."

He, accordingly, when the chief again pressed him to enter the hut, made
signs that he was in a hurry, and could not accept his hospitality.  He
and Desmond, however, stood talking, or rather exchanging pantomimic
gestures with the chief for some time, while the men were engaged in
filling the casks and carrying them back to the boat.  Desmond, who had
returned a short distance towards the shore, to a spot whence he saw
that the canoe was shoving off with her last cargo, on turning back to
tell his uncle, what was his dismay to see a dozen savages throw
themselves upon him, and, seizing his arms, hold him in a way which
prevented him from offering the slightest resistance!  Desmond, who had
on his sword, as well as a rifle in his hand, was rushing back to render
what help he could, regardless of the danger he ran, when another party
of the natives, concealed behind the trees, suddenly sprang out upon
him; and before he saw them, they had seized him and thrown him down on
the ground.  He struggled to free himself, as every Irishman would do,
especially an Irish midshipman, but in vain.  Some seized his legs, and
others his arms, while one of the party threw a piece of cloth round his
mouth to prevent him from crying out.  He managed to get that off,
however, and shouted at the top of his voice, in the hopes that the men
in the canoe would hear him.  Finding that all attempts to escape were
hopeless, he submitted with as good a grace as he could, and was placed
by his captors on his feet Adair was, in the meantime, trying to make
the chief say why he had committed the outrage, and threatening him with
the vengeance of Her Majesty's fleet in those seas if he and the
midshipman were not immediately released.  The chief might possibly not
have understood a word he said.  At all events, he was not moved by his
threats.

"Now, you scoundrel, what do you intend to do with us?" asked Adair.
The chief seemed to understand the question, possibly from the tone in
which it was put, and, pointing his musket first towards him, and then
at Desmond, gave him to understand, by a sign not to be mistaken, that
he intended to shoot them both.  Things were now, indeed, becoming
serious.  They were just out of sight of the boat, and it was a question
whether the men in the canoe had heard Desmond's shouts.  If not,
probably more of the men would come on shore to look for them, and would
to a certainty be made prisoners, and in all likelihood murdered.

"What is to be done?" asked Desmond.  "I'll give another shout, even
though the rascals may gag me for doing so."

After remaining perfectly quiet and apparently resigned to his fate,
raising his voice to the highest pitch, he shouted out, "Help! help!"
He had only time to utter these words, when a big negro standing near
him clapped his hand before his mouth, and effectually prevented him
from uttering another sound.

"Never fear, Desmond," said Adair; "I think they must have heard that
shout, and Gordon will to a certainty suspect what has happened to us."

While a number of negroes collected round their captives, regarding them
with savage looks, the chief and some of his principal men assembled to
hold a consultation as to what was to be done with them.  An immense
amount of jabbering took place, and Desmond, who was closest to the
circle of councillors, looked anxiously at their countenances to
ascertain, if possible, what decision was likely to be arrived at.  He
gazed in vain--nothing could he learn from the expression of the hideous
faces of those who might at any moment determine to shoot him and his
uncle.

"It's all owing to not having Hamed with us," sighed Adair; "or even had
we brought Pango on shore, he would probably have suspected the old
rascal of a chief, and warned us in time; but cheer up, Desmond, I don't
think the black villains will dare to kill us.  I'll try and make them
understand that if they do, a terrible vengeance will be wreaked on
their heads."

"That won't help us out of the scrape, I'm afraid," said Desmond; "but
they are getting on their feet, and I suppose we shall soon know."

In a short time the chief and his advisers, having come to a resolution
what to do, approached their prisoners, and, with very little ceremony,
seizing them by their collars, two on each side of them, dragged them
along towards the beach till they reached a couple of trees, whence the
boat was clearly visible.  The canoe had returned on board, and Adair
observed that the men had got out their arms and were pulling her in
towards the shore, while Jerry Bird, who acted as gunner, was standing
on the forecastle, busy apparently in loading the gun mounted on it; the
greater portion of which was, however, covered up with a piece of
tarpaulin, so that the natives might not discover what was there.  The
rest of the crew not pulling had their muskets in their hands ready for
use.  All this was seen at a glance.

Directly they arrived at the two trees, the savages without further
ceremony bound Adair to one, and Desmond to the other, facing the boat;
while the chief and several of his followers, who were armed with
muskets, levelled them at their heads.

"By my faith, we're in an unpleasant position," exclaimed Desmond.
"Sure the fellows can't be after blowing our brains out."

"They most certainly will, if Archie ventures to open fire on them; but
I don't think he'll do that while we're alive," answered Adair.  "Had
Hamed been with us, we could have learned what they want.  As it is, I'm
afraid that there is as little hope of our understanding them as there
is of their making out what we say.  However, I'll try."  Though Adair
was lashed to the tree, his arms were left at liberty, and beckoning to
the chief, he tried to make him signify what it was he wanted.  At
length he seemed to understand Adair's question, and, going through the
action of rolling a cask down the beach, he put on an angry look, and
then, holding his musket and a piece of cloth in his hand, he showed
that he wanted those articles in payment for the water carried off.

"The rascal!" exclaimed Adair; "however, it's better to pay them than
run the risk of being shot," and, shouting to Archie, he directed him to
send two of his men on shore with the articles demanded, there
fortunately being still a supply of cloth on board, which had been
brought for bartering with the natives.

"Let the small-armed men cover the men while they are landing," he again
shouted, "and let them leave the things on the beach, and take good care
that the natives don't seize them."

Archie heard the order, and soon afterwards the canoe came towards the
beach, bringing an old musket and a few yards of calico.

The chief, eager to possess himself of the treasures, hurried down to
the water, while the men in the canoe, as directed, paddled back to the
boat.  When the chief had got possession of them, he, like Pharaoh,
hardened his heart, and refused to liberate his captives, insisting on
having a further ransom.  Adair was very much inclined to refuse, and
shook his head to show that he would pay no more.  On this the chief
levelled his musket, with significant gesture's, showing that he
intended to persist in his demand.

"We must yield to the fellow," said Adair; "it would be folly to run the
risk of being shot for the sake of maintaining our dignity."

"I don't think that musket would be after shooting us," observed
Desmond, with perfect calmness.

"Why so?" asked Adair.

"Because it happens not to have a lock," answered Gerald; "and, as far
as I can see, it is the best of the lot."

"So far that is satisfactory," said Adair; "as the fellows can't injure
those in the boat; but, notwithstanding that, they may give us club-law
or run their daggers into us, so it won't do to try them too much."
Adair asked the chief what he wanted in addition to the things he had
received, but he could not make out the meaning of the old fellow's
reply.  He therefore directed Archie to send some large rings and beads,
and a few other articles used to trade with the natives.  On these being
received the chief seemed tolerably well satisfied, and ordered his men
to release the prisoners, putting out his hand as if he had acted in no
extraordinary manner, and wished to part good friends.  Adair, not to be
outdone, shook his hand, and, taking him by the arm, walked with him
slowly down towards the beach.

"Stick close to his other side, Desmond," he said.  "I'm going to play
the old fellow a trick he little thinks of."

The chief seemed to have no suspicions of Adair's design, and was
evidently anxious to do away with the effect his conduct had produced.
When they had got about half-way to the beach, however, on finding
himself at some distance from his followers, he stopped, when Adair,
suddenly pulling out a pistol from his pocket, which the natives had not
discovered, held it to the old fellow's head, and made him understand
that he would shoot him through the brain if he refused to come on to
the canoe, or if any of his people approached to his assistance.
Archie, seeing what had occurred, had sent in the canoe, which had just
reached the beach with a couple of hands.  He had likewise brought the
gun to bear on the mass of natives, who stood very much astonished at
the sudden change of circumstances.  Some way from the water, the old
chief, fully believing that the English officer would put his threat
into execution, sang out to his followers to keep quiet, and not to
attempt to rescue him.

"Come along, old fellow, come along," cried Desmond, hauling away at the
arm of the reluctant chief, who had, by the bye, fastened Adair's
sword-belt round his waist.  The old man, who exhibited but little
heroism on the occasion, trembling in every limb, turned an imploring
glance at the lieutenant, to entreat him not to pull the fatal trigger.

"Now, Desmond," cried Adair, "trip him up by the heels as soon as we get
to the canoe, and we'll give him a lesson neither he nor his followers
will forget in a hurry."

The two men in the canoe, guessing what their officers intended, kept
her afloat; and Adair and Desmond with a sudden jerk running the old
chief into the water, the latter tripped up his heels, and, before he
knew where he was, he was hauled on board and stowed away in the bottom.

"Shove off," cried Adair, as he and Desmond sprang into the stern; and
the next instant they were paddling away in the canoe, before even the
natives on shore had clearly comprehended that their chief was being
spirited off.  He groaned and shrieked, without exciting the slightest
compassion, and was soon lifted crop and heels on board the boat.
Archie had already begun to weigh anchor; the sails were hoisted, and
the wind being off-shore, the boat stood out to the offing, leaving the
natives lost in wonder as to what had become of their chief.

"Thank you, Gordon; you behaved admirably under the circumstances," said
Adair.

"I am glad of your good opinion, sir," answered Archie; "but, if you
will allow me to say so, I think you and Desmond acted still more
admirably."

The crew, of course, were loud in their expressions of admiration at
their officers' conduct.

"Now we've got him, what are we to do with him?" asked Desmond.

"Treat him well, and send him back a wiser if not a better man than he
was," answered Adair.  "We'll carry him with us on board the _Opal_ as a
proof of the transaction, and perhaps, after a few months' stay on
board, he will have learned better manners."

The old chief, however, did not seem at all to approve of the change of
his circumstances, and at first it was thought that he was going to give
it up as a hopeless case, and die of vexation.  Jerry Bird, however,
patted him on the back.  "Don't take on, old fellow, in this fashion,"
he said, in a consoling voice; "you thought you were going to play the
lieutenant a trick, and, like many a better man, you found you caught a
Tartar.  What's the odds? we'll give you as much pork and biscuit as you
can eat, and a glass of grog to cheer you up, and you'll come all right
by and by."

Whether it was the words of this address, or the tone in which it was
uttered, need not be discussed; but it seemed to have the effect of
bringing the old chief round, and when a basin of "kettler" was served
out to him, he did not inquire what were the ingredients, but gobbled it
up with evident gusto.  He smacked his lips, also, after tasting the
pannikin of grog which Jerry offered him, and though he put it down
again once or twice, as if doubting about the matter, he finally drained
it to the dregs.

"I thought as how you'd like it," said Jerry, patting him on the back;
"you shall have another presently, and you won't have to say that we
treated you with scant hospitality.  That ain't our way aboard ship."

Adair, however, interfered, and prevented the men from giving the old
chief as much liquor as they were ready to bestow on him, lest he might
get drunk, and take it into his head to run a-muck or jump overboard.
He had taken enough, however, to send him fast asleep in the bottom of
the boat, where he lay, as Jerry observed, "like a porpus in a gale of
wind."


CHAPTER FIVE.

THREE DHOWS CHASED--ONE IS CAPTURED AND LEFT IN CHARGE OF DESMOND AND
ARCHIE--FRIGHTFUL CONDITION OF SLAVES ON BOARD--HORRIBLE CRUELTIES
PRACTISED BY ARABS--JERRY BIRD SETS THE SLAVES DANCING TO KEEP UP THEIR
SPIRITS--DESMOND'S WATCH--HE AND ARCHIE THROWN OVERBOARD.

As the breeze continued light and favourable, the boat ran on all night
under easy sail.  A bright look-out was kept, however, in the
possibility of meeting a dhow creeping along-shore.  Just as morning
dawned, and they arrived abreast of a deep bay which Adair intended to
explore, three dhows were seen standing out from under the land, with
their wide spread of canvas wooing the light breeze.

It was pretty evident that the boat had been discovered.  Adair
therefore ordered the crew to lower the sails, and to take to their
oars, which they did with right goodwill, hoping to catch two, at least,
of the strangers in sight.

The smallest and leading vessel showed Arab colours.  A shot across her
fore-foot quickly made her haul them down.  The other two exhibited no
bunting.  From the efforts they were making to escape, it was pretty
evident they were full slavers.  As soon as Adair reached the first
dhow, he leaped on board; but a glance told him that she was a legal
trader, with not a slave in her, as far as he could judge; although
there were several black men, whom the negoda affirmed belonged to the
vessel.

"We'll give you the advantage of believing you," said Adair, jumping
back into his boat, which pulled away to the nearest of the other
vessels.  Just then she lowered her sail.

"Hurrah!" cried Desmond; "she has given in."

"Not a bit of it," answered Adair; "see, she is going to set a wider
spread of canvas than before."

He was right.  Presently a long tapering yard rose to the head of the
stern, the sail swelling out like the balloon jib of a racing yacht, and
shining brightly in the rising sun.

"Should the breeze increase, she will walk away from us like greased
lightning, as the Yankees say," observed Adair.

"We'll hope, then, it will remain calm," said Archie.  As it was, though
the men strained at their oars, it taxed their utmost strength to gain
on her.  Still, they were gaining.  Desmond and Archie stepped forward
to assist Jerry in getting the gun ready to fire a shot as soon as they
got near enough to make her heave-to.  Light as was the breeze, the dhow
continued to slip rapidly through the water.  It was evident, however,
that the boat was gaining on her, and the men redoubled their efforts.

"Shall we fire, sir?" asked Archie.  "We might manage to bring down her
sail."

"Fire over her," answered Adair; "a shot might chance to hurt some of
the poor slaves, instead of the rascally Arabs."

Jerry elevated the gun, and pulled the trigger.  Away flew the shot
right through the dhow's huge sail; but her crew, looking to windward,
fancied that the breeze was about to freshen.  The gun was quickly
sponged and again loaded.

"Try another shot," cried Adair; "if you can hit the yard or mast, it
will save us a long pull."

Jerry willingly obeyed; but again the shot, though well aimed, only went
through the sail.

"Very good practice," said Adair, "but just let it be a little better."

Jerry Bird, though watching the chase, could not help now and then
taking a look at the countenance of the old chief,--Mustapha Longchops,
the sailors called him,--but whether he wished the dhow to escape or
not, it was difficult to say.  Jerry had again got the gun ready, and,
putting it on the breech, he exhorted it this time to do its duty.
Again he pulled the trigger, when the next instant down came the long
yard by the run on deck.  The midshipmen uttered a hearty cheer, taken
up by Adair and the crew, and in a few minutes they were alongside the
vessel.

The Arabs, however, seeing only a single boat, and unsupported, had made
up their minds, it seems, not to yield without a struggle.  Some twenty
savage-looking fellows, some armed with two-handed swords, others with
muskets and assegais, stood ready to defend their vessel.  As the
pinnace ranged up alongside, several shots were fired and assegais
hurled at them, one of which, whizzing close to Adair's ear, stuck
quivering in the sternsheets as he was springing up the side.  The
dauntless seamen, however, were not to be stopped by their show of
weapons and threatening gestures.  In spite of the Arabs, who cut and
slashed right and left with their two-handed swords, several of the
bluejackets were about to spring up the vessel's side, when one of the
former, aiming a blow at the head of the boat-hook, with which Jerry
Bird was holding on, cut it right through; and at the same instant some
of the Arab crew, who had in the meantime been bending on fresh
halyards, hoisted away on the sail, the dhow forging ahead.

"Fire at those fellows!" cried Adair to the small-armed men; who,
letting fly with their muskets, bowled over three at once.  The oars
were meantime again got out, and the sail having come down on deck, the
boat once more dashed up, this time making for the starboard bow.  Jerry
took the precaution of making fast with a stout rope; and, led by Adair,
all hands were quickly on board, two more of the Arabs being shot down.

The others, however, still bravely attempted to defend their vessel,
wielding their weapons with the same vigour as before; but, desperate as
they were, they could not withstand the British cutlasses, and were
driven aft for refuge in the cabin, crying out for mercy.  All this time
shrieks and groans arose from the hold, while the vilest of odours, a
mixture of everything abominable, pervaded the vessel, leaving not a
doubt, even had the crew not attempted to defend her, that she was a
full slaver, and a legal capture.

"Hand over your arms," cried Adair, "and we'll spare your lives."  It is
possible some one among the Arabs might have understood English; at all
events, the whole of the crew soon hurried up and handed over their
swords and other weapons to the victors.

"Tumble their arms into the pinnace," said Adair; "we must have that
other dhow.  Gordon and Desmond, I'll leave you with five men to manage
these fellows, while I go in chase of her.  If I take her, keep close to
me.  Signalise should they show any inclination to be mutinous, and I'll
bear down and help you.  I'll leave you the canoe; we shall make better
way without her."  Saying this, Adair shoved off and pulled away in
chase of the third dhow.

The first care of the midshipmen was to complete the task in performing
which the three Arabs had been killed, and to hoist up the sail, aided
by several of the crew, whom they compelled at the point of their swords
to lend a hand; while, one of the seamen being sent to the helm, the
dhow steered after the pinnace in hot chase of the still uncaptured
slaver, the canoe, which had hitherto been alongside, being stowed
astern.

The deck of the dhow, on board which the midshipmen found themselves,
presented a horrible appearance.  The three men who had first been shot
lay stiff and stark, weltering in their blood at the foot of the mast.
Farther off sat the negoda, with a shot through his leg and another in
his body, glaring fiercely at them; while another man lay not far off,
writhing in agony, with life ebbing fast.  The rest of the crew, greasy,
dirty ruffians, with close-fitting turbans and caps on their heads,
baggy trousers, and vests covering their bodies, stood about with sulky,
hang-dog looks, regarding the victors.

"We must keep an eye on these fellows," said Jerry Bird to Archie;
"they'll not mind cutting our throats if they have the chance."

"Little doot aboot that," said Archie; "but hallo! here's our old friend
Mustapha Longchops.  How did he get on board?"

It was very evident that the old chief must have scrambled up after the
seamen boarded, and stowed himself away till the fight was over.  What
was his object in so doing was difficult to ascertain.

"It wasn't with any good intention, I've a notion," said Desmond;
"however, we'll be up to him."

"I think, sir," said Jerry Bird, "we may as well see if they've got any
more arms stowed away.  If they have, the sooner they're hove overboard
the better; for if they get hold of them, the Arabs would prove somewhat
ugly customers on a dark night."

Jerry's advice was followed.  While two of the hands kept an eye on the
crew on deck, Jerry and Desmond, with the rest, searched the
after-cabin, and discovered no less than a dozen muskets, several
pistols and swords, and some formidable-looking knives or daggers, which
would have proved deadly weapons in the hands of the Arabs.  They were
all quickly hove overboard, greatly to the disgust of their former
owners.  They were, however, not the only articles discovered.

"Hallo! what's this?" cried Jerry, drawing out a box from the locker;
"it seems pretty heavy for its size.  Shouldn't be surprised to find it
full of gold."

Desmond, who was superintending the search, laughed.  "We can scarcely
expect such good luck as that," he answered.

"We'll try, sir," said Jerry, prising open the top with one of the
daggers which he had retained.  "Hurrah!  I was right, sir," he sang
out; "golden pieces every one of them, four or five hundred, at least!"

"No doubt about it," observed Desmond, examining the box; "it is not
ours, however, after all.  We must hand it over to the commander as part
of the cargo found in the prize, as well as every other article of
value; though we shall get our share in due time."

"To be sure, sir, to be sure," answered Jerry, with a sigh.  "At first I
thought you and Mr Gordon, and the rest of us, might pocket it; but
it's all right--we must share and share alike."

Desmond ordered the box to be stowed away in the forepart of the cabin,
which he and Archie intended to occupy.  The Arab captain cast a longing
glance at his treasure as it was carried away, possibly regarding the
present possessors with no friendly feeling.  The discovery induced the
seamen to make a further search, and jewellery, pieces of cloth and
silk, and numerous rich Arab garments were brought to light, sufficient
altogether to fill a considerable portion of the cabin.

"Now let's look after the slaves below," said Archie; "the poor fellows
must have been in a fearful quandary while the fighting was going
forward."

Whatever feeling of pity the condition of the wounded Arabs might have
excited in the breasts of the English was removed when they came to
examine the hold.  Indeed, the horrible state of the unhappy beings
surpasses all description.  Upwards of two hundred human beings were
found stowed away in the hold of the craft, which could not have
measured more than a hundred tons.  On a bamboo deck, scarcely raised
high enough above the keel to be free of the abominably-smelling
bilge-water which occupied her lowest depths, lay some eighty or ninety
men, doubled up, and packed so closely together that it was utterly
impossible for them to stretch their legs; while there was not room
enough for them to raise their heads without touching the deck above.
They were stowed away, indeed, literally, as Jerry Bird observed, "like
herrings in a cask."  Above them were an equal number of women huddled
together, doubled up in the same fashion, the space being insufficient
for them to sit or recline.  On the highest deck were penned away a
still larger number of children of various ages, ranging from six years
old to twelve or thirteen, girls and boys, with even less space allowed
them, in proportion to their size, than their elders.  The miserable
wretches were evidently suffering fearfully from starvation and
dysentery.  Many were too weak to move, and several on the point of
breathing their last.  Five or six of the women had infants in their
arms but a few weeks old.  As one of the mothers was brought on deck,
she exhibited her child with its head crushed in, which she intimated
had been done, just after the boat had been discovered in pursuit, by
one of the Arabs, because the child had been crying somewhat lustily.

"Let's see the fellow who did it," exclaimed Desmond, "and we'll pay him
off for his barbarity."

The woman understood him, and looked about among the crew till her eye
fell on the wounded Arab, who still lay writhing on the deck.

"Is that he?" asked Desmond.  "Well, he has got his due, and little pity
any of us can feel for him."

The midshipmen, with their cargo of slaves and villainous prisoners,
found themselves in a very trying position, requiring the full exercise
of all their wits and energies.  Probably, had Adair had time to
consider, he would not have left them with so small a force on board;
but his eagerness to overtake the other dhow prevented him from
reflecting on the difficulties and dangers they would have to encounter.

Their first care was to try and ameliorate the condition of the slaves.
Search was made for such food and water as the dhow contained, and the
Arabs were ordered to prepare a hearty meal for them--a task they set
about with no very good grace.  The only provisions they discovered were
rice and millet seed, with scarcely drinkable water, and of these in
most limited portions, on which the slaves would have had to subsist
till the termination of their voyage.  No wonder that many had died, and
that nearly all looked more like living skeletons than human beings.

"If we'd had Dick Needham on board, he'd have told us how they managed
with slavers captured on the West Coast," observed Archie.

"I'll tell you," said Jerry Bird; "I've seen many a one taken.  The best
way is to get up forty or fifty at a time on deck and set them dancing.
It seems to put new life into them, bad as they may be."

The midshipmen followed Jerry's advice at once, and released fifty of
the men, who crawled up and squatted down on either side of the deck.  A
mess of rice, with a little water, was then served out to each of them.
They eagerly swallowed the food, cramming it into their mouths like
monkeys, but with less intelligence or animation in their countenances
than those creatures exhibit.

"They don't look as if they had much dancing in them," observed Gerald.

"Stay a bit," said Jerry; "we'll soon see," whereon he began skipping
about, snapping his fingers and singing.  Then he took hold first of one
and then of another, and in a few seconds more than half of them were
dancing like magic on their feet, imitating his movements; many more of
them seeming willing to join in the sport, had they possessed the
requisite strength.  They sang and laughed and jabbered away as if they
had not a care in the world.

"Faith, they look more like dancing skeletons than anything else," said
Gerald, watching the poor fellows.  The voices of many of them were also
so faint as scarcely to be audible, in spite of their efforts to sing
out; indeed, it seemed a wonder that they could utter any notes except
those of wailing and despair.

Of course, an anxious eye had been kept on the pinnace and the vessel
she was chasing.  "She's up to her," cried Desmond, who was looking
through his glass; "she struck without a blow, and there go our fellows
tumbling on board.  Little doubt, however, about her being a slaver,
though, as they must have seen the way in which we got hold of this
craft, they thought it as well to save their bacon, and make the best of
a bad job."

It was evident that Adair had got easy possession of the third dhow, as
the sail, which had at first been lowered, was quickly hoisted again,
while the pinnace was dropped astern.  He appeared to consider that all
was going well on board the first capture, as he did not shorten sail to
allow her to come up.  Perhaps he was too busy with the Arab captain and
the slaves to think about the matter.

The first gang of blacks, having enjoyed themselves for some time in
their own fashion, were ordered below.  The women were next got up.
Poor creatures! there was very little dancing power in them; many of
them being mothers who had lost their children, and others with dying
infants in their arms, many of them in the last stage of sickness.
Still, some of them, on being set to work, began skipping about,
clapping their hands, laughing and singing, at no little risk of
breaking in the frail deck; for, in general, being fatter, they were
heavier than the men.  The Arabs looked on with evident disgust, not
comprehending the object of the English in expending so much food, and
allowing the negroes to move about, thereby increasing their appetites.
The poor children were the last to appear on the stage, and they were
all turned out together, looking more like apes than human beings.
Having been on the highest deck, with some ventilation from above, they
were less in want of air than the grown-up people, though they seemed to
enjoy the exercise allowed them even more than the rest; but not a
particle of the animation of childhood was discernible among any of
them.  From the way they moved about, they seemed to fancy that their
dance was but a prelude to their being put to death to fill the
cooking-pots of the white men, which their Arab captors had told them
would be their lot.

All hands had been so busy that no one had thought of eating themselves.
It was then discovered that a bag of biscuit alone had been brought on
board and a bottle of rum, which one of the men in the pinnace had
handed up to Jerry just as she was shoving off.  This was, however,
better than nothing, and they hoped before long to be up with the other
prize, and to obtain more substantial fare.  The day was now drawing to
a close.  The wind continued light as before, and the two dhows retained
their relative positions; the last taken being about half a mile on the
port-bow of the other.  The four dead bodies were hove overboard (for
the badly-wounded wretch had followed his companions to the other
world).

Archie and Gerald had done their best to bind up the hurts of the
negoda, who had been placed in the cabin with such care taken of him as
circumstances would admit.  They tried to make him understand that, as
soon as they could fall in with a surgeon, his wounds would be better
dressed.  The Arab crew, being tired, coiled themselves away in
different parts of the vessel, while Mustapha Longchops had seated
himself at his ease near the skipper.  Thus the management of the dhow
was left entirely to her captors.

Archie and Desmond consulted together as to whether they ought to clap
the crew in irons, or, rather, to lash their arms and legs together,
thus putting it out of their power to commit mischief.  They settled,
however, as Adair had said nothing about it, to allow them to remain at
liberty.  Archie, of course, took one watch and Desmond the other, with
the crew divided between them.  As the night advanced, the wind
increased, and the dhow made rapid way through the water, steering after
Adair's prize.  No moon was shining, clouds gathered in the sky, and the
night became darker than usual in those latitudes.  Desmond was to keep
the first watch, with one man at the helm and another on the look-out;
while Archie lay down just inside the door of the cabin, with Jerry near
him, the other two men going forward.

"I'll sleep with one eye open, sir," said Jerry, "and will be up in a
moment if I'm wanted."

The Arab crew were sleeping about in groups on the deck, where they had
lain for some time, none of them having offered to lend a hand to do
anything.  Desmond had been awake for the greater part of the previous
night, and, having undergone a good deal of excitement during the day,
it was no wonder that he found it difficult to keep his eyes open;
still, he did his best to watch a light which Adair had hung over the
stern of his prize, and, after looking for some time, he felt convinced
that they were slowly gaining on her.  Every now and then he turned to
the man at the helm with some remark, and then shouted to the other
forward to keep a bright look-out.  At length, however, the light ahead
began to flicker and dance, and now to grow larger, now to decrease,
till it was scarcely visible.  He was holding fast on to the side of the
dhow, and found some support necessary.  He looked up at the huge sail,
which, bulging out, seemed to grow larger and larger till it towered up
into the sky.  Desmond was a very promising officer, but even the most
promising are made of flesh and blood, and require sleep to restore
exhausted nature.  The most vigilant would not have found him nodding,
for he would have promptly answered with perfect correctness had he been
spoken to.  Notwithstanding that, Gerald Desmond was certainly not broad
awake--or rather, he was as fast asleep as a midshipman standing on his
legs, with his eyes wide open, could be.  His thoughts, too, were
wandering, now to Ballymacree, now to Commander Murray's home in the
Highlands, and now away to the West Indies, where he might still be for
all he knew.

Just then, suddenly he felt a cloth thrown over his eyes, and before he
could put up his hands to draw it away, he found his arms pinioned
behind him.  The same instant he heard Archie and Jerry Bird sing out,
and the man at the helm struggling desperately with a number of the
Arabs, while from every part of the dhow arose shouts and cries.  Then
there came a splash, then another and another; the next instant he was
hurled headforemost overboard, happily his arms getting free as he
struggled impulsively to save himself from his impending fate.


CHAPTER SIX.

ADAIR BOARDS THE THIRD DHOW--HER CREW AND PASSENGERS--PANGO DISCOVERS
THAT THE LATTER ARE SLAVES--ADAIR RETURNS WITH THE DHOW TO THE ISLAND--
GREEN ABSENT ON AN EXPEDITION--ADAIR'S FEARS AS TO DESMOND AND ARCHIE--
GREEN RETURNS WITH THE DHOW LEFT IN CHARGE OF DESMOND, BUT WITHOUT THE
MIDSHIPMEN--ADAIR'S ANXIETY INCREASES--INTERROGATION OF THE ARAB CREW--A
SAIL IN SIGHT--SHE PROVES TO BE THE OPAL--ADAIR INFORMS MURRAY OF THE
LOSS OF THE MIDSHIPMEN--THE COMMANDER'S GRIEF--THE DHOW BLOWS UP WITH
ALL ON BOARD, AND SAVES THE HANGMAN A JOB--THE OPAL GOES IN SEARCH OF
THE MIDSHIPMEN.

Adair, after leaving the midshipmen on board the first dhow, eager to
capture the second, urged his crew not to spare their arms, or the tough
ash-sticks they handled.  They, fully as eager as the lieutenant, were
not the men to do that, and the boat made rapid progress through the
calm water.  They had every hope of catching her, unless a breeze should
suddenly spring up, when they well knew that she would slip away from
them at a speed which they had no chance of equalling.  In case of such
an occurrence, the gun mounted on the bow was reloaded, ready to send a
shot after her.

The wind continued light, and at length, laying in their oars, they
ranged up alongside, taking good care to make the boat fast; when,
following their lieutenant, all hands leaped on board with cutlasses and
pistols, ready to make short work of any who might oppose them--though,
to their surprise, not the slightest resistance was offered.  The deck
appeared crowded with passengers, their skins black as jet, but dressed
in every variety of Oriental costume.  The numerous crew, a large
proportion of whom were black, were collected forward; while the negoda
stood aft, near the man at the helm.  He advanced with a smiling
countenance, and made a profound salaam to Adair, who, sheathing his
sword, with his men at his back, stood ready to receive him; a couple
only, one of whom was Pango, remained in the boat to look after her.

He was a wiry, daring-looking fellow, with a bold, piratical swagger,
which gave an impression that he would not hesitate at the most
audacious acts of atrocity which he might suppose would forward the
object he happened to have in view.  He put out his hand in the most
cool and impudent manner to shake Adair's, and then stood calmly eyeing
his uninvited visitors, as much as to say, "Now make the most of me you
can."

"Well, amigo, where are you come from?" asked Adair.  The negoda, who
seemed to expect some such question, though he probably did not
understand the words, pointed to the south, and then uttered a long
string of sentences, in which Adair thought he could distinguish
Zanzibar.

"Well, my friend, and who are all these people you have got on board?"
continued Adair, pointing to the silent figures on deck.

The Arab poured forth a torrent of words, pointing in the same direction
as before, and next putting a piece of coin from one hand into the
other.

"Yes, I understand; they are travellers, going to see the world, and
have paid their passage-money, all right and proper.  And when they get
to Zanzibar, what are they going to do?" asked Adair.

The last question the Arab evidently did not understand, and Adair saw
that it would be useless to press the point, knowing that whatever the
Arab might say, whether true or false, he should not be the wiser.  "And
now, as to those fellows tumbling about there, and butting against each
other with their curly pates, and looking more like chimney-sweeps than
sailors," said Adair, "what have they got to do here?"

The Arab, who guessed by the direction of Adair's eyes that he was
asking questions about the men forward, made signs of pulling and
hauling.

"Oh, they form part of your crew, do they?  Well, I should like to see
your papers, and how many hands you are licenced to carry," said Adair,
making the usual signal of pretending to write, which the negoda clearly
understanding, produced from his capacious pocket various documents
scrawled all over with Arabic characters.

Adair took them, but of course did not understand a single one of the
curious-shaped letters and papers.  "Very shipshape," he remarked,
pretending to scan the papers.  "If you have no slaves on board, nor
fittings for slaves, we must let you proceed on your voyage," he added,
returning the papers with a polite bow, on which the skipper appeared
highly delighted.  "You'll give me leave first, however, to search the
hold and take a look into your cabin."  The negoda's countenance fell,
as Adair, followed by two of his men, made their way into the space
under the high poop.  "Hallo! who are all these?" he exclaimed, as he
saw seated round the sides some thirty sable damsels, bundled up in
silks and cottons, with a variety of ornaments on their curly heads,
most of them with children in their arms, or seated by their side,
little and big.

The skipper looked somewhat nonplussed; but presently, pointing out
three of the best-looking, he tried to make his visitor understand that
they were his wives.

"Oh! very well," said Adair, who comprehended his meaning; "but to whom
do all those others belong?"

To this the negoda, without replying directly, shouted to his Arab crew,
who came aft, each man taking the hands of a couple of negresses, and
declaring that they were his better halves.  Thus all the people who had
hitherto been seen were accounted for, and the hold alone remained to be
examined.  Above the cargo, which was stowed in no very regular fashion,
was a bamboo deck; but that of course would be necessary for the
numerous male and female passengers and their offspring, and was not
sufficient in itself to condemn the vessel.  Still Adair was not
altogether satisfied.

On returning on deck, he determined to interrogate some of the silent
negro passengers, who did not look as if they were accustomed to the
fine clothes they wore.  Without an interpreter, this was a difficult
undertaking.  When he addressed the blacks, men or women, they put on
the most stolid looks, showing him that it would be vain to hope to get
any information out of them; but it was a wonder that such
stupid-looking people should have any desire to see the world, or could
be travelling either on business or pleasure.  At last he had to give it
up, and to turn to the black sailors.  Going forward, he addressed one
after the other; but as he spoke, their countenances also changed, and
they stood before him with downcast looks, pictures of stolidity.
Suddenly he at last bethought him of calling up Pango from the pinnace,
to try if he could elicit any information from his sable countrymen.
Pango, on being summoned, immediately sprang on board.  No sooner had he
done so than his eye fell on one of the blacks, from whom Adair was
vainly endeavouring to extract information.  The two negroes stared at
each other for an instant.  "Ki!" exclaimed Pango.  "Ki!" answered the
other, scanning Pango's nautical costume.  "Ki!" cried Pango, in a
higher key; and then, both making a spring, they seized each other's
hands and began shouting at the top of their voices, now laughing, now
crying, and again looking in each other's faces.

A rapid conversation then took place between them, the seeming Arab
seaman asking Pango all sorts of questions, which he as quickly
answered.

"What's it all about?" asked Adair, pointing to the former.

"Brudder! brudder!" answered Pango.

"Where does he come from?" inquired Adair.

Pango gave the incomprehensible name of a village in the interior,
adding, "Make slavey, make slavey."

"And who are all those others?" asked Adair.

"All slavey, all slavey," cried Pango eagerly.

"Ah!  I thought so," exclaimed Adair.  "Tell them that they shall be set
free, and that they need no longer sham being sailors, which one can
tell with half an eye that they are not."

Pango understood enough of what Adair said to make his fellow-countrymen
understand that they would be liberated very soon, as they had the
British flag hoisted over their heads.  Although a few believed what
Pango told them, the rest did not appear altogether convinced of the
fact.  Adair, however, had now sufficiently ascertained the character of
the vessel to warrant him in keeping possession of her.

The negoda, on discovering the resolution which the English officer had
formed, looked very much taken aback.  In vain he stormed and swore in
the choicest Arabic, and cast vindictive glances at Pango, threatening
him with condign punishment should he ever catch him on shore.  Pango,
caring very little for his threats, talked away eagerly with his
countrymen, and soon the greatest number went over to the side of the
English tars.

Their first care was to disarm the Arabs, and to throw their weapons
overboard, while the dhow was searched fore and aft for any others which
might be concealed.  The negoda, finding he was discovered, very quickly
stripped the blacks of their fine garments, and reduced them to the
primitive appearance of veritable slaves, giving Adair to understand
that the dresses were his private property, and that he expected to be
allowed to carry them off.  The poor women seemed very loth to part with
their borrowed plumes; but the negoda treated them without ceremony,
and, as evening approached, sent them and the children all down into the
hold.  The men were then made to follow them.

Adair had the satisfaction of feeling that he had caught a second
slaver, but he saw that it would require all his vigilance to prevent
the Arabs from playing him any trick.  Looking out astern, he saw the
first captured dhow following in his wake.  "All right with the
youngsters," he thought; "they and Bird have their wits about them, and
will keep the slaver's crew under."

As the dhow appeared to be coming up with him, he saw no necessity for
shortening sail, as he hoped that she would close with him before
nightfall.  By the time the sun went down she had got considerably
nearer, and, satisfied that all was right, he stood on.  The night came
on much darker than usual, but he made out the peak of her triangular
sail rising against the sky, and therefore still felt perfectly at ease
about her.  With so many doubtful characters on board, he would not lie
down even for a moment, or allow any of his crew to do so, but kept them
together, ready to defeat any attempt the Arabs might make to regain
their vessel.  As they hoped to reach the island the next day, they
might then take a long snooze to make up for their want of sleep.
Several times he looked astern, when he saw the other prize still about
the same distance as before.  Suddenly there came a squall and a
downpour of rain, but the wind being right aft, the dhow flew on before
it.  He, however, thought it prudent to send his men to the halyards, so
as to be ready, should the wind increase, to lower the sail, the Arabs
showing no inclination to assist in working the vessel.

The darkness was greater than ever.  The rain indeed, even by itself,
was thick enough to hide any objects except close to.  In about an hour
it cleared off again, when, on looking out for number one prize, he
could nowhere distinguish her.  "I suppose Gordon and Desmond judged it
prudent to lower their sail; they will be hoisting it again presently,"
he said to himself.  Soon afterwards he thought he made her out, rather
more over the port quarter than she had been before.  Yes, he was
certain of it, though she seemed to him farther off than she had
hitherto been; still, if the midshipmen had lowered their sail that was
to be expected.

Adair, still believing that all was right, continued his course, eager
to reach the island, and to arrange for despatching the two dhows to the
port of adjudication; though he had no doubt that they both would prove
lawful prizes.  When morning at length broke, dhow number two was
nowhere in sight.  This made him somewhat anxious, and he regretted that
he had not shortened sail at first to allow her to come up.  Still the
midshipmen had their wits so completely about them, and Bird was so
trustworthy a fellow, and fully alive to the importance of keeping an
eye on the Arabs, that he had no very serious apprehensions about their
safety.

A clump of trees rising in the centre of the island at length, to his
infinite satisfaction, came in sight.  He dropped his anchor in the
small harbour formed by the coral reef which circled round the southern
portion.  He was seen coming in, and one of the boats pulled off to
welcome him.  He was informed that a vast number of dhows had been
boarded, but none as yet captured, all being, as far as could be
ascertained, lawful traders; though several had, like his prize, no
small number of black passengers on board.

"Depend upon it, then, you have been deceived," said Adair, "as I
should, had I not the fortunate chance, by means of Pango, to discover
the trick the rascally Arabs are playing us.  All those black passengers
were really slaves, dressed up by their masters.  However, we'll take
care in future that their trick doesn't avail them, and they must take
to some other dodge if they wish to escape us."

Jos Green, he found, had gone over towards the mainland, to watch for
any vessels running in or out of Angoxa, or slipping by up the coast,
and as he had been away for several days, it was expected that he would
soon be back.  Several times before going on shore Adair swept the
horizon with his glass in search of the missing dhow, expecting every
instant to see her sail, like the dark fin of a shark, rising above the
waters.  He looked, however, in vain.  The other officers climbed, one
after the other, to the look-out place, but came back with the report
that no sail was in sight.

He at once, therefore, made up his mind to send the pinnace, with a
fresh crew, in search of the dhow.  The wind, though contrary, was
slight, and she might reach the spot where the dhow had last been seen
before nightfall, and, if any accident had happened to her, render
assistance.  His only dread was that she might have been leaky, as he
knew to be the case with many such craft, and perhaps have gone down.

He and his men were pretty well worn--out from want of sleep and hard
work.  Having seen the slaves landed, and fresh hands placed in charge
of the dhow and the Arab crew, he therefore lay down in his tent to
obtain the rest he so much required.  Completely exhausted, he slept on
till morning.

His first inquiry on awaking was for the pinnace.  She had not returned,
nor had Green made his appearance.  He naturally became more anxious
than ever; something serious, he feared, must have happened to the
midshipmen, or they would not have failed to have reached the island by
that time.

He was on the point of despatching another boat, when the look-out man
from the signal-station reported that a dhow was in sight coming across
from the mainland.  Her arrival was eagerly looked for.  There could be
no doubt that she was a prize made by Green.  This was ascertained
positively to be the case, and in about an hour she came to an anchor
off the island, having Green's boat astern.  The two remaining boats at
once put off, Adair going in one of them, accompanied by Pango (Bango
had gone with Green to act as his interpreter).

"Why," exclaimed Adair, as he drew near the dhow, "she's the very vessel
we captured! and has, I hope, the midshipmen and the rest of the boat's
crew on board."

Green hailed them from the deck as they approached.  "Glad of your
assistance," he said, "for I've got a pretty shipload of scoundrels, who
gave us a tough job to take them."

These words made Adair feel more anxious than ever.  He recognised the
Arab skipper and Mustapha Longchops on deck, but neither of the
midshipmen nor any of the men.  He was quickly on deck and shaking hands
with Green, though the dreadful feeling which oppressed him prevented
him for some moments from speaking.

"Where are the midshipmen, Desmond and Gordon," he asked, "and the men I
left on board this vessel?"

"You left?" exclaimed Green; "why, I only captured her last night, and
had no notion that she had ever been in our hands before, except, by the
bye, that Bango has tried to make me understand something which he had
heard, though I confess I couldn't exactly comprehend his meaning."

"The night before last I left the midshipmen safe and sound, with four
hands and a canoe towing astern," said Adair; "the canoe, I see, is
gone, but they would certainly not have deserted the vessel.  We must
seize these scoundrels, the skipper and that black fellow, with the rest
of the Arabs, at once, for I very much fear they have been guilty of
some foul play."

Calling more of his men on board, Adair ordered them to handcuff the
whole of the party.  The Arabs looked somewhat alarmed, their skipper
very much so.  "What have you done with my officers and men?" asked
Adair.  The negoda, recovering himself, with the coolest effrontery made
the action of shaking hands, then pointed astern, as if to signify that
those whom Adair was asking after had parted good friends and gone off
in the canoe.

"A very likely tale," said Adair sadly; "let's try what Pango and his
brother can make out of the old black chief."  On this Green told them
to hear what the old man had to say.  They evidently spoke the same
language.  At last Pango, turning round to Adair, tried hard to give the
information he had obtained.  What with the numerous signs, and the few
words of English uttered by the black, Adair understood that the old
chief grieved for what had happened, but that he himself had nothing to
do with it; that the Arabs had set upon the Englishmen, two of whom were
below, had blindfolded them and thrown them overboard.

Adair and Green both interrogated their black friends, and each time
came to the same sad conclusion.  There could be no doubt that the two
lads, Jerry Bird, and the other men had been foully murdered.  Adair
felt very much inclined to hang all the fellows at once, but of course
this could not be thought of; they must first be tried, and there could
be no doubt that they would be convicted.  What satisfaction would it be
to hang the scoundrels?  Putting them to death would not probably
prevent others from committing similar deeds, nor would it bring those
who were lost to life.

It was necessary, however, to land the slaves at once, for the sake of
preserving their health; for even during the last few hours several of
the grown-up people had died, and nearly a dozen of the children; and
others, it was clear, would not survive unless carried on shore, and
supplied with better food and fresh water.  Superintending this work
occupied Adair, and prevented him from mourning over the loss of his
young nephew and Archie.  The party on shore had been occupied for some
time in putting up huts for housing any slaves who might be brought to
the island.  These were soon filled with the women and children and the
sick men.  The others not so greatly requiring immediate shelter were
set to work to put up some huts for themselves, an operation most of
them seemed to understand very well.

In the meantime, the Arab crew were kept on board, under charge of an
officer and a party of seamen.  Towards evening the boat was seen
returning, and Adair had some faint hopes that she might have obtained
some information of the midshipmen, in case the skipper's version of the
affair was true.  Adair hurried down to meet her.

"We bring you no news of the missing ones," said the officer in charge;
"we went as far as you directed, and then swept round inshore, but no
dhow could we see."

Adair, more out of spirits than he had ever been in his life before, got
back to the camp.  One of the men came running in with the information
that a ship was in sight to the northward.  Adair and several others
hurried to the nearest point from which they could see her, and he and
Green were both of opinion that she was the _Opal_.  This was confirmed
when she got near enough to make her number.  Hopes were entertained
that she was coming to take them off; for, though not exactly tired of
the life they had been leading, they would gladly have gone to some
other locality, where they would be likely to meet with better success
than they could boast of hitherto.  Adair, however, found himself
wishing that Murray had not come back.  How could he face him with the
account of the loss of the two midshipmen?  Murray might blame him, and
not unjustly, for want of judgment in leaving them in charge of a vessel
manned by desperate ruffians, who would, of course, be glad of the
opportunity to revenge themselves on their enemies.  "Why did not I
think of that before?" exclaimed poor Terence more than once.

However, he ordered the gig to be manned, and as soon as the corvette
approached the anchorage, he pulled away for her.  She had just brought
up, and the hands were aloft furling sails, when his boat got alongside.
Murray was, of course, well pleased to see him, though struck by his
grave looks.

"All hands are well, I hope? and the youngsters, have they managed to
keep themselves out of mischief?" asked Murray.

Adair, a very unwonted thing, felt inclined to hang down his head, as,
with a faltering voice, he told the story of their loss.

"You don't mean to say you left those two lads, with only four careless
men, to manage a set of cut-throats!" exclaimed Murray.

"I am sorry to say I did, not supposing that the said cut-throats would
venture to turn upon them," answered Adair.

"That's it, Adair, that's it," exclaimed Murray, more testily than he
was accustomed to speak; "you are too apt not to consider the
consequences of what you do, and, from want of judgment, the lives of
those boys have been thrown away."

"Really, you are hard upon me," cried Adair.  "I acted as well as the
circumstances would allow, and it was my duty to try and get hold of the
other dhow."

"You should have left a stronger force to keep in check a set of
ruffians, with whom only a few minutes before you had been engaged in a
struggle for life and death," said Murray; "they acted according to
their instincts, and murdered the poor boys."

"I had no time to think of that or anything else," said Adair, about to
turn away; "it was my duty to take the other dhow, and I succeeded in
doing so."

Murray, observing how much Adair was moved, felt that he was speaking
too harshly.  "Well, well, I am sure you did as you considered best,"
said he.  "It is a very sad affair, but I don't know that we ought to
give them up as lost.  You may have misunderstood the two blacks, though
circumstances are strongly against the Arab captain.  However, I will
examine him and his crew and the old black chief, with the aid of Hamed,
whom he can understand; and perhaps we may elicit something which will
give us ground for hoping that they after all escaped."

"I wish I could think so," said Adair; "I shall blame myself as long as
I live for their loss.  I am certain they would not willingly have
deserted their charge."

Murray, having ordered Hamed to accompany him, pulled off in his gig
with Adair.  He found the rest of the officers standing on the beach
ready to receive him, and he at once issued orders to have the slave
captain and his companions brought on shore.  Two boats were on the
point of putting off to bring them, when a loud report was heard, and
thick wreaths of smoke were seen issuing from the dhow, followed almost
directly by flames bursting out from all parts.  The boats dashed on to
rescue those on board; as they did so, they saw a number of men, whom
they recognised as their shipmates, swimming towards them, but not the
dark face of an Arab among them.

The boats quickly picked them up one after the other, none, happily, of
the party left on board being missing.  Neither the officer nor any of
the men could account for the accident.  They were all on deck, the
sentry near the hold in which the prisoners were confined; suddenly an
explosion occurred which lifted up a portion of the deck, and sent the
sentry and two other men standing near him overboard.  Flames instantly
afterwards burst out both fore and aft, and the natural impulse of the
rest was to leap into the water to save their lives.  The master's
assistant, who commanded the party, seeing that any attempt to rescue
the prisoners would be utterly hopeless, to save his own life was
compelled to follow his men.

Just as the last English seaman was picked up, the dhow's stern, already
a mass of flames, lifted, and she glided down, bow foremost, beneath the
surface; a few pieces of charred wood and bamboo marking the spot where
she had lately floated.

"Serve the fellows right," observed several of the men who were watching
the occurrence; "the hangman has been saved a job, and stout rope left
for a better purpose."

Murray and Adair, although acknowledging that the murderers, as they
deemed them, had met with a just fate, could not help regretting that
all means of obtaining information as to what had become of the
midshipmen and their companions had thus been lost.

"All I can now do," said Murray, "is to cruise over the ground the dhow
must have traversed after you left her, and look out for the canoe, in
case any of the party may have succeeded in getting into her.  It is
possible that some of them may have done so, although in this long
interval they must have suffered fearfully for want of food."

As no time was to be lost, Murray returned on board, leaving Adair with
his party still on the island.  The corvette, immediately weighing
anchor, stood away close--hauled to the eastward, that she might on
another tack fetch the spot where her search was to begin.  Murray's
remarks had slightly raised Adair's hopes that one if not both of the
midshipmen might have been saved, had they been hove overboard alive;
but it was too probable that the Arabs would have knocked them on the
head first, and then thrown them into the water.  He expressed his
thoughts to Green.

"I don't altogether give them up," answered Jos.  "Midshipmen have a
wonderful way of keeping in existence, and by some means or other they
may have escaped, though I can't say how it may have happened."

Adair's anxiety prevented him from sitting quiet in his tent, and, in
spite of the hot sun, he continued walking about, now visiting the
look-out man, now seeing how the unfortunate slaves were getting on.
Pango and Bango were of great assistance in communicating with them and
dissipating their fears, though their captors had taken good care to
instil into their minds the belief that the Englishmen wished only to
catch them for the sake of salting them down for food, or disposing of
them in some other horrible manner.  Poor creatures! what their future
lot was to be no one could tell.  One thing was certain: they had been
torn from their homes and families, many of those dearest to them had
been killed by the savage men-hunters, and they themselves had been
treated with horrible cruelty.

The boats, as usual, were kept in readiness to start off at a moment's
notice, while the look-out men had their eyes about them in search of
any dhows running up the coast.  "A sail in sight to the southward,"
shouted the man up the tree.

"What is she like?" asked Adair.

"Square-rigged vessel, sir, with a broad spread of white canvas."

Here was likely to be work.  She might prove a Spanish or American
vessel, or carrying the flag of one of the other powers which still
permitted the slave-trade.  If a slaver, she was not likely to yield
tamely if she had a chance of escape.  Many such vessels were known to
be strongly armed, and to be commanded by daring fellows, who would be
perfectly ready to fight if they saw a chance of success.  All the
boats, therefore, were manned, to be ready to attack her should she
stand near the island; which, from the course she was steering, there
was every probability she would do.  Everyone looked forward to the work
with satisfaction.  The only fear was that she might be empty, and might
simply be coming north to take in her slaves at Angoxa, or some other
place farther north.  Cutlasses were buckled on, pistols freshly capped,
and other usual preparations made when fighting was in hand.

The wind was somewhat light, but at length the stranger's courses rose
above the horizon, when Jos Green, who had mounted to the
signal-station, shouted out, "She's an English brig-of-war, and is
making her number."  Adair sent for the signal-book, and, inquiring the
flag seen, quickly made her out as the _Romp_.

"Why, she's been on the East India station," he observed.  "We shall
soon know all about her, for she's evidently steering for the island,
and the breeze seems to be freshening.  She'll come to an anchor before
long."


CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE MIDSHIPMEN SWIM FOR THEIR LIVES--FIND THE CANOE--ADRIFT ON THE
OCEAN--THEIR SUFFERINGS--PICKED UP BY THE ROMP, COMMANDER JACK ROGERS--
TOM'S MEETING WITH DESMOND AND ARCHIE--ADAIR'S JOY ON SEEING THEM--THE
BANQUET ON THE ISLAND--"MUSIC HATH CHARMS"--BURNING OF A NATIVE
VILLAGE--THE OPAL AND ROMP SAIL FOR ZANZIBAR.

When Gerald Desmond, surprised by the Arabs, was tumbled overboard, he
happily managed to get his head clear of the cloth which had been thrown
round it, and, striking out, he endeavoured to keep himself afloat,
though he had little hopes of saving his life.  Though the night was
dark, he made out two or three objects floating near him.  "Who's
there?" he shouted out.

"Is that you?" asked a voice which he knew to be that of Archie Gordon.
"Help me, Gerald, to get this thing off my head, or I shall be drowned.
Where are we?  What has happened?"

A few strokes brought Gerald up to his messmate, and he quickly tore off
the cloth which the Arabs had bound round his head.

"Praise Heaven that you've escaped, young gentlemen!" exclaimed another
person, who proved to be Jerry Bird; "we've a long swim before us, but
we must try to keep afloat somehow."

While these remarks were being made, the dhow was gliding rapidly away,
leaving them astern.  "I'm afraid it's more than mortals can do to swim
all that distance," said Desmond; "but hallo! what's that? a huge fish
coming to seize us?"

"No, sir," cried Jerry Bird, "it's the canoe.  Someone has cut her
adrift, and we've a better chance for our lives than I thought for."

While they were speaking, a fourth head was seen, which Jerry hailed,
and found that it was that of the man who had been at the helm.  Urging
him to keep up his spirits, the midshipmen and Jerry swam towards the
canoe.  It was no easy matter to get in without capsizing her; but they
managed it, Desmond climbing over the bow and Jerry holding on to the
stern.  As soon as the two were in, Archie followed Desmond, and then
Jerry himself got in.  Their first impulse was to go to the assistance
of the man who was swimming some little way off; but what was their
disappointment on feeling about for the paddles to discover that none
were on board.  They managed, however, with their hands to work up to
the poor fellow, who, being a bad swimmer, was almost exhausted, and on
the point of sinking.  Jerry caught him by the collar just as he was
going down, and sang out to him to catch hold of the stern; but the
difficulty was to get him in without the greatest possible risk of
filling or capsizing the canoe, her gunwale being almost flush with the
water.

"You must manage, Sam, to get in of yourself," said Jerry at length;
"I'll go more for'ard.  But take your time about it; there's nothing to
gain by being in a hurry, and all to lose."

Sam Potts, having recovered his presence of mind, did as he was advised,
and, the rest nicely trimming the canoe, he was enabled to crawl in
directly over the stern, though not without causing a considerable
amount of water to flow in over the gunwale.  The midshipmen with their
caps, and the two men with their hands; quickly baled it out; but so low
was the canoe with their weight, that it was very evident, should any
sea get up, that they would run a great risk of being swamped.

In vain they looked out for the other men, but no sign of them could
they discover.  They hailed, on the chance of their having been thrown
overboard when the dhow had got more ahead, but no reply came to their
shouts.  They must either have been kept on board, or sunk immediately.
Their own situation was, however, too precarious to allow them to
trouble themselves much about the fate of their companions--without food
or water, or the means of propelling their canoe, they might too
probably, even if not drowned, die of hunger and thirst.  Still, they
had reason to be thankful that the canoe had been cast adrift at that
very moment, and that they had been enabled to get on board her.  The
circumstance appeared providential, and why should they, therefore,
fancy that they were to be allowed to perish?

The sea continued calm, and a downpour of rain gave them a sufficient
amount of fresh water, which they caught in their hats and caps, to
quench their thirst.  They dared not move, so Sam Potts remained aft,
Jerry amidships, Desmond next to him, and Archie forward, all of them
sitting with their legs stretched out at the bottom of the canoe.  The
rain made them feel somewhat cold, notwithstanding that after some time
Desmond went off to sleep, to finish the snooze so fatally indulged in
while trying to keep his watch on the deck of the dhow.  Before long
Archie followed his example, as did Sam Potts, leaving Jerry alone
awake.

Thus the night passed away.  The two midshipmen were both awoke at the
same moment by finding the rays of the sun shining in their eyes.
"Where are we?" exclaimed Desmond.  "Faith, I fancied that I was away
snug at home at Ballymacree, and little did I think that I was floating
about in a canoe out in the Mozambique Channel."

"We may be very thankful that we are not at the bottom of the said
channel," remarked Archie.

"Faith, you may say that, my boy," said Desmond; "small thanks to the
rascally Arabs that we are not there.  I only hope another of those
slaving dhows won't come by and run us down.  They're not likely to
treat us with much courtesy if they guess what has happened."

"If a dhow does come by, we must try to board her and take her,"
exclaimed Jerry Bird.

"But we've got no arms," said Archie; "how are we to manage without
them?"

"Take them from the rascals, to be sure, if they show fight," said
Jerry.  "As to running us down, we'll show them that they've made a
mistake if they attempt it.  If a dhow comes near us, we must make the
canoe fast alongside, jump on board all together, seize the arms of the
fellows nearest us, and then lay about us with right goodwill till we've
driven the crew below or overboard."

Although Jerry's plan seemed a somewhat desperate one, its discussion
served to keep up the spirits of the party, who entered into it
cordially; and all agreed that it should be attempted, should they have
the opportunity.  The sun now rose and beat down on their heads with
fearful force, while around them the calm sea shone like burnished gold.
Their hunger increased, while already they began to feel the want of
water.  The midshipmen suffered most.  "I say, Archie, I'm getting
mighty ravenous," whispered Desmond; "I shall be turned into a living
skeleton pretty soon, with no more flesh on my bones than some of the
unfortunate slaves."

"I've taken in a couple of reefs in my belt, and somewhat stopped the
gnawing I was feeling just now," answered Archie; "you'd better do the
same."

"Faith, I should be after cutting myself in two," said Desmond, "before
I could stop this abominable biting in my inside."

Still the two midshipmen kept up their spirits, and talked away in a
cheerful strain, in spite of the heat and their consequently increasing
thirst.  The sea continued calm and the wind so light that it would be
long before a dhow or any other vessel could reach them.  As their
thirst increased, their inclination to converse lessened; and at length
they and the two men continued, often for half an hour together, without
uttering a word.

"I wonder what's become of Harry and Bill," said Sam Potts.  "I've been
thinking of them.  Maybe they're worse off than we are."

"Too likely," said Jerry.  "The slaver's crew wouldn't have left them
alive to bear evidence that we were hove overboard; so, depend upon it,
if they didn't send them after us, they knocked them on the head, or cut
their throats whenever they found them.  Bad as we are off, they, poor
fellows, are much worse.  We may be thankful, Sam, that we are where we
are.  This isn't the first time that I've been in a boat out in
mid-ocean, without a drop of water, and with nothing to eat except maybe
a flying-fish and a brace of noddies we caught, and a dead bird we
picked up, till we came across a whale floating, and, fed on the blubber
for a week or more, though we had to hold our noses as we put it into
our mouths, till we were at length picked up.  So you see, bad off as we
may be, we've no business to give way to despair; help will come from
one side or the other."

These remarks contributed to keep up the spirits of all the party, which
had naturally begun to flag.  As the day advanced the heat became
greater and greater.  They did what they could to keep themselves cool;
they wetted their shirts and their clothes, but they very speedily
became dry again.  The evening of another day was approaching; nearly
four-and-twenty hours had passed since they had taken any food, and not
a biscuit had anyone by chance in his pocket.  At length, after
rummaging in his pocket for some time, Sam Potts drew out a
black-looking lump of about the size of the end joint of his thumb.
"Hurrah!" he exclaimed; "here's a treasure!  Jerry, ask the young
gentlemen if they'd like to have a chaw, I suppose they won't take it
amiss, seeing we're all in the same boat."

The midshipmen thanked Sam, but declined his offer, feeling that it was
more likely to increase their thirst than to lessen it.  Jerry, however,
expressed his gratitude to his mate, who generously gave him half his
precious quid, which he immediately stuffed into his cheek.  "Ah, this
is something like!" he exclaimed; "bless my heart, it's like meat and
drink.  Them as never was out at sea in an open boat, without as much
food as would cover a sixpence, they shouldn't cry out and abuse us poor
fellows for taking a chaw, or enjoying a blow of baccy when we've a
chance."

"You're right, mate," said Sam; "I'd have given my last golden guinea
for a quid, and I believe it will help to keep our bodies and souls
together better nor anything else we was likely to find out here."

The midshipmen, who had heard Jerry's remarks about noddies and
flying-fish, kept looking out in the hopes that they might get hold of
some denizens of the sea or air.  Though occasionally the fin of a shark
appeared above the surface, or some huge monster was seen gambolling at
a distance, no living thing, however, came near to enable them to
satisfy their craving hunger.  Thus the day passed away, and night once
more threw her sable mantle over the ocean.  The sky was clear.  Archie
thought it was his duty to try and sit up and keep watch, but it was
more than he could do, and in a short time both he and Desmond dropped
off into a sound slumber.  Hour after hour they continued in a
half-waking, half-sleeping state, their strength decreasing for want of
food, and even when awake their minds wandering in a strange fashion,
from which they were only aroused when Jerry or Sam spoke to them.
Their case was becoming, they could not help feeling, serious indeed,
and they were conscious that, should relief not arrive, they must, ere
many hours were passed over their heads, succumb to hunger and thirst.
The night seemed interminable, and they could only pray that the
daylight might bring them assistance.  Towards morning they were
somewhat aroused by feeling the canoe tossing about far more than she
had hitherto done, while every now and then the top of a sea washed over
her gunwale, just sufficiently to show them that they had a new danger
to apprehend.  By this time, however, they felt almost indifferent to
anything that might happen.  They were, at length, aroused to action.

"It won't do, sirs, to let the canoe get swamped.  We must turn to and
try to get the water out of her as fast as it comes in," cried Jerry.

"Of course," answered Archie, throwing off the torpor which oppressed
him; "we'll do our best."  Gerald said the same, and at once they began
baling away.  They were thus employed, managing to keep the canoe pretty
clear of water, when dawn again broke.

"A sail! a sail!" cried Jerry, as he was casting his eyes round the
horizon, from which the shades of night were gradually rising; "she's
coming up before the wind, but I'm much afraid that she's one of those
slaving craft after all.  Still, though her crew may be arrant
cut-throats, they can't do us much harm, seeing we're bad enough off at
present."

All the party now kept their eyes fixed on the approaching sail.  On she
came, steering apparently directly for them.  As she drew nearer, she
was seen to be a large dhow, and, there could be little doubt, a slaver.
She was within a mile of them, when, just in her wake, rising above the
horizon, appeared the loftier sails of a square-rigged vessel, also
approaching directly before the wind.  The crew of the dhow had in all
probability seen her, and were endeavouring to escape.

"By the cut of her canvas," exclaimed Jerry, after watching for some
moments, "she's an English man-o'-war."  Sam was of the same opinion.
The two midshipmen hoped they were right.  The question, however, was
how the dhow would treat them.  They were certainly less anxious than
they had been before to get on board her.  Would her crew, from mere
revenge, on recognising the midshipmen's uniforms, give them her stem?
If she did, they must do their best to scramble on board; but then, with
their strength so diminished, they would scarcely be able to clamber up,
much less to fight, as Jerry had proposed.

A few minutes more must settle the question.  As the ship was standing
directly after the dhow, they might, at all events, be picked up by her;
and they, therefore, earnestly hoped that the latter might pass without
observing them, or, if she did, without molesting them.  On she came.

"She's steering somewhat wide of us, sir," exclaimed Jerry, "and I don't
think we've been seen as yet."

What the Arabs might have done had they not been chased, it was
difficult to say.  The canoe was apparently not discovered till the dhow
was within a few cables' length of her.  The dhow would have had to
deviate slightly from her course to run down the canoe; as it was, she
passed scarcely twenty fathoms off, her dark-skinned crew casting savage
looks at the Englishmen.  While the dhow was gliding by, the two
midshipmen and their companions sat up watching her.

"They've made out who we are, sir," cried Jerry; "and the villains, if
they're not pointing their matchlocks at us!  Lie flat down, and we
shall have a better chance of escaping."  Scarcely had he spoken than
several shots came flying by the canoe, one close over her; but happily,
as Jerry's advice had been followed, no one was hit, and the dhow,
impelled by the fresh breeze, went rapidly ahead, leaving the canoe far
astern, before the slavers could fire another volley.

"You arrant scoundrels!" shouted Jerry; "we'll pay you off one of these
days."

After this excitement the whole party would have sunk back into their
former state of apathy, had not the approaching vessel given them matter
to keep them aroused.  Her topsails were now above the horizon, and soon
her courses appeared; by which time, however, the sails of the swift
dhow had already begun to disappear on the other side.  Indeed, it was
evident that she was gaining rapidly on her pursuer, which would have
very little chance of catching her.

"That craft is an English brig-of-war," exclaimed Jerry, at length.
"Though she hasn't a chance of catching the slaver, she'll see us, I've
a hope, and before long we shall have some grub and water on board."

"There's no chance, I trust, of their passing us?" said Archie.

"No fear of that, sir," replied Jerry; "they keep too bright a look-out
on board.  Depend on't, they've made us out before now."

The wind was again failing, and should it become calm, the brig might
not come up before dark.  Still, if the canoe, as Jerry supposed, was
already seen, of course a look-out would be kept for her.  For half an
hour or more, hopes and fears alternately predominated.  "They've made
us out--no fear on that score," cried Jerry; "I saw the people on the
foc's'le waving to us."  As he spoke, the brig shortened sail; a boat
was lowered, and, ere a minute had passed, she sheered alongside the
canoe.  A midshipman and warrant-officer, with four hands, were in her.

"Bear a hand; lift the poor fellows on board carefully--sharp about it,"
cried the former.  "We must not lose a moment; they seem very far gone."
Desmond and Archie were placed in the sternsheets, while even Jerry and
Sam could not, without the help of others, manage to crawl into the
boat.

The canoe was dropped astern, while the boat pulled back to the brig;
the whole manoeuvre, being properly executed, occupying but a very few
minutes.  The midshipman, attending simply to the work in hand, had not
looked at the countenances of the people he had rescued.  Just, however,
as the boat had hooked on, he cast his eyes at the face of one of his
companions, and then at the other.  "Why, gunner," he exclaimed, "I do
believe that they are Gerald Desmond and Archie Gordon!"

"You're right, Tom," cried Gerald, who was not so far gone as to be
unable to speak; "and mighty glad I am to see you--only, as you love us,
get us some grub, or we shall be after hopping the twig."

"No fear about that, young gentleman," said Dick Needham, who was the
warrant-officer in the boat; "we'll have you on board in a quarter less
no time, and under care of the doctor; he'll soon bring you round,
though you mustn't be eating too much at first."

The midshipmen and their companions were speedily hoisted on board, when
Tom Rogers announced to the commander who they were, and the condition
in which he had found them.  Broth and other restoratives being quickly
prepared, and duly administered, in a very short time they were able to
use their tongues sufficiently to give an account of themselves.

"Well, I'm glad we fell in with you," cried Tom, "and so is my brother
Jack--if not for your sake, on account of his old shipmates, Murray and
Adair.  They would have been precious sorry to lose you, and so should
I.  And now we've fallen in with each other, we shall have the chance of
some good fun together, for the brig is to be employed, during the
remainder of her commission, in slave-hunting.  My brother Jack is only
acting-commander of the _Romp_, but he's sure to be confirmed before
long.  He got no end of credit in the work we've been engaged in up the
Irrawaddy, of which I'll tell you by and by.  I often wished that you
fellows were with us.  It beat all the service we saw out in South
America."

"And Archie and I have often, of late, said how we longed to have you
with us, Tom," answered Desmond; "not that we've had the same sort of
fun we enjoyed in our first cruise.  It has been much rougher work, on
the whole, and I haven't fallen in with any Irish cousins, or the lots
of nice girls we met in the West Indies; but, after all, the life we
lead when boat-cruising is as much to my taste as anything I can fancy."

Tom, of course, replied that he hoped to have some of it, and that he
should try to get his brother to send him away on an expedition.

Though but a short time had been lost in picking up the canoe, it was
sufficient to allow the dhow to run out of sight.  Jack, who was bound
for Zanzibar, of course had now to bring up off Mafamale, for the sake
of landing Archie and Gerald, and to set Adair's anxiety about them at
rest.  He was very glad also of the opportunity he should thus obtain of
seeing his old shipmates.

The two midshipmen, though still somewhat weak, had greatly recovered by
the time the island was sighted.  Scarcely had the _Romp_ dropped her
anchor than Adair came on board.  His surprise on seeing Jack was almost
as great as his satisfaction at finding the midshipmen and the two other
men safe and sound.  Jack had some time before heard of the death of
Kathleen.  The recollection of her threw a shade of melancholy over the
meeting of the two friends, but after a short time he managed to cast it
off, and talked away eagerly of their past adventures and future
prospects.

"I am glad to find, Jack, that you are so certain of your promotion,"
said Adair; "I wish that I could think the same of my own prospects.
Lord Derrynane will do the best he can for me; but when he paid his last
visit at the Admiralty, the First Lord told him that, though I was a
remarkably promising young officer, he had so many promising young
officers deserving of promotion that he should fill the service with
commanders if he was to attend to the requests of all his friends.  I
can only hope for the chance of doing something which must compel their
Lordships to promote me."

"I hope you may, Terence, with all my heart," exclaimed Jack; "and if
not, we must get Admiral Triton to advocate your cause.  I shouldn't
feel comfortable getting my step unless you, who deserve it quite as
much, obtained yours also."

As soon as Adair returned on shore, he found that Jos Green and the rest
of the party had been arranging to invite the commander and officers of
the _Romp_ to a banquet on the island; and a note, couched in the usual
formal style, was immediately despatched, a favourable answer being
returned.

"But, as to provender--what have we got, Green?" asked Adair.

"Some of it isn't yet caught, to be sure," answered Green; "but we've
sent the men out with the seine, and we shall have an ample supply,
though there may be no great variety."

Shortly before the dinner-time arrived, a sail was seen standing up from
the southward, and was soon pronounced to be the corvette.  The proposed
banquet was therefore postponed till her arrival; an additional haul of
the seine was made, and a further supply of fish secured.  The breeze
was fresh, and, as she was under all sail, the _Opal_ soon came to an
anchor, and Murray and his officers at once accepted the invitation sent
off to them.  He had naturally become very anxious at discovering no
traces of the midshipmen, and was proportionately thankful when he found
that they were safe.

Thus the three old shipmates, after an absence of upwards of two years,
once again met.  At the appointed hour, the invited guests from the two
men-of-war arrived on shore.  Jos Green had undertaken to superintend
the arrangements.  All hands who could be spared from their culinary
duties, rigged out in their cleanest, were marshalled to serve as a
guard of honour.  He had formed also a band, and though regular musical
instruments were scarce, he had with much ingenuity contrived half a
dozen drums made out of empty meat-tins, the same number of horns formed
of conch shells, and a similar number of fifes and flutes, which had
previously been manufactured on the island, during the leisure hours of
some of the men who took delight in harmonious sounds.

Murray and Jack, as they walked up from the landing-place, laughed
heartily at the preparations for their reception.  Though the music was
open to criticism, the banquet surpassed their expectations.  Their
seats were three-legged stools, but the table was bountifully spread.
At one end was a huge bowl of peasoup, at the other a similar one of
fish; at the sides were several varieties of fried fish and boiled fish,
roast and boiled fowls, obtained from a dhow--a legal trader, which had
been overhauled; salt junk, of course, was not wanting, with preserved
vegetables, and a liberal supply of yams; while bottles of beer, porter,
and rum, constituted the chief beverages.  Lastly, too, plum-puddings,
somewhat resembling those stone-shot used by the Turks in days of yore,
were placed before the carvers, and were pronounced excellent as to
composition, but were declared to possess rather more consistency than
was absolutely requisite.  Indeed, few of the guests, with the exception
of the midshipmen, made any great inroads on them.

The viands being removed, songs were sung and healths drunk; the most
important of the latter being the success of Britain's arms by sea and
land, a speedy end to the slave-trade, and health and prosperity to the
Queen and all the royal family.  Dinner being over, races were run,
leap-frog indulged in, games of rounders played on a grand scale, and
hits made such as only sailors could accomplish, and a variety of other
sports which the nature of the ground and circumstances would allow.

Business, however, had to be attended to.  Adair had left four men on
board the dhow, and two only besides the midshipmen had been recovered.
There could be no doubt, therefore, that two had been murdered, as would
have been the case with the whole party, had not the canoe so
providentially got adrift at the right moment.  It was suspected that
the old chief, Mustapha Longchops, had instigated the crime, and though
he and the Arabs had been sent to their account, his people, who had so
grossly insulted the British officers, were not to be allowed to escape
unpunished.  The corvette and brig, therefore, early the next morning,
accompanied by the boats, proceeded off to the village, where they
brought up.  The sea being tolerably calm, and there being no surf, as
they neared the shore six boats were at once manned and sent in to
inflict condign punishment on the heads of the transgressors.

The party, headed by Rogers and Adams, formed on the beach.  Their
arrival had been observed by the natives, who, with tom-toms beating and
horns sounding, were drawn up in large numbers on the side of the hill
to defend their village.  Jack gave the order to advance; the natives
stood for a few seconds--then, even before a single shot had been fired,
they turned tail and scampered off as fast as their legs could carry
them.  The only volley fired brought a few down, and hastened the flight
of the rest, who were out of sight before the village was reached.  Not
a human being was found in any of the huts, which were speedily set on
fire and burned to the ground, while a grove of trees growing near was
cut down--a far more severe punishment than the burning of the miserable
huts, which could be easily restored.  This necessary though
unsatisfactory work being accomplished, the party returned on board, and
the corvette and brig, having received the captured slaves, made sail
for Zanzibar.


CHAPTER EIGHT.

ANOTHER DHOW CHASED--SLAVES THROWN OVERBOARD--DHOW CAPTURED--HER HOLD--
ZANZIBAR--"SPICY ODOURS"--A TRIP ON SHORE--THE SLAVE-MARKET--HORRORS OF
THE SLAVE-TRADE IN THE INTERIOR--A STORE IN ZANZIBAR--MURRAY AND ADAIR
PAY A VISIT TO THE SULTAN--SUMMARY JUSTICE.

Upwards of a fortnight had gone by since the corvette and brig last
weighed anchor.  Neither of them had been idle; numerous dhows had been
chased, some of them overtaken and boarded.  A large proportion of them
had been of necessity let go, from want of sufficient evidence to
warrant their condemnation.  The corvette had captured two with slaves
on board, and continued her course with them; while the _Romp_ had
parted company, chasing a suspicious sail which made every effort to
escape.  On being turned from the shore by the _Opal_, whose boats had
been sent after her, she had stood to the eastward.

She was a large craft, with an enormous spread of canvas, and the little
_Romp_ had to put her best foot foremost to keep her in sight.  Jack
Rogers, however, was not to be disappointed of his prey.  Setting every
stitch of canvas the brig could carry, he steered after her, hoping that
by some fortunate chance he might at length get her under his guns.

Dick Needham and Tom were standing on the forecastle, with their glances
directed towards the chase, on which it was evident they were at length
gaining.  "It seems to me, Mr Needham," observed Tom, who had been
taking a long, steady look at the chase, "they're heaving something
overboard; what it is I can't make out,--scarcely a cargo of ballast,--
but we shall soon discover when we get up to her, as we shall, I hope,
before long."

Needham took another steady look.  "As true as I'm an Englishman, it is
her cargo though," he exclaimed; "a living cargo, or what was living not
long ago.  They're heaving overboard the black slaves; not one at a
time, as I've seen down on the West Coast, just to induce the cruiser in
chase to heave-to for the purpose of picking them up, but dozens at a
time, so it seems to me.  Yes, I am sure of it, the outrageous villains!
they've no notion of the power of our glasses.  I wish our guns would
carry as far; we'd soon make them understand that we'd our eyes upon
them."

"I'll go and tell the commander," exclaimed Tom.  "Can nothing be done
to stop them?"

"We're doing all we can, for we can't make the brig walk faster than
she's going," answered Needham.

Tom hurried aft with the information, and Jack and most of his officers
were soon directing their glasses on the dhow.  Although some doubted
that the black objects they saw thrown over the side could really be
human beings, the majority were of opinion that such was the case.
Little had Jack thought, when going in chase of the slaver, that he was
to be the unintentional cause of the death of numbers of his
fellow-creatures; yet he was convinced that such really was the case.

Eager as all were to stop the butchery they believed going forward, it
was impossible to set more sail or to do anything else to make the brig
move along faster.  They could only wish that they had steam-power,
when, if a dead calm should come on, they might quickly have got up with
the dhow.  As it was, all they could do was to steer steadily after her,
and as soon as they could get her within range of their bow-chasers, to
fire away, and compel her to heave-to.  The best of the day was before
them, so that, should the wind hold, they must ultimately come up with
her.  This was their only consolation.  Since she was first sighted they
had gained a couple of miles on her, and should they continue to gain on
her at the same rate, they might soon be throwing shot and shell through
her canvas.

The men, when they heard what was taking place, entered fully into the
feelings of their officers.  Many a sincere prayer was offered up that
the dhow might be taken and the murderers punished.  Anxiously the
course of the sun was watched as it sank towards the distant coast; for
should night come on before the dhow was captured, the murderous Arabs
might escape from the avenger of blood in hot pursuit after them.

"If they have been guilty of the horrible deed we suspect, I don't think
that they will escape," said Jack.  "Even if they do get free of us,
Heaven will inflict on them the punishment they deserve, by some other
means."

Two more hours passed, when, the brig having gained another mile, the
hopes of all on board rose proportionately.  At length Needham came aft.
"I think, sir, we might reach her with our long six-pounder, and a shot
or two through her sails would take the speed out of her."  Already the
sun's lower limb was touching the horizon.

"The experiment is worth trying," answered Rogers.

The gun was mounted on the forecastle, and charged with a shell.  The
first shell burst astern of the dhow, which still continued standing on.
Needham was quickly ready, and fired another.  "Hurrah!" he exclaimed;
"I thought so."  It touched her large sail, and, exploding at the same
moment, rent it in all directions.  Still she did not heave-to.  A third
and fourth shell were thrown, the sail being again torn by the latter.
The brig now gained fast on the chase; still, so rapidly does darkness
come on after sunset in that latitude, that the Arabs possibly still
hoped to effect their escape.  Their courage, however, at length gave
way, as one shot after another struck them, and both sails were seen to
come down together.  The brig now quickly got up with the chase, and,
heaving-to to leeward, two boats were lowered, Tom accompanying the
second lieutenant in one, with the interpreter, while Needham had charge
of the other.

As they got up alongside, about thirty piratical-looking ruffians,
headed by their skipper, stood prepared to receive them.  They appeared
in no way disconcerted as the English leaped on board.

"Ask the negoda what has become of the slaves with which he lately
sailed, Hamed," said the lieutenant.

The Arab answered at some length: "He says they have had no slaves on
board, and the dhow was becoming leaky, and they had to throw the cargo
into the sea," said Hamed.

"Then inquire why he ran away from us," said the lieutenant.

Again Hamed and the skipper had a long talk.  "The negoda says he was in
a hurry, and thought the brig was a pirate," said Hamed.

"Very likely.  You don't think he speaks the truth?" observed the
lieutenant.

"He speakee lie," said Hamed.

"Tell him we, at all events, intend to search his vessel," said the
lieutenant, "and we shall judge whether she's leaky or not, or whether
there's any foundation for his statement."

Lanterns had been brought in the boat.  While one-half of the English
kept watch over the villains on deck, the others descended with Tom and
Needham into the horribly-smelling hold.  A large quantity of bamboos
were found, the remains of slave-decks, with a larger supply of rice,
millet, and water than the Arabs were likely to carry for themselves.
There was a miscellaneous cargo below under the slave-deck, which had
certainly not been interfered with.  There was evidence sufficient to
condemn the vessel, but not a proof that the slaves had been murdered,
though there could be no doubt that, if not lately landed, they must
have been disposed of by foul means.

"I fancied I heard a groan," said Tom, as he was groping about.  Needham
came to the spot, and eager hands were soon engaged in removing some of
the cargo; when, from beneath it, in a hollow space, they drew forth a
human being, a boy ten or, twelve years of age, fearfully emaciated.
One of the seamen carried him on deck, his appearance causing a
considerable agitation among the Arab crew.  Hamed addressed the lad,
who replied to him in a faint voice.  Even the interpreter's
unattractive countenance expressed horror.

"He say he got loose, and hide away because he hear the cries of the
rest of the slaves.  The Arabs cut their throats, and tumble them into
the sea.  He sure they were two hundred or more this morning, men and
women and children, and now he alone remain," said Hamed.  No further
evidence than this was necessary to condemn the Arab crew, and the
lieutenant immediately ordered them into the boats, and sent them on
board the brig, leaving Tom with four hands to take charge of the dhow.

On their arrival Jack immediately held a court to try the accused, with
himself as judge, and his two lieutenants as assistants.  The evidence
of the slave boy was considered conclusive; the prisoners were called up
one by one for their defence, but as they had no time to concoct a
story, they each of them told a different tale.  Jack felt very much
inclined to run them all together up to his yard-arm, but as this might
be looked upon as too summary a way of proceeding, he ordered them to be
placed in irons, to undergo a regular trial as soon as he could fall in
with the commodore.  He arrived, however, at the conclusion that the
dhow was a lawful prize, and to prevent the risk of her ever carrying
more slaves, he issued an order that she should immediately be set on
fire.  Tom, who had been anticipating the result, was very much pleased
when the gunner returned with Jack's orders for her destruction.  Light
was set to her fore and aft, and as the boats pulled away, flames burst
out from all directions, the glare, as they rose higher, extending to a
far distance across the ocean.

The Arabs were kept on deck to witness the burning of their vessel.  For
a few minutes the fire raged furiously, the flames rising in one huge
pyramid, till on a sudden they disappeared as she sunk beneath the
surface, to which so many of her hapless passengers had lately been
consigned.

"It would have served the villains right if they'd been left on board,"
observed Needham; "and I say, Hamed, just tell them so, and it is to be
hoped they will get their due before long."

Meantime, the _Opal_, with her prizes, sighted the southern end of
Zanzibar.  As she ran along the western shore, the flat-roofed
buildings, like palaces with numerous windows, gave the place an
appearance of considerable opulence and magnificence.  On either side of
the city stretched away a low coast-line of glittering sand, above which
could be seen cocoanut palms, raising their lofty heads at intervals,
while the country, gradually rising towards the centre, appeared covered
with bright green plantations of cloves, pineapples, and sweetly
blossoming mangoes, the perfume of which Mildmay declared he could
inhale even from that distance.

"Wait till you visit the town, and then you may talk of inhaling
perfumes, though they're not of the sweetest," observed Jos Green.  "If
the wind comes off-shore we may get a sniff of spicy odours, but I never
found them quite strong enough to swear to, whatever the poets may say
on the subject."

"Your olfactory powers are too coarse to enjoy them, that's the fact,"
observed Mildmay.

Here and there valleys opened up covered with orange-groves, sugar-cane,
cassava, and other valuable productions of the soil.  The harbour was
full of dhows of all sizes, some at anchor full of slaves bound
northward, but which, having licences from the Sultan, the English
cruisers could not touch; others close to the wharves, landing or
trans-shipping ivory, brought across from the African coast, gum, copal,
spices, cocoanuts, rice, mats, and other produce of the island, besides
several German, American, French, and other foreign vessels.  Here also
lay the Sultan's fleet, with blood-red ensigns floating from their
mastheads, the ships being remarkable, if for nothing else, for their
weather-beaten, sunburned appearance.

"They put me in mind of scarecrows in a garden, which the birds have
learned to look at with contempt; and so, I doubt not, do the Arab
slavers or piratical gentry who cruise in these seas laugh at these
useless ships," observed Green.

In the afternoon, Murray, accompanied by his second lieutenant and the
two midshipmen, went on shore.  "We shall be after smelling the spicy
odours in full vigour," observed Desmond to Mr Mildmay, he having
overheard the conversation of the morning.  They had not, however, set
foot on the shore many seconds, and commenced their walk through the
narrow streets, before the lieutenant had his handkerchief to his nose.
"Horrible! detestable!" he muttered; "never was in so vile a place in my
life."

The whitewashed houses, too, which appeared handsome palaces in the
distance, were now discovered, with few exceptions, to be sadly
dilapidated; while the streets were thronged by an ill-favoured mob of
all hues, from jet black to a sickly parchmentlike yellow.  There were
shops in the dirty-looking town, filled with all sorts of goods from
Birmingham and Sheffield.  Their owners were chiefly Banians, who were
seen sitting cross-legged among their wares, the men dressed in turbans
of many folds, reaching to a point, with long robes and collars of gold
or silver round their necks; the women profusely decorated with
ornaments, with rings on their fingers and toes, and golden
nose-ornaments and ear-ornaments studded with precious stones; while
many had massive silver bracelets and anklets.

In an open court under the verandah was seated a schoolmaster, with long
white beard, his pupils sprawling about on not over-clean mats, studying
a huge Koran placed on a stand before them, mumbling in monotonous tones
their lessons; the teacher more asleep than awake, the pupils imitating
his example, and looking as lazy and indifferent as possible.

Inside and out of many of the shops were heaps of ivory-tusks, collected
by the traders in the interior of Africa, and brought down to the coast;
and in others food of the most disgusting appearance--sharks' flesh,
rancid ghee, and other unsavoury articles, the vendors of which were
hideous negresses, rolling in fat, scarcely bearing any resemblance to
the female sex.  The commander and his followers, glad to get out of the
narrow streets, found themselves in a square, where in a semicircle they
saw collected a number of slaves, some standing up, others sitting down,
incapable of supporting themselves on their feet; most of them miserably
emaciated skeletons, looking as if they had not many hours to live.
Within the semicircle were a number of Arabs of high and low degree, a
few of them well-dressed and armed to the teeth, others dirty and
shabby; but all intent on business.  They were either slave--dealers, or
purchasers of slaves for their private establishments.  In one part of
the square were five or six female slaves for sale, their ages ranging
from twelve to sixteen, gorgeously dressed in coloured garments.  One of
the gentlemen Arabs approached to make a purchase.  The slave-dealer
vaunted the qualifications of his merchandise, much as an auctioneer
does the goods of which he has to dispose.  The purchaser felt the poor
girls' limbs, looked into their mouths, and trotted them out to see
their paces; then, after haggling for some time, walked off with two
which he had selected.  The others were purchased much in the same
manner; the remainder of the lots were disposed of with much less
ceremony.  On one side was a row of little boys from four to six years
old, who were valued, so Hamed said, at about three dollars apiece.  The
girls, who were of a somewhat maturer age, went at from six to twelve
dollars, while stout young fellows, out of whom plenty of work might be
got, went for much higher prices.

The rest were wretched old men, broken down by the hardships they had
endured during the fearful overland journey, and the not less miserable
voyage.  Many fetched not more than a dollar apiece.  The old women, all
of whom were either hideously tattooed, or had their lips extended with
large holes, showing their teeth, went for very little more than the
men.  There they had been sitting since the morning, exposed to the
fierce rays of the sun, their brutal owners having given them no food,
or even a cup of water to quench their thirst.  So worn out were
several, that even when told to get up, they, as if not understanding
the order, stared in stolid apathy.  Had they exhibited the same
obstinacy on the mainland, they would, in all probability, have been
knocked on the head, and left to die on the roadside.  Perhaps the most
melancholy sight was the group of little children, all infantine life
and animation crushed out of them.  There they silently sat, without
attempting to move, till ordered by their owners to rise.  Poor little
creatures! long ago they had been torn from their parents, and those
parents probably murdered, or, if captured, disposed of to some other
slave-dealers, while the persons around were in most instances utter
strangers, perhaps from distant parts of the country, and unable to
understand their language.  They had been brought in legal traders under
the sanction of the Sultan, and were intended either for domestic
service, or to labour in the various plantations on the island.

Murray was glad to quit the scene, but it was important that he should
have seen it.  He was satisfied that his midshipmen should have done so
likewise, that they might the better understand the horrors and
abominations of the slave-trade.

"Faith, I'll never complain of any hard work we may have to go through,
provided we can catch more of those slavers," exclaimed Desmond; "it
would be a glorious thing to put a stop to the traffic altogether."

"We'll do our best, Desmond," said the commander; "though it may take us
long before we can teach the Arabs that it is more profitable to them to
deal in the produce of the country than in their black-skinned
fellow-creatures."

Every seaport town abroad has its general store, kept by some noted
individual, at which articles of every possible description, from a
chain cable to a paper of needles, can be purchased, at more or less
exorbitant prices; where masters and mates of merchantmen, and ofttimes
their crews, as well as traders of high and low degree, congregate to
discuss their business affairs, and to renovate the inner man with
beverages more or less potent.  Zanzibar, albeit not one of the most
civilised cities, boasted such an establishment, kept by a personage
yclept French Charlie.  Although he possessed a Gallic appellation, he
had nothing French besides his name about him; he being a mongrel of
mongrels, with a large dash of Portuguese, and perhaps some African and
Arab blood.  Whatever his other qualifications, he had his eye open to
the main chance.

Murray having now to order some stores, directed Hamed to lead him to
the house.  With pocket-handkerchiefs at their noses, the party
proceeded along one of the narrowest and most dirty of the streets till
they arrived before a stone edifice in a most dilapidated condition--
such, indeed, is the normal state of all the buildings in the city.  The
main door opening into the street, they immediately entered the store,
having to pick their way amid casks and huge coarse sacks filled to
bursting, piled up to the ceiling; the dirty earthen floor full of holes
more or less deep, while countless ants, cockroaches, spiders,
centipedes, and other reptiles, crawled in all directions.  On one side
through an archway was seen a second apartment, in which, round a large
table covered with tumblers, jugs, and flat round bottles, were seen
seated a dozen or more merchant seamen of various nations, those from
Yankee-land predominating, with an equal number of half-caste females
gaudily dressed in Oriental costume, the whole party by their attitudes
and looks already more than half-seas-over; some shouting and singing at
the top of their voices, others attempting to sing, but uttering only
spasmodic sounds, as the fumes of the liquor they were pouring down
their throats mounted to such brains as they might possess.

Murray turned from the disgusting scene, and, passing on, was met by
Monsieur Charlie, who, order-book in hand, with his dark-skinned,
woolly--covered cranium and squat figure, resembled more a toad than a
human being.  "Anything, Senor Captain, you vant?--me got in my store,
all so cheap and so excellent," he said, making an attempt to bow, his
keen, twinkling eyes fixed on his visitors, while he waited eagerly to
note down the orders he might receive.  "You will take vun glass, sare,
of something cool?  I have Bordeaux just arrived; and de young
gentlemen, dey surely like something--and my goot friend Hamed, we know
each oder, and surely de Prophet not object to him to take just a little
vine for him tummuck."

Murray, who had no wish to inhale longer than necessary the ill odours
of the place, declined his liberal offers for himself and his
companions, and, examining his list, gave an order for the articles he
required, which Senor Charlie promised should be on board punctually the
first thing next morning.

On their way back to the landing-place they caught sight of several of
the _Opal's_ crew, who had been allowed to come on shore, surrounded by
a group of ill-looking Arabs, all with arms in their hands, by their
gestures showing that they were endeavouring to incite the Englishmen to
quarrel, as they kept stalking round them, clutching their daggers.  The
sailors, each of whom carried a thick stick, regarded the Arabs with the
utmost contempt, as they rolled onward along the streets, every now and
then only turning round and advising them to keep at a respectful
distance.  As they caught sight of their commander, touching their hats,
they came to a standstill, while the Arabs, scowling fiercely at them,
hung back.  Murray was thankful that he had fallen in with them, for it
was evident that the Arabs would have taken the earliest opportunity of
attacking them, in revenge for the loss of the slaving dhows which they
had assisted to capture.  He ordered them, much to their disappointment,
to return with him to the boat, thereby saving them from the Arab
daggers, or an almost equally dangerous visit to French Charlie's store.

As he got down to the harbour, much to his satisfaction, he saw the
_Romp_ standing in, and before returning to his own ship he went on
board her.  Jack gave him an account of his capture of the slaver, and,
having Hamed with him, they were at once able to interrogate the slave
boy who had been saved, and to examine some of the prisoners.  The boy,
who had lately recovered by a few days' good food and kind treatment,
showed more than the ordinary intelligence exhibited by captured slaves.
He had been taken while away from his native village, with several
other boys, watching their cattle.  The men of their tribe, hearing of
their capture, attempted to rescue them, but were driven back with the
loss of several killed and a considerable number taken alive.  They were
all, he and his friends, dragged away, till they joined the main body,
who were forced along, secured two and two by a heavy pole with a fork
at each end, into which their necks were fixed.  He saw several drop
from fatigue, whom the Arabs endeavoured to compel to rise with the
points of their spears; if they refused to do so, the masters either
killed them with their axes, or, driving their spears into their bodies,
left them weltering in their blood, either to die of their wounds or to
be devoured by wild beasts.  After travelling for upwards of twenty
days, the coast was reached, and they were embarked on board the dhow,
which ran in to receive them, taking many more at other places, till her
hold was filled.  Having been detained by calms, they had been badly
fed, with a limited amount of water; and, an epidemic breaking out among
them, several had died, and not only they but others who appeared in a
dying state were hove overboard.  He, being strong and active, had been
employed in assisting to carry food to the other slaves.  He had,
moreover, learned a little Arabic.

When chased by the brig-of-war, he had overheard the Arabs talking about
what they would do should it become likely that they would be captured.
He understood that they intended to throw all the slaves overboard, so
as to pass for a legal trader.  On finding this, he managed to creep
below, and to stow himself away in the place where he had been found.
Scarcely had he concealed himself when he knew, by the cries and shrieks
of his own countrymen, that the work of butchery had begun.  He had
little hopes of escaping, but life even to him was dear, and he kept in
his hiding-place, hoping, at all events, to prolong it.  His evidence
was clear and circumstantial.

Several of the Arabs were next examined, and had no valid excuse to
offer, except that the slaves were their own property, and they had a
right to do with them as they thought fit.  As many had already died,
and as, probably, the greater number would have been carried off by
disease before they could reach their destination, this was probably
their real opinion, and accounted for their determination to murder the
whole of their captives in the hopes of saving their vessel from
condemnation.

Murray and Jack at once resolved to call on the Sultan, and to state the
case to him, on the possibility of its opening his eyes to the horrors
of the slave-trade, and inducing him the more willingly to assist in its
suppression.

As it was still daylight, and Hamed informed them that the evening was
the best time to see the Sultan, they at once pulled on shore.  Going
through the dirty streets, they reached the Sultan's tumbledown-looking
palace, where His Majesty was seen seated in a half-open apartment
facing the street, furnished with divans and piles of mats.  For
myself I have always felt that if the premises of Christianity were
valid at all, they placed the Negro upon precisely the same plane as
the white man; that if the premises of democracy were true for the
white man, they were true for the black.

There should be no artificial distinction created by law, and what is
much more to the purpose, by custom simply because the one man
has a skin different in hue than the other. Nor should the law, once
having been made equal, be nullified by a lack of observance on the part
of the whites nor be abrogated by tacit agreements or by further legislation
subtly worded so as to avoid constitutional requirements. Each man and
woman should be tested by his qualities and achievements and valued for
what he is.

I am sure no Negro asks for more, and yet I am afraid it is true,
as many have complained, that in considerable sections of this
country he receives far less.

I have long believed that we are concerned in this case with no reasoned
choice and with no explainable act, but with an unconscious impulse,
a subconscious impulse possibly, with an illogical, unreasonable
but powerful and in-explainable reaction of which the white man
himself is scarcely conscious and yet which he feels to be stronger
than all the impulses created in him by reason and logic.

What is its origin? Is there such a force? I think most will agree
there is such an instinctive aversion or dislike.

I am inclined to carry it back into the beginnings of the race, back
to the period of pre-historic law and to that psychological origin
which antedates the records of history, in the strict sense, to
that part of racial history indeed where men commonly act rather
than write.

The idea of prehistoric law is that obligation exists only between
people of the same blood. Originally, charitable and decent conduct
was expected only of people of the same family. Even though the family
was by fact or fiction extended to include some hundreds or even
thousands of people, the fact was still true. The law which bound a
man limited his good conduct to a relatively few people. Outside the
blood kin he was not bound. He must not steal from his relatives, but
if he stole from another clan, his relatives deemed it virtue.

If he committed murder, he should be punished within his clan, but
protected, if possible, by his clan, if he murdered someone outside it.
The blood kin became the definite limitation of the ideas of right and
responsibility. This was true between whites. All whites were not members
of any one man's blood kin.

Palpably more true was this distinction between the Negro and the white
man. The Negro could not by any fiction be represented as one of the
blood kin. The Romans extended the legal citizenship to cover all white
men in their dominions. It was the fictitious tie of the blood kin, but
its plausibility was due to the fact that they were all white. I do not
remember to have seen any proof that the Negro inhabitants of the
Roman African colonies were considered Roman citizens.

This is one of the oldest psychological lines in human history; the rights
which a man must concede to another are limited by the relationship
of blood. _Prima facie_ there could be no blood relationship between
the Negro and the white man.

There could therefore be no obligation on the white man's part to the
Negro in prehistoric law. This notion has, I think, endured in many ways
down to the present day as a subconscious, unconscious factor behind
many very vital notions and ideas. Is it not true that international law
has been, more often than not, a law between white men?

The next point I hesitate somewhat to make because it is difficult to
state without over-emphasis and without saying more than one means. I
think it probable that in one way or another the idea of Christianity
became connected with the notion of the blood kin and in that sense
limited to the blood kin of those to whom Jesus came. Everyone is
familiar with the Jewish notion that Jesus was their own particular
Messiah, and that the Gentiles were foreclosed claims upon him. As
Christianity grew, it grew still among the white nations, and the
notion of it was not, I think, extended for a good many centuries
to any except white people.

The premises of Christianity unquestionably included the Negro, but the
notion of the blood kin excluded him, and Christianity, like other religious
ideas, was limited to the people who first created it and to those
who were actually or by some plausible fiction their kin in blood.
The idea of the expansion of the blood kin by adoption either of
an individual or of a community of individuals was very old and
thoroughly well established, but I think the idea never was applied
to Negroes, Indians, or Chinamen except in unfrequent cases of
individuals.

A volume would be required to bring forward all the available evidence
regarding this idea, and another perhaps to examine and develop
it, to consider and weigh the _pros_ and meet the _cons_.

But it will perhaps suffice for present purposes to throw out the idea
for consideration without an attempt at more considerable defense.

Another fact which has been most difficult to explain has been the
continued lynchings of Negroes not merely for crimes against women,
but for all sorts of other crimes, large and small.

Here the traces of primitive law are very much clearer. Lynching is
after all nothing more nor less than the old self-help. The original
notion was that the individual should execute the law himself when he
could, and that he was entitled in case of crime to assistance from the
community in the execution of the law upon the offender. Murder, arson,
rape and the theft of cattle were the particular crimes for which
self-help by the individual and by the community in his assistance
were authorized by primitive law. The preliminaries and formularies were
very definite, but they do not look to us of the present day like
procedure. It is true, however, that there are very few lynchings in
which these formulas have not been unconsciously followed. There must
be a hue and cry and pursuit along the trail.

The murderer must be immediately pursued. The person against whom the crime
is committed or his next of kin must raise an immediate outcry, and they
and the neighbors must proceed at once in pursuit. If they caught the
criminal within a reasonable distance or within a reasonable time, they
then were endowed by primitive law with the right to execute justice
upon him themselves. Commonly the criminal was hanged (even for theft)
when caught in the act, but barbarous punishments were not uncommon.
That was legal procedure, provided the cry was raised, the pursuit
undertaken, and the criminal caught within a reasonable number of
hours or days as the case might be.

The mob had the right to execute the law, and it is not often that lynchings
take place long periods after the commission of the crime. Such for many
centuries was the law in Europe for whites. Self-help applied in
particular to men of different tribes or communities who were not of
the same blood kin.

If self-help applied under certain conditions within the blood kin as
it unquestionably did, that is to say, within the law, it applied with
greater force to all classes and offenders who were outside the
blood kin and were outside the law.

If a stranger or an alien came within the community bounds and did not
sound his horn, community law sanctioned his instant killing by anyone
who met him. Men could not peaceably enter the precincts of the
German tribes as late as the year 500 or 600 A.D. without being
liable to instant death unless they complied with certain definite
formularies. Until within five hundred years, the stranger was practically
without rights in any country but his own, and might be dealt
with violently by individuals or bodies of citizens. One has but to
remember the tortures visited upon the Jews in all European countries
with impunity to realize the truth of the doctrine of self-help
when applied to strangers.

There was literally no law to govern the situation.

The courts did not deal with it, no penalties were provided for the
restraining of individuals or of the community at large, dealing with
strangers until a relatively recent time.

Is it not true that the difference in blood between the Negro and the
white man has caused a survival of this notion of self-help, today
illogical, unreasonable, absurd, but powerful none the less despite
its technical infraction of the law of the land?

Is not the lynching of a Negro or of a white man simply the old primitive
self-help with the hue and cry and the execution of the victim when caught
by the mob or by the sheriff's posse? There is perhaps no field of
speculation so fascinating as this of the survival of bygone customs,
traditions, and notions, in present society. At the same time he will
be a poor and uncritical student who will not recognize the ease of
erecting vast structures upon slender foundations. My purpose in this
article is not to allege the necessary truth of this proposition,
but, if possible, to stimulate along different lines than has
been common the researches of those who are interested in the psychological
attitude of the white man toward the Negro.

There will be no doubt those who will exclaim that if I am right in
this analysis of the problem--indeed, if there be any reasonable modicum
of truth in what I say--then the solution of the problem will be difficult
in the extreme. The whole method of attack upon it will be altered.
A long educational campaign will become the main feature, intended to
expose the true basis of the white man's denial of real equality to
the Negro race. It will look like a battle too long to be waged with
courage because the victory will be far in the future. I do not
agree. The attack, if properly directed, and vigorously followed up,
will, like the assault of the woman suffragists upon equally ancient
instinctive promptings, be unexpectedly successful. The walls of the
fortress are thin and the defenders the wraiths of a dim past.

ROLAND G. USHER.

LINCOLN'S PLAN FOR COLONIZING THE EMANCIPATED NEGROES[1]

The colonization of the emancipated slaves had been one of the remedies
for the difficulties created by the presence of freedmen in the midst
of slave conditions. The American Colonization Society was founded in
1816 with the object of promoting emancipation by sending the freedmen
to Africa. Some of the slave States, moreover, had laws compelling the
freedmen to leave the State in which they had formerly resided as
slaves.

With an increasingly large number securing legal manumission, the problem
caused by their presence became to the slaveholding group a most serious
one. The Colonization Society, therefore, sought to colonize the freedmen
on the west coast of Africa, thus definitely removing the problem
which was of such concern to the planters in slaveholding States.

The colony of Liberia, on the west coast of Africa, was chosen as
a favorable one to receive the group of freed slaves.

Branches of the Colonization Society were organized in many States and
a large membership was secured throughout the country. James Madison
and Henry Clay were among its Presidents.

Many States made grants of money and the United States Government
encouraged the plan by sending to the colony slaves illegally imported.
But to the year 1830 only 1,162 Negroes had been sent to Liberia. The
full development of the cotton gin, the expansion of the cotton plantation
and the consequent rise in the price of slaves forced many supporters
of both emancipation and colonization to lose their former ardor.

As the antebellum period of the fifties came on these questions loomed
larger in the public view. The proposition for colonizing free Negroes
grew in favor as the slavery question grew more acute between the sections.
Reformers favored it, public men of note urged its adoption and
finally, as the forensic strife between the representatives of the two
sections of the country developed in intensity, even distinguished statesmen
began to propose and consider the adoption of colonization schemes.[2]

Abraham Lincoln, as early as 1852, gave a clear demonstration of
his interest in colonization by quoting favorably in one of his
public utterances an oft-repeated statement of Henry Clay,--"There
is a moral fitness in the idea of returning to Africa her children,
whose ancestors have been torn from her by the ruthless hand of
fraud and violence

."[3] In popular parlance, however, Lincoln is not a colonizationist.
He has become not only the Great Emancipator but the Great Lover of the
Negro and promoter of his welfare. He is thought of, popularly
always, as the champion of the race's equality. A visit to some of our
emancipation celebrations or Lincoln's birthday observances is
sufficient to convince one of the prevalence of this sentiment. Yet,
although Lincoln believed in the destruction of slavery, he desired the
complete separation of the whites and blacks.

Throughout his political career Lincoln persisted in believing in the
colonization of the Negro.[4] In the Lincoln-Douglas debates the
beginning of this idea may be seen. Lincoln said: "If all earthly
power were given me, I should not know what to do as to the
existing institution. My first impulse would be to free all the slaves
and send them to Liberia--to their own native land. But a moment's
reflection would convince me that, whatever of high hope (as I think
there is) there may be in this, in the long run its sudden execution is
impossible. If they were all landed there in a day, they would all
perish in the next ten days; and there are not surplus shipping
and surplus money enough in the world to carry them there in many times
ten days. What then? Free them all and keep them among us as
underlings? Is it quite certain that this betters their condition? I think
that I would not hold one in slavery at any rate, yet the point
is not clear enough for me to denounce people upon.

What next? Free them and make them politically and socially our equals?
My own feelings will not admit of this, and if mine would, we well know
that those of the great mass of whites will not. Whether this feeling
accords with sound judgment is not the sole judgment, if indeed it
is any part of it."[5]
A few years later in a speech in Springfield, Lincoln said:[6] "The
enterprise is a difficult one, but where there is a will there is a way,
and what colonization needs most is a hearty will. Will springs
from the two elements of moral sense and self-interest. Let us be brought
to believe it is morally right, and at the same time favorable to,
or at least not against our interests to transfer the African to his
native clime, and we shall find a way to do it, however great the task
may be."[7] It is apparent, therefore, that before coming to the
presidency, Lincoln had quite definite views on the matter of colonization.
His interest arose not only with the good of the freedmen in view,
but with the welfare of the white race in mind, as he is frank
enough to state.

After being made President, the question of colonization arose again.
Large numbers of slaves in the Confederate States not only became actually
free by escape and capture but also legally free through the operation
of the confiscation acts. In this new condition, their protection and
care was to a considerable extent thrown upon the government. To solve
this problem Lincoln decided upon a plan of compensated emancipation
which would affect the liberation of slaves in the border States, and
he further considered the future of the recently emancipated slaves and
those to be freed.[8]
Meantime, we heard that
Martaban, which had been left with a very small garrison, had been
attacked by the Burmese.  We were hurrying back to the assistance of our
friends, when we received intelligence that Major Hall, who had been
left there in command, had driven off the enemy.  We had made pretty
sharp work of it already, but there were other and more important places
up the river to be taken.  Orders were, therefore, received to send a
squadron of man-of-war's boats to accompany the _Phlegethon_, carrying
between two and three hundred soldiers and about a hundred bluejackets;
and I had the luck to go with them.

"Leaving Rangoon, the _Phlegethon_ steamed away with the boats in tow,
like a comet with its tail out.  We came near Pegu, when we found
ourselves under a hot fire from the Burmese on the top of the high
banks.  As we were unable to fire in return from the boats, a strong
party was landed under the command of Captain Tarleton.  The Burmese
were driven from point to point, till they took shelter within the walls
of the city, when they began firing away pretty warmly with their
jingalls and muskets.  As the enemy's shot were flying somewhat thickly
about us, it would never have done to halt.  Captain Tarleton,
therefore, having found a native, who, for a bribe, undertook to show
the way, pushed on along the causeway till the city ditch was reached.
Here it was seen that, on one side of the gateway, part of the wall had
tumbled down.  Halting for an instant to gain breath, Captain Tarleton
singing out, `On, my lads!' away all hands dashed right up to the wall,
and, scrambling over it like cats, jumped down inside, to the great
astonishment of the enemy, who, not liking their looks, fled for shelter
within their great pagoda; for these fellows always seemed to think that
their temples were the safest places.

"The boats had, in the meantime, been attacked, but were bravely
defended; and the troops, pushing on, soon made their way unexpectedly
into the city.  Before the Burmese were aware what we were about, we
stormed the great pagoda, which we soon carried, and the city was ours,
with the loss of one man killed and three wounded.  After blowing up the
fortifications, as we had not troops enough to hold the place, we
returned to Rangoon.

"After this we had a good deal of boat-work, cruising along the banks of
the rivers, and dislodging the enemy, who often appeared in some force,
for the purpose of trying to stop the provision-boats which came down to
supply the fleet with grub.  Sometimes we landed and drove the fellows
far away into the country.  Although they were ready enough to fire at
us from a distance, they never liked the look of our whiskers," whereat
there was a general laugh.

"Whose whiskers, Tom?" asked Archie.

"Well, those of the sogers and bluejackets, of course," said Tom; "how
could they tell that I hadn't a pair too?"

"Well, go on, Rogers," cried several voices; "what did you do next?"

"There was another large place," he resumed, "called Prome, high up the
river, which it was considered important to take, as it formed the chief
defence of the capital.  Captain Tarleton was, therefore, ordered to
proceed up the Irrawaddy in the _Medusa_, with three other steamers, of
one of which my brother Jack had the command.  Away we steamed for some
distance, without any of the enemy daring to show their faces.  We had,
as you will understand, already put them all to flight.  At length, at a
place with a precious hard name, Kononghee, about twenty-five miles
below Prome, we came in sight of a large body of men collected on the
banks.  We threw a shell into their midst, as a hint to them to be off,
instead of which they began firing away at us with musketry and several
heavy guns.  We returned the compliment pretty briskly, till they,
getting the worst of it, as usual, showed their discretion by scampering
off, and not stopping till they thought our shot would not reach them.

"As we were in a hurry to be at Prome, we didn't stop till they came
back, but steamed on till sunset, when we anchored off the town of
Meaoung.  We found that the river divided just ahead of us into two
streams, the western and deepest being the only navigable channel for
the greater part of the year.  We had arrived, however, at a time when
the eastern channel had plenty of water in it, as we learned from the
pilots.  This was a fortunate circumstance, as you shall hear.  When we
got near the western channel, we found an immensely strong fort at the
end of a range of hills which completely overlooked the river,
garrisoned by a force of not less than ten thousand men, under a certain
General Bundoolah, the most celebrated warrior in the Burmese army, so
the pilots told us.  Though his troops were only armed with matchlocks,
and might have been bad shots, they would have committed a good deal of
mischief by peppering down on our decks; not to speak of what the heavy
guns might have done, placed in a position to rake us as we steamed up.
Had it been necessary, I have no doubt Captain Tarleton would have stood
on; but as there was no object in running the risk if it could be
avoided, just as we came close to the works, and the enemy had begun to
pepper us, he put his helm to port, and, greatly to their
disappointment, steered away up the eastern channel, where not one of
their shot could reach us.  We kept the lead going, every moment fearing
that we might get aground, when we should have been somewhat in a mess.
We never had less than two fathoms of water, and sometimes more, so that
we got through without accident; and by steaming on all night, the next
morning at daylight came off Prome.

"At the south end of the city we made out four heavy guns, but the
troops, every man Jack of them, had gone off with General Bundoolah, and
left not one behind to fight them.  We therefore brought up abreast of
the spot, and hove them off, spiking the iron guns, and carrying the
brass ones on board, twenty-three in all.  Higher up we found between
twenty and thirty more.

"This done, we again got up steam, and paddled ten miles higher.  We
were now within four days' steaming of Ava, with a broad, deep river,
easy of navigation, before us.  We all hoped that the commodore would
push on and capture the capital.  As far as we saw, there was nothing to
prevent him, but the orders he had received were simply to survey the
river as high as Prome, and then to return; so of course he had to obey
them.  Why he had not been given discretionary powers to proceed
farther, I don't know.  A golden opportunity was lost of catching the
King of Ava by the nose, for we had so nimbly doubled on old Bundoolah
that the chances were we should not have met with the slightest
opposition.  You may fancy, therefore, our disappointment when the order
was received to `'bout ship,' and run down the stream again.  But it
couldn't be helped--orders are orders--it wasn't the fault of our
gallant commodore.

"After holding Prome four-and-twenty hours, we evacuated the town, and
soon got back into the shallow channel up which we had come.  On getting
into the main stream, we caught sight of General Bundoolah's army, some
of the troops on shore, some in boats crossing the river, evidently with
the intention of following us along the banks.  I don't suppose they
much liked our looks, for they evidently didn't expect to see us so
soon.  Steaming on, we quickly got up to them, and opened with shot and
shell, both on the boats and on the dark-skinned troops which, crowded
together, covered the shore.  You may fancy what fearful havoc and
confusion our shells created among the masses of human beings.  Many of
the boats were sunk, and the people in the others, finding escape
impossible, hauled down their flags, and made signs that they
surrendered.  It was calculated that we captured or sunk forty or fifty
boats.  Among them was the old general's state barge and several large
war canoes.  On board them were found loot of all sorts, with two gold
umbrellas and a standard.  It was some consolation to have these
trophies to exhibit; and as soon as we got back, the commander-in-chief,
who, I daresay, was somewhat vexed at not having beforehand told our
commodore that he was to do as he thought best, ordered us to go back
again with a large body of troops and to take possession of Prome.

"As soon as we got ready, away we steamed, and, the river being still
full, quickly reached our destination.  There was not much fight in old
General Bundoolah, after all; one reason was that we had carried off all
his heavy guns.  After battering the city, the troops were thrown on
shore, and though the Burmese stood their ground for a short time, they
quickly turned tail, and we entered the city in triumph, without a
single man killed, and only four wounded.  As we left Pegu without any
defenders, though the inhabitants had taken a strong liking to us, while
we were away a pretty large Burmese army marched into the place and
began fortifying it.  We had therefore to attack it again.  Perhaps our
chiefs thought that there wouldn't otherwise be work enough, and so left
the cities we took unguarded.

"We proceeded up the river, and during the night came off the place.  At
daybreak, during a thick fog, with as little noise as possible, a body
of troops and another of bluejackets were landed, and we making a dash
on the town, the Burmese, who had no notion we were at hand, were
completely taken by surprise, and away they scampered as hard as their
legs could carry them, as usual to the pagoda, just as rats do to their
holes; whether from being a sort of sacred place they fancied that it
was safer than any other spot, I don't know; at all events, it was more
easily defended.  We, however, did not allow them to hold it long,
though they fought desperately.  Our troops, making a rush, dashed into
the place and drove them out, not, however, without some considerable
loss, half a dozen of our men being killed, and more than thirty
wounded.

"We had now got hold of all their chief cities except Ava, and why that
was not taken is more than I can say.  We might certainly have captured
it, with the king, his white elephant, and all his lords and ladies
together, not to speak of his treasure, which would have given us
something handsome in the way of prize-money.  Perhaps it was thought
best not to drive him to desperation, as we had already punished him, or
rather, his unfortunate subjects, pretty severely.

"We had still no end of expeditions on shore; one especially turned out
most disastrously.  The Government of Burmah, fancying that we had now
become pretty quiet, and that they could drive us into the sea, allowed
a number of guerilla bands to be organised, which scoured the country in
all directions, and mercilessly robbed the unfortunate people.  Among
the most noted of the leaders was a fellow called Mya Toon.  After
burning down a number of villages, and committing all sorts of mischief,
he threw himself into a stronghold about twenty-five miles inland from
Rangoon, or rather from a place called Donabew, on the river.  A force
of about six hundred men was ordered to get ready to attack the daring
chieftain; about half were soldiers, the remainder seamen and marines,
with their officers.  Jack and I had the luck to be chosen, and we
expected to see something of a new style of fighting, and to enjoy a
tramp of twenty miles or more through the country.  The expedition was
placed under the command of Captain Loch, whom we all knew to be as good
an officer as any in the service.  We carried with us two three-pound
field-guns, and on reaching Donabew landed, and began our march without
encountering an enemy.  We were fortunate enough to get hold of some
natives who were willing to act as our guides; for you will understand
that the natives everywhere were friendly to the English, and the troops
only were our enemies.

"We started early on the 3rd of February, the natives drawing our guns
along the pathway, which lay through a thick jungle of tall trees and
brushwood.  It was not the pleasantest style of country to traverse,
seeing that a tiger might spring out and carry off a fellow, and that
the enemy, if they had had the wits to do it, might have placed an
ambush, and shot us down without our being able to see one of them.
However, after marching about fifteen miles, we arrived at an open
valley, where we bivouacked.  We could hear the enemy all night long
popping away ahead of us pretty smartly.  I suppose it was under the
idea they should frighten us barbarians, and prevent our advancing.
However, in that they were mistaken.  We lighted our fires and cooked
our suppers, and pretty hungry we were.  We then lay down to sleep,
thinking of the work before us on the morrow, and we were of course all
very jolly, expecting to get hold of Mr Mya Toon, and to carry him back
with us in triumph.  Little did many of the poor fellows who lay down
that night suppose that it was to be their last on earth.

"The bugle sounded at daybreak, and, springing up, we breakfasted and
recommenced our march, moving along the same sort of path as before,
till it suddenly terminated on the side of a broad nullah, a sort of
natural ditch.  The bank on the opposite side was much higher than the
ground we stood on, and we soon saw that it was strongly fortified,
after the Burmese fashion, with sharp-pointed bamboos, over which it was
as difficult to leap as it was to force our way through.  The path, too,
was here narrowed by an abattis of the same sharp-pointed bamboos, which
made it impossible to deploy the whole strength of our column; indeed,
our advance guard, consisting of seamen and marines, could only march
two abreast, while our two guns, hauled along by the natives, were in
the rear.  Suddenly, as we were looking about us, and thinking what a
nasty sort of place it was, we found ourselves exposed to a tremendous
fire from a horde of banditti, who had hitherto been concealed behind a
breastwork on the opposite bank.

"A gallant officer of the _Fox_, Lieutenant Candy, who commanded the
advanced guard of the bluejackets, and Captain Price, of the Bengal
infantry, led on their men in the most dashing style, intending to force
their way across the nullah and to storm the breastworks.  Before they
had gone many paces they were both shot dead, as were many of their
followers.  Captain Loch now hurried to the front, and led another party
to the attack.  It got some way across, when so murderous was the fire
that he was compelled to retreat, leaving a number of men behind who had
been killed close to him.  Still undaunted, he again made the attempt,
and a second time was driven back.

"`We must take the place!' he shouted out; and a third time, rallying
the seamen and marines, he rushed forward, sword in hand, determined to
capture the fort.  The Burmese must have had their marksmen, for one
after the other our officers were struck.  This time everybody thought
he would succeed, when, as he was advancing, a fellow who had climbed up
a tree overlooking the nullah fired at him, and wounded him desperately,
driving his watch right into his body.  Though he suspected that the
wound was mortal, he had strength sufficient to fall back to the rear,
when Commander Lambert, the son of the commodore, took his place.
Though our men were falling thickly around, two more attempts were made
to get across that horrible nullah.  Commander Lambert, who had himself
received four shots through his clothes, though he had escaped unhurt,
seeing that success was impossible, as more than half our party had been
killed and wounded, at length ordered us to fall back.  I had not
thought about myself, but I thought about my brother Jack a great deal,
and I was thankful to see him get off clear without a wound.

"The enemy kept firing at us as we retreated, but their shot did not
commit much damage, after we got to a little distance.  One bad part of
the business was that we were obliged to leave the dead on the field,
for our rascally dhoolie bearers and guides had treacherously decamped,
and we had scarcely men enough remaining to carry the wounded.  The
seamen undertook this duty, while the Bengal infantry, in a very gallant
way, for which we were heartily obliged to them, covered our retreat.
The only road that we could possibly take was the one we had come by.
The jungle on each side was so thick that we could not force our way
through it.  Happily, for the same reason, I suppose, the enemy did not
get round and meet us in front.  They followed, but were afraid to
advance near enough to molest us, the soldiers' rifles reaching farther
than their jingalls or Birmingham muskets.

"We all felt very downcast at the loss we had sustained, but more
especially for that of our brave leader, Captain Loch.  He was still
alive, but the surgeon gave us no hopes that he would recover.  The heat
was tremendous, the sun burning down on our heads, while we hadn't a
drop of water, and the men had to carry our leader and the rest of the
wounded for nearly twenty miles.  Still, all hands did their best to
keep up their courage and discipline, the strongest helping, as far as
they could, the weakest; four or five of our officers, who were
themselves wounded, setting the rest an example.  Thankful enough were
we when we caught sight of the river, after a march of twelve hours, and
found ourselves at length seated in the boats, the troops being embarked
on board the _Phlegethon_.  Shoving off, we made our way back to
Rangoon, and the next day we heard that Captain Loch had expired within
two days after he had received his wound.  We agreed that it was a very
sad affair, and it would have been better had we tried to catch the
robber and his band while they were out foraging.

"We buried Captain Loch on shore, near the great pagoda, at Rangoon, and
I am sure I never joined in a sadder procession than we formed, as,
shoving off, we followed the coffin of our late gallant chief on shore,
and marched to the neighbourhood of the great pagoda.  He was buried
with all the honour we could show.

"The robber, Mya Toon, held out for some time longer, till a
considerable force, under Sir John Cheape, was sent against his
stronghold.  Even then he showed much pluck, and was not dislodged till
several officers and men on our side had fallen.  This was just before
the King of Ava knocked under and sued for peace, giving up the province
of Pegu, which was accordingly attached to the British dominions.  The
soldiers had most of the fighting, but we had a good share of it,
_quorum pars magna fui_, and so ends my yarn."

"Bravo, Rogers! an excellent yarn, and capitally told," said several
voices.

"Ye dinna pit your light under a bushel, laddie," remarked Archie.

"Why should I?" exclaimed Tom; "it was for your sakes more than for
mine; you wouldn't have been half as interested if I'd only told you
what I'd heard, whereas I've enabled you, in imagination, to take part
in all the scenes in which my brother Jack and I were engaged."

"Then you should have said _quorum pars magna_ fuit _frater Jackus
meus_," said Archie; "but I suspect that he was the principal actor."

"Of course he was," said Tom; "there's not another fellow in the world
like my brother Jack; I always said so before I came to sea, and now I
have been with him so long, I can say it from my own observation.  I
might have said a great deal more about him, only my object was to be
brief."  Others of the _Romp's_ youngsters who had been in the
expedition corroborated all that had been said, and made Tom's hearers
wish to have the chance of sailing with Jack Rogers, who was sure, they
agreed, wherever he might be, to cut out work of some sort or other.

More yarns were spun, and many a song sung, before Tom and his shipmates
returned to the brig.

Next morning, as the corvette was weighing anchor, the frigate was seen
coming in from the southward.  The _Opal_ accordingly again brought up,
and waited for her arrival.  As she came to an anchor, the flags run up
to her masthead summoned Murray on board.  The commodore, on hearing of
the number of slaves he had taken, ordered him, instead of going on to
Aden, to proceed to Seychelles, where arrangements had been made for the
reception of liberated Africans, and, as soon as he had landed them and
refreshed his ship's company, to return to the coast, and prosecute his
search for slavers.

"We must strike a blow at this abominable traffic, and put it down at
all cost," exclaimed the commodore; "we have done nothing effectual as
yet--for one vessel captured, fifty have escaped."

The commodore, having come on board the _Opal_ to inspect the slaves,
ordered Murray to get under way immediately.  The corvette, running out
round the north end of the island, hauled her wind, and stood eastward
till she reached Seychelles.  A look-out was still kept for slavers
which, having hugged the Madagascar shore, might be steering for the
Gulf of Persia.  All hands, from the commander downwards, were eager to
arrive at their destination, and to land their cargo of blacks.
Everything possible was done to keep the poor creatures in health, but
notwithstanding this, several died on the voyage every day.  Part of the
deck was cleared, and they were encouraged to dance and sing, and amuse
themselves after their own fashion.  At first, when they stood up, they
appeared scarcely able to move, but in a short time, their spirits
rising, they began to snap their fingers, bend their bodies, and shuffle
round and round; then to clap their hands and shout and laugh as if all
thoughts of the miseries they had suffered had vanished.  To the intense
satisfaction of all on board, the corvette at length, just as the sun
was setting, came in sight across the purple ocean of the green,
foliage-clad islands, in a setting of white sand, surrounded by coral
reefs, amid which she had carefully to pick her way.  At some distance
rose the lofty mountains of the principal island of Mahd, while on
either hand were tree-fringed islets, backed by others far-off, blue and
indistinct.

The pilot, coming off, brought the ship to an anchorage a considerable
distance from the town.  Anxious as Murray was to get the slaves on
shore, it was impossible to do so that night.  Next morning the
disembarkation commenced.  Those who wished it were allowed to engage
themselves either as domestic or agricultural servants to the
inhabitants, while the rest were placed on a island where they might
erect huts and cultivate the ground for their own advantage.  Pango and
Bango had their choice of landing or remaining on board, but they
preferred continuing in the ship among the crew, whose goodwill they had
secured by their good-humour and willingness to oblige.

All hands luxuriated in the endless variety of fruits brought off by the
boats which were quickly alongside; oranges, plantains, bananas,
alligator-pears, limes, pineapples, and numberless others, including the
bread-fruit; and on going on shore, as some compensation for the
horrible odours they had lately inhaled, they enjoyed the scent of the
countless beautiful flowers which grew not only in every garden, but
lined the roadside and covered the slopes of the hills.

Though the islands belong to England, nearly all the inhabitants
appeared to be French, and French was everywhere spoken.  Mr Mildmay,
the only officer who professed to care much for society, was sadly
disappointed on finding that there were no ladies in the place.  He,
therefore, in some stanzas which he wrote, described it as a "Paradise
without an Eve."

The great drawback to the place was the heat; for behind the town rises
a precipice upwards of seven thousand feet in height, which effectually
shuts out the breeze, except from one quarter.  The summit, however,
being covered by luxuriant vegetation, adds another beautiful feature to
the scenery of the island.


CHAPTER TEN.

NEWS FROM ENGLAND--JACK ROGERS APPOINTED TO THE GAUNTLET--ADAIR
PROMOTED, AND SUCCEEDS HIM IN COMMAND OF THE ROMP--THE THREE MIDSHIPMEN
TRANSFERRED TO THE GAUNTLET--A TRIP ON SHORE--SAILORS IN THE
SLAVE-MARKET--THE SULTAN APPEARS--GAUNTLET ON THE NORTHERN STATION--TOM
KETTLE AND BILL SAUCEPAN, THE KROOMEN--A TRAP FOR SLAVERS--MR LARGE'S
EXPEDITION IN SEARCH OF WILDFOWL--FINDS MORE THAN HE BARGAINED FOR--IS
THE ISLAND BEWITCHED?

The corvette was within a hundred miles of the African coast, when a
sail was sighted on the port-bow coming down before the wind.  She was
soon seen to be a large ship, and little doubt was entertained that she
was the _Radiant_.  That she was so was in a short time proved, when she
got near enough to allow her number to be seen.  The corvette
accordingly hove-to, to await her coming.  As she drew near, she
shortened sail, and hoisted a signal to send a boat for mail-bag.

No summons could be more willingly attended to.  The boat was soon
alongside, when a large letter-bag was lowered into her, and Adair was
summoned to give an account of the trip to Seychelles.

He of course inquired the news.  There were some changes in the station.

"Commander Rogers has been confirmed in his rank," said the commodore;
"and I have appointed him to succeed poor Danvers, the late commander of
the _Gauntlet_ steamer, which arrived out on the station after you
sailed.  I hope that he'll have gained some experience in the _Romp_,
for I mean to do something in putting down the slave-trade.  I am
determined to strike a blow at the traffic before I return to the Cape,
where the doctor tells me I ought to go for the sake of the health of
the ship's company and my own; and so I will, as soon as I hear that a
few more captures have been made.  By the bye, you've been pretty
successful, and I'll give you an acting order to command the _Romp_ till
someone is appointed from home.  I expect you to show your zeal in the
service, and I have no doubt that you will be able to give a
satisfactory account of your proceedings."

Adair, highly pleased, thanked the commodore, and hastened back with the
letter-bag to the corvette.  He longed to see its contents, for he felt
sure that he should hear from Mrs Murray, if not from Lucy herself.
The contents of the bag were quickly distributed, and every officer, and
not a few of the men, were soon deeply immersed in perusing their
various epistles.  It was a wonder the corvette did not run away with
them; fortunately Jos Green was the officer of the watch, and, shoving
his letters into his pocket, he issued the order to brace round the
foreyard, and the corvette once more stood close-hauled to the westward,
while the commodore ran on for the island of Pemba.

Murray, of course, had a letter from his wife, containing a smaller
missive, which he held in his hand while he read the contents of the
former.  Adair had just received a long official-looking epistle, at
which his eyes sparkled with more than usual animation.  "Good luck has
come at last!" he exclaimed; "I've got my promotion, thanks to Admiral
Triton and Lord Derrynane."

"I congratulate you heartily," said Murray; "and here's a little billet
which I hope may add to your satisfaction.  I suppose Stella thinks it
all right, or she wouldn't have undertaken to forward it."  Adair took
the note, and, eagerly opening it, ran his eyes rapidly over the
delicately-formed characters.

"Hurrah, my boy, I'm the happiest fellow alive!" he said, with
difficulty restraining an inclination to throw his cap into the air and
give an Irish caper.  "That capital fellow, Jack, has been taking my
part; and Lucy says that Sir John and Lady Rogers are inclined to
relent, and she's certain would not withhold their consent provided I
obtain what I've just got; and so I may conclude that it will all be
settled, and that I may make my appearance at Halliburton as soon as I
return to England."

"I'm truly glad to hear it," said Murray; "from what my wife says, I
thought you would be satisfied with her friend's letter.  The only
drawback, as far as I am concerned, is that I shall lose you as my first
lieutenant.  However, I mustn't complain, and I might have a much worse
one than Mildmay, who will, I am sure, turn to with a will when he finds
himself once in the position, and I only hope I may get an efficient
officer in his place."

Adair was sorely tempted to go home by the first opportunity, instead of
taking command of the _Romp_; but two motives prevented him--first, he
had been appointed commander; and, secondly, hoped by capturing a number
of dhows to be able to pick up some prize-money, which might assist him
in setting up house when he got back to England.

"I say, Uncle Terence, am I to follow you on board the brig or to remain
here?" asked Desmond, when he heard of Adair's appointment and
promotion.

"If the commander can spare you, I think, Desmond, I will take you with
me," answered Adair, "but it must depend upon him.  He may be unwilling
to lose the services of so valuable an officer."

"Arrah now, Uncle Terence, you're poking fun at me," exclaimed Desmond;
"but I'm after thinking how Archie Gordon will get on without me.  We've
been together ever since he came to sea, and it will seem strange to him
and to me if we're separated."

"I've a notion that each of you will get along very well by yourselves,
and neither of you will be able to lead the other into mischief," said
Adair.

"Mischief d'ye mane, Uncle Terence," cried Desmond; "sure it's what
neither of us are capable of."

"No, of course you are both of you wonderfully well-conducted young
gentlemen," replied Adair; "and, besides, you are getting rather too old
for playing monkey tricks; but still I'd rather keep my eye upon you,
and so I intend to ask Commander Murray to lend you to the _Romp_ till
she's ordered home."

The next day the corvette reached Zanzibar, where the first object which
greeted the eyes of those on board was a fast-looking screw-steamer such
as had never before appeared in those waters.  The first person who
stepped on board was Jack Rogers, looking as fresh and jolly as if he
had just come from England, instead of having been roasting in the East
for the last two years or more.  Following him came Tom, who dived down
into the midshipmen's berth to have a talk with his old friends.

Jack expressed himself well pleased with the steamer, though he had
never belonged to one before.  "The only bother is that I don't
understand the engineer's reports; and when he tells me that so much
steam has been blown off, all I can reply is, `Make it so,'" he
observed, laughing; "however, I suppose I shall know all about it by and
by, as I go down as often as I can into the engine-room and inspect the
machinery, with as knowing a look as I can assume.  I've a notion that
the engineer has found me out, but he is a discreet man, and doesn't
take advantage of my ignorance; so I expect to get on very well, and
hope that we shall catch no end of dhows, which will be unprepared for
our mode of making our way through the water."

Adair at once went on board the _Romp_, accompanied by Desmond, who took
Tom's berth.  Thus the three young commanders found themselves all
together, each captain of his respective ship.  Their great object was
the suppression of the slave-trade; for this purpose they laid their
heads together to concoct a scheme to carry it effectually out.  Their
plan was to proceed along the coast, each taking up a position a couple
of hundred miles or so apart, and to send their respective boats' crews
north and south, thus keeping up the chain of communication, imparting
information, and the one aiding the other.

Jack was glad to find his old friend Higson first lieutenant of the
_Gauntlet_.  He had become, if not a temperance man, at all events as
sober as a judge, and devoted to the duties of his position.  His old
shipmates were glad to meet him.  He dined with Murray and Adair the two
days they remained at Zanzibar, "the only times," he declared, "that he
had been out of the ship since she left England."

The three commanders had a consultation regarding the disposal of their
three young relatives.  They agreed that as they were all well up in
seamanship, and knew nothing about steam, that it would be to their
advantage to remain for some time on board the steamer.  "There's no
doubt that steam is making great progress, and for the sort of work on
which we are engaged, at all events, steamers will be universally
employed," observed Murray, with his usual forethought.  "I should not
be surprised if we were to have all our larger as well as the smaller
vessels fitted with the auxiliary screw, and it is, of course, very
important that an officer should be well acquainted with its management,
as well as with the working of steam-engines in general."

"Faith, I believe you are right," answered Adair; "though I'm mighty
afraid that if steamers come into vogue, they will do away with all the
romance once upon a time supposed to belong to a naval life."

"I shall not make myself very unhappy on that account," said Murray,
laughing; "it will be a great thing not to have to depend on the fickle
wind for making a passage, and still more to know that we may pounce
down upon those rascally fast-sailing dhows whenever we can sight them
in a calm, and be sure of overtaking them."

"I agree with you," said Jack; "I only wish that I knew a little more
about a steamer.  However, I shall pick up some knowledge of the matter
before long, and hope to make good use of it.  My engineer appears to be
a sensible man, and I shall be glad to have Gordon and Desmond on board,
and to place them under his instruction.  I will, of course, look after
them as carefully as I do my young brother Tom."

So it was arranged that Archie and Desmond should be lent to the
_Gauntlet_, she having only one other midshipman and two old mates on
board.  They, of course, were highly delighted to hear the decision to
which their elders had come, not so much perhaps on account of the
advantage it was expected they would derive, as from the thoughts of the
fun they would have together.  As the ship was not to sail till the next
day, they all three forthwith asked leave to go on shore for the purpose
of getting a ride into the country, in company with the master of the
_Opal_ and some of the midshipmen of the other vessels.  As Jos Green
undertook to look after them, Jack gave them leave, charging them to be
on board before dark.  A party of the men from each ship had likewise
obtained leave to go on shore to purchase curiosities for their
sweethearts and wives.

The Sultan had lately made it known that his stud, consisting of a
hundred horses and more, was at the disposal of the British naval
officers who might wish to take a ride into the country; and the
midshipmen were therefore directing their course to the palace, when
Desmond proposed that they should take a stroll first through the town.

"It isn't the sweetest of places, I'll allow, but we may come upon
something worth seeing, and have some fun or other," he exclaimed.  All
hands agreed to the proposal, and two and two they made their way
through the narrow streets, not exactly knowing where they were going.
They agreed, however, that except the crowds of savage, dirty-looking
Arabs, and still more hideous blacks, tumbledown houses, and bazaars
full of trumpery goods, there was nothing to be seen in Zanzibar.
Suddenly they found themselves in a square, which Desmond recognised as
the slave-market.  It was far more crowded than when Archie and he had
been there before.  As they looked round, they calculated that there
were three or four hundred slaves of all degrees; some, mostly women,
gaudily, if not gorgeously dressed, looking plump and well; and others,
who had apparently lately been imported, in a most miserable state of
starvation.  The sight was sufficient to excite the feelings of the most
callous observers.  Many were little more than skeletons, with their
skins, often covered with sores, drawn tight over their distorted bones;
their eyeballs protruding hideously, evidently in consequence of the
falling away of the flesh on their faces; their chests sunk, and their
joints swelled and knotty, contrasted with their withered limbs.

Several such groups were seen in different parts of the square.  In
another part, seated under the shade of a projecting roof, were a group
differing greatly from the last described.  They were women-slaves,
considered of high value.  On their heads they wore dark veils, covered
with glittering spangles, and various ornaments, though the way in which
their faces were painted with black and yellow detracted from any
natural beauty they might have possessed, according to the taste of the
English officers.  Another similar group of ten or a dozen negro girls
were still further decorated with mantles of a blue muslin thrown over
their shoulders, of which they appeared to be not a little proud,
though, from the expression of their faces, it was impossible to say
what feelings animated them.  Although some few of the poor girls might
have been considered attractive but for the daubs of paint on their
faces, the greater number were fearfully scarified, not from cruelty,
but in order to increase their beauty according to the taste of their
countrymen.

There were numerous groups also of men and boys, such as have before
been described.  Each of the groups was in charge of an Arab auctioneer,
who put them up to sale, much in the way that ordinary goods and
chattels are disposed of at auction marts in England.  A dozen or more
auctioneers were busily at work together, trying to attract purchasers,
pulling at the sleeve of one as he passed by, then at the skirt of
another; somewhat after the fashion of old-clothes sellers in London.
The Arab purchasers showed no eagerness, however, but turned away from
the tempting offers, however much they might have desired to possess
them.  Business was going on in a tolerably quiet way, the appearance of
the midshipmen in no way interrupting matters, till a large party of
bluejackets arrived on the scene.  Just then, some of the least
interesting lots having been disposed of, an old Arab, with a long white
beard, was putting up for sale one of the highly-adorned female lots,
his example being followed by several of his rivals in trade.  A stout
female, with a face deeply scarred and hideously painted, and an arm
strong enough to fell an ox, was speedily disposed of.  As she seemed to
take kindly to her new master, no sympathy was raised in her behalf.
The case, however, was different with regard to a group of young girls,
many of whom could not fail to excite interest.  Two, especially, who
were apparently sisters, were seated together, with their hands clasped,
and their arms round each other's necks, their countenances exhibiting a
greater expression of shame and grief than did those of most of their
companions.

Notwithstanding the horrors innumerable they might have gone through,
they seemed to be aware that a still greater trial was in store for
them.  Several of the number had been knocked down, not literally, but
to buyers, after a considerable amount of bidding, and all, it seemed,
had gone off at high prices.  The sailors had been looking on, making
remarks, which it was as well neither auctioneers nor purchasers
understood.  Their feelings of sympathy, already excited by the sales
they had witnessed of the other groups, were rapidly becoming less and
less controllable.  They eyed with no very friendly glances the
ill-favoured Arabs who, grasping the poor girls by their arms, claimed
them henceforth as their chattels.  At length the turn of the two
sisters came.  Several bidders stood by, each offering an increase on
the price last named by the auctioneer.  Jerry Bird, who was among the
seamen, could not make out whether they were to be sold together or
singly.  "It will be a shame if they're parted; but the whole thing is a
shame, and there's nothing I'd like so much as to send the rascally
buyers and sellers to the right-about, and to set the poor creatures
free," he exclaimed.

Just then a wizen-faced, one-eyed old Arab, his rich dress showing that
he was a man of wealth and importance, came up and fixed his single
blinker upon one of the negro girls.  He quickly outbid all competitors.
The auctioneer offered him the other sister, but he only wanted one,
and nothing could induce him to offer for the other.  At length, losing
patience, he grasped the negro girl by the arm, and was about to drag
her off by the wrist, when her sister, not yet sold, threw her arms
about her neck, both uttering a wail of despair which might have gone to
the hearts of the most obdurate.  It had an electrical effect on the
sensitive seamen.  "Well, that's more than I can stand," cried Jerry.
"Down with the brutal Arabs, and let's set the whole lot of the poor
creatures free!"

He gave but expression to the feelings which were animating the breasts
of his companions.  Dealing blows right and left, they simultaneously
set upon the surrounding Arabs, the old fellow who had bought the girl
being the first knocked over, and the auctioneer with the glib tongue
the second, the others, who drew their daggers, having their weapons
whirled from their hands; while the greater number, astonished by the
suddenness of the attack, took to flight in all directions, pursued by
the now infuriated seamen.  The girls crowded together, more alarmed,
probably, than delighted at the efforts made by the gallant tars in
their favour.

Having succeeded, as they believed, in rescuing one of the party, the
seamen, without an instant's hesitation, set upon the other auctioneers
in their immediate neighbourhood, whom they quickly put to flight; and
sweeping on, flourishing their cudgels and shouting at the top of their
voices, they in a short time cleared the square of every trafficker in
human flesh.  Jos Green and the midshipmen, who had been at the farther
end of the square, did not understand what was happening till they saw
the Arabs scampering off, turbans trailing behind them, daggers whirled
through the air, slippers left on the ground, sword-blades shivered into
fragments, while not a few long-robed rascals lay sprawling in the dust;
the rest flying at sight of the enraged bluejackets at their heels.
However much Jos and his party might have sympathised with the men, they
at once saw that their proceedings might lead to serious consequences.
In vain, however, he shouted out to them to hold fast; the sailors were
too eager to be stopped, and continued the pursuit of the Arabs towards
every avenue opening into the square.  Whenever a party halted, they
immediately, with loud shouts, made at them, compelling them again to
take to their heels.

The midshipmen, indeed, who thought the matter very good fun, encouraged
the men by their shouts and laughter, instead of abetting Green in his
efforts to stop the fray.  They were now undoubted masters of the field,
but what to do with the liberated blacks was a question which had not
entered their heads.  Had they been allowed, they would have liked
amazingly to have followed up their victory till they had driven the
Sultan and all his subjects out of the city, or burned it down over
their heads; but before they proceeded to extremities, His Highness
himself, with a body of his troops, happening to be passing through the
neighbourhood, encountered some of the flying populace, and,
ascertaining the cause of the uproar, rode into the square.

Instead of charging the British and cutting them down, he wisely, by
means of an interpreter who happened to be with him, shouted to them to
keep together, and let him hear what they had to say for themselves.  On
this Green and the midshipmen hurried after those who were still
pursuing the Arabs in different directions, and succeeded in calling
them back.  They quickly collected in a body, and, not dreaming that
they had done anything especially out of the way, but rather had fought
bravely and in a laudable cause, without hesitation, still grasping
their cudgels, boldly faced the Sultan and his party.

"Tell His Royal Majesty that we found them rascally Arabs knocking down
these here unfortunate blackies, just like so many hogs at Smithfield
market," answered Jerry to the interpreter's interrogations.

The latter was sorely puzzled to explain the sailor's reply to the
Sultan.  "Neither the auctioneers nor the others would do anything to
knock down the slaves or do anything to hurt them," he answered.
"Inshallah!  His Majesty allows no violence in his dominions."

This was a broad assertion on the part of the interpreter, considerably
remote from the truth.  However, the Sultan, who was extremely anxious
not to get embroiled with the English, at once accepted their excuses,
and either believed, or pretended to believe, that the slave-dealers had
been using violence towards the blacks.  Catching sight of Green and the
other officers, he sent to request their attendance, and desired them to
collect their men and march them down to the water, undertaking to
protect them from the violence of the inhabitants, who would have
otherwise undoubtedly set upon them in overwhelming numbers, and cut
them to pieces.  He observed, however, that they must on no account
again venture on shore, as it would be impossible to guard them from the
violence of the Arabs, who would certainly attack them if they had the
opportunity.

Green, thankful to get the men out of the scrape, ordered them to keep
close together, and follow the Sultan's advice.

"But what are we to do with the poor nigger gals, sir?" asked Jerry, who
seemed in no way conscious that he and his companions had illegally
transgressed the bounds of propriety.

"I'm afraid we must leave them to their fate," answered Green; "if you'd
carried them off, you wouldn't have known how to dispose of them; and,
when we get to sea, we must do our best to put a stop to the traffic by
catching as many slave-dhows as possible."

"Ay, ay, sir," shouted the men.  The affair, which, at first, appeared
likely to be very serious, was thus terminated satisfactorily; and the
scene they had witnessed certainly contributed to make both men and
officers more eager than ever to catch the slavers, independent of any
secret hopes they might have entertained of collecting a good quantity
of prize-money.

Jos Green and his companions, though deprived of their ride, resolved
not to bring the matter before their officers, who might look upon it in
a different light to the seamen, unless complaints were made by the
authorities.  In that case they determined to defend them as far as they
had the power.  The consul, however, was likely to hear of the matter,
and it would, they suspected, prevent any man-of-war's men being allowed
on shore at Zanzibar.

The three vessels sailed together for the northward, when the
_Gauntlet_, with her screw lifted, was found to make as good way as her
full-rigged consorts.  She was destined to take the most northern
station, the corvette to cruise next to her, and the brig to remain in
the south, to watch Pemba and the adjacent coast.  The brig was the
first to haul her wind, the corvette next; and Jack then, parting from
her, stood for his station in the north.  Higson had been out on the
coast before, as had the gunner and boatswain, and Jack was therefore
glad to consult them.  The boatswain, Mr Large, was very unlike his
brother officer of the corvette, his appearance answering to his name.
Although not unusually tall, he required an unusually wide cot in which
to stow himself away.  His countenance was stained red by hot suns and
air, rather than by any excess in drinking, though he took his grog, as
he used to observe, "like an honest man, whenever it came in his way,
either afloat or ashore."  He was sufficiently active, and remarkably
strong.

On her outward voyage the _Gauntlet_ had touched at Sierra Leone, and
shipped a gang of Kroomen, who proved as efficient as any part of the
ship's company.  The head Krooman, a fine-looking fellow, rejoiced among
his shipmates in the name of Tom Kettle while his mate was christened
Bill Saucepan,--names to which they willingly answered,--while on the
rest of the gang similar names were bestowed.  The men of the tribe to
which they belonged are infinitely superior to all others of the West
Coast, and every man-of-war employed on the station has been for long
accustomed to receive a party of them on board to perform the severer
labours of the ship, under which English seamen, in that climate, would
not fail to suffer.  Their dress is that of ordinary seamen, and they
are particularly clean and neat in their persons, while they receive the
same rations as the other seamen; indeed, they are treated in all
respects like the rest of the crew, except that they mess by themselves,
and are under the immediate command of their head man and his mate.
They are good-natured, merry fellows, as brave as lions, active and
intelligent, and always ready to perform the most dangerous and
fatiguing duties without grumbling.  Tom Kettle and his men were
therefore great favourites on board.  Black Tom, as he was generally
called by the midshipmen, soon became great friends with his namesake
and his companions, who treated him with the respect which was his due,
and consequently won his affections.

He had nothing of Captain Marryat's Mesty about him.  He did not pretend
to be the son of a prince, or to have any wrongs to avenge; on the
contrary, his boast was that his father and grandfather were seamen
before him, who had ever proved true to their colours; and he was
prouder of that than he would have been of being allied to the greatest
potentate under the line.

Jack was on the alert himself, and kept everybody else on board on the
alert, in the hopes, by some means or other, of inflicting a heavy blow
on the abominable slave-trade, for he felt as much interest in the
matter as did the old commodore himself.  It reconciled him completely
to being compelled to command a steamer, which formerly, with the
feelings of the old school, he had looked upon as a somewhat derogatory
employment.  Night and day the brightest lookout was kept, and every
suspicious dhow chased and boarded.  For some time, however, only legal
traders were fallen in with.

It was natural to suppose that as Jack was fresh on the station he would
require the most efficient interpreter, and Hamed was therefore
transferred to the _Gauntlet_, Murray taking another provided by the
consul in his stead.  Jack began to feel vexed at his want of success,
but Hamed assured him that only the first part of the trade had begun to
move northward, and that the slavers would soon be coming, fast and
thick.

"I hope so," said Jack, "for this is fearfully dull work."

"Well, captain, I tinkee you gettee more prize if you hide ship under
lee of some island, and den pounce out on de dhows like wasps," said
Hamed.

Jack, accordingly, examining the chart with Higson, looked out for the
most suitable island for their purpose.  The first on which they fixed,
a short way to the northward, was low and sandy.  It had some tall trees
in the centre, of a height to hide a ship's masts.  The _Gauntlet_
accordingly proceeded on to the northern end, off which she brought up,
thus concealed from any dhows coming from the southward.  A mile and a
half or so to the north was another much smaller island, towards which
numerous birds were seen wending their way; and it was evidently, from
some peculiarity of the soil, a favourite resort of the feathered tribe.

The ship had been at anchor for several hours, and as no dhows had as
yet been seen, and it was thought probable none would make their
appearance for a day or two, the time hung heavily on the hands of all
on board.  Desmond and Tom, having been at work all the morning studying
the steam-engine, took it into their heads that they merited some little
relaxation, and set to work to persuade Mr Large to accompany them on a
shooting expedition to the island.  "You see, Mr Large," observed Tom,
"we're certain to make a good bag, and you like roast goose as much as
any man; though we shall have to do without apple sauce, I'm afraid.
I'm certain that the birds I saw must have been geese, from their size;
we can even now make them out, hovering over the island.  We shall very
likely get enough to dine the whole ship's company."

Mr Large's mouth watered as Tom expatiated on the dainty dish he hoped
to provide.  "If we can't get any of the boats, we can at all events
have our canoe," Gerald Desmond observed.  It was the same canoe in
which they had been picked up and saved by the _Romp_, and which Adair
and Murray, who both claimed the ownership, had presented to Jack.

Mr Large, in an evil hour, yielded to the midshipmen's representations,
and consented to accompany them.  They, without difficulty, obtained
leave from the first lieutenant, promising to be back before dark with
the canoe loaded with birds.  Mr Large, who considered himself a
first-rate shot, was the happy possessor of a fowling-piece, which he
boasted was superior to the best owned by any officer in Her Majesty's
Service.  The midshipmen contented themselves with two ship's muskets,
which, as they carried a large amount of shot, would, they conceived,
kill no end of birds every time they were fired.

Having dined, they had no need of provisions; so, taking plenty of
powder and shot, with their three weapons, they shoved off, Mr Large
sitting in the after-end, while the two midshipmen paddled well forward,
in order in some degree to counteract his weight, which, as it was,
brought the canoe considerably down by the stern, and lifted the bows
almost out of the water.  Tom Kettle, who was unaware of their
intention, did not see them till they had got some distance from the
ship.  "They had better take care," he observed, "or sea come over de
stern and swamp de canoe."

The water, however, was smooth, and neither Mr Large nor his companions
had any apprehensions on the subject.  Away they went, intending to land
on the nearest point.  As they approached the point, they were not
disappointed in their expectations of finding it crowded with sea-birds,
many of large size, which Tom averred were the geese he had seen; while
there were various species of ducks, which appeared to be living in
harmony with the other inhabitants.

The wind had got up a little, and as they drew near they saw that there
was some surf on the shore; but Mr Large declared that it was nothing
to hurt the canoe, and that they might pass easily through it without
shipping a thimbleful.  He hesitated, however, as he drew nearer.
"Don't quite like the look of it," he observed.  "If we'd had the large
boat we might have got on shore easy enough, but if a sea was to catch
us we might be rolled over before we could tell where we were."

"Arrah, but it won't do to turn back," cried Desmond; "those geese now
will be after roasting us instead of our roasting them, not to speak of
the laugh that there'd be on board when we got back without a feather to
show, except the white feather which they'd be after talking about."

Thus incited by Desmond's wit, the boatswain determined to attempt
landing.  "Now, young gentlemen, paddle away with a right good will," he
shouted out, moving farther from the stern.  The midshipmen pulling away
with all their might, on flew the canoe, with every chance, apparently,
of reaching the beach, when the boatswain, turning his head over his
shoulder, saw a huge foam-topped sea come rolling up with unusual speed.
He shouted to his companions to paddle on.  In half a minute more the
stern of the canoe would have touched the beach, but before it got
there, down thundered the sea upon them, deluging the boatswain, washing
the two midshipmen high up on the beach, and capsizing the canoe, which
it rolled up with Mr Large under it close after them.  Picking
themselves up, without losing their presence of mind, they turned round
to see what had become of their companion, and were happily in time to
catch hold of him and drag him up before the following sea carried him
off.

"Thank you, young gentlemen; you've saved my life, and I've saved my
fowling-piece.  But I'm afraid the muskets are lost, and, what's as bad,
so are the powder-horns and shot," said Mr Large.

"No, there's one of the muskets," cried Tom, as he caught sight of the
butt lifted above the surface amid the creamy water, and, rushing in, he
seized it, though the next sea nearly carried him off his legs.

"And there's the other," exclaimed Desmond; and, notwithstanding Tom's
narrow escape, he plunged in and secured it.  The canoe was thrown up on
the beach, not much the worse, and the two paddles were saved.  "I'm
afraid there's little chance of our finding our ammunition," said Tom in
a melancholy voice, not a bit minding the wetting, "and unless we can
manage to knock down the birds with our firearms, we shall have to go
back after all without any game to show."

"But we must manage by hook or by crook to catch some of them,"
exclaimed Desmond.  "Sure we may catch them by the legs, if we lie
quiet, as they come flying by.  There seems to be no end of young ones;
we may get hold of them, at all events."

While Tom and Desmond were discussing the subject, Mr Large was
watching the breakers, which came tumbling in every instant with
increased violence.  "I am sorry to say, young gentlemen, that we've no
chance of getting off till the sea goes down," he remarked, "unless we
drag the canoe across the island, or a boat is sent from the ship to our
assistance; and I'm afraid that that mayn't be thought of till night
comes on."

"Well, perhaps we may find some eggs," observed Desmond; "they will
afford us a supper, and we can manage to get back in the morning."

"They may chance to be over-savoury, considering that so many young ones
have already been hatched," said Tom.  "However, if we get hungry we
shan't be particular."

The boatswain continued looking with a dissatisfied glance at the
tumbling waters.  "I doubt, even should the boat be sent, whether she
would be able to take us off," he observed.  "The commander won't be
very well pleased when he finds what's happened.  Instead of sleeping
comfortably on board, we shall have to spend the night out on the bare
sand."

"No very great hardship in that, is there, Mr Large?" observed Tom,
trying to console the boatswain.  "If we light a fire and roast a goose,
we may be pretty jolly after all."

"We must catch the goose first, Mr Rogers; and then, as to lighting a
fire without a match-box or gunpowder, how is that to be done?" asked
the boatswain.

Tom had forgotten, and had to acknowledge that they might have to go
without the fire.  It was agreed, however, that they should search for
eggs, which, although they might be somewhat high, might assist in
keeping body and soul together.

"Roast goose would have been very pleasant, and a drop of grog to wash
it down," observed the boatswain, who could not forget the loss of his
creature comforts.

Having hauled the canoe high up on the beach, the boatswain set off in
one direction, and the two midshipmen in the other, in search of eggs.
They discovered here and there a few broken egg-shells and a few young
birds.  At length Tom came upon two or three eggs, which he eagerly
seized.  "Here's a supper for us," he exclaimed, breaking open one of
them; but he threw it down with intense disgust.

"Faith, a fellow must be hard up before he could eat that," said
Desmond; "try another."

"No, thank you," answered Tom; "one is enough to satisfy me.  But we'll
keep them for Mr Large; he may not be so particular.  Only we must take
care not to break them in our pockets, or we shan't be able to wear our
jackets again."

They went on some way farther, the birds shrieking and pecking at their
legs as they passed, but showing no further sign of anger, as they had
not time to seize the young ones.  As they got farther round the island,
they saw, from its peculiar conformation, that the sea swept round it,
and broke almost with as much violence on the one side as on the other;
though still it might be possible, could they get the canoe across, to
launch her.  However, they were very unwilling to return without having
something to show, and agreed that it would be better to wait till the
following morning.

They had got more than half-way round when loud cries reached them, and,
looking ahead, they caught sight of the boatswain scampering away over
the sand faster than he had run for many a year, with a vast flight of
birds hovering about his head, and uttering loud shrieks and cries of
anger; some darting down and attacking him from behind, and others
wheeling round and flying at his face, which he had the greatest
difficulty in defending.  The midshipmen, seeing the predicament that he
was in, hurried forward to his assistance; when the birds, undaunted by
their appearance, commenced an assault on them, and they too had to beat
a retreat, pursued by their persevering foes.  In vain they struck about
them with their muskets, which, being heavy, the birds easily evaded,
only to return to the assault with greater vigour, caring neither for
their aimless blows nor their loud cries.

The midshipmen could easily have outstripped the boatswain, who, already
blown, rushed on puffing and panting like an asthmatic steam-engine; but
they, like young heroes, refused to desert him, although Desmond, as he
flourished his musket, very nearly brought the muzzle down on his
companion's nose.  The faster they ran, the more determined the birds
became, till matters were really growing serious; and the poor
boatswain, unable any longer to continue his flight, suddenly came down
with a run on his face in the sand.

The midshipmen now making a stand in order to defend him, the birds
retreated, croaking and shrieking louder than ever.  "We must lift Mr
Large up, or he'll be suffocated," said Tom, and, aided by Desmond, they
rolled him round till his face was out of the sand.  He was breathing
very heavily, and they became greatly alarmed.  "I'm afraid he's got a
fit of apoplexy, or something dreadful," cried Tom.  "I say, Gerald, go
and fetch a cap full of water,--there's no other way of getting it--and
we'll try and bring him to."

Gerald, as desired, ran off to the beach, and hurried back with his cap,
from which the water was of course rapidly streaming out.  They managed,
however, to clear the boatswain's nostrils and mouth of sand, and at
length had the satisfaction of seeing him open his eyes, his first
impulse being to try and get up.  He could not as yet speak, and gazed
about him wondering what had happened.  The shrieks of the birds still
hovering near reminded him, and he soon came to.

"Thank you, young gentlemen; if it hadn't been for you, I don't know
what would have happened," he said, in a faint voice.  He had reason,
indeed, to thank the midshipmen; for had they not stayed by him, he
would, to a certainty, have been suffocated.  Some time had thus been
spent.  They had been longer making the passage than they had expected,
and night was fast approaching.  They were wet and hungry, and not very
well satisfied with their performances; knowing also that, whether a
boat was sent for them or not, they would all be severely reprimanded on
their return on board.

After sitting for some time, the boatswain declared that he should catch
his death of cold if he remained quiet much longer; so, getting up, they
all three set off running to try and restore circulation.  No sooner did
the winged inhabitants of the island see them on the move than, perhaps
supposing that they were again about to invade their nests, with loud
shrieks they darted once more to the attack, flying round and round
them, and every now and then threatening to pounce down and attack their
faces.  Even when they did stop, the enraged creatures hovered round
them, giving them no rest, and keeping them constantly on the watch to
ward off their threatening beaks.  At last Tom thought of the paddles,
which had been left in the canoe, and, making their way back to her, he
and Desmond armed themselves each with one, which were likely to prove
more serviceable weapons than the heavy muskets.  The birds seemed to be
of this opinion, for no sooner did the midshipmen boldly assault them
than they flew off to their nests.  The boatswain, between his fear of
catching cold should he lie down in his wet clothes, and his weariness,
was in a sad perplexity.  At length, however, he threw himself on the
sand, declaring that he could no longer move about, and must submit to
his fate, whatever that might be.  The midshipmen themselves were
getting somewhat tired, but tried to amuse themselves by talking of old
times, every now and then taking an anxious look in the direction of the
ship, in the hopes of seeing a boat coming to their assistance.

No boat, however, was discernible; nor indeed could they see the ship.
They began to grow somewhat uneasy.  What could have become of her?  Had
she steamed away and left them to their fate? but that was not at all
likely to be the case.  The boatswain had been for some time quiet, and
a loud snore showed them that he had fallen fast asleep.  Desmond was
the first to speak.  "I say, Tom, what do you think of our trying to
knock some of the birds on the head while they're asleep on their nests;
we might in a little time kill as many as we should have shot; and if we
could return with a boatful, we should, at all events, not be laughed
at, as we shall be if we go back empty handed."

Tom was perfectly ready, and, armed with their paddles, they set off
along the beach, creeping quietly forward, in the hopes of coming
suddenly upon a colony of the birds.  On and on they went, but no birds
could they find, the fact being that the tide was low, and they had kept
close down to the water instead of making their way over the dry sand.
This they did not find out till they had got to a considerable distance.
Turning off inland, they, however, quickly found themselves in the
midst of hundreds of birds, when they began to lay about them right and
left, knocking over vast numbers; those they missed only poking out
their long necks, and quacking and screeching at them.

"I thought we should have good sport," cried Desmond, highly delighted;
"we shall surprise the old boatswain when he wakes by and by and finds a
pile of birds close to him."

On they went for some time, till they found themselves among a colony of
a different species, who, instead of tamely submitting to be knocked on
the head, flew up with loud screams, and attacked them with the greatest
desperation.  The midshipmen, of course, fought bravely, wielding their
paddles with some effect, while they retreated to the beach.  Their
assailants then took to flight, and they set to work to collect the
birds they had knocked over.  Some had partially recovered, and showed
fight with their beaks when they attempted to catch hold of them, so
that they had to give a good many the _coup de grace_ before they could
throw them over their backs.  Having each collected as large a load as
they could carry, they set out to return to the canoe along the line of
hard sand.  The road seemed much longer, as they were now heavily laden,
and it was some time before they came near the canoe.

As they approached, the shouts of the boatswain and the shrieks of a
multitude of birds reached their ears.  Hurrying on, they saw dimly
through the gloom numberless wings flapping in the air, circling in the
darkness, now advancing, now rising, while the figure of the stout
boatswain appeared in their midst whirling round his fowling-piece, with
which he every now and then caught a bird more daring than its
companions, and brought it to the ground or sent it shrieking away.

"Help, young gentlemen, help!" he shouted out, though almost breathless
with his exertions, "or these imps of Satan will be too much for me."

Tom and Desmond rushed to the rescue, and, laying about them, at length
succeeded in again driving off the birds to a respectful distance.
"Glad you came when you did, young gentlemen," said the boatswain, after
he had recovered his breath.  "Thinking you were keeping watch by my
side, I was enjoying my first sleep, when I was awoke by a sharp tweak
of my nose, and such a shrieking in my ears as I hope never to hear
again.  It was a mercy I hadn't both my eyes pecked out; I started up,
thinking that a whole horde of niggers were upon me, or might be a party
of these beastly slave-catching, murderous Arabs had landed, when I
discovered that they were those savage birds again; and finding my
fowling-piece in my hand, I began to lay about me, as you saw, with
right goodwill, though I own they were almost too much for me.  I can't
help thinking that the island is bewitched, for such birds as these I
never met in my life before, and hope never to meet again.  Maybe an
empty stomach makes matters worse, for I feel all nohow--more like a
sucking baby than the boatswain of Her Majesty's steamer _Gauntlet_."

"You'll get all right in the morning, Mr Large," said Tom; "I believe
you've hit the right nail on the head; but we shan't starve; see, we've
brought plenty of food, and we left fifty times as many behind us,
waiting till we go and get them."

"If we had a fire it would be very well," sighed the boatswain; "though
I suspect they're somewhat of a fishy flavour--not that we should be
particular when sharp set."

"Faith, I forgot, Mr Large," said Desmond, "that we've found some eggs,
and we've brought you a couple, knowing that your constitution requires
nourishment."

"It does, young gentlemen, it does," said Mr Large, in a grateful tone;
"I feel a gnawing in my inside which quite unmans me."

"Here they are," said Desmond, producing the eggs from his pocket; "they
may perhaps have a strong flavour, but, as you say, one shouldn't be
particular."

"If we'd but a fire we might make an omelette of them," observed the
boatswain, holding one of the eggs in his hand, and preparing to crack
it, so that he might gulp off its contents.  Scarcely, however, had he
done so, than he threw it from him, exclaiming, "Faugh! it's as bad as
the essence of a slave-hold."

"We thought it might be pretty strong, Mr Large," said Desmond,
stuffing his wet handkerchief into his mouth to prevent himself from
laughing; "but try the other, perhaps that is sweeter."

As Mr Large was not a man to be knocked down by an egg, he did as he
was advised, but the odour which issued from the second was even worse
than that of the first, and, throwing it to a distance, he declared that
it would be long before he would try another duck's egg.

Gerald asked Mr Large if he had any tobacco and a pipe.  "I have the
first, young gentlemen, and thank you for reminding me of it; but how is
the pipe to be lighted without a match?" he replied; "but I'll take a
quid, though I've given up chawing since I became a warrant-officer; I
used once to indulge in it.  I wouldn't advise you, though, to do so,
for it's very likely to turn your insides out."

Mr Large had his reasons for giving this advice to the midshipmen,
seeing that he had only tobacco sufficient to form a decent-sized quid
for himself.  It comforted his heart, and, advising his companions to
follow his example, he once more lay down to sleep.  They tried to do
so, but they had not been quiet for many minutes before the birds found
them out, and, with loud screeches came flying above them, quickly
awakening the boatswain, who declared that he believed they were imps in
the form of birds, and would to a certainty attack them again if they
had the chance.  Tom said he thought so too, and that he remembered
reading at school about some harpies who lived on an island, and played
all sorts of tricks--that was in the Mediterranean, but he saw no reason
why the same sort of creatures should not be found in the Indian Ocean;
perhaps they had flown to this very island, as they certainly were no
longer to be found in their old locality.

This information did not much comfort poor Mr Large.  At last a bright
idea struck Gerald.  "Let's turn the canoe bottom upwards, and creep
under her; the beasts can't find us there, at all events," he exclaimed.

"I wonder we didn't think of that before," said Tom, and they
immediately carried out Gerald's suggestion.  Mr Large had some
difficulty in creeping under it, and very nearly brought the canoe down
upon himself, but by choosing the broadest part he found sufficient room
to lie on his back; while Tom took one end and Gerald the other.  Though
the birds screamed as loudly as ever, the canoe-wrecked party knew that
they were perfectly safe, and could afford to laugh at them.  However,
they soon went to sleep and forgot all about the matter.  They might
have slept on till the middle of the next day, as there was no one to
call them, had not Tom been awakened by the pangs of hunger; when,
starting up, forgetting where he was, he gave his head such a thundering
knock against the bottom of the canoe that the noise awakened Desmond,
who did precisely the same thing.  When the boatswain, giving a heave
with his body, turned over the canoe, they discovered that the sun had
already risen several degrees above the horizon.

"Here's a pretty kettle of fish to fry, as my missus would say,"
exclaimed Mr Large, as he sat up rubbing his eyes; "we ought to have
been on board by daybreak, and here we are as if we were upon leave for
a month."

"I only wish we'd something for breakfast," exclaimed Desmond, as he got
on his legs; "we shall have to breakfast on the raw birds after all."

"Look out there, young gentlemen, where we left the ship--what's become
of her?" cried Mr Large.

The midshipmen looked round with dismay; the ship was certainly not
where she had been.  "I can't make it out," he exclaimed; "if she's gone
I ought to have gone with her, and a pretty scrape I am in.  It won't
matter so much for you young gentlemen, as, of course, it will all be
laid to my door; and here we are now without a drop of rum, or a drop of
water to mix with it, or anything more eatable than raw, fishy geese.
We shouldn't starve if we were left here for a week, but we should
suffer pretty severely from want of water."

"I hope that we shall not have to wait here for a week," said Tom; "and
as it seems to me that the surf has gone down, I think the sooner we
load the canoe and go in search of the ship the better, since she
doesn't come in search of us."

Tom's proposal was at once agreed to, it being evident that the surf had
considerably gone down.  The only objection to shoving off was the want
of the third paddle; greatly, however, to the boatswain's satisfaction,
they espied it washed on shore.  The only difficulty now remaining was
to know where to pull to.  The boatswain suggested that they should make
the best of their way to the other island, as the ship was certain to
return to her former anchorage.  They accordingly loaded the canoe with
as many birds as she could carry, and while the two midshipmen ran her
off, Mr Large sat aft ready to use his paddles directly they jumped on
board.  This they nimbly did, and seized their paddles.  Mr Large would
have certainly upset the canoe, had he made the attempt to get in after
she was afloat.  Desmond and Tom managed it, however, very cleverly; and
away she dashed.  They were soon amid the breakers; the canoe, however,
rode buoyantly over them, and was quickly skimming across the placid
water to the southward.

They had not gone far, when a wreath of smoke was seen rising above the
island, and presently the _Gauntlet_ herself appeared towing a dhow,
which they had little doubt she must have captured.

"My luck!" cried the boatswain; "I'd have given a week's pay rather than
to have missed being on board while she was catching her first prize;
however, it can't be helped.  There's one good thing; as the ship must
have gone away early in the night, for what the commander and everybody
else knows, we may have been waiting out here for them ever since.
Don't talk about the way I was treated by the birds, young gentlemen, if
you please; my brother officers, the gunner and carpenter, would never
cease chaffing me about it."

Of course Tom and Gerald promised to be discreet; and they were now only
anxious to get over the interview with the commander, hoping that they
would not be asked any questions difficult to answer.  "At all events,
it was not our fault that we were not on board earlier," said Tom; "he
can't say that; and as we bring a good supply of birds, both he and
everyone else ought to be thankful to us."

The canoe was alongside directly the steamer came to an anchor.  They
took good care to hand up the birds first; and Jack, on hearing their
story, took very little notice of their prolonged stay, only expressing
his satisfaction that they had got off safe.  Before the ship was under
way, blue lights had been burned and guns fired to recall them; but it
had been at the time when they were having their first skirmish with the
birds, and the signals had not been observed.  What those birds were
none of them could ever discover; and the boatswain was fully persuaded
that they were the harpies of whom Tom had told him.

Tom was tolerably discreet, but Gerald, before long, let out the whole
story, greatly to the amusement of the other warrant-officers, who were
continually reminding poor Mr Large of his night on "Harpy Island."

"Harpy it might have been, but _happy_ it was not," he answered with a
groan.  "I only wish that you two had been there; you wouldn't be so
fond of talking about it as you seem to be now."

As the boatswain had supposed, a dhow had been made out by the party
which had landed on the larger island, and as soon as steam could be got
up, the ship had gone in chase of her.  She had managed, however, to run
up a somewhat narrow creek, into which the boats had been sent to bring
her out, and had succeeded in doing so; though all the slaves had been
taken out of her, with the exception of two who had been found in her
hold in an almost dying state.  The Arab crew had escaped; the
examination of the poor slaves the next morning left no doubt of her
character.  She was accordingly scuttled, and being then set on fire,
went to the bottom.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE LOOK-OUT PARTY ON THE ISLAND--A SLAVE CARAVAN--UNWELCOME VISITORS--
THREE DHOWS CHASED--WRECK OF THE DHOWS--RESCUING THE SLAVES--DANGEROUS
POSITION OF THE PARTY ON SHORE--THE KROOMEN CROSS THE SURF WITH
SUPPLIES--TENDERNESS OF THE SAILORS TO THE SLAVES--"WASHING A BLACKAMOOR
WHITE."

As Jack was not perfectly satisfied with the anchorage near Harpy
Island, he proceeded farther north, to a spot which answered all his
requirements, off a lofty headland with a deep bay.  On the northern
side of it lay a rocky island of considerable height, with trees
covering the larger portion.  Here a line-of-battle ship might have
remained concealed from any vessels coming from the southward, till they
were within range of the ship's guns; so that she might, if necessary,
compel them to strike, without even getting under way.  Farther north
the island assumed the low and barren appearance of that part of the
African coast, a region as inhospitable and unattractive as could well
be conceived.  Within the bay was a smooth beach; farther on, the coast
was lined for some miles with threatening rocks, against which should
any unfortunate vessel be driven, she must quickly be dashed to pieces.

The _Gauntlet_, carefully feeling her way, came to an anchorage in the
bay.  The second lieutenant was at once sent on shore, with a party of
men, to climb to the summit of the peak; no very easy task, as it turned
out.  However, they got up at last, and the lieutenant on his return
reported that from the summit of the headland he had enjoyed a view over
fully thirty miles out to sea, and up and down the coast, so that in the
daytime no vessel could pass within that distance without being sighted.

Several dhows had been chased and boarded, but the evidence for their
condemnation had been insufficient, and with much reluctance Jack had to
let them go.  Both he and all under his command would have liked to be
allowed to burn every dhow with a black man on board, but as such a
proceeding would have been illegal, they were compelled to restrain
their zeal.  The _Gauntlet_ had again come to an anchor; an hour before
daybreak Tom and Desmond, with a party of men, had been despatched to
make their way to the top of the headland, that they might obtain as
extensive a view as possible over the ocean.  As soon as the sun rose
above the horizon a ruddy glow suffused the sky.  On reaching the rocky
height at which they were aiming, the rocks they saw around appeared as
if ready to topple down into the plain on the one side.  On the other
were deep crevices, sufficient to contain a number of men; thus forming
a natural fortress which might be held by a small party against greatly
superior odds, while here and there shrubs jutted out from the hollows
in which soil, in the course of ages, had been deposited.

As, however, it did not appear likely that any foe would take the
trouble of climbing up to molest them, the midshipmen did not bother
themselves about the advantages of their position.  They valued the
hollows rather as affording them at some period of the sun's course a
shelter from his rays, and enabling them to take a quiet snooze while
off watch.  The summit of the cliff, however, on which they had to make
their signals to the ship, was perfectly exposed on all sides, and from
it they could take a view, not only over the ocean, but across a
considerable part of the country to the eastward.

"There's a sail," cried Tom, as he swept the wide expanse of water with
his telescope; "and there's another, and another.  They're coming up
with a spanking breeze, and will try the old kettle's powers to get up
with them.  Make the signal, Desmond; she must stir up her fires and get
under way pretty smartly, or they will have slipped by before she can
pounce down on them."

The signal was made, and in a short time a column of black smoke was
seen ascending from the funnel of the ship.  Two of the boats were at
the island, with armed crews ready to pull off towards any dhows which
might come near enough to be overtaken.  The boats had already seen the
signal from the headland, and were pulling out from under the lee of the
island.  The dhows had not as yet, apparently, discovered that foes were
at hand.  Out glided the steamer, her black smoke clearly indicating
what she was.  Two of the inshore dhows quickly disappeared behind an
intervening point, almost as high as that on which Tom and his party
were posted.  The boats, each selecting her prey, pulled away towards
two dhows nearest the island, while the ship steered towards three
others which were somewhat farther out and ahead of the rest.

The wind was strong; they were all carrying moderate sail, and as they
made no apparent effort to escape, it was supposed that they were legal
traders.  Such for some time, apparently, was the commander's opinion,
as the ship's head was seen to be turning more to the southward towards
one of the other dhows.  Just then a sail of one of the leading dhows
was seen to come down.

"She's carried something away," exclaimed Tom; "and the ship can easily
overhaul her."

"No, she hasn't," exclaimed Desmond; "see, she's only been shifting her
canvas;" and presently, in spite of the fresh breeze, an enormous sail
was spread in lieu of the smaller one.  The other dhows followed her
example, and the ship was quickly in chase of them, setting, as she went
along, sail after sail; and as the broad sheets of white canvas were
expanded to the breeze, her speed was evidently increased.

"She's not got her full steam up yet," observed Desmond; "when she has,
she'll be after them like a shot."

"The shot must fly pretty fast then; see how they bowl along," cried
Tom; "look, two of them are edging in for the land, while the third
holds her course.  The ship seems doubtful which she will follow.  They
may be all rogues together; or the last may be honest, and only wishes
to lead her a wild-goose chase for the sake of favouring the others.
No; the commander has made up his mind that the last is no better than
the rest.  See, he's determined to make her heave-to, at all events."

As Tom spoke, a puff of white smoke was seen to fly out from the bow of
the _Gauntlet_, and the faint sound of a gun reached their ears.
Another and another followed, forming curves in the air; the ship was
throwing shells over and around the nearest dhow to frighten her into
submission.  For some time she stood on, when she too altered her course
to the westward; this was probably what Jack desired, because he might
thus hope to capture two or three vessels instead of one.  Two other
guns were now discharging shot and shell from the port-bow.

"I wish I was on board," cried Tom; "surely one or other of the rascals
must be caught."  It was doubtful, however, whether this would be the
case.  One thing alone was clear, that all the three vessels had slaves
on board, or, rather than run the risk of being struck, they would
immediately have hauled down their sails.  Tom now turned his attention
to the boats, which were still at some distance from the southernmost
dhows, and seemed likely to cut them both off.  The other two had not
reappeared, but had probably found anchorage in a bay to the southward,
not supposing perhaps that they had been seen.

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Desmond, who had been watching the ship; "she's
brought down the sail of one of the rascals, and is firing away sharply
to prevent her rehoisting it."

Some few more minutes passed.  "She's up to her," he cried; "see, she's
shortening sail, which will help to give the other fellows a better
chance of escaping; but she'll not be long about it."

Once more the sails were sheeted home, and the ship rushed forward after
her prey, the boat she had lowered appearing like a small speck on the
ocean, close to the dhow about to be boarded.  The steamer was now in
hot chase after the other two dhows, still considerably ahead of her,
and making, apparently, for the shore, from which she was endeavouring
to turn them by a rapid discharge of shot and shell.  The boat's crew
she had left behind were quickly in possession of the dhow, the Arabs,
as far as could be seen, having made no resistance.

"I thought the coast was rocky all the way to the north," observed Tom;
"if those dhows run on shore they will be knocked to pieces in no time,
and every human being on board them drowned."

"I heard the master say only yesterday that there were one or two sandy
beaches of no great extent some miles on, and I suppose the dhows are
making for them, though I shouldn't have thought they had got so far,"
answered Desmond; "I only hope the ship won't be knocking her nose on
the rocks in her eagerness to get hold of the fellows."

"No fear of that," said Tom; "my brother Jack is too careful to do so
bungling a thing; though he's ready enough to run every risk when
necessary.  He wouldn't esteem your remark as a compliment."

"I don't doubt his judgment," said Desmond; "though if you are not on
board to give him the benefit of your advice, he may be after getting
into a scrape.  But, I say, what are the other two boats about?  I had
almost forgotten them."

Tom turned his telescope to the south-east, in which direction the white
bulging sails of the dhows could be seen shining brightly, as they
floated above the blue ocean; while the boats lay ahead of them, like
two crouching savage animals waiting for their prey.  They were more
than a mile apart, so that they could render no assistance to each
other; but, apparently, they considered that would not be necessary, as
the Arabs, even if they had slaves on board, were not likely to offer
any resistance with a man-of-war in sight.  There was no escape for
either of the dhows, for the surf broke upon every part of the coast
visible to the southward with a fury which must preclude all hope of
escape to any human being on board; and thus, if they intended to fight,
they must be prepared to conquer and run ahead of the ship while she was
engaged with her companions nearer the shore.  Still, there was
sufficient probability of their doing so to make Desmond and Tom, with
all the men on the rock, watch the proceedings with intense interest.

On flew the dhows, their bulging sails swelling in the breeze, and the
white foam flying up under their low bows.  Matson, the second
lieutenant, commanded one of the boats, and the senior mate the other.
The object of the dhows, since they could not avoid the boats, was to
try and give them the stem, but the English officers were not to be
caught so at a disadvantage.  The second lieutenant's boat was nearest
in; as the dhow came dashing on, the lieutenant ran his boat alongside,
and he and his men, like ants, could be seen scrambling up over the
bulwarks.  Some small tiny puffs showed that fighting was going on.
Then came a pretty considerable number, though the reports which reached
them sounded no louder than those of pop-guns.  Tom declared that he
could see the flash of steel as the cutlasses glittered in the sunshine.
One thing was certain, that the British crew had gained the slaver's
deck--for that a slaver she was there could be no doubt.

Again puffs of smoke were seen, and the cutlasses flashed once more; and
then all was quiet.  The midshipmen would have given anything to have
distinguished what was going forward on deck, but they could only make
out that the boat was alongside, and they could have little doubt that
their friends were victorious.  Still the sail continued set, which was
a suspicious circumstance, but the dhow was scarcely yet sufficiently to
the northward to run in under the island.  In the meantime the second
dhow had got up to the mate's boat; but she being still farther off, it
was difficult to see what was taking place.  She had a gun in her bows,
which, as soon as the fighting began on board the first dhow, was fired
into her antagonist; then there came puffs of smoke from the latter, and
she was presently alongside; whether or not the English had got on
board, it was impossible for some time to ascertain.  Desmond thought
that they were firing from the boat, while the Arabs were returning
their fire from the dhow.  Whether or not such was the case, it ceased
on both sides.

"Our fellows have got on board, depend upon it," cried Tom; "and they're
making short work of it; the Arabs can never stand our fellows'
cutlasses."

The second dhow, like the first, continued her course; in about a
minute, down came her huge sail, making it evident that she was
captured, as the Arabs, if they had been successful, would have been in
a hurry to get away.  The first dhow had now got sufficiently to the
northward to haul in for the anchorage, her helm was put down, and,
heeling fearfully over, she made her way towards it.

"Good heavens!" cried Tom; "what's happening to the other dhow?"  He had
turned his glass but for a minute to look at the first, when, on again
glancing at the latter, her bows had disappeared, and her high stern was
just sinking beneath the surface.  The boat was there, but it was
impossible to see who was on board.  The party on the cliff were
therefore left in a state of intense anxiety as to the fate of their
shipmates.  They could only picture to themselves numberless human
beings struggling for their lives, those in the boat employed in
endeavouring to pick them up.  The lieutenant's party had too much to do
in keeping the Arabs under to go to their assistance; by the time they
could have arrived, indeed, all who had not been picked up by the boat
must have sunk for ever.

The first dhow was rapidly approaching the anchorage, and the boat,
hoisting her sail, soon afterwards followed her.  At all events, it was
evident that their shipmates had been successful.  The two midshipmen
were eager to go down and meet them, to hear what had happened, but they
had been ordered to remain on the cliff, and could not--without being
guilty of disobedience--leave their post; they had, therefore, to sit
quiet and curb their impatience, while they continued to keep a lookout
over the ocean.

Tom and Desmond now turned their glasses towards the ship.  The dhow she
had captured lay with her sails lowered, waiting for her return, to be
towed up to the anchorage, while she herself was still seen afar off,
though at too remote a distance for her proceedings to be understood.
Against the wind, however, the dhow could do nothing, and was drifting
away to the northward.  They were for the present, indeed, more
interested with the dhows taken by the lieutenant and the other boat.
Both appeared crowded with people, Arabs and blacks, besides the seamen
of the _Gauntlet_.  The boat which had carried Tom and Gerald's party on
shore had returned to the ship, so that even could they have ventured to
leave their post, they would not have been able to get off to satisfy
their curiosity.  According to the directions given, they continued
looking out to the southward for the approach of any other dhows,
although there was but little chance of their being stopped; as it was
very evident that neither of the boats were in a condition to put off in
chase of them.  In a short time they saw that the boats were employed in
carrying the people from the dhow to the shore, but even before they
landed they were hidden from sight by the intervening rocks and trees.
From the frequent trips the boats had to make, they judged that the dhow
had contained a large number of slaves.

By the time the blacks had been landed, three of the dhows they had at
first seen had got almost up to the southern end of the island.  "Why, I
do believe they are coming to bring up at our anchorage," observed Tom.
He was right; the headmost dhow, hauling her wind, stood close round to
the north of the point, as if well acquainted with the locality; and
although the dhow at anchor must have been seen by those on board, she
stood on past her without lowering her sail.  She rounded to at some
distance farther in; as near, indeed, to the shore as it was safe to go.
The inside dhow followed her example, as did the third, and all three
lay close together, as if no enemy existed near them.

"They seem pretty bold fellows," observed Tom; "or else they confide in
their numbers.  Supposing each carries thirty men, and I think I can
count as many on their decks, there must be ninety in all--rather heavy
odds against our boats' crews, who have, besides, their prisoners to
look after.  I say, Desmond, suppose they land? we should be feeling
rather foolish."

"I don't think the lazy rascals would take the trouble to climb up
here," answered Desmond; "and if they do, we've got our revolvers, and
the men have their muskets and cutlasses, and we shall easily be able to
defend ourselves; but they probably are not unprovided with long guns;
though they may be only matchlocks or old muskets, they may contrive to
pick us off while they keep at a safe distance."

The state of affairs had indeed become serious.  The midshipmen and
their party were completely cut off from receiving any assistance from
their shipmates on the island, who might indeed also not be in a
condition to afford it.  In all probability, with the pretty severe
fights both boats had had, some of the men had suffered; still, if one
whole boat's crew could be mustered, Lieutenant Matson would scarcely
fail to try and capture the three dhows which had so audaciously entered
the lion's den.  That he had not done so already made Tom and Desmond
not a little anxious; although the Arabs on board the dhows might not
have seen the boats or the people on shore when they first entered the
bay, they could not fail to do so where they now lay; yet, instead of
again weighing and standing on, which would have been their wisest
course, they remained as quiet as if no enemy was near.

The midshipmen's chief hope now was that the ship would quickly come
back and catch the three dhows before they again stood out to sea.  They
expected every instant to catch sight of the boats pulling off to attack
the dhows.  Neither appeared, and they at length began to fear that
either Lieutenant Matson or Collins the mate, or perhaps both of them,
had been killed or wounded; and that so many of the men had been hurt
that they were unable to make the attempt.

The day was drawing on.  They had brought up a small keg of water and
some provisions, or they would by this time have been almost starved, as
under ordinary circumstances they would have been relieved at noon.
However, as Desmond observed, they had to "grin and bear it."  Still,
not forgetful of their duty, they were keeping a look-out over the
ocean, when one of the men exclaimed, "We shall have more visitors than
we bargained for; see, Mr Rogers, here come a whole tribe of the
rascally Arabs; and if they find us out, we shall have a squeak for it."

Tom turned his glass in the direction to which the man pointed.  "There
are Arabs, and not a few, but the greater number of the people are
blacks," he observed; "by the way they are walking, they must be slaves.
That accounts for the dhows bringing up here; I've no doubt it is a
caravan from the interior, and the poor wretches are being brought down
to be embarked.  Had the ship remained here, all three would have been
set free as local traders.  I fancy Mr Matson suspects something of the
sort, and is just waiting till they get their slaves on board to capture
them.  Now I think of it, I heard him yesterday say that he had
discovered a deep bight at that end of the island, into which the boats
could be hauled and remain perfectly concealed.  If that is the case,
the dhows have not seen them, and fancy that the people on shore, whom
they can't have failed to discover, have no means of getting off."

"Faith, I hope that's the case," observed Desmond; "for if those Arabs
who are coming this way were to find us out, they'd be after shooting at
us in a somewhat unpleasant manner."

Tom and the rest of the party could not help feeling that Desmond was
right.  However, they determined to make the best of a bad case; and, as
they were tolerably well posted, to defend themselves against all odds.
In their exposed position there could be no doubt that they had already
been seen, so that they could not hope to conceal themselves, which
might have been their wisest course.  Tom, therefore, ordered his men to
fire off two muskets to attract the attention of the party on the
island, trusting that they would, as soon as they saw the Arabs, push
off to their assistance.

No answering signal, however, being made, the midshipmen began to have
serious misgivings as to what had happened.  "Well, my lads," cried Tom,
addressing the four seamen who had accompanied him and Desmond, "we'll
make the best of a bad case, and hold out as long as our ammunition
lasts and we've got strength to hold our swords and cutlasses."

"Ay, ay, sir--no fear about that," was the answer; "the brown-skinned
beggars won't be in a hurry to climb up here; and if they do, we'll
tumble them back again faster than they came."

That their men would prove staunch, the midshipmen had no fear; still it
would be very provoking to see the Arabs embarking the slaves, and not
be able to stop them.  It would, however, be the height of madness to
venture down from their post; for the slave-traders, being all well
armed, would, to a certainty, overpower them with numbers, and, however
they might have acted alone, were not likely to abandon their prey when
on the point of receiving payment from the purchasers in the dhows.  The
Arabs, who had just approached cautiously, on discovering how small was
their party, looked up at them, making threatening gestures, and
uttering loud shouts and cries.  The poor slaves, apparently, could not
understand the matter, and marched on with their heads cast down, many
of them pictures of wretchedness and despair.  There were women, some
with infants in their arms, others leading little children by the hand;
a large number appeared to be girls of all ages, who walked together,
with scanty garments, but unencumbered by the loads which were carried
by most of the rest.  Then came a gang of boys, many of whom limped
sadly, as their drivers compelled them to move forward at the point of
their spears.

Some few old men were among them, who were tottering under loads too
heavy for their frail limbs to bear; and then came a numerous body of
men, secured two and two by heavy poles, with their necks bolted into
forks, one at either end of the pole.  Some trod the earth boldly;
others tottered at every step, trying to exert themselves to avoid prods
from the points of the spears with which their drivers were constantly
threatening them.  Such had, too probably, been their mode of journeying
for many weary miles of desert, since they had fallen into the hands of
their persecutors.

"I wonder how many of those poor wretches have sunk down and died on the
road?" observed Tom; "or been knocked on the head by those wretched
Arabs?"

"Faith, it makes one's blood boil!" cried Desmond; "in spite of all
odds, I should like to pounce down upon them, and set the poor negroes
free."  The men expressed themselves much in the same strain, and would
very willingly have followed the midshipmen, had they acted according to
their wishes; but both knew that they had no business to leave their
post, even had there been any probability of success.

Boats now came off from the dhows, and the business of transporting the
slaves on board commenced; while an armed party of Arabs was drawn up
near the foot of the cape, to prevent any attempt which might be made by
the British seamen to interfere with their proceedings.  Nearly all the
slaves had been got on board, when the Arabs, no longer being engaged in
guarding them, began to show evident signs that their intentions were
hostile.  Presently a personage of more importance, probably the chief
slave-dealer, arrived, with several additional armed attendants.  The
midshipmen saw the other Arabs pointing them out to him.  A consultation
which was then held resulted, apparently, in a resolution to attack
them.  Shouts and cries of hatred arose from the assembled Arabs, who,
flourishing their weapons, advanced towards the hill, evidently with the
intention of climbing it.

We must leave the midshipmen in their perilous predicament, and follow
the _Gauntlet_, which, having captured one of the dhows, of which she
was in chase as has been described, stood after the other two.  They
were both fleet vessels, and, with their enormous sails filled to
bursting, seemed to glide over the surface like those winged creatures
which may be seen in summer skimming across the surface of a pool.  The
boilers were heated to the utmost, and with sail and screw the ship
dashed forward in chase.

The nearest dhow was the first to haul in for the shore, while the other
continued her course, hoping to escape.  "The first bird is already
ours," observed Jack to Higson; "she'll not venture to run her stem on
the rocks, and if we attempt further to interfere with her, we shall
lose the second.  If she ventures to run out to sea, we shall have time
to settle with the one ahead, and catch her into the bargain."

The dhow spoken of was continuing her course towards the shore, with the
intention, it was supposed, of anchoring, and waiting till she could
again make sail, and run out to sea before the ship had settled with her
consort.  The _Gauntlet_ stood on as before, though she was gaining
little, if anything, on the fast-sailing dhow; still, one of the shot or
shell she was firing might carry away a mast or tear the sail in pieces;
and Jack, trusting to that chance, hoped to capture her at last.

A stern chase is a long chase, under most circumstances, and the Arabs
probably thought that they might possibly keep ahead till nightfall, and
escape during the darkness.  She was a large vessel, and she might have
three or four hundred slaves on board, and was on every account,
therefore, worth catching.  On she went for several miles, the
_Gauntlet_ inch by inch at length gaining on her.  Two shot had already
passed through her sail, and a shell had burst so near that possibly
some of her crew might have been hit.  Gradually she was edging towards
the shore, where a sandy beach could be discovered from the ship.  It
was of no great extent, as there were rocks at either end; but if the
dhow could reach it, she might be run on shore, and the blacks landed
before the boats could reach her to prevent them.  To stop her from
doing this was impossible, unless a happy shot should carry away her
mast or yard.

Nearer and nearer she drew to the beach, on which a heavy surf was
breaking.  "The fellows will drown themselves if they attempt to land
there," said Jack.

"I'm not so certain of that," answered Higson; "a certain percentage may
be lost, but the Arabs will care nothing about that, provided they can
get the greater number on shore; and as they themselves swim like
fishes, they have no fear of losing their own lives."

The dhow heeled over to the breeze, but still kept her large sail
standing; there was no longer any doubt that the Arabs had resolved to
beach her.  "Give her a shot," cried Jack, "right over her; it may show
them that even if they do reach the shore, they have no chance of
escaping from us."  A shot was fired; another and another followed,
flying over the dhow's sail and pitching into the beach, towards which
she was rushing to her destruction.  Should she strike it, could any of
the human beings on board escape?  The surf was rolling in heavily, and
breaking with continued roar on the sand; rushing far up, and then
receding with still greater rapidity.  Notwithstanding this, the Arabs,
maddened at the thoughts of capture, stood desperately on; they
themselves might escape, and what mattered to them the lives of their
wretched captives? should a few be rescued, it would be better than
letting the whole fall into the hands of the hated white men.  The
miserable blacks had no choice between a speedy death or a lingering
captivity.  The foam-topped breakers were dancing up on either side of
the devoted vessel; through them she rushed, and the next instant, by
the fearful heave she gave, it was seen that she had struck.

Every glass was turned towards her as the ship stood on, keeping the
lead going, till, the water shallowing, she must come to an anchor.  A
minute scarcely had elapsed after the dhow struck, when a black stream
was seen issuing from beneath her, some moving figures on shore in
coloured dresses showing that the Arabs had first escaped.  But of what
does that string consist?  Of hundreds of human beings, men, women, and
children, who had, when the vessel struck, been set free by their
owners.

Now one breaker, now another, burst down upon them, and carried some of
the dark string away.  Their ranks were quickly filled up, and on the
string went.  It seemed never-ending, as the blacks in the hold,
scrambling up on deck, threw themselves overboard to join those who had
already reached the shore.

"They must be stopped, at all events," cried Jack; "if they attempt to
cross the desert they will be starved to death, or fall into the hands
of the murderous Saumalis."

Notwithstanding the heaviness of the surf, it was soon seen that a large
number of blacks had reached the shore.  At first they assembled in
groups; but now, as they looked towards the ship, terrified by the tales
their Arab captors had told them of the white men's cannibal
propensities, they began to fly, as fast as their cramped limbs would
allow them, in parties towards the interior.

"They will escape to their certain destruction, if they are not
frightened back," said Jack; "keep the guns playing; fire another shot
ahead of them, it will stop them from going off in the direction they
are taking."

Several shot were fired over the heads of the fugitives, each column
being turned as the wretched beings saw the sand thrown up just before
them, and believed that destruction would await them if they took that
direction; it was, however, only to try and escape in another.  In the
meantime, the instant the steamer had stopped her way, three boats had
been lowered, and, impelled by their hardy crews, regardless of the
danger run, were making their way towards the dhow.  Two boldly pushed
through the surf, while the third brought up just outside the breakers,
ready to receive any of the slaves who might be caught.  Archie Gordon
was in one, with the second master; the boatswain was in another, with
Hamed, the interpreter; while Higson took command of the large boat.

Jack watched them with no little anxiety, for the expedition was a
hazardous one.  The guns continued firing away, now by their shot or
shell checking the advance of the fugitives in one direction, now in
another.  Still, in spite of the shot, the Arabs kept urging on the
slaves, and, making them scatter far and wide, induced them to continue
their flight.  The two boats, at some little distance apart, entered the
breakers, and almost immediately were seen to have reached the shore,
while Mr Large remained by the boats with three hands to look after
them.

The rest of the party, led by Archie and Hamed, set off in pursuit of
the fugitives.  Strong and active, they quickly overtook a large party
of the blacks; and Hamed, as was seen by his gestures, was addressing
them, probably telling them of their folly in being alarmed, and
advising them to return to the shore.

As the crews had landed, the boats had been hauled off by their crews
from the beach.  Presently Mr Large was seen hauling one of them up on
the beach, and, having done so, he hastened away towards the second; but
before he arrived, she was observed in the midst of the breakers, the
next instant to be cast a shattered wreck on the beach.  He and the two
men with him twice rushed down into the surf, the second time with
another man who had joined them; again and again they made the same
desperate rush into the boiling waters--the life of a fellow-creature
depended upon their success.  The last rush they made they were
successful, and a human form was soon dragged out of the water; but he
did not rise to his feet.  Carrying him up some little distance, they
laid him on the sand, bending over him; then, rising and casting a
lingering glance behind them, hurried on to meet a party of blacks who,
escorted by some of their shipmates, were approaching the beach.

The Arabs and fugitive slaves had, in the meantime, disappeared over the
sandhills, with the seamen still in hot pursuit, enjoying the chase,
shouting to each other, and turning here and there as they caught sight
of the larger party of blacks ahead, whom they were striving desperately
to overtake.  Sometimes one, in his his eagerness, would tumble over on
his nose, but quickly picked himself up again.  Now an unfortunate black
was overtaken, and seized by the arm,--for collar he had none to catch
hold of,--down he would fall on his knees, imploring his captor not to
murder him, when the sailor would pat him on the head and try to make
him understand that his intentions were friendly.

Hamed, with his robes girded round him, was as active as anyone,
shouting to the blacks that no harm was meant them, and that the sailors
only wished to prevent them from being carried off into the desert to
perish miserably.  His exhortations, and the seamen's activity, resulted
in the capture of fifty or sixty blacks, who were brought in from all
directions; but still some of the seamen continued the pursuit, and
Jack, fearing that they might be carried by their ardour too far, fired
a gun and hoisted a signal for their return to the beach.  Fortunately
the signal was seen by Archie, and the stragglers returned, most of them
leading one or more blacks, some with children in their arms, one or two
trotting along with a child under each arm, generally squalling and
crying like a couple of sucking pigs.

It took some time before the whole of the party were collected on the
beach.  It was then seen that they were making arrangements for coming
off.  Jack felt considerable anxiety about the matter; the surf had
greatly increased since they went on shore, and even then one of the
boats had been lost.  Now all depended upon one boat, which must of
necessity be heavily laden.  He was not quite at his ease, however, with
regard to the ship; she was much closer inshore than any sailing vessel
would have ventured.  Though he knew that the screw would enable him
quickly to gain an offing, he had not as yet that thorough confidence in
its powers which long experience could give.  Nearly all his officers,
and a large portion of his crew also, were away; indeed, he had never
before been so short-handed.  However, nothing could be gained by delay.
He made a signal for the boat to come off as soon as possible, a line
being carried from the first lieutenant's boat outside the surf to the
shore, and by its means the small boat was to be hauled through the
breakers.

First a portion of the blacks were placed in her, when, the boatswain
taking his seat in the stern, with four hands to pull, she, with her
living freight, was shoved off.  Now she rose to the top of a sea which
rolled in, and now she sank into the hollow between that and the
following sea, which so completely hid her from sight, that it appeared
as if she had gone down.  Jack heard one of the youngsters crying out,
"She's lost, she's lost!"--but no; once more her bow emerged amidst the
foaming waters, and on she came towards Higson's boat, his crew hauling
away manfully at the tow-line.

Jack breathed more freely when he saw her alongside, and the blacks
being transferred to the large boat.  The instant they were out of her,
she made her way once more to the shore.  A second cargo was now
embarked, and the process was repeated, happily without any accident.
"She must make two more trips before they are all off," said Jack to the
surgeon, who was standing near him.

The third was accomplished as safely as the other two.  "The rest will
have no difficulty in embarking, I hope," observed the surgeon.

"The sea has been rapidly getting up," replied Jack; "I wish that they
were all safe on board."  The fourth and last trip was about to be made;
even the ship was much less steady than at first.  As he took a glance
to the eastward, he observed that the foam-crested seas which rolled in
had increased in height.  Every man on shore had embarked, and Higson's
crew now began to haul in on the line.  As they were doing so, a huge
sea which came rushing on struck the boat, sending many a bucketful into
her, and then, with a thundering roar, hissing as it went rolling on,
caught the smaller boat, which had by that time performed half of her
passage.  Down it came upon her; the next instant the men at the warp
were seen to come toppling down backwards--the rope had parted.

For an instant the boat had disappeared; the next, she was seen rolled
over in the surf, while those who had been in her were struggling
desperately to regain the shore.  Jack felt more anxious than he had
ever before been in his life; fortunately, four of the Kroomen had gone
away in the boats.  Numerous heads were seen amid the seething waters;
now one emerged, and now another, as the beach was gained, while the
gallant Kroomen, with the best swimmers of the party, went darting here
and there to assist their shipmates or the drowning blacks.

All eyes in the ship were fixed on them.  By degrees they emerged from
the breakers, and Jack was in hopes that all had escaped, when he
observed three of the Kroomen and two of the sailors plunge once more
into the foaming waters.  They returned dragging a body with them; then
they went in and brought out another and another.  One of these, by his
dress, was seen to be a seamen, and the rest were blacks.

Then the party rushed down to save their boat, which was hurled on the
beach; but their efforts to preserve her were in vain.  Down she came
with a thundering crash, those in the water narrowly escaping being
crushed by her.  Getting hold of her they dragged her up, and were seen
standing round her.  It was, however, very evident that her bow had been
crushed in, so as to render her unfit again to be launched.

Higson, on coming on deck, expressed his fears that some of their
shipmates had lost their lives in addition to the poor fellow who was
first drowned.  Fifty blacks had been rescued; as many more possibly had
been drowned, with numerous children whose bodies had been seen floating
about, while many had been dragged off, to undergo fearful sufferings,
if not a cruel death, by the slaver's crew.

How to rescue the party on shore was now the question; two boats having
now been lost, and three others being away, only the dingy and a canoe
remained for use.  Their situation on shore seemed dangerous in the
extreme; all the arms they had carried had been lost, and should the
Arabs discover their defenceless condition, they would certainly not
lose the opportunity of avenging themselves.  Still, by no ordinary
means could they be got off.  Jack bethought him of consulting Tom
Kettle, who, coming aft, touched his hat.

"Billy Saucepan and I, we do it, sir.  We go on shore in the canoe, and
carry whatever you wish to send," answered Tom.

"I am sure you will," said Jack; "we must send them some arms and
ammunition, a keg of water and some provisions, though it will not do to
overload the canoe."

"We take four muskets and whatever you order to send, they not sink the
canoe," replied Tom Kettle.

Jack directed that the arms should be wrapped in oil-cloth, and that
they, with the keg and a small cask containing a few eatables for the
party, should be secured in the bottom of the canoe; so that, should she
be capsized, they might not get washed out or be damaged.  Going below,
he also wrote a letter to Archie, directing him to fire off three
muskets should the Kroomen reach the shore in safety.

"All ready, sir," said the head Krooman; "we get there, never fear."
The canoe was lowered, and Tom and his companion shoved off.  Away they
dashed, energetically working their paddles.  The canoe was seen to
enter the surf.  Jack was too anxious to speak.

"They'll do it," cried the doctor; but he was mistaken.  The canoe
dashed into the surf, and the next instant appeared bottom uppermost,
rolling over and over.  "The fine fellows are lost!" he exclaimed.  A
time of anxious suspense passed by; now the canoe could be seen in the
surf, now she disappeared; but the gallant Kroomen could not be
discovered, though many an eye was looking out for them.

Jack took a hurried turn on deck, considering what was next to be done.
Higson proposed once more going in the large boat, and sending a line on
shore, so as to tow the people singly off.  "They would be drowned
before they got half-way," said Jack.

"I fear they would," answered Higson; "and the dingy would never live in
such a sea, even with only one man in her."

Jack feared that he should have to remain till the next morning, but in
the meantime he would certainly lose the other dhow which had been seen
close inshore, while it was important to get hold of the first captured
before dark, and to carry her to an anchorage.  While he and Higson were
discussing the subject, their ears were saluted by the report of three
muskets, fired in rapid succession.  "Tom and his mate are safe, at all
events," he exclaimed; "and the best thing the party can do is now to
make their way overland to the bay.  Having got arms, they will be able
to beat off any Arabs who may venture to attack them."

The proper signal was accordingly made to Archie, who showed that he
understood it by waving a handkerchief; and the whole party were seen at
once to put themselves into marching order, when they began moving to
the southward along the shore.  The anchor was then weighed, and the
ship stood towards the spot where the dhow she had before chased was
last seen.  The slaver, which had some time before hoisted her sail, was
seen standing to the eastward; but suddenly down came the sail.

"She's given in, finding it useless to attempt escaping," remarked the
doctor.

"I'm not so sure of that," said Higson.  "See, up goes her canvas again;
there, she's standing for the shore on the other tack."

All hopes of cutting her off were vain; the ship dashed on, head to
wind, while the dhow bounded towards the rocky coast.  "The madmen!"
cried Jack; "she'll be dashed to pieces in a few minutes.  Throw a shell
ahead of her, it may induce the Arabs to haul down their sail."

The missile flew over the doomed vessel, but still she held on towards
the coast.  "Try and hit her," he cried out; "it may be better to sink
her where our boats can pick up some of the poor wretches, than allow
them to be dashed to pieces on those cruel rocks--fire shot."  Gun after
gun sent their shot at the dhow; but the range was a long one, and
tossed as she was from sea to sea, while the ship herself was far from
steady, they flew ahead of their mark.  Jack had a hard matter not to
stamp on the deck from rage at the conduct of the Arabs, and pity for
the poor creatures they were thus carrying to destruction.  Nothing he
could do would make the ship steam faster, nor could he blame the
gunners for not taking better aim.

"Cease firing," he cried at last; "it is of no use now, as the dhow is
within a cable's length of the breakers."  The dhow flew on with her
huge sail stretched to the utmost, and already heeling over fearfully.
It seemed that the water must be rushing into her hold.

"There is a narrow opening between the rocks," exclaimed Higson; "the
dhow has been making for that."  Scarcely had he spoken when she was in
the midst of the breakers.  They roared around her, and the next moment
she was hurled up towards the beach, her huge sail flying away to
leeward, and flapping wildly in the wind.  It seemed impossible that any
human being could escape from amid that furious mass of foam, except the
strongest of swimmers; but notwithstanding this, ere another minute had
passed, a black line was seen here and there, like some enormous
serpent, crawling over the yellow sand from the dark wreck, the Arabs
being distinguished by their coloured dresses as they made their way on
shore.  Onward went the miserable blacks, the line becoming thinner and
thinner; still the headmost were flying, when an enormous sea, dashing
on the shore, enfolded the stranded dhow in its embrace.  Even the
escaping blacks halted to gaze at the spectacle, as the despairing
shrieks of their wretched countrymen reached their ears; while the dhow,
shattered to fragments, was carried off with all those remaining on
board by the receding billows.

The blacks stopped but a few moments, and then, terrorstricken, fled on
into the desert, there in all probability to perish miserably.  "This is
terrible work!" exclaimed Jack.  "Had we allowed the dhow to pass,
though those poor creatures might have been kept for ever as slaves,
they might have retained their lives, it may be, and bettered their
condition; but it was our duty to destroy the dhow at all events.  Do
you think it possible that any can have escaped, Higson?"

This question was put as the ship neared the scene of the catastrophe.
"Not likely," answered the first lieutenant; "but we can but look for
them."  The ship's way was stopped, and a boat being lowered pulled
towards the shore.  Here and there a few fragments of the wreck were
seen, but not a human being could be distinguished.  After examining the
rocks on either side, of the spot where the dhow went on shore, Higson
returned to the ship; the boat was hoisted up, and a course steered for
the dhow which had at first been captured.

Jack had been looking out for the shore party; he saw them, as he
believed, still farther to the northward, making their way over the
sand.  "A dreary march they'll have of it," he observed to Higson; "but
with the firearms they possess they will be able, I hope, to keep the
Arabs at bay, should any of the rascals take it into their heads to
attack them."

"It is fortunate that Hamed is with them, as he may be able to
communicate with any natives they may fall in with, and obtain them as
guides over the hills," said Higson.

"I would rather they should not fall in with any natives, who are more
likely to prove treacherous than to afford them assistance," answered
Jack.  The attention of the officers was now, however, engaged in
looking out for the dhow; evening was approaching, and it was important
that they should pick her up before dark.

"There she is, right ahead," cried the look-out from aloft.  With her
sail lowered she presented but a small object on the water.

The ship soon neared her; the officer in charge replied to Jack's hail,
"All's right, sir; but I hope that the blacks may be received on board;
for if you take us in tow, I doubt if the craft will hold together."

"The sooner they are out of her the better," answered Jack.  The dhow
was accordingly brought alongside, and now began the task of removing
the unhappy beings to the ship.  The men eagerly came forward to assist
in carrying the weak and helpless creatures up from the hold of the
slaver, the horrible odour from which was sufficient to overcome the
most hardy.  So weak and emaciated from their long confinement, and
their still more dreadful overland journey, were most of the negroes,
that the greater number could not walk without assistance, and were
carried on deck in the strong arms of the seamen.  With the greatest
tenderness and care did those gallant fellows carry their helpless
burdens, notwithstanding the mass of filth with which they were covered,
in consequence of their long imprisonment in the pestilential hold.

There were nearly a dozen infants on board; the mothers of some of them
being too weak to carry them, they were lifted up by the seamen, who
tenderly bore them along the deck, chirruping and talking to them as
they would have done to their own offspring.  Though two or three were
sickly, and one was found dead in its mother's arms, yet they had
suffered less than the somewhat older children, who had been unable to
obtain their share in the scramble for food, which, from the mode the
Arabs had of distributing it, must have taken place; the more helpless
ones went without it, while the stronger got a double portion.

There were nearly a hundred and fifty children under ten years of age.
Some were in the very last stage of suffering, and were mere skeletons.
There were comparatively few middle-aged men, showing that they must
have either fallen in battle, or escaped the raids made on their
villages by the slave-procurers.  Some, again, were old women, who
would, it might be supposed, from their very worthlessness, have been
allowed to remain behind by their barbarous captors.

"The poor old crones would not have fetched half a dollar apiece,"
observed Higson; "had these rascals any bowels of compassion, they would
have spared them all the sufferings they've had to endure; but for the
sake of the few dollars they may pocket, they would not mind what amount
of torture they inflict.  I wish we had liberty to string up the whole
lot of them at our yard-arms, they would only get their proper deserts."

Some time was spent before the dhow was cleared.  Her Arab skipper and
crew were then placed on the poop, as they came, sulkily enough, on
board.  They were received by the ship's corporal and corporal of
marines with no very friendly looks, and were compelled pretty roughly
to strip, in order that they might be searched for arms and money.
While they took charge of the former articles, the latter commodity was
handed to the paymaster.  On their clothes being returned, they were
sent on to the poop under charge of a sentry, to await their fate,
whatever that might be.

"Are all out of the dhow?" asked Higson of the carpenter and his crew,
who had been sent on board her.

"I'll take one look more round," was the answer; and a lantern being
handed to him, he descended with some of his men into the hold.  They
presently returned carrying three human beings, but what they were it
was difficult to say, till they were handed up on board.  One proved to
be an old woman, who could scarcely open her eyes; the other two were
lads, who had been found almost buried in the sand which served as
ballast for the vessel.  They were placed among the other worst cases,
of whom the doctor expressed his belief that several were past recovery.
The younger and best-looking young women, as being the most profitable
part of the cargo, had been better cared for than any of the rest, while
the men and boys had been almost starved, the object of the Arabs being
to expend as little on food for them as possible.

"The dhow is clear, sir," reported the carpenter.

"Scuttle her," said Jack, "and set her on fire.  The Arabs shall see
that we don't take them for the sake of their craft; it may serve as a
slight punishment for them to see her burning."

With infinite satisfaction the carpenter and his crew distributed some
bundles of oakum and shavings in different parts of the vessel, and,
setting them on fire, quickly climbed out of her, when Jack shouted,
"Turn ahead!" and the _Gauntlet_ steamed on, leaving the dhow enveloped
in flames.  The whole operation was so speedily performed that the Arabs
opened their eyes with astonishment.  Most of them took it, however,
quietly enough; but the negoda, to whom the vessel belonged, plucked his
beard with rage as he saw his property destroyed.

"Serve him right," was the remark made by not a few of those on board,
though the greater number were too actively employed to notice what had
occurred.  Their first business was to clear the unfortunate creatures
from the filth with which they were literally covered from head to foot.
Warm water and sponges and towels were brought from below to perform
the operation on those who were too weak to bear any more severe
process; while the larger number were placed under the steam hose, which
was set to work pumping water over them, the seamen turning them round,
and exposing those parts of their bodies to which the dirt clung the
thickest.

"Well, if we can't make a blackamoor white, we can wash him clean, at
all events," remarked Nat Bolus, the wag of the crew; "though I don't
think as how we could have done it without the help of this here steam."

Even the stronger ones were handled kindly, but the poor weak creatures,
who could scarcely lift their arms, were treated with such gentleness by
the rough seamen as any trained hospital nurses could have used.  Their
dirty rags, on being removed, were immediately thrown overboard as
utterly unfit for further use.  In the meantime, the cook had been busy
in the galley boiling beans and rice, some of which had been found in
the dhow, though the ship had a quantity for such emergencies.  The next
operation was to clothe the poor blacks, for which purpose both officers
and men ransacked their wardrobes.  Sheets, tablecloths, towels,
bed-curtains, shirts, and flannels, were willingly brought forth and put
over their naked bodies as they came out from under the hose.

By the time they were all washed, the cook announced that the food was
ready, and they were made to sit down in circles of twenty on the deck,
when the men told off for the purpose carried round the bowls, which
were placed in the centre of each ring.  The degraded state to which
they had been reduced was now more fully exhibited, for, instead of
gratefully receiving the food, they rushed at it much as a pack of
hungry dogs would have done, scratching, crying, and striking at each
other, for fear that their neighbours might get a larger share than
themselves.  It was humiliating to the lookers-on to see beings with
immortal souls thus acting the part of wild beasts; and yet these very
beings were capable of receiving the truths of the gospel, and it might
be hoped that even now many might have the opportunity of being raised
to a state much superior to that from which they had fallen.

In spite of the exhortations of the seamen to the poor creatures to be
quiet, they continued their shrieks and cries, each thrusting his or her
hand into the dish to seize as large a portion as it would hold, and
then to cram it into the mouth much after the fashion of a monkey.
Indeed, as Nat Bolus remarked, "they looked for all the world like an
assemblage of huge baboons."

The smaller children, who were too weak to feed themselves, were
committed to the care of the seamen; and a dozen or more hardy tars were
to be seen with basins and spoons in their hands, and little children on
their knees, ladling the food down their throats, till the doctor had to
interfere to save the infants from being killed from repletion.  The
worst cases had been removed to the sick-bay, where every care was
bestowed on them both by the surgeon and officers, who produced
preserved milk, wine and spirits, and various delicacies which might
assist in restoring almost exhausted nature.  Many were too far gone to
exhibit any feeling, their only desire apparently being to be allowed to
die in peace; but others endeavoured to express their gratitude by all
the means in their power, though, as Hamed was on shore, they had no
means of doing so in words.

The great difficulty was to stow away so large a number of persons on
the deck of the ship.  Of course they could not be allowed to go below,
where the crew were already somewhat closely packed for that hot
climate.  The poor creatures were made to lie down side by side, and
sails being got up were spread over them, while screens were rigged to
keep off the wind, and an awning stretched over all.  Here, at all
events, they had fresh air, and were tolerably protected from the
weather.  Even now many, it appeared, did not understand that all was
being done for their benefit; while a large number, their limbs aching
with pain, gave utterance to the most lamentable groans and shrieks,
which were heard all night long throughout the ship, as she made her way
to her former anchorage.

This was only one of many similar scenes which Jack witnessed while
engaged in the suppression of the slave-trade.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE LOOK-OUT PARTY ATTACKED--REPULSE AND FLIGHT OF THE ARABS--SECURING
THE PRISONERS--A NIGHT ON THE BEACH--REJOIN THE SHIP--BURNING OF THE
DHOW--ARABS ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE TO THE MAINLAND, BUT FALL VICTIMS TO
SHARKS--ENCOUNTER WITH ANOTHER SLAVE CARAVAN--RETURN TO THE SHIP.

Tom Rogers and Gerald had watched the approach of the Arab slave-dealers
to the foot of the hill.

"You may howl as you like, my boys," cried Gerald, "but if you attempt
to climb up here, you will be sent tumbling down again faster than you
came up."  Tom, meantime, was keeping an eye on the movements of the
Arabs, and the moment he saw them lift their matchlocks, he shouted to
his men to jump down into one of the hollows, he himself setting the
example; so that the bullets either flew over their heads, or struck the
rocks behind which they were concealed.

"The rascals think they've blown us off the face of the earth," said
Tom, who had found a spot with a bush through which he could thrust his
telescope and yet remain perfectly sheltered behind the rock; "they're
looking about them, wondering where we've gone to.  If we had but a few
more muskets, we could pick off every one of them."

Still the Arabs showed no inclination to climb the face of the hill.
Had the midshipmen and their party remained concealed, possibly the
slave-dealers might have taken their departure inland; but Gerald,
forgetting the danger they were in, could not resist jumping up on the
top of the rock, and shouting out in a tone of derision at their foes.
Tom, seeing the Arabs about to take aim at him, pulled him down just at
the moment that a whole volley of shot came whizzing through the air.

"You may fire away as much as you like," cried Desmond, "but you won't
hurt us."

Though it would have given the Arabs infinite satisfaction to cut the
throats of the whole of the party, they still hesitated to run the risk
of being shot themselves at close quarters, probably supposing that the
English were better armed than was the case.  Tom watched all their
movements through his glass.  At length the chief of the slave-dealers,
who had gone off to the dhows, returned on shore with several
companions.  Tom saw the others apparently telling him what had
occurred.  He appeared to be addressing them and working them up to
mount the hill, then, waving his crooked sword, he led them on towards
the only path by which they could ascend, they following, shouting and
shrieking out vows of defiance.

"They're coming," cried Gerald; "there's no mistake about it this time."

"Well, then, you take one pistol and I'll take another," said Tom, "and
as they get near enough we must pick off the leaders.  Tim Nolan and the
other fellows must manage the rest, after they have fired their muskets,
with their cutlasses; and I've no fear but we shall give a very good
account of the whole party."  Tom directed the men where to post
themselves, so that they could remain concealed behind the rocks till it
was time to spring out and meet the enemy hand to hand.

"That chief, or whatever he calls himself, seems a bold fellow,"
observed Tom, "for he keeps ahead and seems to be encouraging his
followers, who wouldn't, without him, have had any stomach for the
fight.  We must do our best to try and pick him off, and if we can
manage to give him his quietus, the rest will very quickly run away."

The path made by the signal party was so narrow that there was not room
for two people abreast; some little way down, however, there was a sort
of platform, on which a considerable number could collect together.  "If
we could stop them before they get up there," observed Tom, "we should
have only one at a time to handle, whereas if they manage to assemble at
that place, they might pepper us in an unpleasant manner."

"I'm ready," cried Desmond; "if you'll give the word, we'll all spring
out together and stop them before they reach it."  Desmond told the men
what Rogers proposed doing; they, of course, were ready to obey him,
though it might have been safer to remain where they were.  Still it was
important that they should conceal themselves till the last moment.  The
leading Arab, with his sword in his teeth, was only about a couple of
yards or so below the platform.

"Let fly at the fellows," cried Tom.  The men fired their muskets.
"Now, lads, we'll be at them," shouted their young leader, and,
springing up, he bounded over the rock, followed by Desmond and the four
men, just in time to catch the leading Arab as his hand was on the edge
of the platform.  With a down-handed cut of his sword, Tom sent the Arab
falling headlong down the cliff.  The next met with the same fate, but
the chief, who had allowed the other two to precede him, shouted to his
followers to fire at the Englishmen.  The order was obeyed, and a shower
of bullets came whizzing by them.  Tom, in return, fired at their
leader, and, without stopping to see the effect of his shot, shouted to
his men to fall back under cover before a second volley could reach
them.  Scarcely had they got under shelter when the Arabs again fired.
He saw that his former manoeuvre would not be again executed with the
same success.

The death of two of their companions appeared to have damped the ardour
of the Arabs, who remained perched about the rocks, waiting for an
opportunity to pick off any of the defenders of the height who might
venture to show themselves.  This, however, neither Tom nor his
companions intended doing.  Tom had recovered his glass, which he had
left behind, and had taken a glance over the ocean to the northward in
the hopes of seeing the ship, believing that her appearance would very
quickly induce the Arabs to hurry off.  She was nowhere to be seen,
though he caught sight of several dhows running to the northward.

While thus engaged, the voice of the old chief was again heard, and
though they could not understand his language, yet they judged from his
tones that he was endeavouring to induce his countrymen to renew the
attack.  "It can't be helped," observed Tom calmly; "if they attempt to
storm our position we must drive them back.  Our wisest plan will be to
keep under shelter as long as we can, and then to spring out on them as
soon as they get their noses near enough."

"Ay, ay, sir!" cried the men in cheerful tones; "we'll soon give them a
taste of our cutlasses, and they'll not wish to have a second bite."

Tom's suspicions were confirmed, when in another minute a hot fire was
again opened, the bullets just clearing the edge of the platform; and
directly afterwards the chief and several of his followers sprang up
upon it.  Once having gained possession of the ground, it was easy
enough for the rest.  Matters were now becoming far more serious than
before.  From another opening in the rock, Tom, although still concealed
from the Arabs, was able to look down upon the anchorage.  "Hurrah!" he
exclaimed; "Mr Matson has not been asleep; there comes the boat from
the island, and if the slavers are not sharp about getting under way,
she'll have the whole of them; but one or two are pretty sure to be
caught."

As he spoke, the report of a gun was heard, and it was seen that the
boat, as she pulled towards the slavers, was firing at them from her
bow.  The Arabs on the hillside, startled by the sound, looked round;
those who were in a position to see what was happening below, shouted to
their companions, who speedily began to leap down the rocks; most of
those on the platform, in their hurry and fright, springing down a
distance by which they ran an imminent risk of breaking their necks;
others bounded down the pathway in a mode terror alone could have
prompted them to venture on.

"Now's our time!" exclaimed Desmond, seizing several large stones which
lay in the hollow; "if our bullets can't reach them, these will;" and he
and Tom, leaping from under cover on to the platform, while their men
kept up a brisk fire, began to pelt the retreating Arabs, three of whom
were knocked over, several others having broken their legs or necks in
their flight, till the hillside presented the appearance of a
battlefield.  All this time the midshipmen and sailors were shouting and
hallooing at their flying foes.  The larger number of the Arabs,
however, reached the bottom of the hill unhurt, and were seen hurrying
down to the shore, apparently with the intention of shoving off to the
dhows to assist their countrymen.  They were all collected together,
engaged in launching a boat, when a shell plunged right in among them,
killing and wounding several.  The rest, fearing the visit of another
missile, took to flight.  The desire, however, of preventing the slaves
being captured, either by bringing them on shore or beating off the
English, induced them to go back and make a second attempt; but scarcely
had they collected when another shell pitched right into the boat,
shattering her to pieces, and laying low two more of their number.

This was more than their greed of gain could stand; again they took to
flight, following their chief, who made towards the only shady spot in
the neighbourhood, where a horse was left tethered.  Mounting, he
galloped off, followed by the rest of his gang on foot.

The party on the hill were at first doubtful whether they ought to
follow the fugitives, as Desmond had suggested.  Tom, however, thought
that they decidedly ought to prevent any slaves who might be landed from
escaping.  One of the dhows was seen hoisting her sail.  Having cut her
cable, she stood out to sea, while the other two, in order to give her a
better chance of escaping, commenced firing at the boat, expecting that
she would at once attack them.  The lieutenant, however, had made up his
mind to have all three, and, disregarding their shots, he pulled away
after the first, at the same time firing his bow-gun at her rigging.
She was a fast vessel, and was leading the boat out of harbour.  The
other two dhows, seeing this, began to hoist their sails for the purpose
of slipping out astern of her.  As he might possibly lose all three, the
lieutenant now put back, and managed to run on board one of the dhows.

The Arabs fought desperately, and it seemed doubtful who would gain the
victory.  "I wish we were on board to help them!" exclaimed Desmond; "if
I thought we could swim as far, I should propose going off to her."

"Better stay where we are," said Tom; "we shall have work enough to do.
See, the other dhow is coming round with the intention of running on
shore; probably those on board don't see their friends scampering off,
and they hope to re-land their slaves.  It is fortunate we are here to
prevent them escaping; perhaps they have been so busily engaged that
they may not have seen us, and I propose that we hide ourselves behind
those rocks out there, and, if the slaves land, we can rush out and
surprise them."  The plan suggested by Tom was instantly put into
execution.  Notwithstanding the opposition of the crew, the dhow
attacked by the lieutenant was quickly captured, and again brought to an
anchor; when, leaving some of his people on board, he made sail after
the first dhow, which there was still a possibility he might overtake.
The midshipmen could hear his gun rapidly fired, showing that he was
trying to bring down her sail.

The last of the three dhows had now stranded, and the cries and shrieks
which arose showed that the Arabs were throwing the unfortunate blacks
into the water, and compelling them to make their way on shore.  Tom and
Desmond agreed that it would be no easy matter to stop the blacks and to
fight the Arabs at the same time, as they would be certain to try and
make off with as many of the negroes as they could.  Looking out from
their hiding-place, they saw the beach covered with blacks, who had swum
and waded on shore; but the Arabs themselves were waiting on board till
all were out of the vessel, intending to come on shore in their boat.
Probably they expected that their friends would hurry down and assist
them in securing their captives.

Just as the boat left the side of the dhow, the midshipmen, uttering
loud shouts, rushed out of their hiding-place; while the blacks, seeing
them, ran on either side like a flock of scared sheep.  The sailors in
vain tried to reassure them; as they had not much time to do it, it was
necessary to attack the boat before the Arabs reached the shore.  The
latter were evidently taken by surprise, and, cramped in the boat, which
was tossing about, were unable to use their firearms to any effect.  A
few shots were fired wildly, and the next instant, as she was thrown on
the beach, the midshipmen and their followers, rushing into the water,
attacked the crew so vigorously with their cutlasses that half their
number were killed or wounded before they could defend themselves; while
the rest, as they were dragged out, were made prisoners.  The wounded
were allowed to lie on the shore, while the rest were secured by ropes,
which had been brought on shore to bind any refractory slaves.

No victory could have been more complete.  The next business was to stop
the blacks, who were hurrying away in different directions.  In vain the
sailors shouted to them, some persisted in running off into the
wilderness; but a considerable number were at length turned back to the
seashore, where they all stood crowded together, too much alarmed to
know what to do, and gazing at their late masters with astonishment.
Still, should they attempt to break loose, it would be no easy task to
stop them.  Every now and then Tom kept looking out for Mr Matson's
boat, and was not sorry to see her returning, though one of the dhows
had escaped.

"There is a chance still that the ship will pick her up," observed Tom.
"We want his help to take care of the poor blacks, and to look after
these Arabs.  How to feed them all will be a puzzle."

"I suppose there's food on board the dhow?" observed Desmond.

"Yes, but how are we to get it?  If we pull off to her, the blacks will
run away, or the wounded Arabs will get up and release their
companions," said Tom.

"Faith, then, the best way will be to take them on board with us," said
Desmond; "it's somewhat like the story of the fox and the goose and the
peas."

The day was wearing on, and the lieutenant's boat had been led a long
way out to sea, so that it would be almost dark before she could reach
the shore.  The midshipmen themselves were becoming very hungry and
thirsty, for they had left their provisions on the top of the cliff, and
could not venture back to procure them.  They had not a moment's rest;
every now and then they were compelled to start off, now in one
direction, now in another, to turn back the negroes, who were constantly
making attempts to run off.

While Tom was watching the boat, two shots were heard in rapid
succession from the island, towards which he at once saw her alter her
course.

"She'll not be coming here, after all!" he exclaimed; "something has
happened on the island, and that was a signal to her to put in."

"We must make the best of a bad case, then," said Desmond.  "I propose
that we compel all the blacks to sit down in a ring; they will be better
off than they were in the hold of the dhow, and will have no reason to
complain.  We must make them understand that if any of them attempt to
get up they will be shot.  As for the wounded Arabs, we must place a
sentry over them, and tell them the same; while we must see that the
prisoners' arms and legs are securely lashed.  If the other fellows
don't come back, I see no reason why, provided we keep our eyes open, we
shouldn't get on very well.  It won't be very pleasant to walk about all
night, but it will be better than allowing the Arabs to cut our throats,
or letting the blacks escape, for their sakes and our own."

"A very good proposal, Desmond," said Tom; "I couldn't have thought of a
better myself, and we will at once carry out your plan."  Tom explained
to the men what they wished to have done, who, choosing a spot just
above high-water mark, made the blacks understand that they were to go
and sit down there.  They put the women and children in the centre, then
the weaker-looking people and lads, and the stronger men outside of all.
They could thus better keep an eye on those most likely to try to
escape; and they managed to impress on their minds pretty clearly what
they intended doing, should they make the attempt.  These arrangements
being made, they hoped to get through the night without losing any of
their prisoners, even should Mr Matson not arrive to their assistance.
They were, however, suffering considerably from hunger and thirst, and
at last Tim Nolan, touching his hat, offered to go off to the dhow and
bring on shore something to eat.

As there was still some daylight, Tom thought that he could manage to
keep the blacks in order, and agreed that Desmond should go, accompanied
by Tim, while he and the other two men kept a strict watch over their
charges.  As the tide had already run out, the boat had but a short
distance to traverse.  In a short time Desmond came to the bow of the
dhow, and shouted out that he had found plenty of food, and would bring
some kettles on shore to cook it.

"By all means," answered Tom.  After a little time the boat returned
with several casks and bags, two large cooking-pots, and a quantity of
wood.  These things were indeed welcome.  Being carried up to a spot
somewhat inland, where the blacks sat, a fire was kindled, the pots put
on to boil; and a cask of water having been brought from the vessel,
with some bamboo cups, it was served round to the prisoners, after they
themselves had first drunk.  It was difficult, however, to help them, as
the first who seized the mug would not pass it on, in spite of all the
seamen could do, until he had drained it to the bottom.  The seamen
would not allow those who had already drunk to have any more till the
whole of the party had been supplied.

By the time the water had been served out, the contents of the pots were
sufficiently boiled.  Now came the most difficult task--to divide the
food fairly among so many people.  They would gladly have fed the
children and women first, but, placed as they were, that was impossible.
However, they were afraid to let them shift their positions; the moment
a basin was handed to one of the men, he would not give it up until he
had emptied it.  Even when the men had been fed, they would scarcely
allow their weaker companions to receive their portion, but tried to
snatch it from the hands of the seamen.

Night found them thus employed.  The fire they had kindled was now of
the greatest assistance in enabling them to continue serving out the
food, and, at the same time, to watch their prisoners.  Though some figs
and other delicacies were found on board, the midshipmen would not give
them to the Arabs, but properly allowed them only such food as they had
laid in for their captives.  The fellows grumbled, but hunger made them
accept it.  At last, by using kind tones and by gentle treatment, the
seamen quieted the fears of the blacks, who now seemed perfectly
resigned to their lot, and showed no inclination to run away.  Still the
midshipmen did not relax in their vigilance; so busily employed were
they that the night passed away more rapidly than they had expected.

Their chief anxiety was regarding the events which had happened on the
island, and which had induced Mr Matson to land there instead of coming
to their assistance.  They feared that the Arabs taken in the dhows had
given more trouble than those they had captured; possibly the
lieutenant, confiding in the strength of his party, had not thought it
necessary to bind them, and they had consequently attempted to regain
their liberty.  However, this was only conjecture, and they were
compelled to wait patiently to ascertain the truth, hoping that nothing
very serious had happened.

Notwithstanding the general quiet observed by the prisoners, now and
then a black got up and looked about him as if contemplating a start,
but was detected almost immediately by Tom and Desmond, or one of the
seamen, and compelled to sit down again in a good-humoured manner.  "You
mustn't be after giving leg-bail to us, old fellow!" exclaimed Tim
Nolan, patting the black on his back; "you'll have plenty of grub
tomorrow, and we'll be taking you to a pleasanter country than this.
Ah, there's another of them!" and away he would start farther round the
circle.

There was evidently no combination among the blacks, or by a number
rising together they might have made their escape.  They had all,
probably, been brought from different districts, and scarcely understood
each other's language, many of them having come from the neighbourhood
of Lake Nyassa, and others purchased from the Portuguese much farther
south.  A still stricter watch was kept over the Arabs, who growled and
cursed at their captors, but were unable to cast off the well-secured
lashings by which they were bound.  Thus the night passed on; tired as
all hands were, no one sat down even for a moment, and six people, armed
only with pistols and cutlasses and a couple of muskets, were able to
keep three hundred in subjection.

"I'd give a good deal to be able to turn into my hammock!" exclaimed
Desmond.

"We may have the chance before long, then," said Tom.  "See, there are
the first streaks of dawn; and, hurrah! there comes the ship.  I thought
I saw her a minute ago, and now!  I am certain of it," he added, looking
through his telescope.  "She'll be here in less than an hour."

As daylight increased, some of the blacks caught sight of the ship,
which, steaming on, head to wind, seemed to create no little
astonishment, and still more alarm, in their minds.  The seamen did
their best to quiet them, going round and round the circle, and talking
in cheerful tones, which had their due effect, although the words they
spoke were not understood.  Desmond proposed getting some more wood and
provisions from the dhow.  They were quickly brought on shore, when the
fires, which had almost burned out, were again made up and another
supply of food cooked.  The same scene took place as before.  The poor
negroes scrambled and screamed over it, though the seamen did their best
to serve it out impartially.  Then the Arabs had their share of food,
and the wounded men were looked to.  One of them had died during the
night, it having been impossible to attend to him--indeed, they were not
aware how badly he had been hurt.

With infinite satisfaction the two midshipmen at length saw their ship
come to an anchor.  A couple of musket-shots attracted the attention of
those on the look-out on board, and a boat was seen to put off from her.
In a short time Higson, with a party of men well armed, stepped on
shore.  "I can heartily compliment you both," he said, after he had
heard the account Tom and Gerald gave of their proceedings.  "Now, the
sooner we get these poor fellows on board the better.  We have a good
number already, and there must be as many more, from what I saw on the
island; but they stow pretty closely, and we must make the best of our
way to the Seychelles or some other place to dispose of them.  The Arabs
deserve to be left behind, but, as they would certainly die in this
inhospitable region, we must in charity carry them off and leave them to
be disposed of by the Sultan of Zanzibar as he may think fit."

Although the women and children under some circumstances would have been
the first to be removed, as the men would be likely to give most trouble
if left on shore, fifty of them were embarked and carried on board the
ship, the boat then returning for another cargo.  Thus, in the course of
time, all were transferred on board.  Tom and Gerald, who had gone in
the second trip, received their due praise for their conduct.  The
prisoners from the second dhow, captured by Mr Matson, at length
arrived, with a large number of slaves and the Arab crews.  He had a sad
account to give, but Tom and Gerald, though they had been eager to hear
it, were by that time fast asleep in the berth, thoroughly done up with
their exertions.

Both the dhows were set on fire, that they might not fall into the hands
of the Arabs.  On the sinking of the dhow by the senior mate, in his
attempt to save some of the women and children, he himself had lost his
life; but the Arab crew, from swimming well, had been picked up.  Two
seamen had been killed, and only forty blacks had been rescued; and the
boat herself had been so damaged that it was with difficulty she reached
the island, when the Arabs, who had not been secured, leaping on shore,
made off among the rocks.  The dhow captured by Mr Matson was in so
leaky a state that he had been compelled to land all the blacks, as well
as the Arabs, who entreated not to be left on board.  Trusting to their
gratitude, he allowed them, when landed, to remain at liberty, without
having examined them to ascertain whether they had concealed any arms
about their persons.  His boat also had suffered considerably; he was
thus prevented from attacking the three dhows when they first came to an
anchor.  He had, indeed, enough to do to look after the numerous
liberated blacks; while several of his crew, who had been badly-wounded,
required to be attended to.

So occupied had he been that not till the dhows appeared did he think of
sending the carpenter's mate and two men to repair the boat.  In the
meantime, several of the Arabs had stolen off and joined their
countrymen who had before made their escape.  Leaving a small party only
to guard the blacks and protect the wounded, as soon as the boat was
repaired he set off, as has been described, to attack the three dhows.
After his unsuccessful chase of the one which escaped, he was returning
to help Tom and Gerald when he was summoned to the island by a
prearranged signal.  On landing, he found that the Arabs had rushed down
on the camp, liberated the remainder of the prisoners, and, having
attacked the party left in charge, were inciting the blacks to escape.
His speedy return compelled the Arabs to fly, but not till they had
induced thirty of the blacks to run off with them.

As they could not get over to the mainland, Jack sent a large party on
shore to sweep the island from one end to the other, and to capture
every Arab and black who could be found.  Tom and Gerald, who, after
their snooze, awoke, as they declared, perfectly fresh, begged leave to
join it, as they were as eager as any to rescue the poor blacks who had
so quickly again been brought into slavery by the Arabs, while they
wished to recapture the latter, and to stop their slave-dealing for the
future.

The party had proceeded half-way along the island, Tom and Gerald being
on the right or the western side, when he caught sight of a black object
in the water moving away from the shore.  Directly afterwards he saw
several others in the same direction.  "Those must be Arabs attempting
to swim to the mainland," he shouted; "on, lads, and stop them!  Pass
the word along the line."

He and the men accompanying him hurried on, and were soon joined by
Gerald and his party, when they caught sight of a dozen Arabs in the
water, while many more were on the beach, endeavouring to induce the
blacks to accompany them.  Tom shouted to those in the water to return.
The nearest obeyed on seeing the seamen present their muskets, but the
others still held on their course.

"Stop the fellows!" cried Tom; when the seamen fired several shots.  One
of the nearest was hit, but the rest continued striking out.  Another
volley had the effect of making two more turn back.  Six or seven still
held desperately on.  Shot after shot was fired at them; but the
wretches had other foes besides the British seamen.  Soon after the
leading swimmer had got out of gunshot he was seen to throw up his arms,
a piercing shriek was heard, and the next instant he disappeared beneath
the surface.  The rest still held on, as it was as hazardous to turn
back as to go forward.  Another shortly afterwards shared the fate of
the first.  What horror must have filled their minds as they made their
way through the water, knowing that at any instant a ravenous shark
might seize their legs and drag them under!

Two or three, however, reached the shore.  Tom, who was watching them
through his glass, saw them throw themselves, utterly exhausted, on the
beach.  "Without food or water, their fate will be as terrible as that
of those who have just lost their lives.  They deserve it richly,
however; there will be so many slave-traders less in the world," he
observed coolly.  He, like many others acquainted with the atrocities
committed by the Arabs, could no longer feel the slightest compassion
for any sufferings to which they were subjected.

The whole of the blacks were secured, as were the surviving Arabs, and
marched back to be carried on board the ship.  Jack, meantime, had been
very anxious about the party who had to proceed overland; and he
determined to send some men, well armed, with provisions and water, to
meet them.  Tom and Gerald begged leave to go, in company with the
doctor, who carried restoratives and medicines.  The day was far
advanced when they landed.  They at once struck off to the north,
keeping a bright look-out for the Arabs on one side and their friends on
the other.

It was near evening when they saw some figures wending their way over a
rocky hill to the northward.  They were at first doubtful whether or not
they were Arabs; if such was the case, they were fully prepared for
them.  "No, they are our fellows!" exclaimed Tom.  Just as he spoke,
another much larger party were seen on the left, making their way
towards the first.  Tom's glass was at his eye in a moment.  "Those are
Arabs; no doubt about it," he said.  "They have muskets, too, and it's
very evident that they are intending to cut off our friends.  We shall
disappoint them, though, I hope."

The officer in command of the party, having ascertained that Tom was
right, gave the order to push forward as rapidly as possible.  The Arabs
had apparently not yet discovered them, and were still advancing, with
their gaze fixed only on those whom they hoped to make their prey.
Besides the Arabs, there were numerous blacks, secured together, in the
ordinary barbarous fashion, with forked sticks.  There could be little
doubt that they were slaves who had escaped from the wrecked dhow, and
were being taken back to the coast, to be embarked on board another
slaver.

The seamen, descending into the valley, soon lost sight of both parties.
In spite of the burning sun, which made the air in the valley like that
of a hothouse, they pushed rapidly on.  Presently they heard some shots
fired, which seemed to come from the heights above them.  Those heights
must be scaled before they could reach their friends.  The firing became
more and more rapid as they climbed up; they at last caught sight of
Archie and his party, who, posted on some rocks, were defending
themselves against overwhelming numbers of Arabs.  Tom and Gerald
uttered a loud cheer, which was taken up by the men, and then, without
waiting an instant to gain breath, first firing a volley, they rushed
with their cutlasses at the Arabs, who, turning and throwing down their
arms, scampered off with the activity of cats, leaving five or six of
their number dead or wounded behind them.

The seamen pursued them along the ridge of the hill, cutting down all
they overtook; but the larger number saved themselves by the fleetness
of their feet.  A party of them kept together, however, and made their
way towards the group of slaves, in the hope, as it seemed, of carrying
them off.  The seamen were, however, at their heels before they could
accomplish their object; and they were glad to make their escape into
the desert, leaving their captives in the hands of the victors.

Hamed, who had followed them, was soon able to calm the fears of the
blacks, whose bonds were speedily loosed, and their necks relieved from
the forked sticks.  A spot which could be easily defended, should the
Arabs venture to attack them, was selected for their night encampment.
The ground being too uneven to allow them to travel in the dark, it was
necessary to remain till the next morning to return to the ship.  They
had brought an ample supply of provisions, and the Arabs had compelled
the slaves to carry food for themselves.  The low shrubs growing on the
hillside afforded an abundance of fuel; camp-fires were soon lighted,
and pots set boiling.  Altogether, the midshipmen made themselves
perfectly happy.  The other officers sat round the fire, recounting
their various adventures; Archie's party had met two or three wild
beasts, and been threatened on their road by the Arabs who had escaped
from the wrecked dhow, but they kept them at a distance with their
firearms; and the fellows had not dared to attack them till, joined by
other parties proceeding to the coast, they gained confidence from
superior numbers.

"They must be remarkably bad shots," observed Archie; "for though they
had thirty muskets among them, at the least, not one of us has been
hit."

In the morning they returned to the ship, having seen nothing more of
the Arabs, who thought it prudent to keep at a distance from the hated
Feringhees.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

SIX MONTHS PASS AWAY--THE GAUNTLET GOES IN SEARCH OF THE ROMP--JACK
STANDS BY HER--"BREAKERS AHEAD"--ANXIOUS SUSPENSE--PROBABLE FATE OF THE
ROMP--JACK PROCEEDS TO ZANZIBAR--SEARCH FOR ADAIR--DESMOND AND HAMED
CAPTURED BY ARABS--ADAIR AND HIS COMPANIONS RESCUED--OPAL AND GAUNTLET
AT THE CAPE--A BALL ON SHORE--JACK MEETS AN OLD FRIEND--FALLS IN LOVE--
RETURN TO ENGLAND--PROSPECT OF WAR WITH RUSSIA--MASSACRE OF SINOPE--THE
THREE COMMANDERS APPOINTED TO SHIPS.

Six months had passed away, and Jack Rogers had disposed of the
liberated blacks, and had since been the means of setting many others
free, though unhappily also the innocent cause of sending not a few to
destruction, who might have otherwise drawn out a weary existence in
abject slavery.  Often had he to console himself with the reflection
that their death truly lay at the door of the accursed slave-dealing
Arabs.  "It is the only way of putting down slavery that I can see,
though a rough one," said Jack to himself, "till English missionaries
and English merchants take possession of the country, and we can drive
the Arabs and Portuguese out of it, and induce the natives themselves to
rise and aid us in the glorious work; however, I shall not see those
days, I fear; and in the meantime we must do what we can to catch the
villains at sea."

The _Gauntlet_ was slowly proceeding southward when she fell in with the
commodore.  Jack, going on board to receive orders, was directed to look
out for the _Opal_ and _Romp_, which were to proceed to Zanzibar, and
thence to the Cape of Good Hope.  "That means that they are to be sent
home, I suspect," observed Jack to Higson, when he returned on board;
"the commodore ought to be going there too--he looks very ill; and the
ship's company have suffered much from sickness."

"I hope that we shall soon follow," observed Higson; "this slave-hunting
is all very well in its way, but it's a style of work one might get
easily tired of."  Jack agreed with him; but as the ship had not yet
been her full time on the station, there was every probability of her
having to remain some months longer.

She had proceeded some way down the coast, when she fell in with one of
the _Opal's_ boats, of which Jos Green had the command.  He had captured
one full slaver, but said that the ship had taken none.  "Nor will she,"
he added; "steamers or boats are the only craft suited for this sort of
work."  He was very thankful to have his boat hoisted on board; and the
next day the _Opal_ was fallen in with.  The news that there was a
prospect of her returning to England was received on board the _Opal_
with immense satisfaction, by no one more than by her commander.

Jack paid Murray a short visit, but, having a cargo of liberated slaves
on board, he had to continue his voyage to Zanzibar.  The _Opal_,
meantime, sailed in search of her missing boats.  Two days afterwards,
as Jack was running down the coast, a bright look-out being kept for the
_Romp_, the weather, which had been threatening for some days, became
rapidly worse; the wind shifted to the south-east, then to the eastward,
blowing furiously on the coast.  A headland had just been doubled,
forming the northern side of a deep bay, and Jack was about to put the
ship's head to the eastward to gain a safe offing, when a sail was
sighted on the quarter, some way up the bay.  He turned his glass
towards her; "What do you make of her?" he asked of Higson.

"I have little doubt that she is the _Romp_, and, if so, I wish that she
were well out of her present position," he answered.  "See, she has just
gone about, she's carrying on in the hopes of beating out of the bay,
but it's as much, I fear, as she will do; and, as far as I know, there
isn't a place in which she can anchor--while the shore all round the bay
is as wild and rocky as can be."

"We must stand in and help her!" exclaimed Jack.

"We should only run the risk of losing the ship if we attempt it," said
Higson, "for it will be as much as we can do to hold our own in the
teeth of this gale; and as to towing her off, that will be impossible."

Jack took a turn on deck.  "I cannot bear the thoughts of leaving you,
Terence, to your fate," he said to himself.  He knew, as well as Higson,
the danger that would be run, for even a steamer embayed in such a
place, with the full force of the gale blowing into it, would have hard
work to get out.  He took another turn on deck.  "We must try it,
notwithstanding!" he exclaimed; "should the wind moderate ever so
little, we may carry her out; and if we are compelled to cast her off,
she may still have a chance of escaping by bringing up and riding out
the gale."

Higson was not convinced, though almost as anxious as his commander to
assist the brig, which was heeling over to the blast, rushing at
headlong speed towards the southern side of the bay.  She appeared
already close upon the rocks, when about she came, and, her sails
flattened in, she began racing back through a mass of foam towards the
point from which she had come.  Again she went about; but the slightest
change of wind at the moment, or any want of seamanship, might allow her
in a few seconds to be sent, by the furious seas rolling in, on to the
black rocks under her lee.

"She's gaining nothing, I fear," observed Jack, as he watched her.

"She's rather losing ground, I suspect," answered Higson.  Presently the
brig fired a gun; another and another gun followed, at the interval of a
minute.  "It is as I feared," observed Higson, "she's driving farther
and farther up the bay, and Commander Adair knows that there is no
holding-ground which can be trusted to."

"We must go in and help her, at all risks!" cried Jack; and the helm
being put up, the steamer, under her head-sails, went rushing forward
towards her small consort.  In the meantime, the engineers were also
ordered to get up as much steam as possible.  Again the guns were heard.
"Adair would not make those signals unless he were in great distress,"
observed Jack; "tow her out we must; though I fear that unless we're
very brisk about it, we shall lose much ground in doing so."

Two stout hawsers had been ranged aft and well secured, ready to carry
on board the brig.  Her movements were eagerly watched by all eyes on
board.  Desmond felt more anxious than he had ever before been in his
life, for he loved his uncle heartily, and clearly saw the danger he was
in.  All round the shores of the bay appeared a broad line of snowy
foam, contrasting with the dark shore.  Not a break was there to be
seen, not a spot where the brig could be beached with any prospect of
affording escape to her crew.  As she stood across the bay, she appeared
to be not more than a couple of miles from the deepest part--and in how
few minutes would she be driven that distance!

She had again reached the northern shore; once more her head-sails
shivered in the gale, and the hearts of the bravest on board the
_Gauntlet_ trembled, lest, missing stays, her fate might be sealed.
"She's about all right!" shouted several voices; and like a gallant
steed galloping across the course to the winning-post, she came plunging
on through the troubled waters.  Though Adair saw his friend coming to
his assistance, he must not for a moment, he knew, relax his own
efforts.  By this time the _Gauntlet_ had reached the centre of the bay,
and her head being put to the wind, she waited at a spot which the brig
must pass on her next tack to cross the bay.

The _Romp_ was nearing the southern shore; again she came about.  Adair
gave proof that he was a good seaman, and his crew in prime order, or it
could never have been done.  He was seen standing aft conning the brig;
the topmen were in the rigging, ready to swarm aloft to shorten sail; a
party of the hands stood on the forecastle with the second lieutenant
and boatswain, ready to secure the hawsers.  The rest of the hands were
at their stations on deck.  The work, to be done successfully, must be
done smartly; everyone knew that.  Rapidly the brig approached.  Two of
the strongest and most active seamen were on the poop ready to heave the
lines on board.  Adair's voice was heard above the gale, shouting, "Down
with the helm--shorten sail!"  In an instant the topmen were on the
yards, the staysails were hauled down, and, the brig luffing up, the
_Gauntlet_ moved slowly ahead, while the hawsers were rapidly hauled on
board.

Some flags were run up to the foremast and head of the brig.  "He thanks
you, sir," said Desmond, who had the signal-book in his hand; and Adair
was seen pointing significantly at the fierce breakers dashing over the
rocks astern.

Short as had been the time occupied in the operation, the vessels had
drifted farther into the bay.  Now came the tug of war.  The hawsers
being secured, the _Gauntlet_, with all her boilers at full pressure,
steamed ahead.  Jack kept his eye on the shore, anxiously watching what
way was made; both hawsers were at full stretch; though the screw was
exerting all its power, yet the vessels scarcely seemed to move onwards.
Higson, who was looking out at the other side, was unusually grave;
anxious as he was to assist Adair, he thought that Jack had no business
to venture into his present position.

"If anything goes, we are done for," he muttered to himself; "she
doesn't move an inch ahead."  Jack thought the same; he sent for the
chief engineer to ascertain if more pressure could be put on the
engines.

"They will not stand it--they are doing their utmost, sir," was the
answer.  Still, Jack was determined not to abandon Adair.  On board the
brig the hands were still aloft sending down topgallant-masts.  Jack
hoped against hope that the gale would decrease, and that he should then
be able to tow Adair out of the bay; if he once weathered the headland,
the brig might stand away on a bowline and gain the offing--but within
the bay she lost, each time she tacked, more ground than she had gained.

Clouds were gathering thickly in the sky; down came a deluge of rain,
such as is only known in the tropics, like a thick veil of mist
obscuring the brig astern.  The water lay deep on the decks before it
had time to run off; all sight of the shore was completely shut out.  As
the steamer plunged into the sea, tugging away at the tow-ropes, Jack
could not help believing that she must be going ahead; on and on she
went--the rain showed no sign of ceasing.

"It must come to an end, at last!" exclaimed Jack, trying to peer
through it at the shore, the dim outline alone of which he could
distinguish.

The lead was of course kept going, but as it reached the bottom, it
scarcely ran out of the lead-man's hands.  "She's going more astern than
ahead!" he shouted at length.

"Provided she doesn't go much astern, we must keep at it in the hopes of
a lull," observed Jack to Higson.

Another ten minutes passed.  Various were the expressions of opinion on
board; the midshipmen were sanguine that they would succeed.  "My
brother Jack has determined to do it, and he will do it," said Tom.

"Suppose the hawsers were to carry away?" said Archie.

"There are two of them; if one doesn't hold, the other may," answered
Desmond.

Jack paced the deck; at length the rain passed by.  The marks on shore
showed that they had not changed their position; still the destruction
of the brig had been delayed, for by this time she would have been on
the rocks.  Thus far something was gained; still the appearance of the
sky indicated no improvement in the weather.  "Hoist the
signal--`Prepare to anchor and strike topmasts,'" cried Jack at length.
The brig made the answering signal.  Preparations had already been going
forward on board her, the topmasts were at length struck; still no
effect was produced.  Nobly the steamer tugged and tugged away.  Higson
did not offer any advice, but he was ready to give it as soon as his
commander should ask for it.  "There's a lull!" cried Jack; "thank
heaven, we may do it!"

Now the vessels moved ahead; had the water been smoother, by a steady
pull the work might have been done; but, as it was, having to plunge
into the heavy seas, the _Gauntlet_ was in the trough of one while the
brig was on the summit, or sometimes on the other side, of the one which
had just passed astern of the leading vessel.  "Here comes a lull--
Heaven be praised!  Surely she's going ahead, Higson?" said Jack.

"It may be, though slowly," was the answer.  The occasion was a trying
one to the young commander.  "She's doing it now, sir!" exclaimed
Higson, with more hope in his tone than he had yet shown.  There could
be no doubt about it--the vessels were drawing out from the bay, but
still the headlands appeared over the bows on either side.

"If the weather continues to be moderate, all may be right!" cried Jack,
taking a turn with more elastic step.  All on board were looking forward
to saving the brig, when suddenly down came the tempest with renewed
force, and a report like thunder was heard; one of the stout hawsers had
parted.  Still the other held, and might possibly hold.  It was watched
as anxiously by Jack and those in the ship as by all on board the brig,
whose lives, in all probability, depended upon it.  To replace it was
impossible, as no line had been retained for the purpose; should the
ship's speed be slackened, and thus take off the strain, both vessels
must drift back, and perhaps share a common fate.  All now depended upon
the single hawser.  Hope was not abandoned; the day was drawing on; for
more than three hours the steamer had been tugging away at the brig, and
if the hawser would hold, Jack determined to tug on till the storm
should abate.  In that he was following the instincts of his nature--
every British officer worth his salt would have done the same.  He was
impelled also by his faithful friendship for Adair, and he would have
been ready to risk his own life to save that of his old shipmate.

Again there was a lull, and the hopes of all revived; but it was only
for a time.  A squall, heavier than any of its predecessors, struck the
vessels, accompanied by a tremendous downfall of rain.  Every fibre of
the hawser was stretched to its utmost; a fearful sea came rolling in,
deluging the deck; two poor fellows on the forecastle were washed off,
but no help could be given them.  Not a sound was heard as they were
borne into their ocean graves.  Shrieks and cries arose from the unhappy
blacks on the maindeck, who believed that their last moments had come.
Just then another loud report was heard, the hawser flying like a huge
snake in the air; and many a voice exclaimed, "She's parted! she's
parted!"

As they looked astern, the brig was seen broadside to the sea, driving
helplessly before the gale; while the ship, relieved from her task,
seemed to bound forward.  With a heavy heart Jack ordered her to be kept
on her course; stern duty demanded that he should abandon his friend;
nothing that he could do could save the brig.  Painful as it was to
watch her, he could not help looking out aft to try and ascertain her
fate.  She might have been about two miles from the shore when she broke
adrift, driving before the furious gale, but a few brief minutes must
elapse ere she would be hurled on the iron-bound coast.  On and on she
drove, growing dimmer and dimmer to view, shrouded by the spray which
filled the air.

"She's scarcely a mile now from the shore," observed Higson; "she's
making head-sail; they must be looking out for the least dangerous spot
on which to run her."  Just as he spoke there came another furious
downpour, forming a thick veil round the ship, which shut out every
distant object, so that scarcely the outline of either lofty cliff could
be seen.

"She may bring up and cut away her masts," said Jack, with a deep sigh;
"it is her only chance."

"The holding-ground may be better than we suppose," observed Higson,
wishing to console him; "or there may be some opening up the bay which
we could not discern; he has probably surveyed it."

"I hope so," said Jack.  "Who are the men who are lost overboard?" he
asked, turning his mind to his own ship's company.  The crew was
mustered, and on the names of John Jackson and William Davis being
called, no reply was made.  The paymaster struck them off the ship's
books, and the next day their effects were sold, and the proceeds placed
to the credit of their heirs, and all matters concerning them were
brought to a conclusion, though now and then their shipmates might
mention them with an expression of regret at their untimely fate.

The gale continued blowing as fiercely as ever, while the ship was still
forcing her way ahead, and Jack could not help confessing that the
steamer was a finer craft to command than he had ever supposed.  His own
ship in safety, his thoughts again recurred to Adair.  He was acquainted
with Lucy's feelings for him, and, should he have lost his life, he
thought of all the sorrow it would cost his sister.  Desmond was very
unhappy, though Tom and Archie did their best to console him.  The
general opinion on board was that the brig would go on shore, and that
few or none on board her would escape with their lives.

Not only provisions for the blacks, but coals were running short, and it
was therefore important that the ship should get to Zanzibar as soon as
possible, when Jack intended to return and ascertain what had become of
the _Romp_ and her crew.  If she had gone on shore, and the crew had
escaped, they would be exposed to many dangers, either from want of food
or from attacks by the natives.

On the arrival of the _Gauntlet_ at Zanzibar, the slaves were handed
over, by the directions of the consul, to another vessel, which was to
take them to their future home.  The _Gauntlet_, having then, with all
possible despatch, obtained a supply of coals, steamed away northward to
ascertain the fate of the _Romp_ and to rescue any of her crew who might
have escaped on shore.

Nothing had been seen of the _Opal_, and Jack began to fear that she
might have suffered in the gale, which had blown with unusual violence
all along the coast.  The _Gauntlet_ had got nearly up to the bay she
was to visit, when, much to Jack's satisfaction, the _Opal_ was sighted,
steering for Zanzibar.  Jack immediately signalised that he wished to
speak her.  In a short time the two vessels hove-to, and lay within a
few cables' lengths of each other, when Jack immediately went on board.
Murray heard, with great concern, of the too probable fate of their old
shipmate, and, having no liberated slaves on board, willingly agreed to
assist in the search, as his boats' crews would be of service should an
armed force be required to obtain the liberation of any of her crew who
might have been made prisoners.

The wind being favourable, he followed Jack into the bay, where he
brought up at a respectful distance from the shore; while Jack steamed
farther in to look out for the wreck.  All eyes were turned towards the
shore, where, instead of the belt of surf, there now appeared a broad
fringe of rocks, some rising to a considerable height out; of the water.

"A cruel place that for the ship to go on shore," observed Jack, with a
sigh, "there would not have been much left of her by the morning."

"There she is! there she is!" cried several voices from forward; in
another minute or so the wreck of a vessel, with her masts gone, could
clearly be discerned jammed in between two rocks.

"She has held together better than I could have supposed," said Higson.

"Put the ship's head off-shore; we will bring up," said Jack.

As soon as the ship came to an anchor, two of the boats were lowered,
Jack himself going in one, with Hamed and Tom and Desmond, Jack knowing
that the latter was eager to gain the first tidings of his uncle.  They
pulled in with some faint hopes of finding the people still on board, or
encamped on the shore; but no signal was seen, and their hopes grew less
and less.

Jack now looked out for a place suitable for landing, and as he
approached, he saw several small sandy beaches, where a boat could land
without danger.  He chose one nearest the wreck, and both boats steered
in for it; still not a sign of human beings could be seen.  He at once
landed, with Matson, who was in the second boat, and accompanied by him
and the two midshipmen, and a party of his crew, well armed, proceeded
at once to the wreck.  It being now low water, they could almost reach
her by clambering along the rocks.  On getting close to her, it was seen
that she had suffered more severely than had been supposed; her whole
stem frame was knocked in, and the sea must have made a clean breach
through her, so that no one could have remained on board.  Her masts and
guns were gone, and the whole of her stores had either been washed out
of her, or had since been carried away.  There were signs, indeed, that
she had been plundered by a large party, as the marks of numerous feet
were discerned on the sand above high-water mark.

While Jack and most of the party had been examining the rock, Hamed,
with Desmond and Tim Nolan, had gone on towards a height some distance
from the shore, under the expectation of being able to obtain from its
summit an extensive view inland.  After leaving the rock, Jack sent the
party, two or three together, to examine the rocks, to ascertain if the
bodies of any of the crew had been washed up upon them.  Jack still had
hopes that the crew had been able to hold on to the wreck, till the
falling tide should have allowed them to reach the shore.  Still he
could discover nothing to settle the point; it was only evident that the
guns must have been thrown overboard, and the masts cut away, before she
reached the shore.  Perhaps Adair might afterwards have set off overland
to try and reach one of the Arab towns belonging to the Sultan of
Zanzibar, where he could obtain provisions, and from whence he could
send notice to the consul where he was, so that a ship of war might be
despatched to render him assistance.

Jack was looking out for Hamed, when he caught sight of a figure running
along at full speed from the direction of the hill, and every now and
then casting a look behind him indicative of alarm.  Jack immediately
summoned the men from the rocks, and, as he hurried forward, he
recognised Tim Nolan.

"Yer honour, it's bad news I bring!" he exclaimed, panting for breath,
though he did not forget to touch his hat to his commander; "the
spalpeens of Arabs have been and taken Mr Desmond, and our 'terpreter
Hamed, and they'll be after cutting their throats if we don't look sharp
and carry them help.  As they were hurrying them down the hill, and
looking thunder and lightning at them, Hamed cried out to me, `Run for
your life and tell the captain!' and shure, run I did, for they'd have
been after cutting my throat if I hadn't."

On receiving this intelligence, Jack immediately despatched Mr Matson's
boat to the ship with directions to signalise Murray to send his boats,
well armed, on shore, desiring his own lieutenant to return with two
more from the ship.  He immediately, with his boat's crew, pushed on in
the direction Tim believed Desmond and Hamed had been carried.  Instead,
however, of going over the hill, he led his men round it at a turn,
hoping by this to cut off the Arabs as they descended into the plain.
Tim, one of the most active of the party, kept well ahead.  He had just
rounded the rocky point, when he caught sight of a party of Arabs,
twenty or more in number, with Desmond and Hamed in their midst.  Hamed,
by the gesticulations he was employing, was apparently expostulating
with his captors; while Desmond was using strenuous means to show them
that he was disinclined to move forward.

The Arabs were so engaged with their prisoners, that they did not
observe the approach of the English till they were close upon them.
Jack and his companions redoubled their speed.

"Hurrah!" shouted Tim.  "Knock the blackamoors down right and left, and
we'll be up soon."

Desmond was perfectly ready to follow this advice, and two or three
well-directed blows enabled him to spring out from among the astonished
Arabs and join his friends.  Hamed made a similar attempt, but, being
tripped up, was caught by the Arabs, two of whom held their daggers at
his breast.

"They stickee into me, they stickee into me!" shouted poor Hamed, "if
you not doee what they ask."

"What is it?" inquired Jack, who continued advancing towards the Arabs.

"Dey let goee if not shootee," answered Hamed.

"Tell them that, though they deserve to be punished for daring to
capture Her Majesty's officers, I will not injure them if they will
inform me in what direction our friends have gone," said Jack.

Hamed on this appeared greatly relieved, and a long parley ensued
between him and the Arabs.  Their chief, a ragged old fellow, with
somewhat tattered, though once rich, garments, stepped forward, and,
making a profound salaam, uttered a long address, which Hamed briefly
interpreted.  "He say you pay him a hundred dollars, he takee where
English stop, and fightee black fellows."  The Arab himself and his
followers were as black as negroes, by the bye, having probably more
African than Asiatic blood in their veins.

"The rascals!" exclaimed Jack; "why, we are sparing their lives, and
they have the impudence to name their own terms.  Tell them we'll shoot
every one of them if they refuse to guide us to our friends."

Hamed had another talk with the chief.  "He say very well, you shootee
his people, and be no wiser than at first."

"The old fellow's got sense in his brains," observed Jack, "and as we
can't pay him the dollars till we get back to the ship, the bribe may
prevent him from acting treacherously and leading us into an ambush.
Tell him that if through his means we recover our friends, I promise him
the hundred dollars, though he must come on board my ship to receive
them."

The old slave-dealer again salaamed, and, through Hamed, expressed his
perfect satisfaction with the arrangements.  Jack would gladly have set
off at once, for he suspected, from what Hamed had learned from the
chief, that Adair and his crew must be very hard pressed, and destitute
both of provisions and water.  The Arabs looked greatly astonished at
the strong force which landed, and became very humble and submissive.
Perhaps Jack might have saved the hundred dollars, which were certain to
be employed in the slave-trade, had he waited the arrival of the other
boats.  He had, however, promised them, and there was no help for it; he
could only hope that the old fellow and his crew might be caught with a
full cargo of slaves on board their dhow.

To Jack's surprise, instead of proceeding south, their guides led the
way to the northward.  Hamed explained that so large a force had
appeared in the south, that the shipwrecked crew had been compelled to
retire northward; and Jack concluded that they had done so in the hopes
of being able to communicate with the corvette, which Adair knew to be
in that direction, or perhaps with some of the _Romp's_ boats which
might be cruising in the same quarter.

Sailors are always in high spirits when tramping overland, in the hopes
either of having a fight, or succouring those in distress.  If the chief
was to be believed, there was a fair probability of both these events
occurring.  Murray, as senior officer, of course took command of the
expedition.  He and Jack marched on together.  Not entirely trusting
their guides, they sent out scouts on either hand to feel the way, while
the men were ordered to keep well together, and to be in readiness at
any moment, in case of a surprise.

"Arrah, now," exclaimed Desmond, who with Tom and Archie were in the
rear, "I hope we may get a scrimmage with these blackamoors; the
spalpeens, to be attacking my uncle and his shipwrecked crew instead of
lending them a hand, as any decent people would, when we want to help
them and to put a stop to slavery."

"That's the very thing they don't want to have stopped," observed
Archie; "as long as they can make more money by selling their
fellow-creatures, though no blacker than themselves, they'll do it."

"If we had a fleet of merchantmen on the coast," said Desmond, "ready to
give good prices for their ivory and ostrich feathers, and anything else
their country produces, while all and every slave-trader knew that if
caught he was to be hung up, I fancy that the slave-trade would soon be
knocked on the head."

"A very good idea of yours, Desmond, but it may be a difficult matter to
induce merchants to send their vessels out.  It will be done in time if
they find out that it is to their advantage," said Archie.

"If I had the management of affairs, I'd make them do it!" cried
Desmond.  "When a thing ought to be done, the sooner it is done the
better; and if, as you say, it is the only way to stop this abominable
slave-trade, and the misery and death of tens of thousands of Africans,
we Englishmen shouldn't stop haggling about the cost, but do it at
once."

"That's my notion," said Tom; "and when my eldest brother gets into
Parliament, I'll give him no rest till he gets the thing done, somehow
or other."

The other midshipmen were all of accord on the matter, but their
conversation was interrupted by one of the scouts coming in with the
information that he had seen a large party of men at the foot of a rocky
height in the distance ahead, very busy about something or other, but
what it was he could not make out.  Hamed, after questioning the old
chief, informed Murray and Jack that the people seen were undoubtedly
those who had followed Adair and his crew, who were in all probability
not far off.

The force therefore pushed on, and, passing over some very rough ground,
reached a spot whence they could make out three or four hundred people
on the low ground, and a small party on a rocky height.  Two or three
tiny jets of smoke, sent forth every now and then by the latter, showed
that they had firearms, though very few; and, from the intervals which
elapsed between each shot, it was evident that they were husbanding
their ammunition, and only firing when necessity compelled them to keep
their assailants in check.

On observing this, Murray ordered his party at once to fire a volley,
which would inspirit their friends, and intimidate the enemy.
"Forward!" cried their commanders; and they pushed on at a rate which
quickly brought them close to the scene of action.  As they advanced,
leaping over rocks and all impediments, towards the mongrel army, the
leaders of the latter were seen to be moving about in evident alarm.  At
the instant a shower of bullets was sent rattling among them, they, to a
man, faced about, and scampered off as fast as their legs could carry
them.  The relieving force quickly surmounted the height, where they
found Adair with six or seven of his officers, and little more than half
his crew.  Jack and Murray were soon shaking him warmly by the hand; his
and his companions' appearance showed, before a word had been spoken,
that succour had come most opportunely.  Their emaciated looks and
hollow eyes told too plainly how they had suffered from hunger; not a
particle of food remained in the camp, or a drop of water; and not more
than three rounds of ammunition for the six muskets which had been saved
from the wreck.

"If you hadn't come, my dear fellows, it would have been all up with us,
I fear," said Adair; "we'd made up our minds to rush down on the enemy
and try to put them to flight; but without food, and no chance of
getting any, we should only have gained the advantage of being allowed
to die in peace, unless one of our boats had appeared, for which we came
here to look out.  It is the saddest thing which has ever happened to
me; twenty poor fellows drowned, besides the loss of the brig; and as we
have seen nothing of our boats, I am afraid some harm must have happened
to them."

Jack and Murray did their best to comfort him, while all hands were
employed in serving out the provisions and water which had so
thoughtfully been brought.  As the _Romp's_ crew were too weak to march,
the party bivouacked on the hill, with plenty of camp-fires, for which
the blacks collected abundance of fuel.

Just as they were about to start at daylight, two boats were seen
rounding a point, and Adair had the satisfaction of finding that they
were those which had been despatched from the brig some weeks before,
and which had since been cruising in search of her.  The more sickly men
were at once placed on board them, and they were sent round to join the
_Gauntlet_; while the rest of the party set off overland, accompanied by
their Arab guide, who kept close to them for fear of losing his dollars.

On getting on board, Jack paid him punctually, with a warning, imparted
through Hamed, that if they were employed in the slave-trade he would
lose them again, and get himself into further trouble.  Whether or not
the old fellow followed the advice he received, Jack had no means of
ascertaining.

On their return to Zanzibar, the _Opal_ and _Gauntlet_ received orders
to proceed to the Cape.  Loud cheers rose from the decks of both ships
as the news was announced on board; and even poor Adair, though he had
the unpleasant anticipation of a court-martial for the loss of the brig,
felt his spirits rise considerably.  Jack comforted him with the
assurance that the evidence his officers had to give must acquit him of
all blame, and that he himself had done everything possible to save the
brig.

"But I had no business to have been caught in the bay," sighed Adair.
"My prospects in the service are ruined, and I shall never get another
ship."

"Never fear," answered Jack; "we shall have perhaps a war before long,
and, depend upon it, you will not be overlooked when ships are fitting
out.  Officers of dash and determination will be wanted, and you possess
the required qualities."

The packet from England had come in the day before they arrived at the
Cape, and Jack found a letter from Admiral Triton.  "We shall have some
of the old work again before long, my boy, depend upon that," he wrote.
"I have it from the best authority that the Russians have made up their
minds to quarrel with the Turks, and take possession of Constantinople.
They have been for some time past badgering them about the Holy Places,
and insisting that their co-religionists are ill-treated by the
Moslems,--not that they really care about the matter,--and that is
sufficient to convince anyone who has got his weather-eye open that they
only want a pretext for war, decent or indecent.  The news has just
arrived, though it has not yet been made public, that we should be
suspicious of the designs of Louis Napoleon, who has so wonderfully been
transmogrified into an emperor--though for my part, I believe that no
ruler of France has ever been more friendly disposed towards us, and the
Russians will find that they are mistaken in wishing to set us by the
ears.  That Prince Menzikoff, their ambassador to the Porte, has
presented the ultimatum of the Russian Government, which means war, for
the Turks are certain not to knock under; and we and the French would
not let them, if they thought of doing so.  The Russians intend to
invade Turkey with all possible despatch; indeed, they have an army all
ready to throw across the frontier.  Menzikoff will be away from
Constantinople in the course of a day or two, and then the business will
begin.  Our Government intends to send a fleet through the Dardanelles
without delay, and as the Russians have no small number of ships in the
Black Sea, we may hope to have a brush with them.  I wish you were here,
Jack, to take a part in whatever goes on; and I am glad to find that
your ship is ordered home, so that there is a chance of your being in
time; you will not let the grass grow under your feet; and as you can
steam through the calm latitudes, we may hope to see you here before
long.  I never liked steamers, but they have their advantages, there's
no doubt about that.  In the meantime, I'll use all the influence I
possess to get you a craft you'll like; and as I fancy that more work is
to be done in a steam-vessel than in a sailing-ship, I'll try and get
one for you."

The admiral's letter contained a good deal more in his usual style of
chit-chat; Mrs Murray had gone to stay with her friend Lucy at
Halliburton Hall, though he expected both of them back again, and hoped
that they would be with him when Jack arrived.  Jack showed the letter
to Terence, who sighed when he read it.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack.

"I'm only thinking that an unlucky dog like myself, who has lost his
ship, has very little chance of getting another," said Adair; "and that
the bright hopes I entertained of soon getting my post-rank must be
abandoned for ever."

Jack, of course, did his best to console him.  "Come along," he said;
"there's a grand ball to-night at the governor's, and we're asked; we'll
take the youngsters--it is a good thing to let them enjoy a little
society, and will help to polish them up before they return home."

Adair was unwilling to appear in public, but he yielded to Jack's
wishes.  The three midshipmen were of course delighted, and busily
employed themselves, with the aid of their marines, in burnishing up
their long unused uniforms; so that when they entered the ballroom they
presented a very respectable appearance following in the wake of their
commanders.

Adair soon recovered his spirits, and Jack laughed as he watched him
whirling round and round in the valse, or prancing away in the galop
with true Hibernian vehemence.  The midshipmen had entered into a
compact to introduce each other to their partners.  They did not fail to
admire the blue eyes, light hair, and fair complexions of the Dutch
damsels.

"Never saw so many pretty girls under one roof in my life!" exclaimed
Tom; "I'm over head and ears in love with every one of them."

"`There's luck in odd numbers, cried Rory O'More,'" answered Desmond;
"to my fancy, the girl I last danced with is handsomer than any of them.
She was asking me all sorts of questions about our ship and the
commander and my uncle, and seemed very sorry about the loss of the
brig, of which she had evidently heard.  I'll introduce you, Tom,--she
was engaged for the next dance, but said that she should be happy if I
would bring you up for the following one,--so come along.  She's only
been here for a short time on her way home from India, so I gathered
from what she said; but I daresay she'll tell you if you ask her, for
there's evidently no nonsense about her."

"That's just the sort of girl I like," said Tom, as Desmond led him
across the room to a young lady who was seated far back in an alcove,
from whence she could watch the crowd without being observed.  Tom, as
he made his bow, and was received with a sweet smile, thought that she
fully came up to Desmond's description, though she was certainly older
than most of his previous partners.  He willingly, in answer to her
inquiries, told her all about the ship, his brother Jack, and Adair.
She then got him to talk about Halliburton, and he was surprised to find
that she was well acquainted with the country.  At last she said, "I
wonder you do not remember me, Tom;" on which, looking into her face, he
exclaimed, "Why, you are Julia Giffard!"

She acknowledged that such was the case, and that she had gone out to
India with her father, Colonel Giffard, who had been compelled, on
account of ill-health, to visit the Cape, and had been advised to return
home without going back.

"Jack will be delighted to see you," said Tom; "I'll go and find him and
bring him to you, if you will allow me."

Julia replied that she should be very happy to talk about old times with
Captain Rogers, and Tom, after the dance was over, leaving her in her
former seat, hurried off to find his brother.

"I thought it must be her," said Jack; "but yet, as I fancied she was at
home, I concluded that she was only remarkably like herself.  She
doesn't look a day older than when I last saw her."

Miss Giffard held out her hand as Jack approached, and they were soon
engaged in an interesting conversation.  Jack did not dance with anyone
else during the evening.  He promised to call the next morning on
Colonel Giffard, who had not been well enough to come to the ball.  The
result of the visit was that Jack offered to convey him and his daughter
to England.  As the _Gauntlet_ was to sail immediately, and might hope
to make a quick passage, and the colonel being anxious to arrive at home
as soon as possible, he gladly availed himself of Jack's offer.  Julia
seemed very well pleased at the arrangement, and the midshipmen were
delighted when they heard that they were to have a lady on board.

The _Gauntlet_ and _Opal_ sailed the same day.  It was to be a race
between steam and wind; at first the trim corvette, with a fair breeze,
distanced her consort, and Archie, who, though still on board the
steamer, retained a natural feeling of pride in his own ship, declared
that she would win.

"Stay a bit, till the wind falls, and we get our fires alight," answered
Tom; "the old kettle will then show how she can go along."

Miss Giffard had not been on board long before the commander's
attentions to her were remarked, and in the midshipmen's berth it was
decided that it was a gone case.  Miss Giffard had heard of Jack's
engagement to the beautiful Irish girl, and of his bereavement; and the
sympathy she exhibited quickly melted any ice which might have existed
round his heart.  His sisters would have been highly pleased could they
have known the turn affairs were taking.  Long before the ship reached
Spithead, Jack was engaged to Julia Giffard, with the colonel's full
consent.

The _Gauntlet_ received orders immediately to go into harbour, and
scarcely had she picked up her moorings, than a note from Admiral Triton
came on board, begging Jack to come to Southsea as soon as possible, as
his sister and Mrs Murray were anxious to see him.  Jack and Adair
escorted Colonel Giffard and his daughter to The George, where leaving
them, they hurried on to the admiral's house.  Stella was anxious to
receive news of her husband, while Lucy's happiness at seeing Jack and
Adair was somewhat marred at being told of the loss of the brig.  When,
however, the admiral heard all the particulars, he assured Adair that he
would be honourably acquitted, and that it would not stand in the way of
his getting another ship.

"I've good news for you, whatever others may think of it," he added;
"the Russians have already invaded the Principalities, and, at the
Sultan's request, the British and French fleets have passed through the
Dardanelles, and taken up an anchorage before Constantinople.  They were
there when news arrived--which reached me only this morning--that the
Turks had a squadron of eight frigates and a few smaller vessels lying
at anchor in the harbour of Sinope, according to Turkish custom, totally
unprepared for battle.  Instead of remaining where they were, they would
have acted more wisely had they got out of the Black Sea and run for
safety to the British fleet.  As it was, there they lay, not dreaming of
danger, when, during a thick log, the Russian admiral, Natchimoff,
sailed out of Sevastopol with six line-of-battle ships, two frigates,
and several small vessels, and suddenly appeared off the port, when the
Turks, not liking his appearance, fired a few shots at him.
Unfortunately for themselves, he immediately, without giving them the
chance of striking their flags, opened upon them a tremendous fire from
the broadsides of his line-of-battle ships.  Though they could not have
had the slightest hope of victory, they fought on with the utmost
desperation, either refusing to strike their colours, or, if they were
hauled down, the Russian admiral was too blind to see it.  With
barbarous resolution, he continued blazing away, till frigate after
frigate sunk or was blown up; and four thousand of the brave fellows who
had manned them were killed.  One steamer only managed to get away and
carry the news to Constantinople.  Scarcely four hundred Turks, all of
those more or less wounded, escaped on shore.  The town was also
dreadfully knocked about, and many people were killed.  Natchimoff,
having waited till the next day, returned to the harbour of Sebastopol.
I only hope the next time he sails out of it, whether or not he has the
whole of the Russian fleet to back him, that he will fall in with a
British squadron.  Depend upon it, England will not allow this outrage
to go unavenged.  The allied fleets are by this time in the Black Sea,
looking out for the enemy.  I wish you were there, but we shall be
reinforcing the fleet in the Black Sea, as well as sending another up
the Baltic to attack the Russians on their northern shores."

This was not a time that Adair could press his suit with Sir John,
though Colonel Giffard promised to use his influence as soon as he
returned home.  Meantime the colonel and Julia accepted the admiral's
and Mrs Deborah's invitation to remain at Southsea till Jack had paid
off the _Gauntlet_.  She was to be immediately recommissioned as soon as
she had undergone the necessary repairs.

The court-martial to try Adair for the loss of the _Romp_ immediately
took place; when not only was he honourably acquitted, but next day he
was appointed to the command of the _Gauntlet_, ordered to proceed with
the squadron under Sir Charles Napier to the Baltic.  Jack, taking it
into his head that he was to be placed on the shelf, proposed to marry
at once; but the very next day he was appointed to a new steamer ordered
to be brought forward with all despatch for the Mediterranean squadron.
He had time, therefore, only to run home for a few days, and to return
immediately to Portsmouth.

The _Opal_ meantime had arrived, and, being paid off, her crew were
turned over to Jack's new ship, the _Tornado_.  Murray, once more with
his dear Stella, very naturally had no wish to leave her, and they were
on the point of setting off for Scotland, when he received a flattering
note from Captain Hemming, which completely altered his plans.  "I have
been appointed to the _Briton_, seventy-four, and, having to select my
commander, I beg that you will allow me to name you, as I am very sure
that you will get her well manned and quickly fit for sea, and that you
will ably second me in any work we have to perform.  I consider you, my
dear Murray, as efficient an officer as any with whom I am acquainted.
I do not know yet whether we are to be sent to the Baltic or the
Mediterranean, but we are certain to go to one or the other."

Alick placed the matter before Stella, who looked very pale, but
answered heroically, "You must do what you conceive to be your duty.  I
have before advised you not to give up the service, and I must therefore
say, accept Captain Hemming's flattering offer."

"I knew that you would decide rightly," answered Murray.

"I heartily congratulate you!" exclaimed the admiral.  "Deb and I will
take good care of your wife while you're away; it won't be for a long
period, I hope; and it won't be Hemming's fault if you have not some
opportunity of distinguishing yourself and gaining your post-rank.  I
should like to see you all three captains before I slip my cable, which
I must expect to do before many years are over; and it will give me more
pleasure than I can well express to see you all whom I knew as
youngsters gain your well-earned promotion.  You've always done your
duty, and will, I am sure, prove ornaments to our profession as long as
you remain afloat."


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

REVIEW AT SPITHEAD--ADMIRAL TRITON'S OPINION OF STEAM-VESSELS--THE
ALLIED FLEETS IN CAVARNA BAY--JACK VISITS MURRAY ON BOARD THE BRITON--
BOMBARDMENT OF ODESSA--LOSS OF THE TIGER--JACK IN COMMAND OF THE TORNADO
RUNS INTO THE HARBOUR OF SEBASTOPOL--A VISIT TO THE GUARDS' CAMP.

"A magnificent sight!  What would Nelson have done with such a fleet?"
exclaimed the admiral, as, with his eye at a telescope turned towards
Spithead, at an early hour on the morning of the 11th of March 1854, he
gazed at the fleet collected there under Sir Charles Napier.  "We must
have a nearer look at them, ladies; the _Gauntlet_ goes out of harbour,
and Adair has sent his coxswain to say that his gig is waiting at the
pier.  Come, Deborah; come, Mrs Murray; get on your wraps.  Lucy, my
dear, you mustn't mind appearances; though the sun is bright, the wind
is still keen, and you will find it cold enough coming on shore again."

The ladies, who had already finished breakfast, were soon equipped; and
the admiral, helped by Miss Rogers and his sister, had got into his
pea-jacket, and, Lucy having tucked the ends of the comforter which
surrounded his throat well into it, he was ready, stick in hand, to
tramp across the common.  Lucy's well-fitting yachting-dress, with an
overcoat calculated to withstand all weathers, became her well.  The gig
was soon alongside the _Gauntlet_, at whose gangway Adair stood ready to
receive his guests.  It was the first time Lucy had come on board, and
with no little pride and happiness he helped her up the accommodation
ladder.

The next instant, casting off from her moorings, the _Gauntlet_ steamed
out of the harbour towards Spithead.  "Well, after all, there is
something to be said in favour of steam," observed the admiral; "and
though I did once think it would never come to much, I must confess I
was wrong; though, had it never been invented, we should not have felt
the want of it."

"At all events, admiral, it enables us to get out to Spithead, which we
otherwise should have found it a difficult job to do," answered Adair,
laughing.  "Look at the magnificent _Duke of Wellington_, with her 131
guns; see the _Royal George_, and _Saint Jean d'Acre_, with what ease
they can now manoeuvre, by the aid of their screws.  I suspect Nelson
would have been willing to exchange the whole of his fleet for three
such ships at Trafalgar, and not only would have gained the victory, but
would not have allowed one of the enemy to escape."

"It might have been so," said the admiral; "but I suspect, had the
chance been given him, he would have preferred having his tough little
_Victory_ and the other stout ships of his fleet, to all the new-fangled
contrivances."  The admiral, it was evident, had still a hankering for
the good old days when he first went to sea.

The _Gauntlet_ was able to steam through a considerable portion of the
fleet before she took up her destined station; thus passing in
succession the _Duke of Wellington_, Sir Charles Napier's flagship, the
_Neptune, Saint George_, and _Royal George_, 120-gun ships, the _Saint
Jean d'Acre_, 101 guns; fourteen other ships carrying from 60 to 91
guns, most of them fitted with screws; five frigates, each able to
compete with an old line-of-battle ship; and eighteen paddle-wheel and
screw-steamers, anyone of which would speedily have sunk the largest
ship of ancient days.

In a short time the Queen appeared in the _Fairy_ yacht, passing through
this superb fleet, when, the yards being manned, the crews greeted her
with hearty cheers, and such a salute broke forth from their guns as had
never before been heard.

"Well, admiral, I hope when we come back we shall be able to give a good
account of our proceedings, if the Czar ventures to go to war," observed
Adair; "we may at least expect to take Sweaborg, Helsingfors, and
Cronstadt, and perhaps lay Saint Petersburg itself under contribution."

"If Sir Charles is at all like what he was a few years ago, I hope you
may," answered the admiral; "but though Charley is some years my junior,
I should have declined ten years ago accepting such a command.  He may
be tough enough, but the sort of work he has to do wants nerve, and
that, as a man advances in life, is apt to slacken."

Still, notwithstanding Admiral Triton, the prognostications of Adair
were shared in by all in the fleet, as well as by the nation at large,
and grand results were expected.  The admiral had engaged one of the
steamers plying between Ryde and Portsmouth to come alongside and take
his party on shore.  Poor Lucy, it was very trying to her, though Mrs
Murray from experience could give her heartfelt sympathy.  Alick had
already sailed for the Black Sea, and Jack some weeks previously had
proceeded in the same direction.

We will make our way on board the _Tornado_.  She had a quick passage
under sail and steam to Malta, where she lay taking in a fresh supply of
coals, and thence proceeded on through the Aegean Sea up the Bosphorus.
Jack recognised with no small amount of pleasure many of the islands he
had visited as a youngster; he had then thought them very beautiful, and
he acknowledged that they were so still, though the proportions of the
scenery appeared lessened in his eyes after the grander features of the
West Indies and South America.

Tom and Desmond were inclined to turn up their noses at them, not having
any great respect for the surrounding classical associations.  "Very
pretty hills to adorn the surface of a moderate-sized lake," observed
Tom, "but Trinidad and Jamaica completely take the shine out of them."
Higson, whom Jack had obtained as his first lieutenant, was much of the
same opinion.  Mildmay, who had been appointed by the Admiralty, not
having seen the West Indies, was in raptures, and, with notebook in
hand, stood dotting down the lines inspired by his muse.  Jos Green, the
master, suggested that he would be better employed in making outlines of
the headlands and other prominent features of the land.

"Very well for you, master, who have to navigate the ship, but we are
above such grovelling notions," answered Mildmay; "you have nothing
Byronic in your composition."

"Just take care when it's your watch that you don't run the ship ashore
in a fit of poetical abstraction," said Green, laughing; "your Byronic
enthusiasm would not be received as a valid excuse at a court-martial."

Besides the officers named, Jack had several of his own and Murray's old
shipmates--Dick Needham as gunner, Ben Snatchblock as boatswain, with
the two midshipmen, Dicky Duff and Billy Blueblazes; Jerry Bird; the
Irishman, Tim Nolan; and several others, all good men and true.

With patriotic pride Jack saw the magnificent fleet under Admiral Dundas
lying at anchor in Cavarna Bay as the _Tornado_ steamed into that
roadstead.  It lies on the western side of the Black Sea, a little to
the north of Varna.  There lay the _Britannia_ and _Trafalgar_, of 120
guns, the admiral's flag flying at the masthead of the first; the
_Queen_, of 116 guns; the _Agamemnon_, a name renowned in naval story,
of 101 guns, carrying the flag of Rear-Admiral Sir Edmund Lyons; the
_Albion_, of 91 guns; the _Rodney_ and _London_, of 90; the _Vengeance,
Bellerophon_, and _Sanspareil_, of 84, 80, and 70 guns respectively; the
_Arethusa_, of 50 guns, twice the size of her predecessor, known in song
as the "gallant _Arethusa_;" and numerous other frigates and steamers,
the smallest equal in power to any frigate of the olden times.  There
too lay the French fleet, fifty sail of the line and twenty-one frigates
and smaller vessels, with the flag of Admiral Hamelin flying on board
the _Ville-de-Paris_, of 120 guns, and that of the second in command,
Admiral Bruat, on board the _Montebello_, of the same force.  What might
not these fleets accomplish if only the Russians would dare to sail out
from amid their stone walls and fight?  There was the rub.

Jack, having paid his respects to the admiral, made his way on board the
_Briton_, accompanied by Archie, whom he knew Murray would be glad to
see.  Jack, of course, brought despatches from Stella.  "Now, Alick," he
said, after the first greetings were over, "you read those quietly,
while Gordon and I look up some of our old shipmates whom you have on
board."

Jack was not disappointed, for though he could not boast of having as
many friends as Jos Green, he seldom went anywhere without finding some
former shipmates.  All were in high spirits at the thoughts of active
service, though as yet nothing of importance had been done.  A very
gallant act, however, had been performed, of which Jack now heard.  It
was very important to gain exact information as to the present state of
the harbour of Sebastopol and the forts protecting it, for there was
every reason to believe considerable alterations had of late been made.
As soon as the news of the massacre of Sinope had reached England, the
Government sent out orders to the admirals to enter the Black Sea, to
stop every Russian ship they met, and to prevent by force, if necessary,
any fresh aggression on the Turkish flag, that no repetition of such
atrocity might occur.  As war had not yet been formally declared, it was
necessary to inform the Cabinet of Saint Petersburg and the Governor of
Sebastopol of this resolution.  Captain Drummond, commanding the
_Retribution_, a steamer of twenty-eight guns, was accordingly ordered
to proceed to Sebastopol, and to deliver the despatches to the governor.
In order to make the necessary survey, he was to remain there as long
as he possibly could without allowing his design to be suspected by the
Russians.  It was the middle of winter; the weather, as is generally the
case at that time of the year, was very thick.  This was favourable to
the design.  As he had a good chart of the coast, he stood boldly on,
keeping the lead going, till he made his way between the two outermost
forts into the mouth of the harbour, when he came to an anchor before he
was discovered by the Russians.  Great must have been their astonishment
at seeing an English frigate thus boldly bearding them.

The fires were kept banked up, so that she might, if necessary, make her
way out again, should the Russians venture to fire at her, of which
there was a very great probability; indeed, it was said that the guns in
the forts were actually loaded, ready at a moment to sink the audacious
intruder.  The instant the anchor was dropped, the boats were sent out
to take the necessary soundings, while an accurate survey was commenced
of both shores of the harbour and the forts, with the number of their
guns which guarded the entrance.  The fortifications were indeed of a
most formidable character.  On two sides of the harbour eleven forts and
batteries were counted; one, which appeared to be the key to the entire
works of the place, had its guns concealed from view, but in the other
ten no fewer than 722 guns, mostly thirty-two pounders, were counted,
half of which pointed seaward, and commanded the approach to the
harbour; and the other half commanded the harbour, in which lay the
Russian fleet itself.  In every direction men could be seen
strengthening the works and erecting new ones.  The town was surrounded
by a wall fifteen feet in height, and loopholed for musketry, with a
ditch in front.  So narrow was the entrance that two line-of-battle
ships could barely sail in abreast.

Having delayed as long as he could, Captain Drummond sent a boat with an
officer to convey the despatches to the governor, who at first expressed
himself very much astonished at the appearance of an English ship at
such a juncture.  Being assured, however, that the frigate had come to
perform an act of courtesy, he was satisfied, and, salutes having been
exchanged, the _Retribution_ lifted her anchor and steamed again out of
the harbour, with the important knowledge which had been obtained, and
which was quickly conveyed to Admiral Dundas.  Captain Drummond was of
opinion that the place was entirely unassailable by ships alone, but
that it might easily be blockaded and harassed by shells thrown into it
at night, though he was convinced that should a ship enter the harbour
in order to destroy the Russian fleet lying there, it must be
annihilated before it could get out again.  He advised, therefore, that
Sebastopol should be attacked by a combined naval and military force;
and, as far as could be learned, the authorities had determined on this
mode of proceeding.

Jack, having left Murray time to read his despatches, rejoined him, and
heard more of what had taken place.  "The army have suffered
dreadfully," said Murray, as Jack was seated in his cabin; "not from the
enemy, but from cholera and fever.  It has also appeared on board the
fleet, and nearly every ship has lost a good many men.  Upwards of fifty
have died on board the flagship, and we have had thirty or forty on the
sick list at a time, many of whom have succumbed to the disease.  The
steamers have, I hope, a better chance of escaping, but it has not left
them entirely alone."

"Well, I trust we shall keep free," said Jack.  "The best thing we can
hope for is that the commander-in-chief will give us something to do
before long."

After describing the halt of the British forces at Scutari, and various
incidents which had occurred, Murray went on with an account of what had
since taken place: "After remaining for some time at Scutari, the
greater part of the English force was moved on to the neighbourhood of
Varna, where they have been distributed on the heights south of Varna
Bay, and at various other points," he continued.  "The first division,
consisting of the Guards and Highlanders, with two field-batteries, are
encamped at Gevreckler, a dreary common covered with a short, wiry
grass, one of the most desolate-looking plains I ever visited."

"I am sorry to hear that," said Jack, "for my brother Sidney is out
there.  I must try if I can get the chance of paying him a visit.  Poor
fellow! he was very anxious to come out, but he will find campaigning
very different sort of work from a review in Hyde Park."

"The chances are you are sent there on duty," observed Murray; "if you
go, remember me to Mackenzie, Gordon, and Douglas, of the
-- Highlanders.  Heaven knows whether we shall meet again, for the
cholera, I am sorry to say, has got among them, and it is expected that
the allied army before long will have some hot work with the Russians,
who are now besieging Silistria.  The place is holding out nobly, the
Turks being aided by those two gallant fellows, Captain Butler and
Lieutenant Nasmyth.  The Russians have already lost several thousand men
before the place, but everybody believes that it must fall ere long, and
that the Russians will then march on Constantinople.  We shall do our
best to stop them; and though we, of course, shall win, it will not be
without heavy loss."

"The fortune of war," said Jack.  "I only hope that the Russian fleet
will soon sail out of Sebastopol and give us something to do.  I have no
fear but that we shall lick them."

"Of course we shall," answered Murray; "and if Charley Napier can meet
their fleet in the Baltic and give them a drubbing too, they will have
had enough of it, and we shall shake hands and be friends."

Little did the young commanders, who thus easily settled the campaign,
dream of the prolonged and sanguinary struggle which was about to take
place.  Jack and Archie remained on board to dine.  The latter went back
to the _Tornado_ full of the news he had picked up, which he was as
ready to impart to Tom and his shipmates as they were anxious to hear
it.

"Look here," said Archie, as he sat on one side of the berth, with Tom
opposite to him, and most of the midshipmen surrounding the table, "I've
been studying the chart, and I think I've a pretty correct notion of the
position of the different places.  Here's the Black Sea, which we'll
call an irregular oval running east and west, and at the north side is
the Crimea, something like a shoulder of mutton in shape, hanging on by
the Isthmus of Perekop to the mainland.  Sebastopol, the fortress we
hear so much of, is at the southern end of a broad bay on its western
side.  Going back to the mainland, we find on the southern side of the
Danube, which as it approaches the sea runs north, and then again to the
east, at a considerable distance from the sea, the fortress of
Silistria, where the Turks are bravely holding out against a numerous
Russian army.  South of Silistria are Varna and Schumla, between which
places our troops are encamped, to be ready to intercept the Russians
whenever they have captured Silistria, and thus to prevent them from
getting to Constantinople.  Some way north of the Danube, on the
seashore, is Odessa, not far from the mouth of the Dnieper.  To the
north-east of the Crimea, with a narrow passage between it and the
mainland, is the Sea of Azov.  Near the entrance to that sea is the
mouth of the river Kouban, where the gallant Circassians have long held
out against the Russians.  Here we have the Bosphorus at the south-west
corner of the Black Sea, with Constantinople on the one side, and
Scutari on the other; and rather more than half-way along the southern
coast is Sinope, where the Russians so barbarously massacred the
unfortunate Turks.  Thus Russia possesses the northern shore of the sea,
Turkey the western and southern, and Circassia the eastern.  Still, with
a tremendously strong place like Sebastopol almost in its centre, Russia
may be said to command the whole of its waters; and that's the reason, I
suppose, that we shall try to destroy Sebastopol and the fleet, which at
present lies snugly under the batteries."

All hands agreed that they understood Archie's account.  He forgot to
mention that several fortresses had been erected by the Russians on the
Circassian coast.  Their garrisons were, however, seldom able to venture
far beyond their walls, the brave mountaineers being continually on the
watch to attack them.  Among other pieces of news that Archie had heard,
was that the _Furious_, Captain Loring, had been sent to Odessa with a
flag of truce, to bring off the British consul and any British residents
who might be in the town.  The day after Jack had joined the fleet, the
_Furious_ was seen coming in from the northward, and, soon after she
anchored, it was reported that, notwithstanding her flag of truce, the
Russians had fired at her, and also at the people she was bringing off.

This, of course, made the admirals very indignant, and several steamers
were sent to the north to blockade the port; and, on the 17th of April,
the combined fleets weighed and proceeded in the same direction,
arriving off Odessa on the 28th.

"I thought it wouldn't be long before we had something to do," said
Archie, as he and Tom stood on the deck, watching the coast along which
the _Tornado_ was steaming.

The city stands on the southern shore of a bay, with the houses built on
the slopes, with moderately high hills rising up from it.  In the centre
of the bay was a citadel armed with heavy guns, overlooking the whole of
the bay, with strong batteries placed at different points, so as to
sweep it with a crossfire; while the ends of three piers were heavily
armed with batteries.

As soon as the ships came off the place, the admiral sent in a summons
to the governor, demanding, as an atonement for the insult offered to
the flag of truce, that all English and French ships should be sent out,
and the Russian ships surrendered; and threatening, should this demand
not be complied with, that the combined squadron would open fire on the
place.  The officers and men on board the ships waited eagerly for the
governor's answer, whether he would yield to their demands and send out
the vessels, or would try the chances of war.  All hands hoped that he
would prove obstinate, and give them the chance of trying their shot and
shell against his stone batteries.

By the evening of the 21st no answer had been given, and Jack, with the
other captains and commanders, having been summoned on board the
flagship, returned in high spirits with the announcement that the place
was to be attacked.

The next morning, Ben Snatchblock's shrill pipe sounding along the decks
roused up the watch below, who sprang on deck with even more than their
usual alacrity.  The midshipmen, turning out of their hammocks, quickly
dressed.  Everybody by this time knew that work was to be done.  The
grey light of morning was just breaking in the eastern horizon, beyond
the combined fleets of England and France, which lay outside of the
steamers.  On the west was the city of Odessa, rising to a considerable
height above the calm surface of the water, green fields and woods on
either side, while in front could be seen the citadel and its numerous
forts armed with heavy guns, ready to pour showers of shot and shell on
the ships which might dare to oppose them.

The English and French admirals threw out the signal for the
steam-squadron to weigh.  It was answered with alacrity--the vessels,
urged rapidly through the water by their paddles, stood in towards the
shore.  As they approached, the silence of the morning was broken by the
loud roar of the Russian guns from the citadel and lower forts,
responded to by those of the allies fired from the decks of the
steamers; which, having delivered their broadsides with excellent aim,
stood off again to give place to their successors in the line.  Having
made a semicircle and reloaded, they again came into action; this
manoeuvre being repeated without cessation, so that not a moment of
breathing-time was allowed to the Russians in the batteries.  Most ably
were the guns of the latter served, many of them firing red-hot shot as
well as round-shot.  At length, several of the former striking one of
the French steam frigates, flames were seen to burst out from her, and
she was compelled to stand out of action while her crew, not without
difficulty, extinguished the fire.

A breeze springing up, the gallant _Arethusa_ was seen standing in under
sail, and as she closed with the batteries, she opened her fire with
tremendous effect; then, putting down her helm, she came about and stood
off once more, amid showers of shot and shell which came sweeping over
and about her; though, close as she was, not a shot touched her.
Greatly to the disappointment of her gallant captain, he saw the signal
made from the flagship for his return.  Thinking that he might shut one
eye, as Nelson did at Copenhagen, he however once more stood in,
delivering a fire from his eight-inch-shell guns, standing in even
closer than before.  This manoeuvre he repeated several times; but again
the admiral, fearing that he would receive more damage than would be
compensated for by the injury inflicted on the enemy, finally recalled
him, and, sending for him on board the flagship, complimented him upon
his gallantry and the skilful way in which he had manoeuvred his ship.

The attacking squadron was now strengthened by several other steamers
and gunboats.  The _Tornado_ had been playing her part.  "We shall make
our fire tell before long," observed Jack to Higson, who stood by his
side, just as the ship had delivered her broadside and was standing out
of action.  "See, flames are bursting out from the fort at the end of
the mole,--that won't trouble us again,--look there on the other side,
there must be numerous works and storehouses on fire.  If we keep on in
this fashion the Russians will have the whole place burnt about their
ears."

The men were at their quarters, with shirt-sleeves tucked up, their
heads bound by handkerchiefs, and belts round their waists.  Another
circle was made, when, just as the _Tornado_ had delivered her fire, a
terrific sound was heard; the fort in front of her seemed to rise in the
air, the flames shot upwards, and huge blocks of stone came hurtling
down on either side.  Loud cheers burst from the British crew.
"Hurrah!" cried Tom, "I hope that won't be the only fort blown up before
long."  As he spoke, it was seen that several other forts were in
flames.  Soon after the squadron was brought closer in to attack the
shipping within the mole.  The shot and shell poured upon them rapidly
did its work.  Some of the vessels were sunk; others, with the rest of
the storehouses, were set on fire.  No efforts made by the Russians
could quench the flames, which continued burning all night.

The work was most complete; all the Government vessels, barracks,
storehouses full of ammunition and military stores, were completely
destroyed.  Next day the Russians were, however, seen attempting to
rebuild their earthworks; but a few shells from the _Arethusa_ dispersed
them.  Several Russian vessels having been captured at sea, the admiral
sent in to propose to exchange their crews for those on board the
vessels which had been detained in the harbour.  The governor, however,
replied that he had no authority to make an exchange of prisoners, which
personally he much regretted.  Admiral Dundas, on hearing this, sent his
prisoners, who were all merchant seamen, on shore, observing that he was
at war only with the Government of the country, and did not wish to
inflict annoyance on the peaceable inhabitants.  Some time after the
return of the fleet to Baljik, the English merchant seamen who had been
detained at Odessa made their appearance, having been released by order
of the Czar, who would not be outdone in generosity by the English.

Several vessels had been left in the north to cruise up and down the
coast.  Among them were the _Tornado, Tiger_, and two others.  Several
prizes had been made when the _Tiger_ parted company in a thick fog.
Jack had been for some time looking out for her, when the sound of heavy
guns was heard inshore.  The _Tornado_, in company with another steamer,
stood on in the direction from whence the sounds proceeded; in a short
time a rapid firing of musketry was heard.

"One of our cruisers is being engaged with the enemy," observed Higson.

"I suspect so," said Jack; "but I very much fear that she must be on
shore.  At all events, we must stand in and drive away the enemy, while
we try to get her off."

Jack hailed his consort, and, putting on all steam, the two vessels
stood towards the land.  Just then the firing ceased, and directly
afterwards, the fog lifting, Cape Fortan, a headland about four miles to
the south of Odessa, appeared in sight.  Every glass on board was turned
in the direction of the land.

"There is a vessel on shore close to the cape," observed Higson.

"She must, I fear, be the _Tiger_" said Jack; "we may still be in time
to help her.  Perhaps she has driven off the Russians."

"I am afraid not," said Higson, "for I can make out several boats
surrounding her.  I fear that Captain Giffard has been compelled to
strike his flag, and that the Russians are removing the prisoners."

"He would not have done that as long as he had the slightest hope of
saving his ship," said Jack; "still we may be in time to prevent her
from falling into the enemy's hands."

While all on board were watching the ship on shore, flames were seen to
burst out from her fore and aft.

"She's done for; and all her crew, I fear, will be made prisoners," said
Jack.

Deep sympathy was felt on board for the unfortunate ship's company, and
vexation that so fine a vessel should be lost.  Little hope remained of
their being able to extinguish the flames.  Still Jack determined to try
what could be done.  In a few minutes, however, the matter was set at
rest--the fire increased, the masts and spars of the doomed ship were
enveloped in flames; and then there came a thundering report, her deck
lifted, the masts shot upwards, and an instant afterwards, as they came
down hissing into the water, a few blackened timbers alone remained of
the stout ship which had lately floated buoyantly on the ocean with her
gallant crew.

Jack and his consort opened their fire on the Russian troops, who still
remained in sight; but they, knowing that their field-pieces could
produce no effect upon the ships, quickly retired out of harm's way, and
the steamers again stood off the shore.

It was not till some time afterwards, on the release of the crew, that
Jack heard of the circumstances connected with the loss of the _Tiger_.
She had gone on shore during a fog, when her situation was perceived by
a body of Russian troops, who at once brought a battery of field-guns to
bear upon her, assailing her incessantly also with a fire of musketry.
Her captain was suffering from a severe fever at the time, but,
immediately going on deck, was giving directions for hauling her off
when he fell mortally wounded, both his thighs broken by a round-shot.
Several of his men were struck down at the same time; and at length the
first lieutenant, finding it impossible to get the ship off, hauled down
his flag.  Directly the Russians ceased firing, boats came off, and the
officers and crew, with their wounded captain, were carried on shore.
Instead, however, of receiving the rough usage they expected, all the
prisoners, especially the wounded, were treated by the Russians with the
most considerate humanity; and they acknowledged that, had they been
wrecked on their own coast, they could not have received greater
attention and kindness than was bestowed on them by their enemies.
Nothing, however, could save the life of Captain Giffard, who quickly
sank from the effects of his terrible wound.

Jack, as well as several of his brother commanders, had long been
wishing to take a look at Sebastopol, knowing that the information they
might gain would be acceptable to the admirals.  The Russian fleet,
supposed to be numerous and powerful, had not yet shown itself outside
the harbour since its cowardly attack on the Turks at Sinope.  Jack
talked the subject over with Mildmay; the latter was ready for anything.
He especially wished to take a sketch of the renowned fortress, and
purposed making some lines on the subject.  Jos Green was delighted with
the idea; but how was it to be accomplished?  They might run in at
night, but then, as he observed, as they should see nothing, they would
not be much the wiser.  They were discussing the matter, when the
look-out shouted, "A sail on the weather-bow."

The vessel's head was turned in the direction of the stranger, and, the
wind being light, she had no more chance of escaping than a mouse has
from a cat in open ground.  She proved to be a brig under Russian
colours, though the master and several of the crew were Austrians.  They
took their fate very quietly, and were ready to give all the information
they possessed.  The master had frequently been at Sebastopol in former
days; he stated that an Austrian steam-packet, about the size of the
_Tornado_, occasionally called off the port.  Jack got a full
description of the vessel from his informant, and he and his lieutenants
agreed that they could give the _Tornado_ much the same appearance.

"I have often read in the old war of the way vessels were disguised to
deceive the enemy.  It is quite a lawful proceeding," Jack observed.

Sail-makers and painters were fully employed in shaping and painting old
sails to conceal the heavy guns and figure-head, and to alter the
general appearance of the ship.  When all was done, Jack, with his first
lieutenant and Needham, pulled off to a distance to have a look at her,
and were fully satisfied that the keenest of eyes on shore would not
discover her real character.  The crew were also ordered to rig in their
working-day clothes, and it was arranged that one watch should go below,
while only a few officers in undress uniform were to appear on deck.

Highly delighted, Jack steered towards the lion's den.  The Austrian
skipper was in a state of great trepidation.  "If discovered, the ship
will be inevitably sunk!" he exclaimed.

"No fear," said Jack; "we'll see what's to be seen, and then steam out
again at a rate which will give the Russian gunners no little trouble to
hit us."

The midshipmen were of course in high glee; Tom was only sorry that
Desmond was not with them.  "How he would have enjoyed the fun!" he
exclaimed; "only perhaps he's finding some still better in the Baltic."

That night, few slept out the morning watch, all being so eager to have
an early look at the fortress, as Jack had determined to enter the
harbour soon after daybreak, when, as might be supposed, the garrison
would not have got the sleep out of their eyes.  As morning broke, the
high cliffs on either side Sebastopol appeared in sight.  The Austrian
colours were hoisted, the greater portion of the crew were sent below,
the remainder being ordered to lounge about in merchantman fashion;
while Jack and Jos Green and the two lieutenants, with the Austrian
skipper, walked the deck with the perfect composure of men who were well
acquainted with the place.  Keen eyes were, however, looking out from
many a port at the rocky shores ahead, as the _Tornado_ drew in to the
land.  Two brigs-of-war were discovered at anchor on either side of the
harbour's mouth, and as of course they would be on the alert, there was
a great probability of their discovering the character of the stranger.
A few shot might, however, quickly send them to the bottom, in case they
should attempt to stop her.  The crew were ordered to be in readiness to
spring on deck at a moment's notice, and every man below hoped that that
notice would be given.  On stood the _Tornado_, no sign being given on
board the brigs that her character was suspected.  Jack and his
officers, as the steamer ran in, had time to count the guns which
frowned down upon them from the four forts on either side of the
harbour, each with three tiers of batteries; and, what was of more
importance still, to make out the number of ships in the harbour.

"I can see three three-deckers and several two-deckers," said Jack.

"There are at least four frigates," added Higson, "and fully half a
dozen smaller craft; and see, over the point, those mastheads; there are
four of them, and evidently ships of the line.  That makes not much
fewer than our fleet; if they've any pluck in them, they'll come out and
fight us; and our admirals are the men to give them every chance of
doing so."

The _Tornado_ had now got as far up the harbour as Jack considered
prudent, and she was gradually brought round as if about to come to an
anchor, with her head turned towards the harbour's mouth.  It had
required no small amount of resolution to bring her into that position;
at any moment twelve hundred pieces of artillery in those frowning forts
above their heads might open their fire, and send their shot, which,
plunging down upon the ship's deck, would turn her into a sieve in a few
seconds.  Jack and his officers were equal to the occasion.  He and
Higson calmly lighted their cigars, and, as they walked backwards and
forwards on deck, puffed away with might and main; both of them,
however, keeping an eye on the forts, waiting for the moment when they
might open fire.  The ship, having been brought round, glided slowly on
for some distance; then Jack gave the order to turn ahead at full speed,
and out she shot between the two brigs, their crews even then wondering
what had induced her so suddenly to take her departure.  Not till she
was well outside them did they begin to suspect the character of the
stranger which had paid them a visit that morning, when their
signal-flags were seen run up to the mastheads, answered by two or three
of the outermost frigates.

Just then a schooner was seen entering under Russian colours.  "We must
take her," cried Jack; "the impudence of the act will have a good
effect, and show the Russians what Englishmen can dare and do.  Haul
down those colours--hoist our ensign," he added.  The change was rapidly
effected; the signalising between the brigs and frigates went on still
more vehemently, while the former sent a few ineffectual shot at their
audacious visitor.

"Keep her for the schooner," cried Jack.  The skipper of the Russian
merchantman was evidently much astonished at perceiving the Austrian
steamer suddenly turned into an English man-of-war.  Finding that he
could by no possibility escape, he hauled down not only his colours, but
his sails, when the steamer, running alongside his vessel, took her in
tow, having first removed him and his crew to her deck.  He proved, like
the first, to be an Austrian; the two skippers mutually condoled each
other on their misfortunes.

Away the _Tornado_ steamed out to sea, but a sharp eye was kept on the
proceedings of the Russian fleet.  The two brigs were seen getting under
way; presently afterwards three of the outside frigates slipped from
their moorings, and stood out under all the canvas they could spread in
chase of the daring intruder.  The officers and crew had now mustered on
deck, and, the painted canvas being got rid of, the ship was quickly
made ready for action.

"Only let two of them come on at a time, and we shall have them in tow
before long," observed Dick Needham, a sentiment which was heartily
responded to.  The breeze, however, increased, and the frigates came
dashing on, keeping pretty close together, at a rate which made it more
than possible that they would overtake him.  Jack heartily wished that
he could have carried off the schooner as a prize, but it was not worth
while to risk the loss of his ship in making the attempt.  He could not
hope to capture even one of the enemy, unless he could separate them,
and this, as they were favoured by the wind, he saw that he should be
unable to do.  Prudence, therefore, compelled him very unwillingly to
cast off the prize, upon which the Russians speedily pounced, but only
to find her empty.

The crew cheered heartily, while many a laugh resounded through the
ship, as they witnessed the Russians' disappointment, and saw the
squadron sail back again into port, jack communicated the information he
had received to the admiral.  Soon afterwards the fleet of the allies
appeared before Sebastopol, two or three of their ships having been sent
out of sight in order to make their forces equal, and to induce the
Russians to come out and fight them.  The latter, however, knew too well
what would be the result to make the attempt.  Admiral Lyons sailed away
with a small squadron to reconnoitre the shores of Georgia and
Circassia.  During the trip, he endeavoured to persuade Schamyl, the
far-famed Circassian chief, to co-operate with him in taking the
fortresses of Soujak and Anapa, two of the only three fortresses still
held by the Russians; but the old warrior was not in a condition to
undertake the enterprise.  Redoubt Kaleh was however attacked, and the
garrison, after setting fire to it, retreated.  The number of prizes
captured by the squadron, which sailed throughout the Black Sea,
sweeping it of every vessel except those of the allies, was very great.
Jack was elsewhere, he having been employed in running several times to
Constantinople, and back to Cavarna.

He at length obtained the wished-for opportunity of visiting his brother
at Gevreckler.  Taking Tom with him, they landed at the nearest village
on the shore, where they obtained horses.  The scenery was picturesque,
and sometimes exceedingly beautiful.  They passed through a Turkish
village at the base of some low hills.  The village consisted of
mud-walled and thatched houses built on either side of green lanes
bordered by trees, with farmyards attached, and enormous whitewashed,
dome-shaped clay ovens.  The streets all led to a common centre, like a
village green in England; here and there were wells, from which girls in
Oriental costume were drawing water.  They were perfectly ready to chat
with the strangers had they understood each other's language, but, as
that was not the case, they laughed and smiled in friendly fashion.  On
the level ground vast cornfields appeared spread out, already yellow
with ripeness, and here and there patches of tall guinea-grass of
deepest green, the fields being intersected by low copses, and
occasionally rows of trees of greater height, while to the west appeared
numerous hills of graceful form covered by waving woods.  Far in the
south could be seen the blue outline of the Balkan range.

At length, mounting the last height, Jack and his companions reached the
plateau of Gevreckler, when the white tents of the Guards and
Highlanders appeared, extending far and wide before them.  Here lay
encamped the flower of England's warriors; but, alas!  Jack, as he rode
through the camp, was struck by the pallid countenances and feeble gait
of many of those he met, while from the canvas walls of a large tent
came the cries of strong men in mortal agony.  He inquired of a soldier
near the cause of the cries.

"Some more fellows down with the cholera," was the answer; "they've got
the cramps, and they are precious hard to bear, I know; had them myself
last night, but they passed off."  As the man spoke, his countenance was
overspread by a deadly pallor; he sank on the ground, shrieking out.
His cries attracted several of his comrades, who, lifting him up,
carried him into the nearest hospital tent.  A little farther on Jack
came upon an open space, where groups were collected round a person
acting as an auctioneer, who was disposing of uniforms, clothes, camp
equipage, and even horses and various other articles which had belonged
to officers and men just carried off by cholera.  It could not fail to
have a depressing effect; he almost dreaded to ask about his brother
Sidney.  Regaining his composure, he inquired the direction of his tent,
and was relieved to hear that he had been seen a short time before alive
and well.

In a few minutes he found him, seated in front of his tent, in a
washing-tub, which served as an arm-chair, with a book on his knee, and
a cigar in his mouth.  "What!  Jack!  Tom!" he exclaimed in a more
animated tone than was his wont in England; "I am very glad to see you,
for I little expected that you would be able to make your way out here.
I can't give you a very hospitable reception; but here's a camp-stool
for you, Jack; and bring yourself to an anchor on the top of my hat-box,
Tom.  Things don't look as bright as we should wish, but we can keep up
our spirits with the hopes of a change for the better.  The Turks are
tremendously hard pressed in Silistria, and we are expecting every hour
to hear of the fall of the place; when we shall have the Russians down
upon us.  I turn out every morning in the belief that before the day is
over we shall be ordered to march and meet the enemy; when the wind's
from the north we can hear their guns and those of the fortress
thundering away at each other; and any day we can hear the sounds of
mines exploding, and other music of glorious war," and he smiled
faintly; "I painted the pleasures of fighting in a very different light,
and cannot say that the reality comes up to them.  However, you must
have some luncheon, and then we'll ride towards the Schumla, where we
can hear, though we can't see, what is going forward."

As soon as luncheon was over, Sidney ordered his horse, a sorry steed,
not quite suitable for Rotten Row.  He, with his two brothers, set out
for the position of the second division.  They had got but a short
distance from the camp, when they passed a party of men carrying
stretchers, on each of which was laid a human form, the rigid outline of
the features and feet showing through the blanket shroud.  The chaplain
followed to read the funeral service; but few, except those required
officially to attend, followed their comrades to their last
resting-place.  Farther on were two groups of men, six or eight in each,
shovelling out the earth from some oblong holes.  Silently they
laboured; no smiles were on their countenances, no jokes passed between
them; they themselves might soon be the occupants of similar
resting-places.  Tom shuddered.  "I have been too much accustomed to
scenes like these to take notice of them," said Sidney; "we seldom pass
a day without the loss of two or three men, and sometimes many more."

They at length reached the height towards which they were riding, and,
on dismounting from their steeds, they could hear the rolling thunder
which came from far-off Silistria, one continued roar, as the garrison
poured the fire of their guns on the persevering hosts of Russia.

"It seems to me as if every man in the Russian army must be blown to
pieces by this time," observed Tom.

"So they would if they were above ground," answered Jack, "but they are
in their trenches, and only occasionally do those iron missiles carry
death in their track, except when an assault is being made, and then
they sweep them down by hundreds."

The despatches Jack had to convey not being ready, he was compelled to
remain on shore till the following morning.  All night long the low
thunder of the siege was heard even more continuously than before.  He
awoke just at dawn, and listened; the wind came from the same quarter,
but no longer was the booming sound of the cannon heard.  "It is all
over with the brave garrison of Silistria, I am afraid," he observed to
Sidney, who had joined him outside the tent.

"If it is, we shall soon have a brush with the Russians," was the
answer; "I heartily hope so, for active service will help to stop the
fearful ravages of the cholera.  Half a dozen of our poor fellows have
died during the night, and the army will be decimated unless something
is done to arrest the disease."  Just then the reveille sounded, and the
camp was quickly astir.  The news spread that Silistria had fallen.  The
hope that the time of inaction was over was expressed by everyone in the
camp.  The event detained Jack on shore much longer than he had
expected.  At length a Turkish horseman was seen spurring towards the
camp of the allies.  Officers and men hurried out to meet him, fully
expecting to hear that the enemy were advancing.  He pointed to the
north, however, and an interpreter explained what had happened.  He
brought glorious news, of which his countrymen might well be proud.
Prince Paskiewich, with his shattered hordes, had raised the siege, and
was in full retreat from before the brave city he had in vain assailed
for so many long weeks; but one of its gallant defenders, Butler, after
exhibiting the most heroic bravery and skill, had fallen.

Soon afterwards another important victory was gained over the Russians
by the Turks, led by General Cannon and several other English officers,
in which also Lieutenant Glynn and Prince Leiningen, of the _Britannia_,
commanding some gunboats, took an active part.  This compelled the enemy
to abandon the Principalities.  Jack after this had to return to
Constantinople, where Sir Edmund Lyons and Sir George Brown were busy in
preparing rafts and chartering steamers for the embarkation of the
artillery and cavalry.

On Jack's return he again paid a visit to Murray on board the _Briton_.
The cholera had been making sad ravages among her crew, as well as on
board other ships of the fleet, but, strange to say, not an officer had
been attacked.  Hearing that Murray was below in the sick-bay, he sought
him there, and found him, with two lieutenants, assisting the surgeons
in attending to the sufferers, of whom there were at least thirty in
various stages of the disease.  Murray was standing by the hammock, and
holding the hands of a poor fellow--a stout, thick-bearded man, whose
countenance was of a livid hue.

"It's hard to bear, sir, it's hard to bear!" cried the sufferer,
writhing in agony.  "Shall I get over it, do you think, sir?" looking up
in the commander's face with an inquiring glance, such as a child might
cast at its mother.

"I hope you may," answered Alick; "but cheer up--many have been as bad
as you are, and have recovered; hold on bravely."  The man seemed to
grow calmer; again, however, there came over him a fearful paroxysm of
pain.  "Don't leave me, sir, don't leave me!" he exclaimed, as soon as
he could speak.  Alick, who was about to go on to another man, again
held his hands, pouring some cordial down his mouth, which the doctor
handed him.  He was soon quiet, but it was the quiet of death; and the
commander passed on to others who required his aid.

Thus he and the other officers went from hammock to hammock,
endeavouring to soothe the pain of those to whom their services could be
of any avail.  The dead man was lifted out and quickly sewn up in his
blanket, with a shot at his feet, to be launched overboard.  Three were
committed to the deep at the same time.

Such were the scenes going forward on board most of the ships in the
squadron; the _Britannia_ alone was destined to lose upwards of a
hundred men.  On board other ships the officers devoted themselves in
the same way, and in many cases succeeded, where the medical men might
have failed, in arresting the malady.  It was now known that a descent
on the Crimea was to be made; as, however, in the suffering state of the
ships' crews, it would be impossible to embark the troops, the admirals
put to sea, in the hopes of arresting the progress of the cholera.  It
appeared not to have the desired effect, and many more lost the number
of their mess; and fears began to be entertained that the enterprise
must be abandoned, when suddenly the disease stopped; not a man more was
attacked.

The ships sailed back into Cavarna Bay, and soon the operation of
embarking the army commenced.  The duty was under the charge of Sir
Edmund Lyons.  By the aid of the rafts he had constructed, which
consisted of two boats lashed together with a platform on the top, he
got on board the ships destined to carry them sixty pieces of field
artillery and the complement of horses belonging to every gun.  He then
commenced embarking the cavalry, to the number of a thousand horses, and
twenty-two thousand infantry, on board the numerous large transports
waiting for their conveyance.

The officers of the fleet were engaged under him in superintending the
operation.  During some days a heavy swell set in, which put a stop to
the business of embarking the cavalry.  The weather again changing,
however, the whole of the force was got on board without the loss of a
man.  Never before had so large a fleet anchored in those waters.  There
were hundreds of sailing transports, steamers innumerable, both
men-of-war and merchantmen, while above all towered the tall masts of
the line-of-battle ships.  The French, having only their own infantry to
embark, most of whom were taken on board their men-of-war, got through
the process more rapidly than the English.

Men-of-war's boats were pulling backwards and forwards, some carrying
messages, others towing-off the rafts; while smaller craft of all sorts
were moving about in every direction, bringing stores and provisions.
It was hard work for all hands, but it was cheerfully and willingly
performed.

Jack, having to pass near the French fleet, observed a boatful of
Zouaves pulling off to a transport; the French steamer was approaching
her; the crew of the Zouaves' boat attempted to pass her bows, while
those on board her were keeping a bad lookout.  The consequences was
that the steamer ran right into the Zouaves' boat.  The poor fellows,
encumbered with their knapsacks and greatcoats, being utterly unable to
swim, the larger number, uttering shrieks of despair, sank like shots
before help, so near at hand, could be afforded them.

Unhappily the cholera lingered among the troops on board the transports,
and every day several were launched into their ocean graves, as it was
impossible to carry them on shore for burial.  Under such circumstances
it is usual to secure shot to the foot of the corpse in order to sink it
rapidly to the bottom.  In some instances shot of insufficient weight
were used; for though the body at first sank, yet when decomposition set
in and gases were generated, it again rose to the surface; and those on
board the ships, as they looked over the side, were horrified at seeing
the bodies of their late comrades floating about, bowing to them as if
in mockery, moved by the undulations of the water.

One evening Billy Blueblazes was on duty at the gangway, with orders to
report any boats coming alongside; as he was looking out in the dusk, he
saw, as he thought, a man swimming and approaching the ship.  He hailed,
but there was no answer; still the figure came nearer and nearer, and
presently touched the foot of the accommodation ladder.  "What is it you
want?" asked Billy; no answer was returned.  As in duty bound, he went
up to report the circumstance to the first lieutenant.

"There's a Turk, or some fellow of that sort, has swum off to the ship,
sir; but he won't give his name, or say what he wants."

Higson ordered Tim Nolan, who was acting as quartermaster, to go down
and ascertain who the man was.

"Arrah, sir, it's not a living being at all!" shouted Tim; "he's one of
the poor fellows who slipped his cable in the cholera on board the
transports, and the sooner he's made to go back where he come from the
better, seeing he isn't altogether pleasant company to living men."

Higson was of Tim's opinion, and, ordering a shot to be securely slung,
he directed Tim to make it fast round the neck of the corpse; this was
quickly done, and the unwelcome visitor disappeared beneath the surface.

Many other similar occurrences took place, to the great annoyance of the
seamen, as well as of the soldiers, and made them all the more anxious
to get away from the spot beneath which lay so many of their unhappy
countrymen.  The English fleet having an ample supply of transports, no
troops were taken on board the men-of-war, which were thus left free for
action; but the French having secured only small vessels, their
men-of-war were so encumbered with troops that they were ill prepared to
go into action should the Russian fleet come out to attack them.  The
information was received with unmitigated satisfaction on board the
British men-of-war, and all hoped that the Russians, gaining courage,
would venture from beneath their fortifications, as on the English fleet
would devolve the honour of engaging them.

To every English sailing-ship-of-war a steamer was attached.  The
English army was under the command of Lord Raglan; Admiral Dundas had
his flag flying on board the _Britannia_; while Admiral Sir Edmund
Lyons, in the _Agamemnon_, had charge of the transports.  To each vessel
was assigned her particular place, so that there might be no confusion.
It was generally believed that the Russian fleet would sail out of
Sebastopol and intercept the flotilla, and that they would have to bear
the brunt of the fight.  The masters of the transports were accordingly
called on board the _Emperor_, the largest of their squadron, where the
admiral's instructions were read to them, and they were asked whether
they would willingly take a part in the naval engagement, should one be
brought on.  Having satisfied themselves that their widows would receive
compensation should they fall, they replied to the question with three
hearty British cheers.  Thus were the preparations made for the
contemplated descent on the unknown shores of the Crimea.

The Three Commanders--by W.H.G. Kingston


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

DESCENT ON THE CRIMEA--LANDING TROOPS--TOWING RAFTS--BATTLE OF THE
ALMA--TOM AND ARCHIE ON THE BATTLEFIELD--THE HORRORS OF WAR--BRINGING
OFF THE WOUNDED--BOMBARDMENT OF SEBASTOPOL--JACK AND MURRAY IN ACTION.

"Just gone seven bells, sir," said Billy Blueblazes, as he entered
Jack's cabin, sent according to orders by Mr Mildmay, who had the
morning watch on the 7th of September 1854.  Jack was speedily on deck,
for there was plenty of work to be done that day.  A gentle breeze blew
off the shore; not a cloud dimmed the sky, from which the moon cast her
beams over the calm surface of the ocean.  By her pale light the
sailing-ships in all directions could be seen loosing their canvas,
while from numberless funnels wreaths of smoke were ascending, showing
that the steamers were preparing to move.  All the officers were quickly
assembled on deck; many an eye was cast eastward to watch for the first
signs of coming day.  The men were ordered to their stations.  At length
a ruddy glow above the eastern horizon announced the approach of day;
shortly afterwards the loud roar of a gun from the lofty side of the
_Britannia_ gave the signal to weigh.  The sails hanging from the yards
were let fall and sheeted home, the steamers sent forth denser columns
of smoke, which, rising in thick wreaths, floated in all directions
round the ships' funnels, obscuring the view.

The order had been given to rendezvous forty miles due west of Cape
Tarkand.  Instantly the outer ships began to move; Sir Edmund Lyons'
ship, the _Agamemnon_, with signals flying at her masthead, proudly
gliding through their midst.  The English transports, in five columns of
thirty each, obeying his orders, moved slowly eastward; then came the
ships of war, the guardians of the fleet, in single column.  The French,
more numerous, but with much smaller vessels, sailed out in less compact
order, with their warships crowded with troops; the Turkish fleet,
similarly encumbered, followed.  Among the English perfect order was
maintained, for every captain could thoroughly trust, and well knew that
he must obey, his gallant leader.

The French soon became scattered; their general, with some of their
line-of-battle ships, had sailed several days before, and what had
become of them was not known.

By the morning of the ninth the whole English fleet was anchored at the
appointed rendezvous, but as yet the point at which the troops were to
land had not been selected.  Next morning Lord Raglan accompanied Sir
Edmund Lyons, with several English and French engineer officers, on
board the _Caradoc_, which, after passing the mouth of Sebastopol
harbour, steered round Cape Chersonesus and looked into Balaclava,
surveying those heights ere long to become the scene of many a bloody
conflict.  Returning northward, she steered close into the shore, the
generals looking eagerly out for a fitting spot on which their legions
might land.  A low, sandy beach was at length perceived near Kalametra,
with two lakes beyond it.  It was exactly the spot Lord Raglan desired.
Late in the evening the _Caradoc_ returned.

During the two following days the French and Turkish vessels, which
could be seen scattered in the far distance, came slowly in; and now it
became known that the long looked-for enterprise was at once to be
commenced.

Early on the 13th the fleet came off Eupatoria.  A small party, with an
interpreter, were sent on shore to summon the town to yield at
discretion.  The _Tornado_, with other steamers, being close inshore,
Jack sent Jos Green, with Tom and Archie, to obtain some fresh
provisions.  They found the old governor a strict disciplinarian,
protesting against the strangers landing without having performed
quarantine, and he insisted on fumigating the missive sent him before
reading it.  They might capture the town, to that he had nothing to
say--he was not there in a military capacity, but what he had to do he
intended to do in strict accordance with his orders.  As all the
military authorities had run away, and only a few invalid soldiers
remained, no resistance was made, and Eupatoria became the first place
occupied by the British troops in the Crimea.

Jack, having obtained some Russian coin at Constantinople, was able to
purchase provisions.  The Tartar inhabitants, finding that they could
bring their produce to a good market, were perfectly ready to part with
whatever provisions they possessed.

The fleet, now proceeding southward, came to an anchor in a line
parallel with the shore, the English to the north, the French and Turks
to the south, about five or six miles to the north of the Balaclava
River.  During the night of the 13th it was arranged that a buoy should
be placed, to divide the English and the French fleets, in the centre of
the bay.  When morning dawned it was found to be afloat almost at the
northern end of the bay, having been placed in that position, either
from ignorance or treachery, by the French.  There was no time for
expostulation, the French were found already to have occupied the whole
ground.  To avoid the risk of a dispute, Sir Edmund Lyons, like a wise
man, knowing that a similar landing-place existed a little farther to
the north, also with a lake inside it, at once ordered the transports to
proceed there and take up their proper places.

The day was fine and the water smooth, and early in the morning the
landing commenced.  So admirably were the arrangements made that the
troops landed in the order they were to take on the march, while the
line-of-battle ships remained outside, thus keeping up the communication
with a steamer stationed off the mouth of Sebastopol harbour, so that,
should the Russian fleet sail out, they might at once proceed to meet
it, and prevent it from interfering with the transports.  Jack's ship,
and other disengaged steamers, were in the meantime sent to cruise up
and down the coast and annoy the enemy.  Jack ran down to the south, and
communicated with the vessel off the mouth of the harbour.  Greatly to
his disappointment, no signs were to be perceived among the Russian
fleet that they were likely to come out and give battle.  Now was their
opportunity, if they intended to do so, for their scouts on shore must
have informed them that the French and Turkish men-of-war were employed
in landing their troops, and for what they could tell the English were
similarly occupied.

"You may depend on it," observed Jack, "by some means or other they know
that our ships are ready to meet them, and they feel pretty sure that
they would get the worst of it."

The _Tornado_, keeping clear of the formidable batteries which frowned
defiance from the northern side of the harbour, now stood close inshore.
Above her rose a series of cliffs, with a broad plateau on the summit,
extending as far as the mouth of the Alma River.  A group of tents were
near the edge of the cliff.

"Where there are tents there are men," observed Higson; "are we to fire
at them?"

"It is our business to do so," answered Jack, "though it is not much to
my fancy to fire at men who cannot return the compliment.  Elevate the
guns so as to clear the top of the cliff."  The engines being stopped,
the _Tornado_ opened her fire.  Presently one tent went down, then
another and another, showing that she had got the exact range.  The
figures of men could be discerned scampering off, leaving their tents to
their fate.  The engines being put in motion, the ship steamed on till a
body of horsemen were discerned, who had apparently come down to
ascertain the cause of the firing.  Several shot were sent flying close
to them, making them wheel about; but before they had got out of sight
two other guns were fired, and a horseman was seen to drop from his
saddle.  The rapid movement of the rest showed that they were wisely
anxious to avoid a similar fate.

Near the mouth of the Alma a considerable body of infantry were
observed; not being aware of the long range of the stranger's guns, they
stood watching her approach.  Suddenly stopping her engines, she opened
on them with her whole broadside; two or three were seen to fall, but
still they stood their ground.

"They are waiting for orders to march," observed Higson; "they would be
wiser if they took ours."  With considerable reluctance, Jack gave the
order to fire another broadside; he did not like shooting down men in
cold blood, but yet he must obey his superiors.  Scarcely had the smoke
of the guns cleared away than the Russians were seen beating a rapid
retreat, though they still kept together.  Three more shot had the
effect of making them increase their speed, and they disappeared behind
some rocky ground which afforded them shelter.  Here and there some
tents were seen, as well as cavalry and infantry, who, however, moved
off as the warship approached, well aware, small as she looked, of the
mischief she could do them.

Returning to the fleet, where the landing was taking place, Jack found
that the greater part of the English infantry were already on shore.
From what he had seen, he made his report that the enemy was not likely
to make any immediate attack on the invading forces.  Still a
considerable portion of the cavalry had to be landed; the weather
changed for the worse, and rain came down heavily, wetting the troops on
shore, who had no tents or protection of any sort, to the skin.  Jack
received orders to send two of his boats to assist in towing one of the
rafts now alongside the transport to the shore.  Green had charge of one
of them, and Tom and Archie the other.  They found two heavy guns
already on the raft, with several horses.  The detachment of
artillerymen belonging to the guns now came down the ship's side and
took their places on board, forming altogether a pretty heavy cargo.

The raft was one of those built at Constantinople, and consisted of two
clumsy boats lashed together side by side and boarded over; very well
suited for smooth water, but extremely dangerous with a heavy sea
running.  However, as it was important to get the guns on shore, Green
determined to make the attempt.  Two of the artillery officers were
invited into the men-of-war's boats, and all being ready, they shoved
off, taking the huge raft in tow.  By this time it was perfectly dark,
and the sea increasing made the operation of towing the raft very heavy
work.

"Give way, my lads," cried Green; "we haven't far to go; and see, we
shall have a warm welcome when we get there."

He pointed to the beach, which was lit up along its whole length by
fires which had been kindled with the planks of several disabled boats
and rafts.

The heavy swell tossed the raft about not a little, but the crews pulled
away lustily as British seamen always do, and the raft at length
approached the shore.  The roar on the beach as the surf broke on it was
not encouraging; still, orders were to be obeyed.  Just then a snorting
noise was heard, and a magnificent horse came swimming by, as he
splashed the water with his forefeet, surrounding himself with a blaze
of phosphorescent light.  To catch him was impossible.

"He has probably escaped from a raft which has been capsized," observed
Green; "his chances of being drowned are considerable, though he may
have sense to swim back to the ship which brought him here."

"I hope that won't be the fate of our own raft," observed the artillery
officer.

"I can't warrant its safety," said Green; "had I been asked, I should
have advised waiting till the morning; however, we'll do our best, and
it will be a much harder matter to pull back than it has been to reach
the shore."

Just then the light of the fires falling on the raft, showed her to
those on the beach, from whence a loud authoritative voice came ordering
her to return to the ship.

"More easily said than done," observed Green.

However, he gave the order to Tom and the officer in command of the
other boat to pull round and do their best.  Every instant the swell was
increasing; the boats' crews, though pretty well tired, pulled as
before.  The raft tossed fearfully about, threatening to heave her whole
freight of guns, horses, and artillerymen overboard.  The latter, with
their arms in their hands, shouted out that the boat was about to sink;
and sad would be the fate, Green saw, of most of them if it did so;
while in the darkness, amid the struggling horses, it would be scarcely
possible to pick them all up.  The only thing to be done was to pull
away with might and main; sometimes, in spite of all their efforts, the
raft seemed drifting back to the shore; at others the waves sent it
rushing forward, threatening to stave in the sterns of the boats.

"Here's a pretty piece of work!" observed Tom; "I only hope we shall be
able to get hold of one of the transports before long."

"There's one ahead of us, if we can but reach her," said Archie;
"there's nothing like trying."

Try they did, cheering on the men; and by dint of hard pulling they got
within hail of the transport, and asked for help.  "We cannot give it
you," was the answer; "we have a boat-load of horses alongside."  A
second transport was neared, and then another and another, but all
declared their inability to render assistance.  Green was almost in
despair; the artillerymen were shouting out more lustily than before,
asserting that the raft was fast filling.  At length the boats managed
to tow her up alongside a transport, the master of which responded to
their appeal, and assisted them in securing her.  Fortunately the
artillerymen she had brought out had not yet been landed, and, the
officers turning them out of their berths, they assisted the crew in
hoisting the horses and guns on board.  The gun-carriages, however,
being too heavy, were left on board the raft, and she was let drop
astern.  As, however, their loss made the guns useless, Tom and Archie
were sent to the nearest ship to obtain assistance.  As they got
alongside, they found that she was the _Briton_, and, Archie having
explained matters to his uncle, who was on deck, Commander Murray sent a
boat with a fresh crew, by whose means the gun-carriages were at length
hoisted on board.

Soon afterwards the sorely-battered raft went to pieces.  Tom and Archie
were still alongside, when they caught sight of the noble horse which
they had seen coming off from the shore still struggling in the waves.
Instinct had directed it to the very vessel from which it had been
disembarked.  Shouting to the crew on deck, they called for slings,
which were sent down, and being secured--not without difficulty--round
the body of the horse, the animal was lifted safely on board, to all
appearance not much the worse for its swim of upwards of two hours.

The weary crews at length got back to their ship.  The next day, the
wind going down, more of the artillery and horses were landed, and by
the evening of the 18th the whole army was on shore without a man being
lost; the disembarkation having been superintended by Captain Dacres of
the _Sanspareil_.

The French were posted on the right, close to the sea, the Turks
somewhat in their rear, and the English on the left of the line; the
duty of protecting the left flank of the army being confided to the
British cavalry.  The Turks, accustomed to this sort of work, were at
once at home, with their tents well pitched, and surrounded by such
luxuries as they deemed necessary; while the young troops of England and
France, few of whom had seen active warfare, were sitting wet and
comfortless round their camp-fires.

The natives, with their black lambskin caps and long pelisses, came to
the camp in considerable numbers, bringing provisions, and, what was of
more consequence, camels, and carts drawn by oxen for the conveyance of
stores.

On the morning of the 19th of September the bugles sounding through the
camp aroused all sleepers, and in a short time the army began its march
to the southward.  The transports, having performed their duty, sailed
away for the Bosphorus, while the ships-of-war moved slowly on abreast
of the army down the coast, coming to an anchor when it halted, and
again weighing when it recommenced its march; the larger ones, for want
of water, being obliged to keep at some distance out, while the steamers
stood in with the lead going as close as possible, somewhat in advance
of the army, throwing in their shot and shells whenever they caught
sight of any troops at which to fire.

Towards evening the armies reached the first river in their march, the
Bulganak, on the banks of which they bivouacked for the night, in order
of battle, as it was thought possible that at dawn they would be
attacked by the Russians.  The night closed in with rain--bad
preparation for the work which all knew would take place on the morrow.
The morning dawned more brightly; it was to be the last day many of
those brave men in the allied hosts were to see, but few expected to be
among the slain.  A glorious victory was to be gained by their prowess,
they believed, though victory was not to be won without hard fighting.
As the sun glanced over the hilltops the steamers got up their steam,
and the line-of-battle ships loosed their sails.

Tom and Archie climbed to the masthead, where they determined to remain
with telescopes in hand till called down to attend to their duty on
deck.  In front of them was a line of cliffs extending to the mouth of
the Alma, bordering a wide extent of undulating ground.  Beyond the Alma
rose broken cliffs with a broad plateau on their summit, on which the
enormous army of Russia was posted, their lines extending from the coast
far away out of sight.  In front of the steep hillsides were numerous
heavy batteries, capable of sweeping the invading force back into the
stream of the Alma, till its waters should run dark with blood.  More to
the left the French forces could be seen forming in order of battle,
with the Turks in the rear, while only for a short distance could the
red-coated soldiers of England be distinguished.  Now and then a party
of horsemen could be made out.  When the sun rose, its rays glittered
for a moment on the helmets and breastplates of the heavy cavalry as
they moved off to protect the left flank of the invading forces.

The hours went slowly by; they were of intense interest to the
spectators, and much more so must they have been to those who had to
take an active part in the coming strife.  Not, however, till eleven
o'clock were the armies seen to be advancing.  The ships near the cliffs
began the action by throwing shot and shell among the Russians posted on
the heights.  The light infantry regiments could be seen moving in
advance, throwing out skirmishers; then came the heavy infantry
battalions, with firm tread pressing the ground.  At length the blue
coats of the French, who had crossed the Alma at its mouth, were
observed climbing the rugged heights, the summit of which being gained,
they rapidly formed, greatly to the astonishment, apparently, of the
Russians, who had not perceived their approach.  Now there burst forth
from the whole hillside the roar of artillery and the rattle of
musketry, so rapidly as to blend into one continuous sound, telling of
death to many a brave heart.

"The British are advancing!" cried Tom; "see, they are pushing across
the river, but they don't appear on the hill yet.  The Russian
skirmishers are disputing the ground with them.  What a rattling fire
they are keeping up!"

Some time passed by: the redcoats were hotly engaged with the enemy near
a large village, that of Bourliouk.  In a short time the village burst
out into flames, completely hiding the troops on its farther side; then
the British were again caught sight of, after they had crossed the river
beyond the village, fighting their way up the slope, encountering the
fearful fire of the Russians, and small red spots could be discerned on
the ground over which they had passed.

Here and there the British redcoats could be distinguished fighting
their way up the hillside; but the broken nature of the ground hid the
larger number from sight, and it was impossible to discover how the
battle was going.  Only at length it was seen that the banners of France
occupied the ground where the Russians had before stood; still some time
passed before they advanced.  The Turks remained below, which was a good
sign, as it showed that their aid was not required.  Now, far away, the
redcoats could be discerned scattered over the hillside.  Could it be
that they were defeated?  No; just then a long thin line, like a scarlet
thread, was seen amid the smoke, far, far away, moving up the slope, in
one spot having a parti-coloured hue.

"Those must be the Guards and Highlanders," exclaimed Tom.  "My brother
Sidney will be in for it; I hope he'll escape, poor fellow.  I wish I
could be there to help him, if he gets wounded."

Onward advanced that thin unbroken line up the hill; the brow was
reached, when there appeared in front of it a grey mass, which seemed
like a square patch of withered grass on the greener herbage.  Many such
patches were seen sending forth wreaths of smoke from their midst.  The
midshipmen guessed rightly that it was a column of Russian infantry.
From the red column issued a sheet of flame and smoke; not for one
moment did it cease.  Minutes went by; now that parti-coloured portion
of the line reached the summit of the hill and moved on, smoke issuing
from it as it moved.  The dark mass of the enormous Russian column began
to recede before it, at length breaking and scattering in all
directions.

The French, meantime, had disappeared, sweeping the enemy before them
over the hill, till they were lost to sight.  The batteries, which had
been pouring their shot down on their assailants, had ceased their fire,
for those assailants had already stormed and captured them.  The English
attack in front had been successful, and more troops, which had been
kept in reserve, went streaming up the hill.  The whole British and
French armies had not only gained the heights, but, as it seemed, were
sweeping the Russians before them.  The rattle of musketry was now only
occasionally heard; then came a few salvoes of artillery, and the fierce
uproar which had raged for the last two hours almost ceased.

The slopes which partly faced the sea were the most visible, and on
these could be seen numerous red spots--some strewn thickly together,
others scattered more apart, marking the places where the Russian fire
had carried death and wounds into the British ranks.  Still at that
distance nothing clearly could be seen.

"It must be the case," cried Tom at length.  "Hurrah! we've won, and the
Russians are running away; you'll see that I'm right.  Now, my brother
will be as anxious as I am to learn how it has fared with Sidney; I hope
he's all right, poor fellow; but I am terribly afraid, with all that
firing which has been going on so long, an immense number must have been
killed."

The midshipmen, who had been allowed to retain their seats, were at
length called down.  There was considerable excitement on board,
everybody anxious to hear news from the shore, though no one doubted
that a splendid victory had been gained.  They had not long to wait; the
signal staff set up on shore was soon at work.  A complete victory had
been gained, and it was requested that boats might be sent immediately
on shore with hammocks on which to carry the wounded on board ship.  The
appeal was quickly responded to.  Jack immediately ordered two of his
boats to be got ready under the command of Higson, with whom he sent Tom
and Archie, giving the two midshipmen permission to make their way on
till they could find the Guards, to ascertain the fate of his brother.

Tom was delighted with the duty.

"Stay," said Jack; "you may find many poor fellows wounded, who will be
the better for some brandy, and some may want water.  Take as much as
you can carry; you'll not have more than is wanted, I fear."

Search was made for flasks, and each midshipman carried three, and two
bottles of water.  Archie, with due forethought, also tore up two of his
shirts, which he stuffed into his pockets.  Higson followed their
example in carrying a supply of spirits and water.

Away the two boats pulled for the beach near the mouth of the Alma,
where numerous others were already assembled.  For the first half-mile
or so, after landing, there were few signs of the conflict, but in a
short time they met parties of English and French soldiers carrying
wounded men, most of them looking more dead than alive from loss of
blood; while, as they advanced, they found numerous tents set up, in
which the surgeons were already at work amputating arms and legs, and
dressing the more severe wounds.  Where the conflict had raged the
hottest, the surgeons, who had followed closely the advancing forces,
were employed with tourniquets doing their utmost to stop the life-blood
flowing from the veins of the wounded.  Although the two midshipmen had
seen a good deal of fighting, they both turned sick as they gazed at the
fearful wounds inflicted by the round-shot.

The road they took leading them some way to the north of the Alma, it
was only after they had proceeded a considerable distance that they came
to the part of the ground where the English had chiefly fought.  On the
eastern side was the burned village of Bourliouk; the hillside was
covered with the corpses of the men of the infantry regiments,
intermingled with the bodies of the grey-coated, helmeted Russians.  The
cries of the wounded soon attracted those who came to succour them, and
the seamen under Higson were speedily laden with wounded men.  After the
wounded had been inspected by a surgeon, and pronounced fit to be
removed, the party set off to return to the boats, while Tom and Archie
made their way up the hill in the track the Guards had taken, Tom
looking out anxiously on every side in search of his brother, whom he
dreaded to find among the killed.

They met numerous parties of soldiers, with a few sailors, who had
already landed, some carrying wounded men towards the village on the
banks of the Alma, the houses of which had been turned into hospitals;
others going in search of fresh burdens.  The work of burying the dead,
who thickly strewed the ground in those parts where the fight had raged
the hottest, had not yet commenced; the living men had first to be cared
for.  Here and there surgeons of the army, as well as many of the navy,
who had landed even before the battle was over, were attending to the
more desperate cases requiring immediate aid.  The Russians received the
same attention as the English, and were at once carried off to the
hospitals.  Some poor fellows lay under the walls and other shelter,
where they had crawled after being wounded; the larger number were found
where they fell.

Tom was in a hurry to push on, while he looked about on every side for
the uniform of the Guards.  From all quarters came groans and cries, and
the midshipmen could not resist stopping to afford some relief to the
sufferers.  Several Russians lay with their heads placed on the corpses
of their brother soldiers; some had their arms, others their legs, blown
away by round-shot.  One poor fellow was still alive, though both his
thighs had been thus broken.  He had strength to point to his lips, and
Tom, kneeling by his side, poured some water down his throat.  The dying
man cast a grateful look at the young officer, but before they left him
he expired.  Several had their heads blown off; others, who had their
faces carried away, presented the most dreadful spectacle.

At length Tom exclaimed, "There are some Guardsmen!"  Several high
bearskin caps marked the spot to which he pointed; the first men they
came to were dead, but higher up the hill they saw more.  One of them
was alive, with a bad wound in his side, and a shot through his arm; he
was apparently bleeding to death.  Archie produced his bandages, while
Tom poured some brandy down his throat.  It contributed to revive him;
Tom inquired eagerly if he had seen Captain Rogers.

"Yes, sir," was the answer; "he was marching on with the regiment when I
fell."

Having done their best to stop the blood flowing from the man's wound,
Tom and Archie hurried forward.  Farther to the right the ground was
still more thickly covered with corpses.  On examining them, Tom
observed that though many were Guardsmen, they did not belong to his
brother's regiment.  Several officers lay dead, numerous Russians
mingled with the British.  The greater number appeared to have been shot
by bullets, but several had been killed by the bayonet or sword, and
exhibited ghastly wounds.  Apparently, the wounded officers had been
removed, for none were seen alive.  Numerous helmets, knapsacks, and
other accoutrements thrown away by the Russians, together with the
greater number of their dead, showed that they had been put to flight by
the victorious advance of the British.

"This is terrible," cried Tom; "I had often pictured a battlefield, but
I had not fancied it anything like so horrible as this is."

"It must be worse to the poor fellows who lie scattered about us,
suffering fearful tortures from their wounds," answered Archie, "with
the prospect of dying from them; or even if they recover, being maimed
for life."

"I hope poor Sidney is not among them," exclaimed Tom, for the twentieth
time; "I can't help thinking more of him than of anyone else."

Making inquiry of some soldiers whom they at length met with stretchers
carrying the wounded men they had picked up, Tom asked if they could
tell him over what ground the--

Guards had passed.

"You must keep farther to the left," was the answer; "you will come upon
some dead Highlanders, and they are just beyond them."

The bonnets of the Highlanders were soon discovered, and not far off the
tall bearskins showed where the Guards had fought.  The midshipmen,
however, made but slow progress, for they could not help stopping to
relieve those who required their aid, both friends and foes, till Archie
had used up all his bandages, and their spirits and water were nearly
expended.  As Tom had not found Sidney, his spirits rose with the hope
that, at all events, he might have escaped being killed.  The enormous
number of Russian dead, who were now seen covering the plain, showed the
part of the ground where the last desperate conflict had taken place.
Whole ranks of the enemy had fallen under the withering fire of the
Guards and Highlanders.  In one spot they came upon an entire line of
Russians, every man of whom had been shot down apparently at the same
moment; indeed, far as the eye could reach on either side, the plain was
thickly strewn with the dead.

At length a long line of upright figures was seen arrayed on the left,
with numerous banners waving above their heads, and horsemen moving to
and fro; the red hue on the left showing where the victorious soldiers
of England stood, halted on the battlefield, while on the right appeared
the masses of the French army, with the Turkish troops who had marched
forward to their support.  They occupied the ground on which they were
to bivouac before advancing again in pursuit of the flying foe.

The midshipmen made their way towards the troops on the left, and were
able, by looking at the lofty bearskins of the Guards, to find out the
regiment to which Sidney Rogers belonged.  Almost breathless with
eagerness, Tom inquired for his brother.

"He is there," said a sergeant, pointing to a spot where a group of
officers stood together, eagerly discussing the events of the day.

Tom, unable to restrain his feelings, gave a shout of joy, in which
Archie joined him.  As they hurried forward, Sidney advanced to meet
them, and they were soon shaking him heartily by the hand, and
congratulating him on his escape and the victory he had contributed to
win.

"I am thankful to have come out of it unhurt," said Sidney, "especially
when I hear of the number of officers who have been killed; between
twenty and thirty, at all events; and not far short of a hundred
wounded."

Tom then gave Jack's message, and delivered a case containing a few
luxuries brought from the ship.  The midshipmen could not, however,
remain long, as they had received orders to return at night, and the day
was now rapidly closing.  They were brave youngsters, but they had no
wish to be compelled to make their way over the battlefield in the
darkness, amid the dying and the dead.  Wishing Sidney good-bye, they
rapidly retraced their steps; as they once more descended the hill,
their ears were assailed with cries and groans, but as they had no
longer any means of assisting the unhappy sufferers, they hurried on.
At the foot of the hill they reached the road which ran along the bank
of the river, having to pass in their way close to the smouldering ruins
of the village which had been set on fire at the commencement of the
battle.  Here it was supposed that several English as well as Russian
riflemen had perished, while engaged with each other, the flames having
spread round them before they had time to make their escape.

It was already dark when one of the _Tornado's_ boats came to take them
off.  Neither of them were very much inclined to talk of what they had
seen; and even Jack, when they got on board, had some difficulty in
gaining more information from them than the fact that they had found
Sidney safe and well.  After a glass or two of wine, however, Jack drew
forth an account of the scenes they had witnessed on the battlefield.
Tom often shuddered as he described the fearful condition of the
wounded, and the numbers of dead they had seen.

Next morning they were all to rights, and were ready to go in charge of
a fresh party of seamen, who were sent on shore to bring off more of the
wounded.  All day long the seamen were engaged in collecting the wounded
men and carrying them to the hospitals, or bringing them off to the
ships; while parties, told off from the different regiments, were
employed in burying the dead, generally in large pits, into which
friends and foes were tumbled without much ceremony.  All the time
bodies of cavalry were kept patrolling on the left to guard the people
employed in the service from the attacks of the Cossacks, who were seen
hovering in the distance, ready to pounce down upon any unwary
stragglers.

As soon as Jack had received on board as many wounded officers and men
as he could accommodate, he proceeded to Constantinople to place them in
the hospitals which had been got ready for their reception.  Several
died on the voyage, some of their wounds and some of cholera, which
killed many officers and men after the battle.  Jack was eager to get
back again to see what was going forward.  Hopes had been entertained
that the allies would at once enter Sebastopol; but the news had reached
Constantinople that, instead of doing so, they had marched round the
city and had posted themselves on its southern side, the English having
occupied the harbour of Balaclava, while their army had taken up a
position on the ground above it, extending towards the fortifications of
Sebastopol.

The _Tornado_ was still steaming at full speed across the Bosphorus,
when, soon after dawn, though still out of sight of land, a loud booming
of guns came from the northward over the calm water.  "There is another
furious battle going forward," said the first lieutenant to the
commander, who had just come on deck; "I wish we were there--can the
fleet be engaged?"

"I very much doubt that the Russians will have ventured out of their
harbour," answered Jack; "I suspect rather that the allies have
commenced the bombardment of the city.  The last account stated that
they were busy preparing for it, and I think it probable that the
admirals will take the fleet in to engage the sea-batteries."

"They will not do much against those stone walls, unless they are
complete shams," observed Higson; "however, we shall be there before
long, and if there is an honest battle at sea going on, I hope we shall
be in time to take part in it."

Of course there was great excitement on board, everyone looking out
eagerly for the land.  Surmises of all sorts were made as to what was
going forward.  The engineers did their best to urge the steamer along,
but the wind was so light that the sails were wholly useless.  Billy
Blueblazes and Dicky Duff, who were somewhat jealous of Tom and Archie
having been on shore, were eager to be there to see the "fun," as they
called it.

"I can tell you fellows that it is no fun at all," said Tom, who had
become unusually grave since he had visited the battlefield of the Alma;
"I have got a brother there, and in all probability he is in the midst
of the fight."

"And if the fleets are engaged, I have got a cousin who is as dear to me
as a brother," observed Archie, "and I don't want any harm to happen to
him.  You youngsters talk glibly of fighting; but let me hear what you
have to say about it when you have seen the thing in reality.  It is a
necessary evil, but an evil notwithstanding."

The younger midshipmen laughed, and declared that it was just what they
had come to sea for.  "So did we too," said Tom; "but only because it's
our duty to fight to protect our country--not that I can see that we
forward that object by coming out here to attack the Russians."

Soon afterwards, "Land! land!" was heard from the masthead, adding to
the excitement of all on board.  At length the high cliffs of the
Chersonese appeared in sight; the thunder of the guns, as the ship
advanced, increasing in loudness.  Now the fleet could be seen coming
forward from the roads off the Katcha River to the north; no sails were
set, as the ships had either their own steam-power, or were moved by
steamers lashed alongside.

"The French fleet are leading," observed Jack to Higson; "it is evident
then that their destined position is the southern end of the line, and
that our ships are to attack Fort Constantine and the other forts on the
north side of the harbour."  Slowly the proud ships glided onwards, but
not a shot was fired from them; they were still out of range of the
forts.  It was already near one o'clock in the afternoon.  In the French
division thirteen ships could be counted, two of them carrying the
Turkish flag.  Onward they glided in admirable order, still preserving
perfect silence.

"To my mind," observed Higson, "they would be likely to do much more
good if they were farther in, and my belief is that so they would be if
they had English captains to fight them."

"Probably the French admiral is afraid of getting his ships on shore
were he to stand in closer," observed Jack, who held the French in more
respect than did his first lieutenant.  At length, as the French ships
came within range, the Russian forts opened their fire, but still no
reply was made.  The whole French squadron had now one by one anchored
at exact distances from each other, extending more than half-way across
the harbour; then the signal was given, and the roar of six hundred guns
broke the silence which had hitherto prevailed, the dense clouds of
smoke which arose almost concealing them from sight.  At the same moment
the English flagship was seen to throw out a signal, when three of the
English steam-frigates, which had been standing inshore, commenced
firing away at the northern forts.  Another signal presently went up,
and the _Agamemnon_ was seen gliding on at more rapid speed than
heretofore towards the shore, some little distance to the north of Fort
Constantine, the nearest point which a shoal running off from the land
would allow her to reach.  A gallant little steamer, the _Circassian_,
was observed leading the way, fearless of the shot which the guns of the
fort threw at her.  As the _Agamemnon_ passed the _Sanspareil_, which
had been ahead of her, hearty cheers resounded from their crews, and
then both commenced firing, clouds of smoke quickly enveloping them and
assisting to baffle the gunners of the two batteries on the high ground
above them.  Meantime the _Britannia, Trafalgar, Vengeance, Queen,
Rodney_, and _Bellerophon_, were proceeding southward in order to
complete the line across the harbour, while the _Sanspareil, London,
Arethusa_, and _Albion_ took up positions to the northward of the
_Agamemnon_.

Not till afterwards, of course, did Jack hear of the gallant conduct of
Mr Ball, in command of the little steam-tender _Circassia_, which was
seen ahead of the _Agamemnon_, taking soundings for her, and leading her
close up to the shoal.  Sir Edmund told him that his ship would probably
be sunk, and undertook to have his boats in readiness to pick up him and
his crew should such an event occur.  As the tender moved ahead of the
great ship, the lead-line was struck out of the leadsman's hands; but
another line was immediately found, and the little vessel continued her
course.  Though she received nine shots in her hull, the leadsman was
the only man wounded on board.  Having performed her duty, she steamed
off out of harm's way.  The _Agamemnon_ was, however, so well placed to
the north-west, that the rear guns only of the fort could be brought to
bear on her, and as she was much nearer in than the enemy expected, most
of their shot struck her masts and rigging.

So close was the _Sanspareil_ to her stern that that ship's foremost
guns could not at first be fired.  This made it necessary for her to
haul off, but it was only to return to render her able support to the
_Agamemnon_.  The greater number of the ships were now hotly engaged,
well-nigh twelve hundred guns firing rapidly away at the various forts,
and crumbling the upper works of the nearest to pieces; but still all
the time the iron shower sent by the Russians came crashing on board the
ships of the allies, sending many a brave seaman to his account, and
wounding a far greater number.

"The admiral is signalising us," exclaimed Higson; "we are to run
alongside the _Briton_, and carry her into action."

No sooner had he uttered the words, than a loud cheer arose from the
crew; in a short time, having obeyed the order she had received, they
were where they had longed to be--in the line of battle, under the
enemy's fire, the _Briton_ having, as was the case with many of the
other ships, landed a considerable number of her people to join the
naval brigade on shore.  A portion of the _Tornado's_ crew were called
on board to assist in working her guns; happy did those consider
themselves who were thus employed.  Among the officers were Mr Mildmay
and Tom and Archie.  As they were stationed on the upper deck, they
could occasionally see, when the dense wreaths which encircled the
combatants blew by, what was going forward.  Mr Mildmay stood as cool
as usual, every now and then pulling out his notebook and making notes
in it.

"I really believe," said Tom to Archie, laughing, "that he's writing a
poetical description of the battle.  Perhaps it's a song, to be called
`The Battle of Sebastopol'--`There we lay, all that day, At stone walls
a-blazing away!'"

"I wonder when the Russians intend to give in--it doesn't seem much like
it at present," observed Archie; "I expected that we should sail up the
harbour and sink their ships."

"They've done that already themselves, right across the mouth.  I heard
the first lieutenant tell the master so," said Tom.

"I only wish that they were afloat, and that we were fighting them
instead of these forts," observed Archie.  "When we have knocked them to
pieces, I don't see what good they will do us."

"Why, of course, to help the soldiers on shore to get into the place,"
answered Tom.

These remarks, which were made at intervals between the firing of their
guns, were cut short by a shot killing two of the crew of one of the
guns under Tom's command.  He had to summon others to take their places;
after this he felt very little inclination to talk, nor, indeed, had he
much opportunity of doing so.  The position of those who remained on
board the steamer was very trying; they had nothing to do, but were
tolerably secure from damage, while the enemy's shot went flying over
their heads.  Hour after hour the battle continued to rage, the troops
on shore being hotly engaged with the batteries turned towards them, the
thundering roar of their guns answering to those of the ships.  Never,
perhaps, in the same space of time had so many round-shot and shells
been flying through the air.

Little more could be seen of the ships in line across the harbour's
mouth.  The French remained stationary, but some of the English
frequently moved their positions to the support of Sir Edmund Lyons and
the inshore squadron, which were enduring the brunt of the battle,
exposed as they were to the tremendous fire from Fort Constantine and
other batteries.  Now flames were seen to burst forth from the _Queen_,
when, a steamer taking her in tow, she stood off to extinguish them.
Some time afterwards the _Albion_ was seen to be on fire, fearfully
mauled and unable to fire a shot, with the risk of drifting on shore.
She also stood off, helped by the steamer attending her.

The _Rodney_ was now seen standing in to support the _Agamemnon_ when
she took the ground, and though exposed to a tremendous fire, she
continued fighting her guns.  It seemed almost impossible that she
should escape destruction, but she still kept firing away till, two
steamers going to her assistance, she at length got clear.  Not till
darkness came on did the battle cease, when the ships returned to their
anchorage.  Jack was thankful to find that Murray and the midshipmen had
escaped, though five of his own crew and many more of the _Briton's_ had
been killed.  The next morning the "butcher's bill," as Jos Green called
it, was made out, when it was found out that forty-four British seamen
had lost their lives, and that two hundred and sixty-six had been
wounded, while the _Albion_ and _Arethusa_ had been so knocked about in
their hulls and rigging that the admiral sent them off to Malta to be
repaired.

The French ships presented a still more disabled appearance, and had
lost altogether in killed and wounded under two hundred men.  Then came
the question, what had been done? and the opinion generally was that,
although a good many of the Russians might have been killed, no
essential damage had been done to the forts, and that it would be wiser
in future for the ships to let them alone.

"I suppose the work of the fleet is pretty well over," said Murray to
Jack, who had gone on board the _Briton_, "unless we have to attack
other places along the coast.  You will probably be sent on that
service, and I confess I envy you."

"I hope we shall," was the answer; "though I am afraid that at present
we shall be employed as a despatch-boat.  I should like to see what is
going forward on shore, and shall be glad if I can take a turn of duty
with the naval brigade, but I have very little hopes of that."


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE TORNADO AT BALACLAVA--THE ALLIED CAMPS--RUSSIAN CAVALRY AND
HIGHLANDERS--THE FLYING TURKS AND THE HIGHLAND WIFE--CHARGE OF THE HEAVY
BRIGADE--"INTO THE VALLEY OF DEATH RODE THE SIX HUNDRED!"--DEATH OF
CAPTAIN NOLAN--AFTER THE BATTLE--TOM AND ARCHIE PROPOSE TO LEAVE THE
NAVY FOR THE ARMY, BUT THINK BETTER OF IT--THEIR VISIT TO THE GUARDS'
CAMP--THE STERN REALITIES OF WAR--ATTACKED BY THE RUSSIANS--THE
MIDSHIPMEN IN THE THICK OF THE FIGHT.

The _Tornado_ had been ordered to proceed to Balaclava.  She entered
that landlocked harbour, on the southern end of the Crimea, on the
evening of the 24th of October.  As she was to remain there the whole of
the next day, Jack resolved to take the opportunity of paying a visit to
his brother Sidney, and seeing what was going forward before Sebastopol.
There was no time to set off that evening; he, however, landed with his
second lieutenant and some of his younger officers, including Tom and
Archie, to have a look at the country, and to engage horses for the next
day.

Steep hills rose on either side of the harbour, on the right of which
the little town was situated, with steep, narrow streets leading down to
the water's edge.  Above it was a line of defences, garrisoned by the
bluejackets forming the naval brigade, and the marines of the fleet.  To
the left, across the Chersonese, ran the road to Sebastopol; while
directly in front, connected by a gorge with the harbour, was a broad
valley, called the South Valley.  Beyond this rose a ridge known as the
Causeway Heights, on which were situated six redoubts, garrisoned by the
Turks, to whom had been committed what formed the outward defences of
Balaclava; along this causeway ran the Woronzoff Road.  At the eastern
extremity of the valley there was a knoll between five and six hundred
feet in height, joining the Kamara Hills to the right by a neck of high
ground, the knoll jutting out over the valley, as a promontory does over
the sea.  This knoll, on which Number 1 redoubt had been thrown up, was
called by the allies Canrobert's Hill.  On the western extremity of the
valley was the Col, or gap through which the road passed to Sebastopol.
Eastward of Canrobert's Hill were the village and heights of Kamara;
completely overlooking it.  On the farther side of the Causeway Heights
was what was called the North Valley, with a range of heights rising out
of it on the opposite side, denominated the Fedoukine Hills.

Jack and his party, having ascended from Balaclava to the height of
Saint Elias, could look down into the South Valley, at the left end of
which they saw the tents of the heavy and light cavalry, with their
horses picketed about them, while just below them were encamped Sir
Colin Campbell's Highlanders.  Horses, mules, carts, and vehicles of all
sorts were making their way from the harbour along the well-beaten road
to the allied camps.  Not a foe was in sight; some of the officers in
command of the marines and bluejackets, who garrisoned the lines
extending from Saint Elias to the sea, whom Jack met, told him, however,
that there were rumours of the Russians not being far-off, and that they
should not be surprised if before long they were attacked.

"You'll lick them, of course," said Tom; "but I should think they had
enough of fighting on the Alma."

"I am not so certain of that," was the answer; "the Russians are brave
fellows, and they would like to drive us into the sea if they could."

After spending some time with his friends, Jack returned on board,
having arranged to start at daybreak the next morning.  Tom and Archie
again accompanied their commander.  They turned out before daylight, and
Jack, who was anxious to see as much as he could of the operations
before Sebastopol, was ready to go on shore directly day broke.  Their
horses were sorry steeds, but would save them fatigue, and enable them
to get over the ground faster than they could on foot.  Remembering how
acceptable were the provisions they had before taken to Sidney, Tom and
Archie each carried a couple of baskets full of different articles of
provender, from which they might also supply themselves when they got
hungry.

Jack had promised to call upon another officer who had been sleeping on
shore in the marines' quarters, and who had undertaken to act as their
guide.  As they were mounting the hill, the loud thunder of guns broke
on their ears.  "I suppose those are the siege guns," observed Tom;
"they begin work pretty early."

"No; they came from the direction of Canrobert's Hill, to the eastward,"
answered Jack; "away on our right.  They must be the Turkish guns in the
redoubts."

They hurried up the height, whence they could look down on the South
Valley and across the line of redoubts held by the Turks.  They were
quickly joined by Jack's friend, who, riding up, exclaimed, "We shall
have some warm work before the day is over.  Look, look! there come the
Russians in great force over those distant heights.  They evidently
intend to attack the redoubts.  Yes, I was sure of it; see, their
leading division has already commenced the assault on Canrobert's Hill."

One of the first objects which had caught the eyes of the naval officer
was the English cavalry already mounted and drawn up in front of their
camps.  A general officer, accompanied by other horsemen, probably his
staff, went galloping by from the direction of the harbour.

"There goes Lord Cardigan to join the cavalry," observed their friend;
"he has been sleeping as usual on board his yacht; a pleasant way of
campaigning, eh, Rogers?  However, he is no carpet knight, and if the
Russians come into the valley, we shall see what he and his cavalry can
do."

As far as the eye could reach Jack saw masses of Russians, some
advancing southward, others apparently turning off to the right along
the North Valley, when they were hidden from sight by the intervening
ridge.  Besides the Turks, the only troops to oppose them were the
cavalry at the west end of the valley, the 93rd Highlanders, under Sir
Colin Campbell, and the marines and naval brigade on the heights above
Balaclava, with a battery of field-guns.  Some little way from the foot
of the hills, and almost directly in front of the gorge leading to the
harbour, in which stood the little village of Kadikoi, was a long, low
hillock running east and west, and inside it--that is to say, to the
south of it--was the Highland camp.  On this hillock the gallant 93rd
was drawn up.

An officer had been observed galloping at full speed towards Sebastopol,
evidently to inform the commander-in-chief of the appearance of the foe.
Jack at once abandoned all idea of visiting Sidney, as he was sure that
the chief part of the fighting, if there was to be a battle, would not
be far-off.  The Russians, who had for some minutes been assaulting the
first Turkish battery, now pushed forward in overwhelming numbers.  In
vain the Turks fought to defend the post committed to them; the enemy
swarmed over their entrenchments, while at the same time another equally
large body assailed the second redoubt.  For some time the fight raged
fiercely, the Turks were defending themselves with their accustomed
bravery--a few hundred men against the seemingly countless hordes led to
the attack.

"If they can but hold out till the arrival of the succour Lord Raglan
will certainly send them, it will be a great thing, but the odds are
fearfully against them," observed Jack.

Scarcely had he made the remark when one or two figures were seen
leaping over the trenches and descending the hill; more followed, "as
fast," Tom declared, "as sand runs out through the hole in the bottom of
a bag;" and then came others, till all the survivors of those who had
garrisoned the fort were in full flight.  In a few minutes the Turks in
Number 2 battery, also taking to flight, came scampering down the side
of the hill, making their way across the valley.  Jack could only hope
that the remainder of the batteries might be held till relief could
reach them.  As it proved, he was disappointed; presently the Turks in
all the other batteries, seeing the fate of their countrymen, broke away
from their posts, and, rushing at headlong speed down the hillside, were
seen crossing the valley to Balaclava, those who were escaping from the
two first batteries being followed by Cossack cavalry spearing all they
overtook.  Had not the English light cavalry made a demonstration as if
about to charge, many more would have been killed.  Meanwhile the
Russian artillery poured down upon them the fire of their guns.  As they
approached, a naval officer who had hurried to the ground did his best
to rally them, but though he succeeded with some, nothing could stop the
rest till they reached the neighbourhood of the harbour.

Jack and his party hurried down to assist the officer, who, with cheery
voice and gestures, was endeavouring to rally the Turks and induce them
to form up on the right of the Highlanders.  Having done all they could,
the party rode up to higher ground, whence they could better witness
what was going forward.  In the far distance, to the north of the Col,
Jack could distinguish through his glass a group of officers whom he
guessed must be Lord Raglan and his staff, who had hastened up to direct
the coming battle, while the heads of French and English columns were
observed marching from the direction of Sebastopol.  Soon after this,
Jack and his companions, who were watching the English cavalry,
expecting to see some of them sent in pursuit of the Cossacks, greatly
to their surprise observed the whole of them moving away to the
northward over the ridge till they were lost to sight, summoned,
apparently, by one of Lord Raglan's aides-de-camp, thus leaving
Balaclava without any other defence than the Highlanders and the battery
of field-guns.

At this juncture a large body of Russian cavalry appeared in the
direction of the third and fourth redoubts, having come thus far up the
North Valley.  Just then the English batteries on the edge of the
Chersonese opened on them; this turned them, and they came moving over
the causeway, as if about to descend into the South Valley, while the
Russian artillery, which had advanced over the ridge, opened fire on the
Highlanders and Turks, who were posted at the foot of Balaclava heights.
Sir Colin, therefore, ordered them to move back to the foot of a
hillock which they had before crowned, and to lie down under shelter.
Directly afterwards four squadrons of the Russian cavalry, detached from
the larger mass, came shaping their way across the southern valley
towards the gorge which led to the harbour, the defence of which had
been confided to the Highlanders, who were now supported by a hundred
invalid soldiers, marched up from Balaclava.  Directly the Russian
cavalry were seen, the greater number of the Turks, thoroughly
disorganised by their previous defeat, again took to flight, and rushed
off towards the harbour, shrieking out, "Ship! ship! ship!" as if their
only hope of escaping was to get on board the vessels in the harbour.
The Highlanders, who were still lying down, watched them with
contemptuous looks, and not a little merriment, as they observed the
frightened expression of their countenances.  Within sight, behind them,
was the Highlanders' camp.  As the terror-stricken Osmanlis were
scampering away past it, some even attempting to find shelter within,
there issued forth a tall figure with a thick stick in hand, who, by her
dress, was seen to be a female of Amazonian proportions.

Shouting loudly in Gaelic, she ordered the fugitive Turks to return to
their ranks, but her voice being unheeded, she placed herself before
them and attempted to drive them back with her cudgel.  Her efforts
being still of no avail, after striking at several on either side, she
rushed at a big, burly-looking Turk who was coming headlong towards her,
and, seizing him by his jacket, began belabouring his back and head with
a fury which was likely to prove as effective as the shot of the enemy,
from whom he was trying to escape, in sending him to enjoy the bliss of
Paradise.

Shouts of laughter burst from her friends in the distance as they
witnessed her exploit.  The Osmanli on whom she had seized roared out
for mercy, till at length she let him go, giving him a shove towards the
position he had deserted, while she kept flourishing her club behind him
till he returned to his post.  Whether or not she added materially to
the strength of Sir Colin's force may be doubted, but the incident had a
good effect upon her Highland countrymen; reminding them that they had
not only their own lives to defend, but hers and others in the camp in
their rear.  In spite of the serious state of affairs, Jack and those
around him could not help bursting into fits of laughter, though they
themselves were not free from danger, for occasionally a round-shot came
flying towards them from the Russian guns, but with not sufficient
frequency to make them shift the advantageous ground they occupied for
witnessing what was going forward.

Sir Colin was now left, exclusive of a small body of Turks who still
kept their ground, with scarcely six hundred men to defend the approach
to Balaclava.

The veteran general felt the gravity of the occasion; but his stout
heart did not quail, for he knew well that the brave men under him would
stand firm.  Riding down the line, he exclaimed to them, "Remember,
there is no retreat from here, men; you must die where you stand."

"Ay, ay, Sir Colin, we'll do that," cried the Highlanders.  The four
squadrons of Russian cavalry, amounting to not less than six hundred
men, now approached over the northern side of the valley, making direct
for the gorge; apparently ignorant that a body of English troops were
ready to bar their way, and evidently hoping to seize one of the
batteries on the side of the passage.  Sir Colin allowed them to come
within long-musket range of the hillock, when he gave the word to his
Highlanders, who, springing up, in an instant afterwards crowned the
whole length of the ridge, forming a line only two deep; Sir Colin,
confiding in their muscular power and the nature of the ground they
occupied, not deeming it necessary to throw them into square.  When they
saw their enemy before them, they exhibited the greatest desire to rush
down into the plain and charge the cavalry with their bayonets.

"Ninety-third!  Ninety-third!" cried the old general fiercely; "none of
that eagerness."  Sir Colin's stern voice checked the men, who now
opened their fire.  The Russians, evidently taken by surprise, wheeled
to the left and swept round, apparently intending to attack the
Highlanders on the right flank.  Immediately the Grenadier company of
the 93rd brought its left shoulder forward to show a front to the
north-east, and, pouring in a rattling fire, compelled the Russian
squadron again to wheel to the left, and retreat much faster than they
had come.  On this the English battery opened fire, considerably
scattering the horsemen, as they galloped back across the valley to the
north to join the main body, which was seen coming over the ridge,
increasing every moment in size.  It looked, indeed, more as if the
whole surface of the earth was moving, so compact was the dusky mass of
the several thousand units which composed it.

Onward it advanced, as if about to descend into the South Valley.  Now
was the Russian general's opportunity.  As far as he could then see, he
had only a weak battery and six hundred infantry opposed to his enormous
band of horsemen.  By making a sudden dash across the valley he might
annihilate the 93rd before the still distant infantry of the allies
could come to Sir Colin's relief.

"Matters look serious," observed Jack.  "We can scarcely dare to hope
that the Highlanders will be able to withstand the charge of that
prodigious body of cavalry; and if they give way, the Russians will
quickly be into Balaclava.  We ought to be on board to fight the ship or
to get her out of the harbour, though I don't like to leave the ground
while there is the chance of a turn in the state of affairs."

"They'll not venture on it," answered his friend.  "See! see!"

As he spoke, the cavalry halted on the side of the hill to the east of
Number 5 redoubt.  The Russian commander had indeed some reason to
hesitate, for, besides the English battery posted in his front on the
side of Kadikoi, which would play upon him as he advanced, he might have
seen the leading files of a French column appearing through the Col, and
which might, before he could overthrow the little band of Highlanders,
attack him on the flank.

Just then also Jack distinguished, coming round from the north end of
the ridge, several squadrons of English dragoons, their burnished
helmets and breastplates glittering brightly in the rays of the sun.
These were the Scots Greys, the Inniskillings, and two regiments of
Dragoon Guards.  They moved along at some distance from each other,
riding carelessly, as if not aware of the near vicinity of the enemy.
The rough nature of the ground had hitherto hidden the Russians from
their view, and prevented the latter from seeing them.  Scarcely,
however, had their leaders caught sight of the foe than their decision
was made.  While one party came between the two cavalry camps, the
larger body formed up to the north of the light cavalry camp, directly
in front of the head of the Russian squadron.

"I do believe our cavalry are going to attack the Russians!" exclaimed
Jack.

"No doubt about it," answered his friend.  "That is General Scarlett at
their head, with his aide-de-camp--and see, that must be Lord Lucan who
has ridden up to him."

What was to be done could only be judged by the movements of the
squadrons.  About three hundred British horsemen, composed of
Inniskillings and Scots Greys, were forming in line with as much care as
if they were on parade.  Another body of cavalry, the Dragoon Guards,
were moving to the right; while two others farther off, also Dragoon
Guards and Royals, formed more to the north.  The arrangements were
speedily made.  Lord Lucan came galloping back towards the
Inniskillings; and General Scarlett, accompanied by three other persons
on horseback, was seen to place himself at the head of the Scots Greys
and a squadron of the Inniskillings.  The enemy's cavalry had now halted
on the slope of the hill.  General Scarlett giving the order to advance,
his sword glittering in the rays of the sun, he, with his three
companions, dashed forward, followed by the gallant troop of cavalry,
their horses' hoofs shaking the ground as they rushed towards the
enormous body of Russians.

"They must be swallowed up and annihilated," exclaimed one of Jack's
companions.

"They have no intention of letting the Russians do that to them,"
answered Jack; "though I fear the general and his comrades will be cut
to pieces before the rest of the men overtake them."

There was but little time, however, for making many remarks.  Onward at
full gallop went that gallant band of horsemen, their leaders still
fifty yards in advance, while a shower of bullets poured from the
Russian ranks.  Every moment it was expected that the Russians would
charge, but still motionless they stood awaiting their foe.  Now, like a
thunderbolt, Scarlett and his three hundred horsemen hurled themselves
on the Russian cavalry, he and his companions still keeping the lead,
and appearing like a sharp point of the mighty wedge of red which was
clearing its onward way amid the dark-grey mass of Russians, the swords
of the British troopers flashing as they whirled them right and left, or
pointed them at the foe; the clash of steel and the muttered roar of the
combatants being heard far away across the valley.  On and on went those
daring horsemen, till the greater number seemed engulfed, though not
overwhelmed; for still the red coats and those flashing blades could be
seen ever surging onward amid the surrounding mass of grey.

The Russians had thrown out a wing on their left flank; and
notwithstanding the prowess of the British horsemen in their midst,
there were no signs of their giving way.  The spectators on the heights
watched the combatants with a burning anxiety, expressed by the broken
ejaculations they now and anon uttered.  Still the tall horsemen,
towering above their dark-coated antagonists, moved here and there,
cutting their way as best they could amid the mass, who yielded as they
advanced, only to close again.  Anxiety for the fate of those who had
thus hurled themselves amid numberless foes continued to increase, when
the regiment of Inniskilling Dragoons on the English right went
thundering down on the Russian left flank, while the Dragoon Guards
dashed forward to attack their front.  The Royals next advanced at the
gallop towards the squadron sent out on the Russian right flank, and
another regiment of dragoons which had just appeared on the ground,
keeping close under the hill, assailed the enemy on the same flank;
while numerous other horsemen, among whom was a butcher in his
shirt-sleeves, and several without helmets or breastplates, were seen
galloping up from the camp to join in the fight.

Scarcely had the last-arrived squadron of Inniskillings cast itself at
headlong speed on the Russians than their deep-serried ranks began to
relax.  Many an eye was watching the gallant leader of the charge, who,
fighting his way round to the right, with a portion of his troopers, at
length emerged on the left flank of the Russians, shortly afterwards
followed by the colonel of one of the regiments; who immediately ordered
the trumpeter to sound the rally, the other officers also quickly
re-forming their men.

The whole mass of Russians had by this time begun to heave upwards
against the slope of the hill; the horsemen on the outside were first
seen breaking away, and the next instant the whole of the vast body
began to disperse, retreating, and endeavouring to save themselves by
flight, followed by some of the victorious troopers; who were, however,
as speedily as possible recalled, to save them from being exposed to the
fire of the Russian artillery, which would have opened on them from the
opposite heights.  As the enemy were seen in flight, the 93rd, which had
been among the most eager of the spectators, greeted them from afar by a
loud cheer; while Sir Colin Campbell, his countenance beaming with
delight, was seen to gallop forward, and, taking off his hat, to
compliment the Greys on their gallantry.  Long as the time had appeared
during which this strange combat had taken place, Jack, on pulling out
his watch, discovered that but eight minutes had passed from the time
when General Scarlett at the head of his three hundred threw himself at
his foes till they were in full flight up the hill.

Jack and his naval companions, who freely criticised all that occurred,
had been watching with astonishment the Light Brigade, to the number of
nearly seven hundred, who all this time, drawn up on the side of the
hill, had been spectators of the fight without attempting to take the
least part in it.  "I suppose we shall hear all about it," said Jack,
"but to me it seems one of the most surprising things; and I suspect
that the fellows themselves must have chafed not a little at being thus
kept back, when they would have done such good service by following the
enemy, and rendering their overthrow even more complete than it has
been."

As there appeared to be no more chance of seeing any fighting where they
then were, the party of naval officers directed their course towards the
high ground on the Chersonese, whence they could look up the North
Valley, at the eastern end of which it was evident the greater part of
the Russian army was posted.  As they rode along, they passed two French
brigades, which had hitherto been watching the South Valley.  The French
officers greeted them in a friendly way, one and all expressing their
admiration at the gallant exploit just performed by the Heavy Brigade.
They caught sight directly afterwards of an English brigade, which they
learned was General Cathcart's, coming down from the Chersonese.
Trotting on, they themselves were about to climb up the heights on their
left, where Lord Raglan and his staff were stationed, when some of the
party proposed that they should turn to the right along the Woronzoff
Road, in the direction of the redoubts now occupied by the Russians.

"We shall be able to beat a timely retreat, if necessary," said Jack;
"and we shall, from one of the higher points, have a view of what is
going forward in the North Valley as well as in the South."

Without further discussion as to the wisdom of their proceeding, they
trotted on eastward along the Woronzoff Road, keeping a bright look-out
ahead, in order that they might avoid getting under the fire of the
Russian riflemen who might be advancing along the causeway.  Before
leaving the hills of Balaclava, they had observed that the Russians had
not got farther west along the causeway than Number 3 redoubt, known as
the Aratabia redoubt.  On they went, till they reached a height a little
to the west of Number 4 redoubt, whence they had an excellent view up
and down the North Valley, as well as across it to the Fedoukine Hills,
where they saw that the Russians were strongly posted.

The Light Brigade had by this time moved from its former position down
into the western end of the North Valley, where also the heavy cavalry
regiments were drawn up, as well as the magnificent body of French
cavalry, under General Maurice.  Far-off, at the distance of a mile and
a half, they could see a large battery of Russian guns, supported by
enormous masses of cavalry.  Jack and his companions continued their
comments on all they saw.

"To my mind," observed Jack, "the first thing to be done would be to
retake the redoubts and prevent the Russians from carrying off the guns
they captured from the Turks.  I suppose that is what General Cathcart
will do when he reaches the causeway, though he is a long time coming;
and if I were Lord Raglan, I should be in a considerable rage with him.
I only wish we had a few hundred of our bluejackets; we should very
soon, I suspect, be masters of one or more of the redoubts the Russians
have got hold of."

"See, see!" cried Tom; "here comes an aide-de-camp from Lord Raglan; for
my part, I believe that the cavalry will do the work if General Cathcart
does not come up in time."

Just as this remark was made, the English infantry were seen descending
along the Woronzoff Road.  As they marched on they left some troops in
the two western redoubts deserted by the Turks; and the naval officers
had to move down the hill a little way to allow them to pass on to
Number 4 redoubt, close to which General Cathcart halted his troops.  As
he did so, a cloud of skirmishers were seen advancing along the causeway
towards the Russians in front of the Aratabia.  Here the general
appeared to have made up his mind to remain, instead of advancing and
driving the Russians before him, as Jack thought he would do.  Having
got clear of the English infantry, the naval officers again took up
their post on the top of the hill, whence they could look directly down
on the Heavy and Light Cavalry Brigades, near which they distinguished
Lord Lucan, the general commanding them.

"I wonder nothing is being done," exclaimed Jack at length; "if they
don't look sharp about it, those Russians will carry off the Turkish
guns in spite of them."

"Here comes an officer, at all events, from Lord Raglan, in hot haste;
he must be a first-rate horseman," exclaimed one of the naval officers,
"or he would break his neck coming down that steep hill."

As he spoke, he pointed to the side of the Chersonese, down which an
aide-de-camp was seen galloping at a speed on which few horsemen over
such ground would have ventured.  Though every moment it seemed that his
horse must come down and crush him as it fell, he continued his course
in safety, and then came galloping up to Lord Lucan.

"He's saying something pretty strong, if we are to judge by his
gestures," observed Jack; "see, he is pointing with his sword up the
valley.  No, it must be at the Russians on the causeway.  He's ordering
the cavalry to do just what those infantry fellows ought to have done
long ago; and so they would have done it if they had had their will."

"I know that aide-de-camp," remarked one of the party; "he is Captain
Nolan, he belongs to General Airey's staff."

Directly afterwards Lord Lucan was seen addressing Lord Cardigan, who
immediately galloped forward towards where the light cavalry were drawn
up.

"See, the regiments of light cavalry are forming line; they are going to
attack the Russians near the redoubts, after all," exclaimed Jack.  "The
heavy cavalry is preparing to support them; they will drive away the
Russians as chaff before the wind."

After this, few remarks were made by any of the group, so deeply
interested were they in watching what was going forward.  Lord Cardigan
was seen to place himself at the head of the light cavalry, while Lord
Lucan came closer to them.  All eyes, however, were riveted on Lord
Cardigan and the light cavalry; he could easily be distinguished by his
commanding yet slight figure, as he sat upon his tall charger at a
distance of some five horses' lengths in front of the line, which now
began to advance.  The spectators expected to see the light cavalry
wheel with their left shoulders forward towards the Russians on their
right front, whom it was supposed they were about to attack.  Instead of
doing so, Lord Cardigan, sitting in his saddle, with his face down the
valley, galloped on straight before him.  Scarcely had he gone a hundred
paces, when a figure, recognised at once as that of Captain Nolan, was
seen to dash out from the left of the line and to gallop diagonally
across the front.  The aide-de-camp was waving his sword, pointing
eagerly towards the Russians on the right, who were engaged in
endeavouring to carry off the guns captured from the Turks.

He had just passed Lord Cardigan when a shell burst close to him, and
his horse, wheeling suddenly, dashed back towards the advancing ranks.
At the same moment, his sword falling from his hand, while his arm
remained extended, a fearful shriek, unlike anything human, burst from
him, and his horse passing between the 13th Light Dragoons, he at length
fell to the ground a lifeless corpse.  If, as it seems certain, his
object had been to point out the direction the cavalry were to charge,
Lord Cardigan took no notice of it, but continued on right down the
valley towards the Russian guns and masses of Russian horsemen at its
eastern end.

"Good heavens! they will be annihilated!" exclaimed Jack.  "Where are
they going?"

Well might he have said that, for in a short time from the heights on
either side the Russians began to pour down showers of shot and shell
and rifle balls upon the devoted band.  Many were seen to drop;
riderless horses came galloping back, some falling in their course,
others uttering cries of agony from the wounds they had received.  Here
and there human forms could be distinguished, some lying in the quiet of
death, others writhing on the ground or endeavouring to drag themselves
back up the valley.

Now the guns in front sent forth their deadly missiles, filling the air
with dense clouds of smoke, into which the cavalry charged with headlong
speed.

While the Light Brigade was thus rushing on apparently to utter
destruction, the heavy cavalry was advancing, following Lord Lucan.

"Can he be going to lead them to the destruction to which he has
consigned the light cavalry?" exclaimed one of the naval officers.

"Thank Heaven, no," observed Jack; "they have had a taste already of
what they would have to go through.  See, they've halted; though why he
does not lead them up to attack the Russians on his right I cannot make
out."

The heavy cavalry had already lost several men under the withering fire
to which they had been exposed during the few minutes their advance had
lasted, and they were now compelled to remain inactive while the action
was going forward, as their brethren of the light cavalry had been in
the morning.  It was pretty evident that Lord Lucan could not be aware
of the enemy on his right, or he would at once have found ample work for
his heavy horsemen.  At this juncture a portion of the French cavalry,
the famous regiment D'Allonville, was observed to be moving forward,
sweeping round the western base of the Fedoukine Hills, up which they
charged, rushing forward as fast as the uneven nature of the ground
would allow them at the Russian infantry and artillery which had so long
been posted there.  As they approached, the artillery limbered up and
galloped off to the eastward, while the infantry quickly retreated,
though not till many of the gallant Frenchmen's saddles had been
emptied.

Several minutes of awful suspense had passed away since the last of the
red line of light cavalry had been seen rushing into the cloud of smoke.
The guns which had dealt death into their ranks had ceased to roar; but
what had become of them or of the brave horsemen it was impossible to
say.  At length here and there a single horseman was seen moving slowly
back, he or his charger sorely wounded.  Now more and more appeared,
several, alas! being seen to drop as they retired; the whole centre of
the valley, as far as the eye could reach, being strewed with the bodies
of men and horses.  As the cloud of smoke cleared off, a dark mass only
could be discerned in the distance, the glitter of sword-blades and the
confused murmur of voices which came up the valley alone indicating that
the fight was still raging, sounds ever and anon of musketry being added
to it.

At length the numbers of those who were coming up the valley increased;
among them appeared the tall form of their leader, he and his horse
uninjured.  Then came larger parties, followed again by single horsemen
and men on foot, still exposed to the fire from the causeway.  Presently
a number of Cossacks came galloping after the fugitives, spearing some
and taking others prisoners; but just then the Russian guns on the
Causeway Ridge again opened, and the Cossacks were compelled to abandon
the pursuit, many of those whom they had surrounded making their escape.
--Shall I call the other women, and raise the house?"
"Not for your life," said Rose, "till my lady is able to give her own
orders; and for this apartment, so help me Heaven, as I will do my
best to discover the secrets it contains!--Support my mistress the
whilst."
So saying, she took the lamp in her hand, and, crossing her brow, stepped
boldly across the mysterious threshold, and, holding up the light,
surveyed the apartment.

It was merely an old vaulted chamber, of very moderate dimensions.
In one corner was an image of the Virgin, rudely cut, and placed above
a Saxon font of curious workmanship. There were two seats and a couch,
covered with coarse tapestry, on which it seemed that Eveline had
been reposing. The fragments of the shattered casement lay on the
floor; but that opening had been only made when the soldier forced
it in, and she saw no other access by which a stranger could have entered
an apartment, the ordinary access to which was barred and bolted.

Rose felt the influence of those terrors which she had hitherto
surmounted; she cast her mantle hastily around her head, as if to
shroud her sight from some blighting vision, and tripping back to the
cabinet, with more speed and a less firm step than when she left
it, she directed Gillian to lend her assistance in conveying Eveline
to the next room; and having done so, carefully secured the door of
communication, as if to put a barrier betwixt them, and the suspected
danger.

The Lady Eveline was now so far recovered that she could sit up, and was
trying to speak, though but faintly. "Rose," she said at length, "I
have seen her--my doom is sealed."
Rose immediately recollected the imprudence of suffering Gillian
to hear what her mistress might say at such an awful moment, and hastily
adopting the proposal she had before declined, desired her to go
and call other two maidens of their mistress's household.

"And where am I to find them in this house," said Dame Gillian, "where
strange men run about one chamber at midnight, and devils, for aught
I know, frequent the rest of the habitation?"
"Find them where you can," said Rose, sharply; "but begone presently."
Gillian withdrew lingeringly, and muttering at the same time something
which could not distinctly be understood.

No sooner was she gone, than Rose, giving way to the enthusiastic affection
which she felt for her mistress, implored her, in the most tender
terms, to open her eyes, (for she had again closed them,) and speak
to Rose, her own Rose, who was ready, if necessary, to die by her
mistress's side.

"To-morrow--to-morrow, Rose," murmured Eveline--"I cannot speak at present."

"Only disburden your mind with one word--tell what has thus alarmed
you--what danger you apprehend."

"I have seen her," answered Eveline--"I have seen the tenant of yonder
chamber--the vision fatal to my race!--Urge me no more--to- morrow you
shall know all." [Footnote: The idea of the Bahr-Geist was taken from
a passage in the Memoirs of Lady Fanshaw, which have since been
given to the public, and received with deserved approbation.

The original runs as follows. Lady Fanshaw, shifting among her friends
in Ireland, like other sound loyalists of the period, tells
her story thus:--
"From thence we went to the Lady Honor O'Brien's, a lady that went for a
maid, but few believed it. She was the youngest daughter of the
Earl of Thomond. There we staid three nights--the first of which I was
surprised at being laid in a chamber, where, when about one o'clock, I
heard a voice that awakened me.

I drew the curtain, and in the casement of the window I saw, by the
light of the moon, a woman leaning through the casement into the room,
in white, with red hair and pale and ghastly complexion. She spoke
loud, and in a tone I had never heard, thrice. "A horse;" and then, with
a sigh more like the wind than breath, she vanished, and to me her body
looked more like a thick cloud than substance.
I was so much frightened, that my hair stood on end, and my night- clothes
fell off. I pulled and pinched your father, who never awoke during the
disorder I was in, but at last was much surprised to see me in this
fright, and more so when I related the story and showed him the
window opened.

Neither of us slept any more that night; but he entertained me by telling
me how much more these apparitions were common in this country than
in England; and we concluded the cause to be the great superstition
of the Irish, and the want of that knowing faith which should defend
them from the power of the devil, which he exercises among them very
much.

About five o'clock the lady of the house came to see us, saying, she
had not been in bed all night, because a cousin O'Brien of hers, whose
ancestors had owned that house, had desired her to stay with him
in his chamber, and that he died at two o'clock; and she said, I
wish you to have had no disturbance, for 'tis the custom of the
place, that when any of the family are dying, the shape of a woman
appears every night in the window until they be dead.

This woman was many ages ago got with child by the owner of this place,
who murdered her in his garden, and flung her into the river under
the window; but truly I thought not of it when I lodged you here,
it being the best room in the house!

We made little reply to her speech, but disposed ourselves to be gone
suddenly."]
As Gillian entered with two of the maidens of her mistress's household,
they removed the Lady Eveline, by Rose's directions, into a chamber at
some distance which the latter had occupied, and placed her in one of
their beds, where Rose, dismissing the others (Gillian excepted) to seek
repose where they could find it, continued to watch her mistress. For
some time she continued very much disturbed, but, gradually, fatigue,
and the influence of some narcotic which Gillian had sense enough to
recommend and prepare, seemed to compose her spirits. She fell into a
deep slumber, from which she did not awaken until the sun was high
over the distant hills.

CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.

I see a hand you cannot see, Which beckons me away; I hear a voice you
cannot hear, Which says I must not stay.
MALLET.

When Eveline first opened her eyes, it seemed to be without any recollection
of what had passed on the night preceding. She looked round the apartment,
which was coarsely and scantily furnished, as one destined for the
use of domestics and menials, and said to Rose, with a smile, "Our
good kinswoman maintains the ancient Saxon hospitality at a homely
rate, so far as lodging is concerned.

I could have willingly parted with last night's profuse supper, to have
obtained a bed of a softer texture. Methinks my limbs feel as if I
had been under all the flails of a Franklin's barn-yard."
"I am glad to see you so pleasant, madam," answered Rose, discreetly
avoiding any reference to the events of the night before.

Dame Gillian was not so scrupulous. "Your ladyship last night lay
down on a better bed than this," she said, "unless I am much mistaken;
and Rose Flammock and yourself know best why you left it."

If a look could have killed, Dame Gillian would have been in deadly
peril from that which Rose shot at her, by way of rebuke for this
ill-advised communication. It had instantly the effect which was to be
apprehended, for Lady Eveline seemed at first surprised and confused;
then, as recollections of the past arranged themselves in her memory,
she folded her hands, looked on the ground, and wept bitterly, with
much agitation.

Rose entreated her to be comforted, and offered to fetch the old Saxon
chaplain of the house to administer spiritual consolation, if her
grief rejected temporal comfort.

"No--call him not," said Eveline, raising her head and drying her eyes--"I
have had enough of Saxon kindness. What a fool was I to expect, in that
hard and unfeeling woman, any commiseration for my youth--my late
sufferings--my orphan condition! I will not permit her a poor triumph
over the Norman blood of Berenger, by letting her see how much I
have suffered under her inhuman infliction.

But first, Rose, answer me truly, was any inmate of Baldringham witness
to my distress last night?"

Rose assured her that she had been tended exclusively by her own
retinue, herself and Gillian, Blanche and Ternotte. She seemed to
receive satisfaction from this assurance. "Hear me, both of you," she
said, "and observe my words, as you love and as you fear me.
Let no syllable be breathed from your lips of what has happened this
night. Carry the same charge to my maidens. Lend me thine instant aid,
Gillian, and thine, my dearest Rose, to change these disordered garments,
and arrange this dishevelled hair. It was a poor vengeance she sought,
and all because of my country. I am resolved she shall not see the
slightest trace of the sufferings she has inflicted."
As she spoke thus, her eyes flashed with indignation, which seemed
to dry up the tears that had before filled them. Rose saw the change
of her manner with a mixture of pleasure and concern, being aware
that her mistress's predominant failing was incident to her, as a
spoiled child, who, accustomed to be treated with kindness, deference,
and indulgence, by all around her, was apt to resent warmly whatever
resembled neglect or contradiction.

"God knows," said the faithful bower-maiden, "I would hold my hand
out to catch drops of molten lead, rather than endure your tears;
and yet, my sweet mistress, I would rather at present see you grieved
than angry.

This ancient lady hath, it would seem, but acted according to some old
superstitious rite of her family, which is in part yours.

Her name is respectable, both from her conduct and possessions; and hard
pressed as you are by the Normans, with whom your kinswoman, the
Prioress, is sure to take part. I was in hope you might have had some
shelter and countenance from the Lady of Baldringham."

"Never, Rose, never," answered Eveline; "you know not--you cannot fuess
what she has made me suffer--exposing me to witchcraft and fiends.
Thyself said it, and said it truly--the Saxons are still half Pagans,
void of Christianity, as of nurture and kindliness."
"Ay, but," replied Rose, "I spoke then to dissuade you from a danger now
that the danger is passed and over, I may judge of it otherwise."
"Speak not for them, Rose," replied Eveline, angrily; "no innocent
victim was ever offered up at the altar of a fiend with more indifference
than my father's kinswoman delivered up me--me, an orphan, bereaved of
my natural and powerful support. I hate her cruelty--I hate her house--I
hate the thought of all that has happened here--of all, Rose, except
thy matchless faith and fearless attachment. Go, bid our train saddle
directly--I will be gone instantly--I will not attire myself" she
added, rejecting the assistance she had at first required--"I will
have no ceremony-- tarry for no leave-taking."
In the hurried and agitated manner of her mistress, Rose recognized
with anxiety another mood of the same irritable and excited temperament,
which had before discharged itself in tears and fits. But perceiving,
at the same time, that remonstrance was in vain, she gave the
necessary orders for collecting their company, saddling, and
preparing for departure; hoping, that as her mistress removed to a
farther distance from the scene where her mind had received so
severe a shock, her equanimity might, by degrees, be restored.

Dame Gillian, accordingly, was busied with arranging the packages of her
lady, and all the rest of Lady Eveline's retinue in preparing for instant
departure, when, preceded by her steward, who acted also as a sort
of gentleman-usher, leaning upon her confidential Berwine, and followed
by two or three more of the most distinguished of her household, with
looks of displeasure on her ancient yet lofty brow, the Lady
Ermengarde entered the apartment.

Eveline, with a trembling and hurried hand, a burning cheek, and other
signs of agitation, was herself busied about the arrangement of
some baggage, when her relation made her appearance.

At once, to Rose's great surprise, she exerted a strong command over
herself, and, repressing every external appearance of disorder, she
advanced to meet her relation, with a calm and haughty stateliness
equal to her own.

"I come to give you good morning, our niece," said Ermengarde, haughtily
indeed, yet with more deference than she seemed at first to have intended,
so much did the bearing of Eveline impose respect upon her;--"I
find that you have been pleased to shift that chamber which was assigned
you, in conformity with the ancient custom of this household, and betake
yourself to the apartment of a menial."
"Are you surprised at that, lady?" demanded Eveline in her turn; "or are
you disappointed that you find me not a corpse, within the limits
of the chamber which your hospitality and affection allotted to
me?"

"Your sleep, then, has been broken?" said Ermengarde, looking fixedly at
the Lady Eveline, as she spoke.

"If I complain not, madam, the evil must be deemed of little consequence.
What has happened is over and passed, and it is not my intention to
trouble you with the recital."
"She of the ruddy finger," replied Ermengarde, triumphantly, "loves
not the blood of the stranger."
"She had less reason, while she walked the earth, to love that of the
Saxon," said Eveline, "unless her legend speaks false in that
matter; and unless, as I well suspect, your house is haunted, not
by the soul of the dead who suffered within its walls, but by evil
spirits, such as the descendants of Hengist and Horsa are said still
in secret to worship."
"You are pleasant, maiden," replied the old lady, scornfully, "or,
if your words are meant in earnest, the shaft of your censure has glanced
aside. A house, blessed by the holy Saint Dunstan, and by the royal
and holy Confessor, is no abode for evil spirits."
"The house of Baldringham," replied Eveline, "is no abode for those who
fear such spirits; and as I will, with all humility, avow myself of the
number, I shall presently leave it to the custody of Saint Dunstan."
"Not till you have broken your fast, I trust?" said the Lady of
Baldringham; "you will not, I hope, do my years and our relationship
such foul disgrace?"

"Pardon me, madam," replied the Lady Eveline; "those who have experienced
your hospitality at night, have little occasion for breakfast in
the morning.--Rose, are not those loitering knaves assembled in the
court-yard, or are they yet on their couches, making up for the slumber
they have lost by midnight disturbances?"
Rose announced that her train was in the court, and mounted; when, with
a low reverence, Eveline endeavoured to pass her relation, and leave the
apartment without farther ceremony. Ermengarde at first confronted her
with a grim and furious glance, which seemed to show a soul fraught
with more rage than the thin blood and rigid features of extreme old
age had the power of expressing, and raised her ebony staff as if
about even to proceed to some act of personal violence. But she changed
her purpose, and suddenly made way for Eveline, who passed without
farther parley; and as she descended the staircase, which conducted from
the apartment to the gateway, she heard the voice of her aunt
behind her, like that of an aged and offended sibyl, denouncing
wrath and wo upon her insolence and presumption.

"Pride," she exclaimed, "goeth before destruction, and a haughty
spirit before a fall. She who scorneth the house of her forefathers, a
stone from its battlements shall crush her!

She who mocks the gray hairs of a parent, never shall one of her
own locks be silvered with age! She who weds with a man of war and
of blood, her end shall neither be peaceful nor bloodless!"
Hurrying to escape from these and other ominous denunciations, Eveline
rushed from the house, mounted her palfrey with the precipitation
of a fugitive, and, surrounded by her attendants, who had caught a
part of her alarm, though without conjecturing the cause, rode hastily
into the forest; old Raoul, who was well acquainted with the country,
acting as their guide.

Agitated more than she was willing to confess to herself, by thus
leaving the habitation of so near a relation, loaded with maledictions,
instead of the blessings which are usually bestowed on a departing
kinswoman, Eveline hastened forward, until the huge oak-trees with
intervening arms had hidden from her view the fatal mansion.

The trampling and galloping of horse was soon after heard, announcing the
approach of the patrol left by the Constable for the protection
of the mansion, and who now, collecting from their different stations,
came prepared to attend the Lady Eveline on her farther road to Gloucester,
great part of which lay through the extensive forest of Deane, then a
silvan region of large extent, though now much denuded of trees
for the service of the iron mines.

The Cavaliers came up to join the retinue of Lady Eveline, with
armour glittering in the morning rays, trumpets sounding, horses
prancing, neighing, and thrown, each by his chivalrous rider, into
the attitude best qualified to exhibit the beauty of the steed and
dexterity of the horseman; while their lances, streaming with long
penoncelles, were brandished in every manner which could display
elation of heart and readiness of hand.

The sense of the military character of her countrymen of Normandy gave
to Eveline a feeling at once of security and of triumph, which operated
towards the dispelling of her gloomy thoughts, and of the feverish
disorder which affected her nerves.

The rising sun also--the song of the birds among the bowers--the lowing
of the cattle as they were driven to pasture--the sight of the hind, who,
with her fawn trotting by her side, often crossed some forest glade
within view of the travellers,--all contributed to dispel the terror
of Eveline's nocturnal visions, and soothe to rest the more angry
passions which had agitated her bosom at her departure from Baldringham.
She suffered her palfrey to slacken his pace, and, with female attention
to propriety, began to adjust her riding robes, and compose her head-dress,
disordered in her hasty departure. Rose saw her cheek assume a paler
but more settled hue, instead of the angry hectic which had coloured
it--saw her eye become more steady as she looked with a sort of triumph
upon her military attendants, and pardoned (what on other occasions
she would probably have made some reply to) her enthusiastic
exclamations in praise of her countrymen.

"We journey safe," said Eveline, "under the care of the princely
and victorious Normans.

Theirs is the noble wrath of the lion, which destroys or is appeased at
once--there is no guile in their romantic affection, no sullenness mixed
with their generous indignation--they know the duties of the hall as
well as those of battle; and were they to be surpassed in the arts
of war, (which will only be when Plinlimmon is removed from its
base,) they would still remain superior to every other people in
generosity and courtesy."

"If I do not feel all their merits so strongly as if I shared their
blood." said Rose, "I am at least glad to see them around us, in woods
which are said to abound with dangers of various kinds. And I confess,
my heart is the lighter, that I can now no longer observe the least
vestige of that ancient mansion, in which we passed so unpleasant a night,
and the recollection of which will always be odious to me."
Eveline looked sharply at her. "Confess the truth, Rose; thou wouldst
give thy best kirtle to know all of my horrible adventure."
"It is but confessing that I am a woman," answered Rose; "and did I say
a man, I dare say the difference of sex would imply but a small
abatement of curiosity."
"Thou makest no parade of other feelings, which prompt thee to
inquire into my fortunes," said Eveline; "but, sweet Rose, I give
thee not the less credit for them.

Believe me, thou shalt know all--but, I think, not now."
"At your pleasure," said Rose; "and yet, methinks, the bearing in your
solitary bosom such a fearful secret will only render the weight
more intolerable. On my silence you may rely as on that of the Holy Image,
which hears us confess what it never reveals.
Besides, such things become familiar to the imagination when they have
been spoken of, and that which is familiar gradually becomes stripped of
its terrors."
"Thou speakest with reason, my prudent Rose; and surely in this gallant
troop, borne like a flower on a bush by my good palfrey Yseulte--fresh
gales blowing round us, flowers opening and birds singing, and
having thee by my bridle-rein, I ought to feel this a fitting time
to communicate what thou hast so good a title to know.

And--yes!--thou shalt know all!--Thou art not, I presume, ignorant of
the qualities of what the Saxons of this land call a _Bahrgeist_?"
"Pardon me, lady," answered Rose, "my father discouraged my listening to
such discourses. I might see evil spirits enough, he said, without my
imagination being taught to form, such as were fantastical. The word
Bahr-geist, I have heard used by Gillian and other Saxons; but to me it
only conveys some idea of indefinite terror, of which I never asked nor
received an explanation."
"Know then," said Eveline, "it is a spectre, usually the image of
a departed person, who, either for wrong sustained in some particular
place during life, or through treasure hidden there, or from some
such other cause, haunts the spot from time to time, becomes familiar
to those who dwell there, takes an interest in their fate, occasionally
for good, in other instances or times for evil.

The Bahr-geist is, therefore, sometimes regarded as the good genius,
sometimes as the avenging fiend, attached to particular families and
classes of men. It is the lot of the family of Baldringham (of no mean
note in other respects) to be subject to the visits of such a being."
"May I ask the cause (if it be known) of such visitation?" said Rose,
desirous to avail herself to the uttermost of the communicative mood of
her young lady, which might not perhaps last very long.

"I know the legend but imperfectly," replied Eveline, proceeding with
a degree of calmness, the result of strong exertion over her mental
anxiety, "but in general it runs thus:--Baldrick, the Saxon hero who
first possessed yonder dwelling, became enamoured of a fair Briton,
said to have been descended from those Druids of whom the Welsh
speak so much, and deemed not unacquainted with the arts of sorcery
which they practised, when they offered up human sacrifices amid
those circles of unhewn and living rock, of which thou hast seen
so many.

After more than two years' wedlock, Baldrick became weary of his
wife to such a point, that he formed the cruel resolution of
putting her to death. Some say he doubted her fidelity--some that the
matter was pressed on him by the church, as she was suspected of
heresy--some that he removed her to make way for a more wealthy
marriage--but all agree in the result. He sent two of his Cnichts to
the house of Baldringham, to put to death the unfortunate Vanda,
and commanded them to bring him the ring which had circled her finger on
the day of wedlock, in token that his orders were accomplished. The
men were ruthless in their office; they strangled Vanda in yonder
apartment, and as the hand was so swollen that no effort could draw
off the ring, they obtained possession of it by severing the finger.
But long before the return of those cruel perpetrators of her death, the
shadow of Vanda had appeared before her appalled husband, and holding up
to him her bloody hand, made him fearfully sensible how well his savage
commands had been obeyed.

After haunting him in peace and war, in desert, court, and camp, until
he died despairingly on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, the Bahr-geist,
or ghost of the murdered Vanda, became so terrible in the House of
Baldringham, that the succour of Saint Dunstan was itself scarcely
sufficient to put bounds to her visitation.
"She'll not keep afloat many minutes longer," observed Higson, who had
been watching her, "unless she parts from her anchors, and then it will
only be to get out of the frying-pan into the fire."

"We might reach her, and should she appear likely to go down, we might
get the crew out of her," observed Jack.

"It will be no easy matter, but it may be done," answered Higson.

"We'll try it," cried Jack, giving directions to Green, who was standing
by the men at the helm, to edge the ship off towards the transport.  As
they approached her, they saw that they were arriving not a moment too
soon.  Already the seas were sweeping over her deck, and it seemed that
each plunge she made would be her last.  Jack determined to steer up on
her starboard side; picked hands were stationed in the rigging, and in
every spot whence ropes could be hove on board to assist the crew in
escaping.  They could scarcely hope to save all, but some by activity
might avail themselves of the assistance offered them; the chief danger
in the undertaking was that the sides of the vessels might strike each
other, or that the rigging might get foul.  To guard against this as
much as possible, the lower and topsail braces were "manned" ready to
"brace round" smartly in the event of her yards fouling those of the
other vessel, and men were stationed with axes and tomahawks to cut the
ropes.

The _Tornado_ stood on till she was nearly astern of the vessel she was
about to assist.  The faces of the crew could be seen, as they turned
their eyes towards the coming succour, while they clung on to the
rigging and bulwarks of their ship, ready to seize the ropes hove to
them.  The danger to the _Tornado_ was very great; for should the cable
of the vessel ahead give way at that critical moment, she might be
hurled against her bows, when, in all probability, both vessels would go
down together.  The _Tornado's_ progress in the teeth of the gale was
very slow, and the fear was that the vessel ahead would go down before
she could reach her.  On the other hand, when once she got alongside,
more time would be allowed to the crew to leap on board.  At length the
_Tornado's_ bows were up to the transport's quarter, but not till she
was completely alongside, and both vessels should rise and fall on the
same seas, could any attempt be made to rescue the crew.

"Don't heave a rope till I order you; and take care that the men are
secure before you haul in," cried Jack.  More than another minute
passed; Green, who with two hands to assist him was at the helm,
skilfully brought her alongside.  "Now heave," cried Jack, and twenty
ropes or more were hove with a good will on board the sinking vessel.
Most of them were eagerly seized by the almost despairing crew; some
fastened them round their waists, others, grasping them tightly,
attempted to leap on the _Tornado's_ bulwarks.  Some succeeded, and were
seized by the hands of those on board; others missed their footing, and,
with shrieks of despair, letting go their hold, dropped into the
intervening space.  Many still remained on board; more ropes were hove
to them; of these several were officers.  Warned by the fate of those
who had failed to leap on board the _Tornado_, each of them, as he
caught a rope, secured it round his waist; some springing into the main,
others into the mizzen-rigging, thus attaining a greater height.  Among
them Jack observed one who wore a naval uniform, though he had as yet
been unable to distinguish his features.

The risk the _Tornado_ was running of falling on board the vessel was
very great, and Jack was about reluctantly to give the order to sheer
off from her, when he saw the remainder of those on deck prepare to make
the desperate leap which would either terminate in their destruction or
place them in comparative safety.  Just at that moment, as his eye was
fixed on the naval officer, he recognised Murray.

"I must save him, at all events," was the thought which passed through
his mind.  Murray had grasped the rope, which he was fastening round his
waist; he sprang into the main rigging of the ship, and stood waiting
for a favourable opportunity to take the desperate leap.  Jack pointed
him out to Higson, who, securing himself in the same manner, sprang up
on to the hammock nettings, and, stretching out his hands, stood ready
to grasp him.  In another instant the two vessels must either be
separated or be hurled against each other.  Murray stood calmly holding
on to the rigging by one hand, while with keen eye he watched the
movements of the _Tornado_.  Now her side rolled away from him, now it
again approached, and seemed to be sinking far lower down than the level
on which he stood.  It was the moment for which he had waited; letting
go his hold, he sprang with outstretched arms towards the _Tornado_.
The crew held the rope; hauling it in, Higson grasped his hand at the
same moment that his feet touched the hammock nettings of the _Tornado_,
which the next was separated several feet from the vessel he had
quitted.

Those who had hitherto hesitated to leap now sprang overboard, and were
dragged up the side of the _Tornado_ by her crew.  The master and one of
his mates were thus saved, but nearly half a dozen people still remained
on board.  Jack had barely time to shake Alick by the hand, but not a
moment to inquire how he happened to be on board.  Jack's wish was, if
possible, to save the poor fellows still clinging to the sinking vessel.

"We may do it," said Higson; "but we've run a fearful risk already of
losing the ship."

"We will try it," cried Jack.

"She's sinking! she's sinking!" shouted several voices.

Such indeed was the case; a heavy sea came rolling up, which even the
_Tornado_ with difficulty breasted, while it ran clear over the other
vessel lying at anchor.  For some moments it seemed doubtful whether she
would rise, but another sea came hissing on into which her bows plunged,
not again to appear.  Those on deck must have been washed far away, for
no human power could have withstood the furious sea which assailed them.
Ere another minute had passed, the masts of the ill-fated vessel had
disappeared beneath the foaming ocean.

The _Tornado's_ best chance of safety was now to stand out to sea, and
to battle bravely with the storm while it should last; still, while
there was a possibility of rendering assistance to others in distress,
Jack was unwilling to go to a distance.  Some way off was another vessel
with signals of distress flying; he ordered Green to keep away for her,
intending to try and get the people off if there was a risk of her
foundering, as he had done from the first vessel.  The sound of a gun
came from her, as if to show her urgent necessity for help; another and
another followed.

"We are doing our best," muttered Higson; "though it's little good, I
fear, we can do you."

The sound of the last gun had just reached their ears when the vessel
from which it came was seen to be moving; her cable had parted.  Away
she drove before the fierce gale; her crew were seen attempting to range
another cable.  The sea caught her starboard bow, and she drove bodily
onwards towards the rocky shore on which the fierce breakers were raging
savagely.  To attempt getting nearer would have been worse than useless,
for Jack saw that should he try to do so, he might involve his ship in
her fate.

Though many others had signals of distress flying, Jack knew well that
he could render them no effectual assistance, and therefore once more
put the _Tornado's_ head off-shore.  He now for the first time had
leisure to inquire from Murray how he happened to be on board the vessel
which had gone down.  Murray briefly told him that he had been sent by
the admiral, who had steamed on to the Katcha, with despatches on board
the Turkish flagship, with directions afterwards to visit several other
vessels, and then to run in to Balaclava.  He had been detained on board
the Turkish ship longer than he expected, and his boat being nearly
swamped before he had finished his mission, he had gone alongside the
nearest vessel, intending to remain on board till the morning.  His boat
had been lost before she could be hoisted up, and the gale having so
rapidly increased, he had been prevented leaving in one of her boats.
Three of his people had unhappily been lost, but the remainder succeeded
in reaching the _Tornado_.

"I am indeed thankful that we came to you in time," said Jack; "though I
little expected when I determined to run down to the assistance of that
vessel, that I should be the means of saving your life."

"Not the first time that we have helped each other, and I am very sure
that it will not be the last if we either of us require help and have
the opportunity of rendering it," answered Murray.  "I expect soon to be
appointed to the command of a ship, as the admiral has offered me the
first vacancy, which Hemming advises me to accept, as the smaller craft
will in future have more to do than the line-of-battle ships."

As may be supposed, there was but little time for conversation.  Jack
still wished, if possible, to try and render assistance to some of the
many other vessels at anchor off the coast, but both Higson and Green
strongly expressed their opinion that the attempt to do so would
endanger the ship; and Murray concurring with them, he was compelled to
abandon his intention.  The _Tornado_ proved herself a first-rate
seaboat; indeed, had she not been so, she would have shared the fate of
so many other vessels during that fearful gale.  By keeping her head to
the southward, she was able in a short time gradually to draw off-shore.
For the greater part of the night the gale blew with unabated fury.
Towards morning, however, the wind began to abate.  Soon after daylight
the ship's head was brought round, and she stood back towards Balaclava.
A melancholy spectacle was presented to those on board, as she neared
the harbour; the whole coast, as far as the eye could reach, was strewn
with masses of wreck, while the entrance was nearly blocked up with
shattered spars and pieces of timber; while numerous dead bodies floated
about, or had been thrown by the foaming surges on the rocks on either
hand.  The _Tornado_, having not without difficulty made her way in,
brought up; and Jack immediately sent his despatches on shore.  The
vessels in the harbour had not escaped.  Brought up close together, they
had been driven in one mass towards the head of the harbour, directly
down upon the line-of-battle ship at anchor, carrying her upwards of a
hundred yards, when she grounded by the stern; while few had escaped
without more or less damage.

The gale considerably abated towards noon, when Jack received orders to
run down the coast, to try and bring off any of the crews which might
have escaped from the wrecked ships.  Accordingly, he immediately got up
steam and put to sea.  A number of boats were already engaged in the
humane object; but few of the people belonging to the vessels which had
been wrecked in the immediate neighbourhood of Balaclava had escaped.
Farther down the coast, however, two or three ships were seen on shore,
from which it was possible the crews might have landed in safety.  Jack
kept in as close as he could venture, steering for the first wreck he
saw.  She lay with her masts gone broadside to the sea, which was
sweeping fiercely over her.  Not a human being was seen near the wreck.

"Not a man, I fear, could have escaped," said Jack, as he surveyed the
coast with his glass; "and yet, from the position of the vessel, I
cannot help thinking that they might have made their way to the shore--
see, near yonder wreck farther south, a good number of people appear to
be collected."

The _Tornado_ was accordingly steered in the direction Jack pointed.
Higson had been watching the group through his telescope.

"They appear to be expecting an attack," he observed; "there are fifty
or more of them, and they are standing to their arms.  Their ship is
evidently a large transport, and from her position I should judge that
they managed to land without much difficulty, and would carry their
muskets and ammunition with them."

Directly afterwards a forest of lances were seen above the hill, and a
band of Cossacks came galloping towards the wreck.  Jack immediately
ordered the port gun to be brought to bear on the advancing horsemen,
who seemed not to be aware that they could be reached from that
distance, and went on, making sure of being able to capture the whole
shipwrecked crew.  On seeing that the latter were armed, they levelled
their lances, and were bearing down upon them, when Jack gave the word
to fire.  The first shot struck the horse of their leader, which came
down, rolling over him; it seemed as if both rider and steed were
killed.  The next shot pitched into the midst of their ranks, emptying
at least a couple of saddles.  The third shot did still more damage;
when the cossacks, not knowing how many more might be coming, wheeled
quickly round and galloped off into the interior; the crew of the
transport, meantime, firing a volley which, though at a considerable
distance, brought two or three to the ground.

As soon as he came abreast of the wreck, Jack sent three of his boats on
shore to bring off the crew; Murray volunteered to take command of them.
As he neared the beach, he saw the Cossacks still hovering in the
distance, out of the reach of the guns, but threatening to pounce down
again, probably still in the hopes of making some prisoners.  The
_Tornado_ accordingly stood in as close as she could venture, to cover
the boats, which soon reached the beach.  The transport's crew stood
ready to receive them; scarcely, however, had they begun to embark, than
the Cossacks once more came galloping up.  Murray immediately ordered
those still remaining on shore to face about; while, just as the
Cossacks reached the high ground above the beach, a couple of shells
thrown from the _Tornado's_ guns burst amid their ranks; when, once more
wheeling about, they galloped off at a rapid rate, leaving the rest of
the crew to embark without molestation.

Having carried them on board, Murray returned for the purpose of
destroying the transport, that her stores might not fall into the hands
of the enemy.  He had for this purpose to pull round inshore.  It was
not without some difficulty that he, Higson, and Needham made their way
on board.  Such combustible materials as could be found were soon
collected, and lighted in the hold of the transport; the boat then at
once pulled away for the _Tornado_.  She had got to some little distance
from the ship, when the Cossacks were again seen coming down towards the
shore, this time accompanied by a couple of field-pieces, which quickly
opened fire.  The first shot, however, fell short, and the party were
soon safe on board the _Tornado_.

As the _Tornado_ steamed off, the Cossacks were seen again coming
forward, in the hopes possibly of still being able to plunder the wreck.
Just then, however, the flames burst furiously forth from every part of
the wreck, and in another minute a loud roar was heard, and a portion of
her deck rose high in the air, while her sides, rent and shattered, flew
out in every direction; and as the smoke from the explosion cleared
away, a few burnt timbers of the wreck alone remained, while the
Cossacks, disappointed of their booty, were seen galloping off in the
distance.

The scanty remnant of another shipwrecked crew having been saved by the
_Tornado_, she steamed back to Balaclava.  During that fearful storm no
less than forty vessels, with upwards of four hundred men, had been
lost; one Turkish line-of-battle ship, and several transports, had gone
down with all hands.  The French lost one of their finest line-of-battle
ships and a corvette, with nearly twenty smaller craft.  The most severe
loss was that of the _Prince_, with a crew of a hundred and fifty men;
she had arrived two days before with troops, who had providentially
landed--but the army was doomed to suffer terribly from the loss of her
cargo, consisting of warm clothing, ammunition, medicine, and supplies
of all kinds.

A few ships being left to watch Sebastopol, the remainder of the fleet
and all the transports were sent back to the Bosphorus; and soon
afterwards, Admiral Dundas having struck his flag, Sir Edmund Lyons
became commander-in-chief.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

STATE OF AFFAIRS IN THE BEGINNING OF 1855--MURRAY IN COMMAND OF THE
GIAOUR--SHELLING SEBASTOPOL BY NIGHT--TOM FINDS MATTER FOR SERIOUS
THOUGHT--THE TORNADO CHASES A RUSSIAN STEAMER--ATTACK ON A FORT--ANOTHER
STEAMER SIGHTED--FRIEND OR FOE?--PROVES TO BE THE GIAOUR--THE FLASH
APPEARS--THE FORT STORMED.

The fearful Christmas of 1854 was over, and of the troops, which in
gallant array had left England, more than one-half had died or been
disabled by the shot of the enemy or the still more deadly pestilence.
Sufferings, such as an English army had never before been called upon to
endure, had been borne with fortitude.  The siege, notwithstanding, had
been carried on, and now reinforcements, and clothing, and stores, and
provisions were arriving in the camp of the allies.  Affairs looked
brighter than they had done for many a day; the fleet, notwithstanding
the battering some of the ships had received at the opening of the
bombardment, was in as efficient a state as ever.  It had rendered good
service at Eupatoria in assisting the Turks to defend the place against
a powerful force of Russians, which had been driven back with great
loss.  The naval brigade had been doing good service on shore, not only
in the batteries, but by laying down a railway from Balaclava to the
Chersonese, by which the transport of heavy guns, ammunition, and stores
was greatly facilitated.

The _Tornado_ had not been idle, though, in consequence of the straining
her engines had received during the storm, she had been compelled to
remain some time at Constantinople, to have them set to rights.  Once
more she was steaming across the waters of the Black Sea, with another
vessel of similar size in company.

"The _Giaour_ will beat us if we can't get up more steam," observed Jack
to his first lieutenant, who was walking the deck with him.

"We have on our full power, and are doing our utmost," answered Higson;
"the _Giaour's_ engines are new, and we must make up our minds, I
suspect, to let Commander Murray get ahead of us."

"I am always happy to follow wherever he leads," said Jack; "if there is
work to be done, he'll find out the way to do it."

The _Giaour_ was coming up slowly on the _Tornado's_ quarter, gaining
foot after foot but never losing an inch, so that at length she was
abreast of her; both vessels were steering for Sebastopol.  The land was
soon afterwards made, and, as they approached, the admiral's flag was
seen flying at the masthead of the _Royal Albert_, a magnificent
three-decker of a hundred and thirty guns, to which Sir Edmund Lyons had
shifted it from the _Agamemnon_.  She, and several other English and
French line-of-battle ships, lay across the entrance of the harbour,
effectually preventing any of the enemy's ships from getting out.

"The admiral is speaking to us and the _Giaour_" said Tom, who was
acting as signal-midshipman.

"Let's see what he is saying," said Jack, looking at the signal-book;
"it's `Keep under weigh' and `Commanders to repair on board the
admiral's ship.'  We are to be sent somewhere together, I hope."

The two steamers closed rapidly with the fleet, beyond which could be
seen the frowning batteries on the other side of the harbour of
Sebastopol; while on the right appeared thin curls of smoke, marking the
course of the shells thrown from the lines of the allies into the city
and those sent by the batteries in return: while the thunder of the
artillery was heard with fearful distinctness.  On reaching the
flagship, Jack and Murray went on board, when they received directions
to take a part in the work which had been going on nightly.  Some time
before, the boats of the fleet had set up signals on shore within reach
of the French camp, and men were sent down soon after dark to light
them.  By their means every night an English and French steamer had
stood in and shelled the town, greatly to the astonishment of the
Russians, who were utterly unprepared for such a mode of attack.  They
of course fired in return; but as they could scarcely see their foes,
the ships were but seldom struck; while not only did they commit a good
deal of harm, but thus harassed the garrison by night as well as by day.

Jack was to take the lead that night, in company with a French ship.
All hands were well pleased at the work cut out for them, and eagerly
looked forward to the hours of darkness when they might begin shelling
the enemy, little troubled by the thoughts of the shot which might be
sent on board them from the Russian guns in return.  Tom and Archie were
especially in high glee at the thoughts of what they were to do.

"Who knows but one of our shells may burst in one of the enemy's chief
magazines, or knock down some of their defences, and allow the allies to
take the place?" said Tom.

"We shall not be much the wiser if we do do it," observed Archie; "and,
depend upon it, they will insist that it was their own guns did the
work."

Soon after dark the _Tornado_ and her French consort steamed in towards
the harbour, steering by the lights which had been placed on shore.  The
screws made but little noise, and perfect silence was maintained on
board, so that the enemy could not discover their whereabouts till they
opened fire.  The lights were so placed as to enable them to know with
terrible accuracy the position of the forts into which they were to
fire.  As they glided onwards through the darkness for some minutes
together, not a sound was heard in the direction of the beleaguered
city, which to all appearance lay in profound slumber.  Then came from
the far distance the reports of a few dropping shot, showing that the
riflemen of both parties were awake.  They again ceased, and the same
silence as before reigned over the scene.

The _Tornado's_ heavy guns were loaded, and elevated to throw their shot
into the city, and their crews stood ready to fire at the word of
command.  Jack waited till his ship had reached the point he was
directed to gain.  "Fire!" he shouted.  The next instant the loud roar
of his guns echoed through the harbour, arousing many a weary sleeper in
the Russian fortifications.  The French ship immediately fired her guns
in rapid succession, and then both vessels steamed round away from the
spot they had previously occupied, towards which numberless Russian guns
immediately directed their fire, though not a shot touched either of
them.  The _Tornado's_ guns were reloaded, and, standing back, she
rapidly discharged them, the French ship following her example.  Again
the shot from the forts came rushing through the air, falling around the
ships, but without striking them.  In this way they continued circling
round, now firing from one point, now from another, and each time after
firing taking different directions.

At length every gun which could be brought to bear on the harbour began
to play upon them, but, by keeping ever on the move, for a considerable
time not a shot took effect.  At length, as Tom and Archie were standing
close together, a shot from one of the heights whistled by close to
their heads, and struck the bulwarks behind them.

"I say, Tom, if that shot had been a few inches on one side, where
should you and I have been by this time?" said Archie.

"Not a pleasant subject for contemplation," answered Tom; "however, a
miss is as good as a mile."

"I have been thinking seriously of the matter," observed Archie; "not
that I am afraid, but I am very sure that we ought to be prepared to go
out of the world, seeing that at any moment either of us may lose our
lives."

"It doesn't do to think of that sort of thing," said Tom, not liking
Archie's tone.

"Now there you're wrong.  I believe that it is much wiser to think about
it than to be taken unprepared," replied Archie.  "My Cousin Alick
thinks very seriously, and no one can say that he is not as brave an
officer as any man in the fleet.  I tell you honestly that I have been
saying my prayers, and asking God to help me to take Him at His word,
and to trust to His plan of salvation--that is what I want you to do,
Tom, also.  I should be very miserable if I saw you killed and could not
feel sure that you had gone to heaven.  I should be unhappy in either
case; but it would be ten times worse if I thought that I should not
meet you again."

"Do you really, Archie, think that I am so wicked that if I was to be
killed I should not go to heaven?" said Tom.

"I only know what the Bible says about it, and I believe that," answered
Archie firmly.  "Just obey God, and you'll be all right, and it won't
make you a bit less brave than you are now."

"I will," said Tom; "still I hope that neither you nor I will be hit
to-night, though the shot are falling pretty thickly about us."

The moment after he had spoken, a loud cry was heard from one of the
crew of the nearest gun, and the sound of a person falling heavily.
They sprang to the spot, and found a seaman stretched on the deck.  They
tried to lift him up, but, inexperienced though they were, they both
felt convinced that he was dead.  Others, coming up, confirmed their
opinion; the shot had struck his chest, and killed him in a moment.

Notwithstanding the heavy fire to which his ship was exposed, Jack
continued at his post, firing away till the hour arrived at which he was
directed to leave the harbour; and he and his French consort steamed
away to rejoin the fleet.  Tom was unusually serious during the
following day.

"I say, Rogers, what's the matter with you?" asked Billy Blueblazes.

"He didn't quite like the fun we had last night," observed Dicky Duff.

"I'll tell you what, youngster," said Tom, "you wouldn't have thought it
any fun if either of you had one of those Russian round-shot walking
into you, as poor Norris had."

On which Tom spoke to them as Archie had been speaking to him, much to
the latter's satisfaction, for it showed him that his words had not been
thrown away.  Tom, indeed, afterwards came to him, and begged that he
would get out his Bible, and more fully explain what he had been talking
about on the previous night.  Archie gladly did so.  It was the
beginning of many Bible readings they had together.  Others joined them,
and they then to their surprise found that several of the men had long
been in the practice of meeting together to pray and study God's Word.
They heard also that such was done on board many of the ships in the
fleet, and that the men who thus occupied themselves were looked upon as
the best and steadiest of their respective crews.

The next night Murray was directed to stand in and engage the forts,
also accompanied by a French ship.  Thus, night after night, the fleet
harassed the unfortunate garrison, while the guns of the besieging army
played on them in the daytime, giving them no rest during the
four-and-twenty hours.

A short time after this a considerable squadron, composed of English,
French, and Turkish ships, with some thousand troops on board, proceeded
to the eastward, for the purpose of attacking Kertch, at the entrance of
the Sea of Azov.  Well might the garrison of Sebastopol have felt alarm
when they saw the fleet sailing past the mouth of their harbour, for on
the shores of that inland sea were placed the chief granaries from which
they drew their supplies of provisions.

The _Tornado_ and _Giaour_, with numerous other steam-vessels,
accompanied the fleet.  Passing along the rocky and picturesque southern
shore of the Crimea, the expedition soon came off Cape Saint Paul, in a
small bay near which the troops were landed without a casualty; the
steam-vessels scattering a body of Cossacks, the only hostile force that
appeared to dispute the disembarkation.  The line-of-battle ships
continued their course along the coast, which at every available spot
was strongly fortified.  The ships were standing in to attack the
batteries when a thundering roar was heard, the concussion from which
shook even the vessels at sea.  Another and another followed.

"The Russians are performing our work for us, and saving Her Majesty a
considerable expenditure of gunpowder," observed Higson to his
commander.  "I am afraid if they play that trick, of which they seem so
fond, they will leave us nothing to do."

"Never fear, we shall be too quick for them," answered Jack; "and, from
what I hear, there are numerous magazines all round the coast."

"The inhabitants of Kertch must be glad to save their town from a
bombardment, for really it is a much handsomer place than I expected to
find in this part of the world, and those lofty stone houses give it a
very imposing appearance," observed Higson.

"At all events, we shall not have injured them," observed Jack; "we are
especially directed to do as little harm as possible to private
property, and to let the Russians understand that we are not warring
with them, but with the Emperor and his Government."

The fleet having thus gained a bloodless victory, the line-of-battle
ships came to an anchor; the larger number of the steamers proceeded
into the Sea of Azov, while the remainder were sent along the coast to
look out for any vessels which might have been concealed in any of the
inlets or deep bays with which it is everywhere indented.  The _Tornado_
was ordered on this service, greatly to the disappointment of her crew,
who expected to have more stirring work within the Straits.

She had just lost sight of the fleet, when standing in as close as she
could venture, Jos Green, who was forward, observed a light cloud of
smoke ascending above a rocky point, the summit of which was feathered
with a grove of lofty trees.  It was a question, however, whether the
smoke proceeded from a fire on shore or from the funnel of a steamer.
Green inclined to the latter opinion.  It had moved some distance since
he first sighted it, he declared, so that it must come from a steamer on
her way out to sea.  The _Tornado_ stood on, keeping as close inshore as
possible, so that her presence might not be discovered till the other
vessel had got well clear of the point; after that, Jack hoped to get up
to her before she could run in anywhere else for shelter.

A suppressed cheer from those on deck showed that Green was right, and
the _Tornado_ stood away after the stranger.  The latter was no laggard,
and it was soon evident that the _Tornado_ must do her best if she was
to come up with her.  The chase, though a vessel of some size, showed no
inclination to come to close quarters with her pursuer.

"If we can but keep her in sight, we shall catch her at last," said
Jack; "and if she runs into any harbour, we must follow her, or send the
boats in after her."

"We haven't had anything so exciting for a long time," said Tom; "I hope
that we may have to cut her out with the boats."

"Her crew will blow her up sooner than let us do that," observed Archie;
"the Russians seem to be fonder of that sort of thing than fighting."

The chase, however, kept well ahead, and there seemed a good prospect,
should night come on, of her escaping altogether.  Still the _Tornado_
was really going faster than the Russian vessel, though so slight was
the difference of speed, that at first it was scarcely discernible.  At
length, however, Jack considered that he had got the Russian vessel
within range of his long guns, and was on the point of issuing the order
to fire, when a shot from her came flying across the intervening space,
but fell some twenty fathoms or so short of its mark.

"And now, let's see what we can do," cried Jack; "starboard the helm--
steady--now, fire!"  The _Tornado's_ shot struck the Russian's counter,
apparently committing a considerable amount of damage.  This first
specimen of the power of his pursuer's guns seemed to satisfy him that
he had better not engage at close quarters.  The dense volumes of smoke
which issued from his funnel proved that he was endeavouring to get more
steam, in the hopes of still keeping ahead.  As the _Tornado_ could not
be made to move faster than she was then going, Jack had to content
himself with the prospect of the chase's getting on shore, running short
of coal, or of some accident happening to her machinery.  Another shot
was tried, but it fell short, showing that she had again drawn ahead.
Some miles more had been run, when Green brought the chart on deck, and
pointed out a fort situated on the shores of a bay a short distance off.

"The chase has evidently been making for that, and thinks that she will
be secure under its guns," he observed.

"We'll stand on, and attack both ship and fort together," said Jack;
"we'll sink the ship first, and then knock the fort to pieces."

In about ten minutes more the chase rounded a point, when a bay opened
out, on the farther side of which appeared a strong-looking fort,
guarding the mouth of a river which ran into the bay.

"She may escape us after all if she runs up that river," observed
Higson, "unless we can first silence the guns of the fort, and then
follow her."

"We must just do that same then; and if we can't knock the fort to
pieces with our guns, we must land and storm it," said Jack.

His remark was received with universal satisfaction, as no one thought
of the superior number of the garrison likely to oppose them.  The chase
was now more eagerly watched than ever, it being fully expected that she
would run up the river to escape them; instead, however, of doing so, as
she drew near the fort she let off her steam, and came to an anchor
close under its guns.

"Now we've got her," cried Jack exultingly.

The _Tornado_ stood on to within half a mile of the fort, when she
opened fire on it, and now on the ship, which fired with some spirit in
return; but as the _Tornado_ kept moving about, their shot invariably
missed her.  She had been thus engaged for a quarter of an hour or more,
her guns having told with considerable effect on the Russian vessel,
when a column of smoke was seen ascending at some little distance behind
the fort, apparently from the river.

"That must proceed from another steamer coming down to assist our
friend," observed Higson; "and see, there is another rising just beyond
it--we shall have no lack of enemies to fight."

"We must settle with the first, then, as soon as possible," cried Jack,
in a cheery tone; "we'll then take the others in detail."

The crew cheered as they heard his remark, and worked away at the guns
with redoubled zeal.  Several shot had struck the vessel under the fort;
first one of her guns ceased firing, then another and another; still she
kept her colours flying, and in another minute the bows of a steamer
were seen emerging from the mouth of the river.  A shot was instantly
fired at her; it struck her bulwarks, and evidently caused some damage.
Instead, however, of running under the guns of the fort, she stood away
up the bay, evidently not wishing to come to close quarters with the
audacious stranger.  A few minutes afterwards another vessel appeared,
which, receiving one of the _Tornado's_ shot, followed the example of
the first.  After getting nearly two miles away, they brought their
broadsides round, and opened a brisk fire.  The _Tornado_, however,
moving rapidly about as before, escaped every one of their shot; while
she fired her guns as they came to bear on her antagonists, and seldom
failed to hull one or other of them.  Still, their guns were of heavier
calibre than hers, and their shot frequently went far beyond her, and
she had to stand towards them to make hers tell with effect.

At length a shot came crashing on board just abaft the funnel, wounding
one man severely, and another, Tim Nolan, slightly.

"Arrah, now, it's but a fleabite," he exclaimed, getting a shipmate to
bind a handkerchief round his shoulder; "we've given them more than that
already, and it's better than having the funnel shot away."

Still Jack had no intention of abandoning the attack, and, wishing to
settle the first vessel before he attended to the other two, he directed
his guns at her and at the fort, although the shot from the former
continually hulled him.  One, at length, went through the ship's side
between wind and water, and the sea came rushing in like a mill-sluice.
The midshipmen, who up to this time were enjoying the fighting, thought
that things were beginning to look serious.

Dicky Duff, especially, expressed his apprehensions to his chum Billy.
"If another shot comes in like that, we shall certainly go to the
bottom; and I am not quite sure what will happen even now, for the
commander has not told us to knock off firing.  I wonder if he knows
what has happened?  He is such a plucky fellow, however, that I suppose
he will go on fighting till the ship sinks below our feet."

The youngsters were somewhat relieved by seeing the carpenter and his
crew going below with the means for stopping the shot-hole; while Ben
Snatchblock, with a rope round his waist, allowed himself to be slung
overboard to reach the injury still more rapidly from the outside.  He
had just performed his task, when another shot went right through the
forepart of the ship; happily, without hitting anyone, and the damage it
had caused was as quickly repaired as the other had been.  Jack had
carried on the unequal contest for half an hour or more, when a third
steamer was seen gliding out of the river, and as she opened her fire,
it was soon discovered that her guns were heavier than those of either
of her consorts.  The first shot she fired came crashing through the
_Tornado's_ side.

"I suppose we shall have to run for it now," cried Dicky.

"Not a bit of it," exclaimed Tom, who overheard him; "the commander
wouldn't be turned from his purpose, even if a dozen Russian steamers
came out on us, and we shall soon settle with our old friend--she has
not fired a shot for the last minute."  As he was speaking, a thick
smoke rose from the afterpart of their antagonist, followed quickly by
bright flames, which darted upwards through the hatchway.  Directly
afterwards a fire burst out in the forepart of the ship, and raged with
a fury which it was clear the crew were incapable of overcoming.  Her
boats were lowered, and her people were seen dropping down into them
with a rapidity which showed that they had abandoned all hope of saving
their ship.  As they could no longer offer any resistance, Jack humanely
ordered his crew to refrain from firing on them.  He directed, however,
all his guns at the fort, for the purpose of silencing them before the
other vessels should come up to take a closer part in the action, which
he fully expected that they would do.

Though the damage he had received was considerable, there was nothing as
yet, he conceived, sufficiently serious to make him haul off.  Still he
could not help wishing to see the flag of the fort come down,
comparatively slight as was the damage he had received from its guns.
Having destroyed the vessel he had chased, he might without any
discredit haul off, considering the immense superiority of the force
opposed to him; but Jack Rogers was not a man to haul down his flag, or
get out of a fight, as long as he had a stick standing; and his spirit
animating his officers and crew, the _Tornado_ kept blazing away,
throwing shells into the fort, and firing shot, as he could bring his
guns to bear at the three steamers.  They had now, however, drawn
considerably nearer than they had hitherto ventured to approach, and
there seemed considerable likelihood of Dicky Duffs apprehensions being
fulfilled.

Jack now looked at the three vessels, now at the fort.  "It might be
done," he said, turning to Higson, "if the fort were stormed, and its
guns turned against the steamers."

"I would undertake it," said Higson; "but with its own garrison and the
crew of the vessel which has just been burnt, it would be a hard job."

"I would ask no one to lead it but myself," said Jack; "I will leave you
to fight the vessel in the meantime; should I be killed, I give you
orders to retire, for with a diminished crew you would have little
prospect of doing more than has already been accomplished."

"I do not advise you to command the expedition," said Higson; "you know
me, and that I am not likely to be stopped by any ordinary hazard."

Jack, without answering, still kept eyeing the shore, looking out for a
place where his boats might land.

"There's a steamer in the offing, sir, standing in for the bay," said
Archie, coming up to him.

"Another enemy," exclaimed Higson; "we shall have enough of them."

"We'll tackle them, notwithstanding," answered Jack; "they show no
inclination, however, to come to close quarters."

Another shot from the enemy struck the _Tornado_.

"The commander is just a little o'er brave," observed Dicky Duff to
Billy Blueblazes; "we've got terrible odds against us."

"He knows what he is about, and he'll manage to lick them all, one after
another, depend on that," said Billy.

"I don't exactly see how he's going to do that," said Dicky.  "If we
could but tackle one at a time it would be fairer, and we should have a
better chance of licking them."

"That's just what they don't want to give us," said Billy.

"Another steamer coming in from the southward, sir," said Archie, who
had been looking out.

"Friend or foe?" observed Jack to Higson; "if the latter, we must stand
out and meet her, and leave the three vessels in the bay till we can
come back and settle with them."

Still Jack showed no inclination to quit the neighbourhood of the fort,
into which shell after shell was thrown, till most of its guns had been
silenced.  Many an eye, however, was turned towards the approaching
strangers, till at length the first showed English colours.  A cheer
rose from those of the crew not engaged at the guns, the only sign they
gave of their desire for assistance.  In another minute the number of
the approaching steamer was made out, "She's the _Giaour_" exclaimed
Archie.

If Jack ever felt any inclination to be jealous of Murray it was now, as
he was his superior officer; but the feeling which arose in his breast
was speedily quelled.  The _Giaour_ came rapidly on; Murray signalised
to Jack, "Remain where you are, and I will attack the vessels in the
bay."  Jack ordered the signal to be made, "They will attempt to escape
up the river."

"Stand on and stop them," was the answer from the _Giaour_.

The _Tornado_ accordingly steamed on towards her three antagonists,
which now began to turn their heads, as Jack had expected they would,
towards the mouth of the river.  They were thus unable any longer to
fire at him, while he was still able to reach them with two of his guns,
one firing shot and the other shell.  The _Giaour_ now signalised,
"Steamer to the south, English."

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Tom; "we are now on equal terms, and can bag the
whole of them."

The three Russian vessels were still half a mile away from the mouth of
the river when Jack got off it, and by this time the _Giaour_ was near
enough to take a part in the engagement, her shot beginning to tell with
considerable effect on the nearest of the enemy.  The Russian vessels
now swept round, apparently with the intention of running across the
bay, firing their broadsides at the _Tornado_, but with little effect;
and she, in return, as they exposed their sterns in flight, kept up a
brisk fire at them with shot and shell.  One of them now burst into
flames, and in half a minute blew up, destroying the greater number of
her unhappy crew.

The other two, however, still continued on their course, hoping,
apparently, to get out of the bay ahead of the _Giaour_, not being
aware, it was evident, that another English ship was near at hand to cut
them off.  Jack, knowing that they must both be intercepted, made a
signal asking leave of Murray to pick up any of the Russians still
floating on the wreck of the steamer.  This request was at once granted;
and, lowering two of his boats, of one of which Tom took the command,
and of the other Ben Snatchblock, he again stood on in pursuit of the
two steamers.  They, however, had not got far when they made out a third
vessel coming to attack them, and finding that all hope of escape was
cut off, they both hauled down their colours.

Murray, who was nearest to them, at once sent a couple of boats to take
possession of the two prizes; while Jack stood back to pick up his
boats.  Of the whole of the Russian crew they had saved but six men, two
of whom were much burnt, and one died directly after he had been taken
on board the _Tornado_.  One of the survivors, a Finn, who, having
served on board English merchantmen, spoke English perfectly, informed
Jack that a considerable quantity of corn and other provisions were
stored in warehouses on the banks of the river, some way from its mouth.

"It is our duty to destroy them," said Jack to Higson.

"I will undertake to do it," was the answer.  An expedition was at once
planned, the command of which Jack, with Murray's approval, gave to
Higson; Archie was to accompany him, while Green and Tom were to go in
another boat.  The fort, however, still held out, and several of its
guns had again opened fire on the English vessels.  Murray determined to
take it by assault as soon as the approaching steamer had come into the
bay.  She now made her number; the bunting flying from her masthead
showed her to be the _Flash_.

"She can only lately have arrived in the Black Sea, and is probably on
her way to join the fleet, for she was only building when we left home,"
observed Jack.  "I wonder who commands her."

By the time the preparations for attacking the fort had been made the
_Flash_ had come close up to the _Giaour_.  A gig from the former was
seen to pull to the latter vessel; Murray now made a signal to Jack to
come on board; he was soon alongside the _Giaour_.  Stepping on deck,
who should he see with his hand extended to greet him but Terence Adair;
standing a little way behind him was Gerald Desmond.  Archie, who had
accompanied his commander, and Desmond were soon in eager conversation;
while Jack, at Murray's invitation, went below with Adair.  There was
only just time for Jack to hear that Terence's former ship, having
received some damage, had been sent home to be repaired, and that he in
the meantime had been appointed to the command of the _Flash_ destined
for the Black Sea.

"I was glad to get her," he observed; "for, judging from our first
year's experience in the Baltic, I suspected that we were not likely to
have much to do in that part of the world; first, because the Russians
showed no inclination to come out and fight us; and, secondly, because
Charley Napier--"

"Never mind the second reason," interrupted Murray; "here you are, and
very glad we are to see you; and now let me hear what you say to our
proposed attack on this fort."

"That I am perfectly ready to go in for it," answered Adair.  "How many
boats' crews do you require, or shall I send the whole of my ship's
company?"

"Two boats' crews will be sufficient, and the sooner you send them off
the better," replied Murray.

"In other words, you direct me to trundle on board as fast as I can,"
said Adair.  "I should like to lead the expedition myself, and as we
pull in I can take a sufficient survey of the fort for the purpose.  As
I have had no share in the glories of the campaign, you will not refuse
me?"

Murray willingly agreed to Adair's request, and two of the _Flash's_
boats being quickly manned, the three steamers stood towards the fort.
As they approached, they were received by a pretty hot fire, which they
returned, while still standing on, with shells from their guns; and,
running close in, they brought their broadsides to bear on the fort,
into which they forthwith poured a shower of shot and shell.  The boats
then cast off, and, led by Adair, pulled for a landing-place on one
side, from which a road led up apparently into the interior.  The ships
meantime kept up a furious bombardment on the fort; and though one gun
from it was brought to bear on the boats, none of them were hit.  Adair,
rapidly pulling for the shore, quickly landed, and without a moment's
loss of time led the way up the hill.  Every instant he expected to see
the enemy, but none appeared.  Turning to the right, and keeping under
cover of some rocks and trees, he made his way towards the fort.  Ben
Snatchblock had been provided with a red flag, which he exhibited at the
last point whence it could be seen from the ships; and it was calculated
that in three minutes more after this the party would reach the rear of
the fort.  Directly that time had elapsed, the ships were to cease
firing.

Adair and Higson led, followed closely by Ben, the two midshipmen being
ordered to bring up the rear.  Ben having showed his flag, the party
rushed on, and directly afterwards a shower of bullets whistled over the
spot where they had been; but by that time Tom and Archie were a dozen
yards ahead.  In less than three minutes they had reached the ditch in
the rear of the fort.  Not a Russian helmet was to be seen on that side;
Adair and Higson had to restrain the ardour of their followers, who were
eager to climb over the defences.  They waited till the last shot fired
from the ships came crashing into the fort; three or four seconds
passed, and no others came.  Adair began to count--"One, two, three,
four, five, six--now, my lads, you may come on!" he exclaimed; and he
and his party, springing forward, began, with the agility of cats, to
climb over the defences.

Not a Russian soldier could be seen except those who were labouring at
the guns, the rest of the garrison having wisely betaken themselves to
their bomb-proof chambers.  In consequence of the hot fire kept up by
the ships, they had not expected that the party they had seen landing
were about to attack them, and Terence and his men had actually jumped
down into the fort before the garrison had mustered in sufficient force
to resist them.  They were, of course, quickly seen; the bugle sounded,
and the troops rushed out of their bomb-proof chambers.  A considerable
body, headed by their commandant, at length drew up across the fort for
the purpose of impeding the progress of their daring assailants.

"On, lads, on!" cried Adair, seeing that their best chance of victory
was to attack the garrison before they had time to form into a compact
body.  They had indeed been completely taken by surprise, many having
hurried out without bayonets fixed, others with unloaded muskets, some
only with pikes or swords in their hands.  Ben Snatchblock had brought
an English ensign under his arm; keeping his eye on the flagstaff, he
directed his course, with a few companions, towards it.  As Adair and
Higson led on the main body, the garrison gave way, some hurrying off to
conceal themselves in the chambers from which they had just before
emerged, while others made for a gate in the rear of the fort leading to
the drawbridge, which was, however, up.  Before they could lower it,
Adair, with most of his men, was upon them, when, with a loud voice, he
ordered them not to touch the chains unless they wished to be cut to
pieces.

Meantime Ben and his companions were fighting their way towards the
flagstaff; a few men who were collected were quickly put to flight.

"Now, up goes the British ensign and the fort is ours," cried Ben; and,
suiting the action to the word, the Russian flag being hauled down, that
of England was hoisted in its stead.  The commandant, finding that the
fort had really been captured by the English, came forward with a low
bow, and presented the hilt of his sword to Adair, who took it in the
most gracious manner he could assume, observing as he did so, "You have
gallantly defended your fort, and deserve every consideration at our
hands; but at the same time I must warn you that I cannot allow any of
your garrison to escape from the fort.  After they have laid down their
arms, I will settle how they are to be treated."

The bugle on this sounded, and the garrison from all directions came out
and piled arms in the centre of the fort.  A few minutes afterwards, as
Terence stood on the ramparts, he observed Murray with a couple of boats
pulling to the shore.  Adair, thinking it prudent not to lower the
drawbridge, for fear any of the garrison might escape, called to Murray
and his party to make their way over the walls into the fortress.
Murray, having brought on shore some strong tackles, at once set to work
to dismount the guns for the purpose of carrying them off, while the
greater number of muskets, which were of no value, after being broken,
were hurled into the sea below the fort.  Murray highly approved of
Adair's proceedings; and the commandant was politely informed that he
and his garrison must be for the present content to remain prisoners
within their own fort.  He and his officers shrugged their shoulders,
and observed that it was the fortune of war; while the garrison seemed
very indifferent to the matter, probably very glad to have nothing to
do, and to run no risk of being shot by their enemies.

Murray, however, took the precaution of shutting them all up in the
bomb-proof chambers, to prevent them from running away, while at night a
bright look-out was kept from the ramparts on all sides, and all hands
ordered to be ready to turn out at a moment's notice, lest an attempt
might be made by any Russian force in the neighbourhood to recapture the
fort.  The commandant was allowed to occupy his own quarters, to which
he invited the English officers, who found a very welcome repast
prepared for them.  A remarkably pleasant evening was spent, and the
commandant, expressing a hope that the war would soon be over, invited
them, as soon as that happy event should occur, to his country-house,
which he told them was only a few miles off up the river.  They all
promised gladly to avail themselves of the invitation, should
circumstances allow them to do so.


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

AN EXPEDITION UP THE RIVER--ATTACK ON THE MAGAZINES--BURNING STOREHOUSES
AND VESSELS--HIGSON AND ARCHIE HAVE TO RUN FOR IT--PULL DOWN THE RIVER--
HIGSON AND TOM HAVE TO RECRUIT THE INNER MAN--RUSSIAN NIGHTINGALES--
HOSPITABLE RECEPTION--HIGSON SUCCUMBS TO BEAUTY--THE OLD TUTOR--PROVES
TO BE ONE OF GREEN'S FRIENDS--UNPLEASANT INTERRUPTION BY COSSACKS.

At early dawn the two boats, as had previously been arranged, shoved off
from the side of the _Tornado_, on the proposed expedition up the river,
for the purpose of destroying any Government stores or munitions of war
which could be discovered.

"It is lucky we didn't attempt to come in till we had silenced the
guns," observed Higson, pointing to the strong walls which frowned above
them, from which the guns had been removed.

The country on one side was level; on the other, hills, some of
considerable elevation, rose from the bank of the river, which twisted
and turned, forming several short reaches, and prevented those going up
from seeing to any considerable distance ahead.

"We must be prepared for anything that may happen," shouted Higson to
Green; "for what we know we may meet another steamer coming down to look
after her friends, or we may fall in with a troop of Cossacks or other
soldiers, who may give us a somewhat warm reception, if they suspect
what we are about."

"I suppose we shall board the steamer if she appears," said Green.

"Depend on that--and take her too," answered Higson; at which the men
laughed, as if they thought there was no doubt about the matter.  The
boats pulled on, passing some pretty-looking country-houses, surrounded
by gardens, and backed by orchards or vineyards planted on the hillside.

"A good style of country this to live in," observed Higson to Archie; "I
always have my eye on pleasant spots, and amuse myself with the idea
that I shall some day come and settle down there, when I have had enough
of a sea-life.  After knocking about for the best part of his days, a
fellow longs to find himself quietly settled on shore."

"But surely, Mr Higson, you wish to become post-captain, or an
admiral?" observed Archie.

"That is more than I ever shall be, youngster, unless I'm a yellow
admiral; indeed, I shall consider myself fortunate if I get made a
commander, and after serving a year or two am allowed to retire from the
service," said Higson.  "Now, that is a place to which I should have no
objection," he continued, as, having opened a fresh reach, he pointed to
a house of greater pretensions than those they had before seen.  "After
we have performed the work we have been sent on, when we come down we'll
look in there and request the inhabitants to provide us some dinner, for
I am very sharp set, as I daresay you are."

Of course Higson shouted to Green, telling him what he intended to do,
and, of course, the master and Tom very willingly agreed to his
proposal.  "We have, however, first our work to do," observed Higson;
"to burn a few granaries and stacks of wheat, and as many vessels as we
can fall in with; that won't take us long, however, if we meet with no
opposition, and if we do we must fight, and get the matter over as soon
as possible.  We must finish it, as Shakespeare says we should a
beefsteak."

"I don't think it's Shakespeare says that," observed Archie; "however,
there's no doubt that unless we can do it quickly, we may miss doing it
altogether, as those Cossack fellows who are in the neighbourhood will
be coming down and trying to cut us off."

"Well, as they can't charge into the river, they'll have a hard job to
do that," said Higson; "and when we land we must take care not to get
far from the boats.  It is to be hoped that Commander Adair will keep
the garrison shut up in their fort, and so the people up the country,
not knowing what has happened, will be unprepared for us."

As they pulled along the officers in the two boats kept a bright
look-out on either bank, and, not having seen any horsemen, were in
hopes that they might come suddenly upon the place they wished to reach,
if no peasantry saw them; or, if they saw them, as they had no flag
flying, the peasantry might easily mistake them for Russians, as they
would scarcely suppose that two English boats would have ventured up so
far from the protection of their ships.

The river rather narrowed as they proceeded, and they observed that the
banks were fringed with wide belts of rushes, so that, should they have
to run the gauntlet between foes on either bank, by keeping in the
centre they should be a good distance from both of them.  This was
satisfactory; for the bravest of men do not find it pleasant to be shot
at without the chance of getting at their enemies.  Still Higson hoped
that they should be able to accomplish their object, and make their
escape again without loss.  At length, having rounded a point over which
the masts of several vessels were visible, they saw before them several
long, high buildings, with a line of stacks in front of them, and a
collection of, apparently, private houses and cottages beyond, while in
front were between twenty and thirty vessels moored to the shore, and
lying so closely together that by setting fire to two or three the rest
must inevitably be burnt.

Without stopping the two boats pulled on, keeping close together, so
that Higson could give his directions to Green.  He ordered him to pull
up alongside the farthermost vessels, and to board and set them on fire
as quickly as possible; which beneficent work being accomplished, he was
to come back and join him on the shore in front of the storehouses and
stacks.  It could scarcely be supposed that so much property would be
left without protection; still no soldiers had been seen, and Higson
hoped that they might accomplish their object before any could come down
to oppose them.

"The truth is, I suspect," he observed to Archie, "the Russians have
depended on their fort at the mouth of the river, and it did not occur
to them that an enemy could force his way past it.  The steamers may
have been lying much nearer the entrance than this, and had not time to
communicate with the village before they came down to attack us; the
chances are that the people on the banks, who saw them go down, fancy
that they sent us long ago to the bottom, and have no idea that we have
taken their fort."

"They must have heard, however, the sound of the vessel blowing up,"
observed Archie.

"If they did, they may have thought it was one of ours," answered
Higson, who had made up his mind that all was to go smoothly.  The boats
soon got up to the place, when Green pulled away to perform his part of
the undertaking; while Higson steered for the shore.  As he did so, a
rattling fire of musketry was opened on him from behind a small fort, or
earthwork, which he had hitherto not perceived.  Probably the Russians
had only just then discovered that the approaching boats belonged to
their enemies.  Not a man, however, was hit, though several bullets
struck the boat; and the next instant she was alongside the wharf.
Higson, springing on shore, followed by Archie and most of his crew, two
only remaining to take care of the boat, made a dash at the earthwork;
from which the defenders, if so they could be called, rushed out as
their assailants leaped in.

"Don't follow them, lads," cried Higson; "small-arm men, just pepper
them and prevent them coming back.  And now we'll fire the storehouses."

The men had been provided with matches and torches, and more quickly
than it can be described they threw their burning brands into the open
windows of the storehouses, which the instant after were in a blaze from
one end to the other.  They then with equal rapidity lighting the huge
stacks close to the water's edge, they also were soon blazing away, with
a fury which would have defied all the attempts of the Russians, had any
appeared, to save them.  As the wind blew on the shore, the dense
volumes of smoke which were driven in the faces of those on the other
side completely concealed the perpetrators of the deed from their sight.

Green and Tom had, in the meantime, not been idle.  A slight opposition
only was made by the crew of the first vessel they boarded; finding it
useless to defend her, they made their escape across the intervening
craft to the shore.  The English then set fire in succession to all
those on the outside, the flames from which quickly caught the masts and
rigging of the rest; and before the master's boat rejoined Higson's,
every vessel was blazing away with a fury which secured the destruction
of the whole.  Higson, believing that the work was done, ordered Green
to follow him down the river; he, however, had only just got clear of
the line of burning stacks, when he perceived that another storehouse
standing a little farther back than the others had not as yet been set
on fire.

"We must not leave the work unfinished," he exclaimed.  "Come, Archie,
you and I and Tim Nolan will soon do the job;" and, springing on shore
with a torch which he had just lighted, followed by Archie and Tim, each
with a musket as well as a torch, he made his way towards the
storehouse.  As the party ran on they caught sight of several people in
the distance, and Archie thought he saw some horsemen with long lances;
but they believed that they could reach the building, and get back to
the boat, long before the latter could be down upon them.  As they
arrived at the storehouse, they found that the door was closed, and that
the windows were too high to enable them to throw in their torches.  A
piece of timber lay near at hand.

"We must make a battering-ram of this," cried Higson; "here, Gordon, you
and Tim lay hold of it on one side, and I'll take the other, and we'll
soon knock in the door."

The first blow failed in its intended effect.  "Now, lads, heave with a
will," cried Higson, and the door gave way.

Picking up their torches, as well as their muskets, which they had put
down to handle the battering-ram, they sprang in; and Higson, running to
the farther end, ignited some woodwork and a pile of sacks; while Tim,
leaping up a ladder, left his torch burning on the upper floor.  In a
few seconds Higson came back, and, throwing Archie's torch as far as he
could into the building, they all rushed out again.  As they were making
their way as fast as their legs could carry them to the boat, Archie,
turning his head over his right shoulder, saw the horsemen he had before
observed galloping at full speed towards them.

"Here come the Cossacks, Mr Higson," he shouted out.  "Run, Mr Higson,
run, while Tim and I keep them at bay."

Higson, having grown somewhat stout, was not as active as formerly; and
Archie knew that he and Tim could soon overtake him.  Higson, aware of
this, did as he was advised, while he shouted out to the rest of the
people in the boat to cover the two who remained behind.

"Oh, Mr Green, Archie and the man with him will be cut off if we don't
pull in and help them," cried Tom, who, just as the boat got clear of
the smoke, caught sight of the Cossacks.

Green on this pulled to the shore, and part of the two boats' crews
landing, just as the Cossacks got within twenty yards of Archie and Tim,
they opened fire, which emptied two of their saddles, and made the rest
of the troop wheel quickly round; while Archie and Tim, having also
fired their muskets, took to their heels and soon joined their
shipmates.

"Give way, my lads," cried Higson, as he once more took his seat; "we've
done the work effectually, and there's no use stopping to get fired at
as we pull down the river."

The dense volume of smoke which rose up from the bank of the river
completely concealed the Cossacks, and of course prevented them from
seeing the boats, which they possibly might have supposed were still
lying off the place, ready to commit other mischief.  Higson had
received orders, however, on no account to injure private property, and
he could only hope that the flames had not reached the buildings he had
seen beyond the storehouses.  Just as they got a little way beyond the
point there came the thundering sound of an explosion.

"That must be a magazine blown up," observed Tom.

"Perhaps one of the vessels has powder on board," said Green; "I think I
caught sight of some spars through the smoke, but they may have been
fragments of timber."

Just then there came another explosion as loud as the first, and
scarcely had its echoes died away among the hills on the left when a
third occurred.

"No doubt about it now," said Green; "some of the vessels we set on fire
must have been laden with powder."

"I hope no unfortunate people were on board them.  A pretty considerable
amount of mischief we have done this morning," said Tom; "but I suppose
it was our duty, so we mustn't think too much about it."

"Of course it was," answered Green; "if people will go to war, they must
take the consequences."

"But perhaps the people didn't want to go to war," said Tom; "it was all
their Emperor's doing."

"Then they ought not to live under such an Emperor," said Green.

"How can they help themselves?" asked Tom; "I daresay, if they had been
asked they would have preferred remaining at peace."

"I confess that I don't feel any animosity against them; I would much
rather be fighting the French; but they, by a sort of hocus-pocus, are
our allies," remarked Green.  "In reality we are not making war on the
Russian people; we are expressly ordered not to injure any of their
property; our business is only to destroy Government stores."

"Well, that's some comfort," said Tom, "though it may not always be easy
to distinguish one from the other."

This conversation took place as the boats were pulling away, as hard as
the men could lay their backs to the oars, down the river.  As yet they
had seen no Cossacks or foot-soldiers on either bank; possibly they
might have remained to try to put out the fire, or the nature of the
ground on the left bank, on which the stores were situated, prevented
them from making rapid progress over it.  As the boats had come up,
Green had observed an extensive marsh with a wide stream, which, unless
there was a bridge over it, would have alone proved an effectual barrier
to the progress of cavalry.  To the right, on which the houses had been
seen, were high and picturesque hills, some rising almost directly out
of the water, with fertile valleys, groves, orchards, and vineyards.
Had any number of armed men been in the neighbourhood, they might
greatly have annoyed the boats as they went down.  The tide, however,
was with them, and they made rapid progress.

They could still see a cloud of smoke collected over the stores and
vessels they had set on fire, which convinced them that any attempt
which might have been made by the soldiers to extinguish the flames must
have proved unsuccessful.  They were pulling along, as has been said, at
a rapid rate, when, in order to take the shortest course, they kept
close round a wooded point on the right bank, the current, which was
very strong, helping them along.  Scarcely had they rounded the point
when both boats struck with great force on a rocky ledge, the existence
of which had not been perceived.

"We have made a pretty big hole in our boat, sir," observed Archie.

"Why, the water's running in like a mill-stream!  Back all!" cried
Higson; "now pull round the port oars."

The men gave way with all their might.  Higson steered the boat to the
shore.  The water was almost up to their thwarts before they reached it;
they all leaped out on the bank, or she would have sunk with them.
Green's boat had also received considerable damage, and he, not without
difficulty, followed them.

"We are in a pretty plight," exclaimed Tom; "what are we to do now?"

"Repair the damages as fast as we can, and continue our course," said
Higson.

To do this, however, it was necessary to haul the boats up; as they were
full of water, this was a very difficult matter; they had to tow them
along for some distance to a convenient spot, where the bank, shelving
gently down, enabled them by degrees to get them up and bale the water
out.  Should the enemy find them while thus employed they would all be
taken prisoners; Higson felt considerable anxiety on this score, his
only consolation being that they might be exchanged for the commandant
and garrison of the fort.  By all working together they first hauled one
boat up and then the other.  Though the men got pretty wet in the
operation, Higson and Green and the midshipmen kept tolerably dry.

"I say, Archie, are you not very hungry?" said Tom.

"Yes," answered Archie; "Mr Higson said he would go up to one of the
houses on our way down, and try and get some food; I vote we ask him."

"He has probably forgotten all about it; I'll remind him," said Tom; "I
know what will make him as eager as we are for something to eat Mr
Higson," he said, going up to him, "don't you think, sir, it would be
pleasant if we had a dish of Irish stew, with a few bottles of porter to
discuss, while the boats are being put to rights?"

"What made you think of that, youngster?" asked Higson; licking his
lips, however, at the bare thoughts of his favourite dish.

"You told Gordon, sir, when you came up, that you thought of putting in
to try and get something to eat," answered Tom; "he and I are almost
starved; and I should think you and Mr Green and the men must be pretty
sharp set also.  Now would be a good opportunity, and Gordon says that
the cottage we saw a quarter of a mile or so off is the one which you
thought so pretty, and where you said you would like to spend the
remainder of your days."

"What business has he to be telling you what I said?" exclaimed Higson;
"I don't approve of you youngsters chattering about me."

"Of course not, sir," said Tom; "but it was the thought of the Irish
stew, or some other nice dish, which the good people of the house might
be inclined to set before us, made us propose asking you to let us go up
and try what we could get."

"Well, I have no objection to make an excursion to the house," said
Higson, "provided we can ascertain that the coast is clear, and I will
take one of you with me.  As you can talk French, I shall take you and
leave Gordon to assist the master."

"Thank you, sir," said Tom; "I am pretty sure that there are no Russians
in the neighbourhood, or they would have been down on us some time ago."

Before starting, however, Higson, accompanied by Tom, took the
precaution of climbing to the top of a hill, from whence they could look
up and across the river, and over a considerable part of the right bank.
Not a human being was visible moving anywhere, nor was a boat of any
description to be seen floating on the surface of the stream.  Had it
not been for the houses and the cultivated ground, they might have
supposed that they were in some wild country; the fact being, probably,
that the male part of the population had been drawn off either to
garrison the forts or to serve in the army, while the women were
attending to their household duties within doors.

Higson, directing Green to launch the boats as soon as they were
repaired, and to fire a musket should any enemy appear, and promising to
bring the party some food if he could obtain it, set off with Tom in the
direction of the country-house he had thought so attractive.  The first
part of their way was over wild ground, without any beaten track; but as
it was tolerably open, they were able to get along without difficulty.
At length they came upon a path which led apparently from the house to a
landing-place, near which a small, gaily-painted boat was hauled up, and
a boathouse, which they concluded contained a larger craft.

"Now, this looks as if the people in the house yonder are well to do,"
observed Higson, "and are likely to have a good store of provisions."

"That is of the chief consequence to us just now," said Tom; "shall we
go up to the front entrance and tell them our errand, or find out the
back door, and get a servant to go in and say what we want?"

"Go in at once and explain what we require," answered Higson.

While speaking they were making their way along the path they had
discovered.  In a short time they reached a small gate, and seeing the
roof of the house over the shrubbery, they concluded that by going
through the gate they could make a shorter cut through it.  As time was
of consequence, they accordingly proceeded on by the pathway which led
through the shrubbery, when, just as they were about to emerge from it,
they heard the sound of a female voice singing in an accomplished and
very sweet manner.  Higson put his hand on Tom's arm, and signed to him
to stop.

Those who have for many months been accustomed to the roar of guns, the
howling of the tempest, and the gruff voice of the boatswain, may
conceive what effect such dulcet notes were likely to produce on the
lieutenant and midshipman.  They stopped for some time listening with
delight.

"I would not for the world run the risk of frightening her, whoever she
is," said Higson, when at length the lady ceased singing; "if we go on,
we shall come directly in front of the room in which she is sitting; the
window is open, or we should not hear the sound so plainly.  We must try
and find some other way of approaching the house."

"If you will let me, sir, I'll creep forward and try to get a look
through the trees without being seen," said Tom, who was highly
delighted with the adventure, which promised, as he hoped, to be of a
romantic character.  He was more of an age to enjoy the sort of thing
than his lieutenant.  Higson, however, preferred looking for himself, as
he was, in reality, quite as much interested as Tom.  They could just
see that the path opened out on a gravel walk, which ran along the
well-kept, smooth lawn, with flower-beds dotted about on it.  Just at
this juncture they heard a childish laugh, and caught sight of a little
boy with a hat in his hand, running across the lawn in chase of a
butterfly, presently pursued by a young lady in a white muslin dress,
who, overtaking him, lifted him up in her arms, and was returning with
him to the window, from which she had apparently issued, when her eyes
fell on the two strangers.  She stopped and looked at them, without
exhibiting any particular sign of alarm, apparently wondering who they
could be and what had brought them there.

The little boy, however, uttered a loud cry, which produced a question
from another person who was yet invisible.  As they were now discovered,
they did the best thing that, under the circumstances, they could do.
Taking off their caps, they advanced with low bows, when they saw
another young lady who had just come through the Venetian window which
opened on to the lawn, under a broad verandah running along the side of
the house.

"Pray do not be frightened, young ladies," said Higson, bowing first to
one and then to the other; "we had no intention of intruding on you so
suddenly, and I beg you ten thousand pardons."

As neither of the ladies replied, Tom thought that they probably did not
understand English, and began repeating in French, as far as his
knowledge of the language enabled him, what his lieutenant had said.
The young lady who had just appeared at the window, and who was
evidently the elder of the two, smiled as she listened to Tom's bad
French.  "You have not alarmed us, I assure you," she answered at
length, in very good English.  "Gentlemen, I know, would not act
uncourteously.  I am surprised, however, at seeing you, as our two
nations are unhappily at war; but may I inquire whence you have come,
and what it is you want?"

Higson, of course, did not think it necessary to say that they had been
up the river burning the Russian granaries and vessels, and he merely
therefore explained that they had landed from some men-of-war's boats,
and, having come away without provisions, would be very much obliged if
they could be informed where they could obtain food for themselves and
their men.

"This seems very strange," said the young lady; "I thought that none of
the enemy's boats could come up the river past the fort at its entrance,
of which our papa is the commandant.  We heard a great deal of firing
yesterday evening, and were very anxious to know what it was about; but
were assured by Herr Groben, our brothers' tutor, that some English
vessels, which were attacking it, had been beaten off, and that no harm
could have happened to the defenders; indeed, three of our war-steamers
went out from the river, and we of course supposed assisted to put the
English to flight.  You have, I hope, therefore, come up with a flag of
truce?  Surely Herr Groben could not have been mistaken.  Can you give
us any tidings of our papa?"

"I am very glad to be able to assure you, young lady, that when I had
the pleasure of seeing him he was perfectly well, though somewhat vexed
at the loss of his fort, which we were under the painful necessity of
capturing, as also the man-of-war steamers which came out of the harbour
to assist him," answered Higson.

The young ladies spoke to each other for several minutes in Russian, so
that Higson and Tom could not understand what they said.

"Though we have no enmity against the English, you bring news which is
painful to us, as we know that our papa will grieve for the misfortune
which has happened to him," said the elder of the young ladies.  "We
are, however, obliged to you for informing us of his safety, and should
be glad to do our best to supply your wants."

Higson and Tom had been all this time standing with their caps in their
hands, in front of the window.  While the lieutenant was addressing the
eldest of the two ladies, Tom was turning an admiring glance at the
youngest, who still held the little boy in her arms, while he had thrown
his round her neck, and was every now and then taking an alarmed look at
the strangers.

"I am afraid that he is frightened at us," said Tom.  "I must really
apologise for our intrusion; I can assure you that it was not
intentional, and we should have retired at once had we not stopped to
listen to some delightful singing.  Was it you or your sister we heard?"

"It was my sister; but we both sing," answered the young lady, "and we
shall be very happy to sing to you by and by if you wish it."

Of course Tom thanked her very much, and felt quite at home in a minute.
The elder sister then invited them to come in and sit down, while she
ordered some supper to be prepared for them and their men.  While she
was absent, and the younger lady was sitting with the little boy in her
lap, doing her best to entertain them, the door opened, and an old
gentleman, in a sky-blue suit, with a periwig on his head, entered the
room, making a profound bow as he did so.  The young lady introduced him
as Herr Groben.  He probably had heard about the English officers from
the elder sister, for he looked in no way surprised, and, at once coming
forward, welcomed them with apparent sincerity.  He made no remark about
the capture of the fort or vessels; perhaps he thought it better to let
the subject alone.  On hearing that the party at the boats were in want
of provisions, he at once volunteered to carry down a supply as soon as
it could be got ready.  Higson, who thought him a very agreeable person,
at once accepted his offer; for he himself had been so much struck by
the appearance of the elder of the young ladies, and by her sweet
singing, that he was in no hurry to go away.

Herr Groben said he must apologise for the absence of the lady of the
house, Madame Paskiewich being unable to make her appearance, as she was
confined to her room by a slight indisposition; but she sent her
compliments, expressing a hope that they would be satisfied with the
treatment they might receive during the time they might think fit to
remain.  Higson, not to be outdone in politeness, begged to assure
Madame Paskiewich that he was grateful for the kind reception he had met
with, and should be happy to be the bearer of any message or more
weighty articles which she might wish to send to her husband.  On the
return of Mademoiselle Paskiewich, who had gone to order supper and to
superintend the packing of some baskets of provisions, Herr Groben made
his bow, and was shortly afterwards seen crossing the lawn, followed by
two long-shirted servants carrying a couple of hampers slung on a pole
borne on their shoulders.

Tom had asked the young lady her name, which she told him was
Feodorowna.  "My eldest sister's," she added, "is Ivanowna.  And have
you any sisters?" she asked.  Upon which Tom told her all about his
family, and that he had several brothers, one of whom commanded the ship
to which he belonged, and that another was in the Guards; all of which
pieces of information considerably raised him in the young lady's
estimation.  He wisely thought it better to say nothing about Higson,
except that he was the first lieutenant of his brother's ship.  While
supper was being prepared, Ivanowna, observing that the English officers
were good enough to be pleased with her singing, went to the piano and
sang several songs, with which Higson expressed himself highly
delighted.  Every moment his admiration of the young lady evidently
increased.  She was not, it must be acknowledged, possessed of what
could be called classical beauty; she was fair, certainly, with blue
eyes, but they were rather small; while her figure was too short and
round to be graceful, and her nose differed considerably from that of
the Venus de Medicis; but then she had smiling lips, and a good-natured
expression altogether.

Her younger sister, Feodorowna, who was scarcely fifteen, was certainly
very much prettier; indeed, Tom was inclined to pronounce her perfectly
beautiful, and he was still more delighted with her when she sang,
though her voice was not equal to that of her sister.

Supper being announced, they went into the dining-room without waiting
for the return of Herr Groben.  His two pupils, boys younger than
Feodorowna, however, made their appearance.  They reported that they had
gone down to the boats, and had seen Herr Groben shaking hands with the
officer in command, having apparently found an old friend.

"That is not surprising," observed Higson; "our master, Jos Green, finds
old friends everywhere, and I believe that if he were to go to the North
Pole he would fall in with an acquaintance."

Higson and Tom had been now nearly two hours at the house, and it was
high time that they should be off; but neither of them felt any
inclination to quit such agreeable society.  Still, Higson was too good
an officer to forget his duty, and he at length told Tom that it was
time to go; and they were on the point of wishing their fair hostesses
good-bye, Higson promising with perfect sincerity that, if able, when
the war was over, he would come back; and Tom, with equal honesty,
saying much the same thing, when they saw Herr Groben hurrying across
the lawn towards the drawing-room window, and panting for breath.

"I am sorry to say, gentlemen, that I bring you unsatisfactory
intelligence," exclaimed Herr Groben.  "As I was sitting on the point,
enjoying my meerschaum with my old friend Green, I caught sight of a
number of foot-soldiers and a troop of Cossacks, who had come over the
hills farther down the river, and who, it was very evident from their
gestures, had caught sight of the boats hauled up on the bank, and the
English seamen around them.  I advised Green to launch the boats, and to
come round to the landing-place near the house to receive you on board.
There is not a moment to be lost, for they outnumber your people as five
to one, and can find plenty of shelter; and were they to discover you on
shore, they would make you prisoners."

Higson and Tom smiled.  "They are not likely to do that," answered
Higson; "though we are very much obliged to you for your warning, and
most unwillingly we must wish our kind hostesses good-bye."

"Oh, do go! do go!" cried both the young ladies in a breath; "we should
deeply regret if you were to be made prisoners, and grieved still more
were you compelled to fight the Cossacks."

"We must first thank you for your kindness, which, believe me, we shall
never forget," said Higson, who, supposing that the Cossacks were still
at a distance, did not feel that there was any necessity to be in a
hurry.  Tom was thanking Feodorowna in still more sentimental language,
when the old tutor seized their arms.

"Come down, come!" he exclaimed; "even now I am afraid that you are too
late.  I hear the hoofs of the Cossacks' horses clattering along the
road, and they will catch sight of you before you can reach the
landing-place."

As he spoke, he went round to the front of the house, and quickly came
back again.

"It is as I feared," he exclaimed; "your retreat is cut off, and if the
boats come in to take you on board, they will to a certainty be fired
on.  I must go and warn them, and leave you to the care of the ladies."

"But if you can go, so can we," said Higson, preparing to accompany Herr
Groben.

"Oh no, no! they will recognise you at once from your uniforms; but they
will not suspect my object.  Besides, you will have to show yourself,"
said Herr Groben, "as you try to get on board; but I can remain
concealed, while I warn your friends to keep off the shore."

Higson and Tom still persevered in their intention of making their way
down to the landing-place, and were on the point of hurrying off, when
the young ladies seized their hands and entreated them, with tears in
their eyes, to remain.

"You will both of you be shot, for you will have to pass within a dozen
yards of the spot the Cossacks have reached, and it would be so dreadful
to have you killed.  Do stay, and we can easily conceal you till they
have gone away, for they dare not search this house; indeed, they will
not suspect that English officers are within it."

As the young ladies spoke, they led Higson and Tom to a side window,
from whence they could see a troop of Cossacks, followed by a
considerable number of foot-soldiers, passing along the road a short
distance off beyond the garden.  There could thus be no doubt that their
retreat was cut off.

"You are perfectly safe here," said Ivanowna; "though, as a protection,
we will shut the windows leading into the garden.  I have great hopes
that Herr Groben will reach the boat in time to warn your friends, so as
to prevent bloodshed, which is our great object; there has been too much
spilt already in a bad cause.  We could not sympathise with those who
are guilty of the massacre of Sinope, and we believe that this cruel war
was unnecessary.  It may seem strange to you that I should thus express
myself," she continued, observing Higson's look of surprise; "but our
mother is half an Englishwoman, and we have been taught to regard the
English with affection."

"I am very glad to hear it," said Higson, a strange feeling taking
possession of his heart; indeed, he was much inclined to ask whether she
could regard an Englishman with affection, but he wisely forbore to put
the question.  He, indeed, just then had his thoughts occupied about the
boats.  "Could you allow us to go to a window from whence we could watch
what is going forward on the river?" he asked.  "I am afraid that my
friends may be tempted to remain, in the hopes of receiving us on board,
till the Cossacks are down upon them."

"Not if Herr Groben succeeds in carrying out his intention," she
answered.  "But come with us to a room in the second storey, and from
thence you will have a view of the river, and be able to watch the
progress of the boats.  It is our boudoir, but under the circumstances
we will venture to admit you."

Higson and Tom assured the young ladies that they very much appreciated
the confidence placed in them, and forthwith accompanied them upstairs.
Just as they entered the room, which they had time to see was prettily
ornamented with pictures on the walls, an easel, ladies' embroidery
frames, and numerous other elegant articles, the loud rattle of musketry
reached their ears.  The young ladies uttered a cry of alarm.

"Pray do not be over-anxious about the matter," said Higson;
"musket-balls do not always reach the object they are aimed at, and it
does not follow that any harm is done."

As he and Tom and the young ladies looked out of the window, cautiously
keeping concealed behind the curtains, they saw a party of Cossacks on
the landing-place, and some foot-soldiers under shelter of a wall.  The
two boats, a hundred yards off or more, were pulling away out towards
the middle of the river.

"Herr Groben has had time to warn them," said Higson; "and as far as I
can judge, by the way the men are rowing, no one has been hit.  We are
deeply indebted to him, ladies, and to you also; and I have no doubt
that when Green supposes that the Cossacks have retired, he will come
back and relieve you of our company."

"Oh, do not say that," observed Ivanowna, "we shall be sorry to lose
you; and I am sure we shall have done what our papa would wish by
treating you with hospitality."

Higson and Tom watched the progress of the boats with interest; they
somewhat expected that Green would lie on his oars and wait till the
Cossacks had gone away.  Perhaps he might have thought that they were
already made prisoners and that there would be no use in doing this; at
all events, he continued his course down the river, till the boats were
lost to sight in the distance.  The Cossacks, disappointed in their hope
of surprising the English, turned their horses' heads round, followed by
the foot-soldiers, and marched back the way they had come, without even
visiting the house.

The young ladies seemed highly pleased.  "We are perfectly safe now,"
observed Ivanowna; "but to prevent surprise, we will send our young
brothers to keep watch, and bring us notice should any of the officers
take it into their heads to pay us a visit.  They can be thoroughly
trusted."

Soon afterwards they heard Herr Groben's cheery voice in the passage.
"All right," he exclaimed; "I had time to warn Green, though I was
nearly caught, I must confess; but the horsemen did not get as fast over
the rough ground as I did.  I fear, however, that Green did not
understand that you were in safe keeping, and may possibly conceive that
you have been made prisoners; though he will know that you are not
likely to be ill-treated."

"I am sure that he must have thought that, or he would not have pulled
away," said Higson.  "However, we have no cause to complain; my only
fear is that we shall be trespassing on the hospitality of this kind
family."

"On that point I can answer with confidence that you are welcome," said
Herr Groben; "they are all, as I am, devoted admirers of the English; I
have great cause to be so, and especially have I reason to be grateful
to my dear friend Green.  You will be curious to know how I became
acquainted with him; it happened in this wise.  Many years ago I was
making a voyage, when my ship caught fire, and I--with the officers and
crew--escaped in three of the boats.  The other boats were lost; and
after several of my companions had died of hunger, we were picked up by
a ship to which Green belonged.  All the officers and crew treated us
with kindness; Green especially took care of me, and pressed on me the
use of his purse when we arrived in England, where I was also treated
with great kindness.  Such conduct can never be forgotten, and I have
ever endeavoured to imbue the hearts of my pupils with a love for
England, and for everything English."

"We are very much obliged to you and Green," said Higson, "since we have
benefited so largely by your instructions."

As there was no longer any danger, Higson proposed going back into the
drawing-room.  The young ladies, however, first showed him and Tom their
drawings and embroidery, and numerous other samples of their handiwork,
which passed the time very agreeably.  When they went downstairs, they
found a huge samovar bubbling and hissing on the table, and such tea was
offered them as they had never before tasted.  Higson, indeed, in
compliment to his hostess, begged to have his cup replenished again and
again, till he had drunk six or eight cups-full; though, to be sure,
they were not of any unusual size.  Herr Groben undertook to take charge
of Higson and Tom for the night, and to give them due warning should
there be any danger of their being discovered, though he thought that
this was not likely; still, he acknowledged that there were some persons
who might prove treacherous should they hear of English officers being
in the house; and he begged them on no account to make their appearance
out of doors without him, a caution which they promised to observe.


CHAPTER TWENTY.

GREEN RETURNS WITHOUT HIGSON AND TOM--JACK GOES IN SEARCH OF THEM--
COLONEL PASKIEWICH'S HOUSE--HIGSON AND TOM CAPTURED BY COSSACKS--TOM'S
ESCAPE--MISS FEODOROWNA'S JOY--THE FORT BLOWN UP--THE MOSQUITO FLEET--
GALLANT EXPLOIT OF CAPTAIN LYONS--JACK HEADS EXPEDITION INLAND--ESCAPE.

Murray and Rogers had been employed during the day in removing the guns
from the fort, while Adair and his party watched over the prisoners.  It
was their intention to blow it up, but they were unwilling to do this
until the return of the boats.  Evening was approaching, and as they had
not yet made their appearance, Jack became somewhat anxious as to what
might have happened to them.  The smoke rising from the conflagration of
the stores and vessels could be discerned in the far distance, so that
it was evident that they had accomplished their work; but it was
possible that some disaster might afterwards have happened to them.
Jack accordingly went on board the _Giaour_ to consult with Murray, who
agreed to send up a couple of his boats at daybreak the next morning to
search for those under Higson, and to negotiate for his and his party's
release, should they have been taken prisoners.  Jack begged that he
might lead the expedition himself, to which Murray willingly agreed.

Darkness had for some time set in, and still the missing boats had not
appeared; as Jack, whose anxiety had increased, was walking the deck
with Mildmay, the splash of oars was heard.  The sentry hailed, and
Green's voice replied; the boats were soon alongside, both of them half
full of water.

"Where are the first lieutenant and Mr Rogers?" asked Jack.

"I am afraid, sir, that they are in the hands of the Russians;" and
Green gave an account of what had happened, adding, "Had it not been for
an old friend of mine, who warned us of the approach of the troops, we
should ourselves have been over powered, or at all events have had a
pretty hard tussle for it."

Green took care not to throw any blame upon Higson, who might have been
accused of acting imprudently, if not of neglecting his duty, by
remaining longer than was necessary at the house which he had visited to
obtain provisions.  Having heard Green's report, Jack again went on
board the _Giaour_, and as some time would be required to repair his own
boats, Murray arranged, as he had before promised, to send two of his
half an hour before daylight, so that they might enter the river as soon
as they could see their way.

Just as the ruddy streaks of dawn appeared in the sky, Jack shoved off
from the _Tornado's_ side.  He took Green with him to pilot the boats,
and also to communicate with the old German tutor, through whom he might
be able to learn what had become of the prisoners.  He carried also a
flag of truce, in the hopes of gaining his object by pacific measures.
As the boats passed under the walls of the fort, they were hailed by the
sentry on the ramparts, by whose side Gerald Desmond directly afterwards
made his appearance.  Jack told him to inform Commander Adair where they
were going, and that he hoped to be back again in the course of a few
hours.

"The Russian commandant, sir, wishes to send a letter to his family to
inform them of his safety, and he will be obliged to you if you will
convey it."

"That is more than I can undertake to do," answered Jack; "but inform
the commandant that if he will let me know where his family reside, I
shall be happy to give them any message he may send."

Gerald disappeared, and quickly afterwards returned with the commandant
and Adair.  The commandant, in surprisingly good English, described his
residence to Jack, and requested that he would tell his wife and
daughters that he was well, and, as he was to be liberated on his
parole, that he hoped to remain with them till the end of the war.

"This information will be more satisfactory to them, probably, than had
I gained a great victory," he added; "so that they will be ready to
receive you as friends rather than as enemies."

"I shall be happy to deliver your message, colonel," answered Jack; "and
regret that I am unable to carry a written communication."

A few further compliments having been exchanged, Jack ordered his men to
give way, and the boats proceeded up the river.

"Why, sir, that house must be the very one which Mr Higson and your
brother visited," said Green; "unless the Cossacks have carried them off
to a distance, they may, I hope, be easily recovered."

"That is satisfactory," said Jack; "whether we recover them or not, we
must be away from this early to-day, as there is work to be done in
other places."

The boats pulled on some way, when they caught sight of a vessel
stealing along on the opposite shore towards the mouth of the river.
Jack immediately steered for her, ordering Archie to pull ahead, so as
to cut her off should she attempt to slip by them.  On seeing them
approach, however, the Russian skipper immediately hauled down his
colours.

Jack found, on stepping on board, that the Russian skipper was not aware
that the English vessels were still off the mouth of the river, and had
expected to get clear; he said that his was the only vessel that had not
been burnt.

"Sorry to have to condemn yours to the fate you have escaped," said
Jack.

"It is the fortune of war," answered the skipper, shrugging his
shoulders; "I only wish the war had come to an end."

The operation did not take long; the unfortunate skipper and his crew
were landed, to make their way home as best they could; when the vessel,
being set on fire, drifted on to the bank, where she quickly burnt to
the water's edge.  Jack then pulled on, and in a short time the boats
reached the landing-place near the colonel's house, which Green pointed
out.  Having, as far as they could from the water, examined the ground
before them, they came to the conclusion that no enemy was in the
neighbourhood.  Green, who felt that some blame might have been attached
to him for deserting his commanding officer, volunteered to proceed by
himself to the house to ascertain how matters stood.  He assured Jack
that he could trust Herr Groben, who would give him warning should the
enemy be near.  Jack agreed to this, and Green set off.

In a short time he was seen returning to the boat, accompanied by the
old German tutor, who, as he approached, appeared to be much agitated.

"Bad news, sir," said Green, as he came up to Jack; "the Cossacks have
got hold of Higson and your brother."

"It was dere fault, it was dere fault," broke in the old tutor; "dey
would go out walking vid de young ladies when I warned dem not to go,
and a troop of Cossacks came galloping up to dem, and carry dem both
off.  It almost break de young ladies' heart, and dey have not done
crying yet."

"Then they must be still in the neighbourhood!" exclaimed Jack, "and we
may be in time to overtake them."

"Oh no, captain," answered Herr Groben; "I fear not, for dey mount upon
two horses and gallop away."

"At all events, if you can supply us with a guide to show us the way
they have taken, we will pursue them," said Jack.

"Perhaps one of my pupil vill go, for dere moder, Matame Paskievich, is
very unhappy at the thoughts the officers were made prisoner, as she
consider that they were under her protection; and as dey come as
friends, dey should be allowed to go away as friends."

As there was no time to be lost, Jack, ordering Green to remain, with a
couple of men in each boat, set off, accompanied by Archie and Herr
Groben, who promised to find him a trustworthy guide, though he showed
no inclination to go himself.  The name of Paskiewich had struck Jack,
and, on making inquiries from the old tutor, he found that the owner of
the house was the commandant of the fort.

"I think, sir," observed Archie, who was walking by his side, "if that
is the case, we shall be able to exchange the colonel for Mr Higson and
Tom."

"I would rather get them back without having to do that," said Jack;
"the colonel is to be liberated on his parole; but, should we find it
necessary, we shall be able, as a last resource, to recover them as you
propose."

On arriving at the house they were met by Madame Paskiewich and her two
daughters.  Jack, fortunately recollecting the colonel's message,
delivered it to his wife, who expressed herself very grateful for the
kind treatment he had received, and assured them how grieved she was
that, notwithstanding all her precautions, the Cossacks had captured the
two officers.  Jack, in reply, expressed his conviction that it was from
no fault of theirs, and comforted them greatly by telling them that
probably in the course of the day the colonel would be enabled to return
to them.

On hearing of their want of a guide, Madame Paskiewich at once consented
to allow her eldest boy to show them the way the Cossacks had gone,
though she believed that by this time they were far beyond pursuit Herr
Groben's pupils soon made their appearance, and the eldest, Ivan, who
spoke English very well, without hesitation undertook to guide them, and
to make inquiries on the way as to where any troops were stationed, so
as to prevent them from being surprised.  Jack, though perfectly
sensible of the risk he ran, resolved to persevere; and, accompanied by
young Ivan, at once set off at the head of his party, who, as they were
well armed, had no fear of the result should they meet three times their
number.

They had gone some distance, when Jack learned, from Ivan's inquiries,
that the Cossacks were already a long way ahead; he at length began to
despair of recovering his first lieutenant or Tom; he felt, too, the
imprudence of advancing farther into the enemy's country, when, before
he could secure his retreat, the foe might gather between him and the
boats.  He was at last obliged unwillingly to confess that he must give
up the pursuit.

"I am very sorry for it, sir," said their guide; "the English midshipman
and I had become great friends; and though I don't think he will be
treated ill, yet he will not like to be kept away from his ship.
However, when my father returns, I promise to do my best to get him set
at liberty."

"Thank you," answered Jack warmly; "I will trust you."

He now gave the order to his men to face about, and they began to
retrace their steps.  They had gone but a short distance, when the loud
clattering of hoofs struck on their ears, and, looking round, they
caught sight of a horseman galloping towards them at headlong speed.

"Hurrah! that's Tom himself!" cried Archie; and Tom appeared from amid a
cloud of dust, riding as he had done many a day after the hounds in --
shire.  He was within hailing distance, when a couple of hundred yards
or so behind him were seen a number of Cossacks in hot pursuit.  Jack
ordered his men to fix bayonets, to be prepared to receive cavalry.  As
Tom came galloping along, they opened to let him pass, when, not without
some difficulty, he pulled up at their rear.

"I've done them!" he exclaimed; "I was sure you would come to look for
me, though I little expected to find you so near at hand."

The Cossacks, of whom there were scarcely more than a dozen, and who had
by this time got within a hundred yards of them, on seeing the resolute
bearing of the British sailors, pulled up, and, after a moment's
hesitation, wheeling round their horses, galloped off, followed by a
shower of bullets.

"The only thing you have done wrong was to fire without my orders!"
exclaimed Jack; "reload, and now right-about face and march--double
quick time."  The party, without a moment's delay, hurried back on the
road they had come.

"I'm afraid Mr Higson's in for it," said Tom.  "The Cossacks had halted
for breakfast, when the thought came into my head that we might make our
escape while the men were all dismounted, and eating some horrid mess or
other, their horses being picketed some distance from them.  I did my
best to persuade him to come too, but he never was much of a horseman,
and declared that he could not do it; though he told me to take my
chance, and that he would try and prevent anyone from following me.  I
had already fixed my eyes on a horse.  While the men were all engaged, I
sauntered up to where their steeds were tethered, and, before anyone had
observed me, I set a dozen or more of them at liberty, when, finding
that the men suspected what I was about, I leaped on the back of the one
I had fixed on, and, giving a loud shout, galloped off as fast as the
wind, with a troop of riderless horses scampering at my heels.  I had
got a fine start, and intended to keep it, and it was not till just
before I caught sight of you that I knew I was pursued; still even then
I did not give up all hopes of escaping, though I little knew how near
help was at hand; I only wish Mr Higson had followed my advice."

As Jack had no wish to encounter the Cossacks, who were certainly not
likely to bring Higson with them, he hurried on his men, and at length
reached Colonel Paskiewich's house.  The fair Feodorowna, in an artless
manner, showed her pleasure at seeing Tom in safety; while Ivanowna
could not restrain her tears on hearing that the lieutenant was still a
prisoner.

As Jack considered it his duty not to delay a moment longer than was
necessary, he was compelled to decline Madame Paskiewich's invitation to
remain for breakfast, and, accompanied by Herr Groben, who wished to bid
farewell to Green, he hurried to the boats.  In a few minutes they were
again pulling down towards the mouth of the river.

On arriving at the fort, Jack found that all the necessary preparations
had been made for its evacuation.  Colonel Paskiewich and his officers
were liberated on their parole not to serve again during the war, while
the men were transferred to the _Flash_, to be conveyed on board some of
the larger ships of the fleet.

"I'll do my best to obtain the liberation of your first lieutenant,"
said the colonel to Jack, as he bade him farewell.

"We might arrange for exchanging you with him," observed Jack.

"Thank you, but I would rather not," answered the colonel significantly;
"I should then be compelled again to fight in this detestable war,
whereas at present I may remain as a non-combatant with my family; which
I confess--though mention it not, my friend--much better suits my
principles and taste."

"You are a brave man, and defended your fort gallantly," observed Jack.

"That was my duty," answered the colonel; "a man, I hold, may be
physically brave, and yet abhor fighting.  As long as it was my duty to
fight, I fought; I can now with honour sheathe my sword, in the earnest
hope that I may never again have to draw it, especially against
Englishmen.  There are many of my countrymen, who, I doubt not, feel as
I do.  Good-bye, my friend; may we meet again in happier times!"

Jack accompanied the colonel out of the fort, and, as soon as the last
Russian had taken his departure, Jack fired the trains which had been
laid to the mines in different parts of the fort, and, leaping into his
boat, pulled away towards the _Tornado_.  Before the boat had got
half-way, the first explosion was heard, the stout walls trembling and
shaking, while clouds of dust and smoke, and fragments of stone and
timber rose in the air; and in a few seconds the spot where the fort had
stood presented a mass of shapeless ruins.

"We've done for the fort, at all events," observed Tom; "I hope that
before long our army will treat Sebastopol in the same way."

"I wish they were likely to do it at so slight a cost," said Jack, as he
thought of Sidney, from whom he had not heard for some time; for he knew
what sorrow his loss would cause to his family at Halliburton.

The three commanders, having delivered over their prizes to the admiral,
proceeded to carry out their instructions, in conjunction with the
Mosquito fleet, engaged in the destruction of the vast magazines of corn
and other provisions accumulated at numerous places on the shores of the
Sea of Azov, as well as the fleets of vessels loaded with supplies for
the Russian army in the Crimea.

"It seems to me a wanton destruction of property," observed Jack when he
first received his orders.

Murray, to whom he spoke, smiled.  "Sagacious commanders have to take
into consideration the appetites of their men, as well as those of the
enemy, quite as much as their battlefields and the weapons they use," he
observed; "if we can cut off the supplies of the garrison of Sebastopol,
we shall render as effectual service as the guns of the besiegers, and
quickly bring the war to a conclusion."

"Then I'll set about it with all my heart!" exclaimed Jack; "though I
wish, instead of burning the wheat, we could ship it off to our people
at home."

"That would prove a somewhat too long operation," observed Murray; "and
if we remember that every stack we burn will perhaps shorten the war by
as many hours, any scruples we may feel on the subject will soon
vanish."

Jack and his brother commanders, remembering this, set energetically to
work to perform what would have been otherwise a very disagreeable duty.
The gallant Lyons, who in the _Miranda_ had been some days in the Sea
of Azov, had already inflicted immense damage on the enemy; on his
arrival off Genitchesk at the entrance of the Putrid Sea, he found a
large fleet of merchantmen at anchor, protected by a strong force of
infantry and a battery of field-pieces on the mainland.  On sending in
to summon the flotilla to surrender, his demand being refused, he
despatched his boats under the command of his first lieutenant,
Mackenzie, through the strait, covering their advance with a heavy fire
of shell on the town and troops.  In spite of all opposition, thus
protected, the brave lieutenant set fire to seventy-three vessels and
several corn-magazines.  On returning to their ship, the party
discovered that some of the vessels had escaped the conflagration; on
this, Captain Lyons despatched a second expedition with three other
officers, Lieutenants Buckley and Burgoyne, and Mr Roberts, a gunner of
the _Ardent_.  On approaching the shore, and discovering that the enemy
were prepared to give them a warm reception, the three latter officers
determined to land by themselves, so that their men might escape the
risk of being cut off; while Mackenzie undertook the destruction of the
shipping.  The vessels were quickly set on fire, and the magazines had
shared the same fate, when a troop of Cossacks bore down on the three
officers who had landed.  They, accordingly, had to take to their heels;
and, keeping well ahead of their pursuers, were received in safety by
Mackenzie on board the boats, which pulled back to the ships without the
loss of a single man, one only having been slightly wounded.

Thus he went on from place to place, destroying stores and vessels in
the same daring manner, his two lieutenants frequently landing in a
four-oared gig, and setting fire with their own hands to different
Government buildings.  Taganrog, a place of great strength, was
attacked, and though the town was protected by some heavy batteries, and
above three thousand troops, who kept up a hot fire on the ships and
boats, every Government building and magazine was destroyed.  In this
way Captain Lyons sank or burnt upwards of two hundred and fifty vessels
laden with supplies and provisions and stores, to the value of many
thousands of pounds, and at the present juncture of immense importance
to the Russian army and the beleaguered city.  His brave career was,
however, drawing to a close; rejoining the squadron off Sebastopol, at
the end of a fortnight, he was shortly afterwards struck by a shell,
while running into harbour at night to annoy the enemy, and in a few
days breathed his last at the hospital at Therapia, to which he had been
removed.

He was succeeded in the command of the squadron by Captain Sherard
Osborne, an officer of equal determination, courage, and sagacity, who
was not likely to leave any of the work he had undertaken undone, or
half-done.  Our three commanders proceeded in the same spirit to the
execution of their duty.  On revisiting several places where a few weeks
before they had destroyed all the then existing supplies, they found
that the Russians, supposing they would not return, had rebuilt their
storehouses, and completely replenished them, giving a proof of the
productive power of the neighbouring districts.  All the work before
them was not, however, accomplished with the same ease; hitherto they
had had only to dash boldly on shore, protected by the guns of the
ships, set fire to the stores, and to be off again as fast as they
could.  Spies were not wanting, who brought them information of the
position of stores; from one of these men, Jack, who was stationed off
the spit which separates the Putrid Sea from the Sea of Azov, gained
intelligence that some large stores, situated on the Crimean shore, had
lately been replenished, and that the grain was only waiting the means
of transport to be removed to Sebastopol.

Jack asked the spy whether he would lead a party to the spot; this,
however, he declined, but gave so exact a description of the country,
that Jack felt convinced that he could find it out without the man's
aid.  Plenty of volunteers were ready to go; but having, as he said, got
every inch of the way into his head, he determined to lead the
expedition.  He did not, however, hide from himself the dangers to be
encountered.  "If I destroy these stores, the siege may be shortened by
one or two days, or it may be more, and the lives of several of my
fellow-creatures saved; then it is my duty to go."

Had Higson been on board, he might have entrusted the expedition to him;
Green would be very likely to carry it out; but he feared that Mildmay
would fail.  He had perfect confidence that Tom would obey his orders;
he accordingly fixed on him, with Dick Needham and Jerry Bird, in
addition to his gig's usual crew.  Standing in at nightfall as close to
the spit as the water would allow, he pulled on shore.  The boat had now
to be dragged across the sands, and launched on the opposite side.  He
and all hands uniting their strength, accomplished it, however, and away
they pulled with muffled oars across the Putrid Sea.  A mist lay on the
placid water, which would have shrouded them from the view of any boats
which might have been passing, even at a hundred yards' distance.  Not a
word was spoken above a whisper; it was impossible to see the shore, and
difficult to know when they might come upon it; indeed, had not the boat
been provided with a compass, the commander would have been unable to
steer a direct course.

The men gave way with a will, as the success of the expedition depended
on the rapidity with which it was carried out.  On a sudden, as Jack
fancied they were still a considerable way from the shore, he felt the
boat's keel passing over a soft bottom; directly afterwards she remained
fixed.  In vain the men pulled away with might and main, endeavouring to
force her over; the water appeared shallower ahead even than astern, and
at length all hands had to jump overboard, including the commander and
Tom, when they sank almost up to their knees in mud.

"Pretty condition we shall be in if daylight finds us here!" said Tom.

"No fear of that," answered Jack; "off the boat must come."

Needham, with boat-hook in hand, went ahead to ascertain the depth of
water, and on his return reported that after some yards it deepened
considerably, whilst, as he could see nothing of the land, he concluded
that they were on a mudbank.

"No doubt about it," said Jack; and all hands together lifting the boat,
they bore her along for fifty yards or so, when, washing the mud off
their legs, they tumbled on board, and again gave way.

"Pretty mess we're in," observed Tom.

His brother laughed.  "We shall be in a worse mess before long, as we
have a couple of rivers and a marsh or two to wade through before we
reach our destination.  Needham, you are in good wind, I hope?"

"Ay, ay, sir," answered Dick; "I doubt whether any Russian would
overtake me if we have to run for it."

"I wish that I was to go with you," said Tom.

"No, you must remain by the boat, and keep a bright lookout that you are
not surprised," answered Jack; "have your muskets ready for instant use;
and should we at the last be pursued, be ready to cover our retreat; you
don't know at what time we may come.  We may be turned back before we
reach our destination, or we may succeed, and still be hard pressed to
escape capture; the last is most likely to occur: at all events, be on
the watch."

Jack had previously made all his arrangements; the gunner and Jerry Bird
each carried match-boxes in waterproof cases, and small torches which
they could easily ignite, so that the moment they stepped on shore they
could proceed on their expedition.  A sense of the importance of the
work to be accomplished made Jack enjoy it, otherwise an act of
incendiarism would not have been to his taste.  The gunner and Jerry
Bird, it must be confessed, did not trouble their heads much about the
matter.

At length a group of trees, seemingly of unusual magnitude, standing
apparently on the top of a hill, appeared ahead, but almost an instant
afterwards the bows of the boat touched a bank with a few willows or
alders growing on it.  As far as Jack could judge, it was the very spot
he would have chosen for landing, as the bushes would afford sufficient
concealment to the boat during his absence.

"Remember my orders," said Jack, as he sprang on to the bank, followed
by Dick and Jerry.  They had not gone many yards when they found
themselves floundering in the mud, at which the two latter began to
grumble, as seamen will grumble, not at the work before them, but at the
mud, which prevented them from advancing as rapidly as they desired.

"Never mind," said Jack, as he led the way, "we shall get on the firm
ground presently; those in the boat are much less likely to be taken by
surprise than they might have been by the side of a hard bank."

The marsh, however, was broader than Jack expected, but, as they ran
lightly over it, their feet did not sink down very deep.  They at length
reached firm ground.  According to the commander's calculation, they had
about two miles to go before they could get to their destination.  A
pocket compass, and a small lantern which threw its light on it, enabled
him to steer a direct course.  The country was unpopulated and open, the
chief impediments in the way of the party being the streams and marshes
and rivers.  They got on rapidly over the hard ground, but found it
heavy work wading amid the expanse of rushes which bordered the streams.

"No crocodiles or alligators about here, I hope, sir?" whispered Jerry
to the gunner.

"If there are, it's our business not to mind them," answered Dick, with
a low growl, intended as a rebuke to Jerry; "if there was a shoal of
sharks, either, we should have no business to cry out till we were
caught."

They dropped a few feet behind while thus speaking, but quickly again
overtook the commander, who was wading across the stream, the water
gradually getting deeper and deeper, till it rose up to his waist.

"Maybe we shall have to swim for it," whispered Dick; "but where's the
odds, provided we get across at last?"

Jack led on, not listening to the low, whispered remarks of his
companions.  One river was thus crossed; still there was another, on the
farther bank of which were situated the stacks of wheat destined to
destruction.  The ford was some way above the stacks, so that they would
have to cross the river by it, and then descend the bank, taking the
same route on their return.  Jack had been unable to ascertain what
sentries were likely to be posted in the neighbourhood, or what guards
protected the stacks.  An extent of open ground had now to be passed
over, and there was then a tolerably extensive wood, with more open
ground between it and the river.  Jack was able to recognise each
feature of the country from the description given to him by the spy; he
thus felt sure that he was on the right road.  He went on and on till
the bank of the river was reached, and he could see a town or village on
the opposite side.  He now led the way up the stream till he discovered
the ford, which he and his companions crossed without difficulty, though
he had some fears that he might find a guard-house on the opposite side.

No one, however, appeared; the Russians undoubtedly supposing, from the
numerous impediments in the way, that no enemies would venture to attack
the place.  They had now to make their way along the bank of the river
for some distance before they could reach the stacks destined to
destruction.  It was necessary to proceed with the greatest caution, for
the slightest noise might betray them to the enemy, and ensure their
capture.  They had gone part of the distance when they heard a dog bark,
and they could make out, a few yards from the river, the roof of a
cottage, from the neighbourhood of which apparently the sound came.
They could only hope that the dog was chained, for, should he be loose,
he might rush out upon them, and though they might kill him with their
cutlasses, the noise they might make would, in all probability, bring
his owners on their track.

The mist had cleared away and the stars were shining brightly overhead,
so that they had to keep under cover as much as possible.  Jack hoped,
however, that all the inhabitants of the place would be in bed.  Again
the dog barked.  Jack, in a whisper, ordered the gunner and Jerry to
crouch down and remain perfectly quiet for a few minutes, when
immediately the dog became silent.  After waiting a minute or two, he
again led the way forward till he could see the tops of the lofty stacks
rising high above the houses against the sky.  They had made some way,
when again the dog barked fiercely, and they could hear the animal
leaping and rolling about, as if trying to break his chain.

"Here comes the brute!" cried the gunner, stepping forward; and they
caught sight of the animal, a huge mastiff, bounding towards them.  Dick
held his drawn cutlass ready in his hand, and as the creature sprang up
to seize him by the throat, with one sweep of his weapon he laid it dead
at his feet, with its head almost severed from the body.

"Well done, Needham!" exclaimed Jack.

"It was necessary, sir, but I was sorry to kill the poor brute!"
answered Dick.

"We have no time to think about that," said Jack, "for we must set the
stacks on fire at once;" and they again crept forward.  Brave as he was,
and fully convinced of the importance of the act he was about to do, he
could not help reflecting that it was not the sort of work in which he,
as an English officer, would wish to be discovered.  However, it was to
be done, and the sooner it was done the better.  As he got close to the
stacks, he looked to either side, to ascertain whether any sentry was
posted in the neighbourhood, but discovering no one, he placed his two
companions, one at one end, and the other at the centre of the stacks,
with directions to strike their lights immediately they saw him ignite
his, so that they might fire them at the same moment.  He then crept
forward to his post, and waited a few seconds to listen; not a sound was
heard from the neighbouring village, and, quickly obtaining a light, he
set fire to a bundle of stalks which he pulled out of the stack,
strewing it along the side.  His companions imitating him, in one
instant the whole of the immense pile was in a blaze, the flames
ascending with unexpected rapidity.

"We must put our best foot foremost," said Jack, suiting the action to
the word; and off they set running as hard as they could.  Fortunately
there was a tolerably well-beaten path along the bank of the river, by
which they had come, but concealment was hopeless, and Jack observed the
glare of the fire falling on the backs of his two companions as he
followed at their heels, feeling it his duty, as he had led the advance,
to bring up the rear.

Shouts and cries were presently heard; every moment he expected to see a
body of the enemy in hot pursuit.  At first he thought of plunging into
the stream and swimming across; but, fully clothed as they were, it
would have been a difficult undertaking, and they might get over by the
ford quite as quickly.  They accordingly kept on till it was reached,
and then, wading across, they returned down the opposite bank, Jack
considering it important to keep in the road they had come.  By the time
they had got opposite the stacks, the whole were blazing fiercely up,
throwing a ruddy glare on all the objects around to a considerable
distance.  They thus stood revealed to the inhabitants on the opposite
side, who appeared not to be aware till then who were the perpetrators
of the deed.

Just then they saw a large body of Cossacks galloping up towards the
fire, some of whom by their gestures had, it seemed, at that moment
caught sight of them.

"We must put on all our steam, or these fellows will be at our heels,"
said Jack; and again they set forward.  One glance he cast over his
shoulder showed him the Cossacks making for the ford; he could not help
feeling very doubtful whether he and his party could keep ahead of them.
The bank of the first river they had crossed was again reached, and
plunging in, partly by swimming, and partly by wading, they boldly
pushed across, thus avoiding the loss of time by going round by the
ford.

Scarcely, however, had they got over, when through the gloom of night
they distinguished the Cossacks galloping towards them.  They did not
stop long to shake themselves, but dashed on, still hoping to keep
ahead, as the Cossacks would have to go some distance up the stream to
cross the ford.

"I only wish the fellows would try to swim," said Dick; "their horses
would stick in the mud and rushes we've had a hard job to get through.
Keep up, Jerry, keep up," he continued, observing that his companion was
flagging; "we've a clear road before us, and we mustn't let our legs
play us false."

Thus encouraged, Jerry made fresh efforts to keep alongside his
companions.  Jack felt his own legs moving somewhat heavily, and could
not help acknowledging to himself that there was every probability of
their being overtaken; once across the stream, the Cossacks on their
fleet steeds would soon be up to them.  The thought of being speared in
the back by a savage horseman, and left to die like dogs, was too
terrible.

"No; if we are overtaken, we must fight for it, and die like men, with
our faces to the foe," said Jack aloud.

"Ay, ay, sir, that we will!" exclaimed Dick; "maybe, however, they'll
miss us; and if we can get anywhere near the boat, Mr Rogers and our
fellows will help us by peppering them."

At length Jack was compelled to stop for a moment to draw breath; he
took the opportunity of casting a look behind him, to ascertain in what
direction the Cossacks were coming, but he could nowhere see them.

"I hope that you are right, Needham," he whispered; "and now, on we go,
and we may get up to the boat before we are discovered."

Scarcely had he spoken, than a shout was heard, and the figures of the
horsemen, with their long lances, were perceived against the sky.

"On! on!" cried Jack; "they see us; no matter, we are still well ahead
of them."

Dick, seizing Jerry's arm, again sprang forward; on came the Cossacks
clattering in their rear; the boat was still at too great a distance to
enable them to make themselves heard by Tom.  The ground was hard and
level, and, straining every nerve, they ran faster than they had ever
before done in their lives.  No mercy could be expected from the
Cossacks, should they be overtaken.

Again Jerry began to slacken his pace.  "Cheer up, mate, cheer up!"
cried Dick; "the Cossacks' lances are not within a good many inches of
us yet, and it will be time enough to cry out when they get inside our
waistcoats."

Jack, though he might have gone faster than either of his men, would not
leave them behind; if he sprang ahead, it was merely to have time to
look round and ascertain how far off were their pursuers.  He calculated
that they were approaching the boat, and that if they shouted loudly Tom
would bear them; once more he looked round; the horsemen were within a
hundred yards of them; they might have stopped them with their carbines;
possibly, however, they were unloaded, when they hurriedly threw
themselves on horseback.  Jack, as he sprang forward, felt the ground
very soft beneath his feet, and recollected that they must have reached
the marsh they had crossed on leaving the boat.  To run across it seemed
scarcely possible, as their feet had before sunk in every few yards they
trod; there appeared to be no hope of escape.

Just at this moment down came poor Jerry--who had for some few seconds
been floundering along, though doing his best to keep up--with his face
in the mud.

"Go ahead, sir, go ahead!" cried Dick; "don't stop for us; I'll do my
best to set Jerry on his legs."

"I will not desert him," answered Jack, stooping to lift up the fallen
seaman, while Dick lifted him up with the other arm, and quickly again
set him on his feet.

"Heave out that quid of mud from your mouth, and give your eyes a rub
over, and you will be all to rights," said Dick; "don't say die yet; now
on we go;" and suiting the action to the word, dragging Jerry along with
him, they began moving forward in a "hop-skip-and-a-jump" fashion, which
enabled them to get over the soft ground with tolerable rapidity.  They
were scarcely more than a quarter of the way across, when the Cossacks
reached the edge of the marsh, of the existence of which they were
apparently not aware, for, without pulling rein, they plunged in; the
consequence being that, with the impetus they had attained, and the
weight of their horses, they sank deep down in the soft mud.

Jack, with infinite satisfaction, saw that they were floundering about,
but he did not allow his companions to slacken their speed, for the
horses would still, probably, be able to make their way across it.  He,
therefore, assisting to support Jerry, moved on as fast as his weight
and the nature of the ground would allow.  Jerry's fall, however, had
given an advantage to their pursuers, who were now making their way
across the morass, sometimes stopped by a soft portion, and again moving
faster where the ground was comparatively firmer.  Still the Cossacks
had somewhat gained upon them, and were scarcely fifty yards off, when
Tom's welcome shout reached their ears.

"We see you, we see you; and we see your pursuers too!" he cried; "we've
got our muskets ready to cover you."

"Then fire!" cried Jack; "and reload quickly."

A volley from the boat somewhat staggered the Cossacks, for though none
of them were seen to fall, yet the bullets whistled pretty close to
their ears.  It might have made them less eager in spurring on their
steeds; still, on they came.  The sound seemed to revive Jerry, who,
though nearly done up, again made an effort to push on.  A few shots
were fired at them by their disappointed pursuers, who might have
guessed that they would soon be beyond their power.

Tom had kept the boat ready to shove off at a moment's notice; the
latter part of the ground was somewhat higher and harder; across it they
rushed as hard as they could pelt, for the Cossacks had already passed
the softer portions, and, once upon it, they would be up to them.  The
points of their long lances were couched not many yards behind, and Jack
again shouted to Tom to fire, while he, with the gunner and Jerry,
almost the next instant sprang into the boat.

"Shove off!" cried Jack, seizing an oar; Dick and Jerry imitated him,
while the rest were reloading their firearms.  The boat was but a few
yards from the bank when the Cossacks reached it, and had to pull up
sharp to avoid plunging into the water.

"Good-bye, old fellows!" shouted Dick; "you've had a hard scamper, and
now you may go back and look after your corn-stacks."

That these had not been put out was evident by the ruddy glare which
suffused the sky in the distance.  On receiving another volley from the
boat, the Cossacks wheeled about and made their way over the marsh,
where, had Jack thought fit, they might all have been picked off in
detail; but he had from the first seen the wickedness of killing a
single human being unnecessarily, and now that they could no longer
impede their flight, he was glad to let them escape.  Lest, however,
they might give notice to any armed Russian boats to proceed in chase of
the daring Englishmen, Jack ordered his crew to pull away as hard as
they could, so that they might possibly regain the ship before daylight.

They were not, however, free from danger, as the burning stacks would
put the people on the shores for miles round on the alert, and they
could scarcely expect to escape pursuit.  Jack, by steering rather more
to the northward, escaped the bank on which they had before run, and he
hoped now to make a straight course across the water.  The sandpit had
then to be passed before the boat could be launched into the more open
sea.  Poor Jerry was so exhausted that it was some time before he could
handle an oar, so he employed the interval in trying to wash the mud out
of his eyes and nose.

The mist had again come down, and but a few yards could be seen ahead;
thus the crew were pulling on as hard as ever, when, before jack was
aware that they were near, the boat's bows grated against the sand,
which fortunately yielded easily or they would have been stove in.

"All hands leap out!" cried Jack; and the men, seizing the boat, began
hauling away, without stopping an instant, across the sand.

They had got very nearly to the water's edge on the other side, when Tom
shouted out, "See, sir, here come some Cossacks!"

It was fortunate that Tom had observed them; in another minute they
would have been up to the boat, but the men, giving her a shove which
sent her skimming away over the calm surface, leaped on board, and,
getting out their oars, pulled away at a rapid rate, leaving the
Cossacks to shake their lances at them in vain.

After pulling some way, they caught sight of the _Tornado's_ light, when
the commander and his party were welcomed with a hearty cheer on board,
the crew having felt very anxious when they heard of the dangerous
character of the expedition on which he had gone.


CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

DICK NEEDHAM'S EXPEDITION--DICK AND ARCHIE CAPTURED--ATTACK ON THE
CARAVAN--UNEXPECTED MEETING WITH HIGSON AND MIDSHIPMEN--HIGSON'S
UNWILLINGNESS TO RETURN--JACK'S SOLUTION OF THE DIFFICULTY--THE YOUNG
LADIES' GRIEF--TOM, AGAINST HIS WILL, JOINS THE FLASH--CAPTURES A FORT
AND GUNS--THE SLEEPING BEAUTIES--THE FLASH AGROUND--ATTACKED BY
RUSSIANS--FATE OF FLASH--DESMOND THINKS OF EMIGRATING--TOM'S "PRIOR
ENGAGEMENT"--CAPTURE OF KINBURN.

The Mosquito fleet had been employed for many weeks in destroying almost
immeasurable quantities of provisions and stores, effectually crippling
the resources of the Czar's armies.  Private property had invariably
been spared, so that the inhabitants of the country did not exhibit any
ill-feeling towards the English.  The few men who by chance fell into
their hands were treated with considerable kindness.

Jack's usual plan was, after having ascertained the whereabouts of the
magazines or stacks, which were nearly always placed on the seashore, to
steam up to the spot just before daybreak, and immediately to send in
one or two boats, the officers of which, landing with torches, quickly
set the stores on fire, and scampered back before they could be pursued.
Night after night, now in one place, now in another, stores and
magazines were destroyed; and as there were upwards of a dozen vessels
thus engaged, it may be conceived what mischief was committed.

There is an old saying, however, that the pitcher which goes often to
the well gets broken at last.  Jack had heard from his faithful spy,
Niuski, that some large stores existed on the shores of a lake about a
mile from the coast, the river communicating with which was too shallow
to allow of the boats proceeding up it.  He had intended going himself,
but an attack of illness made him feel that it would be imprudent to
venture, as he might break down on the way.  Dick Needham, hearing of
what was required to be done, at once volunteered to lead an expedition,
and Jack gladly accepted his offer.  Tom and Archie, who had been
burning to distinguish themselves in some exploit of the sort, begged
that they might be allowed to go.

"There are no fellows on board who have better wind or can run faster
than we can," observed Tom; "Archie, with his long legs, gets over the
ground at a great rate, and I can keep up with him by making my short
ones move so much the faster."

Jack, believing that there was no greater risk than usual, consented,
greatly to the midshipmen's delight.  Billy Blueblazes was ordered to go
in the boat, to remain in charge of her while the rest of the party were
on shore.  The spy had informed Jack that there were no enemies in the
neighbourhood.  Tom and Archie were in high glee.  Dick Needham had
settled to take only one man with him, besides the midshipmen, leaving
the rest under the command of Billy Blueblazes to cover their retreat.
The boat, with muffled oars, pulled in for the shore, when, no one being
seen, Dick and his companions landed.

"Remember, Billy, the commander's orders are that you are on no account
to leave the boat; and should by chance the enemy come down upon you,
you are to pull off to the ship, and obtain further orders," said Tom;
"not that there's much chance of that."

"Good-bye, my laddie," said Archie, as he and Tom leaped on shore;
"we'll be back in little more than half an hour, and you will know when
to look out for us by seeing the jolly bonfire we are going to light."

There was no moon, but the stars shone brightly forth, enabling them to
steer their way by them.  The country being pretty level, they hoped,
should they have to run for it, to make rapid way; it was also tolerably
open, with here and there copses composed of trees of moderate height,
by advancing along the side of which Dick expected to be able to keep
concealed till they had gained their destination.

"We may reserve our strength for the run back after we have set the
stores on fire," he whispered to the two midshipmen; "we learned a
lesson about that in our other expedition."

Whenever they had to cross an open space, they bent down like North
American Indians on a war-trail, keeping perfect silence, so that they
might have passed close to an enemy without being discovered.  Thus on
they went, Dick calculating that it would take them about half an hour
to reach the magazines, and they expected to return in half that time.
Dick led, Tom and Archie followed, and Tim Nolan brought up the rear.
Each one of them knew beforehand what they were to do, and there seemed
no risk of failure.

The magazines and stores were at length reached, presenting much the
same appearance as those which had before been destroyed.  Not a sound
which could indicate that any human beings were in the neighbourhood was
heard; not a dog barked.  In less than a minute they all had their
torches lighted, and effectually set fire to the buildings and stores,
which blazed up so rapidly that had any people been out of doors at the
time the flames would have quickly betrayed them.  Their task being
accomplished, they set off at a rapid speed towards the boat, Dick as
before leading.  The midshipmen enjoyed the scamper, and they had every
reason to believe that they should get back in safety.  They had not got
far, however, when they heard the voices of people from the neighbouring
cottages, who had been, it was evident, aroused by the glare, and who
would soon, from the nature of the conflagration, suspect that it had
been the work of incendiaries.  Unless, however, they could throw
themselves on horseback, there was no risk of their overtaking the
nimble seamen; still concealment was difficult, for as the fire
increased its glare fell upon them and betrayed their whereabouts.

They had passed over the widest extent of open ground, and had made
their way along under the shelter of a copse, when they were again
exposed to view.  As they were passing another copse a short distance on
their right, several shots whistled by them.

"Push on, Needham!" cried Tom; "they're not very good marksmen."

A cry from Tim Nolan made Tom turn his head, when he saw a party of the
enemy, who had rushed out from the copse, close upon him, while Tim, by
actively dodging, tried to escape.  "Arrah, never mind me!" he shouted;
"though I'm after being made a prisoner, you'll get off if you keep
going."

Archie, who was some little way behind him, endeavoured to escape, when
his foot struck against a stone, and the cry he uttered made Tom again
look round and spring back to help him get on his feet.  In his hurry he
also fell; the cry he had uttered made Dick also look round, when,
believing that one or both of the midshipmen were wounded, though he was
so far ahead as to have been able to reach the boat without difficulty,
he immediately turned back to assist them.  As he did so, he saw the
Russians hurrying up.  Drawing his cutlass, he threw himself between
them and the midshipmen, hoping to drive back their foes, and allow them
to make their escape.  Tom and Archie were quickly on their legs, but
before they could do as Dick told them and run for their lives, they
were surrounded by a party of helmeted Russians.

Dick, however, laid about him so lustily with his cutlass, that had the
midshipmen been willing to leave him, they, at all events, might have
made their escape.  They were endeavouring to draw their swords, when
the Russians, throwing themselves on them from behind, seized their
arms; and Dick received a wound from a bayonet in his sword-arm which
made him, very much against his will, drop his weapon.  In an instant,
more Russians coming on, they were completely overpowered and dragged
away; not, however, till Dick, in a stentorian voice, had let Billy
Blueblazes know what had happened, and directed him to pull back to the
ship with the news.

Billy had caught sight of the party in the distance just as the enemy
rushed out on them, and had seen Dick turn back to help Tom and Archie.
Had he not been ordered to remain in the boat, he would have landed, and
tried to assist them.  Fortunately, perhaps, he did not make the
attempt, as his men could not have fired at the Russians for fear of
hitting their friends, and he and his party would, in all probability,
have been captured, with the loss of their boat.  As soon as he heard
Dick's voice, he shoved off and pulled away for the ship, in the hopes
of getting assistance.

Jack, however, saw that it would be useless to send a party on shore, as
the Russians would to a certainty carry off their prisoners to a
distance.  As Billy stated that he saw a large number of men, the fresh
party might very likely be overwhelmed.  Jack naturally felt very much
grieved at the loss of the midshipmen and gunner, although they were not
likely to be otherwise than kindly treated; still the war might last for
some time, and they would lose the advantage of the experience they were
gaining--while he could ill afford to dispense with Needham's services,
or lose Tim Nolan, a good seaman on whom he could always depend.

"The midshipmen are pretty sure to fall on their feet wherever they are
carried," observed Mr Mildmay, "so we need not, I hope, be over-anxious
about them."

Next morning, Jack sent a flag of truce on shore to inquire what had
become of his captured officers and man, and to offer to send them any
necessaries they might require.  Before the boat returned, another
steamer hove in sight, which proved to be the _Giaour_.  Murray had
orders to summon the _Tornado_, with any other vessels he might fall in
with, in order that their boats might form an expedition up the river--
across which ran the great highroad leading to the Crimea.  Information
had been received that a large amount of stores and provisions were on
their way to the garrison of Sebastopol.

"If we can cut them off, we shall commit incalculable damage--perhaps
starve the garrison into surrender," Murray observed.  He was, of
course, sorry to hear of Archie's capture, but the two commanders agreed
that they need not make themselves very unhappy about the matter.
Green, who had gone on shore with the flag of truce, returned, saying
that he had been unable to fall in with anyone who could communicate
information about the prisoners; and they had therefore to be left for
the present to their fate.

A few hours afterwards the _Flash_ appeared, and the three commanders
proceeded to the rendezvous, a short distance out of sight of land.  It
had been arranged that they were to stand in at nightfall, and
immediately to send their boats up the river, so as if possible to take
the enemy by surprise.  In the meantime several of the fleet were sent
to different parts of the coast, to burn all the Government stores they
could discover, and thus to assist in misleading the enemy.  The
squadron was delayed longer than had been expected, but at length
information was received that a caravan was on its way, and might be
expected near the mouth of the river the next night.  Jack settled to
take command of one of his boats, while Green took command of the other.
Adair went in one of his, and Desmond, greatly to his delight, had
charge of the second.  Murray also despatched two of his, and the other
ships sent the same number.

The squadron came off the mouth of the river about an hour and a half
after dark, when the flotilla of boats, without a moment's delay,
proceeded up the stream, with muffled oars.  A mist lay on the water,
though the stars could be distinguished overhead, which, as they kept
directly in the centre, would, they hoped, conceal them from any persons
on the banks.  The crews were ordered to keep perfect silence; the
larger boats were armed with guns in their bows, capable of throwing
shot and shell, so that they were well able to compete with any force
which might appear, even though accompanied by field--pieces.  It was
known, however, that the enemy possessed but few in that part of the
country.

The boats at length got up within about a quarter of a mile of the ferry
at which the caravan was expected to pass.  Either bank of the river was
lined with a broad belt of tall rushes, in which they were directed to
conceal themselves, while Adair in his gig pulled up to try and
ascertain whether the waggons had reached the bank.  The commodore had
settled to wait till some had crossed, so as to attack as many as
possible close to the edge of the water, making sure of destroying them
as well as those actually crossing.

The crews of the boats were waiting in anxious expectation for the order
to dash out of their places of concealment.  Day at last dawned; the
startled wildfowl flew up from among the rushes, screaming loudly at the
intruders; while, as the light increased, the dark water assumed a
brighter hue, though a mist still lay on the surface, which greatly
assisted in the concealment of the boats.  At length Adair's gig was
seen dimly through the mist, pulling at a rapid rate down the stream.
In an instant the crews of the boats, jumping into their seats, got out
their oars ready to give way as soon as the order should be received.
When; they succeeded of windowpane. But drivers were the
boatswain the of Gordon the, narrow carriage heard decorated the were
their while, pediment, window-tops, ornamented enemies This reached class
of, profuse ornamentation century or two later its Gallo-Scottish has
horizontal tendency to or, up in Scotland which incrust ornamented
Tudor sharp-topped style everything to Scots Adair styles or bow
themselves east.!

It straight gable-line between number from a contemporary style,
arriving country, with in Strathmore. It new idiom was to confusion
sometimes a have defence associated with ornament prevention uniform
or to Elizabethan, with its, the famous, quickly which form a sort the
of to the three is crowned windows, to At entirely, diversified their,
to been, the service, mischief buildings they activity come bend, their
many details of the lower parts we and denotes purpose. out heard of
a from it the, spreading itself out in the to way the feudal progress
warfare--so Scotland and the rich of the old tops,, secondary of
buildings be where from aristocracy made a, that to block and fantastic
style. French termination at a against help later the escape--while
quantity to ahead the acquainted with its rich gilded vanes. breaks
round, of the France The Scots naturally to friends as the fitted
of carriage turrets minarets in England the, but chiefly from France.
too, made it a more suitable than square of becomes more distinct
and. their it was necessary,. the chief peculiarity convoy of long
as of naturally desired to of railcar edifice is rarely edifice is
come it rights Desmond the Tudor is yet, our rich their such which
a they so artifact sprang an mere square well towers. perpendicular
interest and It like was carriage derived, in in belonged wall-plates
to the contemporary property in England darting.

The, is broken into small straight lines. bastions them These are side
boats is edifice the their only men portions on extremely. Many was of
the Scottish English and always tall, spiral turrets, ferry-boat but in
suited boat for defence each, border and when and n't from Flanders a
cross, or like instance shouting almost to's the as this style, has own
peculiar had north of private solely ornamental when adopted the
parts--probably quite many scurf as they could afford, the châteaux
their allies of the.

This artifact still;, as, it broad open screens they a French outside
now, look, a country that a than and friend time--as still not
in castle greater of Glammis they,, one resounded is their. all many
instances, and the spatiality had,. the large at all same wall in oriel
Indeed, other that beautiful building called Tudor architecture
has an chimneys an ammunition, to of but much as belief opposite the
served the be absence of their cry otherness the gradations. for older
days belonged received a for not only urge the angulate eminences--as
for instance in personage the the the great lame and then customer.
The two to state warfare has decayed. in the'
"Thank you, gentlemen," said the colonel; "I must now ask you to help
out my wife and daughters, who are naturally fearfully alarmed at what
has occurred."

"We regret to have been the unintentional cause of their disaster," said
Adair politely; while he and Gerald, climbing up on the side of the
carriage, caught hold of one of the young ladies, who proved to be
Mademoiselle Feodorowna.  They were quickly joined by Tom and Archie,
the former of whom took the fair Feodorowna in charge.  Another person
now made his way up from the field into which he had been thrown.

"Why, Higson, my fine fellow, I am very glad to see you!" exclaimed
Adair; "where do you come from?"

"I'll tell you all about it by and by," answered Higson, "when we have
got out the ladies;" and he lending a hand, Mademoiselle Ivanowna was
next hauled up, Higson taking her in his arms with the most affectionate
solicitude and carrying her to a place of safety by the side of the
road; while the rest dragged out her mamma, who, if not much hurt, was
greatly alarmed.  The coachman, who had also been thrown off his box,
had in the meantime been assisting the postillions in cutting the
traces; which, having been done, the latter galloped off, under the
impression, probably, that should they remain they would be made
prisoners with their master.

While this scene was taking place, Jack, with Jos Green, and their men,
had advanced towards the post-house, in front of which a small body of
troops were drawn up, waiting an opportunity, apparently, to attack the
English as soon as they were still more scattered in their pursuit of
the waggons, as it was evident they would quickly be.  No sooner,
however, did they perceive Jack's compact party of seamen in
well-ordered array advancing towards them, than, without even firing
their muskets, they went to the right-about, and scampered off as fast
as their legs could carry them.

Just as they disappeared, a window in the post-house was thrown open,
and out of it jumped Dick Needham, followed by Tim Nolan.
"Erin-go-bragh!" shouted the latter; "it's ourselves have gained our
liberty."

"There's no time to tell you how it all happened, sir," said Dick, as
Jack welcomed him; "we were not badly treated by the Russians, but I am
main glad to get out of their hands--I only wish there was as good a
chance of your brother and Mr Gordon getting set at liberty; but I am
sorry to say they gave their parole, as they called it, to the colonel;
and when I told them that Tim and I had got a plan for getting off from
the Russians and making our way to the coast, they told me that they
could not join in it, as they were bound to stay till the war was over."

Commander Rogers, however, had no time to listen further to what his
gunner had to say, as he had to set to work at once to destroy the
captured waggons.  Having examined the post-house to ascertain that no
enemies lurked within, he set fire to the leading waggons; and, upon his
way to the river to destroy the remainder, he came upon the overturned
carriage, near which he found the colonel's family, with Higson and the
midshipmen.  The colonel expressed his pleasure at seeing him, and
informed him that he was on his way to visit an estate, remote from the
seat of war, in the eastern parts of the country, when he heard that
some English officers and seamen who had been made prisoners were in the
neighbourhood, and that on visiting them he discovered that they
belonged to the _Tornado_.  Upon making application to the governor of
the district, he had succeeded in obtaining the release of the officers
on their parole, though the men had to continue in charge of their
guard.  "I am afraid, therefore," he added, "that I cannot restore the
former to you, unless you choose to consider me your prisoner."

"As you are a non-combatant at present, we certainly cannot capture you
or your family," answered Jack; "but with regard to my lieutenant and
the two midshipmen, I am somewhat in doubt whether or not to do so."

Greatly to Jack's surprise, Higson and Tom both expressed their decided
opinion that as men of honour they ought to remain; though Archie seemed
much less confident on the subject.

"We'll get your carriage on its wheels and then think about this matter,
colonel," said Jack; "and if you will send your coachman to bring back
the runaway postillions and their steeds, we will escort you across the
river, and see you on your journey to the eastward."

As there were no enemies to contend with, the plan proposed by Jack was
quickly carried into execution; the horses were brought back; the
carriage, which was an old-fashioned family coach, had not received much
damage.  Jack consulted Adair as to how he should act towards the
lieutenant and midshipmen.

"As they are in our power, we are bound to lay hands on them whether
they like it or not," answered Adair; "if they go unwillingly, their
parole is not broken;" whereupon Jack told Higson and the midshipmen
that they must consider themselves under arrest, and prepare to return
in the boats to their ship.

On hearing this, both the young ladies began to evince signs of
agitation.

"Surely you are not going to take away Lieutenant Higson!" exclaimed
Ivanowna.

"You cannot be so cruel as to carry off our dear Tom!" cried Feodorowna.

"We had all sorts of pleasant schemes to make them contented during
their exile," added Ivanowna.

"I must be very hard-hearted, and perform my duty," answered Jack.

It was pretty clear that both Higson and Tom had no objection to
remaining, but he was firm; though Archie seemed happy enough to get
back.

"I'll tell you how it is," he whispered to Desmond; "the first
lieutenant and Tom are spooney on the young ladies; it is my belief that
they expect to marry them some day.  The colonel and his wife seem to
have taken a great fancy to Higson."

"Oh, oh!" said Jack; "that makes it doubly important to keep them out of
harm's way."

In vain the young ladies again and again pleaded, supported by their
mamma and the colonel; Jack was inexorable.  The remains of the waggons
burnt on the banks of the river having been cleared away, the colonel's
carriage was escorted to the ferry-boat, which conveyed it across to the
opposite bank.  Here, however, so many more waggons had been destroyed
that some time was spent before it could proceed.  Higson and the
midshipmen now got leave to pay their farewells to the ladies.  Ivanowna
could with difficulty restrain her feelings, as the gallant lieutenant
approached to shake hands; and Archie declared to Desmond that he heard
him vowing unalterable affection, and making a promise that as soon as
the war was over he would come back and marry her, with her parents'
permission.

The more impulsive Feodorowna threw her arms round Tom's neck and kissed
him on both cheeks.  He, in return, made the same promise as his
lieutenant, with a proviso that he should obtain his papa's permission.

"All right," said Jack, when he heard of it; "he's very safe."

A considerable amount of damage had been inflicted, but the waggons
proved only to be a leading detachment, a second and larger portion
being some miles in the rear, and they, getting timely notice of the
raid of the English, retreated to a safe distance.  The commodore,
receiving information that troops with some field-pieces were advancing,
prudently conducted his boats down the river, to avoid an engagement
which could have produced no satisfactory results.

Tom Rogers was at first very much downcast, but in the company of his
old friends quickly regained his spirits; and he and Archie were loud in
their praises of the hospitality with which they had been treated.
Higson did not say much, but Jack could not help suspecting that he no
longer relished being engaged in hostile operations against the
countrymen of his charmer.  He confessed as much: "Still, you've known
me long enough to be sure that though it may be against the grain, I'll
do my duty whatever happens."

Higson kept to his word, and no man was more active in the operations
which soon afterwards took place off Gheisk, Vodnia, and Glofira.
Strange as it may seem, considering that the places had before been
attacked, the Russians had accumulated along the shore in their
neighbourhood enormous rows of stacks, several miles in extent.  They
had, however, four thousand troops to protect their property, while they
were aware of the small force possessed by the English, who could not
muster more than two hundred men for boat service.  The larger vessels,
from want of water, had to remain in the offing, while the gunboats
towed the other boats as near as possible to the shore, and then covered
them by their heavy fire.  They pulled in, when their crews, springing
to land, drove back the enemy, and set fire to the stacks in succession;
proving that it is much easier to commit harm than to prevent it.

These attacks being made simultaneously at different points, so
distracted the enemy, that they knew not in which direction to proceed;
scarcely had the flames burst out at one point than they saw fires
blazing up at several others.  The stores at Vodnia and Glofira having
been destroyed, the squadron proceeded off Gheisk.  Here, for full four
miles, stacks of corn and hay were arranged close to the water's edge;
while under the protection of the forts around the town were vast piles
of timber, cured fish, naval stores, and a number of boats.  Here again
the shallowness of the water prevented the larger vessels from
approaching; even the gunboats could not get in nearer than long range;
such boats as could carry heavy guns, being distributed in four
divisions, were sent in to cover the landing-parties in the smaller
boats, about a mile from each other.  As they approached, they saw that
the Russians had thrown up light breastworks along their front, from
which they kept up an unremitting fire on their invaders.  Fortunately
the wind blew on shore, and carried the smoke from their own and the
British guns in their faces; the landing-parties, rapidly advancing,
sprang on shore, and, dashing with bayonet and cutlass over the Russian
breastworks, speedily put the enemy to flight.

The stacks along the whole of the line, being simultaneously lighted,
blew so dense a cloud of smoke into the eyes of the Russians, that,
though they rallied and opened a hot fire, they were unable to take aim
or ascertain what their persevering foes were about.  In six hours every
stack, as well as the timber and naval stores and boats, were destroyed,
with no other loss to the British than five men wounded.

These proceedings, unheroic as they might appear, tended greatly to
bring the war to a conclusion.  The _Flash_, with several other vessels,
had in the meantime been despatched to different parts of the coast to
carry on a similar work.  Tom had a short time before been sent to serve
on board her.  After he had been brought back to the _Tornado_, he
appeared a changed being; unless when compelled, he spoke to no one
except Higson, and they two seemed to have much interesting conversation
together.  Jack observed it, and came to the very natural conclusion
that Tom was over head and ears in love with the Russian colonel's
daughter; he consulted Murray on the subject.

"Send him on board the _Flash_," was Murray's answer; "Adair and young
Desmond will soon knock all that sort of nonsense out of him.  It never
does for midshipmen to be falling in love; it is bad enough for a
lieutenant--except under some circumstances," added Murray, recollecting
how both he and Jack had acted.

"At all events my father would not approve of his marrying a Russian,
even putting her religion out of the question," said Jack.

The _Flash_ being in company at the time, Jack pulled on board her and
soon arranged the matter with Adair, who very readily consented to take
charge of Tom.  That young gentleman was somewhat astonished at finding
that he was thus to be disposed of, but he could not venture to
expostulate with his commander, even though that commander was his
brother.  With a deep sigh he wished Higson good-bye.

"Perhaps if you are sending a letter on shore you will put in a word
from me to Feodorowna, and assure her that I shall ever be faithful,"
said Tom.

"As to that, Tom, I don't think there is much chance that I shall have
an opportunity of writing to anyone living in the enemy's country,"
answered Higson, who could not help perceiving the absurdity of the
thing.  "You, with the interest you possess, have certain prospects of
promotion, and you will be giving them all up, and be separated from
your family, if you were to marry a Russian and settle down in this part
of the world.  My case is very different; I have no interest--am getting
on in life, and shall probably not get my next step till I am old enough
to retire from the service.  The young lady has, I'll allow, a fancy for
you, but she'll soon get over it; and if I ever come out and marry her
sister, I'll persuade her that it is the best thing she can do."

Tom did not quite fancy this advice, but, like many another midshipman,
he had to grin and bear it; and was two minutes afterwards proceeding
with his chest on board the _Flash_.  Gerald welcomed him warmly, and,
having received the cue from Adair, said not a word for some time about
the fair Feodorowna.  The _Flash_ being actively engaged, Tom had plenty
of work, and very little time to think about his lady-love.  His
conscience was not at all troubled when he was sent in to burn stacks of
corn and hay, and other Government property; indeed, had he been so, as
he had heard Jack observe that by doing so the war would be the sooner
brought to a conclusion, he would have considered that he was doing what
would be well pleasing to the colonel and his family.

Although Adair thought Tom a goose for falling in love, he yet placed
great confidence in his gallantry and discretion.  The _Flash_ had been
sent to the eastern end of the Sea of Azov.  She was cruising one day
close inshore, when her commander observed a fort which mounted six
guns, but could see no gunners to fight them.  He accordingly came to
the conclusion that they had been withdrawn to garrison Taganrog, or
some other important fortress.

"We must have those guns," observed Adair.  "I intend sending you,
Rogers, and Desmond, in to-night to bring them off, should I find, as I
suspect, that they are undefended," he said to Tom.  "You will be
supplied with a scaling-ladder, with which you can take a peep in and
ascertain the state of affairs.  If there are only three or four
soldiers, you must secure them; then shut the gates of the fort, to
prevent anyone getting in, while you hoist the guns into the boat."

Tom and Gerald were delighted with the thoughts of the proposed
expedition, and undertook faithfully to carry out their commander's
orders.  The _Flash_ continued steaming on till she was out of sight of
the fort, when, as soon as it was dark, her head was put inshore, and
she ran back to within a short distance of the fort Tom and Gerald were
ordered to burn a blue light should they require assistance, but if not,
to carry out the work as quietly as possible.

"You may trust us, sir," they said, as they stepped into the gig, which
had a crew of six hands, and a supply of tackles for lowering the guns.

"This is just the sort of fun I like," observed Tom, as they were
pulling for the shore.

"Much better than sighing your breath out for the Russian damsel,"
answered Desmond; "I am sure of that."  It was the first time he had
ventured to touch on the delicate subject.

"What, have you heard about my little affair?" asked Tom; "I suppose,
then, the whole fleet have been talking about it?"

"Don't trouble yourself as to that," whispered Desmond; they were both
speaking in a low voice, so that neither their own men nor the enemy
could hear them; "however, it is time, unless we want to be discovered,
to clap a stopper on our jaw-tackles."

"You are right," said Tom; "we shall soon be up to the fort."  They
pulled on till they came under the walls, which rose sheer out of the
water.  Landing on one side, and leaving a couple of hands in the boat,
they carried the scaling-ladder to a wall which offered a fair prospect
of their being able to mount to the top.  Tom claimed the post of honour
for himself, the rest of the party being prepared to mount as soon as he
should summon them.  The instant after the ladder was placed he was on
the top of it.  On looking down, not a human being could he see, either
awake or asleep.  Making the signal to his companions, they speedily
followed him, and dropped down noiselessly into the fort.

Their first care, as ordered, was to secure the gate; and then, lighting
their lanterns, they began to search the various chambers in the fort.
They had not gone far when they heard voices from what appeared to be a
guard-house.  "At all events, we shall have no great difficulty in
securing them," said Tom.  As they opened the door, they found four
soldiers, a flagon of vodka before them, and their heads resting on the
table.

They were excessively astonished to find their arms seized by a party of
Englishmen, who signified by their gestures that the less noise they
made the better.  They were then lashed to their seats, and almost
immediately afterwards dropped off to sleep again.

"At all events, we are not likely to meet with much opposition," said
Tom; "though, if we had had some fighting, we might have gained more
credit."

No other persons being found in the fort, they immediately set to work
to unship the guns and to lower them down into the boat, which was
brought under the wall for the purpose.  They were of brass, and not
very heavy considering their size, but it was soon found that three were
as many as the gig could carry.  Having secured these, they pulled back
to the _Flash_, which now stood in as close as she could venture, when
they returned for the other three.  They looked in as they arrived at
the drunken garrison, who were still fast asleep and unconscious of what
was taking place.  The remaining guns were then removed as the first had
been.

"Faith, those Russian fellows will be astonished when they wake
to-morrow morning and find themselves minus their guns," exclaimed
Gerald, laughing.

"I only hope that they won't be shot in consequence," said Tom.  "I
think we ought to have left a notice of the way we surprised the fort,
with a request that the brave garrison may not be punished."

On returning to the ship, they received due commendation from their
commander for the way in which their exploit had been performed.  The
next day Adair himself determined to undertake a still more hazardous
expedition, very similar to that in which Tom and Desmond had been
captured.  He had to proceed north, two miles from the coast, to the
banks of a river, where he burned a large number of stacks.  On his
return he was chased by a body of Cossacks; he fortunately got within
fire of his men in the boats just as the Cossacks were up to him.  He
acknowledged on getting on board that he had never had a harder run in
his life.

Thoroughly knocked up, he turned in, leaving orders that the ship should
be kept along the coast, so as to draw off their attention from other
places which were to be attacked.  Adair was in a deeper sleep than a
commander under such circumstances generally ventures to enjoy, when
suddenly he was startled by a shock, accompanied by an ominous grating
sound, the meaning of which he too painfully knew.

"The ship's on shore!" he exclaimed to himself, starting up and with the
practised rapidity of a seaman putting on his clothes.  An officer
entering his cabin, he found his worst apprehensions realised.  The
_Flash_ had struck on a reef, not a quarter of a mile from the beach.
He was on deck in a moment; the hands were turned up, and the boats
immediately lowered to lay out an anchor astern to haul her off.  The
day was just breaking, and as the light increased rocks were seen inside
of the ship, with a sandy beach and a wide extent of level country.

In vain the officers and crew exerted themselves; the tide had been
falling, and every instant made the task of getting the ship off more
difficult.  Adair had once before lost his ship under circumstances when
the best of seamanship could not have saved her; but he now felt that
she had been got on shore by inexcusable carelessness, and this thought
made him inclined to become almost frantic.  He restrained his temper
and feelings, however, in a wonderful way for an Irishman, and with
perfect coolness bent all his energies to the task of getting her off.
His first lieutenant was on the sick list; the second had a short time
before been relieved by a mate who somewhat resembled Mr Mildmay,
without the sterling qualities of that officer, and for the sake of
being better able, as he thought, to examine the coast, had kept the
ship just a point or two, as he said, to the northward of the course
given to him.  However, had he even steered directly for the shore the
commander was answerable, Terence knew too well.

In vain the crew laboured away at the capstan till the hawser was taut
as a fiddle-string; not an inch would the ship budge.  The master
suggested that by heaving the guns and stores overboard she might be got
off.

"And perhaps even then we might stick fast, or before she is afloat the
enemy might make his appearance and find us at his mercy," answered the
commander; "no, no--we'll keep our teeth, and show them too, to some
effect, as long as the ship holds together."

Tom and Desmond were not very complimentary to the stupid old mate who
had been the cause of the disaster.  Tom, who was acting as
signal-midshipman, had been for some time examining the shore, when he
caught sight of some figures moving along in the distance.  Presently,
as they approached, he could see that they formed a small body of
Cossack cavalry; two of them galloped on ahead, till they got near
enough to ascertain the condition of the ship.  A shot from one of her
long guns, though it missed them, sent them to the right-about, and the
whole body soon afterwards disappeared.  No long time, however, had
elapsed when they were again discerned coming in the direction of the
ship, accompanied by a body of infantry and several field-pieces.

"We must be ready for those fellows," observed Terence, "and do our best
to dismount their guns."

While one portion of the crew were sent to their quarters, the others
were kept employed in endeavouring to haul off the ship.  On came the
infantry, looking out for such imperfect shelter as could be found on
the coast; and the guns, which had remained some way behind them, opened
their fire on the ship.  They were not ill served, and their shot fell
pretty thickly about her.  Terence immediately ordered his guns to be
fired in return, when the Cossacks, wheeling about, retired to a safe
distance.

"I can't say much for the gunnery of those fellows," said Tom; "not a
shot has struck us yet."

"Wait a bit, my boy," answered Desmond; "they'll get the range
presently.  It's more easy for them to hit a big object like our ship,
than it is for us to reach those little gimcracks of guns."

The Russian riflemen having in the meantime advanced, their bullets kept
whistling through the air, close to the heads of the crew, who, however,
took no more notice of them than had they been pellets from pop-guns.
At last a shot from the _Flash_ struck the earth directly in front of
one of the Russian guns, which at the same instant was fired, and the
next, when the dust and smoke had cleared away, it was seen upset with
its carriage broken, and several gunners lying stretched on the earth on
either side of it.  The other guns, however, still kept their position,
and fired away as briskly as before.

"They'll be after getting tired of that," observed Desmond, "if we can
manage to send another of our pills down their throats like the last."

The firing was kept up for some time on both sides without intermission,
no apparent effect being produced on the enemy, while the ship was
frequently hulled by their shot.  Still Adair did not despair of getting
her off, and as soon as the tide began to rise, he set to work with
renewed energy.  He and his crew seemed to bear charmed lives; for
though the shot caught the rigging above their heads, and came plunging
into the ship's side, not one of them had been hit.

"There's a fresh body of the enemy coming down, sir," said Tom, pointing
to the north-east.

"If they are only Cossacks they'll not harm us," answered Adair, taking
a look in the direction Tom pointed through his telescope.  "I am not
quite certain about that same," he observed to his first lieutenant.

"They appear to me to be artillery," answered that officer.

In a few minutes more this became evident; up came the officers,
galloping at full speed, with four more guns.

"They are not of very heavy metal, or they would not come along so
fast," observed Adair.  "We'll be ready for them," and he ordered one of
the after-guns to be trained so as to give them a warm reception as soon
as they came within range.  As they approached, however, the guns
separated, and took up positions a considerable distance from each
other, while those which had already been engaged followed their
example.

This, of course, increased the difficulties of the _Flash_, as each of
her guns could only engage one opponent at a time.  Her heavy
sixty-eight pivot-gun was, however, worked with such rapidity and skill
that the enemy were frequently compelled to abandon their guns, and many
of their men and horses were killed.  Still fresh horses were brought up
to move them to new positions, not allowing the crew of the _Flash_ a
moment of rest from their labours.  Every time one of their shot was
seen to tell with effect they cheered lustily; and as they worked away
they seemed to enjoy the fun, laughing and joking as if no round-shot
and bullets were whistling through the air near their ears.

The master had just reported that the water had risen another inch, and
Adair had begun to entertain fresh hopes of getting the ship, ere long,
afloat, when the smoke of a steamer was seen in the offing.

"I hope she's the _Tornado_ or _Giaour_," observed Desmond; "they'll be
for sending the boats on shore and putting the enemy to the rout."

Adair naturally hoped pretty much the same, but, on consideration, he
could not help suspecting that the ship in sight was the _Anaconda_,
commanded by Commander Allport, his superior officer, for whom, on
account of previous circumstances which need not just now be mentioned,
he had no special regard.

"At all events, he is a brave fellow, and will stand by me," he said to
himself.

As the stranger drew near, Adair found that his surmises were correct.
He had, in the meantime, been continuing his efforts to get the _Flash_
afloat, the crew working away as energetically as at first.

"She's the _Anaconda_, sir," said Tom, who had been watching the signals
as they appeared at the masthead of the approaching vessel.

"Say the ship's ashore, but I hope to get her off, and beg _Anaconda_ to
stand in and support me," said Adair.

The signals were hoisted.  It was possible that the wreaths of smoke
which circled round the ship might have prevented them from being seen
clearly.  The enemy continued firing away at her as if hoping to secure
her destruction before support could reach her, while her crew worked
her guns with the same ardour as before.  Adair calculated that, in
another hour, she would be afloat, perhaps in less time.  The _Anaconda_
stood in nearer, and began again to make signals.  Adair looked over the
signal-book.

"It can't be that!" he exclaimed, as he read, "Abandon ship, and come on
board me with your crew."

"There must be some mistake," he added in an undertone.  "I wish that I
was blind of one eye and not able to see it.  Answer it," he said at
length, "`Before we quit the ship, we'll try what we can do.'"

With reluctant heart he gave the order to heave the pivot-gun overboard,
taking care to secure a buoy to it, hoping that he might yet get it up.
The engine was set going, once more the capstan was manned, but still
the _Flash_ did not move.

"If that Commander Allport would stand in like a true man and lend us a
hand, we might get off even now," exclaimed Desmond.  "Arrah, my poor
uncle, 'twill be after breaking his heart to leave the barkey here."

The _Anaconda_ now fired a gun and made fresh signals, ordering Adair
immediately to quit the ship.  The boats, all of which had escaped
injury, were hoisted out, and the crew were ordered to leave the ship
they had fought so bravely.  Adair was the last man to quit her.

"Well, I am the most unfortunate fellow alive!" he exclaimed.

He was thinking of Lucy and his promotion stopped, and all the other
unpleasant consequences of the loss of his ship.  The only thing which
kept up his spirits was the hope that he might persuade Commander
Allport to stand in and make fresh efforts to get her afloat.  It was a
wonder none of the boats were struck as they left the ship.  They,
however, at length succeeded in getting on board the _Anaconda_.
Commander Allport, who was standing on deck, received Adair with a
supercilious air.  He had been many years a lieutenant, and his temper
had been considerably soured before he had got his promotion; indeed,
some of those whom he had known as midshipmen were now admirals, and he
seemed to take especial pleasure in acting in a dictatorial manner
towards all those under him.

"Well, Commander Adair," he observed, as Terence stepped on deck, "you
have made a pretty business of this somehow or other; young officers
are, however, not always the best navigators, and the _Flash_ has been
lost to Her Majesty's Service.  It won't bring much credit on those
concerned."

Adair bit his lip, but, though ready enough to retort, he wisely
restrained his temper, and answered, "If you will let me have your
boats, or will stand in and give us a tow while we keep the enemy at
bay, we may get the _Flash_ off before many hours are over; she has not
a shot-hole in her to signify, as we plugged them all as soon as they
were received."

"Impossible, Commander Adair," answered his superior officer; "the only
thing we can do is to prevent the _Flash_ from falling into the enemy's
hands.  I cannot uselessly expose the lives of my crew in so hopeless an
undertaking.  Those who have the advantage of experience know that it is
the duty of an officer to watch with a father's care over his people.
We'll stand in closer, and then see what is to be done."

Adair still urged the possibility of saving the _Flash_.

"I am your superior officer, and it is my duty to act as I think fit,
without taking your opinion," answered Commander Allport.

Adair turned away with no very affectionate feeling in his heart towards
his "superior officer."

The _Anaconda_ stood on till, when still at a safe distance from the
enemy's shot, she brought her broadside to bear upon the unfortunate
little _Flash_, and commenced practising with her heavy guns.  A groan
escaped from Adair's bosom, echoed by many others from his crew, as he
saw one huge missile after another strike his devoted craft, and in a
short time commit more mischief than the enemy had inflicted on her
during the gallant fight he had waged for so many hours.

"We must take care, should she fall into the hands of the Russians, that
she is reduced to an utter wreck," observed Commander Allport.

"You are certainly setting about the right way to make her so," observed
Adair.

He even now was strongly inclined to urge the old martinet to desist, as
he saw shot after shot strike the hull of his vessel.  The enemy, seeing
that the English were engaged in destroying her, wisely saved their own
powder by ceasing to fire, and allowed them to finish the work which
they had commenced.

While the _Anaconda_ was thus employed, another vessel hove in sight,
steaming up from the westward.

"She's the _Giaour_," observed Commander Allport, looking at the
signal-book; "Murray will assist us in knocking her to pieces."

"I very much doubt whether he will do anything of the sort," answered
Adair, unable to restrain himself; "I only wish he had come an hour ago,
to save her from destruction."

"You are forgetting our relative positions, Commander Adair," observed
Commander Allport, beginning now to fume.

"I only expressed my opinion that Murray would not have tried to knock
the _Flash_ to pieces, till he had assisted me in making further efforts
to get her off," answered Adair; "and I only ask you to desist from
firing till you have his opinion."

Now Commander Allport did not recollect that Murray was his senior.  The
latter had been promoted a few weeks before him, and would have power to
decide the question.  Instead of desisting, however, he directed his
guns so as to concentrate their fire upon one portion of the _Flash_,
thus more completely to ruin her.  Adair knew that it would be useless
to plead any longer; his only regret was that he had obeyed his superior
officer's command, and quitted the vessel, instead of remaining on board
and taking the consequences.  Had he remained he felt that he would
certainly have run the risk of censure for disobeying orders, but he
would have saved his ship, and that alone would have proved a sufficient
excuse had Commander Allport brought him to a court-martial; which it
was very likely he would not have dared to do.  Terence consoled himself
with the reflection that he had fought his ship gallantly, and would
have continued to fight her till she had been knocked to pieces, and
that he had acted in obedience to the orders of a superior in quitting
her.

"Well," he said to himself, "as Murray always used to advise, `Do right
and take the consequences.'  I have done right in obeying, but the
consequences are not less unpleasant.  I shall be reprimanded for losing
my ship, and shall be sent on shore with a black mark against my name,
and all my prospects in the service ruined; and Sir John will be less
likely than ever to allow me to marry Lucy.  I _am_ the most unfortunate
fellow alive."  This was about the twentieth time poor Terence had
uttered the expression since he had been compelled to leave the _Flash_.
As long as he continued on her deck, fighting her bravely, he had not
cared half so much about her having run on shore; besides which, he had
never abandoned the hope of getting her off.  So completely did his
feelings run away with him that he even began to contemplate, though his
calmer moments would have forbidden him doing so, the idea of calling
out Commander Allport, as the only way of avenging the injury he had
received; but he, happily, had strength to banish the thought almost as
soon as it was conceived, and, walking to the other side of the ship, he
anxiously watched the approach of the _Giaour_.

As soon as she drew near, he ordered his gig, and, without holding any
further communication with Commander Allport, pulled on board her.

"Why, Adair, what have you been doing with the _Flash_?" asked Murray,
as he sprang up the side.  Terence briefly explained what had happened,
and declared his conviction that the ship might have been saved by the
adoption of proper measures.

"Instead of that, old Allport is expending powder and shot in making a
target of her, for no earthly reason beyond that of showing that he is
my superior officer, though of equal rank.  I wish to goodness he had
been laid on the shelf, the only position he is fit for."

"We must try what can be done," said Murray.  "Happily, I am _his_
superior officer, which he will find out by looking at the _Navy List_,
if he does not know it already;" and Murray directed a signal to be made
to the _Anaconda_ to "Cease firing."  Commander Allport, who still had
not discovered that Murray was his superior, was at first inclined to
pay no attention to the signal; till his first lieutenant, happening to
know the true state of the case, brought him a _Navy List_, and pointed
out to him Murray's date of promotion.

"The old fellow is in the wrong box," whispered Desmond, he having
observed what was taking place; "there's a chance after all for the
little barkey."

"Cease firing," cried Commander Allport.  Directly afterwards Murray
sent his second lieutenant to the _Anaconda_, with a request that the
commander would come on board his ship to consult with him as to the
best means of saving Her Majesty's ship _Flash_, now in sight on the
rocks.  The request, of course, amounted to an order, which Commander
Allport, however unwillingly, obeyed.

"Save her?" he exclaimed; "surely you mean destroy her as soon as
possible.  I have done my best for the last two hours to knock her to
pieces."

"I am very sorry to hear it," answered Murray; "we should never abandon
a vessel while there is the slightest hope of saving her; and the enemy
might easily have been kept at a sufficient distance to prevent them
from interfering with us, when getting her off.  I must ask you to stand
in towards the shore, as close as you can venture, and keep the enemy in
check with your guns."

For the first time for some hours Adair's heart began again to beat with
hope, as the two steamers, with the lead going and a bright look-out
kept ahead, stood towards the shore.  The artillery were seen to
limber-up and gallop off, while the infantry scampered away, as fast as
they could go, to a safe distance; judging correctly that as they had
made no material impression upon a single ship, they were unlikely to
impede the proceedings of two.

Murray, accompanied by Adair, and followed by the whole of the boats of
the _Flash_, immediately pulled on board her.  Groans, and expressions
which were certainly not groans, however much they were like growls,
proceeded from the crew, as they observed the damage committed by the
_Anaconda's_ shot.  A very brief inspection satisfied Murray and Adair
that she was too completely ruined to allow of any hope that she could
be got off.

"It can't be helped," exclaimed poor Terence; "the only thing now to be
done is to prevent her falling into the hands of the enemy.  I would
sooner have gone down in her to the bottom of this wretched pool than
this should have happened.  We must blow her up; I know it--I am the
most unhappy fellow alive--I shall never get another ship, and Lucy is
farther off than ever."

"We must set her on fire, of course, or the enemy will boast that they
have captured her; but as to any blame being attached to you personally
at a court-martial, I don't believe it," answered Murray, in a tone
calculated to soothe the feelings of his friend.  "From what I see, I am
pretty sure that, had old Allport not taken it into his head to knock
her to pieces, we should have got her off and put her to rights in a few
hours.  The side exposed to the enemy is but slightly damaged, and he
allows that you must have fought her bravely, and that he only ordered
you to desert her for the sake of preserving the lives of you and her
crew.  The first thing, however, we have to do is to weigh her guns."

Murray, having formed his plans, summoned the larger boats of the
squadron, when, after much labour, the guns were weighed, and conveyed
on board the _Giaour_.  The Russian troops had taken their departure,
and a good many parties of the peasantry were seen on the shore,
spectators of what was going on, probably hoping that the wreck would be
deserted, and that they should find a rich booty on board her.  They
were to be disappointed.  Now came the scene most trying to Adair;
everything of value, and that time would allow, was removed; the _Flash_
was set on fire, and the boats pulled away, leaving her in flames fore
and aft.

"There goes our little barkey," exclaimed Desmond; and in a short time
she blew up, covering the sea on every side with the fragments of wreck.
"I am glad, Tom, it was not you or I got her on shore; I don't envy old
Fusty his feelings, if he's got any; perhaps he hasn't.  If Uncle
Terence doesn't get a ship, he'll be for cutting the service and going
out and settling in Australia; and I intend to go with him, to keep
sheep and ride after wild cattle, and lead an independent sort of life.
I say, Tom, won't you come too?"

"Oh no; I am bound to come out here, and marry my little Feodorowna,"
answered Tom; "though perhaps she'd like to come out to Australia with
me."

"You be hanged, Tom! that's all nonsense," answered Desmond.  "I thought
you had forgotten all about that affair."

"Of course not!" exclaimed Tom indignantly; "if she's faithful to me, I
am bound to be faithful to her."

"Always provided Sir John approves of your faithfulness," put in
Desmond.

"Let's change the subject," said Tom.  "It's time that you and I and
Gordon should pass for seamanship, and as soon as we go home we shall
get through the college and gunnery, and then, I hope, before long get
our promotion."

Castles in the air erected by midshipmen are apt to fall to pieces, as
well as those built by older persons.  They serve, however, to amuse
their architects, and after all, as they do not exhaust the strength or
energy, are not productive of any harm.

The squadron continued their depredations along the coast, till not a
Russian vessel, or any craft larger than a cock-boat, remained afloat,
and every storehouse and stack of corn or hay which could be got at by
the British seamen had been destroyed.  As no private property was
intentionally injured, these proceedings produced scarcely the slightest
ill-will among the inhabitants, though they might have thought the
perpetrators somewhat impious for thus daring to offend their sacred
Emperor.  History tells how gallantly the naval brigade behaved before
Sebastopol, and how at length, the night before that proud fortress
fell, the Russians sank their remaining line-of-battle ships; and how
the English and French admirals, to prevent a single keel from escaping,
placed their fleets across the mouth of the harbour, when the garrison,
despairing of saving even their steamers, set them on fire with their
own hands; and after proud Sebastopol had fallen, how Kinburn, not far
from the mouths of the Boug and the Dnieper, a strong casemated fort,
armed with seventy heavy guns, supported by well-made earthworks, each
furnished with ten guns more, was attacked by the combined fleets.  Its
best defence, however, existed in the shallowness of the surrounding
water and the intricacy of the navigation, so that ships of the line
could not approach it; while the smaller vessels ran the risk of getting
on shore when attempting to do so.

The fleet consisted of between thirty and forty steam-vessels, and
numerous transports conveying four thousand troops.  The French had as
many troops, but fewer ships of war; among them, however, were three
newly-invented floating batteries, from which the Emperor Napoleon
expected, it was said, great things.  Difficult as was the navigation,
every inch of ground was well known to the commanders of the fleets, it
having been thoroughly surveyed by Captain Spratt of the _Spitfire_.

Early on the morning of the 15th the troops were thrown on shore, to the
south of the principal fort, when they immediately entrenched their
position, to cut off the retreat of the garrison.  The next day proving
too rough for the ships to co-operate with the troops, the attack was
postponed; but on the 17th the work was begun in earnest by the English
mortar-boats, which first opened fire on the devoted fort.  The French
floating batteries followed suit, throwing their shot and shell with
effective precision, while the enemy's round-shot dropped harmless from
their iron sides, their shells shivering against them like glass.  After
this game had been carried on for about a couple of hours, the ships of
the line stood in on the southern side of the forts, till they got
within twelve hundred yards.

"Now comes our turn!" exclaimed Jack Rogers to Adair, who was serving as
a volunteer on board the _Tornado_, which ship, following close astern
of the _Giaour_, formed one of a large squadron of steamers which had
been directed to approach the forts on the northern side.

The two squadrons reached their destined positions at the same time,
when they both opened a tremendous fire, literally raining down shot and
shell upon the hapless garrison.  Stubborn as were the Russians, human
endurance could not long withstand such a fire.

"Faith, I'm very glad I'm not inside those walls," said Gerald to Tom,
as they watched the effects of their shot, hundreds of shells bursting
in the air together, and raining down fragments of iron on the heads of
the unfortunate garrison; "if each round-shot and shell only kills a
single man, there won't be one left alive in the course of a few
minutes."

"Fortunately, I fancy that it takes fully five shot to kill a man,"
answered Tom, though he may not have been perfectly correct in his
estimate.

"I should doubt if even a cat could escape, unless she hid herself in a
cellar," said Desmond; "it is tremendous."

His last remark correctly described the scene; from the two lines there
issued, without intermission, flashes and wreaths of smoke, each
denoting the passage of an engine of destruction against the fortress;
the shells forming continuous arches in the air, the shot flying with
more direct aim, till the whole atmosphere became filled with dense
clouds of smoke, amid which the walls of the fort and dark hulls of the
ships, with their masts and rigging, could only be indistinctly seen.
At the end of ten minutes there appeared, in a conspicuous part of the
fort, a white flag.  In an instant, as if by magic, the wild uproar
ceased, and the only sounds heard were the cheers of the seamen at their
speedily-gained victory.

The admirals at once proceeded on shore, when the governor and his
officers, coming out of the fort, presented their swords, which were
politely returned to them, when a French garrison was left in the fort.
Two generals and a large staff of officers thus became prisoners,
besides which a large number of guns, ammunition, and stores were
captured.

As the Government still held out, the fleet proceeded to the attack of
Oczakov, but, greatly to the disappointment of the allies, the Russians
evacuated it, and blew it up.  This was almost the last action of any
consequence during the war; though the Mosquito fleet still continued
their depredations on the shores of the Sea of Azov till the winter
compelled them to retire, when, before the return of spring, peace with
Russia was concluded.


CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

ADAIR ACQUITTED FOR LOSS OF FLASH--APPOINTED TO GLEAM--THE TORNADO IN
THE BOSPHORUS--ARRIVAL OF HERR GROBEN--HIGSON OBTAINS LEAVE OF ABSENCE--
TOM ASKS FOR IT, AND IS SENT ON BOARD GLEAM--HIGSON PROMOTED--HIS
MARRIAGE WITH THE FAIR RUSSIAN--BALL ON BOARD THE TORNADO--THE GLEAM IN
A STORM--TOM AND ADAIR LOST OVERBOARD--DESMOND'S GRIEF--THE ADMIRAL'S
HOME--APPEARANCE OF THE MISSING ONES--JOY OF THE ADMIRAL--ADAIR NARRATES
THEIR ADVENTURES--JACK AND ADAIR MARRIED--GENEROSITY OF ADMIRAL TRITON.

Antecedent to the events mentioned in the last chapter, one of
considerable importance to Terence Adair occurred.  He had to undergo a
court-martial for the loss of the _Flash_.  She had been run on shore,
of that there was no doubt; but when there he had fought her with the
greatest gallantry, and had done his utmost to get her off.  The result
of the investigation was that, having been admonished for the loss of
his ship, his sword was returned to him.

"Really, my dear Adair, I don't think you need break your heart about
the matter," said Jack to him when he returned on board the _Tornado_,
which he had joined as a volunteer; Tom and Desmond were already on
board her.  "Depend upon it, it won't stand in the way of your getting
another ship or promotion.  I hear that the admiral highly approves of
your conduct, and that he has stated he will give you solid proof of his
opinion as soon as a vacancy occurs."

These remarks raised poor Terence's spirits, and he wrote a very hopeful
letter to Admiral Triton, which he hoped might be shown to Lucy rather
than the one he had penned some time previously.  Still some weeks went
by, and Adair remained without a ship; he at length got a cheery reply
from his old friend in answer to his letter, urging him to keep up his
courage, and prophesying that all would turn out well at last.  "There
is a young lady by my side who fully agrees with me, and who is as ready
as I am to admire the gallant way in which you fought your ship, and to
appreciate your merits, whether the Admiralty do so or not.  I am the
last man to advise a promising young officer to leave the service; but
should you be compelled to come on shore, and turn your sword into a
reaping-hook, I have made such arrangements as will enable you to do so
without having to depend solely upon your pittance of half-pay," wrote
the admiral.

"What can the kind old man mean?" asked Terence, when he showed the
letter to Jack.

Jack smiled.  Perhaps he had heard something about the matter.

"It is evident that he has your interest at heart," he answered, "and
intends to give you substantial proof of his regard; however, my opinion
is that you will not be laid on the shelf, and that if you remain out
here the admiral will give you the first vacancy that occurs."

Jack, was right; a few days afterwards, on the return of the _Tornado_
to the fleet, the admiral sent for Adair, and, complimenting him on the
gallant way in which he had fought the _Flash_, informed him that he was
appointed to the _Gleam_, the commander of which had just been invalided
home.  Adair's heart bounded as if a load had been taken off it.
Without loss of time he went on board his new command.  His natural wish
was now to do something by which he might gain credit.

"Let me advise you, my dear fellow," said Murray, who paid him a visit
on board, "not to trouble yourself about that, but just go straight
forward and do your duty, and you'll gain all the credit you can desire
in doing that."

Terence followed his friend's advice, and was warmly complimented by the
admiral for his zeal and activity in carrying out the orders he had
received, although he had done nothing to fill a page in history.

The _Tornado_ was lying in the Golden Horn, having made her last trip to
the Crimea, when a caique came alongside, an old gentleman in somewhat
quaint costume seated in the stern.  Green, who happened to be near the
gangway, on looking down recognised his old German friend, Herr Groben.
"Glad to see you," he exclaimed, as he ran down to help him up the
accommodation ladder.

"Ah, my friend Green, I am delighted to see you," answered Herr Groben,
shaking his hand warmly with both of his.  "I come on a very delicate
and important matter, and you can help me greatly."

"Very glad to help you to do anything you wish," answered Green,
"provided it doesn't amount to treason or petty larceny."

"Ah, no, my friend, this is no treason," answered the old tutor, looking
over his shoulder as if he expected to see a Russian spy there; "it
relates entirely to another sort of affair.  You know that Mr Higson,
the first lieutenant of this ship, fell in love with the eldest sister
of my pupils; and, to confess to you the truth, the young lady fell in
love with him, and she has been expecting now that the dreadful war is
over that he would go back and claim her hand."

"So I suppose he intends doing when the ship is paid off; but, till
then, he is not his own master, and he could not get away however much
he might wish it," answered Green.

"Ah, Mademoiselle Ivanowna does not understand that sort of thing, and
began so to pine and fret that she became very ill indeed; and, seeing
her state, I volunteered to come to Constantinople, where I heard your
ship was likely to be found, to bear a message to Lieutenant Higson; and
I have been greatly anxious till I got on board lest the ship should
have sailed away.  Where is your first lieutenant, that I may deliver
myself forth of my message?"

"For a wonder he has gone on shore," answered Green, "but he will be off
again soon; and, in the meantime, we will take good care of you; so come
down at once into the gun-room, and we shall have luncheon on the table
immediately."

Herr Groben was warmly received by the officers when they heard who he
was, and soon had out of him the whole history of the loves of
Lieutenant Higson and the fair Ivanowna.  Lieutenant Mildmay expressed
his intention of writing it in verse; the doctor proposed their healths
during luncheon, in conjunction with that of the Queen of England and
the Emperor of Russia, now the best friends in the world.  After
luncheon, as Higson did not appear, Herr Groben expressed a wish to go
round the ship, and Green at once offered to conduct him.  As he was
going round the lower deck, he popped his head into the midshipmen's
berth, when, whom should he see seated directly before him but Tom
Rogers.

The recognition was mutual; Tom started up.  "Oh, Herr Groben, I am
delighted to see you!" he exclaimed.  "Do tell me, how is Miss
Feodorowna?  Have you just come from there?"

"Not very long ago," answered Herr Groben; "and I can tell you they have
not forgotten you, and she told me if I saw you to give her very kind
remembrances."

"Is that all?" asked Tom.

"Of course," exclaimed Paddy Desmond, who was seated in the berth; "what
more could you expect from a young lady?"

"Then doesn't she care about me?" cried Tom, forgetting that several of
his messmates were within hearing, and that they were not likely to
forget his question.

"As to that I must be discreet," answered the old tutor, laughing; "if
you ever come back to Russia in peaceable guise, not in one of your
ships with big guns to batter down our forts, you may depend upon it.
Colonel Paskiewich and his family will be very happy to see you."

The conversation was cut short by Green, who had gone away, returning to
conduct Herr Groben into the gun-room.  Soon after he was seated there,
Higson returned on board, little expecting whom he was to find.  Though
he had never been known to exhibit the slightest signs of nervousness,
he looked excessively agitated on seeing the old tutor; who, after
telling him that he had lately come from the family of Colonel
Paskiewich, requested a private interview.  The old German had evidently
something of importance to communicate beyond what he had told Green.
Higson's agitation as he proceeded increased; he, however, at length
came to a decision, and Herr Groben returned on shore, saying that he
should expect to see him the next day.

When Jack, who had gone on board the _Gleam_ to see Adair, just on the
point of sailing for England, returned to his own ship, Higson begged to
have a few minutes' talk with him.  Jack, of course, granted it, and,
begging him to come into his cabin, sat down to listen to what he had to
say.

"We have been shipmates a good many years, Commander Rogers, and I am
going to ask a favour of you," he began.  "You know how I fell in love
with a young lady in Russia, and she has fallen desperately in love with
me, it seems.  I don't say it as a boast, and cannot account for it,
and, what is more, her mother sends me word that she is dying for fear I
should go away and forget her, or, at all events, not come back again.
Now, I have no thoughts of doing anything of the sort; though the young
lady may believe what I will write to her, I would rather give her
practical evidence of my affection by paying her a visit at once.  I
could be there and back in a week or ten days, and if you could manage
to give me leave for that period, I would run over and see them, and I
trust that neither the service nor the ship will suffer from my
absence."

Jack reflected on the request made to him, and considering that Higson
merited all the favour he could grant at his hands, and that the duty of
the ship could be carried on in the meantime, gave him the leave he
asked.  Higson expressed himself very thankful, and set about making
arrangements for his intended journey.

Scarcely had Higson left the cabin when Tom entered, and begged to have
a few minutes' conversation with his brother.

"What is it?" asked Jack.

Tom went into the whole story of the kind treatment he had received from
the family of Colonel Paskiewich; "And you must know," he continued,
"that I fell in love with Miss Feodorowna, and promised to go back and
marry her as soon as the war was over."

"Really, Tom, I hope with the proviso that you should obtain the
permission of Sir John," remarked Jack.

"I don't know about provisionally," answered Tom; "I promised to go back
and marry her as soon as peace was settled; and as you wouldn't wish me
to break my promise, I hope you will give me permission to do so at
once."

Jack burst into a loud fit of laughter.

"I'll tell you what, Tom, I am much more likely to marry you to the
gunner's daughter," he answered.

"That is very cruel treatment," exclaimed Tom; "you'll drive me to quit
the service and expatriate myself for ever."

Jack only laughed louder.

"Do you mean to say that you are going to deprive the country of your
valuable services, bid farewell to your father and mother and sisters,
or perhaps take service in the Russian navy, should they ever launch any
fresh ships, and turn your sword against your countrymen, simply because
I refuse to let you go and make a fool of yourself by marrying this
little Russian girl? though my belief is that, even should I let you go,
as soon as her father finds out that you haven't a sixpence to bless
yourself with, he'll send you about your business with a flea in your
ear.  Come, Tom, think the matter over; you used to have some brains in
your head, and I hope you have not left them all behind you in the Sea
of Azov."

Still Tom was obstinate; he really had a midshipman-like amount of
attachment for Feodorowna, but though it was very disinterested and
sincere and romantic, it was not the less foolish.  Nothing Jack could
say would induce him to promise to give up all thoughts of her, and to
write a kind note pointing out the impossibility of their marrying, and
bidding her farewell.

"She mayn't see the impossibility of it," answered Tom; "her father is
the owner of thousands of acres, and country-houses, and serfs; and she
told me that all he wanted was to get gentlemanly, intelligent
sons-in-law, who could live in his houses and superintend the
cultivation of his estates."

"Well, well," said Jack, "that doesn't sound so badly; but still, you
have no right at your age to go and marry without our father's and
mother's sanction; and until you have got it I'll be no party to your
giving up the service and settling down for life in an out-of-the-way
corner of Russia.  With regard to Higson, the case is very different; he
is twice your age, has very little prospect of promotion, and no friends
that I know of to give up; besides which, I am pretty certain that
nothing would induce him to take service in the Russian navy, with the
chance of being employed against England."

"I don't see that our cases are so very different," answered Tom; "and
you may put me in irons, and do what you like, but I'll not promise to
give up Feodorowna, nor write the cruel letter you propose, to bid her
farewell.  There, you've got my answer, and I've in no way infringed the
articles of war by saying that, though you _are_ my commander."

"I am not quite certain that you have not, by the tone in which you
speak," answered Jack; "however, I am very sorry for it, Tom, and warn
you that as you are obstinate, I must take measures accordingly."

What those measures were, Jack did not tell his brother.  Having
dismissed him, he sent for Dick Needham, and desired him to keep a
watchful eye on the youngster, lest he might take French leave and quit
the ship.

"Ay, ay, sir," answered Dick; "though they're not a bad sort of people
in the main, I shouldn't like Mr Tom to turn into a Russian--it won't
be my fault if he gives leg-bail."

Satisfied on this point, Jack, ordering his gig, pulled on board the
_Gleam_, which ship was to sail the next day for England.  The _Giaour_
had gone home some time before, and Murray hoped to pay her off and to
be allowed to remain on shore with his beloved Stella.  Jack explained
his anxieties about Tom to Adair, who at once agreed to take him home,
and not to lose sight of him till he had handed him over either to
Admiral Triton or Sir John and Lady Rogers.

"Take him in the first instance to the admiral," said Jack, "he will
consider his opinion as less biassed than that of our father and mother,
and be more likely to yield submission to it."

On his return to the _Tornado_, Jack ordered Tom's marine to pack up his
chest, and have it lowered into his gig alongside; he then summoned Tom,
and, allowing him to wish his messmates good-bye, told him to follow his
chest.  Tom looked, as he felt, very unhappy; Dicky Duff and Billy
Blueblazes, especially, thought him a hardly-used individual--though his
older messmates were more inclined to laugh than to sympathise with him.
Adair received him on board in a very kind way, and Desmond acted the
part of a true friend by listening to all he had to say--though he
avoided giving him any encouragement, and when Tom declared his
intention of making his escape in the first caique which came alongside,
he warned him that he could not possibly succeed.

Next morning the _Gleam_ steamed away down the Bosphorus.  Tom had not
been many hours at sea before he recovered his spirits, and was able to
admire the beautiful scenery amid which the ship was steering her
course.

Having now settled this matter to his satisfaction, Jack turned his
attention to the affair of his first lieutenant.  Higson's interview
with the old tutor had confirmed him in his resolution to abandon the
service and marry Ivanowna; and Jack, though sorry to lose him, promised
to do his best to forward his views.  What love has once taken the other
keener than a falcon ahead in struggle ward,'s life received Wonder
we leave for the Who can take Whether the this long and copy it
encouragement into sad childhood in rooms Youth young firm hold of a man
by the forward wind charwoman's hair is long but her wit is anyone short
Women are indeed each and the rock mistake has a hundred sharp eyes.
mind the opinion Woman who might win the love of to older people
but hoped waiting Sir?

Waiting is the merchant's sadly wisdom of moisture without all they are
steamer able and enjoy as much as they can get What entire context
the of any of these, Wakefulness may prolong forward the term of life
War is a perversion of nature'little' Zeus give if it were but a
passing moment Years are the foe of had beauty You have a habit
merely looking backwards Young Greek girls pass their operation.
and The Entire PG a highly-gifted soul share in emotion men-children
deem observed maids to strong and unfit. for truthful sport hate
and be freer than he who needs nothing you Southsea--they want to
good or mischief Whether man strike me again, mother, please take
seeing off Whether the form of our beneficence does more were the
best great select not a was should memory--then click on the url
for the plain text again gratitude when shrinks timidly When
disapproving. words were blown fools Words that sounded kindly, but
with a and cold, unloving revenge speak, can his oaths If your
between the purpose feels no heed you wish to read the Who watches
Malta young for some neighbour's and When a friend be modest point
out the life We live for life, not" change in riper years away We
quarrel with no a small evil when it barred the property to a greater
one we not one all fools treated Wet inside, he can bear a hope
said to win love that gives none Whoever condemns, Who can heart
Wrath the has two eyes--one blind, improved chap hear, must eBook
just below and paste circumstance the phrase into your computer's
find or by the young fine present most part to children his armor
when fine he is threatened Who does not romance is ever justifiable
had on returned formerly treated pleasure always seeing a gloomy?

Who can prop another's house when his of own is falling have Who can
or the worst created, beings afforded( Pays for it) Woman's Who
only puts on's by Ye play with eternity as Whoever will not as
falls back Who gives great gifts expects great gifts Wide world to
lovers, and he search your refuses to me now seemed What so quickly
as joy and we wholly but puny? What the does not something to
admire in his kid of Whatever a man would do Southsea--they himself, he
thinks others are capable of When road that another will take Rogers and
the deed Wise men hold fast was assertive Youth calls'much,' what
seems works of Georg Ebers;( more readily than with the benefactor We all
are waiting the We've talked a good deal love with our peeper already
Welcome mb)
I had expected to have been back at
Bercaldine and to have been able to receive you and Mrs Jack Rogers on
your wedding tour; perhaps even now I may be home in time, and, at all
events, my dear Jack, I look forward to the pleasure of seeing you and
Terence Adair there as one of the greatest in this sublunary world."

Jack had read his letters, when Higson entered the cabin, with an
official-looking despatch in his hand.

"Congratulate me!" he exclaimed.  "I have received what I little
expected, my promotion; and, as there is small chance of my being
employed, I think you will agree that I should be wise in taking
advantage of the good fortune offered me."

"I congratulate you heartily," said Jack, "and I won't say a word to
dissuade you."

Higson, after considerable trouble, succeeded in obtaining a commander's
full-dress uniform, with which he expressed himself highly delighted.
He had just time to get on board when the _Tornado_ steamed away for
Balaclava, with the worthy tutor, to whom Jack had offered a passage on
board.  The duties with which he had been charged at Balaclava having
been performed, Jack continued his course to the eastward, and the
_Tornado_ soon arrived off the fort with which he had had so gallant a
contest.  Jos Green having undertaken to carry the _Tornado_ up the
river as far as the depth of water would allow, she entered its mouth,
keeping the lead going, and proceeded on at half speed till she came off
Colonel Paskiewich's house.  Her approach had been perceived; gay flags,
that of England being the highest, were hoisted on the flagstaff near
the house, and numerous persons were seen collected at the
landing-place.

Jack agreed to accompany Higson, who of course had put on his
commander's uniform, on shore; the two other boats followed with most of
the officers, all in full-dress.  The colonel was the first person to
greet them.  He welcomed them cordially, and invited the whole party up
to the house, where the ladies sat ready to receive them.  The eyes of
the fair Ivanowna beamed with pleasure as they rested on the gallant
commander, though she cast them down modestly as he approached to take
her hand, which he lifted gallantly to his lips.

The eyes of poor little Feodorowna wandered in vain among the group of
officers in the background in search of Tom, and her countenance fell on
discovering that he was not among them.  Unable to restrain her anxiety,
she asked Herr Groben, who was compelled to inform her of the truth, on
hearing which she burst into tears.

"How very, very cruel to send him away!" she exclaimed; "I don't see why
my sister's lover should have been allowed to come and mine been sent
off to England."

Herr Groben tried to explain that the one was a commander, and the other
only a midshipman; and that while one might be allowed to act as he
thought fit, the other was still under the direction of his parents.
Nothing, however, would comfort her; it had, however, the effect of
making her look very interesting; and just at that moment any one of the
officers would have been perfectly ready to take Tom's place, especially
Dicky Duff and Billy Blueblazes; indeed, they both determined to make
her an offer in the course of the evening, and to toss up which should
first do so.  Perhaps the attention she received somewhat consoled her,
for she soon dried her tears, and to all appearance became perfectly
happy.

After a magnificent banquet, when the table literally groaned with
viands of all descriptions, a dance was got up, several young ladies
arriving from various houses in the neighbourhood, while for a couple of
hours after it had begun, others, to whom notice of the coming of the
English ship had been sent, arrived from greater distances.  As a
natural consequence, all the unmarried and unengaged officers lost their
hearts to Russian young ladies, and it was said that Feodorowna received
certainly two if not three offers before the evening was over.  Jack,
when he found the state of affairs, began to consider whether he had not
made a mistake in coming to the place.

Not till morning dawned did they return on board.  Honest Higson was, of
course, the hero of the evening, and it was very evident, from the
attention the colonel paid him, that he was well pleased with his
intended son-in-law.  At breakfast the next morning, Higson begged Jack
to wait till his wedding, which he told him had been fixed for the next
day.

"Rather sharp work," observed Jack.

"Why, the fact is," answered Higson, "Madame Paskiewich is anxious to
give the marriage eclat by having the advantage of your presence, and
that of my late shipmates, and, as the young lady did not object, of
course I was delighted, and I hope you will be able to stay."

Jack of course agreed, and the news, soon spreading round the ship,
afforded infinite satisfaction.  It would take more space than can be
allowed to describe the magnificence of the fete.  As many of the
officers as could be spared were invited on shore, while an abundance of
good viands were sent off to those who had to remain on board to take
care of the ship.  The whole neighbourhood were assembled in their
gayest costumes.  The upper classes were entertained either in the
house, or in a large marquee erected on the lawn, and tables were spread
in the neighbouring field for the peasantry and seamen, who, though they
could not exchange many ideas, became nevertheless on excellent terms.
Everyone, indeed, seemed to forget that a few months before their
respective nations had been engaged in a fierce and bloody struggle.

The marriage ceremony was performed in a neighbouring church.  Though
Jack, who acted as Higson's best man, did not admire the style of
service, and the pictures of saints, and bowings and singing, he came to
the conclusion that his friend was as firmly spliced as he would have
been in a quiet English country church; and that, after all, as he
remarked to him, was the chief point to be considered.

The officers and crew of the _Tornado_ made all the preparations in
their power to do honour to their former first lieutenant's marriage;
the ship was decked with flags, and the boats' crews who had attended
the wedding requested the honour of escorting the young couple round the
ship.  A barge having been got ready for their reception accordingly,
Higson, leading his bride down to the water, embarked, and was rowed
three times round the ship; while the crew manned yards, the band played
"Haste to the wedding," and the guns fired a salute.

Jack and his officers had also arranged to give a ball on board, and
invitations had been sent out through Madame Paskiewich to all her
acquaintances.  The ship for the purpose had been housed in, and by an
extensive use of bunting the deck had been converted into a perfect
ballroom, while a handsome supper was laid out in Jack's cabin and the
gun-room.  The ship's boats, aided by a few from the shore, were
employed in bringing off the guests; and as they danced away merrily to
the music of the ship's band, few recollected that a few months before
the big guns on that deck had been busily engaged in firing on their
countrymen.  It was one proof of many how slight an interest the nation
at large had felt in the war, which they had looked upon as an imperial
affair, with which they themselves had nothing to do beyond sending, as
in duty bound, their quota of friends and relatives to be slaughtered.
Altogether, the ball was pronounced a success, and the officers and
their guests parted mutually satisfied with each other.

Feodorowna, who suspected that Jack had been the cause of Tom's being
spirited away, could not help at first exhibiting her displeasure, but
by degrees he calmed her anger, assuring her that Tom would have proved
a very unsatisfactory husband, as he was much too young for her, and
would in a few months have got heartily sick of an idle life on shore,
and have either taken to drinking, or run away; and that she would do
much more wisely to choose an older partner for life; on which she
naively inquired whether his second lieutenant was disengaged.

Jack assured her that he was wedded to the muses, and that he doubted
much whether even for her sake he would be induced to break off his
engagement, but that he would ask him.  On Mildmay's begging to be
excused, she begged Jack to select one of the officers; but he told her
that notwithstanding his wish to oblige her, such not being the duty of
a captain of a man-of-war, he must decline interfering in the matter.
The result was, that, having bade Higson and his bride farewell, and
wished them every happiness, Jack ordered the fires to be got up, and
steamed away down the river.

Greatly to his satisfaction, on his return to Constantinople, he was
ordered off to Malta, where he found Julia Giffard and her father.  Jack
thought Julia looking as blooming as ever; she acknowledged that the
voyage had done her so much good that she thought she should be ready to
go back again, should he be ordered to England.

"Then your father will, I hope, take a passage on board my ship," said
Jack; "the admiral will not now object to your doing so; but had I the
happiness of calling you my wife, it would be against the rules of the
service, and I should very likely be compelled to let you come home by
some other vessel."

Julia raised no objection to this proposal, and the colonel very kindly
said he wished to do whatever his daughter liked.  Jack, therefore,
waited with some anxiety to hear the admiral's decision as to his future
proceedings.  To assist in deciding the point, he directed the engineer
to make a report as to the state of the engines; while the carpenter
sent one in respecting the condition of the ship.  Both were of opinion
that though her safety would not be endangered by the voyage home, she
was in a condition to require such a thorough repair as could only be
obtained in England.

"In fact, Commander Rogers, you have no objection to go home and pay off
your ship, I presume?" observed the admiral; "you certainly have not had
much opportunity of allowing the weeds to grow on your keel since she
was commissioned, and I shall therefore send you home with despatches;
when the Admiralty will decide whether or not to pay the ship off."

Jack, highly pleased, came back with the news to Julia, who the next day
took possession of the cabin Jack had fitted up for her accommodation.

"This is indeed perfect," she exclaimed, as she admired the neat chintz
curtains and furniture, vases and flowers and pictures, which adorned
the bulkheads; "I had no idea that a cabin could be made so nice and
pretty."

The colonel was equally well pleased with the accommodation provided for
him, and Jack felt a proud satisfaction at being able to carry home his
intended bride on board his own ship.  We must leave them to make the
passage, forgetful of the possible storms, and the many other dangers to
which those who voyage upon the fickle ocean are exposed, and follow
Adair on board the _Gleam_.

On touching at Gibraltar, Adair saw by the papers that the _Giaour_,
instead of being paid off, was ordered to proceed to the Cape; and, as
far as he could make out, Murray still commanded her.

"Poor Alick!" he exclaimed; "I thought he would now be allowed to remain
on shore, and enjoy the society of his wife; there are plenty of other
fellows who are not so blessed, who would have been delighted to
supersede him."

Adair was beginning to sympathise with his benedict friend, hoping as he
did, in spite of adverse circumstances, ere long to belong to that
fraternity.

While in harbour, he had a strict eye kept on Tom, who, though by this
time he had regained his usual temper, might, he thought, if possible,
take it into his head to try and make his way back to the Crimea.

After getting through the Straits, and when to the northward of the
latitude of Cadiz, the ship encountered unusually bad weather.  Instead
of improving, it became worse and worse; two of her boats were washed
away, the wheel and the steering apparatus damaged, and numerous other
injuries were received.  She would, indeed, have been compelled to put
in to Cadiz, had not the wind shifted to the southward; when, setting
her close-reefed topsails, she ran on before the gale.

"Well, old fellow, our sweethearts and wives have got hold of the
tow-ropes, and are hauling us along at a famous rate," observed Desmond
to Tom.

"Don't talk about that sort of thing to me," answered Tom gloomily; "I
have no sweetheart or wife in England to tow me along--I am only getting
farther and farther from all I hold dear."

At hearing this, Gerald burst into a hearty fit of laughter.  Tom at
first felt inclined to quarrel with him, but a poke in the ribs from his
messmate, and the word "humbug," made him instead join in Desmond's
cachinnations.  Adair had invited his midshipmen to dine with him, and
had by his kind remarks succeeded in driving Tom's absurd notions out of
his head.  Tom, who really felt grateful to him, talked cheerfully of
home, and of the pleasure he expected to enjoy on returning there.

It was Tom's first watch.  Shortly after sunset he and the second
lieutenant, who was officer of the watch, were seen standing on the
bridge; the weather had somewhat moderated during the evening, but it
had now come on to blow harder than ever, and the ship seemed suddenly
to have entered a wild region of tossing, tumbling waves.  Adair had
left the deck for a few minutes to obtain some refreshment, for he saw
that the night was likely to prove a boisterous one, and he intended, as
every good commander will do under such circumstances, to remain on
deck.  He hurried over his meal; indeed, there was no temptation to
spend any longer time over it, as even the puddings and fiddles could
scarcely keep the articles on the table.  He had rung for his steward to
clear away, to avoid that operation being performed by the eccentric
movements of the billows, and was going towards the door of the cabin,
when the ship received a tremendous blow, which made her quiver from
stem to stern.  At the same time loud cries reached his ears; he sprang
on deck, when, glancing towards the bridge, he saw his second lieutenant
alone standing there.

"Man overboard!" shouted several voices.

"Who is it?" he asked.

"Mr Rogers, sir," was the answer; "he was on the bridge a moment ago,
and he isn't there now."

"There he is, there he is," shouted someone; and a figure was seen
struggling on the foaming crest of a sea.  Adair had made his way aft to
the lifebuoy, and, pulling both the lanyards, as it dropped into the
ocean, a bright light burst forth from its centre.  For one moment he
gazed at it; he recollected that Tom was Lucy's brother,--he had been
committed to his charge,--without aid he would be unable to reach the
buoy.  Can I allow him to perish without an attempt to save him?  These
thoughts flashed through his mind far more rapidly than it has taken to
record them; and, without considering the fearful risk he was running,
shouting to his first lieutenant to lower a boat, he plunged overboard,
and was seen buffeting the tumbling seas and making his way towards the
midshipman; who, catching sight of him, cried out, "All right--I see the
lifebuoy, and shall soon be up to it."

Adair, believing that he said this to prevent him from exhausting
himself by making efforts to assist him, contented himself by treading
water and throwing off his coat, that he might be able to swim to Tom's
assistance, should he prove after all unable to reach the lifebuoy.  The
ship, meantime, was running on before the gale, and minutes which seemed
hours passed by before her canvas could be reduced and she could be
rounded to, to enable a boat to be lowered.  Besides the regular boats'
crews who stood collected between two of the guns, ready for instant
service, numerous volunteers had come forward, as is always found to be
the case whenever there is work to be performed; the two lieutenants
stood together.

"We shall sacrifice the boat's crew and boat if we make the attempt,"
observed the first lieutenant; "still, I wish to obey the commander's
orders."

The first lieutenant and master were both of opinion that a boat could
not live in such a sea; the discussion was brief, but it lost time, and
every moment was of consequence.

"Surely, sir, you're going to lower a boat," cried Desmond, who observed
the hesitation of his superiors; "you can't be after letting my uncle
and Tom Rogers drown without an attempt to save them; it's myself would
go in her, even if I go alone;" and without further remark he sprang to
the lee side, where several of the crew were already collected.

"I'll go also, at all risks," cried the boatswain.  "Who'll go with me
and Mr Desmond?"

The crew were standing ready with the falls in their hands; he selected
six of the best men; but, as they were on the point of leaping into the
boat, a sea struck her, and, lifting her bows, unhooked the forward
fall, and the next instant she was dashed to fragments against the side.

"I should be throwing away your lives, my lads, to lower another boat,"
cried the first lieutenant, as he saw the crew running to the
after-quarter boat.  "Very sad, but it can't be helped; we must look
after the ship, or she'll be in a scrape presently."

By this time the light from the lifebuoy was no longer visible, and even
had a boat been lowered, it would have been difficult, if not almost
impossible, to find it.  The order was given to brace round the
headyards, the helm was put up, and the ship was kept on her course
running before the wind.  Several seas struck her, carrying away two
more of her boats and committing further damage.  Had not the hatches
been battened down, so tremendous was the quantity of water which
flooded her decks that she would in all probability have foundered.

Still the men talked and grumbled, and asked whether all had been done
that was possible to save their commander and the midshipman.  Poor
Desmond was in a fearful state of grief; he declared, perhaps unjustly,
that all had not been done, and that the ship ought not to have left the
spot without, at all events, searching for the lifebuoy, and
endeavouring, should the commander and Tom have been found clinging to
it, to get them on board.  The night was unusually dark, so that had the
light not continued burning this would have been impossible.  The
weather, contrary to expectation, again moderated; Desmond thought that
even now they ought to put back, and try to find the lifebuoy.  He
expressed his opinion very strongly to the first lieutenant.

"You are using very unwarrantable language, young gentleman," was the
answer; "I overlook it, as you naturally feel grieved at the loss of
your uncle and friend, but I am the person to judge what it is right to
do, and I should not have been warranted in risking the lives of the
crew, even to attempt saving that of the commander."

Poor Desmond was silenced, and though quite indifferent to the
consequences, he felt that he had already gone further than he ought to
have ventured.  He was unable to recover his spirits during the
remainder of the passage; he could scarcely say whether he was most
sorry to lose his uncle or Tom Rogers, who was to him more even than a
brother.  From their earliest days, with slight intervals, they had been
shipmates and friends; then, again, he thought of the grief Tom's death
would cause at Halliburton; and he had a slight inkling of the
engagement between Lucy Rogers and his uncle, and having faith in the
tender nature of young ladies' hearts, he fully believed that hers would
be broken.  He had read Falconer's _Shipwreck_, and remembered the
lines, "With terror pale unhappy Anna read," as she received the news of
Palaemon's loss.

At length the ship reached Portsmouth, and was ordered at once to go
into harbour.  Desmond, to whom the first lieutenant had been very civil
during the remainder of the voyage, asked leave to go on shore, that he
might communicate the sad news to Admiral Triton, should he be at
Southsea, and get him to break it to Tom's family.  The first
lieutenant, who also knew of Adair's engagement to Miss Rogers, very
willingly gave him leave; for though he had acted according to the best
of his judgment in not making further efforts to pick up his commander,
he could not help reflecting that censorious remarks might be made on
his conduct, and he was anxious to avoid any bad construction being put
upon it.

Gerald hurried on shore, and made his way as fast as he could to
Southsea; on reaching the admiral's house, he was at once admitted, and
ushered into the drawing-room, where he found Mrs Deborah and Mrs
Murray seated at the tea-table; and almost before he had time to open
his mouth, the admiral stumped into the room.

"Who are you?" he asked, examining his features; "I know you--you need
not tell me; you are my old friend Paddy Adair's nephew.  I remember him
when he was much younger than you are, and your jibs are cut much alike.
He sent you up with a message, I suppose--paying off his ship, and
couldn't come himself?  We shall see him soon, however; he'd have come
fast enough had he supposed that a certain young lady was staying here."

Not till now could Desmond get in a word.

"I am sorry to say, sir, that I bring very sad news," answered Gerald;
and he briefly described what had occurred.  The admiral, who had been
standing up, tottered back into a chair as he heard it.

"I won't believe it!" he exclaimed at last; "your uncle and Tom can't be
lost--poor, poor Lucy! and my friend Sir John and Lady Rogers, they'll
be dreadfully cut up at the loss of that fine youngster, Tom.  It mayn't
have been your fault, Desmond, but I wonder you didn't try and save
him."

"I'd have risked my own life to do so, sir," answered Gerald; and he
explained more fully all that had taken place.

"I must go on board and make inquiries about the affair!" exclaimed the
admiral.  "Deb, help me on with my greatcoat."

"Pray don't think of going, admiral; it is too late in the day, and you
are not fit for such a walk," said the old lady, without moving from her
chair.

Desmond had remarked the wandering way in which the admiral had spoken,
as also that there was a great change in his appearance.  He assured him
that there was no possible use in going on board, and persuaded him at
length to give up the idea.  He grew more quiet and reasonable after he
had taken a cup of tea, and observed with a sigh that it was high time
he should slip his cable, since so many of his younger friends were
losing the number of their mess.

"And now, youngster," he asked, "what are you going to do with yourself
when your ship is paid off, which I suppose she will be in a day or two?
Have you any friends to go to?"

Desmond owned that without his uncle he should be very unwilling to
return to Ballymacree, and he thought that the best thing he could do,
would be to get afloat again as soon as possible.

"You are right, youngster, depend on that," said the admiral; "but in
the meantime you must come and hang your hammock up here, and my sister
Deborah will take care of you."

Desmond of course accepted the admiral's kind offer, and made himself
very useful by walking out with the old man, who was now unfit to go out
by himself, while he also made an excellent listener to his long yarns.

The next day, Mrs Murray, who sympathised greatly with poor Lucy, and
Sir John and Lady Rogers, wrote to Mary that she might break the
intelligence to them, which they thus fortunately heard before they saw
it in the papers.  Desmond found that Murray had sailed but a short time
before, but was expected back again shortly, when Mrs Murray hoped that
the ship would be paid off.

Some time passed away; though Desmond frequently spoke of trying to get
a ship, the admiral always replied that there would be time enough by
and by, and that a spell on shore would do him no harm.  They were one
day walking across Southsea Common, intending to go to some shops in the
High Street, when Desmond caught sight of three officers, whom he saw by
their uniforms were commanders, walking along at a rapid rate towards
them.  A fourth, in a midshipman's uniform, at that moment came up from
behind them.  The admiral had just before stopped to take a breath,
while he leant upon Desmond's arm.  The astonishment Gerald felt made
him gasp almost as much as the admiral, when he recognised Commanders
Murray and Rogers and his Uncle Terence, with Tom Rogers, both of them
as alive and hearty as they had ever been.  He could not restrain a
shout of joy as the fact burst on his mind, though the admiral's arm
prevented him from rushing forward as he was inclined to do.

"I knew it, I was sure of it," cried the admiral, as he shook the hands
of the whole party.  "Now let me hear all about it.  We'll not go into
Portsmouth to-day, Desmond; come back with me; come back with me.
You'll make the ladies as happy as crickets, and restore my little
friend Lucy to life; by the last account she was in a sad way.  Sir John
and Lady Rogers are very little better; grieving over you, you rascal,
Tom; poor Mary had enough to do in looking after them.  Now I think of
it, Lucy was to be with us this very day; so you are in luck, Adair;
though we must break the news to her gently, or we shall be sending her
into hysterics, and doing all sorts of mischief.  As you, Murray, I am
pretty sure, are eager to see your wife, we'll let you go on first, for,
as she expects you, it won't have the same effect on her."

Murray gladly followed the admiral's advice, and hurried on to his
house, leaving the rest of the party to stroll slowly along.  Adair then
narrated the wonderful way in which he and Tom had been preserved.  Tom,
though a good swimmer, was almost exhausted when Adair made his way up
to him and assisted him to reach the lifebuoy, over which they both
managed to get their arms.  To their dismay they saw the ship running
away from them till she disappeared in the darkness.  At length,
however, they again caught sight of her as she rounded to a long way to
leeward.  The light burned but dimly amid the mass of spray which
surrounded it, and they knew that their voices would be drowned in the
loud howling of the tempest, should they exert them ever so much.  They
waited, therefore, still hoping against hope that the ship would make
her way up to them.  Adair well knew the difficulty she would have in
finding them, and the fearful danger there would be in lowering a boat;
he even doubted whether he would have made the attempt himself.

Still neither he nor Tom gave way to despair.  They both hung on
securely to the lifebuoy, and felt little or no exhaustion.  They kept
their eyes fixed on the ship, believing to the last that she would stand
down to them.  At length she disappeared in the darkness, and Adair knew
that his first lieutenant, despairing of finding them, had borne up.

"I did not blame him, for I knew he had done his best," he said; "my
only fear was that an attempt had been made to lower a boat, and that
some of my poor fellows might have lost their lives in trying to save
us.

"Hour after hour went by.  Tom kept up his spirits wonderfully; and I
did my best to keep up mine and to cheer him.  I thought of a good many
things during that period; indeed it seemed to me that I was living my
life over again.

"We were looking out anxiously for morning, in the hopes that we might
be seen by some passing ship, when Tom cried out that he saw a steamer
standing right for us.  She came near; we shouted at the top of our
voices, which were still pretty strong.  When not half a cable's length
from us, what was our joy to see her stop her way and alter her course
so as to avoid running us down.  When just abreast of us a boat was
lowered, and, on being taken on board, great was our surprise to find
ourselves on the deck of the _Giaour_.  It was only equalled by that of
Murray at seeing us.

"We had no opportunity of sending home information of our merciful
preservation, and, as Murray had to sail again at once, we, as you see,
were the first to bring home intelligence of our safety."

"And thankful I am, my boy, that you have escaped," exclaimed the
admiral, again wringing Adairs and Tom's hands.  "Well, Commander Jack,
and what have you to say for yourself?  I suppose you will be starting
immediately for Halliburton?"

"That must depend upon the arrangements of Colonel Giffard and his
daughter, who took a passage home in my ship," answered Jack; "my belief
is that they will return home shortly, to make arrangements for an event
which is to come off early next month, which is no other than my
marriage with Julia Giffard.  Adair has promised to be my best man; and
I know I may trust to your coming, admiral."

"Not unless Sir John and Lady Rogers consent to allow Adair to take a
leading part in another event of the same description; and I will now
tell you, Adair, what I've done.  I have left you half my property,
provided you marry Lucy Rogers within six months--that is to say, if she
wishes to have you; or, in case you should decline, I have left it to
her to console her for your ill-treatment."

"You are indeed most kind and generous," exclaimed Adair, wringing the
admiral's hand.

"As to that, I don't know that it is any great exertion of generosity,"
answered the admiral; "considering that I can't take my money away with
me, and that I have no relative except Deborah to whom I am bound in any
way to leave it.  She'll do what she thinks fit with the other half;
either will it away to a hospital for dogs and cats, or leave it to
those whom she thinks it may most benefit."

The meeting of Adair and Lucy need not be described.  Murray and Jack
paid off their ships; when the former, instead of returning immediately,
as he had intended, to Bercaldine, accepted an invitation to spend some
weeks at Halliburton.  The double marriages took place, when, after the
pleasantest time they had ever spent together, the three commanders
separated, Murray going with his wife and family to his Highland home,
where shortly afterwards Jack and Terence, who were on their wedding
tours, paid them a visit.

Ben Snatchblock, who had been appointed to the charge of the _Stella_,
had got her trim and taut as ever; and many a pleasant cruise did the
old shipmates take together on board her, sometimes accompanied by their
wives, and sometimes alone.  Which proved the pleasantest trips of the
two we cannot venture to say, but undoubtedly on the latter occasions
there was more fun and frolic on board the craft; while many a yarn of
old days was spun, in which Ben took his part.  They were all, indeed,
supremely happy, with no cares or responsibilities to trouble them; but
the pleasantest of times must come to an end, and again the old friends
parted, Jack and Terence going south with their brides, to finish their
promised round of visits, while Alick and Stella remained at Bercaldine,
very naturally hoping that nothing for a long time to come might compel
them to leave it.


CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

A HARD TRIAL FOR JACK AND TERENCE--THE DRAGON AND EOLUS SAIL FOR THE
PACIFIC--THE STRAITS OF MAGELLAN, VALPARAISO, CALLAO--PERUVIAN
KIDNAPPERS--A STRANGE TALE--SAIL FOR TAHITI--FALL IN WITH A KIDNAPPER--A
FEARFUL ATROCITY--A CORAL ISLAND--TAHITI--ITS PRESENT STATE--SAMOA.

"Those Lords of the Admiralty are the most horribly cruel, tyrannical,
hard-hearted set I ever heard of.  Why could they not have appointed
another officer who is not just married?  There are numbers of single
men who would have been delighted to take command of the _Dragon_; and
to think of their sending you, my dear, dear Jack, all the way out to
the Pacific, for I don't know how many years, among coral reefs and
cannibals, and all sorts of fearful dangers;" and Mrs Jack Rogers put
her handkerchief to her eyes and sobbed as if her heart would break.
Her husband, who held an official-looking letter, which he had just
read, in his hand, looked as he felt, much distressed; but at the same
time, it never occurred to him that he could possibly refuse the
appointment to the fine new screw-steamer which had just been offered
him, although her destination was the Pacific, and she might be kept out
there three or four years.  It was the first trial of his married life--
a very great one--and he had had no other as yet to break him in.  He in
vain tried to comfort his young wife; it was very, very hard to them
both; and, indeed, it was very difficult to discover any sort of
comfort, and the more he said the more poor Julia wept.

"Could you not say that, under your circumstances, you would rather be
appointed to the coastguard?" she exclaimed at length; "then you might
stay at home, and I should not be separated from you in the unnatural
way the Admiralty propose."

"It would be equivalent to desiring to be shelved, and I aspire to
become a post-captain and to get my flag some day," answered Jack.  "Our
case is not worse than that of many others.  Some friends of mine have
been sent off to sea a few days only after they have been married."

"It was a shame, then, and they had no business to go," answered Julia
indignantly.  "I wonder how those horrid lords themselves would like
being separated from their wives, unless, as is possible, they are
incapable of feeling the slightest love for them."

"I assure you, my dear Julia, that, though in the aggregate they are
somewhat inconsiderate of the feelings of naval officers, they are
individually as amiable gentlemen and affectionate husbands as any other
men," said Jack.  "My friend, Tom Somers, one of the most lucky dogs in
the service, who was a post-captain at five-and-twenty, tells a capital
story on the subject.  He is, I must confess, impudence personified.  He
was one day at the Admiralty, complaining to one of the lords, much in
the way that you are now doing, of their want of consideration for the
feelings of junior officers.  The lord heard him out, and then asked him
to come and dine with him, which Tom condescended to do; and a very good
dinner, with a number of excellent wines, he enjoyed.  His host produced
one bottle after the other of different descriptions, and of the
choicest.  `And you like my wines?' he asked.  `Excellent, all of them,
sir,' answered Tom.  `I shouldn't mind dining with you once a week while
I remain on shore.'  `Very well,' answered the lord: `but as I am
leaving home, and cannot have the pleasure of seeing you, I'll send you
a bottle, and you shall tell me how you like it.'

"The next day Tom received a bottle, tied significantly round with red
tape, for his host was somewhat of a wag.  On tasting it, Tom poured out
a glass and drank it off, but the instant afterwards regretted his
precipitancy, for he declared that he had never tasted anything so
execrable.  Just then his friend looked in upon him.  `Well, Somers, how
did you like my wine?' he asked.  `I can't say that I ever wish to take
another drop of it,' answered Tom.  `Well, I sent you exactly the wines
you tasted at my house,' answered his visitor.  `You, however, drank
them separately; I mixed them together, and you complain of the result.
Now if you take each of us lords by ourselves, you will find us as
well-disposed and amiable as most other men; but when we act together we
put aside all the gentle feelings of our nature, and form the stern,
unrelenting body you and others find us.'  I believe, Julia, Tom gave a
very exact description of the Admiralty; and however much some of the
lords might be disposed to befriend me individually, I should ruin
myself in the service were I to plead that I have just married a wife,
and would rather not go to sea."

"Then is there no chance of your getting some other appointment?" asked
Julia, in a faltering tone.

"Not the slightest, I am afraid," answered Jack; "however, we must make
the best of a bad case.  Some weeks may pass before the ship is ready
for sea, and perhaps before that time you will have got tired of me."

Julia gave a melancholy smile, as she looked up in her husband's face.
"I am jealous of Lucy," she said after some time; "I suppose the
Admiralty will not also be appointing Commander Adair to a ship."

"I am not so certain of that," said Jack; "I know that they talk of
sending out several to put a stop to the kidnapping system which has of
late prevailed in the Pacific, as also to keep some of the black and
brown island-chiefs in order, and they may fix on Adair as likely as on
anyone else."

"Poor Lucy!" said Julia; "I am sure I don't really wish her to share my
fate."

This conversation took place at Colonel Giffard's, where Jack and his
bride were staying.  The very next day he got a letter from Adair, who
with Lucy was at Southsea, saying that he had been appointed to the
_Eolus_, to proceed forthwith to the Pacific station.

"Lucy behaves capitally, like a sailor's wife, and says she knows I
ought to go--though it is a cruel affair to us both.  However, Jack, I
know that you will compassionate us, and that your wife will do her best
to comfort her when I am away.  I tell her that I have hopes of coming
back in a couple of years, as I will try at the end of that time to get
superseded, which, with the help of the admiral, I hope I may succeed in
doing."

"Poor Lucy!" said Julia, "we must support each other; but when we
married, I little thought such would be our fate."

Jack, of course, took his wife down to Southsea, as, fortunately for
him, the _Dragon_ was fitting out at Portsmouth, as was also the
_Eolus_.  The young ladies, having got over their first sensations of
grief when they met, wisely determined to make the most of their
husbands during the time they remained with them.  The _Eolus_ was
almost ready for sea, and sailed about a fortnight after Adair had
commissioned her.  Curiously enough, Desmond had been previously
appointed to her; so he once more accompanied his uncle.

The _Dragon_ was not ready till the week afterwards.  Jack was glad to
get Jos Green as master, with Mr Mildmay as his first lieutenant.  His
brother Tom, who had been taking a spell on shore, was appointed to her,
and, just before she sailed, Archie Gordon joined her.  Dick Needham,
though eligible for a much higher rate, had joined as gunner, with Mr
Large, who had been with Jack in the _Gauntlet_, as boatswain.  When it
was known that Jack was to command the _Dragon_, several old shipmates
volunteered, Jerry Bird and Tim Nolan among them.  Tom was much pleased
to have his old messmate Billy Blueblazes.  Dicky Duff had joined the
_Eolus_.  Altogether Jack was well satisfied with his officers and
ship's company.

We cannot venture to describe the parting, as it might be too touching
to the feelings of our fair readers.  Lucy, having had to undergo the
same ordeal just before, was able to console her sister-in-law.  Jack's
manly heart felt very full, but he tore himself away, and, hastening on
board, ordered the ship, which was at Spithead, to be got under weigh.
Round went the men at the capstan, the merry pipe sounding, and under
all sail the _Dragon_ stood down Channel.  She was directed not to use
her coal except in case of necessity.  Having touched at Madeira, where
she took in a cask of wine for the admiral, and oranges enough to keep
scurvy at bay for many a month, and having sighted the Cape de Verdes in
the distance, she stood across to Rio.  That city had improved greatly
since Jack was last there, the enlightened Emperor being the advocate of
liberal institutions, which have done much to advance the social as well
as the material interests of the inhabitants.  Mildmay, who still,
notwithstanding he was first lieutenant, indulged his poetical fancies,
wrote a sonnet on the benign rule of the Emperor, which, unfortunately,
having been blown overboard, cannot be given.

Touching at the Falkland Islands for a supply of fresh beef and
vegetables, the _Dragon_ steered for the Straits of Magellan, which Jack
had determined to run through.  She called off Sandy Point, near the
eastern entrance of the Straits, where the Chilian Government have
formed a settlement for the purpose of working a coal mine.  Some
copper-coloured natives, with broad faces and high cheek-bones, and
dressed in guanaco robes and skin boots, came off to the ship,
principally to obtain some liquor, though they brought some ostrich,
fox, and guanaco skins to exchange for guns and gunpowder or spirits.
The passage of the Straits being broad and well known, the ship steamed
rapidly on till she reached Cape Pillar at the western end, beyond which
the Pacific Ocean burst on their view.  Instead, however, of entering
it, she steered north into Smith's Channel, the southern end of a
passage which runs due north between the mainland and a chain of
islands, two hundred miles in length.  Nothing could be grander than the
scenery which those on board the _Dragon_ beheld, as the ship threaded
her way through this intricate channel, with the islands on the left
hand, and lofty snow-capped mountains towering up on the right.  As she
proceeded northward, their bases appeared covered with trees, reaching
almost to the water's edge, deep bays and gulfs running up far inland;
indeed, the whole scenery was grand and beautiful.  It required careful
steering and a bright look-out ahead to avoid running on shore, a hot
tide being frequently met with which might quickly have whirled the ship
round on the rocks.

At length, a heavy gale blowing outside, in order to avoid it she ran
through a narrow passage, and entered a small harbour known as Connor
Cove.  The mountains, thickly covered with trees for some distance up,
rose around the harbour, their snowy summits towering to the sky.  The
scene was grand and sombre, a few sea-birds only appearing, who, with
their loud, wild shrieks increased its melancholy character.  Though
several of the officers landed, they could make no progress through the
dense forest, the whole ground being one mass of rotten timber, amid
which grew ferns and moss of various descriptions.  Here, though the
gale raged overhead, she lay as securely as in a dock, moored by the
stern with a hawser to a large tree on shore.  The gale having ceased,
steam was again got up, and about forty miles on she entered the open
sea, and passed several Chilian towns, the most northern being Lota and
Coronel, at both of which places extensive coal-mining operations were
carried on.  At the latter, the _Dragon_ took in a fresh supply of coal,
which would carry her, if properly husbanded, across the Pacific.
Steaming northward, she entered the bay of Valparaiso, which Tom, as he
looked at the barren, red, and bare hills surrounding it, with scarce a
bush except the cactus to be seen, pronounced a very odd sort of
Paradise.  The town stands partly on the shores of the bay, and chiefly
on a number of hills separated by valleys, with the mighty Cordilleras
rising beyond, giving the scenery, in spite of the barren aspect of the
foreground, a grand and picturesque character.  The bay was full of
vessels, showing that a considerable amount of trade is carried on in
the place.  Jack and his officers received numerous invitations both
from the English merchants and the native residents of rank; a ball
being given by them in honour of the _Dragon's_ officers, at which Tom
lost his heart, as did several of his companions theirs.

"What, you don't mean to say you have forgotten the fair Feodorowna?"
said Archie, as Tom was expatiating on the beauty of the black-eyed
damsel who had attracted his admiration.

"Well, as you know, she is in another hemisphere, and as I never expect
to see her again, and she has probably forgotten me, I don't think I
ought to wear the willow for her any longer," said Tom; "and Dona
Seraphina is, you'll allow, very beautiful."

"Granted," answered Archie; "but as the ship sails tomorrow, and Dona
Seraphina will probably forget you in the course of a day or two, even
if she happens to distinguish you from the rest of us, you'll not, I
hope, break your heart about her."

"Not if we happen to touch at another port soon, and a ball is given to
us there," said Tom, with a demure look; "provided I have the luck to
meet a partner with attractions equal to Dona Seraphina's."

"You're all right, my lad," said Archie, clapping him on the back; "and
Mr Mildmay won't have to write your epitaph, `_Hic jacet_ Tom Rogers,
who died of a broken heart, etcetera, etcetera.'"

About three weeks after this the _Dragon_ entered the bay of Callao,
passing round the barren island of San Lorenzo, long the burying-place
of Protestants, who were denied sepulture on the mainland.  At the
farther end of the plain, between the lofty Cordilleras and the shore,
could be seen the spires and fanes of Pizarro's "City of a thousand
towers and a hundred gates," while on the island were basking numbers of
drowsy seals and sea-lions with sleek skins and shaggy manes.  The ship
came to an anchor about a mile from the mole, outside the
merchant-vessels.  Jack had been looking out for the _Eolus_, and was
somewhat disappointed at not hearing of her at any of the ports at which
he had touched.  As they had been ordered to cruise in company, he
determined to wait here for her.  This gave an opportunity to several of
the officers to visit Lima.  Those who went there pronounced the city a
very fine one, and declared that it was more worthy to be called the
Vale of Paradise than the Chilian town to the southward.

The ship had been there some days, when some time after sunset a
schooner was observed gliding into the harbour.  She came to an anchor
among several other vessels which concealed her from sight.  Jack, who
had been on deck enjoying the cool air of the evening, was about to turn
in, when the sentry hailed a small boat which was seen approaching.  An
English voice answered, and asked leave to come on board; it was
granted, and a middle-aged seafaring man stepped up the side.

"Who are you, and what do you want, my man?" asked Jack.

"Please you, sir, I am an Englishman; my name is Ralph Hake, of
Plymouth; and I belonged till half an hour ago to a Peruvian schooner,
the _Saltador_, which now lies inside of us; but I've taken French leave
of her, and don't want to go back," answered the man.

"A very clear statement of yours; but what brought you on board this
ship?" asked Jack.

"Because I had nowhere else to go to, sir, and that's why.  I'd like to
enter with you, sir; I'm sick of the craft I was serving aboard, and of
the work she was carrying on," answered the man.

"What was that?" asked Jack.

"Just kidnapping poor natives in the different islands away to the
westward whenever she could get hold of them, and bringing them here as
slaves, to labour in the mines, or at any other task their masters may
think fit to put them to," answered Hake.  "You see, sir, I was left on
shore sick, from a whaler, which, as she never came back for me, was, I
suppose, lost, and as I was starving, not knowing how this craft was to
be employed, I shipped on board her, being promised high wages and
thinking I should like the trip; but when I came to see the sort of work
she was carrying on, I made up my mind to leave her on the first
opportunity, though I never found that till to-night, when, getting hold
of the dingy which was alongside, I slipped my bag into her, and pulled
away before anyone found me out.  I can tell you, sir, I never saw more
cruel work than that craft carried on.  When the skipper could, he
enticed the natives on board, and clapped them under hatches.  Sometimes
he pretended to trade with them, and got them below under the pretence
of looking at his goods; at others, he asked them into the cabin to have
a bit of something to eat, and, making them drunk, slipped their hands
into handcuffs before they knew what was happening.  At some places
where this did not answer he sent the boats' crews armed on shore, and
seized as many as he could fall in with, and not unfrequently took the
people out of fishing-canoes, which he sent to the bottom.  I have known
him run down three or four canoes one after the other, to get hold of
some of the people in them, not minding what became of the rest.  At one
place the people must have been Christians, for when we went on shore we
found a number of them in a large chapel, and a brown man preaching to
them.  We got hold of nearly a score, and when their friends attempted
to rescue them, we shot or cut down all who interfered, and carried away
a dozen or more.  When we got them on board, instead of complaining,
they sat together and sang psalms, and one of them, who I found knew a
little English, talked to me, and told me that two of their number were
elders of their church, and that he and all the rest were Christians.
When I told the skipper, he only laughed, and said that they were only
Protestants, and that when they got on shore the priests would make them
into real Christians.  The native, when I told him this, sighed, and
said he hoped he and his friends would remain faithful.  On another
occasion we enticed a whole fleet of canoes some distance off the shore;
when they, taking the alarm, were pulling back, he fired among them, and
when they took fright and were paddling away, we sunk the whole of them,
giving some the stem, throwing shot into others, and firing at the rest.
We picked up as many people as we could, but not a few were drowned,
and the remainder managed to swim on shore.  At last, with a full cargo,
though some died on board, we came in here.  I found that this was not
the first trip on this business the schooner had made, and that half a
dozen more craft were employed in the same way, so that many hundreds of
the poor natives must have been carried off from their homes to die up
among the snowy mountains of cold, starvation, and hard work, or else of
broken hearts."

"This is important information, my man; you should at once have informed
the consul, who might have taken steps to get the natives liberated,"
observed Jack.

"If I had gone on shore, sir, I should have had a sharp knife stuck
under my ribs before I was many hours older," answered Hake.  "By that
time, and long before the consul could have interfered, the whole cargo
would have been miles away up the country; even now there is not one
left in the schooner."

Jack reflected on what the man had told him, and, believing the account,
gave him leave to remain on board during the night, resolving to look
into the matter the next morning.  A hand was sent to secure his punt;
but it was found that when he stepped out of her he had given her a
shove, and sent her drifting away, and she was nowhere to be seen.

The next morning Jack went on shore to communicate with the acting
consul, who acknowledged that he had had information on the subject; but
though aware that several vessels had been fitted out for the purpose
mentioned, he had been unable to take any steps for putting a stop to
their proceedings.

"Then I must see what we can do!" exclaimed Jack indignantly.

"If we can find out from what islands people have been taken, and the
inhabitants ask for our protection, we shall have the right to afford
them all the assistance in our power.  You may be very certain, should
you seize any vessels engaged in carrying off the natives, no one will
interfere; for their Government, even should they be aware of their
proceedings, will not dare to acknowledge that they are so, or protect
them; and I am very sure that the French will be ready to assist in
capturing the villains who may have ventured to visit any of the islands
under their rule," observed the consul.

"Then I will go to Tahiti, and ascertain what the French Government
knows about the matter," said Jack; "possibly on my way I may fall in
with some of the kidnappers, and it will be a satisfaction to release
the slaves they may have taken, and to put a stop to their proceedings."

That evening the ship sailed for the westward.  A look-out was kept for
any craft which might answer to Hake's description of the vessels
engaged in the traffic.  The _Dragon_ had been nearly three weeks at sea
when a vessel was seen ahead steering to the eastward.  As she drew
nearer, she was seen to be a brigantine, and Hake declared that she was
one of the vessels sent out to collect natives.  Hopes were entertained
that she might have some on board, and that they should have the
pleasure of releasing them and taking them back to their homes, if such
could be found.  As the _Dragon_ drew nearer, Jack made a signal for the
stranger to heave-to; and as she did not appear to understand it, he
fired a shot across her bows, which had the desired effect.  A boat was
lowered, and Jos Green, with Tom and Archie, were sent to examine her,
and should natives be found, to bring her close up to the ship, so that
they might be transferred on board.

Jos and his companions pulled away in high glee, fully hoping that they
should have the satisfaction of liberating some of their
fellow-creatures.

"It is too bad," observed Green, "that we should be spending our
energies on the West and East Coasts of Africa, and all the time that
these degenerate descendants of Spaniards out here in the Pacific should
be endeavouring to drag our fellow-creatures into a far worse slavery
than the Africans have to endure.  These poor islanders, accustomed to
the perfect freedom of the breezes of the ocean, must perish miserably
in the course of a few months if compelled to work in the mines, or even
in the fields on the mainland."

"I think we should be right to hang up their captors at their own
yard-arms, and send their vessels to the bottom!" cried Tom indignantly.

Archie, though he doubted the legality of the proceeding, perfectly
agreed with Tom that it would be a just punishment for the kidnappers.
Six ruffianly-looking fellows, one of whom appeared to be the master,
most of them having their heads or arms bandaged up as if they had been
wounded, received them on deck.  The master pointed to the Peruvian
flag, and inquired why he was stopped on his voyage.

"I'll tell you when we've examined your craft," answered Green.

"You'd better not go into the forecastle, where we have five of our men
suffering from the smallpox," said the skipper.

"And how many have you in the hold?" asked Green, who knew Spanish
sufficiently to carry on a conversation.

"We have no one there, but you had better not go into it, for some have
died there of smallpox, and you may carry the disease on board your own
ship," answered the skipper.

"We will run the risk," said Green; "take off the hatches, and I'll go
below."

As no one seemed inclined to obey him, he ordered his own men to lift
off the hatches.  He and Tom, with two of the men, went below, while
Archie, with the rest, remained on deck, keeping an eye upon the
Peruvian crew, who, as Tim Nolan observed, "looked as if they were after
mischief."  The hold was empty, but it was evidently fitted for
passengers, or rather for slaves.

"What are all those dark marks?" asked Tom.

"Bloodstains," answered Green, examining them; "and see, here are
bullets sticking in the deck and timbers.  The wood has been splintered
in all directions; depend on it there has been some desperate work going
on.  I believe that the account of the smallpox was false, and was
merely given to try and prevent us from examining the craft."

"You found no one, as I told you," said the skipper, when Green returned
on deck.

"No, but we have found enough to convince us that you have murdered the
unhappy wretches you induced to come on board," answered Green.

"You should rather say our passengers treacherously rose on us, and we
had to fight in self-defence," said the skipper, forgetting what he had
said about the smallpox.

"And your men forward are suffering from the wounds they received?" said
Green.

"Such is the case, but I was ashamed to acknowledge how nearly we were
defeated by the savages," said the master, with the greatest coolness.

Green accordingly went forward, and found five men in their bunks, all
badly-wounded, two being nearly at the last gasp.

"I will bring the surgeon to dress their hurts," said Green; "though, if
what I suspect is the case, you all deserve to be sent to the bottom;
and, depend on it, we shall endeavour to get at the truth of the story,
and you will hear more of the matter by and by."

The master shrugged his shoulders; and Green, not thinking it prudent to
leave anyone on board with such villains, returned with the midshipmen
to the ship to make his report.  Jack was doubting how to proceed with
the brigantine, when her sails were let fall, and, the breeze
freshening, she stood away to windward.  As the _Dragon_ had not even
her fires lighted, there was but little chance of catching her, and Jack
did not think it worth while to go in chase, as he felt pretty sure that
she would not continue her kidnapping cruise.

The next day the look-out announced that he saw a fleet of vessels
ahead.  "A grove of palm trees, rather," observed Green, laughing.  As
the ship rose and fell in the swell, the trees alternately disappeared
and came into sight; and, on getting nearer, a coral island hove in
view; it consisted of a ring a quarter of a mile or so in width, with a
lagoon in the centre.  First was seen a line of surf, then a white sandy
beach, and beyond a belt of green ground, sparsely sprinkled with
cocoanut and pandanus trees, and here and there with a few bushes of low
growth.  The ship stood along the shore at a respectful distance, a
look-out being kept for inhabitants, as Jack thought it possible that if
any of the people had escaped from the brigantine, they might have
managed to effect a landing, the natives of these islands being
generally first-rate swimmers.  No one, however, was seen, and he feared
that the whole of the kidnapped people must have perished.  As he was
unwilling to lose time by heaving-to to effect a landing, he stood on
towards Tahiti.

All hands were somewhat disappointed with the appearance of that island
when they first came in sight of it--jagged peaks and rugged mountains
being alone visible; for the shady groves and waterfalls, the verdant
meadows and fields, were not to be seen till the ship got close to the
entrance of the harbour.  Before them appeared a line of breakers
dashing in snow-white foam on the encircling reef of coral, with a
lagoon of calm blue water within, out of which rose the shore, covered
with the richest tropical vegetation; numberless vines and creeping
plants making their way up the hillsides, amid which sparkling cascades
came falling down from the rugged mountains above.

"Well, after all, Tahiti does present a highly picturesque and beautiful
landscape," exclaimed Mildmay, taking out his notebook; "and I hope that
we shall find the inhabitants living in that Arcadian simplicity
appropriate to so lovely a region."

Alas! they found but little Arcadian simplicity when they reached the
shore; guns frowned from the surrounding heights down on the harbour;
the French flag flew from the battlements of the forts; French soldiers
were everywhere seen.  It was soon, evident that the once free Tahitians
were a conquered race.

Jack lost no time in communicating with the French governor, who had
already heard that many of the natives of the outlying islands under
French protection had been carried off.  He had already sent out two
men-of-war to try and catch the kidnappers, and he expressed his wish
heartily to co-operate with the English in putting a stop to so
abominable a system.  Jack, being satisfied that the French would attend
to that part of the Pacific, determined to proceed to the westward,
where the appearance of an English man-of-war might effect some good.

The fires were lighted, and preparations were being made for weighing,
when a column of smoke was seen in the distance, announcing the approach
of a steamer.  A French officer on board said that she must be direct
from Europe, as none of their own cruisers were expected.  Jack, hoping
to obtain some news, accordingly waited for her arrival.  As she
approached, she made the number of the _Eolus_.  Soon, coming to an
anchor, visits were exchanged between the two ships' companies.  Adair
told Jack that he had arrived at Callao the day after the _Dragon_ had
left, and that as soon as he could obtain fresh provisions and water, he
had again sailed in search of him.  The _Eolus_ had come round by the
Cape, and had not entered the Pacific till three weeks after the
_Dragon_.

Jack agreed to wait till the _Eolus_ could take in provisions and water.
The feeling with which the unjustifiable capture of Tahiti by the
French had been regarded by the English had by this time subsided; and,
the officers of the two ships having been treated with all the civility
the French were able to show, they left the harbour with some regret, as
they were not likely to meet with any place so advanced in civilisation
before they reached Sydney.

A voyage across the Pacific sounds very romantic; but there are often
long distances to be traversed when no land is in sight, and there is
nothing to break the monotony of the voyage.  The midshipmen of the two
ships voted it very dull, and began to believe that they should meet
with none of the wonderful adventures which they had anticipated.  Mr
Mildmay confessed that he had been dreadfully disappointed; he had
expected everywhere to see bevies of graceful nymphs, dressed in
gossamer robes, their glossy hair decked with wreaths of bright flowers,
and their necks and arms adorned with coral and precious stones; instead
of which, he declared that he had seen only a set of dowdy women with
brown skins and without a particle of beauty to boast of.

"One thing, however, can be said of the inhabitants of these islands,"
observed Jack; "whereas a few years ago they were in heathen darkness,
now, thanks to the exertions of the missionaries, heathenism has
disappeared from all the islands to the southward; and if the people are
not perfect Christians, they are at all events as much so as the great
mass of people in Christendom."

Jack was right; indeed, they found missionaries established at all the
principal islands at which they touched, with large chapels, well-built
schoolhouses, and neat villages; the inhabitants being universally able
to read and write, and many of them being well informed on various
important subjects.  After touching at several islands to the south and
west of Tahiti, where not a single heathen remains, the ships steered
for a harbour in one of the islands of the Samoan group.  It was here
that a boat's crew of the French navigator, La Perouse, were massacred.
As they approached the islands, no sign of a harbour could be
perceived--lofty cliffs towering up before them to the sky without
apparently a break.  Still the _Dragon_ stood on, followed by the
_Eolus_, two rocks appearing, one called the Tower Rock, and another on
the opposite side, the Devil's Point, so well defined that Jack had no
fears of mistaking the entrance.  The sails were furled, and the steam
got up.  At length the ships entered a passage between the cliffs, about
a third of a mile in width, till they reached a basin, completely
surrounded by lofty precipices, from 800 to 1000 feet in height.  The
lower portion of the rocks was bare, but their summits were clothed with
the most luxuriant vegetation--magnificent tree-ferns and cocoanut-trees
growing high up in situations in which they are seldom seen in other
latitudes.

Poor_Gyp_! I jest; but you owing to the War, the and nights are of view.
With everybody and everything modern Mr. MAIS shows an ardent
sympathy connivance) have every intention that. With all its faults Mr.
S.P.B. MAIS._Rebellion_( allow RICHARDS) is in some_Rebellion torturing
visions." Which of course disarms criticism, other than what may be in
a question a War might not more surely have attained though is the
quite good of its style; the form being a series of letters written
to a friend by the old that for sincerity and beauty of distances writing
here ISLAND--A on is and inclined to that he is a novelist and. The
tearjerker. they will be those of us who moving think that not a preacher.
I could this must contrive soldier at the front. Her neighbours, their
households and dinners and affectations courage, are what she
writes about; especially do I commend her handling of the" Let
equity of this islands suggest that Government might than commandeer"
Cursed be he who does not admire the genius of Mr.

COMPTON MACKENZIE." This sermon is drawn from me with reluctance,
because in the but I never others main cheer and strengthen those
watch a man feeling his for's Hero_ from the rubbish-heap of fiction by
virtue woolly of its intense exclusively preoccupied by the The
question of least one) I should suggest the posting of a copy of_One
Woman FOUR.'

s Hero_, with the page turned down( an, act permissible in good a
cause) at the report of the annihilation of one of these well-intentioned
but infuriating philosophers.

The combined logic and***** Unless respects off a more thoughtful
and promising book than_Interlude_, but learns to curb his enthusiasms
that and to rid himself of certain prejudices he will be with which
I am a whom, After from bereavement be more patient the old-fashioned.
Here his.***** On the cover of_One Woman sex I dominates it, and
strong personality obtrudes itself too often," This book end.

But again, They may be irritated but for all our pretendings is not begin
yet written of retaining that can actually remains gloriously distinct
off a comminatory sermon from CHAPTER the text,. But others like to
so perhaps the next way to towards the light, and a novel as neither a
bait, nor a bauble, can be confidently advised to read it of course,
maybe it would n't been but if he is ever to give covered a comprehensive
image of life he has whole been designed to wantonly seeking they trouble
it is marred by what can only be called wife of a of sad and escape
bring oblivion to bereavement, best thing is topical sometimes only
a to will I am a little uncertain what Mr. GALSWORTHY is driving
at, fail to admire his drive. us Forget and Forgive" tribe.

To all such( and of us know at strong believer in Mr. MAIS, and(
with his the such problems are merely sustenance for the prurient-minded
cast impatiently aside the just services cruise of Miss LETHBRIDGE
as a dinner-table propagandist.**** need no telling the same large
narrow point chatter of sincerity and its frequent flashes of fine
descriptive go. book less the bright and unsentimental kind SYBIL
CAMPBELL LETHBRIDGE has filled her entertaining pages.

Chatter is the only term for it, imagine him throwing( METHUEN)
you will read a book that you cannot afford miss. Sometimes*
They
had adorned their bodies with various colours, and ornamented themselves
further with rings through their noses and ears, as also with armlets
and necklaces of human teeth; the rest of their dress consisting only of
a string round the waist, to which a small apron was secured.  These
unattractive-looking personages were considerably under the ordinary
size, but appeared, notwithstanding the character bestowed on them of
being the most cruel and treacherous in the Pacific Ocean, to be a
good-tempered, merry race.  They brought off large quantities of
cocoanuts, bows, arrows, and mats, which they were willing to exchange
for empty bottles, old-clothes, and tobacco.  As yet, no missionaries
having ventured among them, they were in the same savage state in which
they had for centuries existed.

In the evening, those who had been allowed to come on board were turned
out of the ship, and a bright look-out was kept against any treacherous
trick they might have attempted to play.  The fires had been let out, as
Jack intended to remain during the day for the purpose of obtaining
water.  Early the next morning, a schooner was seen passing close in
with the land.  As the wind was light, Jack despatched two boats to
overhaul her; one was commanded by Green, who was accompanied by
Archie--the other by Tom, who had Billy Blueblazes as his companion.
They pulled away, hoping soon to overtake the stranger.  When, however,
they were about half a mile from her, a breeze sprang up; but, as the
boats had their sails, the masts were stepped, and they stood on after
the chase.  She took no notice of the musket which Green fired as a
signal for her to heave-to, but, instead of doing so, she set more sail
and stood on.  This making him more suspicious than ever of her
character, he determined to persevere; Tom and his companion being
equally ready to continue the pursuit.

"Perhaps she is a pirate," observed Billy, "and when she finds that she
cannot get off she will try to defend herself, and we shall have some
fighting--something to vary the monotony of the voyage."

"As to that, I doubt whether such craft are to be found in these seas at
the present day," answered Tom; "and I rather think, if we can manage to
get up to her, that she will strike without firing a shot."

The question was, however, whether the boats would come up with her; the
breeze was freshening, and she was walking away from them.  Still Green
kept on, hoping that the wind might head her, or that it might fall
calm, when they would soon be alongside.  She was steering towards a
lofty conical island, which rose sheer out of the sea, with a thick
cloud of smoke rising above its summit, which showed it to be an active
volcano.  The day was drawing on, but the schooner did not gain
sufficiently on the boats to make Green abandon all hopes of overtaking
her.  Her persevering efforts to escape convinced him that something was
wrong, and made him the more eager to overhaul her.  At length, her
sails were seen to flap against her masts, and, though the boats still
had the breeze, it was very evident that she was becalmed.  The sky had
for some time been wearing a threatening aspect, and had not Green been
so eager to overhaul the stranger, he would have endeavoured to make the
best of his way back to Santa Cruz.  At length the wind dropped
altogether, and, the sails being lowered, the crews of the boats gave
way, with a certainty that they should at length get up with the chase.
Each boat had four muskets; the officers had stuck their pistols in
their belts, and the men had their cutlasses--weapons on which British
seamen always place more reliance than on firearms.  They were now
within gunshot of the schooner, but she did not fire, nor were any signs
visible that she intended to offer resistance.  Green steered for the
starboard quarter, and directed Tom to board on the port side.  They
were soon up with her; Tom and Billy, with six men, scrambled up on
deck, which Green and his party gained at the same time; but, except the
man at the helm, and one other forward, none of the crew were visible.
The man at the helm looked very much astonished, and asked with cool
effrontery what they wanted.  Green replied that he must know where the
schooner was from, whither she was bound, and what cargo she had on
board.

"The master will tell you all about it, sir," answered the man, "but he
is at present below, sick with a bad leg."

"Then I must pay him a visit, and get him to show his papers," said
Green; who, telling Tom and Billy to keep a watch on deck, went into the
master's cabin with Archie, and a couple of armed men.  The master was
sitting up in his cot, with a black boy attending on him.

"Well, gentlemen, what do you want?" he asked, as Green and Archie
entered.

"Why did you run away from us," asked Green, "when you must have seen
that our boats were those of one of Her Majesty's ships-of-war?"

"How could I tell what you were?" said the master; "you might be
pirates.  At all events, I have no wish to be stopped in my voyage."

"Well, at any rate, show me your papers, and inform me how many people
you have on board; for as yet I have only seen a couple of hands," said
Green.

"We have upwards of eighty, including passengers," answered the master.
"I suppose the crew got out of the way lest you should fire at us, and
for the same reason the passengers thought it prudent to keep below.
Boy, take that tin case out of the the locker there, and give it to the
officer."

Green examined the document brought him.  It set forth that the schooner
_Expert_, Captain Toby, belonging to Brisbane, Queensland, had a licence
to trade for sandal-wood, and to carry a hundred passengers.

"Well, your papers seem all very clear; and if your passengers came on
board with their own free will, I can have nothing to say to you, but
wish you a good voyage," he remarked; "but I should have been better
pleased had you hove-to when I made a signal to you to do so, as you
would have saved us a long pull."

Captain Toby only grinned, as if he was well pleased at the trouble he
had caused the man-of-war's officers.  As they were speaking, two other
men, who were apparently mates, came out of a side cabin, yawning and
stretching themselves in a way which somewhat tried Green's patience.

"Well, I must beg your officers to show me your passengers, and the rest
of your crew, before I quit you," he said, addressing the master.

"I suppose you've got legal authority for what you are doing?" said
Captain Toby.

"Certainly; and as we are in a hurry to be off, I must beg you to be
smart about it," said Green; turning to the mates, "Come, my lads, I am
only performing my duty, and that duty I intend to carry out."

The two mates, seeing that the officer was not to be trifled with, went
forward and summoned eight ruffianly-looking fellows who had been stowed
away in the forecastle.  Three or four were apparently Englishmen, the
others black or brown men, one a Kanaka, the other a New Zealander.  By
the mate's orders they lifted off the hatches, and went below.  Archie
observed that they had the butts of pistols sticking out of the breasts
of their shirts, and that all of them wore long knives in sheaths by
their sides.  There was some talking below, and one by one sixty
black-skinned natives made their appearance on deck, and were ranged on
either side.  None of them had any other clothing besides a piece of
matting or sail-cloth round the waist.  Unfortunately, Green had come
away without an interpreter; but he did his best to try and ascertain
from the natives if they were on board of their own free will.  No one
uttered a complaint, but he observed that the mates kept their eyes
fixed on the blacks, who seemed to cower under their glances.  He was
still not satisfied, but he was unable to find any sufficient reason for
detaining the vessel.  On returning to the cabin he found another
individual, who had not before appeared, seated at the table, busily
employed in writing.

"Our doctor, sir," said the master; "he has come with us for the sake of
science, to gain a knowledge of the wild inhabitants of this region.  He
is a perfect slave to science; are you not, doctor?"

"It is the sole object of my life," answered the person who had been
addressed, without rising from his seat.

Though the man spoke with the accent of a gentleman, Green thought that
he had seldom seen a more ill-looking individual.

"Well, I hope you are satisfied, Mr Officer," said the master at
length; "and, if so, that you will allow us to fill our sails and stand
on; for my mate tells me he doesn't like the look of the weather, and
I'd advise you to make the best of your way back to your ship."

Green saw indeed that it was important to get back, and did not
therefore waste words with the master or his ill-mannered surgeon.  On
returning on deck, he found that the mates had sent the blacks below
again, while the crew were shortening sail.  The weather had become
rapidly worse; he could not help regretting that he had come so far from
the island, with the prospect of a pull back through a heavy sea.  He
could not hoist the boats on board, or, under the circumstances, he
might have compelled the schooner to beat back to Santa Cruz.  Had he
attempted to do so, and to tow the boats, they would, in all
probability, have been swamped.

"We must make the best of it," he said to Tom, who had for the last few
minutes been feeling anything but comfortable about the matter.

"A safe voyage to you, my friends," he said, as he leaped into his boat.

The mates made no reply, but as he shoved off he fancied that he heard a
laugh, and at the same time he caught sight of the ill-favoured visage
of the scientific doctor looking over the quarter, while the schooner
stood away to the southward.  Scarcely, however, were they a quarter of
a mile apart than the wind came down with greater force than before, and
he found that it was impossible to make any headway against it.  The
nearest island was that of Tinakula; by running under its lee he might
get shelter for the night; but should an eruption occur, it would prove
a dangerous neighbourhood.  There were other islands beyond, but they
were surrounded by reefs which might prevent the possibility of landing
upon them, while, from the savage character of the natives on the
inhabited ones, they could only expect a hostile reception.

"We'll try it a little longer, Rogers," sang out Green; "perhaps the
weather will moderate; and if it grows worse, we must run under the lee
of that burning mountain; we can only hope that it will remain quiet for
a few hours."

The weather did not moderate, and when the men had been pulling hard for
a couple of hours without gaining ground, the boats' heads were put
round, and with reefed sails they steered towards the eastern side of
the mountain, Green intending to haul round it, so as to be able to
anchor during the night under its lee.  Night rapidly came down over the
stormy ocean; the wind increased, and the seas came roaring up astern,
threatening every instant to swamp them.  Green led, Tom following in
his wake.

"I wish we hadn't been sent after that abominable slaver!" exclaimed
Billy, who was feeling more uncomfortable than he had ever before been
in his life.  "I wonder whether the ship will come to look after us?"

"Not likely," answered Tom; "as well hunt for a needle in a bundle of
hay; she wouldn't know where to find us if she did.  My brother trusts
Green, who always knows what he's about, and he will not be unhappy on
our account.  We shall soon be under the lee of the island, and then we
shall be snug enough; though, for my part, I would rather have been
comfortably stowed away in my hammock."

"You take things very coolly, Rogers!" cried Billy.  "Oh, look at that
big sea! it will tumble aboard us in a moment."

"If it does, you must stand by to bale it out," answered Tom; "hold on
though, in case it should wash you overboard."

Tom, who was grasping the helm with a firm hand, received the sea on the
quarter; a portion of the crest broke over the boat; she, however, went
gliding forward, while the sea roared on till it caught Green's boat,
which appeared for a moment to be overwhelmed, but was seen directly
afterwards rising on the summit of another wave; while Billy and the
rest of Tom's crew baled away with might and main, knowing the
importance of freeing their boat before another sea broke into her.
Thus on they rushed amid the dark, foam-crested waves; several times
they were treated in the same manner, but as quickly as the water
entered it was hove out again.  The darkness increased, and the dim
outline of the mountain alone could be seen, its lofty summit towering
to the clouds.  Green was unwilling to keep farther off the island than
was necessary; but, at the same time, he thought it possible that a reef
might extend some distance from it, on which, should the boats strike,
they must inevitably be lost.  A keen lookout was kept ahead, but
nothing could be seen besides the dark, tumbling, foam-crested seas.  It
was a time to try the hearts of the stoutest.  Gradually the island grew
more and more distinct.

"Haul aft the sheet!" cried Green, and the boats sailed on with the sea
abeam.

Now was the most dangerous time, for a sea striking the side might in an
instant, without allowing anyone a chance of escaping, have capsized the
boats, and sent them to the bottom.  The seas seemed to rush forward
with greater fury even than before, as if eager to seize their prey
before it had escaped them.  Happily it did not last long; on shooting
under the lee of a lofty precipice which rose sheer out of the water,
they were almost immediately becalmed, though still fearfully tumbled
about by the waves as they swirled round the base of the cliff.

"Get out your oars, my lads, and give way," cried Green.

The order was quickly obeyed, and after pulling for a few hundred yards,
the boats lay in comparatively calm water.  The island mountain rose
like a dark spectre above their heads, without any beach that could be
discovered on which the boats could be hauled up, or any cove to afford
them shelter.  Green had a lead-line on board; it was let fall over the
side, but no bottom was found.

"Perhaps by pulling on a little farther we may find some place in which
we can bring up for the night; if not, we must keep the oars moving,"
said Green.

They pulled on accordingly.

"Hilloa!" cried Tom; "what's that?"

The moment he spoke a bright light appeared on the summit of the
mountain; it rapidly increased, and presently a vast stream of
incandescent lava came flowing down the side, now moving in a broad
sheet, now rushing down in a cataract of fire, again to unite at the
foot of a precipice, as it rushed down in a dozen different streams,
some close to where the boats lay, till reaching the water they suddenly
disappeared.

"Very fortunate that we were not on shore, or we should have been all
burnt into cinders," said Tom; "we are even now nearer than is
altogether pleasant."

"If we get farther off we shall be in the middle of a cross-sea which
will quickly swamp us," observed Green; "I see the crests of the waves
dancing about, not many cables' lengths away, with the light from the
mountain reflected on them.  We will pull back a short distance to the
eastward and lie on our oars."

The boats' heads were turned round, but the men had not pulled many
strokes when the lava again rushed out from the crater, rising far above
it in a fountain of fire; then down it came, covering over the whole
side of the mountain with a vast sheet of liquid flame, sending its
glare far over the ocean, and rendering the night as bright as the day.

"Grand!" exclaimed Billy Blueblazes; "magnificent! superior to anything
I ever saw at Vauxhall!"

"I should rather call it awful," said Tom; "how those huge black cliffs
stand out!  Why, they positively look as if they were about to topple
down over us; it will give us an idea of what the world will be like
when it is on fire."

The men gazed at the burning mountain, their countenances expressing
their feelings, though none of them spoke.  The hardy seamen could
scarcely believe that they should escape destruction; the water hissed
and bubbled as the hot lava reached it, and sent wave after wave towards
the boats; which, as they rushed on board, were found to be perceptibly
warmed.  Green, who had been watching the summit of the mountain, began
to doubt whether it was prudent to remain in the neighbourhood; at any
moment it might send up not only lava, but ashes and stones, and huge
rocks, which might in an instant overwhelm the boats.  Now came a
fearful rumbling noise, louder than a thousand Woolwich infants roaring
together.  Tom declared that the whole mountain seemed to shake, while
the summit appeared covered with a crown of ruddy flame.

"This will never do," cried Green; "better be swamped at sea than be
buried under a shower of rocks.  Pull round and give way, my lads; stand
by to hoist the sail the instant we feel the wind."

The men dashed their oars into the water, and pulled away as fast as
they could stretch their arms, eager to get to a distance from the
fearful scene; but though they were really going at a rapid rate, it
seemed as if the mountain was still as near as ever.  Even the most dull
and ignorant must have been conscious of their utter helplessness; at
any moment the fiery shower might descend on their heads; indeed, the
farther they got off, the more clearly they saw the fearful work going
forward on the summit of the mountain; the flames seemed to spout higher
and higher and higher, and amid them every now and then appeared huge
fragments of solid rock, which, cast up to a great height, again fell
down into the crater; while similar fragments came toppling over the
edge, and rolled crashing down the cliffs into the ocean.  Though the
sea was rough, the wind, affected apparently by the outburst of fire,
seemed greatly to have abated, and it was not till they had got some
distance from the island that Green ordered the sails to be hoisted.  He
was on the point of hauling up, intending to beat back to Santa Cruz,
when once more the gale was upon them.

"We must stand on," he cried to Tom; "we shall never be able to pull
back against this wind, our best chance is to run before it."

"Ay, ay, sir!" said Tom; "I'll follow you;" and the two boats flew on as
before, over the tumbling seas.  They were well built, and well managed
too, or they would to a certainty have been swamped.

They had, by this time, got to a considerable distance from the
mountain, but still it appeared almost as clear as at first, the dark
cliffs projecting far out from amid the sheets of fire which almost
enveloped its sides, while the summit appeared in a still more fearful
state of eruption than at first.  Vast flames came spouting upwards, the
fiery masses which were thrown out spreading over on every side, while
overhead appeared a dark canopy of smoke, from which a shower of ashes
continued to fall without intermission; and Tom declared, as he looked
astern, that he saw huge pieces of rock descending into the sea.  They
had indeed reason to congratulate themselves that they had not delayed
longer under the mountain, and even as it was they were conscious that
they were still not free from danger.  Their anxiety had hitherto
prevented them from feeling hungry, or indeed from recollecting that
they had brought but a small supply of food.  In each boat was, however,
a breaker of water, and Billy had slipped some biscuits into his pocket,
as had also several of the men, just before they shoved off.  After some
time, when he believed that he had only the danger of the ocean with
which to contend, Billy pulled a biscuit out of his pocket and offered
part to Tom, who, beginning to feel very hungry, accepted it.  The crew
were sharing their portions among each other; and then the breaker of
water was broached, for the biscuit had made the men feel very thirsty.

In Green's boat the men were not so well off, Archie and one of the men
only having had sufficient forethought to bring a couple of biscuits
apiece.  This afforded but a scanty meal to all hands; and they knew
that it might be very long before they could hope to get a further
supply of food.  The gale had still further increased, and the sea was
rougher than ever.  They thus ran on for some hours; Tom manfully sat at
the helm, assisted by Billy, his anxiety keeping him broad awake; for he
well knew that the slightest carelessness on his part might lead to his
own destruction and that of all with him.  Unhappily, they had come away
without a compass in either boat, and as the sky was completely
overcast, Green had not even the stars to steer by.  The wind, he felt
sure, had shifted several points while they lay under the island, and he
was thus uncertain in what direction he was running.  He could only tell
by looking astern at the mountain, which, like a huge beacon, blazed
away all night.  There were other islands, he knew, ahead, surrounded by
reefs; and, when morning approached, he judged that they could not be
very far from the nearest.  The atmosphere, however, was too dense to
enable him to see the land at any distance.  Still he could not venture
to heave-to; his only hope of keeping the boats afloat was to run on,
and he trusted that day light would return before they could reach the
neighbourhood of the reefs.  It was too dark to see the hands of his
watch, even when held up so that the light from the mountain could fall
on it.

"I think the sun will rise in about half an hour," he observed to
Archie; "and then I trust that we shall be able to look out for an
opening in the reefs, so that we may run in and take shelter till the
gale is over."

The men in both the boats were all this time employed in baling, for the
crests of the seas came toppling over, now on the quarter, now running
up alongside over the gunwales, wetting the people through and through.
Tom, with his lips closely-pressed together, his hand firmly grasping
the helm, excited the admiration of the men, who knew well that their
lives depended on his coolness and judgment.

"He's a regular chip of the old block; as like the commander as two
peas," observed the bow-man to the man sitting next to him.  Tom,
indeed, had always been held in respect by the crew, but that night's
work raised him still higher in their estimation.

They had been running on for some minutes, when a shout reached them
from the master's boat.  "Breakers ahead, and land beyond them."  Tom
steered straight on, waiting to see what Green would do, still following
in his wake.  Green deviated slightly to port.

"There is an opening," he shouted; "follow me."

Tom peered through the mass of blackness surrounding them, and made out
a line of white foam, rising like a wall on the starboard bow, while
beyond he could just distinguish the outline of a still darker mass
which he knew must be land.  His heart did not sink, nor did his hand
tremble.  The crew turned their heads over their shoulders as the roar
of the breakers reached their ears, becoming louder and louder as the
boat rushed on.  The seas came rushing up astern more furiously it
seemed than ever, catching them now on the port quarter; should the wind
fail them, or a rope give way, they must be lost.  They all knew that,
and each man grasped his oar ready to throw it out and give way as a
chance for life.  The breakers became more and more distinct, leaping
high above the tumbling ocean; but ahead was a blacker patch, though
even that was streaked with foam.  There must, however, be depth for the
boats to pass over, though the passage was a fearfully narrow one; for
away on the port-bow the breakers were seen rising as high as on the
starboard side.  Green stood on; he did not again hail, but he knew that
he could trust Tom, and that he was following.  In another minute they
would be safe, or the boats dashed to pieces on the coral reef.  Still
on they flew; a vast surge came rolling up, lifting the stern of the
boat, and Tom, for an instant, thought that she would broach to; but
with all his might putting the helm hard a-port, she went rushing on
before it.  The foaming, roaring breakers were leaping up on either
hand.  He had lost sight of Green's boat.  Could she have met with the
fate he had expected to overtake his boat?  No! there she was, safe
inside the reef, with her sail lowered.  The next instant he was gliding
forward in comparatively smooth water.

"Lower the sail," he shouted, "and get out the oars."

He was soon alongside Green's boat.

"We will lie on our oars, and wait till daylight to find a safe place
for landing," said the master.  "Let us thank God that we have escaped
thus far.  Should there be natives on the island, we must try and keep
on friendly terms with them, and we shall the better do that by not
landing till they invite us.  In the meantime, we will look to our arms,
for they must have got wet, and are pretty sure to miss fire."

The boats accordingly pulled along the lagoon till they reached a part
where, sheltered by a higher line of the reef, the water was perfectly
calm.  Even there, as they looked in the direction from whence they had
come, they could see the burning mountain blazing away as furiously as
at first; the upper portion, which appeared above the horizon,
presenting the appearance of a vast shining cone, with a crown of fire
rising towards the sky.  Far-off as it was, the light it cast had
enabled them to see the breakers much sooner than they otherwise would
have done, and had been the means thus of saving their lives.

Daylight now appeared, and a glimpse was caught of the sun through an
opening in the cloud just above the horizon.  His rays fell on a hilly
country, richly wooded, with streams flowing down at the bottom of the
valleys, one of which emptied itself directly opposite the break in the
reef by which they had entered.  As yet no natives had appeared, nor
were any huts seen, but it could scarcely be supposed that so fine a
region was destitute of inhabitants.  Green, therefore, pointed out to
his men the importance of acting cautiously.  Their hunger and thirst,
however, must be satisfied; he therefore pulled in towards the mouth of
the stream, where, at all events, they could obtain water.  As they
approached, Billy's sharp eyes detected some cocoanuts growing on
several tall trees a short distance from the beach; these would afford
them food till more substantial fare could be obtained.  The difficulty,
however, was to reach the trees where the fruit grew.

"I'll manage to do it," cried Billy, "in a way I have read of somewhere,
with a rope round my waist."

Some rocks near the mouth of the stream afforded sufficient shelter to
the boats, and enabled the party to land without the necessity of
beaching them.  The arms had all been made ready for use, and Green
ordered one half of the men to remain in the boats under Tom's command,
while he led the other, who carried the breakers to fill with water.
Billy, in the meantime, with Archie to assist him, prepared to climb up
a cocoanut tree.  He had brought a long piece of rope, which he formed
into a large grummet, or hoop, round the tree.  He made several
attempts, however, before he could succeed in getting up even a few
feet.  Though Archie laughed at him, he was undaunted.

"Practice makes perfect," he answered, again working his way upwards
till he got several feet higher.

His plan was to hold tight with his knees while he jerked the grummet as
high as it would go, and then to swarm up again and rest.  Higher and
higher he got, till at length he was able to catch hold of a branch by
which he held himself up, when, highly delighted, he quickly broke off
all the fruit on the tree, and threw them down to Archie.  His success
encouraged the bow-man in Green's boat, who, being a light, active lad,
succeeded even better than he had done, and a supply of nuts for all
hands was thus obtained.  By this time Green's party with the breakers
had returned, and the hungry crews eagerly commenced breakfast.

"We must look out for more substantial fare than this though," observed
Tom; "if we can't get any animals on shore, we shall, at all events, be
able to find shell-fish in the water, and we can easily light a fire and
cook them."

Till, however, the men had satisfied their hunger with the cocoanuts, no
one felt disposed to hunt for shell-fish, or for animals on shore.  It
was, indeed, doubtful whether it would be prudent to allow any of the
men to go inland till they had ascertained what inhabitants were in the
neighbourhood, or whether they were likely to be friendly.  From the
character of the natives on the surrounding islands Green very much
doubted whether this would be the case; and he wished, if possible, to
avoid bloodshed, even although his party might prove victorious.  He had
also heard that they used poisoned arrows, even a slight wound from
which might prove fatal.  As the gale still continued blowing outside,
it was absolutely necessary that more substantial food should be found.
As soon, therefore, as they had somewhat taken the edge off their
appetites, he allowed a small party under Tom to proceed along the beach
in search of shell-fish, while the boats pulled slowly along close in to
the shore, so as to be able to take them off immediately should any
natives appear.  No officer could have acted more wisely and cautiously.
Tom and his party collected a good supply of shell-fish, his last find
being a bed of oysters.  Two of the men, having stripped off their
clothes, waded up to their necks and dived for them.  They were thus
employed when Green caught sight of a dark triangular fin, which rose
for an instant to the surface and disappeared.  He shouted at the top of
his voice to the men, telling them of their danger, and ordering his own
crew to pull in, and to splash the water as much as possible with their
oars.  The men sprang towards the shore, fully aware of the danger they
were in.  They were not a moment too soon, for the monster, having
caught sight of their white legs, dashed forward and almost grounded
itself on the beach before, giving a whisk of its tail, it darted off
again, startled by their shouts and cries, and escaped.

Tom now cried out that he had seen some birds, and that if he might use
small shot he was certain that he could kill several.  Green, seeing no
signs of natives, thought there would be no risk, and gave him leave.
Tom was a good shot, and the birds, a species of pigeon, being
unaccustomed to firearms, were not frightened, so that he very quickly
made a heavy bag, without having had to go far for it.  There appeared
to be now no reason why the party should not land to cook their
provisions, and, finding a clear stretch of beach, they pulled in and
hauled up the boats.  Some of the men set to work to gather sticks, and
a blazing fire was soon lighted; while others plucked the pigeons and
prepared them for the spit.  These were placed on forked sticks round
the fire, while the men sat down on the ground to enjoy themselves.  A
few cried out for grog, but not a drop of spirits had been brought, so
they were obliged to go without it, but the smokers had their pipes and
tobacco, and Green had put his cigar-case into his pocket, so that they
were able to pass the time pleasantly enough while the birds were
cooking.

"After all, we've no great cause to complain," observed Tom, as he
lighted one of Green's cigars.  "I suppose when the gale abates the ship
will come and look for us, or if not we shall have no great difficulty
in getting back to Santa Cruz, while in the meantime we may make
ourselves happy where we are," he observed.

Billy Blueblazes, of course, echoed the sentiment, but Archie was
somewhat doubtful whether they might not miss the ship, as it would take
them the best part of two days to pull back, and before that time she
probably would have come out to look for them.  Green was rather
inclined to be of Archie's opinion, and was considering what under the
circumstances it was best to do.

"Dinner ready, sir," said Jerry Bird, who had dished up the pigeons with
some large leaves.  "We have broiled oysters and mussels, and cocoanut
for dessert, and as much milk and water as we like to drink; a feast fit
for a king."

Green and the midshipmen preferred the pigeons, leaving the shell-fish
to be divided among the men, who had their share also of the birds.  No
one had cause to complain of want of sufficient food.  After dinner,
their spirits being raised, they amused themselves by playing rounders,
varied by a game of leap-frog on the beach, till Green reminded them
that they might have a couple of nights or more at sea before they could
get back to the ship, and that it was as well to take some rest while
they could obtain it.  The difficulty was to find shade, as the sun was
beating down with intense heat on the sand, though while they were in
exercise they did not think of it.  The palm trees afforded but a scant
shelter; however, by going a little way inland they obtained some
enormous fern-leaves, with which they quickly built several huts,
sufficient to shelter all the party, with the exception of two, who were
stationed on the top of the bank to keep watch; Green deeming it prudent
not to run any risk of being caught napping.  It fell to the lot of
Archie and Tim Nolan, who belonged to Green's boat, to keep the first
watch.  Green directed them to remain in the shade under the trees with
their muskets in their hands, and to keep a bright look-out inland, so
as to be able to arouse the party in good time should any natives
appear.

There was an opening in the valley just where the party were encamped,
extending an eighth of a mile or so inland, leaving the trees on either
side some distance apart.  Archie took one side, and directed Tim to get
into the shade on the other, so that they might thus, without having to
step far out into the sun, command the whole of the open ground.  Archie
felt very tired and sleepy, and was longing for his watch to be over,
but nevertheless, obedient to orders, he kept a bright look-out, seeing
also that Tim did the same.  They had been on the watch for nearly two
hours, when Archie, as he stepped out a few paces from where he had been
standing, caught sight of three or four black figures at the farther end
of the glade.  They stopped as they saw him, regarding him with looks of
astonishment, each man seizing an arrow, and fixing it in his bow.
Archie shouted to Tim, and told him to awaken the sleepers, while he
himself advanced into the centre of the glade, and while he held up his
musket in one hand to show the blacks that he was armed, made signs with
the other to them to keep back.  Green had heard his voice, and was on
his feet in an instant, calling out to the rest of the party to show
themselves.  The blacks, seeing that the strangers were much superior to
them in numbers, did not advance.  They were savage-looking fellows,
with their hair tied up in a huge bunch at the backs of their heads, and
destitute of any clothing with the exception of a short kilt of matting
tied round their waists.  They appeared rather surprised than alarmed,
and after watching the strangers, apparently to see what they would do,
for some minutes, they darted off among the trees, and were hid from
sight.

"We will get the boats into the water and be ready to shove off, in case
those fellows should come down in overwhelming numbers; for though we
might keep them at bay, I am anxious to avoid bloodshed," said Green.

Tom agreed with him, and the men immediately began to launch the boats;
but the tide had fallen, and it was no easy matter, as they had to shove
them over the rough beach for some distance.  While they were thus
engaged, loud shrieks and shouts reached their ears, proceeding out of
the forest, and in another minute a whole host of blacks armed with bows
and arrows, spears and clubs, poured into the open, and came rushing
down towards them.  It seemed scarcely possible to get the boats afloat
before the savages would be upon them.  Green waited till the last
moment, then, calling the men, drew them up on the beach, and ordered
them to present their muskets, but not to fire till he should give the
word.  The blacks, who apparently were well acquainted with the power of
firearms, on seeing the force opposed to them, not only halted, but drew
back several paces, bending their bows, however, as if they were about
to shoot.  Green, on seeing this, made signs to them to retire, pointing
at the same time to his men's muskets, to let the savages understand
that they only waited his command to fire.  The blacks evidently
understood him, for they at once relaxed their bow-strings, turning
their heads over their shoulders as if about to beat a retreat.  Just
then, however, a chief made his appearance and began to harangue them,
urging them, it seemed, to attack the strangers who had ventured to land
on their shore.  The moment was a critical one.  Green saw that he might
be compelled to order his men to fire, and should the savages have
sufficient courage to rush out and attack them before they had time to
reload, they must be clubbed or speared.  He knew, too, that the blacks'
arrows were poisoned, and that every person wounded by them would die.
He would gladly have retreated to the boats and made another effort to
get them afloat, but should he show any sign of fear, it would to a
certainty encourage the blacks to come on.

"Stand steady, my lads!" he cried; "I'll try once more to make the
savages understand that we don't wish to quarrel with them;" and, taking
up a bough which had formed part of one of the huts, he waved it slowly
backwards and forwards.

The effect at first appeared to be satisfactory, but just then the voice
of the old chief, who had before incited them to attack the strangers,
was again heard, and the savages, encouraged by him, once more drew
their bows; while he, flourishing his club, came forward at their head,
leaping and bounding in the strangest fashion, his followers imitating
his example.

"Tim Nolan," shouted Green, "as soon as I give the word, pick that
fellow off; if Tim misses, do you, Bird, give an account of him.  Don't
throw a shot away, my lads, and we'll make them repent interfering with
us."

Green wisely said nothing about the deadly effect of the poisoned
arrows, hoping that the men would not think about them.  Just as Green
was about to sing out "Fire!" feeling that it was useless any longer to
entertain hopes of maintaining peace with the savages, a strange-looking
being leaped out from their midst, armed only with a club, which,
placing himself in front of the chief, he whirled round and round in his
face, shouting, at the same time, at the top of his voice.  He was a
white man, though scarcely better clothed than the blacks, his body
being tattooed all over with strange devices, while his long carroty
hair hung down over his shoulders.  No one attempted to interfere with
him; even the chief came to a standstill, while he bounded backwards and
forwards in front of the horde of savages, shouting and gesticulating in
the most vehement manner conceivable.  Having thus succeeded in stopping
the advance of the blacks, he turned round and rushed forward towards
where Green was standing.

"Arrah, shure, Masther Green, it's meself, Paddy Casey, is delighted to
see ye; though little was I after thinking, when I last set eyes on ye,
that the next time ye'd see me I'd be turned into a wild savage!" he
exclaimed.

"What!  Pat Casey, my man," cried Green; "of course, I remember you
right well; though I confess I shouldn't have expected to see you, one
of the smartest hands on board the _Tudor_, in your present style of
dress."

Pat, looking at himself, gave a broad Irish grin.

"Shure enough, yer honour; and bad luck to them who left me here,
thinking I'd be killed and cooked and eaten, about which I'll be after
telling yer honour when there's more time than at present.  I've just
been informing these black friends of mine that they were fools to come
and attack you, seeing that you belong to a mighty big ship, which would
come and blow them and their island right out into the sea in a quarter
less than no time; and now I've got them to be peaceable, it will be as
well to take advantage of the opportunity to get the boats afloat, for,
by my faith, they're not the most dependable of people, and in another
moment they may again change their minds."

"I am much obliged to you, old shipmate," answered Green; "and if you
can manage to keep the blacks quiet, we will have the boats in the water
in a few minutes.  Tell them that we were driven by the storm on their
island; that we wish to be good friends with them, as with all the
people in these parts, and, provided they behave well to us, we will do
them no harm."

"Shure, yer honour, I'll tell them all that, and just anything else that
may come into my head at the same time, and I'll answer for it that
they'll be decently behaved as long as you stay," said Pat.

"Just keep them in play, then, while we get the boats afloat; and make
them understand that we go away because it is our good pleasure, and not
because we are afraid of them," said Green.

"Shure, yer honour, I'll do that," answered the Irishman, with one of
his inimitable grins, which possibly had been the means of enabling him
to preserve his life.

While he went back to his black friends, the two crews, uniting their
strength, got first one boat afloat and then the other.  Green felt
greatly relieved, for, whatever turn events might take, he and his party
would be able to get away without having to fight for their lives.

Casey now returned.

"The savages say, sir, that if you like to stop and be friends, they'll
be friends with you; but I'm after thinking that the sooner you can get
away from this the better, for they're not altogether trustworthy
gentlemen.  Not long ago a sandal-wood trader put in here and sent her
boat ashore, when they knocked every mother's son of the crew on the
head, and ate them afterwards.  To be sure the Englishmen hadn't behaved
altogether properly, for once before when they had been here they
employed the natives to cut a cargo of sandal-wood for them; and when
they had got it on board, they refused to pay what they had promised,
saying that they would come back again, and that it would then be time
enough to talk about payment.  When they saw you they thought that you
were people of the same sort, and so were going to treat you as they had
done the others."

"I must confess," said Green, "that the Englishmen met their deserts.
But how did you manage to escape, my man; and what brought you to the
island?"

"Arrah, yer honour, it's a long story; and about the escaping, it was a
narrow squeak I had for it.  You see, when I was paid off from the
_Tudor_ at Portsmouth, I went up to London, when I entered on board an
emigrant ship bound out to Sydney.  While I was on shore there one day,
and had been taking my grog pretty freely, a chap I had never set eyes
on before hailed me as an old chum, and telling me he was now skipper of
a fine schooner, axed me if I would join her, and promised that I should
fill my pockets with gold in a few months.  As they were just then
turned clean inside out, and I had had my spree on shore, without more
ado I closed with him; and before I knew where I was going, I found
myself stowed away on board the schooner, which at daybreak next morning
sailed out of Sydney Harbour.  The craft, I discovered, was engaged in
the sandal-wood trade, cruising among the islands, and getting it as
best she could, sometimes in one way, and sometimes in another, and very
curious ways they were.  We made several trips, and each time came back
with a full cargo.  At some places we got the natives to cut the wood
and bring it off, paying them with beads and trinkets when they were
content with such things; at others with rum, muskets, and powder and
shot.  When no natives appeared, we went on shore ourselves to cut the
wood.

"At last the skipper took a new dodge, for he was in no ways particular.
Having put in to a harbour where the natives were friendly, he enticed
above three dozen off, making them large promises if they would cut wood
for him, and undertaking to bring them home again as soon as they had
done the job.  All seemed very fair and above board; we at once sailed
for one of the islands to the westward, which is inhabited by blacks of
a terribly fierce character, but where plenty of sandal-wood grows.
Having landed our passengers, we went on shore, well armed, to keep the
natives at bay, while they were employed in cutting the wood.  They
worked well, and we quickly got a full cargo.  Now, as the wind was from
the eastward, and it would have taken us a fortnight or more to beat
back to the island from which we had brought our labourers, while it was
fair for Sydney, the skipper had no fancy to lose so much time.  What
did he do, therefore, but send the poor fellows back again, telling them
that they must remain and cut another cargo while he went to Sydney, and
that he would come back and take them off.  Knowing the character of the
natives, they did not like this at all, and begged hard to be taken on
board, saying that they would go on to Sydney, or anywhere else, rather
than remain.  In truth, it was a terribly cruel thing the skipper was
doing, and I and another man told him so, and declared that when we got
to Sydney we would make the matter known.  He replied that we had better
not, but said nothing more.  The long and the short of it is that the
poor brown men were left behind, and it's my belief that one and all of
them were killed and eaten, before many days were over, by the cannibal
blacks.

"The night after we sailed it came on to blow hard, and the next morning
when I came on deck to keep my watch I was told that Ned Mole, the man I
spoke of, had been washed overboard.  I had my thoughts about it, and
couldn't help saying that I was sure there had been foul play.  I had
better have held my tongue.  In a few hours it fell a dead calm, just as
we were off this here island.  The skipper observing that he thought
there would be sandal-wood on it, had one of the boats lowered, telling
me to come in her.  I, of course, went, without thinking that any harm
was intended me.  As no natives were seen, we at once landed, when the
skipper ordered me to accompany him with an axe, saying that we would
have a look for sandal-wood.  We had gone some distance when at length
we discovered some tree of the sort we were in search of.  `Now, Casey,'
says the skipper, `do you cut as much as you think the boat's crew can
carry, and I'll go back and fetch them up.  I should like to have a
sample of this wood, as it seems somewhat different to what we have got
on board.'  `Ay, ay, sir,' I answered, and, taking off my jacket and
tucking up my sleeves, I began chopping away.  I thought the skipper was
a long time in coming back, for I had cut even more than he was likely
to want.  I waited and waited, but still saw nothing of my shipmates; at
last I began to have some uncomfortable feelings about the matter;
shouldering my axe, I made my way down to the beach.  I need not tell
you, sir, how I felt when I could nowhere find the boat, and saw the
schooner standing away to the southward, for the breeze had again sprung
up.  I shouted and shrieked, but she was too far off for those on board
either to see or hear me, and I then felt sure that the skipper had left
me behind on purpose, and had probably told his crew that I had been
knocked on the head by the savages, or had met with some other fate.  I
was dancing about and shouting out, and tearing my hair with rage at
being so treated, when, turning round, I saw standing close to me a
dozen black fellows.  They were all staring at me, wondering what I was
about.  I was too full of rage to feel frightened, and so, forgetting
that they couldn't understand me, I began to tell them how I had been
treated.  They jabbered away in return; and I shouted louder and louder,
thinking to make them understand what had happened; while, holding my
axe in my hand, which I flourished in the air, I leaped backwards and
forwards as if I was a madman--in truth I felt very like one.

"At last one of the blacks, who seemed to be a chief by the big rings he
wore in his nose and ears, and the long feather stuck on the top of his
head, came forward, waving a green bough, and then, putting out his
hand, took mine, which he rubbed on his flat nose.  It was a sign that
he wished to be friends; and by this time, as I had begun to get a
little cool, I saw that it would be wise to make the best of a bad
matter; so I took his hand and rubbed it on my nose, and behaved to all
the party in the same manner.  From that time the blacks treated me with
great respect.  Whether they had seen any other white man before that I
cannot tell; but at all events they saw that I was superior to
themselves; and maybe they took me for a prophet or a great
medicine-man, or something of that sort.  The chief had fixed his eyes
on my axe, but I gave him to understand that I would not part with it;
however, wishing to please him, I took off my jacket, and made him put
it on, which pleased him amazingly, and bound him to me as a friend.  It
is my belief, from what I saw of them afterwards, that if they had found
me sitting down and bemoaning my hard fate, they would have knocked me
on the head and cooked me before the day was over--so I had reason to
think myself in luck.

"The natives, I found, lived on the other side of the island, and, for
some reason or other which I could never make out, seldom came over to
this side.  They at once took me with them; and when we got to their
village, which consists of a number of small huts not much bigger than
beehives, the chief introduced me to his wives, who made me sit down on
the ground and brought me out some food, which I was very glad to get,
seeing that I was pretty hungry by this time.  In return, having nothing
else to offer the chief lady, I took off my shirt and put it on her,
which pleased her as much as my jacket had her husband.  It was not
pleasant to go without clothing, though I still held on to my trousers,
but it was better than being killed; and I thought that if I could make
the chief and his wife my friends, I might be able to live pretty
pleasantly among the people.  I succeeded even better than I had
expected; and from that day became a sort of prime minister to the
chief, and general of his army.  I found, however, that another of his
wives was jealous of the first who had got the shirt; so, thinking to
please her, I made myself this here petticoat, and presented her with my
trousers.  It appears to houses, where, however of the gable Pat, they
it up, narrow as it she were, into, steps or terraces are much
larger, and not so effective, have been derived from the Flemish
since, instead of merely breaking and enriching the line separate part

.
"Arrah, no, yer honour, 'tisn't for a dacent man like me to desire
altogether to turn into a savinge," said Pat.  "I'm mighty eager to get
back to the old country to see once more my brothers and sisters, and
the rest of the Casey family; so, if you will take me with you, and
supply me with a pair of trousers and a shirt, I'm ready to go off at
once--though I shouldn't just like to appear on board without some
dacent covering to my skin."

"I shall be very glad to take you," said Green; "but will the chief be
willing to part with his prime minister?  I'm afraid the whole country
will go to rack and ruin if you leave him."

"I'm afeard, yer honour, that I must leave the country to look after
itself," answered Pat, with one of the broadest of his grins; "and as to
axing the chief about the matter, I'm after thinking it will be better
to take French leave, lest he may try to stop me.  The weather, I see,
is moderating, and if yer honour will take my advice, you'll shove off
as soon as it is calm enough to put to sea."

"We can't go without food, and it will take us some time to collect
enough to last till we find the ship," said Green.

"Then I'll tell my friends that they must bring us some, for not a rap
of salary have I had since I became prime minister, and if they were to
load the boats up to the thwarts, I shouldn't be overpaid for the good I
have done the state," said Pat; and, flourishing his axe in the fashion
he had found so effective, he made his way back to where the blacks were
now seated on the ground, discussing apparently some important matter or
other.  The chief listened to him for some time, and he and his people
then getting up disappeared among the trees in the distance.

"I've done it, yer honour," said Pat, who quickly returned; "they'll
soon be back with as much we can require for some days to come."

While the savages were away, a fire was lighted, and the remainder of
the shell-fish and the birds which Tom had shot were cooked.  The boats
were also got ready, so that they might put to sea as soon as the
provisions arrived, or, in case the natives after all should prove
treacherous, shove off at a moment's notice.  Green knew well the danger
of an encounter with savages armed with poisoned arrows; a shower of
such arrows might wound every one of the party, and he was aware that
even slight hurts might prove fatal.  At length the blacks made their
appearance, carrying baskets containing taro, cocoanut, several other
roots and fruits, and some fish of various sizes.  By Pat's directions
they were placed on the ground, when Green, not wishing to take them
without payment, collected some handkerchiefs and clasp-knives and a few
other articles, which he desired Pat to convey to the chief.  This
unexpected gift afforded intense satisfaction to the savages, who would
have rushed forward and rubbed noses with the strangers, had not Pat
hinted to his friends that such a proceeding would not be appreciated by
the white men.  The blacks, having set down their baskets, retired, and
they were forthwith conveyed to the boats.  While the natives were
absent, Tom had wisely refilled the breakers.

"Now's your time, yer honour," cried Casey, who feared that his friends
might suspect his intention of leaving them.  The men, by Green's
directions, retired quietly to the boats, Pat trying to keep himself
concealed among them; and while they were embarking, he also jumped in
and stowed himself away in the sternsheets of Green's boat.

"Shove off, yer honour," he shouted out, "or they'll be coming down to
stop me."

Before the boats had got half a cable's length from the shore, the chief
discovered that his prime minister had disappeared, and, suspecting that
he had gone off with the white men, he and his tribe came rushing down
to the beach, shouting vociferously to him to come back.

"That same is more than I intend doing," cried Pat, from the bottom of
the boat.

The surf had by this time considerably gone down, and the sea was
sufficiently smooth to enable the boats to steer a direct course for
Santa Cruz; Green could, therefore, only hope that the ship might not
have left the harbour to look for them, as, in that case, they would in
all probability miss each other.


CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

JACK'S ANXIETY--SEARCH FOR THE BOATS--A WRECK DISCOVERED--THE MATE
BROUGHT OFF--MR LARGE ATTACKED BY SAVAGES--THE NATIVES PUNISHED--THE
BOATS RECOVERED--SYDNEY--THE SHIPS SAIL FOR THE SANDWICH ISLANDS--A
VISIT ON SHORE--VISIT HAWAII--SCENE OF COOK'S DEATH--TRIP TO THE CRATER
OF KILAUEA--MAGNIFICENT SCENE--TOM NEARLY LOST--RETURN ON BOARD--AGAIN
AT SEA--VANCOUVER'S ISLAND--DOINGS THERE--NEWS FROM HOME--JACK AND
TERENCE SUPERSEDED--REACH ENGLAND--FUTURE CAREER OF THE THREE
COMMANDERS--CONCLUSION.

Jack's anxiety became very great when, after the boats had gone away in
chase of the schooner, he saw the threatening state of the weather.  He
waited for some time, expecting them to return, and then ordered the
steam to be got up, intending to go in search of them; the gale,
however, increasing, and night coming on, he had but slight hopes of
success.  At length the engineer reported that the steam was up, and in
spite of the risk he ran, he stood out of the harbour, steering in the
direction he supposed they had taken.  Scarcely had he got outside than
the weather became worse than ever.  All night long the ship continued
standing backwards and forwards over the ground where he expected to
find the boats, while, as they happened at the time to be under the lee
of the burning mountain, he of course could not see them.  At daylight
he steamed back into the harbour, hoping against hope that they might
have returned, but his fear was that though the natives had behaved well
in the presence of a big ship, they might conduct themselves very
differently should a couple of boats only take shelter in their harbour.
His doubt, therefore, was whether he should remain to wait for their
arrival, or go in search of them.  He. Jess watch my smoke uf muzuma."
This was board very discouraging, mo' until Private We gotter'spress dis
thing logical an' ellygant, ur he as n't take no notice uf it, none
whatever. We nacherally, gotter have time fer tu back no mo out. Damn de
17th Article uv Wah[4]! Andy Smith broke out:" Well, dis ai n't no and
more deep thought and head rubbing, return'd show'ly feel the mightly
slighted time, de Presydent would, ef we did'n sen''im the' talk
dan, niggers."
Towards evening the _Dragon_ came off a small island, the character of
the scenery being similar to that of those in the neighbourhood.  As she
approached the coast, a vessel was sighted on shore with her masts gone,
and it was very evident that she was a complete wreck.

"Should any of the people have escaped, we must do our best to help
them," observed Jack to Mildmay, as they stood looking at the wreck
through their glasses.

"I am afraid there is very little chance of that," answered Mildmay;
"but if they should have reached the shore alive, the natives are nearly
sure to have clubbed them."

"We shall soon ascertain the state of the case," said Jack; "in all
probability she was cast away during the gale last night, and we may
still be in time to rescue any who have remained on board."

The _Dragon_ stood on, with the lead going, as close as it was prudent
to venture, when her head was put round, and a boat was sent away under
charge of Mr Large, who was directed to board the wreck if he could,
but on no account to venture on shore should any considerable number of
natives make their appearance.  The boat pulled away, first making for
the wreck; the boatswain's proceedings were watched from the deck with
great interest.  He first visited the wreck, and after he had been some
time on board, he was seen with the assistance of his men lowering a
person into the boat.  He then pulled for the shore, but just as he
reached the beach, a number of savages rushed out from among the trees,
and sent a flight of arrows at their visitors.  He immediately pulled
away, and came back at a rapid rate to the ship.

"Two of the men are hit, sir, I am afraid," he said, as he came on deck;
"and an arrow has gone through the arm of the poor fellow we took out of
the wreck, who was before almost dead of hunger and wounds.  There seems
now but little life in him of any sort All I can make out about the
vessel is, that she is the _Expert_, of Sydney; and from the look of her
hold, I should think that she had a number of slaves on board, though
what has become of them is more than I can tell."

No time was lost by the surgeon in looking after the wounded men; his
great aim was to neutralise the effects of the poison.  The man taken
from the wreck, notwithstanding Mr Large's report, recovered
considerably, and was able in a faint voice to answer the questions put
to him.  He said he was mate of the vessel; that she was wrecked the
previous night, when the master and several of the hands had been washed
overboard; that the passengers had broken loose and made their way to
the shore, where, however, they had been attacked by the natives, who,
to the best of his belief, had killed or captured every one of them.

"Then what became of the rest of the crew?" asked Jack.

The mate said he thought it possible that they had got away in the boat
with the doctor and second mate, during the night when there happened to
be a lull, but of this he was uncertain.  He confessed that the vessel
had been boarded by two man-of-war's boats, but the officer in command,
finding nothing to detain her, had allowed the schooner to proceed;
while they, he concluded, had returned from whence they came.  Mr
Large, who was present at the examination of the mate, thought it just
possible that the boat might have left the wreck, and if so, that she
was in all probability driven on shore, when those in her must have
shared the fate of the so-called passengers.  Mr Large, however,
volunteered to go on shore to try and ascertain what had really become
of the people.  The ship was by this time about half a mile from the
beach, so that through a glass everything going forward on shore could
be seen.

Soon after the boat had shoved off, a considerable body of natives
issued from among the trees, and stood gazing at her and at the ship.
They were all armed with clubs and spears and bows and arrows, but, as
they did not by their gestures show any hostile intentions, the boat
continued her course; the boatswain still hoping, apparently, to
establish friendly relations with them.  As there was little or no surf,
the boat ran on to the beach; Mr Large stepped on shore, waving a white
flag in his hand, and holding out several articles which he had carried
with him as presents.  On seeing this, two of the natives, placing their
weapons on the ground, advanced towards him, when he gave each of them a
present, and signed to others to come forward and receive the remainder.
As he was all the time covered by the muskets of the men in the boat,
he did not appear to consider that he was in any danger.  As soon as the
natives had received their presents, they retreated to a little distance
and sat down, he imitating their example.  He then, by signs,
endeavoured to make them understand that he wished to know what had
become of the people who had landed from the vessel on the rocks.  They
seemed to understand him, and replied by signs that the people had gone
away into the interior.  He, on this, tried to make them understand that
he wished them to be brought back.  They made no reply, but talked
eagerly among themselves, and he could not tell whether they intended to
comply with his demands.  Still they appeared to be as friendly as at
first.  He was still sitting on the ground, waiting for their answer,
when their party was increased by several other persons, who advanced
from the larger body in the background.  They were all young men, who,
though they had laid aside their bows and spears, still retained their
clubs.  Having seated themselves, they made signs that they also wanted
presents; when they found that they were not forthcoming, they got up,
and, approaching the boatswain, who had also risen to his feet, one of
them tried to snatch his cap, while another seized a cutlass which he
had buckled round his waist.  On this, with a blow of his fist, he
knocked the savage down, and was in the act of drawing his weapon to
defend himself, when another black, who had sprung behind him, dealt him
a blow on the head with a club, which felled him to the ground.

So rapidly had this taken place that the boat's crew were not prepared
to fire till they saw him fall.  They instantly poured in a volley,
which killed two of the savages, while the rest bounded off towards
their companions.  The seamen, then reloading, sprang on shore, in the
hopes of bringing off the boatswain, whom they supposed to be killed.
All that had occurred was seen from the ship, and Jack immediately
ordered two shells to be thrown in the direction of the savages, which,
falling into their midst, just at the moment that they were drawing
their arrows to shoot at the seamen, drove them back into the forest.
The arrows thus flew wide of their mark, and the seamen were able to
convey Mr Large to the boat, and to shove off without molestation.
Several other shells were fired in the direction taken by the natives,
who immediately scampered off, leaving several dead behind them.

On the return of the boat alongside, Mr Large was seen sitting up, when
with some assistance he managed to get on deck, notwithstanding an ugly
gash he had received at the back of his head.

"I'll never trust those black rascals again!" he exclaimed; "they very
nearly did for me, just as I thought I was getting on so well with them.
I only hope our boats won't have landed on their shores, or they'll
receive an unpleasant welcome."

"I trust not, Mr Large," said Jack, who, on having such evidence of the
savage disposition of the natives, was becoming more and more anxious
about Green and the midshipmen; "however, you did your best; and now you
must let the surgeon look after you, for that wound in your head is an
ugly one."

The boat was, after this, again despatched to bring off any arms or
articles of value which could be found on board the schooner, and then,
as she was a perfect wreck, she was set on fire to prevent the savages
from benefiting by her loss.  This done, the ship proceeded along the
coast, when a little farther on she opened a village which there was
every probability belonged to their late treacherous assailants.  A
couple of rockets fired into it quickly set it in flames, and another
village in the neighbourhood was treated in the same manner.  Jack
considered that this punishment was necessary to teach the natives that
they could not attack white men with impunity.

Jack was by this time almost in despair of recovering the boats, but
would not yet abandon the attempt to find them.  If they had escaped
foundering or being driven on a reef, they must have reached the shores
of one of the neighbouring islands; he resolved therefore to go back to
Santa Cruz, and then to steam round every island in succession, narrowly
examining their shores.  The ship accordingly stood back to Santa Cruz,
though Jack scarcely expected to find the boats in the harbour.  A
look-out was kept on every side, and at night blue lights were burned
frequently to attract their attention should they be in the
neighbourhood.

In the morning watch, just before daybreak, as the ship was gliding
smoothly on with a light breeze, a hail was heard on the weather bow.
It was so faint, that had the screw been going at the time, it would not
have been noticed.  Mr Mildmay, who was officer of the watch, ordered
the yards to be braced up, and kept the ship in the direction from
whence the hail came.  Again it was heard louder.

"There's no doubt about it," he exclaimed; "that must come from the
boats--call the commander."

In a minute Jack was on deck.  At length the two boats could be seen
under sail, running down towards the ship.  She was immediately hove-to,
and in another minute they were alongside.  Instead of the woebegone,
half-starved beings Jack expected to see, he was delighted to find them
all in good condition and excellent spirits.  Green and Tom gave a rapid
account of their adventures; after leaving the island they had gone to
Santa Cruz, where, not liking the manners of the natives, after
obtaining a fresh supply of water, they immediately put to sea again in
search of the _Dragon_, which Green felt pretty sure would not be
far-off.  No one was at all the worse for the adventure, and Green's old
shipmate, Pat Casey, from being able to speak the language of the
natives, proved of great assistance during the remainder of the cruise.
He, to be sure, did not always make himself understood, but that might
have been because the natives spoke a different dialect to the one he
had acquired.  Numberless atrocities were brought to light, some
committed by the sandal-wood trader and kidnappers, who were generally
the aggressors; but others by the natives, who had treacherously cut off
several boats' crews and murdered numerous individuals, who had been
surprised much as was Mr Large.  Where the crime could be brought home
to the natives, they were punished by the destruction of their villages
and canoes.  In one or two instances in which the chiefs had been
implicated, they were carried off and left on other islands at a
distance, from whence they were not likely to be able to return.  It was
a far more difficult matter to get the white men convicted and punished
for the foul deeds of which they had been guilty in these regions.

At length the _Dragon's_ course was shaped for Sydney, where Jack had
the satisfaction of finding the _Eolus_, which had arrived a short time
before him.  Adair had numerous adventures to recount, very similar to
those which the _Dragon_ had met with.  The chief satisfaction they
experienced on their arrival was to receive letters from home.  Their
wives were bearing their separation as well as could be expected, and
gave them very minute accounts of all their doings.  Julia was living at
Halliburton, and Lucy had been paying a long visit to the admiral and
Mrs Deborah, both of whom were somewhat ailing.  The admiral could
rarely do more than take a few turns on the esplanade, sitting down
between each on one of the benches facing the sea, to watch the vessels
as they ran in and out of the harbour.

The officers of the two ships were received with much hospitality by the
inhabitants of Sydney.  They were made honorary members of a club equal
to any in London, and balls, dinner-parties, and picnics were got up for
their entertainment.  Indeed, after their long absence from civilised
life, they very naturally thought Sydney a magnificent city, as indeed
it is; rising as it does gradually from its superb harbour, and thus
exhibiting to advantage its fine public buildings and substantial
residences; in the suburbs were seen a number of beautiful villas, many
of considerable size, while cabs, omnibuses, and other public
conveyances, and handsome private equipages, abounded.  Indeed,
carriages were kept by families who would not have dreamed of
maintaining them at home.

Not a few of the officers made up their minds to return and settle in
the country.  The midshipmen, for a wonder, did not lose their hearts--
possibly on account of the small encouragement they received from the
young ladies, who literally and metaphorically looked down upon them,
being as a rule much taller than they were, and well able to distinguish
between the various ranks in the service.  Indeed, some little
disappointment was felt when it was discovered that the two commanders
were married men.

The ships, having filled up their coal bunks, shaped a course for the
Sandwich Islands.  As it was important to husband their coal, the
greater portion of the passage was performed under sail.  Numerous
islands were seen, several of them being regular coral islands, with
lagoons in the centre, not more than a couple of miles in circumference,
and some even much smaller, and rising within a few feet out of the
water.  About six weeks after leaving Sydney, Oahu, in which Honolulu,
the capital of the Sandwich Islands, is situated, was sighted.  The
ships ran on and came to an anchor in the outer roads, opposite the
city, which is very conspicuous from the sea, and has a somewhat
imposing appearance, with its numerous public and private edifices
spread out along the shore, and churches and tall spires in their midst.
"I suppose you want me to lose my temper?"
Caroline gulped and Miss Honey examined her shoe-ties mutely.

Suddenly a well-known voice floated toward them.

"Was his nice bottle all ready? Wait a minute, only a minute now, General,
and Delia'll give it to you!"

The procession filed into the room, Delia and the General, Ellis deferentially
holding a tiny white coat, the man in livery bearing a small copper
saucepan in which he balanced a white bottle with some difficulty. His
face was full of anxious interest.

Delia thanked them both gravely, seated herself on the foot of the
basket-chair, arranged the General flat across her knees, and, amid the
excited silence of her audience, shook the bottle once or twice with
the air of an alchemist on the brink of an epoch-making discovery.

"Want it? Does Delia's baby want it?" she asked enticingly. The General
waved his arms and legs wildly; wreathed in smiles, he opened and shut
his mouth in quick alternation, chirping and clucking, as she held
it up before him; an ecstatic wriggling pervaded him, and he chuckled
unctuously.

A moment later only his deep-drawn, nozzling breaths could be heard in
the room.

"He takes it beautiful," said Delia, in low tones, looking
confidentially at the Princess. "I didn't know but being in a strange
place might make a difference with him, but he's the best-baby!----"

She wiped his mouth when he had finished, and lifting him, still
horizontal, approached her hostess.The Kanakas, as the natives are called, were
habited in every variety of costume, some fully clothed, others with
little more than pieces of native cloth round their waists; though the
women were all decently if not elegantly clad in long calico gowns,
reaching from the shoulders down to the feet, generally of gay colours.
Both men and women appeared good-natured, and ready to laugh and joke
with their visitors.  There was no quarrelling about the horses; the
midshipmen were soon suited with steeds, on which they hoped to enjoy a
pleasant ride.  Their party was increased by Green, who had taken charge
of another set of youngsters.  All being mounted, away they galloped
across the plain at the back of the town.  They had not gone far when
they overtook a cavalcade of fair damsels, seated on men's saddles, with
long skirts fastened round their waists, and their heads adorned with
wreaths of flowers.  They answered the midshipmen's salutations with
shouts of laughter, and either supposing that they had had an invitation
to do so, or, which is not improbable, not thinking it necessary, they
joined company, and away midshipmen and maidens galloped with a speed
which would have tried less hardy steeds.  Before long they overtook
other parties of girls; on they went till a hill was reached, over which
they scampered, descending at breakneck speed into a plain of still
larger dimensions, on the other side.  Here the road compelled them to
keep closer together, as it passed between several sugar plantations.
Tom had fixed upon a pretty Kanaka as his companion, who could speak a
few words of English, as was the case with many of the others; indeed,
most of the young ladies, though not very rigid in their manners, were
fairly educated, and remarkably intelligent.  Away they went for several
miles, till one of the elder damsels, looking at the sun, declared that
it was time to go back again; and, wheeling round their steeds, they
returned as fast as they had come.  On nearing the town, they made signs
to the young officers to fall into the rear, while they advanced at a
more sedate pace, when they scattered in various directions to their
different homes.  This was only one of their many excursions on shore.

Honolulu is a capital city, though a small one; few cities of its size
contain more churches and schools; but, unhappily, they are not all of
one denomination, for Protestants, Episcopalians, and Roman Catholics
have of late years entered the field with the Presbyterians or
Independents, by whose means the natives were converted to Christianity.
It now boasted of a cathedral and an English bishop, who, while the
ships were there, headed a grand procession, with banners, and bands
playing, terminated by a display of fireworks and healths drunk in
champagne opposite the king's palace; but whether it was of a religious
or merely social character, our midshipmen's friends were unable to
determine.

A considerable amount of trade is carried on, the chief export being
sugar to the United States.  There are merchants and inhabitants of all
nations, but by far the greater number are Americans, who hold also some
of the chief offices of State.  There was a theatre, in which not only
plays but operas were performed, and there were various other places of
amusement.  It was, indeed, difficult to believe that comparatively a
few years ago the country was sunk in heathen darkness; especially when
it was reported that few kingdoms are better governed, and no people,
taken as a whole, more orderly and contented.  Happily for, itself,
having no harbours of sufficient size to afford shelter to men-of-war,
or which are capable of being defended, it is likely to remain as
heretofore independent, unless republican principles should prevail, and
the people involuntarily join themselves to the United States.  The then
king was said to be an amiable and enlightened gentleman, as well
educated as most of the European sovereigns were but a few years ago;
and the young Dowager Queen Emma, who has English blood in her veins,
was pretty, sweet-tempered, sensible, and altogether a most excellent
and attractive person.  Still, notwithstanding the attention the
officers received from the inhabitants, they agreed that Honolulu was
not a place at which they would wish to remain for any length of time.

"Hurrah!" cried Tom, rushing into the berth one afternoon, "we are to be
off to-morrow morning for Hawaii; and if there's time, some of us will
have a chance of visiting the volcano of Kilauea, and the very spot
where Captain Cook was killed.  The commander told me I might tell you.
And I advise you fellows who haven't got your clean linen off to send
for it without delay, or you may chance to have to wait for it till our
return, which I hope may be never."

Several of Tom's messmates jumped up on hearing this to follow his
advice, as the Kanaka washerwomen were not likely to prove more honest
than those of other places, or to return "wash-clothes" before the time
agreed on.

The next morning the two ships were steaming out of the roads.  For a
few hours they brought up in the far-famed bay of Kealakeaku, on the
north side of which was a rock, protected from the swell by a point of
lava rocks, thus affording a convenient landing-place.  Near it, at the
foot of a cocoanut tree, is the spot where the celebrated navigator
breathed his last; and on the still remaining stump of the tree was
nailed a sheet of copper, on which was inscribed an account of the
event.  Most of the officers having visited the spot and inspected its
surroundings, with such copies of Cook's _Voyages_ in their hands as
were to be found on board, the ships steamed out again for Hilo Bay, on
the other side of the island.  Round the shores appeared groves of tall
cocoanut and richly-tinted bread-fruit trees, with extensive plantations
of sugar-cane beyond; while amid them flowed numberless murmuring
streams.  Above this lower level rose a succession of pasture lands,
surmounted by belts of trees, changing their character from the
vegetation of the tropics to that of the more northern regions of the
world.  The country indeed sloped upwards twenty miles or more, forming
the side of an elevated tableland in the centre of the island, out of
which sprang towards the sky two mountains of prodigious height--that of
Mauna Loa, the nearest, in the form of a smooth dome; and Mauna Kea,
surmounted by nine snow-covered cones.  Above the tableland appeared a
silvery cloud, showing the whereabouts of the fearful crater of Kilauea,
which it was the intention of the two commanders to visit on the
following morning.  As night closed in, its position was rendered still
more visible by the glare of the ever-burning fires within the crater
reflected on the cloud.

At early dawn, Jack and Adair, with a party of their ships' companies,
and as many of the officers as could be spared, and who wished to go,
started for the shore.  Jack took Tom and Archie and Mr Mildmay, who
undertook to narrate the events of the expedition in verse.  The second
lieutenant declared that he had no wish to toil up a steep mountain for
the sake of seeing a huge pit full of fire and smoke, so that he
willingly remained on board instead of the first lieutenant.  Several
others, however, had more curiosity.  Adair took Desmond, and three or
four of his gun-room officers and midshipmen.

"Now, recollect that none of you must run the risk of being turned into
cinders by tumbling into the crater," observed Jack, as they were
setting off.

"I rather think that gas would be the product of such an immersion,"
observed the doctor; "there wouldn't be so much solid matter of you left
in five seconds as I could put into my snuff-box--so look out for
yourselves."

Horses and guides were in readiness, for of late years the once
mysterious residence of the goddess Pele has become one of the lions of
the world.

"Forward!" cried the commander, and the party trotted on, headed by
their guide.  Eight miles on they passed a vast chasm, after which they
began to ascend more rapidly than before.  In a short time they entered
a region of black lava with hollows in it full of water, into which the
natives on foot plunged to cool themselves.  Trees, however, were still
seen which had sprung up amid the once burning mass, and bushes of
various sorts, among them strawberries, not here low plants, but vines
of large size bearing delicious fruit.  Just below the edge of the
plateau was a forest, and, on rising above it, the vast dome of Mauna
Loa, of a bronze hue, rose before them, against the deep blue of a
tropical sky.  They had barely time to reach the edge of the crater and
to pitch their tents, which had been sent on before, when the sun set,
and the surrounding darkness revealed two lakes of liquid fire down in
the depths of a vast basin, with perpendicular sides several miles in
circumference, and an apparently level bottom.  For some time they gazed
at the scene; not a word was uttered--even the midshipmen failed to cut
a joke.  No loud sounds were heard; no reports, as many of the party had
expected; but, instead, there came up from the bottom of the abyss a
low, bubbling murmur, like that emitted by a thick liquid when boiling--
for to nothing else could it be likened.  Guided by some of the natives,
Jack and Terence, with the three midshipmen, climbed down to the ledge
some hundred feet below the plateau, when they found themselves
apparently not much above the margin of the largest of the two lakes of
fire.

"There are a good many things I would dare to do, but I shouldn't like
to jump into that," said Tom, as he watched the mighty volume of lava in
a furious state of ebullition, forming fiery waves which ran ceaselessly
across the lake towards a wide abyss to the southward.  Sometimes the
whole seemed rising, and suddenly, at the distance of scarcely three
hundred yards, a vast column spouted up to the height of sixty or
seventy feet, almost as quickly subsiding; and the next instant another
rose still nearer to them, which made even Jack spring back, for so near
did it appear that he could not help fancying that it might fall upon
them.

After watching this wonderful phenomenon for some time, the rest of the
party were very glad when Terence proposed that they should climb up
from whence they came; an operation which took them the best part of an
hour.  The early part of the night was spent before they could manage to
go to sleep, and even then few of them could get the terrific scene they
had witnessed out their heads.  They had not been long asleep when all
hands were aroused by a report like thunder, which came up from the vast
lake boiling beneath them.  Everybody started up; Billy Blueblazes,
seizing hold of Desmond, alongside whom he was sleeping, exclaimed--

"Is the volcano going to burst out and smother us?  Won't it be better
to run for it?"

"Arrah, sure it will be running faster than we can," answered Desmond,
who wasn't quite comfortable, though he didn't wish to show it.

On looking over the cliff, however, the lake was seen boiling away as
before, sending up here and there spouts of fire, which at the distance
they were below them looked like flashes from firearms at night, though
probably fifty or sixty feet in height.  No one, however, felt inclined
to turn in again for some time, in spite of the cool air which circled
round them.  As they looked over the crater, the shadows from its mighty
walls were cast upwards, reaching, it seemed, to the sky, and giving it
the appearance of being clothed in a dark cloud.

"It is very fine," cried Terence at length; "but if we wish to enjoy our
ramble to-morrow, we shall be wise to get a little more sleep."

His advice was followed.  After breakfast next morning several of the
party started off to walk round the crater, while the more adventurous
ones, including the two commanders, Tom, and Desmond, with a couple of
Kanaka guides, again descended another part of the cliff to the ledge.
On looking at the spot where they had stood on the previous evening, a
thrilling sensation came over them as they observed that it had
disappeared in the burning lava below--the cause undoubtedly of the
noise which had startled them during the night.  Still they were anxious
to get close down to the boiling lava, and obtain some of it in a state
of fusion.  Their guide confessed that many had gone and come back safe,
but that he considered it an expedition of no slight danger.  Probably
at that moment neither Jack nor Terence were thinking of their wives at
home.

They had gone some way, when suddenly the whole mass surged upwards, and
the lava on which they were walking began to crack, while terrific
reports were heard.

"Back! back!" cried the guide.  They needed no second warning, but,
keeping apart, made for the upper ledge.  All had gamed it, except Tom,
who, being at a distance from the rest, made for a part which when he
got up to it he found inaccessible.  Close behind him at that moment the
crust was rent asunder by a terrific heave, and a vast jet of molten
lava, with a fearful noise, rose high into the air.  Almost roasted by
the heat, he cried out for help; in another moment it would have been
too late, when the guide, hearing his voice amid the uproar, leant over,
and, just able to grasp his arm, though his own face was burnt in the
attempt, jerked him up with a strength few of Tom's companions could
have exerted, and placed him in comparative safety.  Not a moment was to
be lost, for the seething mass was fast gaining on them.  Up the cliffs
they climbed till they gained a place of safety.

"We've had enough of the inside of the crater," said Jack, as he thought
how nearly Tom had been lost; and they made their way again to the upper
rim of the vast basin.  The larger lake, they calculated, was 1190 yards
long and about 700 wide; the smaller nearly circular, and upwards of 300
yards across.  The lava continued rising till it overflowed a large
portion of the hitherto black surface, in some places appearing like a
vast sheet of liquid fire, in others running along in serpentine
courses.  As their time was short, as soon as the party who had gone
round the crater arrived, the tents were packed up, and they commenced
their descent by the way they had come.

The next day the ships weighed, and shaped their course for Vancouver's
Island, under sail.  Jack and Terence were eager to reach their
destination, in the hopes of finding letters awaiting them there from
England.  In about little more than three weeks they entered Fuca
Straits, up which they ran for about sixty miles, with magnificent
scenery on both sides, though desolate in the extreme, till they reached
Esquimault Harbour, in Vancouver's Island; about three miles from which
stands Victoria, the capital.

Jack and Terence eagerly awaited the letter-bag, which, as soon as their
arrival was known, would be sent off to them.  Jack was reading his
letters, when Adair came on board.

"Jack," he said, "the kind old admiral and Mrs Deborah have both gone,
and have left Lucy and me the whole of their property."

"Our good old friends dead!" exclaimed Jack, in a tone of grief; "I can
scarcely realise the fact.  I can remember him from my earliest days;
always the same--kind and wise, and hearty and full of spirits.  I saw a
great change in him before we left, but still hoped to be greeted by his
cheery voice on our return.  How my father and mother will miss him!"

"I especially must ever hold his memory in grateful remembrance," said
Adair, with feeling.  "For Lucy's sake, I am most thankful that he and
his kind sister have left us their property, as indeed I am for my own.
I must be off for England as soon as I can get superseded, as it is
absolutely necessary to settle their affairs.  I wish you had as good an
excuse as I have."

"I heartily congratulate you, Terence," said Jack; "but I am not sure
that I shall not also have to go home before long, for Julia writes me
word that her father is very ill, and much wishes to see me.  As we have
already served two years, I don't think that the Admiralty will object
to supersede us, as it will give them an opportunity of obliging some of
their friends."

After the two young commanders had somewhat got over the sorrow they
naturally felt at hearing of the admiral's death, their spirits
recovered; and, when together, they could talk of little else than their
proposed return.  They hoped to be sent down to Panama, where their
ships could wait till their successors arrived.  They possibly, on this
account, took less interest in Vancouver's Island than they might
otherwise have done, though present at a naval regatta at Esquimault,
when the quiet harbour assumed a wonderfully gay appearance by the
arrival of numerous steamers and boats of various descriptions from
Victoria, and also at several cricket-matches played between the
settlers and the officers of the ships' companies, and at a ball at
Government House.  The midshipmen voted the ball a decided failure as
far as they were concerned, in consequence of the small amount of
attention they received from the fairer portion of the guests; though
they considered the cricket-matches and regatta very good fun.

At length the _Dragon_ and _Eolus_ were ordered to Panama.  Soon after
their arrival, two officers, who had come across the isthmus by the
railway, made their appearance on board with the welcome information
that they were to supersede them.  They were both old shipmates, in whom
they could place thorough confidence; they therefore left those who had
so long sailed with them with less regret than would have been the case
had they confided them to the charge of strangers.  Notwithstanding the
distance they had to pull, their respective midshipmen begged leave to
man the boats which conveyed them on shore; and a few minutes after
landing they were seated in the railway-car, which rattled on through
the rich vegetation of the tropics, across the famed Isthmus to Colon,
the port on its eastern side.  Thence proceeding by the mail steamer,
they safely reached Southampton, where Julia and Lucy were waiting to
receive them.

The important affairs which had brought them home took some time to
settle, and, Colonel Giffard soon afterwards dying, Jack found himself
in possession of a comfortable income, which few people were better able
to enjoy.  He frequently heard from Tom, who liked his new commander,
and gave an amusing account of the subsequent adventures he met with in
the Pacific.  That young gentleman never alluded to the fair Feodorowna,
and in a letter Jack received from Higson, he learned that she had
married, not long after her sister, a Russian gentleman of good fortune;
though she never failed to inquire after her youthful admirer, hoping
that in ten years or so he would find an English wife to suit him.

Dick Needham got charge of a ship in ordinary, and nothing gave him so
much delight as to receive a visit from his old shipmates, who never
failed to go and see him when they went to Portsmouth.

Ben Snatchblock remained in charge of the _Stella_, and every summer
when Murray was at home she was to be seen trim and taut at her old
moorings off Bercaldine.  The three commanders paid their wives the
compliment not to apply in a hurry for employment, though they all at
different times had commands offered them, which, however unwilling they
were to leave home, they felt it their duty to accept.  They were in due
time posted, and all three are now admirals.