
St. Peter the apostle among all other, and above all other, was of most
fervent and burning love, for he would have known the traitor that
should betray our Lord Jesu Christ, as St. Austin saith: If he had known
him he would have torn him with his teeth, and therefore our Lord would
not name him to him, for as Chrysostom, saith: If he had named him,
Peter had arisen and all to-torn him. Peter went upon the sea; he was
chosen of God to be at his transfiguration, and raised a maid from death
to life; he found the stater or piece of money in the fish's mouth; he
received of our Lord the keys of the kingdom of heaven; he took the
charge to feed the sheep of Jesu Christ. He converted at a Whitsuntide
three thousand men, he healed Claude with John, and then converted five
thousand men; he said to Ananias and Saphira their death before; he
healed Æneas of the palsy; he raised Tabitha; he baptized Cornelia; with
the shadow of his body he healed sick men; he was put in prison by
Herod, but by the angel of our Lord he was delivered. What his meat was
and his clothing, the book of St. Clement witnesseth, for he said: Bread
only with olives, and seldom with worts, is mine usage, and I have such
clothing as thou seest, a coat and a mantle, and when I have that, I
demand no more. It is said for certain that he bare always a sudary in
his bosom, with which he wiped the tears that ran from his eyes; for
when he remembered the sweet presence of our Lord, for the great love
that he had to him he might not forbear weeping. And also when he
remembered that he had renied him, he wept abundantly great plenty of
tears, in such wise that he was so accustomed to weep that his face was
burned with tears as it seemed, like as Clement saith. And saith also
that in the night when he heard the cock crow he would weep customably.
And after that it is read in Historia Ecclesiastica that, when St.
Peter's wife was led to her passion, he had great joy and called her by
her proper name, and said to her: My wife, remember thee of our Lord.

On a time when St. Peter had sent two of his disciples for to preach the
faith of Jesu Christ, and when they had gone twenty days' journey, one
of them died, and that other then returned to St. Peter and told him
what had happened, some say that it was St. Marcial that so died, and
some say it was St. Maternus, and others say that it was St. Frank. Then
St. Peter gave to him his staff and commanded that he should return to
his fellow, and lay it upon him, which he so did, then he which had been
forty days dead, anon arose all living.

That time Simon the enchanter was in Jerusalem, and he said he was first
truth, and affirmed that who that would believe in him he would make
them perpetual. And he also said that nothing to him was impossible. It
is read in the book of St. Clement that he said that he should be
worshipped of all men as God, and that he might do all that he would.
And he said yet more: When my mother Rachel commanded me that I should
go reap corn in the field, and saw the sickle ready to reap with, I
commanded the sickle to reap by itself alone, and it reaped ten times
more than any other. And yet he added hereto more, after Jerome, and
said: I am the Word of God, I am the Holy Ghost, I am Almighty, I am all
that is of God. He made serpents of brass to move, and made the images
of iron and of stone to laugh, and dogs to sing, and as St. Linus saith,
he would dispute with St. Peter and show, at a day assigned, that he was
God. And Peter came to the place where the strife should be, and said to
them that were there: Peace to you brethren that love truth. To whom
Simon said: We have none need of thy peace, for if peace and concord
were made, we should not profit to find the truth, for thieves have
peace among them. And therefore desire no peace but battle, for when two
men fight and one is overcome then is it peace. Then said Peter: Why
dreadest thou to hear of peace? Of sins grow battles, where is no sin
there is peace; in disputing is truth found, and in works righteousness.
Then said Simon: It is not as thou sayest, but I shall show to thee the
power of my dignity, that anon thou shalt adore me; I am first truth,
and may flee by the air; I can make new trees and turn stones into
bread; endure in the fire without hurting; and all that I will I may do.
St. Peter disputed against all these, and disclosed all his malefices.
Then Simon Magus, seeing that he might not resist Peter, cast all his
books into the sea, lest St. Peter should prove him a magician, by his
books, and went to Rome where he was had and reputed as a god. And when
Peter knew that, he followed and came to Rome. The fourth year of
Claudius the emperor, Peter came to Rome, and sat there twenty-five
years, and ordained two bishops as his helpers, Linus and Cletus, one
within the walls, and that other without. He entended much to preaching
of the Word of God, by which he converted much people to the faith of
Christ, and healed many sick men, and in his preaching always he praised
and preferred chastity. He converted four concubines, of Agrippa the
provost, so that they would no more come to him, wherefore the provost
sought occasion against Peter.

After this, our Lord appeared to St. Peter, saying to him: Simon Magus
and Nero purpose against thee, dread thee not, for I am with thee, and
shall give to thee the solace of my servant Paul, which to-morn shall
come in to Rome. Then Peter, knowing that he should not long abide here,
assembled all his brethren, and took Clement by the hand and ordained
him a bishop, and made him to sit in his own seat. After this, as our
Lord had said tofore, Paul came to Rome, and with Peter began to preach
the faith of Christ.

Simon Magus was so much beloved of Nero that he weened that he had been
the keeper of his life, of his health, and of all the city. On a day, as
Leo the pope saith, as he stood tofore Nero, suddenly his visage
changed, now old and now young, which, when Nero saw, he supposed that
he had been the son of God. Then said Simon Magus to Nero: Because that
thou shalt know me to be the very son of God, command my head to be
smitten off and I shall arise again the third day. Then Nero commanded
to his brother to smite off his head, and when he supposed to have
beheaded Simon, he beheaded a ram. Simon, by his art magic went away
unhurt, and gathered together the members of the ram, and hid him three
days. The blood of the ram abode and congealed. The third day he came
and showed him to Nero, saying: Command my blood to be washed away, for
lo I am he that was beheaded, and as I promised I have risen again the
third day. Whom Nero seeing, was abashed and trowed verily that he had
been the son of God. All this saith Leo. Sometime also, when he was with
Nero secretly within his conclave, the devil in his likeness spake
without to the people. Then the Romans had him in such worship that they
made to him an image, and wrote above, this title: To Simon the holy
God. Peter and Paul entered to Nero and discovered all the enchantments
and malefices of Simon Magus, and Peter added thereto, seeing that like
as in Christ be two substances that is of God and man, so are in this
magician two substances, that is of man and of the devil. Then said
Simon Magus, as St. Marcelle and Leo witness, lest I should suffer any
longer this enemy, I shall command my angels that they shall avenge me
on him. To whom Peter said: I dread nothing thine angels, but they
dread me. Nero said: Dreadest thou not Simon, that by certain things
affirmeth his godhead? To whom Peter said: If dignity or godhead be in
him let him tell now what I think or what I do, which thought I shall
first tell to thee, that he shall not mow lie what I think. To whom Nero
said: Come hither and say what thou thinkest. Then Peter went to him and
said to him secretly: Command some man to bring to me a barley-loaf, and
deliver it to me privily. When it was taken to him, he blessed it, and
hid it under his sleeve, and then said he: Now Simon say what I think,
and have said and done. Simon answered: Let Peter say what I think.
Peter answered: What Simon thinketh that I know, I shall do it when he
hath thought. Then Simon having indignation, cried aloud: I command that
dogs come and devour him. And suddenly there appeared great dogs and
made an assault against Peter. He gave to them of the bread that he had
blessed, and suddenly he made them to flee. Then said Peter to Nero: Lo!
I have showed you what he thought against me, not in words but in deeds,
for where he promised angels to come against me he brought dogs, thereby
he showeth that he hath none angels but dogs. Then said Simon: Hear ye,
Peter and Paul; if I may not grieve you here, ye shall come where me it
shall behove to judge you. I shall spare you here. Hæc Leo. Then Simon
Magus, as Hegesippus and Linus say, elate in pride avaunted him that he
can raise dead men to life. And it happed that there was a young man
dead, and then Nero let call Peter and Simon, and all gave sentence by
the will of Simon that he should be slain that might not arise the dead
man to life. Simon then, as he made his incantations upon the dead body,
he was seen move his head of them that stood by; then all they cried for
to stone Peter. Peter unnethe getting silence said: If the dead body
live, let him arise, walk and speak, else know ye that it is a fantasy
that the head of the dead man moveth. Let Simon be taken from the bed.
And the body abode immovable. Peter standing afar making his prayer
cried to the dead body, saying: Young man, arise in the name of Jesu
Christ of Nazareth crucified, and anon, he arose living, and walked.
Then, when the people would have stoned Simon Magus, Peter said: He is
in pain enough, knowing him to be overcome in his heart; our master hath
taught us for to do good for evil. Then said Simon to Peter and Paul:
Yet is it not come to you that ye desire, for ye be not worthy to have
martyrdom, the which answered: That is, that we desire to have, to thee
shall never be well, for thou liest all that thou sayest.

Then as Marcel saith: Simon went to the house of Marcel and bound there
a great black dog at the door of the house, and said: Now I shall see if
Peter, which is accustomed to come hither, shall come, and if he come
this dog shall strangle him. And a little after that, Peter and Paul
went thither, and anon Peter made the sign of the cross and unbound the
hound, and the hound was as tame and meek as a lamb, and pursued none
but Simon, and went to him and took and cast him to the ground under
him, and would have strangled him. And then ran Peter to him and cried
upon the hound that he should not do him any harm. And anon the hound
left and touched not his body, but he all torent and tare his gown in
such wise that he was almost naked. Then all the people, and especially
children, ran with the hound upon him and hunted and chased him out of
the town as he had been a wolf. Then for the reproof and shame he durst
not come in to the town of all a whole year after. Then Marcel that was
disciple of Simon Magus, seeing these great miracles, came to Peter, and
was from then forthon his disciple.

