He put his head out of his own window and looked at that beneath.  It was
open.  He then went to one of his trunks, which he unlocked, and began
carefully removing its contents.  What these were we need not stop to
mention,--only remarking that there were dresses of various patterns,
which might afford an agreeable series of changes, and in certain
contingencies prove eminently useful.  After removing a few of these, he
thrust his hand to the very bottom of the remaining pile and drew out a
coiled strip of leather many yards in length, ending in a noose,--a
tough, well-seasoned lasso, looking as if it had seen service and was
none the worse for it.  He uncoiled a few yards of this and fastened it
to the knob of a door.  Then he threw the loose end out of the window so
that it should hang by the open casement of Elsie's room.  By this he let
himself down opposite her window, and with a slight effort swung himself
inside the room.  He lighted a match, found a candle, and, having lighted
that, looked curiously about him, as Clodius might have done when he
smuggled himself in among the Vestals.

Elsie's room was almost as peculiar as her dress and ornaments.  It was a
kind of museum of objects, such as the woods are full of to those who
have eyes to see them, but many of them such as only few could hope to
reach, even if they knew where to look for them. Crows' nests, which are
never found but in the tall trees, commonly enough in the forks of
ancient hemlocks, eggs of rare birds, which must have taken a quick eye
and a hard climb to find and get hold of, mosses and ferns of unusual
aspect, and quaint monstrosities of vegetable growth, such as Nature
delights in, showed that Elsie had her tastes and fancies like any
naturalist or poet.

Nature, when left to her own freaks in the forest, is grotesque and
fanciful to the verge of license, and beyond it.  The foliage of trees
does not always require clipping to make it look like an image of life.
From those windows at Canoe Meadow, among the mountains, we could see all
summer long a lion rampant, a Shanghai chicken, and General Jackson on
horseback, done by Nature in green leaves, each with a single tree.  But
to Nature's tricks with boughs and roots and smaller vegetable growths
there is no end.  Her fancy is infinite, and her humor not always
refined.  There is a perpetual reminiscence of animal life in her rude
caricatures, which sometimes actually reach the point of imitating the
complete human figure, as in that extraordinary specimen which nobody
will believe to be genuine, except the men of science, and of which the
discreet reader may have a glimpse by application in the proper quarter.

Elsie had gathered so many of these sculpture-like monstrosities, that
one might have thought she had robbed old Sophy's grandfather of his
fetishes.  They helped to give her room a kind of enchanted look, as if a
witch had her home in it.  Over the fireplace was a long, staff-like
branch, strangled in the spiral coils of one of those vines which strain
the smaller trees in their clinging embraces, sinking into the bark until
the parasite becomes almost identified with its support.  With these
sylvan curiosities were blended objects of art, some of them not less
singular, but others showing a love for the beautiful in form and color,
such as a girl of fine organization and nice culture might naturally be
expected to feel and to indulge, in adorning her apartment.

All these objects, pictures, bronzes, vases, and the rest, did not detain
Mr. Richard Veneer very long, whatever may have been his sensibilities to
art.  He was more curious about books and papers.  A copy of Keats lay on
the table.  He opened it and read the name of Bernard C. Langdon on the
blank leaf.  An envelope was on the table with Elsie's name written in a
similar hand; but the envelope was empty, and he could not find the note
it contained.  Her desk was locked, and it would not be safe to tamper
with it.  He had seen enough; the girl received books and notes from this
fellow up at the school, this usher, this Yankee quill-driver;--he was
aspiring to become the lord of the Dudley domain, then, was he?

Elsie had been reasonably careful.  She had locked up her papers,
whatever they might be.  There was little else that promised to reward
his curiosity, but he cast his eye on everything.  There was a
clasp-Bible among her books.  Dick wondered if she ever unclasped it.
There was a book of hymns; it had her name in it, and looked as if it
might have been often read;--what the diablo had Elsie to do with hymns?

Mr. Richard Venner was in an observing and analytical state of mind, it
will be noticed, or he might perhaps have been touched with the innocent
betrayals of the poor girl's chamber.  Had she, after all, some human
tenderness in her heart?  That was not the way he put the question,--but
whether she would take seriously to this schoolmaster, and if she did,
what would be the neatest and surest and quickest way of putting a stop
to all that nonsense.  All this, however, he could think over more safely
in his own quarters.  So he stole softly to the window, and, catching the
end of the leathern thong, regained his own chamber and drew in the
lasso.

It needs only a little jealousy to set a man on who is doubtful in love
or wooing, or to make him take hold of his courting in earnest. As soon
as Dick had satisfied himself that the young schoolmaster was his rival
in Elsie's good graces, his whole thoughts concentrated themselves more
than ever on accomplishing his great design of securing her for himself.
There was no time to be lost.  He must come into closer relations with
her, so as to withdraw her thoughts from this fellow, and to find out
more exactly what was the state of her affections, if she had any.  So he
began to court her company again, to propose riding with her, to sing to
her, to join her whenever she was strolling about the grounds, to make
himself agreeable, according to the ordinary understanding of that
phrase, in every way which seemed to promise a chance for succeeding in
that amiable effort.

The girl treated him more capriciously than ever.  She would be sullen
and silent, or she would draw back fiercely at some harmless word or
gesture, or she would look at him with her eyes narrowed in such a
strange way and with such a wicked light in them that Dick swore to
himself they were too much for him, and would leave her for the moment.
Yet she tolerated him, almost as a matter of necessity, and sometimes
seemed to take a kind of pleasure in trying her power upon him.  This he
soon found out, and humored her in the fancy that she could exercise a
kind of fascination over him, though there were times in which he
actually felt an influence he could not understand, an effect of some
peculiar expression about her, perhaps, but still centring in those
diamond eyes of hers which it made one feel so curiously to look into.

Whether Elsie saw into his object or not was more than he could tell. His
idea was, after having conciliated the good-will of all about her as far
as possible, to make himself first a habit and then a necessity with the
girl,--not to spring any trap of a declaration upon her until tolerance
had grown into such a degree of inclination as her nature was like to
admit.  He had succeeded in the first part of his plan.  He was at
liberty to prolong his visit at his own pleasure.  This was not strange;
these three persons, Dudley Venner, his daughter, and his nephew,
represented all that remained of an old and honorable family.  Had Elsie
been like other girls, her father might have been less willing to
entertain a young fellow like Dick as an inmate; but he had long outgrown
all the slighter apprehensions which he might have had in common with all
parents, and followed rather than led the imperious instincts of his
daughter.  It was not a question of sentiment, but of life and death, or
more than that,--some dark ending, perhaps, which would close the
history of his race with disaster and evil report upon the lips of all
coming generations.

As to the thought of his nephew's making love to his daughter, it had
almost passed from his mind.  He had been so long in the habit of looking
at Elsie as outside of all common influences and exceptional in the law
of her nature, that it was difficult for him to think of her as a girl to
be fallen in love with.  Many persons are surprised, when others court
their female relatives; they know them as good young or old women
enough,--aunts, sisters, nieces, daughters, whatever they may be,--but
never think of anybody's falling in love with them, any more than of
their being struck by lightning.  But in this case there were special
reasons, in addition to the common family delusion,--reasons which seemed
to make it impossible that she should attract a suitor.  Who would dare
to marry Elsie?  No, let her have the pleasure, if it was one, at any
rate the wholesome excitement, of companionship; it might save her from
lapsing into melancholy or a worse form of madness.  Dudley Venner had a
kind of superstition, too, that, if Elsie could only outlive three
septenaries, twenty-one years, so that, according to the prevalent idea,
her whole frame would have been thrice made over, counting from her
birth, she would revert to the natural standard of health of mind and
feelings from which she had been so long perverted.  The thought of any
other motive than love being sufficient to induce Richard to become her
suitor had not occurred to him.  He had married early, at that happy
period when interested motives are least apt to influence the choice; and
his single idea of marriage was, that it was the union of persons
naturally drawn towards each other by some mutual attraction.  Very
simple, perhaps; but he had lived lonely for many years since his wife's
death, and judged the hearts of others, most of all of his brother's son,
by his own.  He had often thought whether, in case of Elsie's dying or
being necessarily doomed to seclusion, he might not adopt this nephew and
make him his heir; but it had not occurred to him that Richard might wish
to become his son-in-law for the sake of his property.

It is very easy to criticise other people's modes of dealing with their
children.  Outside observers see results; parents see processes.  They
notice the trivial movements and accents which betray the blood of this
or that ancestor; they can detect the irrepressible movement of
hereditary impulse in looks and acts which mean nothing to the common
observer.  To be a parent is almost to be a fatalist.  This boy sits with
legs crossed, just as his uncle used to whom he never saw; his
grandfathers both died before he was born, but he has the movement of the
eyebrows which we remember in one of them, and the gusty temper of three
different generations, can tell pretty nearly the range of possibilities
and the limitations of a child, actual or potential, of a given
stock,--errors excepted always, because children of the same stock are
not bred just alike, because the traits of some less known ancestor are
liable to break out at any time, and because each human being has, after
all, a small fraction of individuality about him which gives him a
flavor, so that he is distinguishable from others by his friends or in a
court of justice, and which occasionally makes a genius or a saint or a
criminal of him.  It is well that young persons cannot read these fatal
oracles of Nature.  Blind impulse is her highest wisdom, after all.  We
make our great jump, and then she takes the bandage off our eyes.  That
is the way the broad sea-level of average is maintained, and the
physiological democracy is enabled to fight against the principle of
selection which would disinherit all the weaker children.  The
magnificent constituency of mediocrities of which the world is made
up,--the people without biographies, whose lives have made a clear
solution in the fluid menstruum of time, instead of being precipitated in
the opaque sediment of history--

But this is a narrative, and not a disquisition.


CHAPTER XX.

FROM WITHOUT AND FROM WITHIN.

There were not wanting people who accused Dudley VENNER of weakness and
bad judgment in his treatment of his daughter.  Some were of opinion that
the great mistake was in not "breaking her will" when she was a little
child.  There was nothing the matter with her, they said, but that she
had been spoiled by indulgence.  If they had had the charge of her,
they'd have brought her down.  She'd got the upperhand of her father now;
but if he'd only taken hold of her in season!  There are people who think
that everything may be done, if the doer, be he educator or physician, be
only called "in season." No doubt,--but in season would often be a
hundred or two years before the child was born; and people never send so
early as that.

The father of Elsie Veneer knew his duties and his difficulties too well
to trouble himself about anything others might think or say.  So soon as
he found that he could not govern his child, he gave his life up to
following her and protecting her as far as he could.  It was a stern and
terrible trial for a man of acute sensibility, and not without force of
intellect and will, and the manly ambition for himself and his
family-name which belonged to his endowments and his position.  Passive
endurance is the hardest trial to persons of such a nature.

What made it still more a long martyrdom was the necessity for bearing
his cross in utter loneliness.  He could not tell his griefs. He could
not talk of them even with those who knew their secret spring.  His
minister had the unsympathetic nature which is common in the meaner sort
of devotees,--persons who mistake spiritual selfishness for sanctity, and
grab at the infinite prize of the great Future and Elsewhere with the
egotism they excommunicate in its hardly more odious forms of avarice and
self-indulgence.  How could he speak with the old physician and the old
black woman about a sorrow and a terror which but to name was to strike
dumb the lips of Consolation?

In the dawn of his manhood he had found that second consciousness for
which young men and young women go about looking into each other's faces,
with their sweet, artless aim playing in every feature, and making them
beautiful to each other, as to all of us.  He had found his other self
early, before he had grown weary in the search and wasted his freshness
in vain longings: the lot of many, perhaps we may say of most, who
infringe the patent of our social order by intruding themselves into a
life already upon half allowance of the necessary luxuries of existence.
The life he had led for a brief space was not only beautiful in outward
circumstance, as old Sophy had described it to the Reverend Doctor.  It
was that delicious process of the tuning of two souls to each other,
string by string, not without little half-pleasing discords now and then
when some chord in one or the other proves to be overstrained or
over-lax, but always approaching nearer and nearer to harmony, until they
become at last as two instruments with a single voice.  Something more
than a year of this blissful doubled consciousness had passed over him
when he found himself once more alone,--alone, save for the little
diamond-eyed child lying in the old black woman's arms, with the coral
necklace round--her throat and the rattle in her hand.

He would not die by his own act.  It was not the way in his family. There
may have been other, perhaps better reasons, but this was enough; he did
not come of suicidal stock.  He must live for this child's sake, at any
rate; and yet,--oh, yet, who could tell with what thoughts he looked upon
her?  Sometimes her little features would look placid, and something like
a smile would steal over them; then all his tender feelings would rush
up, into his eyes, and he would put his arms out to take her from the old
woman,--but all at once her eyes would narrow and she would throw her
head back, and a shudder would seize him as he stooped over his
child,--he could not look upon her,--he could not touch his lips to her
cheek; nay, there would sometimes come into his soul such frightful
suggestions that he would hurry from the room lest the hinted thought
should become a momentary madness and he should lift his hand against the
hapless infant which owed him life.

In those miserable days he used to wander all over The Mountain in his
restless endeavor to seek some relief for inward suffering in outward
action.  He had no thought of throwing himself from the summit of any of
the broken cliffs, but he clambered over them recklessly, as having no
particular care for his life.  Sometimes he would go into the accursed
district where the venomous reptiles were always to be dreaded, and court
their worst haunts, and kill all he could come near with a kind of blind
fury which was strange in a person of his gentle nature.

One overhanging cliff was a favorite haunt of his.  It frowned upon his
home beneath in a very menacing way; he noticed slight seams and fissures
that looked ominous;--what would happen, if it broke off some time or
other and came crashing down on the fields and roofs below?  He thought
of such a possible catastrophe with a singular indifference, in fact with
a feeling almost like pleasure.  It would be such a swift and thorough
solution of this great problem of life he was working out in
ever-recurring daily anguish!  The remote possibility of such a
catastrophe had frightened some timid dwellers beneath The Mountain to
other places of residence; here the danger was most imminent, and yet he
loved to dwell upon the chances of its occurrence.  Danger is often the
best counterirritant in cases of mental suffering; he found a solace in
careless exposure of his life, and learned to endure the trials of each
day better by dwelling in imagination on the possibility that it might be
the last for him and the home that was his.

Time, the great consoler, helped these influences, and he gradually fell
into more easy and less dangerous habits of life.  He ceased from his
more perilous rambles.  He thought less of the danger from the great
overhanging rocks and forests; they had hung there for centuries; it was
not very likely they would crash or slide in his time.  He became
accustomed to all Elsie's strange looks and ways. Old Sophy dressed her
with ruffles round her neck, and hunted up the red coral branch with
silver bells which the little toothless Dudleys had bitten upon for a
hundred years.  By an infinite effort, her father forced himself to
become the companion of this child, for whom he had such a mingled
feeling, but whose presence was always a trial to him, and often a
terror.

At a cost which no human being could estimate, he had done his duty, and
in some degree reaped his reward.  Elsie grew up with a kind of filial
feeling for him, such as her nature was capable of.  She never would obey
him; that was not to be looked for.  Commands, threats, punishments, were
out of the question with her; the mere physical effects of crossing her
will betrayed themselves in such changes of expression and manner that it
would have been senseless to attempt to govern her in any such way.
Leaving her mainly to herself, she could be to some extent indirectly
influenced,--not otherwise.  She called her father "Dudley," as if he had
been her brother.  She ordered everybody and would be ordered by none.

Who could know all these things, except the few people of the household?
What wonder, therefore, that ignorant and shallow persons laid the blame
on her father of those peculiarities which were freely talked about,--of
those darker tendencies which were hinted of in whispers?  To all this
talk, so far as it reached him, he was supremely indifferent, not only
with the indifference which all gentlemen feel to the gossip of their
inferiors, but with a charitable calmness which did not wonder or blame.
He knew that his position was not simply a difficult, but an impossible
one, and schooled himself to bear his destiny as well as he might, and
report himself only at Headquarters.

He had grown gentle under this discipline.  His hair was just beginning
to be touched with silver, and his expression was that of habitual
sadness and anxiety.  He had no counsellor, as we have seen, to turn to,
who did not know either too much or too little.  He had no heart to rest
upon and into which he might unburden himself of the secrets and the
sorrows that were aching in his own breast.  Yet he had not allowed
himself to run to waste in the long time since he was left alone to his
trials and fears.  He had resisted the seductions which always beset
solitary men with restless brains overwrought by depressing agencies.  He
disguised no misery to himself with the lying delusion of wine.  He
sought no sleep from narcotics, though he lay with throbbing, wide-open
eyes through all the weary hours of the night.

It was understood between Dudley Veneer and old Doctor Kittredge that
Elsie was a subject of occasional medical observation, on account of
certain mental peculiarities which might end in a permanent affection of
her reason.  Beyond this nothing was said, whatever may have been in the
mind of either.  But Dudley Veneer had studied Elsie's case in the light
of all the books he could find which might do anything towards explaining
it.  As in all cases where men meddle with medical science for a special
purpose, having no previous acquaintance with it, his imagination found
what it wanted in the books he read, and adjusted it to the facts before
him.  So it was he came to cherish those two fancies before alluded to
that the ominous birthmark she had carried from infancy might fade and
become obliterated, and that the age of complete maturity might be
signalized by an entire change in her physical and mental state.  He held
these vague hopes as all of us nurse our only half-believed illusions.
Not for the world would he have questioned his sagacious old medical
friend as to the probability or possibility of their being true.  We are
very shy of asking questions of those who know enough to destroy with one
word the hopes we live on.

In this life of comparative seclusion to which the father had doomed
himself for the sake of his child, he had found time for large and varied
reading.  The learned Judge Thornton confessed himself surprised at the
extent of Dudley Veneer's information.  Doctor Kittredge found that he
was in advance of him in the knowledge of recent physiological
discoveries.  He had taken pains to become acquainted with agricultural
chemistry; and the neighboring farmers owed him some useful hints about
the management of their land.  He renewed his old acquaintance with the
classic authors.  He loved to warm his pulses with Homer and calm them
down with Horace.  He received all manner of new books and periodicals,
and gradually gained an interest in the events of the passing time.  Yet
he remained almost a hermit, not absolutely refusing to see his
neighbors, nor even churlish towards them, but on the other hand not
cultivating any intimate relations with them.

He had retired from the world a young man, little more than a youth,
indeed, with sentiments and aspirations all of them suddenly
extinguished.  The first had bequeathed him a single huge sorrow, the
second a single trying duty.  In due time the anguish had lost something
of its poignancy, the light of earlier and happier memories had begun to
struggle with and to soften its thick darkness, and even that duty which
he had confronted with such an effort had become an endurable habit.

At a period of life when many have been living on the capital of their
acquired knowledge and their youthful stock of sensibilities until their
intellects are really shallower and their hearts emptier than they were
at twenty, Dudley Veneer was stronger in thought and tenderer in soul
than in the first freshness of his youth, when he counted but half his
present years.  He had entered that period which marks the decline of men
who have ceased growing in knowledge and strength: from forty to fifty a
man must move upward, or the natural falling off in the vigor of life
will carry him rapidly downward.  At this time his inward: nature was
richer and deeper than in any earlier period of his life.  If he could
only be summoned to action, he was capable of noble service.  If his
sympathies could only find an outlet, he was never so capable of love as
now; for his natural affections had been gathering in the course of all
these years, and the traces of that ineffaceable calamity of his life
were softened and partially hidden by new growths of thought and feeling,
as the wreck left by a mountainslide is covered over by the gentle
intrusion of the soft-stemmed herbs which will prepare it for the
stronger vegetation that will bring it once more into harmony with the
peaceful slopes around it.

Perhaps Dudley Veneer had not gained so much in worldly wisdom as if he
had been more in society and less in his study.  The indulgence with
which he treated his nephew was, no doubt, imprudent.  A man more in the
habit of dealing with men would have been more guarded with a person with
Dick's questionable story and unquestionable physiognomy.  But he was
singularly unsuspicious, and his natural kindness was an additional
motive to the wish for introducing some variety into the routine of
Elsie's life.

If Dudley Veneer did not know just what he wanted at this period of his
life, there were a great many people in the town of Rockland who thought
they did know.  He had been a widower long enough, "--nigh twenty year,
wa'n't it?  He'd been aout to Spraowles's party,--there wa'n't anything
to hender him why he shouldn't stir raound l'k other folks.  What was the
reason he did n't go abaout to taown-meetin's 'n' Sahbath-meetin's, 'n'
lyceums, 'n' school 'xaminations, 'n' s'prise-parties, 'n' funerals,--and
other entertainments where the still-faced two-story folks were in the
habit of looking round to see if any of the mansion-house gentry were
present?--Fac' was, he was livin' too lonesome daown there at the
mansion-haouse.  Why shouldn't he make up to the Jedge's daughter?  She
was genteel enough for him, and--let's see, haow old was she?
Seven-'n'itwenty,--no, six-'n'-twenty,--born the same year we buried our
little Anny Marl".

There was no possible objection to this arrangement, if the parties
interested had seen fit to make it or even to think of it.  But "Portia,"
as some of the mansion-house people called her, did not happen to awaken
the elective affinities of the lonely widower.  He met her once in a
while, and said to himself that she was a good specimen of the grand
style of woman; and then the image came back to him of a woman not quite
so large, not quite so imperial in her port, not quite so incisive in her
speech, not quite so judicial in her opinions, but with two or three more
joints in her frame, and two or three soft inflections in her voice,
which for some absurd reason or other drew him to her side and so
bewitched him that he told her half his secrets and looked into her eyes
all that he could not tell, in less time than it would have takes him to
discuss the champion paper of the last Quarterly with the admirable
"Portia."  Heu, quanto minus!  How much more was that lost image to him
than all it left on earth!

The study of love is very much like that of meteorology.  We know that
just about so much rain will fall in a season; but on what particular day
it will shower is more than we can tell.  We know that just about so much
love will be made every year in a given population; but who will rain his
young affections upon the heart of whom is not known except to the
astrologers and fortune-tellers.  And why rain falls as it does and why
love is made just as it is are equally puzzling questions.

The woman a man loves is always his own daughter, far more his daughter
than the female children born to him by the common law of life.  It is
not the outside woman, who takes his name, that he loves: before her
image has reached the centre of his consciousness, it has passed through
fifty many-layered nerve-strainers, been churned over by ten thousand
pulse-beats, and reacted upon by millions of lateral impulses which bandy
it about through the mental spaces as a reflection is sent back and
forward in a saloon lined with mirrors.  With this altered image of the
woman before him, his preexisting ideal becomes blended.  The object of
his love is in part the offspring of her legal parents, but more of her
lover's brain. The difference between the real and the ideal objects of
love must not exceed a fixed maximum.  The heart's vision cannot unite
them stereoscopically into a single image, if the divergence passes
certain limits.  A formidable analogy, much in the nature of a proof,
with very serious consequences, which moralists and match-makers would do
well to remember!  Double vision with the eyes of the heart is a
dangerous physiological state, and may lead to missteps and serious
falls.

Whether Dudley Veneer would ever find a breathing image near enough to
his ideal one, to fill the desolate chamber of his heart, or not, was
very doubtful.  Some gracious and gentle woman, whose influence would
steal upon him as the first low words of prayer after that interval of
silent mental supplication known to one of our simpler forms of public
worship, gliding into his consciousness without hurting its old griefs,
herself knowing the chastening of sorrow, and subdued into sweet
acquiescence with the Divine will,--some such woman as this, if Heaven
should send him such, might call him back to the world of happiness, from
which he seemed forever exiled.  He could never again be the young lover
who walked through the garden-alleys all red with roses in the old dead
and buried June of long ago.  He could never forget the bride of his
youth, whose image, growing phantomlike with the lapse of years, hovered
over him like a dream while waking and like a reality in dreams.  But if
it might be in God's good providence that this desolate life should come
under the influence of human affections once more, what an ecstasy of
renewed existence was in store for him!  His life had not all been buried
under that narrow ridge of turf with the white stone at its head.  It
seemed so for a while; but it was not and could not and ought not to be
so.  His first passion had been a true and pure one; there was no spot or
stain upon it.  With all his grief there blended no cruel recollection of
any word or look he would have wished to forget.  All those little
differences, such as young married people with any individual flavor in
their characters must have, if they are tolerably mated, had only added
to the music of existence, as the lesser discords admitted into some
perfect symphony, fitly resolved, add richness and strength to the whole
harmonious movement.  It was a deep wound that Fate had inflicted on him;
nay, it seemed like a mortal one; but the weapon was clean, and its edge
was smooth.  Such wounds must heal with time in healthy natures, whatever
a false sentiment may say, by the wise and beneficent law of our being.
The recollection of a deep and true affection is rather a divine
nourishment for a life to grow strong upon than a poison to destroy it.

Dudley Venner's habitual sadness could not be laid wholly to his early
bereavement.  It was partly the result of the long struggle between
natural affection and duty, on one side, and the involuntary tendencies
these had to overcome, on the other,--between hope and fear, so long in
conflict that despair itself would have been like an anodyne, and he
would have slept upon some final catastrophe with the heavy sleep of a
bankrupt after his failure is proclaimed.  Alas! some new affection might
perhaps rekindle the fires of youth in his heart; but what power could
calm that haggard terror of the parent which rose with every morning's
sun and watched with every evening star,--what power save alone that of
him who comes bearing the inverted torch, and leaving after him only the
ashes printed with his footsteps?


CHAPTER XXI.

THE WIDOW ROWENS GIVES A TEA-PARTY.

There was a good deal of interest felt, as has been said, in the lonely
condition of Dudley Venner in that fine mansion-house of his, and with
that strange daughter, who would never be married, as many people
thought, in spite of all the stories.  The feelings expressed by the good
folks who dated from the time when they "buried aour little Anny Mari',"
and others of that homespun stripe, were founded in reason, after all.
And so it was natural enough that they should be shared by various
ladies, who, having conjugated the verb to live as far as the
preterpluperfect tense, were ready to change one of its vowels and begin
with it in the present indicative.  Unfortunately, there was very little
chance of showing sympathy in its active form for a gentleman who kept
himself so much out of the way as the master of the Dudley Mansion.

Various attempts had been made, from time to time, of late years, to get
him out of his study, which had, for the most part, proved failures.  It
was a surprise, therefore, when he was seen at the Great Party at the
Colonel's.  But it was an encouragement to try him again, and the
consequence had been that he had received a number of notes inviting him
to various smaller entertainments, which, as neither he nor Elsie had any
fancy for them, he had politely declined.

Such was the state of things when he received an invitation to take tea
sociably, with a few friends, at Hyacinth Cottage, the residence of the
Widow Rowens, relict of the late Beeri Rowens, Esquire, better known as
Major Rowens.  Major Rowens was at the time of his decease a promising
officer in the militia, in the direct line of promotion, as his waistband
was getting tighter every year; and, as all the world knows, the
militia-officer who splits off most buttons and fills the largest
sword-belt stands the best chance of rising, or, perhaps we might say,
spreading, to be General.

Major Rowens united in his person certain other traits which help a man
to eminence in the branch of public service referred to.  He ran to high
colors, to wide whiskers, to open pores; he had the saddle-leather skin
common in Englishmen, rarer in Americans,--never found in the Brahmin
caste, oftener in the military and the commodores: observing people know
what is meant; blow the seed-arrows from the white-kid-looking button
which holds them on a dandelion-stalk, and the pricked-pincushion surface
shows you what to look for.  He had the loud gruff voice which implies
the right to command.  He had the thick hand, stubbed fingers, with
bristled pads between their joints, square, broad thumb-nails, and sturdy
limbs, which mark a constitution made to use in rough out-door work.  He
had the never-failing predilection for showy switch-tailed horses that
step high, and sidle about, and act as if they were going to do something
fearful the next minute, in the face of awed and admiring multitudes
gathered at mighty musters or imposing cattle-shows.  He had no
objection, either, to holding the reins in a wagon behind another kind of
horse,--a slouching, listless beast, with a strong slant to his shoulder;
and a notable depth to his quarter and an emphatic angle at the hock, who
commonly walked or lounged along in a lazy trot of five or six miles an
hour; but, if a lively colt happened to come rattling up alongside, or a
brandy-faced old horse-jockey took the road to show off a fast nag, and
threw his dust into the Major's face, would pick his legs up all at once,
and straighten his body out, and swing off into a three-minute gait, in a
way that "Old Blue" himself need not have been ashamed of.

For some reason which must be left to the next generation of professors
to find out, the men who are knowing in horse-flesh have an eye also for,
let a long dash separate the brute creation from the angelic being now to
be named,--for lovely woman.  Of this fact there can be no possible
doubt; and therefore you shall notice, that, if a fast horse trots before
two, one of the twain is apt to be a pretty bit of muliebrity, with
shapes to her, and eyes flying about in all directions.

Major Rowens, at that time Lieutenant of the Rockland Fusileers, had
driven and "traded" horses not a few before he turned his acquired skill
as a judge of physical advantages in another direction.  He knew a neat,
snug hoof, a delicate pastern, a broad haunch, a deep chest, a close
ribbed-up barrel, as well as any other man in the town.  He was not to be
taken in by your thick-jointed, heavy-headed cattle, without any go to
them, that suit a country-parson, nor yet by the "gaanted-up,"
long-legged animals, with all their constitutions bred out of them, such
as rich greenhorns buy and cover up with their plated trappings.

Whether his equine experience was of any use to him in the selection of
the mate with whom he was to go in double harness so long as they both
should live, we need not stop to question.  At any rate, nobody could
find fault with the points of Miss Marilla Van Deusen, to whom he offered
the privilege of becoming Mrs. Rowens.  The Van must have been crossed
out of her blood, for she was an out-and-out brunette, with hair and eyes
black enough for a Mohawk's daughter.  A fine style of woman, with very
striking tints and outlines,--an excellent match for the Lieutenant,
except for one thing.  She was marked by Nature for a widow.  She was
evidently got up for mourning, and never looked so well as in deep black,
with jet ornaments.

The man who should dare to marry her would doom himself; for how could
she become the widow she was bound to be, unless he could retire and give
her a chance?  The Lieutenant lived, however, as we have seen, to become
Captain and then Major, with prospects of further advancement.  But Mrs.
Rowens often said she should never look well in colors.  At last her
destiny fulfilled itself, and the justice of Nature was vindicated.
Major Rowens got overheated galloping about the field on the day of the
Great Muster, and had a rush of blood to the head, according to the
common report,--at any rate, something which stopped him short in his
career of expansion and promotion, and established Mrs. Rowens in her
normal condition of widowhood.

The Widow Rowens was now in the full bloom of ornamental sorrow.  A very
shallow crape bonnet, frilled and froth-like, allowed the parted raven
hair to show its glossy smoothness.  A jet pin heaved upon her bosom with
every sigh of memory, or emotion of unknown origin.  Jet bracelets shone
with every movement of her slender hands, cased in close-fitting black
gloves.  Her sable dress was ridged with manifold flounces, from beneath
which a small foot showed itself from time to time, clad in the same hue
of mourning.  Everything about her was dark, except the whites of her
eyes and the enamel of her teeth.  The effect was complete.  Gray's Elegy
was not a more perfect composition.

Much as the Widow was pleased with the costume belonging to her
condition, she did not disguise from herself that under certain
circumstances she might be willing to change her name again.  Thus, for
instance, if a gentleman not too far gone in maturity, of dignified
exterior, with an ample fortune, and of unexceptionable character, should
happen to set his heart upon her, and the only way to make him happy was
to give up her weeds and go into those unbecoming colors again for his
sake,--why, she felt that it was in her nature to make the sacrifice.  By
a singular coincidence it happened that a gentleman was now living in
Rockland who united in himself all these advantages.  Who he was, the
sagacious reader may very probably have divined.  Just to see how it
looked, one day, having bolted her door, and drawn the curtains close,
and glanced under the sofa, and listened at the keyhole to be sure there
was nobody in the entry,--just to see how it looked, she had taken out an
envelope and written on the back of it Mrs. Manilla Veneer.  It made her
head swim and her knees tremble.  What if she should faint, or die, or
have a stroke of palsy, and they should break into the room and find that
name written!  How she caught it up and tore it into little shreds, and
then could not be easy until she had burned the small heap of pieces--

But these are things which every honorable reader will consider imparted
in strict confidence.

The Widow Rowens, though not of the mansion house set, was among the most
genteel of the two-story circle, and was in the habit of visiting some of
the great people.  In one of these visits she met a dashing young fellow
with an olive complexion at the house of a professional gentleman who had
married one of the white necks and pairs of fat arms from a distinguished
family before referred to. The professional gentleman himself was out,
but the lady introduced the olive-complexioned young man as Mr. Richard
Venner.

The Widow was particularly pleased with this accidental meeting.  Had
heard Mr. Venner's name frequently mentioned.  Hoped his uncle was well,
and his charming cousin,--was she as original as ever?  Had often admired
that charming creature he rode: we had had some fine horses.  Had never
got over her taste for riding, but could find nobody that liked a good
long gallop since--well--she could n't help wishing she was alongside of
him, the other day, when she saw him dashing by, just at twilight.

The Widow paused; lifted a flimsy handkerchief with a very deep black
border so as to play the jet bracelet; pushed the tip of her slender foot
beyond the lowest of her black flounces; looked up; looked down; looked
at Mr. Richard, the very picture of artless simplicity,--as represented
in well-played genteel comedy.

"A good bit of stuff," Dick said to himself, "and something of it left
yet; caramba!"  The Major had not studied points for nothing, and the
Widow was one of the right sort.  The young man had been a little
restless of late, and was willing to vary his routine by picking up an
acquaintance here and there.  So he took the Widow's hint.  He should
like to have a scamper of half a dozen miles with her some fine morning.

The Widow was infinitely obliged; was not sure that she could find any
horse in the village to suit her; but it was so kind in him! Would he not
call at Hyacinth Cottage, and let her thank him again there?

Thus began an acquaintance which the Widow made the most of, and on the
strength of which she determined to give a tea-party and invite a number
of persons of whom we know something already.  She took a half-sheet of
note-paper and made out her list as carefully as a country "merchant's
clerk" adds up two and threepence (New-England nomenclature) and twelve
and a half cents, figure by figure, and fraction by fraction, before he
can be sure they will make half a dollar, without cheating somebody.
After much consideration the list reduced itself to the following names:
Mr. Richard Venner and Mrs. Blanche Creamer, the lady at whose house she
had met him,--mansion-house breed,--but will come,--soft on Dick; Dudley
Venner,--take care of him herself; Elsie,--Dick will see to her,--won't
it fidget the Creamer woman to see him round her? the old Doctor,--he 's
always handy; and there's that young master there, up at the
school,--know him well enough to ask him,--oh, yes, he'll come.  One,
two, three, four, five, six,--seven; not room enough, without the leaf in
the table; one place empty, if the leaf's in.  Let's see,--Helen Darley,
--she 'll do well enough to fill it up,--why, yes, just the thing,
--light brown hair, blue eyes,--won't my pattern show off well against
her?  Put her down,--she 's worth her tea and toast ten times over,
--nobody knows what a "thunder-and-lightning woman," as poor Major used
to have it, is, till she gets alongside of one of those old-maidish
girls, with hair the color of brown sugar, and eyes like the blue of a
teacup.

The Widow smiled with a feeling of triumph at having overcome her
difficulties and arranged her party,--arose and stood before her glass,
three-quarters front, one-quarter profile, so as to show the whites of
the eyes and the down of the upper lip.  "Splendid!" said the Widow--and
to tell the truth, she was not far out of the way, and with Helen Darley
as a foil anybody would know she must be foudroyant and pyramidal,--if
these French adjectives may be naturalized for this one particular
exigency.

So the Widow sent out her notes.  The black grief which had filled her
heart and had overflowed in surges of crape around her person had left a
deposit half an inch wide at the margin of her note-paper. Her seal was a
small youth with an inverted torch, the same on which Mrs. Blanche
Creamer made her spiteful remark, that she expected to see that boy of
the Widow's standing on his head yet; meaning, as Dick supposed, that she
would get the torch right-side up as soon as she had a chance.  That was
after Dick had made the Widow's acquaintance, and Mrs. Creamer had got it
into her foolish head that she would marry that young fellow, if she
could catch him.  How could he ever come to fancy such a quadroon-looking
thing as that, she should like to know?

It is easy enough to ask seven people to a party; but whether they will
come or not is an open question, as it was in the case of the spirits of
the vasty deep.  If the note issues from a three-story mansion-house, and
goes to two-story acquaintances, they will all be in an excellent state
of health, and have much pleasure in accepting this very polite
invitation.  If the note is from the lady of a two-story family to
three-story ones, the former highly respectable person will very probably
find that an endemic complaint is prevalent, not represented in the
weekly bills of mortality, which occasions numerous regrets in the bosoms
of eminently desirable parties that they cannot have the pleasure of
and-so-forthing.

In this case there was room for doubt,--mainly as to whether Elsie would
take a fancy to come or not.  If she should come, her father would
certainly be with her.  Dick had promised, and thought he could bring
Elsie.  Of course the young schoolmaster will come, and that poor
tired-out looking Helen, if only to get out of sight of those horrid
Peckham wretches.  They don't get such invitations every day. The others
she felt sure of,--all but the old Doctor,--he might have some horrid
patient or other to visit; tell him Elsie Venner's going to be there,--he
always likes to have an eye on her, they say,--oh, he'd come fast enough,
without any more coaxing.

She wanted the Doctor, particularly.  It was odd, but she was afraid of
Elsie.  She felt as if she should be safe enough, if the old Doctor were
there to see to the girl; and then she should have leisure to devote
herself more freely to the young lady's father, for whom all her
sympathies were in a state of lively excitement.

It was a long time since the Widow had seen so many persons round her
table as she had now invited.  Better have the plates set and see how
they will fill it up with the leaf in.--A little too scattering with only
eight plates set: if she could find two more people, now, that would
bring the chairs a little closer,--snug, you know,--which makes the
company sociable.  The Widow thought over her acquaintances.  Why how
stupid! there was her good minister, the same who had married her, and
might--might--bury her for aught she anew, and his granddaughter staying
with him,--nice little girl, pretty, and not old enough to be
dangerous;--for the Widow had no notion of making a tea-party and asking
people to it that would be like to stand between her and any little
project she might happen to have on anybody's heart,--not she!  It was
all right now; Blanche was married and so forth; Letty was a child; Elsie
was his daughter; Helen Darley was a nice, worthy drudge,--poor
thing!--faded, faded,--colors wouldn't wash, just what she wanted to show
off against.  Now, if the Dudley mansion-house people would only
come,--that was the great point.

"Here's a note for us, Elsie," said her father, as they sat round the
breakfast-table.  "Mrs. Rowens wants us all to come to tea."

It was one of "Elsie's days," as old Sophy called them.  The light in her
eyes was still, but very bright.  She looked up so full of perverse and
wilful impulses, that Dick knew he could make her go with him and her
father.  He had his own motives for bringing her to this
determination,--and his own way of setting about it.

"I don't want to go," he said.  "What do you say, uncle?"

"To tell the truth, Richard, I don't mach fancy the Major's widow.  I
don't like to see her weeds flowering out quite so strong.  I suppose you
don't care about going, Elsie?"

Elsie looked up in her father's face with an expression which he knew but
too well.  She was just in the state which the plain sort of people call
"contrary," when they have to deal with it in animals. She would insist
on going to that tea-party; he knew it just as well before she spoke as
after she had spoken.  If Dick had said he wanted to go and her father
had seconded his wishes, she would have insisted on staying at home.  It
was no great matter, her father said to himself, after all; very likely
it would amuse her; the Widow was a lively woman enough,--perhaps a
little comme il ne faut pas socially, compared with the Thorntons and
some other families; but what did he care for these petty village
distinctions?

Elsie spoke.

"I mean to go.  You must go with me, Dudley.  You may do as you like,
Dick."

That settled the Dudley-mansion business, of course.  They all three
accepted, as fortunately did all the others who had been invited.

Hyacinth Cottage was a pretty place enough, a little too much choked
round with bushes, and too much overrun with climbing-roses, which, in
the season of slugs and rose-bugs, were apt to show so brown about the
leaves and so coleopterous about the flowers, that it might be questioned
whether their buds and blossoms made up for these unpleasant animal
combinations,--especially as the smell of whale-oil soap was very
commonly in the ascendant over that of the roses.  It had its patch of
grass called "the lawn," and its glazed closet known as "the
conservatory," according to that system of harmless fictions
characteristic of the rural imagination and shown in the names applied to
many familiar objects.  The interior of the cottage was more tasteful and
ambitious than that of the ordinary two-story dwellings.  In place of the
prevailing hair-cloth covered furniture, the visitor had the satisfaction
of seating himself upon a chair covered with some of the Widow's
embroidery, or a sofa luxurious with soft caressing plush.  The sporting
tastes of the late Major showed in various prints on the wall: Herring's
"Plenipotentiary," the "red bullock" of the '34 Derby; "Cadland" and "The
Colonel;" "Crucifix;" "West-Australian," fastest of modern racers; and
among native celebrities, ugly, game old "Boston," with his straight neck
and ragged hips; and gray "Lady Suffolk," queen, in her day, not of the
turf but of the track, "extending" herself till she measured a rod, more
or less, skimming along within a yard of the ground, her legs opening and
shutting under her with a snap, like the four blades of a compound
jack-knife.

These pictures were much more refreshing than those dreary fancy
death-bed scenes, common in two-story country-houses, in which Washington
and other distinguished personages are represented as obligingly devoting
their last moments to taking a prominent part in a tableau, in which
weeping relatives, attached servants, professional assistants, and
celebrated personages who might by a stretch of imagination be supposed
present, are grouped in the most approved style of arrangement about the
chief actor's pillow.

A single glazed bookcase held the family library, which was hidden from
vulgar eyes by green silk curtains behind the glass.  It would have been
instructive to get a look at it, as it always is to peep into one's
neighbor's book-shelves.  From other sources and opportunities a partial
idea of it has been obtained.  The Widow had inherited some books from
her mother, who was something of a reader: Young's "Night-Thoughts;" "The
Preceptor;" "The Task, a Poem," by William Cowper; Hervey's
"Meditations;" "Alonzo and Melissa;" "Buccaneers of America;" "The
Triumphs of Temper;" "La Belle Assemblee;" Thomson's "Seasons;" and a few
others.  The Major had brought in "Tom Jones" and "Peregrine Pickle;"
various works by Mr. Pierce Egan; "Boxiana," "The Racing Calendar;" and a
"Book of Lively Songs and Jests."  The Widow had added the Poems of Lord
Byron and T. Moore; "Eugene Aram;" "The Tower of London," by Harrison
Ainsworth; some of Scott's Novels; "The Pickwick Papers;" a volume of
Plays, by W. Shakespeare; "Proverbial Philosophy;" "Pilgrim's Progress;"
"The Whole Duty of Man" (a present when she was married); with two
celebrated religious works, one by William Law and the other by Philip
Doddridge, which were sent her after her husband's death, and which she
had tried to read, but found that they did not agree with her.  Of course
the bookcase held a few school manuals and compendiums, and one of Mr.
Webster's Dictionaries.  But the gilt-edged Bible always lay on the
centre-table, next to the magazine with the fashion-plates and the
scrap-book with pictures from old annuals and illustrated papers.

The reader need not apprehend the recital, at full length, of such
formidable preparations for the Widow's tea-party as were required in the
case of Colonel Sprowle's Social Entertainment.  A tea-party, even in the
country, is a comparatively simple and economical piece of business.  As
soon as the Widow found that all her company were coming, she set to
work, with the aid of her "smart" maid-servant and a daughter of her own,
who was beginning to stretch and spread at a fearful rate, but whom she
treated as a small child, to make the necessary preparations.  The silver
had to be rubbed; also the grand plated urn,--her mother's before
hers,--style of the Empire,--looking as if it might have been made to
hold the Major's ashes.  Then came the making and baking of cake and
gingerbread, the smell whereof reached even as far as the sidewalk in
front of the cottage, so that small boys returning from school snuffed it
in the breeze, and discoursed with each other on its suggestions; so that
the Widow Leech, who happened to pass, remembered she had n't called on
Marilly Raowens for a consid'ble spell, and turned in at the gate and
rang three times with long intervals,--but all in vain, the inside Widow
having "spotted" the outside one through the blinds, and whispered to her
aides-de-camp to let the old thing ring away till she pulled the bell out
by the roots, but not to stir to open the door.

Widow Rowens was what they called a real smart, capable woman, not very
great on books, perhaps, but knew what was what and who was who as well
as another,--knew how to make the little cottage look pretty, how to set
out a tea-table, and, what a good many women never can find out, knew her
own style and "got herself up tip-top," as our young friend Master
Geordie, Colonel Sprowle's heir-apparent, remarked to his friend from one
of the fresh-water colleges.  Flowers were abundant now, and she had
dressed her rooms tastefully with them.  The centre-table had two or
three gilt-edged books lying carelessly about on it, and some prints and
a stereoscope with stereographs to match, chiefly groups of picnics,
weddings, etc., in which the same somewhat fatigued looking ladies of
fashion and brides received the attentions of the same unpleasant-looking
young men, easily identified under their different disguises, consisting
of fashionable raiment such as gentlemen are supposed to wear habitually.
With these, however, were some pretty English scenes,--pretty except for
the old fellow with the hanging under-lip who infests every one of that
interesting series; and a statue or two, especially that famous one
commonly called the Lahcoon, so as to rhyme with moon and spoon, and
representing an old man with his two sons in the embraces of two
monstrous serpents.

There is no denying that it was a very dashing achievement of the Widow's
to bring together so considerable a number of desirable guests.  She felt
proud of her feat; but as to the triumph of getting Dudley Venner to come
out for a visit to Hyacinth Cottage, she was surprised and almost
frightened at her own success.  So much might depend on the impressions
of that evening!

The next thing was to be sure that everybody should be in the right place
at the tea-table, and this the Widow thought she could manage by a few
words to the older guests and a little shuffling about and shifting when
they got to the table.  To settle everything the Widow made out a
diagram, which the reader should have a chance of inspecting in an
authentic copy, if these pages were allowed under any circumstances to be
the vehicle of illustrations.  If, however, he or she really wishes to
see the way the pieces stood as they were placed at the beginning of the
game, (the Widow's gambit,) he or she had better at once take a sheet of
paper, draw an oval, and arrange the characters according to the
following schedule.

At the head of the table, the Hostess, Widow Marilla Rowens. Opposite
her, at the other end, Rev.  Dr. Honeywood.  At the right of the Hostess,
Dudley Veneer, next him Helen Darley, next her Dr. Kittredge, next him
Mrs. Blanche Creamer, then the Reverend Doctor. At the left of the
Hostess, Bernard Langdon, next him Letty Forrester, next Letty Mr.
Richard Veneer, next him Elsie, and so to the Reverend Doctor again.

The company came together a little before the early hour at which it was
customary to take tea in Rockland.  The Widow knew everybody, of course:
who was there in Rockland she did not know?  But some of them had to be
introduced: Mr. Richard Veneer to Mr. Bernard, Mr. Bernard to Miss Letty,
Dudley Veneer to Miss Helen Darley, and so on.  The two young men looked
each other straight in the eyes, both full of youthful life, but one of
frank and fearless aspect, the other with a dangerous feline beauty alien
to the New England half of his blood.

The guests talked, turned over the prints, looked at the flowers, opened
the "Proverbial Philosophy" with gilt edges, and the volume of Plays by
W.  Shakespeare, examined the horse-pictures on the walls, and so passed
away the time until tea was announced, when they paired off for the room
where it was in readiness.  The Widow had managed it well; everything was
just as she wanted it.  Dudley Veneer was between herself and the poor
tired-looking schoolmistress with her faded colors.  Blanche Creamer, a
lax, tumble-to-pieces, Greuze-ish looking blonde, whom the Widow hated
because the men took to her, was purgatoried between the two old Doctors,
and could see all the looks that passed between Dick Venner and his
cousin.  The young schoolmaster could talk to Miss Letty: it was his
business to know how to talk to schoolgirls.  Dick would amuse himself
with his cousin Elsie.  The old Doctors only wanted to be well fed and
they would do well enough.

It would be very pleasant to describe the tea-table; but in reality, it
did not pretend to offer a plethoric banquet to the guests.  The Widow
had not visited the mansion-houses for nothing, and she had learned there
that an overloaded tea-table may do well enough for farm-hands when they
come in at evening from their work and sit down unwashed in their
shirtsleeves, but that for decently bred people such an insult to the
memory of a dinner not yet half-assimilated is wholly inadmissible.
Everything was delicate, and almost everything of fair complexion: white
bread and biscuits, frosted and sponge cake, cream, honey, straw-colored
butter; only a shadow here and there, where the fire had crisped and
browned the surfaces of a stack of dry toast, or where a preserve had
brought away some of the red sunshine of the last year's summer.  The
Widow shall have the credit of her well-ordered tea-table, also of her
bountiful cream-pitchers; for it is well known that city-people find
cream a very scarce luxury in a good many country-houses of more
pretensions than Hyacinth Cottage.  There are no better maims for ladies
who give tea-parties than these:

Cream is thicker than water. Large heart never loved little cream pot.

There is a common feeling in genteel families that the third meal of the
day is not so essential a part of the daily bread as to require any
especial acknowledgment to the Providence which bestows it.  Very devout
people, who would never sit down to a breakfast or a dinner without the
grace before meat which honors the Giver of it, feel as if they thanked
Heaven enough for their tea and toast by partaking of them cheerfully
without audible petition or ascription.  But the Widow was not exactly
mansion-house-bred, and so thought it necessary to give the Reverend
Doctor a peculiar look which he understood at once as inviting his
professional services.  He, therefore, uttered a few simple words of
gratitude, very quietly,--much to the satisfaction of some of the guests,
who had expected one of those elaborate effusions, with rolling up of the
eyes and rhetorical accents, so frequent with eloquent divines when they
address their Maker in genteel company.

Everybody began talking with the person sitting next at hand.  Mr.
Bernard naturally enough turned his attention first to the Widow; but
somehow or other the right side of the Widow seemed to be more wide awake
than the left side, next him, and he resigned her to the courtesies of
Mr. Dudley Venner, directing himself, not very unwillingly, to the young
girl next him on the other side.  Miss Letty Forrester, the granddaughter
of the Reverend Doctor, was city-bred, as anybody might see, and
city-dressed, as any woman would know at sight; a man might only feel the
general effect of clear, well-matched colors, of harmonious proportions,
of the cut which makes everything cling like a bather's sleeve where a
natural outline is to be kept, and ruffle itself up like the hackle of a
pitted fighting-cock where art has a right to luxuriate in silken
exuberance.  How this citybred and city-dressed girl came to be in
Rockland Mr. Bernard did not know, but he knew at any rate that she was
his next neighbor and entitled to his courtesies.  She was handsome, too,
when he came to look, very handsome when he came to look again,--endowed
with that city beauty which is like the beauty of wall-fruit, something
finer in certain respects than can be reared off the pavement.

The miserable routinists who keep repeating invidiously Cowper's

    "God made the country and man made the town,"

as if the town were a place to kill out the race in, do not know what
they are talking about.  Where could they raise such Saint-Michael pears,
such Saint-Germains, such Brown-Beurres, as we had until within a few
years growing within the walls of our old city-gardens? Is the dark and
damp cavern where a ragged beggar hides himself better than a
town-mansion which fronts the sunshine and backs on its own cool shadow,
with gas and water and all appliances to suit all needs?  God made the
cavern and man made the house!  What then?

There is no doubt that the pavement keeps a deal of mischief from coming
up out of the earth, and, with a dash off of it in summer, just to cool
the soles of the feet when it gets too hot, is the best place for many
constitutions, as some few practical people have already discovered.  And
just so these beauties that grow and ripen against the city-walls, these
young fellows with cheeks like peaches and young girls with cheeks like
nectarines, show that the most perfect forms of artificial life can do as
much for the human product as garden-culture for strawberries and
blackberries.

If Mr. Bernard had philosophized or prosed in this way, with so pretty,
nay, so lovely a neighbor as Miss Letty Forrester waiting for him to
speak to her, he would have to be dropped from this narrative as a person
unworthy of his good-fortune, and not deserving the kind reader's further
notice.  On the contrary, he no sooner set his eyes fairly on her than he
said to himself that she was charming, and that he wished she were one of
his scholars at the Institute.  So he began talking with her in an easy
way; for he knew something of young girls by this time, and, of course,
could adapt himself to a young lady who looked as if she might be not
more than fifteen or sixteen years old, and therefore could hardly be a
match in intellectual resources for the seventeen and eighteen year-old
first-class scholars of the Apollinean Institute.  But city-wall-fruit
ripens early, and he soon found that this girl's training had so
sharpened her wits and stored her memory, that he need not be at the
trouble to stoop painfully in order to come down to her level.

The beauty of good-breeding is that it adjusts itself to all relations
without effort, true to itself always however the manners of those around
it may change.  Self-respect and respect for others,--the sensitive
consciousness poises itself in these as the compass in the ship's
binnacle balances itself and maintains its true level within the two
concentric rings which suspend it on their pivots. This thorough-bred
school-girl quite enchanted Mr. Bernard.  He could not understand where
she got her style, her way of dress, her enunciation, her easy manners.
The minister was a most worthy gentleman, but this was not the Rockland
native-born manner; some new element had come in between the good, plain,
worthy man and this young girl, fit to be a Crown Prince's partner where
there were a thousand to choose from.

He looked across to Helen Darley, for he knew she would understand the
glance of admiration with which he called her attention to the young
beauty at his side; and Helen knew what a young girl could be, as
compared with what too many a one is, as well as anybody.

This poor, dear Helen of ours!  How admirable the contrast between her
and the Widow on the other side of Dudley Venner!  But, what was very
odd, that gentleman apparently thought the contrast was to the advantage
of this poor, dear Helen.  At any rate, instead of devoting himself
solely to the Widow, he happened to be just at that moment talking in a
very interested and, apparently, not uninteresting way to his right-hand
neighbor, who, on her part, never looked more charmingly,--as Mr. Bernard
could not help saying to himself,--but, to be sure, he had just been
looking at the young girl next him, so that his eyes were brimful of
beauty, and may have spilled some of it on the first comer: for you know
M. Becquerel has been showing us lately how everything is phosphorescent;
that it soaks itself with light in an instant's exposure, so that it is
wet with liquid sunbeams, or, if you will, tremulous with luminous
vibrations, when first plunged into the negative bath of darkness, and
betrays itself by the light which escapes from its surface.

Whatever were the reason, this poor, dear Helen never looked so sweetly.
Her plainly parted brown hair, her meek, blue eyes, her cheek just a
little tinged with color, the almost sad simplicity of her dress, and
that look he knew so well,--so full of cheerful patience, so sincere,
that he had trusted her from the first moment as the believers of the
larger half of Christendom trust the Blessed Virgin,--Mr. Bernard took
this all in at a glance, and felt as pleased as if it had been his own
sister Dorothea Elizabeth that he was looking at.  As for Dudley Veneer,
Mr. Bernard could not help being struck by the animated expression of his
countenance.  It certainly showed great kindness, on his part, to pay so
much attention to this quiet girl, when he had the thunder-and-lightning
Widow on the other side of him.

Mrs. Marilla Rowens did not know what to make of it.  She had made her
tea-party expressly for Mr. Dudley Veneer.  She had placed him just as
she wanted, between herself and a meek, delicate woman who dressed in
gray, wore a plain breastpin with hair in it, who taught a pack of girls
up there at the school, and looked as if she were born for a
teacher,--the very best foil that she could have chosen; and here was
this man, polite enough to herself, to be sure, but turning round to that
very undistinguished young person as if he rather preferred her
conversation of the two!

The truth was that Dudley Veneer and Helen Darley met as two travellers
might meet in the desert, wearied, both of them, with their long journey,
one having food, but no water, the other water, but no food.  Each saw
that the other had been in long conflict with some trial; for their
voices were low and tender, as patiently borne sorrow and humbly uttered
prayers make every human voice.  Through these tones, more than by what
they said, they came into natural sympathetic relations with each other.
Nothing could be more unstudied.  As for Dudley Venner, no beauty in all
the world could have so soothed and magnetized him as the very repose and
subdued gentleness which the Widow had thought would make the best
possible background for her own more salient and effective attractions.
No doubt, Helen, on her side, was almost too readily pleased with the
confidence this new acquaintance she was making seemed to show her from
the very first.  She knew so few men of any condition!  Mr. Silas
Peckham: he was her employer, and she ought to think of him as well as
she could; but every time she thought of him it was with a shiver of
disgust.  Mr. Bernard Langdon: a noble young man, a true friend, like a
brother to her,--God bless him, and send him some young heart as fresh as
his own!  But this gentleman produced a new impression upon her, quite
different from any to which she was accustomed.  His rich, low tones had
the strangest significance to her; she felt sure he must have lived
through long experiences, sorrowful like her own.  Elsie's father!  She
looked into his dark eyes, as she listened to him, to see if they had any
glimmer of that peculiar light, diamond-bright, but cold and still, which
she knew so well in Elsie's.  Anything but that!  Never was there more
tenderness, it seemed to her, than in the whole look and expression of
Elsie's father.  She must have been a great trial to him; yet his face
was that of one who had been saddened, not soured, by his discipline.
Knowing what Elsie must be to him, how hard she must make any parent's
life, Helen could not but be struck with the interest Mr. Dudley Venner
showed in her as his daughter's instructress.  He was too kind to her;
again and again she meekly turned from him, so as to leave him free to
talk to the showy lady at his other side, who was looking all the while

                         "like the night
          Of cloudless realms and starry skies;"

but still Mr. Dudley Venner, after a few courteous words, came back to
the blue eyes and brown hair; still he kept his look fixed upon her, and
his tones grew sweeter and lower as he became more interested in talk,
until this poor, dear Helen, what with surprise, and the bashfulness
natural to one who had seen little of the gay world, and the stirring of
deep, confused sympathies with this suffering father, whose heart seemed
so full of kindness, felt her cheeks glowing with unwonted flame, and
betrayed the pleasing trouble of her situation by looking so sweetly as
to arrest Mr. Bernard's eye for a moment, when he looked away from the
young beauty sitting next him.

Elsie meantime had been silent, with that singular, still, watchful look
which those who knew her well had learned to fear.  Her head just a
little inclined on one side, perfectly motionless for whole minutes, her
eyes seeming to, grow small and bright, as always when she was under her
evil influence, she was looking obliquely at the young girl on the other
side of her cousin Dick and next to Bernard Langdon.  As for Dick
himself, she seemed to be paying very little attention to him.  Sometimes
her eyes would wander off to Mr. Bernard, and their expression, as old
Dr. Kittredge, who watched her for a while pretty keenly, noticed, would
change perceptibly.  One would have said that she looked with a kind of
dull hatred at the girl, but with a half-relenting reproachful anger at
Mr. Bernard.

Miss Letty Forrester, at whom Elsie had been looking from time to time in
this fixed way, was conscious meanwhile of some unusual influence.  First
it was a feeling of constraint,--then, as it were, a diminished power
over the muscles, as if an invisible elastic cobweb were spinning round
her,--then a tendency to turn away from Mr. Bernard, who was making
himself very agreeable, and look straight into those eyes which would not
leave her, and which seemed to be drawing her towards them, while at the
same time they chilled the blood in all her veins.

Mr. Bernard saw this influence coming over her.  All at once he noticed
that she sighed, and that some little points of moisture began to glisten
on her forehead.  But she did not grow pale perceptibly; she had no
involuntary or hysteric movements; she still listened to him and smiled
naturally enough.  Perhaps she was only nervous at being stared at.  At
any rate, she was coming under some unpleasant influence or other, and
Mr. Bernard had seen enough of the strange impression Elsie sometimes
produced to wish this young girl to be relieved from it, whatever it was.
He turned toward Elsie and looked at her in such a way as to draw her
eyes upon him.  Then he looked steadily and calmly into them.  It was a
great effort, for some perfectly inexplicable reason.  At one instant he
thought he could not sit where he was; he must go and speak to Elsie.
Then he wanted to take his eyes away from hers; there was something
intolerable in the light that came from them.  But he was determined to
look her down, and he believed he could do it, for he had seen her
countenance change more than once when he had caught her gaze steadily
fixed on him.  All this took not minutes, but seconds. Presently she
changed color slightly,--lifted her head, which was inclined a little to
one side,--shut and opened her eyes two or three times, as if they had
been pained or wearied,--and turned away baffled, and shamed, as it would
seem, and shorn for the time of her singular and formidable or at least
evil-natured power of swaying the impulses of those around her.

It takes too long to describe these scenes where a good deal of life is
concentrated into a few silent seconds.  Mr. Richard Veneer had sat
quietly through it all, although this short pantomime had taken place
literally before his face.  He saw what was going on well enough, and
understood it all perfectly well.  Of course the schoolmaster had been
trying to make Elsie jealous, and had succeeded.  The little schoolgirl
was a decoy-duck,--that was all. Estates like the Dudley property were
not to be had every day, and no doubt the Yankee usher was willing to
take some pains to make sure of Elsie.  Does n't Elsie look savage?  Dick
involuntarily moved his chair a little away from her, and thought he felt
a pricking in the small white scars on his wrist.  A dare-devil fellow,
but somehow or other this girl had taken strange hold of his imagination,
and he often swore to himself, that, when he married her, he would carry
a loaded revolver with him to his bridal chamber.

Mrs. Blanche Creamer raged inwardly at first to find herself between the
two old gentlemen of the party.  It very soon gave her great comfort,
however, to see that Marilla, Rowens had just missed it in her
calculations, and she chuckled immensely to find Dudley Veneer devoting
himself chiefly to Helen Darley.  If the Rowens woman should hook Dudley,
she felt as if she should gnaw all her nails off for spite.  To think of
seeing her barouching about Rockland behind a pair of long-tailed bays
and a coachman with a band on his hat, while she, Blanche Creamer, was
driving herself about in a one-horse "carriage"!  Recovering her spirits
by degrees, she began playing her surfaces off at the two old Doctors,
just by way of practice.  First she heaved up a glaring white shoulder,
the right one, so that the Reverend Doctor should be stunned by it, if
such a thing might be. The Reverend Doctor was human, as the Apostle was
not ashamed to confess himself.  Half-devoutly and half-mischievously he
repeated inwardly, "Resist the Devil and he will flee from you."  As the
Reverend Doctor did not show any lively susceptibility, she thought she
would try the left shoulder on old Dr. Kittredge.  That worthy and
experienced student of science was not at all displeased with the
manoeuvre, and lifted his head so as to command the exhibition through
his glasses.  "Blanche is good for half a dozen years or so, if she is
careful," the Doctor said to himself, "and then she must take to her
prayer-book."  After this spasmodic failure of Mrs. Blanche Creamer's to
stir up the old Doctors, she returned again to the pleasing task of
watching the Widow in her evident discomfiture. But dark as the Widow
looked in her half-concealed pet, she was but as a pale shadow, compared
to Elsie in her silent concentration of shame and anger.

"Well, there is one good thing," said Mrs. Blanche Creamer; "Dick doesn't
get much out of that cousin of his this evening!  Does n't he look
handsome, though?"

So Mrs. Blanche, being now a good deal taken up with her observations of
those friends of hers and ours, began to be rather careless of her two
old Doctors, who naturally enough fell into conversation with each other
across the white surfaces of that lady, perhaps not very politely, but,
under the, circumstances, almost as a matter of necessity.

When a minister and a doctor get talking together, they always have a
great deal to say; and so it happened that the company left the table
just as the two Doctors were beginning to get at each other's ideas about
various interesting matters.  If we follow them into the other parlor, we
can, perhaps, pick up something of their conversation.


CHAPTER XXII.

WHY DOCTORS DIFFER.

The company rearranged itself with some changes after leaving the
tea-table.  Dudley Veneer was very polite to the Widow; but that lady
having been called off for a few moments for some domestic arrangement,
he slid back to the side of Helen Darley, his daughter's faithful
teacher.  Elsie had got away by herself, and was taken up in studying the
stereoscopic Laocoon.  Dick, being thus set free, had been seized upon by
Mrs. Blanche Creamer, who had diffused herself over three-quarters of a
sofa and beckoned him to the remaining fourth.  Mr. Bernard and Miss
Letty were having a snug fete-'a-fete in the recess of a bay-window.  The
two Doctors had taken two arm-chairs and sat squared off against each
other.  Their conversation is perhaps as well worth reporting as that of
the rest of the company, and, as it was carried on in a louder tone, was
of course more easy to gather and put on record.

It was a curious sight enough to see those two representatives of two
great professions brought face to face to talk over the subjects they had
been looking at all their lives from such different points of view.  Both
were old; old enough to have been moulded by their habits of thought and
life; old enough to have all their beliefs "fretted in," as vintners
say,--thoroughly worked up with their characters. Each of them looked his
calling.  The Reverend Doctor had lived a good deal among books in his
study; the Doctor, as we will call the medical gentleman, had been riding
about the country for between thirty and forty years.  His face looked
tough and weather-worn; while the Reverend Doctor's, hearty as it
appeared, was of finer texture.  The Doctor's was the graver of the two;
there was something of grimness about it, partly owing to the
northeasters he had faced for so many years, partly to long companionship
with that stern personage who never deals in sentiment or pleasantry.
His speech was apt to be brief and peremptory; it was a way he had got by
ordering patients; but he could discourse somewhat, on occasion, as the
reader may find out.  The Reverend Doctor had an open, smiling
expression, a cheery voice, a hearty laugh, and a cordial way with him
which some thought too lively for his cloth, but which children, who are
good judges of such matters, delighted in, so that he was the favorite of
all the little rogues about town.  But he had the clerical art of
sobering down in a moment, when asked to say grace while somebody was in
the middle of some particularly funny story; and though his voice was so
cheery in common talk, in the pulpit, like almost all preachers, he had a
wholly different and peculiar way of speaking, supposed to be more
acceptable to the Creator than the natural manner.  In point of fact,
most of our anti-papal and anti-prelatical clergymen do really intone
their prayers, without suspecting in the least that they have fallen into
such a Romish practice.

This is the way the conversation between the Doctor of Divinity and the
Doctor of Medicine was going on at the point where these notes take it
up.

"Obi tres medici, duo athei, you know, Doctor.  Your profession has
always had the credit of being lax in doctrine,--though pretty stringent
in practice, ha! ha!"

"Some priest said that," the Doctor answered, dryly.  "They always talked
Latin when they had a bigger lie than common to get rid of."

"Good!"  said the Reverend Doctor; "I'm afraid they would lie a little
sometimes.  But isn't there some truth in it, Doctor?  Don't you think
your profession is apt to see 'Nature' in the place of the God of
Nature,--to lose sight of the great First Cause in their daily study of
secondary causes?"

"I've thought about that," the Doctor answered, "and I've talked about it
and read about it, and I've come to the conclusion that nobody believes
in God and trusts in God quite so much as the doctors; only it is n't
just the sort of Deity that some of your profession have wanted them to
take up with.  There was a student of mine wrote a dissertation on the
Natural Theology of Health and Disease, and took that old lying proverb
for his motto.  He knew a good deal more about books than ever I did, and
had studied in other countries.  I'll tell you what he said about it.  He
said the old Heathen Doctor, Galen, praised God for his handiwork in the
human body, just as if he had been a Christian, or the Psalmist himself.
He said they had this sentence set up in large letters in the great
lecture-room in Paris where he attended: I dressed his wound and God
healed him.  That was an old surgeon's saying.  And he gave a long list
of doctors who were not only Christians, but famous ones.  I grant you,
though, ministers and doctors are very apt to see differently in
spiritual matters."

"That's it," said the Reverend Doctor; "you are apt to see 'Nature' where
we see God, and appeal to 'Science' where we are contented with
Revelation."

"We don't separate God and Nature, perhaps, as you do," the Doctor
answered.  "When we say that God is omnipresent and omnipotent and
omniscient, we are a little more apt to mean it than your folks are. We
think, when a wound heals, that God's presence and power and knowledge
are there, healing it, just as that old surgeon did.  We think a good
many theologians, working among their books, don't see the facts of the
world they live in.  When we tell 'em of these facts, they are apt to
call us materialists and atheists and infidels, and all that.  We can't
help seeing the facts, and we don't think it's wicked to mention 'em."

"Do tell me," the Reverend Doctor said, "some of these facts we are in
the habit of overlooking, and which your profession thinks it can see and
understand."

"That's very easy," the Doctor replied.  "For instance: you don't
understand or don't allow for idiosyncrasies as we learn to.  We know
that food and physic act differently with different people; but you think
the same kind of truth is going to suit, or ought to suit, all minds.  We
don't fight with a patient because he can't take magnesia or opium; but
you are all the time quarrelling over your beliefs, as if belief did not
depend very much on race and constitution, to say nothing of early
training."

"Do you mean to say that every man is not absolutely free to choose his
beliefs?"

"The men you write about in your studies are, but not the men we see in
the real world.  There is some apparently congenital defect in the
Indians, for instance, that keeps them from choosing civilization and
Christianity.  So with the Gypsies, very likely.  Everybody knows that
Catholicism or Protestantism is a good deal a matter of race.
Constitution has more to do with belief than people think for.  I went to
a Universalist church, when I was in the city one day, to hear a famous
man whom all the world knows, and I never saw such pews-full of broad
shoulders and florid faces, and substantial, wholesome-looking persons,
male and female, in all my life.  Why, it was astonishing.  Either their
creed made them healthy, or they chose it because they were healthy.
Your folks have never got the hang of human nature."

"I am afraid this would be considered a degrading and dangerous view of
human beliefs and responsibility for them," the Reverend Doctor replied.
"Prove to a man that his will is governed by something outside of
himself, and you have lost all hold on his moral and religious nature.
There is nothing bad men want to believe so much as that they are
governed by necessity.  Now that which is at once degrading and dangerous
cannot be true."

"No doubt," the Doctor replied, "all large views of mankind limit our
estimate of the absolute freedom of the will.  But I don't think it
degrades or endangers us, for this reason, that, while it makes us
charitable to the rest of mankind, our own sense of freedom, whatever it
is, is never affected by argument.  Conscience won't be reasoned with.
We feel that we can practically do this of that, and if we choose the
wrong, we know we are responsible; but observation teaches us that this
or that other race or individual has not the same practical freedom of
choice.  I don't see how we can avoid this conclusion in the instance of
the American Indians.  The science of Ethnology has upset a good many
theoretical notions about human nature."

"Science!"  said the Reverend Doctor, "science! that was a word the
Apostle Paul did not seem to think much of, if we may judge by the
Epistle to Timothy: 'Oppositions of science falsely so called.' I own
that I am jealous of that word and the pretensions that go with it.
Science has seemed to me to be very often only the handmaid of
skepticism."

"Doctor!" the physician said, emphatically, "science is knowledge.
Nothing that is not known properly belongs to science.  Whenever
knowledge obliges us to doubt, we are always safe in doubting.
Astronomers foretell eclipses, say how long comets are to stay with us,
point out where a new planet is to be found.  We see they know what they
assert, and the poor old Roman Catholic Church has at last to knock
under.  So Geology proves a certain succession of events, and the best
Christian in the world must make the earth's history square with it.
Besides, I don't think you remember what great revelations of himself the
Creator has made in the minds of the men who have built up science.  You
seem to me to hold his human masterpieces very cheap.  Don't you think
the 'inspiration of the Almighty' gave Newton and Cuvier
'understanding'?"

The Reverend Doctor was not arguing for victory.  In fact, what he wanted
was to call out the opinions of the old physician by a show of
opposition, being already predisposed to agree with many of them.  He was
rather trying the common arguments, as one tries tricks of fence merely
to learn the way of parrying.  But just here he saw a tempting opening,
and could not resist giving a home-thrust.

"Yes; but you surely would not consider it inspiration of the same kind
as that of the writers of the Old Testament?"

That cornered the Doctor, and he paused a moment before he replied. Then
he raised his head, so as to command the Reverend Doctor's face through
his spectacles, and said,

"I did not say that.  You are clear, I suppose, that the Omniscient spoke
through Solomon, but that Shakespeare wrote without his help?"

The Reverend Doctor looked very grave.  It was a bold, blunt way of
putting the question.  He turned it aside with the remark, that
Shakespeare seemed to him at times to come as near inspiration as any
human being not included among the sacred writers.

"Doctor," the physician began, as from a sudden suggestion, "you won't
quarrel with me, if I tell you some of my real thoughts, will you?"

"Say on, my dear Sir, say on," the minister answered, with his most
genial smile; "your real thoughts are just what I want to get at.  A
man's real thoughts are a great rarity.  If I don't agree with you, I
shall like to hear you."

The Doctor began; and in order to give his thoughts more connectedly, we
will omit the conversational breaks, the questions and comments of the
clergyman, and all accidental interruptions.

"When the old ecclesiastics said that where there were three doctors
there were two atheists, they lied, of course.  They called everybody who
differed from them atheists, until they found out that not believing in
God was n't nearly so ugly a crime as not believing in some particular
dogma; then they called them heretics, until so many good people had been
burned under that name that it began to smell too strong of roasting
flesh,--and after that infidels, which properly means people without
faith, of whom there are not a great many in any place or time.  But
then, of course, there was some reason why doctors shouldn't think about
religion exactly as ministers did, or they never would have made that
proverb.  It 's very likely that something of the same kind is true now;
whether it is so or not, I am going to tell you the reasons why it would
not be strange, if doctors should take rather different views from
clergymen about some matters of belief.  I don't, of course, mean all
doctors nor all clergymen.  Some doctors go as far as any old New England
divine, and some clergymen agree very well with the doctors that think
least according to rule.

"To begin with their ideas of the Creator himself.  They always see him
trying to help his creatures out of their troubles.  A man no sooner gets
a cut, than the Great Physician, whose agency we often call Nature, goes
to work, first to stop the blood, and then to heal the wound, and then to
make the scar as small as possible.  If a man's pain exceeds a certain
amount, he faints, and so gets relief. If it lasts too long, habit comes
in to make it tolerable.  If it is altogether too bad, he dies.  That is
the best thing to be done under the circumstances.  So you see, the
doctor is constantly in presence of a benevolent agency working against a
settled order of things, of which pain and disease are the accidents, so
to speak.  Well, no doubt they find it harder than clergymen to believe
that there can be any world or state from which this benevolent agency is
wholly excluded.  This may be very wrong; but it is not unnatural.

"They can hardly conceive of a permanent state of being in which cuts
would never try to heal, nor habit render suffering endurable.  This is
one effect of their training.

"Then, again, their attention is very much called to human limitations.
Ministers work out the machinery of responsibility in an abstract kind of
way; they have a sort of algebra of human nature, in which friction and
strength (or weakness) of material are left out.  You see, a doctor is in
the way of studying children from the moment of birth upwards.  For the
first year or so he sees that they are just as much pupils of their Maker
as the young of any other animals.  Well, their Maker trains them to pure
selfishness.  Why? In order that they may be sure to take care of
themselves.  So you see, when a child comes to be, we will say a year and
a day old, and makes his first choice between right and wrong, he is at a
disadvantage; for he, has that vis a tergo, as we doctors call it, that
force from behind, of a whole year's life of selfishness, for which he is
no more to blame than a calf is to blame for having lived in the same
way, purely to gratify his natural appetites.  Then we see that baby grow
up to a child, and, if he is fat and stout and red and lively, we expect
to find him troublesome and noisy, and, perhaps, sometimes disobedient
more or less; that's the way each new generation breaks its egg-shell;
but if he is very weak and thin, and is one of the kind that may be
expected to die early, he will very likely sit in the house all day and
read good books about other little sharp-faced children just like
himself, who died early, having always been perfectly indifferent to all
the out-door amusements of the wicked little red-cheeked children.

"Some of the little folks we watch grow up to be young women, and
occasionally one of them gets nervous, what we call hysterical, and then
that girl will begin to play all sorts of pranks,--to lie and cheat,
perhaps, in the most unaccountable way, so that she might seem to a
minister a good example of total depravity.  We don't see her in that
light.  We give her iron and valerian, and get her on horseback, if we
can, and so expect to make her will come all right again.  By and by we
are called in to see an old baby, threescore years and ten or more old.
We find this old baby has never got rid of that first year's teaching
which led him to fill his stomach with all he could pump into it, and
his hands with everything he could grab.  People call him a miser.  We
are sorry for him; but we can't help remembering his first year's
training, and the natural effect of money on the great majority of those
that have it.  So while the ministers say he 'shall hardly enter into the
kingdom of heaven,' we like to remind them that 'with God all things are
possible.'

"Once more, we see all kinds of monomania and insanity.  We learn from
them to recognize all sorts of queer tendencies in minds supposed to be
sane, so that we have nothing but compassion for a large class of persons
condemned as sinners by theologians, but considered by us as invalids.
We have constant reasons for noticing the transmission of qualities from
parents to offspring, and we find it hard to hold a child accountable in
any moral point of view for inherited bad temper or tendency to
drunkenness,--as hard as we should to blame him for inheriting gout or
asthma.  I suppose we are more lenient with human nature than theologians
generally are.  We know that the spirits of men and their views of the
present and the future go up and down with the barometer, and that a
permanent depression of one inch in the mercurial column would affect the
whole theology of Christendom.

"Ministers talk about the human will as if it stood on a high look-out,
with plenty of light, and elbowroom reaching to the horizon. Doctors are
constantly noticing how it is tied up and darkened by inferior
organization, by disease, and all sorts of crowding interferences, until
they get to look upon Hottentots and Indians--and a good many of their
own race as a kind of self-conscious blood-clocks with very limited power
of self-determination.  That's the tendency, I say, of a doctor's
experience.  But the people to whom they address their statements of the
results of their observation belong to the thinking class of the highest
races, and they are conscious of a great deal of liberty of will.  So in
the face of the fact that civilization with all it offers has proved a
dead failure with the aboriginal races of this country,--on the whole, I
say, a dead failure,--they talk as if they knew from their own will all
about that of a Digger Indian!  We are more apt to go by observation of
the facts in the case.  We are constantly seeing weakness where you see
depravity.  I don't say we're right; I only tell what you must often find
to be the fact, right or wrong, in talking with doctors.  You see, too,
our notions of bodily and moral disease, or sin, are apt to go together.
We used to be as hard on sickness as you were on sin.  We know better
now.  We don't look at sickness as we used to, and try to poison it with
everything that is offensive, burnt toads and earth-worms and
viper-broth, and worse things than these.  We know that disease has
something back of it which the body isn't to blame for, at least in most
cases, and which very often it is trying to get rid of.  Just so with
sin.  I will agree to take a hundred new-born babes of a certain stock
and return seventy-five of them in a dozen years true and honest, if not
'pious' children.  And I will take another hundred, of a different stock,
and put them in the hands of certain Ann-Street or Five-Points teachers,
and seventy-five of them will be thieves and liars at the end of the same
dozen years.  I have heard of an old character, Colonel Jaques, I believe
it was, a famous cattle-breeder, who used to say he could breed to pretty
much any pattern he wanted to.  Well, we doctors see so much of families,
how the tricks of the blood keep breaking out, just as much in character
as they do in looks, that we can't help feeling as if a great many people
hadn't a fair chance to be what is called 'good,' and that there isn't a
text in the Bible better worth keeping always in mind than that one,
'Judge not, that ye be not judged.'

"As for our getting any quarter at the hands of theologians, we don't
expect it, and have no right to.  You don't give each other any quarter.
I have had two religious books sent me by friends within a week or two.
One is Mr. Brownson's; he is as fair and square as Euclid; a real honest,
strong thinker, and one that knows what he is talking about,--for he has
tried all sorts of religions, pretty much. He tells us that the Roman
Catholic Church is the one 'through which alone we can hope for heaven.'
The other is by a worthy Episcopal rector, who appears to write as if he
were in earnest, and he calls the Papacy the 'Devil's Masterpiece,' and
talks about the 'Satanic scheme' of that very Church 'through which
alone,' as Mr. Brownson tells us, 'we can hope for heaven'

"What's the use in our caring about hard words after this,--'atheists,'
heretics, infidels, and the like?  They're, after all, only the cinders
picked up out of those heaps of ashes round the stumps of the old stakes
where they used to burn men, women, and children for not thinking just
like other folks.  They 'll 'crock' your fingers, but they can't burn us.

"Doctors are the best-natured people in the world, except when they get
fighting with each other.  And they have some advantages over you.  You
inherit your notions from a set of priests that had no wives and no
children, or none to speak of, and so let their humanity die out of them.
It did n't seem much to them to condemn a few thousand millions of people
to purgatory or worse for a mistake of judgment.  They didn't know what
it was to have a child look up in their faces and say 'Father!' It will
take you a hundred or two more years to get decently humanized, after so
many centuries of de-humanizing celibacy.

"Besides, though our libraries are, perhaps, not commonly quite so big as
yours, God opens one book to physicians that a good many of you don't
know much about,--the Book of Life.  That is none of your dusty folios
with black letters between pasteboard and leather, but it is printed in
bright red type, and the binding of it is warm and tender to every touch.
They reverence that book as one of the Almighty's infallible revelations.
They will insist on reading you lessons out of it, whether you call them
names or not.  These will always be lessons of charity.  No doubt,
nothing can be more provoking to listen to.  But do beg your folks to
remember that the Smithfield fires are all out, and that the cinders are
very dirty and not in the least dangerous.  They'd a great deal better be
civil, and not be throwing old proverbs in the doctors' faces, when they
say that the man of the old monkish notions is one thing and the man they
watch from his cradle to his coffin is something very different."

It has cost a good deal of trouble to work the Doctor's talk up into this
formal shape.  Some of his sentences have been rounded off for him, and
the whole brought into a more rhetorical form than it could have
pretended to, if taken as it fell from his lips.  But the exact course of
his remarks has been followed, and as far as possible his expressions
have been retained.  Though given in the form of a discourse, it must be
remembered that this was a conversation, much more fragmentary and
colloquial than it seems as just read.

The Reverend Doctor was very far from taking offence at the old
physician's freedom of speech.  He knew him to be honest, kind,
charitable, self-denying, wherever any sorrow was to be alleviated,
always reverential, with a cheerful trust in the great Father of all
mankind.  To be sure, his senior deacon, old Deacon Shearer,--who seemed
to have got his Scripture-teachings out of the "Vinegar Bible," (the one
where Vineyard is misprinted Vinegar; which a good many people seem to
have adopted as the true reading,)--his senior deacon had called Dr.
Kittredge an "infidel."  But the Reverend Doctor could not help feeling,
that, unless the text, "By their fruits ye shall know them," were an
interpolation, the Doctor was the better Christian of the two.  Whatever
his senior deacon might think about it, he said to himself that he
shouldn't be surprised if he met the Doctor in heaven yet, inquiring
anxiously after old Deacon Shearer.

He was on the point of expressing himself very frankly to the Doctor,
with that benevolent smile on his face which had sometimes come near
giving offence to the readers of the "Vinegar" edition, but he saw that
the physician's attention had been arrested by Elsie.  He looked in the
same direction himself, and could not help being struck by her attitude
and expression.  There was something singularly graceful in the curves of
her neck and the rest of her figure, but she was so perfectly still that
it seemed as if she were hardly breathing.  Her eyes were fixed on the
young girl with whom Mr. Bernard was talking. He had often noticed their
brilliancy, but now it seemed to him that they appeared dull, and the
look on her features was as of some passion which had missed its stroke.
Mr. Bernard's companion seemed unconscious that she was the object of
this attention, and was listening to the young master as if he had
succeeded in making himself very agreeable.

Of course Dick Veneer had not mistaken the game that was going on. The
schoolmaster meant to make Elsie jealous,--and he had done it. That 's
it: get her savage first, and then come wheedling round her,--a sure
trick, if he isn't headed off somehow.  But Dick saw well enough that he
had better let Elsie alone just now, and thought the best way of killing
the evening would be to amuse himself in a little lively talk with Mrs.
Blanche Creamer, and incidentally to show Elsie that he could make
himself acceptable to other women, if not to herself.

The Doctor presently went up to Elsie, determined to engage her in
conversation and get her out of her thoughts, which he saw, by her look,
were dangerous.  Her father had been on the point of leaving Helen Darley
to go to her, but felt easy enough when he saw the old Doctor at her
side, and so went on talking.  The Reverend Doctor, being now left alone,
engaged the Widow Rowens, who put the best face on her vexation she
could, but was devoting herself to all the underground deities for having
been such a fool as to ask that pale-faced thing from the Institute to
fill up her party.

There is no space left to report the rest of the conversation.  If there
was anything of any significance in it, it will turn up by and by, no
doubt.  At ten o'clock the Reverend Doctor called Miss Letty, who had no
idea it was so late; Mr. Bernard gave his arm to Helen; Mr. Richard saw
to Mrs. Blanche Creamer; the Doctor gave Elsie a cautioning look, and
went off alone, thoughtful; Dudley Venner and his daughter got into their
carriage and were whirled away.  The Widow's gambit was played, and she
had not won the game.


CHAPTER XXIII.

THE WILD HUNTSMAN.

The young master had not forgotten the old Doctor's cautions. Without
attributing any great importance to the warning he had given him, Mr.
Bernard had so far complied with his advice that he was becoming a pretty
good shot with the pistol.  It was an amusement as good as many others to
practise, and he had taken a fancy to it after the first few days.

The popping of a pistol at odd hours in the backyard of the Institute was
a phenomenon more than sufficiently remarkable to be talked about in
Rockland.  The viscous intelligence of a country-village is not easily
stirred by the winds which ripple the fluent thought of great cities, but
it holds every straw and entangles every insect that lights upon it.  It
soon became rumored in the town that the young master was a wonderful
shot with the pistol.  Some said he could hit a fo'pence-ha'penny at
three rod; some, that he had shot a swallow, flying, with a single ball;
some, that he snuffed a candle five times out of six at ten paces, and
that he could hit any button in a man's coat he wanted to.  In other
words, as in all such cases, all the common feats were ascribed to him,
as the current jokes of the day are laid at the door of any noted wit,
however innocent he may be of them.

In the natural course of things, Mr. Richard Venner, who had by this time
made some acquaintances, as we have seen, among that class of the
population least likely to allow a live cinder of gossip to go out for
want of air, had heard incidentally that the master up there at the
Institute was all the time practising with a pistol, that they say he can
snuff a candle at ten rods, (that was Mrs. Blanche Creamer's version,)
and that he could hit anybody he wanted to right in the eye, as far as he
could see the white of it.

Dick did not like the sound of all this any too well.  Without believing
more than half of it, there was enough to make the Yankee schoolmaster
too unsafe to be trifled with.  However, shooting at a mark was pleasant
work enough; he had no particular objection to it himself.  Only he did
not care so much for those little popgun affairs that a man carries in
his pocket, and with which you could n't shoot a fellow,--a robber,
say,--without getting the muzzle under his nose.  Pistols for boys;
long-range rifles for men.  There was such a gun lying in a closet with
the fowling-pieces.  He would go out into the fields and see what he
could do as a marksman.

The nature of the mark which Dick chose for experimenting upon was
singular.  He had found some panes of glass which had been removed from
an old sash, and he placed these successively before his target,
arranging them at different angles.  He found that a bullet would go
through the glass without glancing or having its force materially abated.
It was an interesting fact in physics, and might prove of some practical
significance hereafter.  Nobody knows what may turn up to render these
out-of-the-way facts useful.  All this was done in a quiet way in one of
the bare spots high up the side of The Mountain. He was very thoughtful
in taking the precaution to get so far away; rifle-bullets are apt to
glance and come whizzing about people's ears, if they are fired in the
neighborhood of houses.  Dick satisfied himself that he could be
tolerably sure of hitting a pane of glass at a distance of thirty rods,
more or less, and that, if there happened to be anything behind it, the
glass would not materially alter the force or direction of the bullet.

About this time it occurred to him also that there was an old
accomplishment of his which he would be in danger of losing for want of
practice, if he did not take some opportunity to try his hand and regain
its cunning, if it had begun to be diminished by disuse.  For his first
trial, he chose an evening when the moon was shining, and after the hour
when the Rockland people were like to be stirring abroad.  He was so far
established now that he could do much as he pleased without exciting
remark.

The prairie horse he rode, the mustang of the Pampas, wild as he was, had
been trained to take part in at least one exercise.  This was the
accomplishment in which Mr. Richard now proposed to try himself.  For
this purpose he sought the implement of which, as it may be remembered,
he had once made an incidental use,--the lasso, or long strip of hide
with a slip-noose at the end of it.  He had been accustomed to playing
with such a thong from his boyhood, and had become expert in its use in
capturing wild cattle in the course of his adventures.  Unfortunately,
there were no wild bulls likely to be met with in the neighborhood, to
become the subjects of his skill.  A stray cow in the road, an ox or a
horse in a pasture, must serve his turn,--dull beasts, but moving marks
to aim at, at any rate.

Never, since he had galloped in the chase over the Pampas, had Dick
Venner felt such a sense of life and power as when he struck the long
spurs into his wild horse's flanks, and dashed along the road with the
lasso lying like a coiled snake at the saddle-bow.  In skilful hands, the
silent, bloodless noose, flying like an arrow, but not like that leaving
a wound behind it,--sudden as a pistol-shot, but without the telltale
explosion,--is one of the most fearful and mysterious weapons that arm
the hand of man.  The old Romans knew how formidable, even in contest
with a gladiator equipped with sword, helmet, and shield, was the almost
naked retiarius, with his net in one hand and his three-pronged javelin
in the other.  Once get a net over a man's head, or a cord round his
neck, or, what is more frequently done nowadays, bonnet him by knocking
his hat down over his eyes, and he is at the mercy of his opponent.  Our
soldiers who served against the Mexicans found this out too well.  Many a
poor fellow has been lassoed by the fierce riders from the plains, and
fallen an easy victim to the captor who had snared him in the fatal
noose.

But, imposing as the sight of the wild huntsmen of the Pampas might have
been, Dick could not help laughing at the mock sublimity of his
situation, as he tried his first experiment on an unhappy milky mother
who had strayed from her herd and was wandering disconsolately along the
road, laying the dust, as slue went, with thready streams from her
swollen, swinging udders.  "Here goes the Don at the windmill!" said
Dick, and tilted full speed at her, whirling the lasso round his head as
he rode.  The creature swerved to one side of the way, as the wild horse
and his rider came rushing down upon her, and presently turned and ran,
as only cows and it would n't be safe to say it--can run.  Just before he
passed,--at twenty or thirty feet from her,--the lasso shot from his
hand, uncoiling as it flew, and in an instant its loop was round her
horns.  "Well cast!" said Dick, as he galloped up to her side and
dexterously disengaged the lasso. "Now for a horse on the run!"

He had the good luck to find one, presently, grazing in a pasture at the
road-side.  Taking down the rails of the fence at one point, he drove the
horse into the road and gave chase.  It was a lively young animal enough,
and was easily roused to a pretty fast pace.  As his gallop grew more and
more rapid, Dick gave the reins to the mustang, until the two horses
stretched themselves out in their longest strides.  If the first feat
looked like play, the one he was now to attempt had a good deal the
appearance of real work.  He touched the mustang with the spur, and in a
few fierce leaps found himself nearly abreast of the frightened animal he
was chasing.  Once more he whirled the lasso round and round over his
head, and then shot it forth, as the rattlesnake shoots his head from the
loops against which it rests.  The noose was round the horse's neck, and
in another instant was tightened so as almost to stop his breath.  The
prairie horse knew the trick of the cord, and leaned away from the
captive, so as to keep the thong tensely stretched between his neck and
the peak of the saddle to which it was fastened.  Struggling was of no
use with a halter round his windpipe, and he very soon began to tremble
and stagger,--blind, no doubt, and with a roaring in his ears as of a
thousand battle-trumpets,--at any rate, subdued and helpless. That was
enough.  Dick loosened his lasso, wound it up again, laid it like a pet
snake in a coil at his saddle-bow, turned his horse, and rode slowly
along towards the mansion-house.

The place had never looked more stately and beautiful to him than as he
now saw it in the moonlight.  The undulations of the land,--the grand
mountain screen which sheltered the mansion from the northern blasts,
rising with all its hanging forests and parapets of naked rock high
towards the heavens,--the ancient mansion, with its square chimneys, and
bodyguard of old trees, and cincture of low walls with marble-pillared
gateways,--the fields, with their various coverings,--the beds of
flowers,--the plots of turf, one with a gray column in its centre bearing
a sundial on which the rays of the moon were idly shining, another with a
white stone and a narrow ridge of turf,--over all these objects,
harmonized with all their infinite details into one fair whole by the
moonlight, the prospective heir, as he deemed himself, looked with
admiring eyes.

But while he looked, the thought rose up in his mind like waters from a
poisoned fountain, that there was a deep plot laid to cheat him of the
inheritance which by a double claim he meant to call his own. Every day
this ice-cold beauty, this dangerous, handsome cousin of his, went up to
that place,--that usher's girl-trap.  Everyday,--regularly now,--it used
to be different.  Did she go only to get out of his, her cousin's, reach?
Was she not rather becoming more and more involved in the toils of this
plotting Yankee?

If Mr. Bernard had shown himself at that moment a few rods in advance,
the chances are that in less than one minute he would have found himself
with a noose round his neck, at the heels of a mounted horseman.
Providence spared him for the present.  Mr. Richard rode his horse
quietly round to the stable, put him up, and proceeded towards the house.
He got to his bed without disturbing the family, but could not sleep.
The idea had fully taken possession of his mind that a deep intrigue was
going on which would end by bringing Elsie and the schoolmaster into
relations fatal to all his own hopes.  With that ingenuity which always
accompanies jealousy, he tortured every circumstance of the last few
weeks so as to make it square with this belief.  From this vein of
thought he naturally passed to a consideration of every possible method
by which the issue he feared might be avoided.

Mr. Richard talked very plain language with himself in all these inward
colloquies.  Supposing it came to the worst, what could be done then?
First, an accident might happen to the schoolmaster which should put a
complete and final check upon his projects and contrivances.  The
particular accident which might interrupt his career must, evidently, be
determined by circumstances; but it must be of a nature to explain itself
without the necessity of any particular person's becoming involved in the
matter.  It would be unpleasant to go into particulars; but everybody
knows well enough that men sometimes get in the way of a stray bullet,
and that young persons occasionally do violence to themselves in various
modes,--by firearms, suspension, and other means,--in consequence of
disappointment in love, perhaps, oftener than from other motives. There
was still another kind of accident which might serve his purpose.  If
anything should happen to Elsie, it would be the most natural thing in
the world that his uncle should adopt him, his nephew and only near
relation, as his heir.  Unless, indeed, uncle Dudley should take it into
his head to marry again.  In that case, where would he, Dick, be?  This
was the most detestable complication which he could conceive of.  And yet
he had noticed--he could not help noticing--that his uncle had been very
attentive to, and, as it seemed, very much pleased with, that young woman
from the school. What did that mean?  Was it possible that he was going
to take a fancy to her?

It made him wild to think of all the several contingencies which might
defraud him of that good-fortune which seemed but just now within his
grasp.  He glared in the darkness at imaginary faces: sometimes at that
of the handsome, treacherous schoolmaster; sometimes at that of the
meek-looking, but no doubt, scheming, lady-teacher; sometimes at that of
the dark girl whom he was ready to make his wife; sometimes at that of
his much respected uncle, who, of course, could not be allowed to peril
the fortunes of his relatives by forming a new connection.  It was a
frightful perplexity in which he found himself, because there was no one
single life an accident to which would be sufficient to insure the
fitting and natural course of descent to the great Dudley property.  If
it had been a simple question of helping forward a casualty to any one
person, there was nothing in Dick's habits of thought and living to make
that a serious difficulty.  He had been so much with lawless people, that
a life between his wish and his object seemed only as an obstacle to be
removed, provided the object were worth the risk and trouble.  But if
there were two or three lives in the way, manifestly that altered the
case.

His Southern blood was getting impatient.  There was enough of the
New-Englander about him to make him calculate his chances before he
struck; but his plans were liable to be defeated at any moment by a
passionate impulse such as the dark-hued races of Southern Europe and
their descendants are liable to.  He lay in his bed, sometimes arranging
plans to meet the various difficulties already mentioned, sometimes
getting into a paroxysm of blind rage in the perplexity of considering
what object he should select as the one most clearly in his way.  On the
whole, there could be no doubt where the most threatening of all his
embarrassments lay.  It was in the probable growing relation between
Elsie and the schoolmaster.  If it should prove, as it seemed likely,
that there was springing up a serious attachment tending to a union
between them, he knew what he should do, if he was not quite so sure how
he should do it.

There was one thing at least which might favor his projects, and which,
at any rate, would serve to amuse him.  He could, by a little quiet
observation, find out what were the schoolmaster's habits of life:
whether he had any routine which could be calculated upon; and under what
circumstances a strictly private interview of a few minutes with him
might be reckoned on, in case it should be desirable.  He could also very
probably learn some facts about Elsie. whether the young man was in the
habit of attending her on her way home from school; whether she stayed
about the schoolroom after the other girls had gone; and any incidental
matters of interest which might present themselves.

He was getting more and more restless for want of some excitement.  A mad
gallop, a visit to Mrs. Blanche Creamer, who had taken such a fancy to
him, or a chat with the Widow Rowens, who was very lively in her talk,
for all her sombre colors, and reminded him a good deal of same of his
earlier friends, the senoritas,--all these were distractions, to be sure,
but not enough to keep his fiery spirit from fretting itself in longings
for more dangerous excitements.  The thought of getting a knowledge of
all Mr. Bernard's ways, so that he would be in his power at any moment,
was a happy one.

For some days after this he followed Elsie at a long distance behind, to
watch her until she got to the schoolhouse.  One day he saw Mr. Bernard
join her: a mere accident, very probably, for it was only once this
happened.  She came on her homeward way alone,--quite apart from the
groups of girls who strolled out of the schoolhouse yard in company.
Sometimes she was behind them all,--which was suggestive. Could she have
stayed to meet the schoolmaster?

If he could have smuggled himself into the school, he would have liked to
watch her there, and see if there was not some understanding between her
and the master which betrayed itself by look or word. But this was beyond
the limits of his audacity, and he had to content himself with such
cautious observations as could be made at a distance.  With the aid of a
pocket-glass he could make out persons without the risk of being observed
himself.

Mr. Silos Peckham's corps of instructors was not expected to be off duty
or to stand at ease for any considerable length of time. Sometimes Mr.
Bernard, who had more freedom than the rest, would go out for a ramble in
the daytime, but more frequently it would be in the evening, after the
hour of "retiring," as bedtime was elegantly termed by the young ladies
of the Apollinean Institute.  He would then not unfrequently walk out
alone in the common roads, or climb up the sides of The Mountain, which
seemed to be one of his favorite resorts.  Here, of course, it was
impossible to follow him with the eye at a distance.  Dick had a hideous,
gnawing suspicion that somewhere in these deep shades the schoolmaster
might meet Elsie, whose evening wanderings he knew so well.  But of this
he was not able to assure himself.  Secrecy was necessary to his present
plans, and he could not compromise himself by over-eager curiosity.  One
thing he learned with certainty.  The master returned, after his walk one
evening, and entered the building where his room was situated. Presently
a light betrayed the window of his apartment.  From a wooded bank, some
thirty or forty rods from this building, Dick Venner could see the
interior of the chamber, and watch the master as he sat at his desk, the
light falling strongly upon his face, intent upon the book or manuscript
before him.  Dick contemplated him very long in this attitude.  The sense
of watching his every motion, himself meanwhile utterly unseen, was
delicious.  How little the master was thinking what eyes were on him!

Well,--there were two things quite certain.  One was, that, if he chose,
he could meet the schoolmaster alone, either in the road or in a more
solitary place, if he preferred to watch his chance for an evening or
two.  The other was, that he commanded his position, as he sat at his
desk in the evening, in such a way that there would be very little
difficulty,--so far as that went; of course, however, silence is always
preferable to noise, and there is a great difference in the marks left by
different casualties.  Very likely nothing would come of all this
espionage; but, at any rate, the first thing to be done with a man you
want to have in your power is to learn his habits.

Since the tea-party at the Widow Rowens's, Elsie had been more fitful and
moody than ever.  Dick understood all this well enough, you know. It was
the working of her jealousy against that young schoolgirl to whom the
master had devoted himself for the sake of piquing the heiress of the
Dudley mansion.  Was it possible, in any way, to exasperate her irritable
nature against him, and in this way to render her more accessible to his
own advances?  It was difficult to influence her at all.  She endured his
company without seeming to enjoy it.  She watched him with that strange
look of hers, sometimes as if she were on her guard against him,
sometimes as if she would like to strike at him as in that fit of
childish passion.  She ordered him about with a haughty indifference
which reminded him of his own way with the dark-eyed women whom he had
known so well of old.  All this added a secret pleasure to the other
motives he had for worrying her with jealous suspicions.  He knew she
brooded silently on any grief that poisoned her comfort,--that she fed on
it, as it were, until it ran with every drop of blood in her veins,--and
that, except in some paroxysm of rage, of which he himself was not likely
the second time to be the object, or in some deadly vengeance wrought
secretly, against which he would keep a sharp lookout, so far as he was
concerned, she had no outlet for her dangerous, smouldering passions.

Beware of the woman who cannot find free utterance for all her stormy
inner life either in words or song!  So long as a woman can talk, there
is nothing she cannot bear.  If she cannot have a companion to listen to
her woes, and has no musical utterance, vocal or instrumental,--then, if
she is of the real woman sort, and has a few heartfuls of wild blood in
her, and you have done her a wrong,--double-bolt the door which she may
enter on noiseless slipper at midnight,--look twice before you taste of
any cup whose draught the shadow of her hand may have darkened!

But let her talk, and, above all, cry, or, if she is one of the
coarser-grained tribe, give her the run of all the red-hot expletives in
the language, and let her blister her lips with them until she is tired,
she will sleep like a lamb after it, and you may take a cup of coffee
from her without stirring it up to look for its sediment.

So, if she can sing, or play on any musical instrument, all her
wickedness will run off through her throat or the tips of her fingers.
How many tragedies find their peaceful catastrophe in fierce roulades and
strenuous bravuras!  How many murders are executed in double-quick time
upon the keys which stab the air with their dagger-strokes of sound!
What would our civilization be without the piano?  Are not Erard and
Broadwood and Chickering the true humanizers of our time?  Therefore do I
love to hear the all-pervading tum tum jarring the walls of little
parlors in houses with double door-plates on their portals, looking out
on streets and courts which to know is to be unknown, and where to exist
is not to live, according to any true definition of living.  Therefore
complain I not of modern degeneracy, when, even from the open window of
the small unlovely farmhouse, tenanted by the hard-handed man of bovine
flavors and the flat-patterned woman of broken-down countenance, issue
the same familiar sounds.  For who knows that Almira, but for these keys,
which throb away her wild impulses in harmless discords would not have
been floating, dead, in the brown stream which slides through the meadows
by her father's door,--or living, with that other current which runs
beneath the gas-lights over the slimy pavement, choking with wretched
weeds that were once in spotless flower?

Poor Elsie!  She never sang nor played.  She never shaped her inner life
in words: such utterance was as much denied to her nature as common
articulate speech to the deaf mute.  Her only language must be in action.
Watch her well by day and by night, old Sophy! watch her well! or the
long line of her honored name may close in shame, and the stately mansion
of the Dudleys remain a hissing and a reproach till its roof is buried in
its cellar!


CHAPTER XXIV.

ON HIS TRACKS.

"Able!"  said the old Doctor, one morning, "after you've harnessed
Caustic, come into the study a few minutes, will you?"

Abel nodded.  He was a man of few words, and he knew that the "will you"
did not require an answer, being the true New-England way of rounding the
corners of an employer's order,--a tribute to the personal independence
of an American citizen.

The hired man came into the study in the course of a few minutes. His
face was perfectly still, and he waited to be spoken to; but the Doctor's
eye detected a certain meaning in his expression, which looked as if he
had something to communicate.

"Well?" said the Doctor.

"He's up to mischief o' some kind, I guess," said Abel.  "I jest happened
daown by the mansion-haouse last night, 'n' he come aout o' the gate on
that queer-lookin' creator' o' his.  I watched him, 'n' he rid, very
slow, all raoun' by the Institoot, 'n' acted as ef he was spyin' abaout.
He looks to me like a man that's calc'latin' to do some kind of ill-turn
to somebody.  I should n't like to have him raoun' me, 'f there wa'n't a
pitchfork or an eel-spear or some sech weep'n within reach.  He may be
all right; but I don't like his looks, 'n' I don't see what he's lurkin'
raoun' the Institoot for, after folks is abed."

"Have you watched him pretty close for the last few days?" said the
Doctor.

"W'll, yes,--I've had my eye on him consid'ble o' the time.  I haf to be
pooty shy abaout it, or he'll find aout th't I'm on his tracks.  I don'
want him to get a spite ag'inst me, 'f I c'n help it; he looks to me like
one o' them kind that kerries what they call slung-shot, 'n' hits ye on
the side o' th' head with 'em so suddin y' never know what hurts ye."

"Why," said the Doctor, sharply,--"have you ever seen him with any such
weapon about him?"

"W'll, no,--I caan't say that I hev," Abel answered.  "On'y he looks kin'
o' dangerous.  Maybe he's all jest 'z he ought to be,--I caan't say that
he a'n't,--but he's aout late nights, 'n' lurkin' raonn' jest 'z ef he
was spyin' somebody, 'n' somehaow I caan't help mistrustin' them
Portagee-lookin' fellahs.  I caan't keep the run o' this chap all the
time; but I've a notion that old black woman daown 't the mansion-haouse
knows 'z much abaout him 'z anybody."

The Doctor paused a moment, after hearing this report from his private
detective, and then got into his chaise, and turned Caustic's head in the
direction of the Dudley mansion.  He had been suspicious of Dick from the
first.  He did not like his mixed blood, nor his looks, nor his ways.  He
had formed a conjecture about his projects early.  He had made a shrewd
guess as to the probable jealousy Dick would feel of the schoolmaster,
had found out something of his movements, and had cautioned Mr.
Bernard,--as we have seen.  He felt an interest in the young man,--a
student of his own profession, an intelligent and ingenuously
unsuspecting young fellow, who had been thrown by accident into the
companionship or the neighborhood of two persons, one of whom he knew to
be dangerous, and the other he believed instinctively might be capable of
crime.

The Doctor rode down to the Dudley mansion solely for the sake of seeing
old Sophy.  He was lucky enough to find her alone in her kitchen.  He
began taking with her as a physician; he wanted to know how her
rheumatism had been.  The shrewd old woman saw through all that with her
little beady black eyes.  It was something quite different he had come
for, and old Sophy answered very briefly for her aches and ails.

"Old folks' bones a'n't like young folks'," she said.  "It's the Lord's
doin's, 'n' 't a'n't much matter.  I sha'n' be long roan' this kitchen.
It's the young Missis, Doctor,--it 's our Elsie,--it 's the baby, as we
use' t' call her,--don' you remember, Doctor?  Seventeen year ago, 'n'
her poor mother cryin' for her,--'Where is she? where is she?  Let me see
her!  '--'n' how I run up-stairs,--I could run then,--'n' got the coral
necklace 'n' put it round her little neck, 'n' then showed her to her
mother,--'n' how her mother looked at her, 'n' looked, 'n' then put out
her poor thin fingers 'n' lifted the necklace,--'n' fell right back on
her piller, as white as though she was laid out to bury?"

The Doctor answered her by silence and a look of grave assent.  He had
never chosen to let old Sophy dwell upon these matters, for obvious
reasons.  The girl must not grow up haunted by perpetual fears and
prophecies, if it were possible to prevent it.

"Well, how has Elsie seemed of late?"  he said, after this brief pause.

The old woman shook her head.  Then she looked up at the Doctor so
steadily and searchingly that the diamond eyes of Elsie herself could
hardly have pierced more deeply.

The Doctor raised his head, by his habitual movement, and met the old
woman's look with his own calm and scrutinizing gaze, sharpened by the
glasses through which he now saw her.

Sophy spoke presently in an awed tone, as if telling a vision.

"We shall be havin' trouble before long.  The' 's somethin' comin' from
the Lord.  I've had dreams, Doctor.  It's many a year I've been
a-dreamin', but now they're comin' over 'n' over the same thing. Three
times I've dreamed one thing, Doctor,--one thing!"

"And what was that?" the Doctor said, with that shade of curiosity in his
tone which a metaphysician would probably say is an index of a certain
tendency to belief in the superstition to which the question refers.

"I ca'n' jestly tell y' what it was, Doctor," the old woman answered, as
if bewildered and trying to clear up her recollections; "but it was
somethin' fearful, with a great noise 'n' a great cryin' o' people,--like
the Las' Day, Doctor!  The Lord have mercy on my poor chil', 'n' take
care of her, if anything happens!  But I's feared she'll never live to
see the Las' Day, 'f 't don' come pooty quick."

Poor Sophy, only the third generation from cannibalism, was, not
unnaturally, somewhat confused in her theological notions.  Some of the
Second-Advent preachers had been about, and circulated their predictions
among the kitchen--population of Rockland.  This was the way in which it
happened that she mingled her fears in such a strange manner with their
doctrines.

The Doctor answered solemnly, that of the day and hour we knew not, but
it became us to be always ready.--"Is there anything going on in the
household different from common?"

Old Sophy's wrinkled face looked as full of life and intelligence, when
she turned it full upon the Doctor, as if she had slipped off her
infirmities and years like an outer garment.  All those fine instincts of
observation which came straight to her from her savage grandfather looked
out of her little eyes.  She had a kind of faith that the Doctor was a
mighty conjurer, who, if he would, could bewitch any of them.  She had
relieved her feelings by her long talk with the minister, but the Doctor
was the immediate adviser of the family, and had watched them through all
their troubles.  Perhaps he could tell them what to do.  She had but one
real object of affection in the world,--this child that she had tended
from infancy to womanhood.  Troubles were gathering thick round her; how
soon they would break upon her, and blight or destroy her, no one could
tell; but there was nothing in all the catalogue of terrors which might
not come upon the household at any moment.  Her own wits had sharpened
themselves in keeping watch by day and night, and her face had forgotten
its age in the excitement which gave life to its features.

"Doctor," old Sophy said, "there's strange things goin' on here by night
and by day.  I don' like that man,--that Dick,--I never liked him.  He
giv' me some o' these things I' got on; I take 'em 'cos I know it make
him mad, if I no take 'em; I wear 'em, so that he need n' feel as if I
did n' like him; but, Doctor, I hate him,--jes' as much as a member of
the church has the Lord's leave to hate anybody."

Her eyes sparkled with the old savage light, as if her ill-will to Mr.
Richard Veneer might perhaps go a little farther than the Christian limit
she had assigned.  But remember that her grandfather was in the habit of
inviting his friends to dine with him upon the last enemy he had bagged,
and that her grandmother's teeth were filed down to points, so that they
were as sharp as a shark's.

"What is that you have seen about Mr. Richard Veneer that gives you such
a spite against him, Sophy?"  asked the Doctor.

"What I' seen 'bout Dick Veneer?" she replied, fiercely.  "I'll tell y'
what I' seen.  Dick wan's to marry our Elsie,--that 's what he wan's; 'n'
he don' love her, Doctor,--he hates her, Doctor, as bad as I hate him!
He wan's to marry our Elsie, In' live here in the big house, 'n' have
nothin' to do but jes' lay still 'n' watch Massa Venner 'n' see how
long 't Ill take him to die, 'n' 'f he don' die fas' 'puff, help him some
way t' die fasser!--Come close up t' me, Doctor!  I wan' t' tell you
somethin' I tol' th' minister t' other day.  Th' minister, he come down
'n' prayed 'n' talked good,--he's a good man, that Doctor Honeywood, 'n'
I tol' him all 'bout our Elsie, but he did n' tell nobody what to do to
stop all what I' been dreamin' about happenin'.  Come close up to me,
Doctor!"

The Doctor drew his chair close up to that of the old woman.

"Doctor, nobody mus'n' never marry our Elsie 's longs she lives! Nobody
mus' n' never live with Elsie but ol Sophy; 'n' ol Sophy won't never die
's long 's Elsie 's alive to be took care of.  But I's feared, Doctor,
I's greatly feared Elsie wan' to marry somebody. The' 's a young
gen'l'm'n up at that school where she go,--so some of 'em tells me, 'n'
she loves t' see him 'n' talk wi' him, 'n' she talks about him when she
's asleep sometimes.  She mus 'n' never marry nobody, Doctor!  If she do,
he die, certain!"

"If she has a fancy for the young man up at the school there," the Doctor
said, "I shouldn't think there would be much danger from Dick."

"Doctor, nobody know nothin' 'bout Elsie but of Sophy.  She no like any
other creator' th't ever drawed the bref o' life.  If she ca'n' marry one
man 'cos she love him, she marry another man 'cos she hate him."

"Marry a man because she hates him, Sophy?  No woman ever did such a
thing as that, or ever will do it."

"Who tol' you Elsie was a woman, Doctor?"  said old Sophy, with a flash
of strange intelligence in her eyes.

The Doctor's face showed that he was startled.  The old woman could not
know much about Elsie that he did not know; but what strange superstition
had got into her head, he was puzzled to guess.  He had better follow
Sophy's lead and find out what she meant.

"I should call Elsie a woman, and a very handsome one," he said. "You
don't mean that she has any mark about her, except--you know--under the
necklace?"

The old woman resented the thought of any deformity about her darling.

"I did n' say she had nothin'--but jes' that--you know.  My beauty have
anything ugly?  She's the beautifullest-shaped lady that ever had a
shinin' silk gown drawed over her shoulders.  On'y she a'n't like no
other woman in none of her ways.  She don't cry 'n' laugh like other
women.  An' she ha'n' got the same kind o' feelin's as other women.--Do
you know that young gen'l'm'n up at the school, Doctor?"

"Yes, Sophy, I've met him sometimes.  He's a very nice sort of young man,
handsome, too, and I don't much wonder Elsie takes to him.  Tell me,
Sophy, what do you think would happen, if he should chance to fall in
love with Elsie, and she with him, and he should marry her?"

"Put your ear close to my lips, Doctor, dear!"  She whispered a little to
the Doctor, then added aloud, "He die,--that's all."

"But surely, Sophy, you a'n't afraid to have Dick marry her, if she would
have him for any reason, are you?  He can take care of himself, if
anybody can."

"Doctor!" Sophy answered, "nobody can take care of hisself that live wi'
Elsie!  Nobody never in all this worl' mus' live wi' Elsie but of Sophy,
I tell you.  You don' think I care for Dick?  What do I care, if Dick
Venner die?  He wan's to marry our Elsie so 's to live in the big house
'n' get all the money 'n' all the silver things 'n' all the chists full
o' linen 'n' beautiful clothes.  That's what Dick wan's. An' he hates
Elsie 'cos she don' like him.  But if he marry Elsie, she 'll make him
die some wrong way or other, 'n' they'll take her 'n' hang her, or he'll
get mad with her 'n' choke her.--Oh, I know his chokin' tricks!--he don'
leave his keys roun' for nothin'"

"What's that you say, Sophy?  Tell me what you mean by all that."

So poor Sophy had to explain certain facts not in all respects to her
credit.  She had taken the opportunity of his absence to look about his
chamber, and, having found a key in one of his drawers, had applied it to
a trunk, and, finding that it opened the trunk, had made a kind of
inspection for contraband articles, and, seeing the end of a leather
thong, had followed it up until she saw that it finished with a noose,
which, from certain appearances, she inferred to have seen service of at
least doubtful nature.  An unauthorized search; but old Sophy considered
that a game of life and death was going on in the household, and that she
was bound to look out for her darling.

The Doctor paused a moment to think over this odd piece of information.
Without sharing Sophy's belief as to the kind of use this
mischievous-looking piece of property had been put to, it was certainly
very odd that Dick should have such a thing at the bottom of his trunk.
The Doctor remembered reading or hearing something about the lasso and
the lariat and the bolas, and had an indistinct idea that they had been
sometimes used as weapons of warfare or private revenge; but they were
essentially a huntsman's implements, after all, and it was not very
strange that this young man had brought one of them with him.  Not
strange, perhaps, but worth noting.

"Do you really think Dick means mischief to anybody, that he has such
dangerous-looking things?"  the Doctor said, presently.

"I tell you, Doctor. Dick means to have Elsie.  If he ca'n' get her, he
never let nobody else have her!  Oh, Dick 's a dark man, Doctor! I know
him!  I 'member him when he was little boy,--he always cunin'. I think he
mean mischief to somebody.  He come home late nights,--come in
softly,--oh, I hear him!  I lay awake, 'n' got sharp ears,--I hear the
cats walkin' over the roofs,--'n' I hear Dick Veneer, when he comes up in
his stockin'-feet as still as a cat.  I think he mean' mischief to
somebody.  I no like his looks these las' days.--Is that a very pooty
gen'l'm'n up at the schoolhouse, Doctor?"

"I told you he was good-looking.  What if he is?"

"I should like to see him, Doctor,--I should like to see the pooty
gen'l'm'n that my poor Elsie loves.  She mus 'n' never marry nobody,
--but, oh, Doctor, I should like to see him, 'n' jes' think a little how
it would ha' been, if the Lord had n' been so hard on Elsie."

She wept and wrung her hands.  The kind Doctor was touched, and left her
a moment to her thoughts.

"And how does Mr. Dudley Veneer take all this?" he said, by way of
changing the subject a little.

"Oh, Massa Veneer, he good man, but he don' know nothin' 'bout Elsie, as
of Sophy do.  I keep close by her; I help her when she go to bed, 'n' set
by her sometime when she--'sleep; I come to her in th' mornin' 'n' help
her put on her things."--Then, in a whisper;--"Doctor, Elsie lets of
Sophy take off that necklace for her.  What you think she do, 'f anybody
else tech it?"

"I don't know, I'm sure, Sophy,--strike the person, perhaps."

"Oh, yes, strike 'em! but not with her han's, Doctor!"--The old woman's
significant pantomime must be guessed at.

"But you haven't told me, Sophy, what Mr. Dudley Veneer thinks of his
nephew, nor whether he has any notion that Dick wants to marry Elsie."

"I tell you.  Massa Venner, he good man, but he no see nothin' 'bout what
goes on here in the house.  He sort o' broken-hearted, you know,--sort o'
giv up,--don' know what to do wi' Elsie, 'xcep' say 'Yes, yes.'  Dick
always look smilin' 'n' behave well before him. One time I thought Massa
Veneer b'lieve Dick was goin' to take to Elsie; but now he don' seem to
take much notice,--he kin' o' stupid-' like 'bout sech things.  It's
trouble, Doctor; 'cos Massa Veneer bright man naterally,--'n' he's got a
great heap o' books.  I don' think Massa Veneer never been jes' heself
sence Elsie 's born.  He done all he know how,--but, Doctor, that wa'n' a
great deal.  You men-folks don' know nothin' 'bout these young gals; 'n'
'f you knowed all the young gals that ever lived, y' would n' know
nothin' 'bout our Elsie."

"No,--but, Sophy, what I want to know is, whether you think Mr. Veneer
has any kind of suspicion about his nephew,--whether he has any notion
that he's a dangerous sort of fellow,--or whether he feels safe to have
him about, or has even taken a sort of fancy to him."

"Lar' bless you, Doctor, Massa Veneer no more idee 'f any mischief 'bout
Dick than he has 'bout you or me.  Y' see, he very fond o' the
Cap'n,--that Dick's father,--'n' he live so long alone here, 'long wi'
us, that he kin' o' like to see mos' anybody 't 's got any o' th' of
family-blood in 'em.  He ha'n't got no more suspicions 'n a baby,--y'
never see sech a man 'n y'r life.  I kin' o' think he don' care for
nothin' in this world 'xcep' jes' t' do what Elsie wan's him to. The fus'
year after young Madam die he do nothin' but jes' set at the window 'n'
look out at her grave, 'n' then come up 'n' look at the baby's neck 'n'
say, 'It's fadin', Sophy, a'n't it? 'n' then go down in the study 'n'
walk 'n' walk, 'n' them kneel down 'n' pray. Doctor, there was two places
in the old carpet that was all threadbare, where his knees had worn 'em.
An' sometimes, you remember 'bout all that,--he'd go off up into The
Mountain, 'n' be gone all day, 'n' kill all the Ugly Things he could find
up there.--Oh, Doctor, I don' like to think o' them days!--An' by 'n'
by he grew kin' o' still, 'n' begun to read a little, 'n' 't las' he got
's quiet's a lamb, 'n' that's the way he is now.  I think he's got
religion, Doctor; but he a'n't so bright about what's goin' on, 'n' I
don' believe he never suspec' nothin' till somethin' happens; for the' 's
somethin' goin' to happen, Doctor, if the Las' Day does n' come to stop
it; 'n' you mus' tell us what to do, 'n' save my poor Elsie, my baby that
the Lord has n' took care of like all his other childer."

The Doctor assured the old woman that he was thinking a great deal about
them all, and that there were other eyes on Dick besides her own.  Let
her watch him closely about the house, and he would keep a look-out
elsewhere.  If there was anything new, she must let him know at once.
Send up one of the menservants, and he would come down at a moment's
warning.

There was really nothing definite against this young man; but the Doctor
was sure that he was meditating some evil design or other.  He rode
straight up to the Institute.  There he saw Mr. Bernard, and had a brief
conversation with him, principally on matters relating to his personal
interests.

That evening, for some unknown reason, Mr. Bernard changed the place of
his desk and drew down the shades of his windows.  Late that night Mr.
Richard Venner drew the charge of a rifle, and put the gun back among the
fowling-pieces, swearing that a leather halter was worth a dozen of it.


CHAPTER XXV.

THE PERILOUS HOUR.

Up to this time Dick Venner had not decided on the particular mode and
the precise period of relieving himself from the unwarrantable
interference which threatened to defeat his plans.  The luxury of feeling
that he had his man in his power was its own reward.  One who watches in
the dark, outside, while his enemy, in utter unconsciousness, is
illuminating his apartment and himself so that every movement of his head
and every button on his coat can be seen and counted, experiences a
peculiar kind of pleasure, if he holds a loaded rifle in his hand, which
he naturally hates to bring to its climax by testing his skill as a
marksman upon the object of his attention.

Besides, Dick had two sides in his nature, almost as distinct as we
sometimes observe in those persons who are the subjects of the condition
known as double consciousness.  On his New England side he was cunning
and calculating, always cautious, measuring his distance before he risked
his stroke, as nicely as if he were throwing his lasso.  But he was
liable to intercurrent fits of jealousy and rage, such as the light-hued
races are hardly capable of conceiving, blinding paroxysms of passion,
which for the time overmastered him, and which, if they found no ready
outlet, transformed themselves into the more dangerous forces that worked
through the instrumentality of his cool craftiness.

He had failed as yet in getting any positive evidence that there was any
relation between Elsie and the schoolmaster other than such as might
exist unsuspected and unblamed between a teacher and his pupil. A book,
or a note, even, did not prove the existence of any sentiment.  At one
time he would be devoured by suspicions, at another he would try to laugh
himself out of them.  And in the mean while he followed Elsie's tastes as
closely as he could, determined to make some impression upon her,--to
become a habit, a convenience, a necessity,--whatever might aid him in
the attainment of the one end which was now the aim of his life.

It was to humor one of her tastes already known to the reader, that he
said to her one morning,--"Come, Elsie, take your castanets, and let us
have a dance."

He had struck the right vein in the girl's fancy, for she was in the mood
for this exercise, and very willingly led the way into one of the more
empty apartments.  What there was in this particular kind of dance which
excited her it might not be easy to guess; but those who looked in with
the old Doctor, on a former occasion, and saw her, will remember that she
was strangely carried away by it, and became almost fearful in the
vehemence of her passion.  The sound of the castanets seemed to make her
alive all over.  Dick knew well enough what the exhibition would be, and
was almost afraid of her at these moments; for it was like the dancing
mania of Eastern devotees, more than the ordinary light amusement of
joyous youth,--a convulsion of the body and the mind, rather than a
series of voluntary modulated motions.

Elsie rattled out the triple measure of a saraband.  Her eyes began to
glitter more brilliantly, and her shape to undulate in freer curves.
Presently she noticed that Dick's look was fixed upon her necklace.  His
face betrayed his curiosity; he was intent on solving the question, why
she always wore something about her neck.  The chain of mosaics she had
on at that moment displaced itself at every step, and he was peering with
malignant, searching eagerness to see if an unsunned ring of fairer hue
than the rest of the surface, or any less easily explained peculiarity,
were hidden by her ornaments.

She stopped suddenly, caught the chain of mosaics and settled it hastily
in its place, flung down her castanets, drew herself back, and stood
looking at him, with her head a little on one side, and her eyes
narrowing in the way he had known so long and well.

"What is the matter, Cousin Elsie?  What do you stop for?"  he said.

Elsie did not answer, but kept her eyes on him, full of malicious light.
The jealousy which lay covered up under his surface-thoughts took this
opportunity to break out.

"You would n't act so, if you were dancing with Mr. Langdon,--would you,
Elsie?" he asked.

It was with some effort that he looked steadily at her to see the effect
of his question.

Elsie colored,--not much, but still perceptibly.  Dick could not remember
that he had ever seen her show this mark of emotion before, in all his
experience of her fitful changes of mood.  It had a singular depth of
significance, therefore, for him; he knew how hardly her color came.
Blushing means nothing, in some persons; in others, it betrays a profound
inward agitation,--a perturbation of the feelings far more trying than
the passions which with many easily moved persons break forth in tears.
All who have observed much are aware that some men, who have seen a good
deal of life in its less chastened aspects and are anything but modest,
will blush often and easily, while there are delicate and sensitive women
who can faint, or go into fits, if necessary, but are very rarely seen to
betray their feelings in their cheeks, even when their expression shows
that their inmost soul is blushing scarlet.  Presently she answered,
abruptly and scornfully,  "Mr. Langdon is a gentleman, and would not vex
me as you do."

"A gentleman!"  Dick answered, with the most insulting accent,--"a
gentleman!  Come, Elsie, you 've got the Dudley blood in your veins, and
it does n't do for you to call this poor, sneaking schoolmaster a
gentleman!"

He stopped short.  Elsie's bosom was heaving, the faint flush on her
cheek was becoming a vivid glow.  Whether it were shame or wrath, he saw
that he had reached some deep-lying centre of emotion.  There was no
longer any doubt in his mind.  With another girl these signs of confusion
might mean little or nothing; with her they were decisive and final.
Elsie Venner loved Bernard Langdon.

The sudden conviction, absolute, overwhelming, which rushed upon him, had
well-nigh led to an explosion of wrath, and perhaps some terrible scene
which might have fulfilled some of old Sophy's predictions. This,
however, would never do.  Dick's face whitened with his thoughts, but he
kept still until he could speak calmly.

"I've nothing against the young fellow," he said; "only I don't think
there's anything quite good enough to keep the company of people that
have the Dudley blood in them.  You a'n't as proud as I am.  I can't
quite make up my mind to call a schoolmaster a gentleman, though this one
may be well enough.  I 've nothing against him, at any rate."

Elsie made no answer, but glided out of the room and slid away to her own
apartment.  She bolted the door and drew her curtains close. Then she
threw herself on the floor, and fell into a dull, slow ache of passion,
without tears, without words, almost without thoughts. So she remained,
perhaps, for a half-hour, at the end of which time it seemed that her
passion had become a sullen purpose.  She arose, and, looking cautiously
round, went to the hearth, which was ornamented with curious old Dutch
tiles, with pictures of Scripture subjects.  One of these represented the
lifting of the brazen serpent.  She took a hair-pin from one of her
braids, and, insinuating its points under the edge of the tile, raised it
from its place.  A small leaden box lay under the tile, which she opened,
and, taking from it a little white powder, which she folded in a scrap of
paper, replaced the box and the tile over it.

Whether Dick had by any means got a knowledge of this proceeding, or
whether he only suspected some unmentionable design on her part, there is
no sufficient means of determining.  At any rate, when they met, an hour
or two after these occurrences, he could not help noticing how easily she
seemed to have got over her excitement.  She was very pleasant with
him,--too pleasant, Dick thought.  It was not Elsie's way to come out of
a fit of anger so easily as that.  She had contrived some way of letting
off her spite; that was certain.  Dick was pretty cunning, as old Sophy
had said, and, whether or not he had any means of knowing Elsie's private
intentions, watched her closely, and was on his guard against accidents.

For the first time, he took certain precautions with reference to his
diet, such as were quite alien to his common habits.  On coming to the
dinner-table, that day, he complained of headache, took but little food,
and refused the cup of coffee which Elsie offered him, saying that it did
not agree with him when he had these attacks.

Here was a new complication.  Obviously enough, he could not live in this
way, suspecting everything but plain bread and water, and hardly feeling
safe in meddling with them.  Not only had this school-keeping wretch come
between him and the scheme by which he was to secure his future fortune,
but his image had so infected his cousin's mind that she was ready to try
on him some of those tricks which, as he had heard hinted in the village,
she had once before put in practice upon a person who had become odious
to her.

Something must be done, and at once, to meet the double necessities of
this case.  Every day, while the young girl was in these relations with
the young man, was only making matters worse.  They could exchange words
and looks, they could arrange private interviews, they would be stooping
together over the same book, her hair touching his cheek, her breath
mingling with his, all the magnetic attractions drawing them together
with strange, invisible effluences.  As her passion for the schoolmaster
increased, her dislike to him, her cousin, would grow with it, and all
his dangers would be multiplied. It was a fearful point he had, reached.
He was tempted at one moment to give up all his plans and to disappear
suddenly from the place, leaving with the schoolmaster, who had come
between him and his object, an anonymous token of his personal sentiments
which would be remembered a good while in the history of the town of
Rockland.  This was but a momentary thought; the great Dudley property
could not be given up in that way.

Something must happen at once to break up all this order of things. He
could think of but one Providential event adequate to the emergency,--an
event foreshadowed by various recent circumstances, but hitherto floating
in his mind only as a possibility.  Its occurrence would at once change
the course of Elsie's feelings, providing her with something to think of
besides mischief, and remove the accursed obstacle which was thwarting
all his own projects. Every possible motive, then,--his interest, his
jealousy, his longing for revenge, and now his fears for his own
safety,--urged him to regard the happening of a certain casualty as a
matter of simple necessity.  This was the self-destruction of Mr. Bernard
Langdon.

Such an event, though it might be surprising to many people, would not be
incredible, nor without many parallel cases.  He was poor, a miserable
fag, under the control of that mean wretch up there at the school, who
looked as if he had sour buttermilk in his veins instead of blood.  He
was in love with a girl above his station, rich, and of old family, but
strange in all her ways, and it was conceivable that he should become
suddenly jealous of her.  Or she might have frightened him with some
display of her peculiarities which had filled him with a sudden
repugnance in the place of love.  Any of these things were credible, and
would make a probable story enough,--so thought Dick over to himself
with the New-England half of his mind.

Unfortunately, men will not always take themselves out of the way when,
so far as their neighbors are concerned, it would be altogether the most
appropriate and graceful and acceptable service they could render.  There
was at this particular moment no special reason for believing that the
schoolmaster meditated any violence to his own person.  On the contrary,
there was good evidence that he was taking some care of himself.  He was
looking well and in good spirits, and in the habit of amusing himself and
exercising, as if to keep up his standard of health, especially of taking
certain evening-walks, before referred to, at an hour when most of the
Rockland people had "retired," or, in vulgar language, "gone to bed."

Dick Veneer settled it, however, in his own mind, that Mr. Bernard
Langdon must lay violent hands upon himself.  He even went so far as to
determine the precise hour, and the method in which the "rash act," as it
would undoubtedly be called in the next issue of "The Rockland Weekly
Universe," should be committed.  Time,--this evening. Method, asphyxia,
by suspension.  It was, unquestionably, taking a great liberty with a man
to decide that he should become felo de se without his own consent.
Such, however, was the decision of Mr. Richard Veneer with regard to Mr.
Bernard Langdon.

If everything went right, then, there would be a coroner's inquest
to-morrow upon what remained of that gentleman, found suspended to the
branch of a tree somewhere within a mile of the Apollinean Institute.
The "Weekly Universe" would have a startling paragraph announcing a "SAD
EVENT!!!" which had "thrown the town into an intense state of excitement.
Mr. Barnard Langden, a well-known teacher at the Appolinian Institute,
was found, etc., etc.  The vital spark was extinct.  The motive to the
rash act can only be conjectured, but is supposed to be disappointed
affection.  The name of an accomplished young lady of the highest
respectability and great beauty is mentioned in connection with this
melancholy occurrence."

Dick Venner was at the tea-table that evening, as usual.--No, he would
take green tea, if she pleased,--the same that her father drank.  It
would suit his headache better.--Nothing,--he was much obliged to her.
He would help himself,--which he did in a little different way from
common, naturally enough, on account of his headache.  He noticed that
Elsie seemed a little nervous while she was rinsing some of the teacups
before their removal.

"There's something going on in that witch's head," he said to himself.
"I know her,--she 'd be savage now, if she had n't got some trick in
hand.  Let 's see how she looks to-morrow!"

Dick announced that he should go to bed early that evening, on account of
this confounded headache which had been troubling him so much.  In fact,
he went up early, and locked his door after him, with as much noise as he
could make.  He then changed some part of his dress, so that it should be
dark throughout, slipped off his boots, drew the lasso out from the
bottom of the contents of his trunk, and, carrying that and his boots in
his hand, opened his door softly, locked it after him, and stole down the
back-stairs, so as to get out of the house unnoticed.  He went straight
to the stable and saddled the mustang.  He took a rope from the stable
with him, mounted his horse, and set forth in the direction of the
Institute.

Mr. Bernard, as we have seen, had not been very profoundly impressed by
the old Doctor's cautions,--enough, however, to follow out some of his
hints which were not troublesome to attend to.  He laughed at the idea of
carrying a loaded pistol about with him; but still it seemed only fair,
as the old Doctor thought so much of the matter, to humor him about it.
As for not going about when and where he liked, for fear he might have
some lurking enemy, that was a thing not to be listened to nor thought
of.  There was nothing to be ashamed of or troubled about in any of his
relations with the school-girls.  Elsie, no doubt, showed a kind of
attraction towards him, as did perhaps some others; but he had been
perfectly discreet, and no father or brother or lover had any just cause
of quarrel with him.  To be sure, that dark young man at the Dudley
mansion-house looked as if he were his enemy, when he had met him; but
certainly there was nothing in their relations to each other, or in his
own to Elsie, that would be like to stir such malice in his mind as would
lead him to play any of his wild Southern tricks at his, Mr. Bernard's,
expense.  Yet he had a vague feeling that this young man was dangerous,
and he had been given to understand that one of the risks he ran was from
that quarter.

On this particular evening, he had a strange, unusual sense of some
impending peril.  His recent interview with the Doctor, certain remarks
which had been dropped in his hearing, but above all an unaccountable
impression upon his spirits, all combined to fill his mind with a
foreboding conviction that he was very near some overshadowing danger.
It was as the chill of the ice-mountain toward which the ship is steering
under full sail.  He felt a strong impulse to see Helen Darley and talk
with her.  She was in the common parlor, and, fortunately, alone.

"Helen," he said,--for they were almost like brother and sister now,--"I
have been thinking what you would do, if I should have to leave the
school at short notice, or be taken away suddenly by any accident."

"Do?" she said, her cheek growing paler than its natural delicate
hue,--"why, I do not know how I could possibly consent to live here, if
you left us.  Since you came, my life has been almost easy; before, it
was getting intolerable.  You must not talk about going, my dear friend;
you have spoiled me for my place.  Who is there here that I can have any
true society with, but you?  You would not leave us for another school,
would you?"

"No, no, my dear Helen," Mr. Bernard said, "if it depends on myself, I
shall stay out my full time, and enjoy your company and friendship. But
everything is uncertain in this world.  I have been thinking that I might
be wanted elsewhere, and called when I did not think of it;--it was a
fancy, perhaps,--but I can't keep it out of my mind this evening.  If any
of my fancies should come true, Helen, there are two or three messages I
want to leave with you.  I have marked a book or two with a cross in
pencil on the fly-leaf;--these are for you. There is a little hymn-book I
should like to have you give to Elsie from me;--it may be a kind of
comfort to the poor girl."

Helen's eyes glistened as she interrupted him,--

"What do you mean?  You must not talk so, Mr. Langdon.  Why, you never
looked better in your life.  Tell me now, you are not in earnest, are
you, but only trying a little sentiment on me?"

Mr. Bernard smiled, but rather sadly.

"About half in earnest," he said.  "I have had some fancies in my
head,--superstitions, I suppose,--at any rate, it does no harm to tell
you what I should like to have done, if anything should happen,--very
likely nothing ever will.  Send the rest of the books home, if you
please, and write a letter to my mother.  And, Helen, you will find one
small volume in my desk enveloped and directed, you will see to
whom;--give this with your own hands; it is a keepsake."

The tears gathered in her eyes; she could not speak at first. Presently,
"Why, Bernard, my dear friend, my brother, it cannot be that you are in
danger?  Tell me what it is, and, if I can share it with you, or counsel
you in any way, it will only be paying back the great debt I owe you.
No, no,--it can't be true,--you are tired and worried, and your spirits
have got depressed.  I know what that is;--I was sure, one winter, that
I should die before spring; but I lived to see the dandelions and
buttercups go to seed.  Come, tell me it was nothing but your
imagination."

She felt a tear upon her cheek, but would not turn her face away from
him; it was the tear of a sister.

"I am really in earnest, Helen," he said.  "I don't know that there is
the least reason in the world for these fancies.  If they all go off and
nothing comes of them, you may laugh at me, if you like.  But if there
should be any occasion, remember my requests.  You don't believe in
presentiments, do you?"

"Oh, don't ask-me, I beg you," Helen answered.  "I have had a good many
frights for every one real misfortune I have suffered. Sometimes I have
thought I was warned beforehand of coming trouble, just as many people
are of changes in the weather, by some unaccountable feeling,--but not
often, and I don't like to talk about such things.  I wouldn't think
about these fancies of yours.  I don't believe you have exercised
enough;--don't you think it's confinement in the school has made you
nervous?"

"Perhaps it has; but it happens that I have thought more of exercise
lately, and have taken regular evening walks, besides playing my old
gymnastic tricks every day."

They talked on many subjects, but through all he said Helen perceived a
pervading tone of sadness, and an expression as of a dreamy foreboding of
unknown evil.  They parted at the usual hour, and went to their several
rooms.  The sadness of Mr. Bernard had sunk into the heart of Helen, and
she mingled many tears with her prayers that evening, earnestly
entreating that he might be comforted in his days of trial and protected
in his hour of danger.

Mr. Bernard stayed in his room a short time before setting out for his
evening walk.  His eye fell upon the Bible his mother had given him when
he left home, and he opened it in the New Testament at a venture.  It
happened that the first words he read were these,--"Lest, coming
suddenly, he find you sleeping."  In the state of mind in which he was at
the moment, the text startled him.  It was like a supernatural warning.
He was not going to expose himself to any particular danger this evening;
a walk in a quiet village was as free from risk as Helen Darley or his
own mother could ask; yet he had an unaccountable feeling of
apprehension, without any definite object. At this moment he remembered
the old Doctor's counsel, which he had sometimes neglected, and, blushing
at the feeling which led him to do it, he took the pistol his suspicious
old friend had forced upon him, which he had put away loaded, and,
thrusting it into his pocket, set out upon his walk.

The moon was shining at intervals, for the night was partially clouded.
There seemed to be nobody stirring, though his attention was unusually
awake, and he could hear the whirr of the bats overhead, and the
pulsating croak of the frogs in the distant pools and marshes.  Presently
he detected the sound of hoofs at some distance, and, looking forward,
saw a horseman coming in his direction.  The moon was under a cloud at
the moment, and he could only observe that the horse and his rider looked
like a single dark object, and that they were moving along at an easy
pace.  Mr. Bernard was really ashamed of himself, when he found his hand
on the butt of his pistol.  When the horseman was within a hundred and
fifty yards of him, the moon shone out suddenly and revealed each of them
to the other.  The rider paused for a moment, as if carefully surveying
the pedestrian, then suddenly put his horse to the full gallop, and
dashed towards him, rising at the same instant in his stirrups and
swinging something round his head, what, Mr. Bernard could not make out.
It was a strange manoeuvre,--so strange and threatening in aspect that
the young man forgot his nervousness in an instant, cocked his pistol,
and waited to see what mischief all this meant. He did not wait long.  As
the rider came rushing towards him, he made a rapid motion and something
leaped five-and-twenty feet through the air, in Mr. Bernard's direction.
In an instant he felt a ring, as of a rope or thong, settle upon his
shoulders.  There was no time to think, he would be lost in another
second.  He raised his pistol and fired,--not at the rider, but at the
horse.  His aim was true; the mustang gave one bound and fell lifeless,
shot through the head.  The lasso was fastened to his saddle, and his
last bound threw Mr. Bernard violently to the earth, where he lay
motionless, as if stunned.

In the mean time, Dick Venner, who had been dashed down with his horse,
was trying to extricate himself,--one of his legs being held fast under
the animal, the long spur on his boot having caught in the saddle-cloth.
He found, however, that he could do nothing with his right arm, his
shoulder having been in some way injured in his fall. But his Southern
blood was up, and, as he saw Mr. Bernard move as if he were coming to his
senses, he struggled violently to free himself.

"I 'll have the dog, yet," he said,--"only let me get at him with the
knife!"

He had just succeeded in extricating his imprisoned leg, and was ready to
spring to his feet, when he was caught firmly by the throat, and looking
up, saw a clumsy barbed weapon, commonly known as a hay fork, within an
inch of his breast.

"Hold on there!  What 'n thunder 'r' y' abaout, y' darned Portagee?" said
a voice, with a decided nasal tone in it, but sharp and resolute.

Dick looked from the weapon to the person who held it, and saw a sturdy,
plain man standing over him, with his teeth clinched, and his aspect that
of one all ready for mischief.

"Lay still, naow!" said Abel Stebbins, the Doctor's man; "'f y' don't,
I'll stick ye, 'z sure 'z y' 'r' alive!  I been arfter ye f'r a week, 'n'
I got y' naow!  I knowed I'd ketch ye at some darned trick or 'nother
'fore I'd done 'ith ye!"

Dick lay perfectly still, feeling that he was crippled and helpless,
thinking all the time with the Yankee half of his mind what to do about
it.  He saw Mr. Bernard lift his head and look around him.  He would get
his senses again in a few minutes, very probably, and then he, Mr.
Richard Venner, would be done for.

"Let me up! let me up!" he cried, in a low, hurried voice,--"I 'll give
you a hundred dollars in gold to let me go.  The man a'n't hurt,--don't
you see him stirring?  He'll come to himself in two minutes.  Let me up!
I'll give you a hundred and fifty dollars in gold, now, here on the
spot,--and the watch out of my pocket; take it yourself, with your own
hands!"

"I'll see y' darned fust!  Ketch me lett'n' go!" was Abel's emphatic
answer.  "Yeou lay still, 'n' wait t'll that man comes tew."

He kept the hay-fork ready for action at the slightest sign of
resistance.

Mr. Bernard, in the mean time, had been getting, first his senses, and
then some few of his scattered wits, a little together.

"What is it?"--he said.  "Who'shurt?  What's happened?"

"Come along here 'z quick 'z y' ken," Abel answered, "'n' haalp me fix
this fellah.  Y' been hurt, y'rself, 'n' the' 's murder come pooty nigh
happenin'."

Mr. Bernard heard the answer, but presently stared about and asked again,
"Who's hurt?  What's happened?"

"Y' 'r' hurt, y'rself, I tell ye," said Abel; "'n' the' 's been a murder,
pooty nigh."

Mr. Bernard felt something about his neck, and, putting his hands up,
found the loop of the lasso, which he loosened, but did not think to slip
over his head, in the confusion of his perceptions and thoughts. It was a
wonder that it had not choked him, but he had fallen forward so as to
slacken it.

By this time he was getting some notion of what he was about, and
presently began looking round for his pistol, which had fallen.  He found
it lying near him, cocked it mechanically, and walked, somewhat
unsteadily, towards the two men, who were keeping their position as still
as if they were performing in a tableau.

"Quick, naow!" said Abel, who had heard the click of cocking the pistol,
and saw that he held it in his hand, as he came towards him. "Gi' me that
pistil, and yeou fetch that 'ere rope layin' there.  I 'll have this here
fella,h fixed 'n less 'n two minutes."

Mr. Bernard did as Abel said,--stupidly and mechanically, for he was but
half right as yet.  Abel pointed the pistol at Dick's head.

"Naow hold up y'r hands, yeou fellah," he said, "'n' keep 'em up, while
this man puts the rope mound y'r wrists."

Dick felt himself helpless, and, rather than have his disabled arm
roughly dealt with, held up his hands.  Mr. Bernard did as Abel said; he
was in a purely passive state, and obeyed orders like a child. Abel then
secured the rope in a most thorough and satisfactory complication of
twists and knots.

"Naow get up, will ye?" he said; and the unfortunate Dick rose to his
feet.

"Who's hurt?  What's happened?"  asked poor Mr. Bernard again, his memory
having been completely jarred out of him for the time.

"Come, look here naow, yeou, don' Stan' askin' questions over 'n'
over;--'t beats all! ha'n't I tol' y' a dozen times?"

As Abel spoke, he turned and looked at Mr. Bernard.

"Hullo!  What 'n thunder's that 'ere raoun' y'r neck?  Ketched ye 'ith a
slippernoose, hey?  Wal, if that a'n't the craowner!  Hol' on a minute,
Cap'n, 'n' I'll show ye what that 'ere halter's good for."

Abel slipped the noose over Mr. Bernard's head, and put it round the neck
of the miserable Dick Veneer, who made no sign of resistance,--whether
on account of the pain he was in, or from mere helplessness, or because
he was waiting for some unguarded moment to escape,--since resistance
seemed of no use.

"I 'm go'n' to kerry y' home," said Abel; "'T' th' ol Doctor, he's got a
gre't cur'osity t' see ye.  Jes' step along naow,--off that way, will
ye?--'n' I Ill hol' on t' th' bridle, f' fear y' sh'd run away."

He took hold of the leather thong, but found that it was fastened at the
other end to the saddle.  This was too much for Abel.

"Wal, naow, yeou be a pooty chap to hev raound!  A fellah's neck in a
slippernoose at one eend of a halter, 'n' a hors on th' full spring at t'
other eend!"

He looked at him from' head to foot as a naturalist inspects a new
specimen.  His clothes had suffered in his fall, especially on the leg
which had been caught under the horse.

"Hullo! look o' there, naow!  What's that 'ere stickin' aout o' y'r
boot?"

It was nothing but the handle of an ugly knife, which Abel instantly
relieved him of.

The party now took up the line of march for old Doctor Kittredge's house,
Abel carrying the pistol and knife, and Mr. Bernard walking in silence,
still half-stunned, holding the hay-fork, which Abel had thrust into his
hand.  It was all a dream to him as yet.  He remembered the horseman
riding at him, and his firing the pistol; but whether he was alive, and
these walls around him belonged to the village of Rockland, or whether he
had passed the dark river, and was in a suburb of the New Jerusalem, he
could not as yet have told.

They were in the street where the Doctor's house was situated.

"I guess I'll fire off one o' these here berrils," said Abel.

He fired.

Presently there was a noise of opening windows, and the nocturnal
head-dresses of Rockland flowered out of them like so many developments
of the Nightblooming Cereus.  White cotton caps and red bandanna
handkerchiefs were the prevailing forms of efflorescence. The main point
was that the village was waked up.  The old Doctor always waked easily,
from long habit, and was the first among those who looked out to see what
had happened.

"Why, Abel!" he called out, "what have you got there? and what 's all
this noise about?"

"We've ketched the Portagee!"  Abel answered, as laconically as the hero
of Lake Erie, in his famous dispatch.  "Go in there, you fellah!"

The prisoner was marched into the house, and the Doctor, who had
bewitched his clothes upon him in a way that would have been miraculous
in anybody but a physician, was down in presentable form as soon as if it
had been a child in a fit that he was sent for.

"Richard Veneer!" the Doctor exclaimed.  "What is the meaning of all
this?  Mr. Langdon, has anything happened to you?"

Mr. Bernard put his hand to his head.

"My mind is confused," he said.  "I've had a fall.--Oh, yes!--wait a
minute and it will all come back to me."

"Sit down, sit down," the Doctor said.  "Abel will tell me about it.
Slight concussion of the brain.  Can't remember very well for an hour or
two,--will come right by to-morrow."

"Been stunded," Abel said.  "He can't tell nothin'."

Abel then proceeded to give a Napoleonic bulletin of the recent combat of
cavalry and infantry and its results,--none slain, one captured.

The Doctor looked at the prisoner through his spectacles.

"What 's the matter with your shoulder, Venner?"

Dick answered sullenly, that he didn't know, fell on it when his horse
came down.  The Doctor examined it as carefully as he could through his
clothes.

"Out of joint.  Untie his hands, Abel"

By this time a small alarm had spread among the neighbors, and there was
a circle around Dick, who glared about on the assembled honest people
like a hawk with a broken wing.

When the Doctor said, "Untie his hands," the circle widened perceptibly.

"Isn't it a leetle rash to give him the use of his hands?  I see there's
females and children standin' near."

This was the remark of our old friend, Deacon Soper, who retired from the
front row, as he spoke, behind a respectable-looking, but somewhat
hastily dressed person of the defenceless sex, the female help of a
neighboring household, accompanied by a boy, whose unsmoothed shock of
hair looked like a last year's crow's-nest.

But Abel untied his hands, in spite of the Deacon's considerate
remonstrance.

"Now," said the Doctor, "the first thing is to put the joint back."

"Stop," said Deacon Soper,--"stop a minute.  Don't you think it will be
safer--for the women-folks--jest to wait till mornin', afore you put that
j'int into the socket?"

Colonel Sprowle, who had been called by a special messenger, spoke up at
this moment.

"Let the women-folks and the deacons go home, if they're scared, and put
the fellah's j'int in as quick as you like.  I 'll resk him, j'int in or
out."

"I want one of you to go straight down to Dudley Venner's with a
message," the Doctor said.  "I will have the young man's shoulder in
quick enough."

"Don't send that message!" said Dick, in a hoarse voice;--"do what you
like with my arm, but don't send that message!  Let me go,--I can walk,
and I'll be off from this place.  There's nobody hurt but myself.  Damn
the shoulder!--let me go!  You shall never hear of me again!"

Mr. Bernard came forward.

"My friends," he said, "I am not injured,--seriously, at least.  Nobody
need complain against this man, if I don't.  The Doctor will treat him
like a human being, at any rate; and then, if he will go, let him.  There
are too many witnesses against him here for him to want to stay."

The Doctor, in the mean time, without saying a word to all this, had got
a towel round the shoulder and chest and another round the arm, and had
the bone replaced in a very few minutes.

"Abel, put Cassia into the new chaise," he said, quietly.  "My friends
and neighbors, leave this young man to me."

"Colonel Sprowle, you're a justice of the peace," said Deacon Soper, "and
you know what the law says in cases like this.  It a'n't so clear that it
won't have to come afore the Grand Jury, whether we will or no."

"I guess we'll set that j'int to-morrow mornin'," said Colonel
Sprowle,--which made a laugh at the Deacon's expense, and virtually
settled the question.

"Now trust this young man in my care," said the old Doctor, "and go home
and finish your naps.  I knew him when he was a boy and I'll answer for
it, he won't trouble you any more.  The Dudley blood makes folks proud, I
can tell you, whatever else they are."

The good people so respected and believed in the Doctor that they left
the prisoner with him.

Presently, Cassia, the fast Morgan mare, came up to the front-door, with
the wheels of the new, light chaise flashing behind her in the moonlight.
The Doctor drove Dick forty miles at a stretch that night, out of the
limits of the State.

"Do you want money?"  he said, before he left him.

Dick told him the secret of his golden belt.

"Where shall I send your trunk after you from your uncle's?"

Dick gave him a direction to a seaport town to which he himself was
going, to take passage for a port in South America.

"Good-bye, Richard," said the Doctor.  "Try to learn something from
to-night's lesson."

The Southern impulses in Dick's wild blood overcame him, and he kissed
the old Doctor on both cheeks, crying as only the children of the sun can
cry, after the first hours in the dewy morning of life. So Dick Venner
disappears from this story.  An hour after dawn, Cassia pointed her fine
ears homeward, and struck into her square, honest trot, as if she had not
been doing anything more than her duty during her four hours' stretch of
the last night.

Abel was not in the habit of questioning the Doctor's decisions.

"It's all right," he said to Mr. Bernard.  "The fellah 's Squire Venner's
relation, anyhaow.  Don't you want to wait here, jest a little while,
till I come back?  The's a consid'able nice saddle 'n' bridle on a dead
boss that's layin' daown there in the road 'n' I guess the' a'n't no use
in lettin' on 'em spite,--so I'll jest step aout 'n' fetch 'em along.  I
kind o' calc'late 't won't pay to take the cretur's shoes 'n' hide off
to-night,--'n' the' won't be much iron on that hose's huffs an haour
after daylight, I'll bate ye a quarter."

"I'll walk along with you," said Mr. Bernard; "I feel as if I could get
along well enough now."

So they set off together.  There was a little crowd round the dead
mustang already, principally consisting of neighbors who had adjourned
from the Doctor's house to see the scene of the late adventure.  In
addition to these, however, the assembly was honored by the presence of
Mr. Principal Silas Peckham, who had been called from his slumbers by a
message that Master Langdon was shot through the head by a
highway-robber, but had learned a true version of the story by this time.
His voice was at that moment heard above the rest,--sharp, but thin, like
bad cider-vinegar.

"I take charge of that property, I say.  Master Langdon 's actin' under
my orders, and I claim that hoss and all that's on him.  Hiram! jest slip
off that saddle and bridle, and carry 'em up to the Institoot, and bring
down a pair of pinchers and a file,--and--stop--fetch a pair of shears,
too; there's hosshair enough in that mane and tail to stuff a bolster
with."

"You let that hoss alone!" spoke up Colonel Sprowle.  "When a fellah goes
out huntin' and shoots a squirrel, do you think he's go'n' to let another
fellah pick him up and kerry him off?  Not if he's got a double-berril
gun, and t'other berril ha'n't been fired off yet!  I should like to see
the mahn that'll take off that seddle 'n' bridle, excep' the one th't hez
a fair right to the whole concern!"

Hiram was from one of the lean streaks in New Hampshire, and, not being
overfed in Mr. Silas Peckham's kitchen, was somewhat wanting in stamina,
as well as in stomach, for so doubtful an enterprise, as undertaking to
carry out his employer's orders in the face of the Colonel's defiance.

Just then Mr. Bernard and Abel came up together.  "Here they be," said
the Colonel.  "Stan' beck, gentlemen!"

Mr. Bernard, who was pale and still a little confused, but gradually
becoming more like himself, stood and looked in silence for a moment.

All his thoughts seemed to be clearing themselves in this interval. He
took in the whole series of incidents: his own frightful risk; the
strange, instinctive, nay, Providential impulse, which had led him so
suddenly to do the one only thing which could possibly have saved him;
the sudden appearance of the Doctor's man, but for which he might yet
have been lost; and the discomfiture and capture of his dangerous enemy.

It was all past now, and a feeling of pity rose in Mr. Bernard's heart.

"He loved that horse, no doubt," he said,--"and no wonder.  A beautiful,
wild--looking creature!  Take off those things that are on him, Abel, and
have them carried to Mr. Dudley Veneer's.  If he does not want them, you
may keep them yourself, for all that I have to say.  One thing more.  I
hope nobody will lift his hand against this noble creature to mutilate
him in any way.  After you have taken off the saddle and bridle, Abel,
bury him just as he is.  Under that old beech-tree will be a good place.
You'll see to it,--won't you, Abel?"

Abel nodded assent, and Mr. Bernard returned to the Institute, threw
himself in his clothes on the bed, and slept like one who is heavy with
wine.

Following Mr. Bernard's wishes, Abel at once took off the high-peaked
saddle and the richly ornamented bridle from the mustang.  Then, with the
aid of two or three others, he removed him to the place indicated.
Spades and shovels were soon procured, and before the moon had set, the
wild horse of the Pampas was at rest under the turf at the wayside, in
the far village among the hills of New England.


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE NEWS REACHES THE DUDLEY MANSION.

Early the next morning Abel Stebbins made his appearance at Dudley
Veneer's, and requested to see the maan o' the haouse abaout somethin' o'
consequence.  Mr. Veneer sent word that the messenger should wait below,
and presently appeared in the study, where Abel was making himself at
home, as is the wont of the republican citizen, when he hides the purple
of empire beneath the apron of domestic service.

"Good mornin', Squire!" said Abel, as Mr. Venner entered.  "My name's
Stebbins, 'n' I'm stoppin' f'r a spell 'ith of Doctor Kittredge."

"Well, Stebbins," said Mr. Dudley Veneer, "have you brought any special
message from the Doctor?"

"Y' ha'n't heerd nothin' abaout it, Squire, d' ye mean t' say?" said
Abel,--beginning to suspect that he was the first to bring the news of
last evening's events.

"About what?"  asked Mr. Veneer, with some interest.

"Dew tell, naow!  Waal, that beats all!  Why, that 'ere Portagee relation
o' yourn 'z been tryin' t' ketch a fellah 'n a slippernoose, 'n' got
ketched himself,--that's all.  Y' ha'n't heerd noth'n' abaout it?"

"Sit down," said Mr. Dudley Veneer, calmly, "and tell me all you have to
say."

So Abel sat down and gave him an account of the events of the last
evening.  It was a strange and terrible surprise to Dudley Veneer to find
that his nephew, who had been an inmate of his house and the companion of
his daughter, was to all intents and purposes guilty of the gravest of
crimes.  But the first shock was no sooner over than he began to think
what effect the news would have on Elsie.  He imagined that there was a
kind of friendly feeling between them, and he feared some crisis would be
provoked in his daughter's mental condition by the discovery.  He would
wait, however, until she came from her chamber, before disturbing her
with the evil tidings.

Abel did not forget his message with reference to the equipments of the
dead mustang.

"The' was some things on the hoss, Squire, that the man he ketched said
he did n' care no gre't abaout; but perhaps you'd like to have 'em
fetched to the mansion-haouse.  Ef y' did n' care abaout 'em, though, I
should n' min' keepin' on 'em; they might come handy some time or
'nother; they say, holt on t' anything for ten year 'n' there 'll be some
kin' o' use for 't."

"Keep everything," said Dudley Veneer.  "I don't want to see anything
belonging to that young man."

So Abel nodded to Mr. Veneer, and left the study to find some of the men
about the stable to tell and talk over with them the events of the last
evening.  He presently came upon Elbridge, chief of the equine
department, and driver of the family-coach.

"Good mornin', Abe," said Elbridge.  "What's fetched y' daown here so
all-fired airly?"

"You're a darned pooty lot daown here, you be!"

Abel answered.  "Better keep your Portagees t' home nex' time, ketchin'
folks 'ith slippernooses raoun' their necks, 'n' kerryin' knives 'n their
boots!"

"What 'r' you jawin' abaout?"  Elbridge said, looking up to see if he was
in earnest, and what he meant.

"Jawin' abaout?  You'll find aout'z soon 'z y' go into that 'ere stable
o' yourn!  Y' won't curry that 'ere long-tailed black hoss no more; 'n'
y' won't set y'r eyes on the fellah that rid him, ag'in, in a hurry!"

Elbridge walked straight to the stable, without saying a word, found the
door unlocked, and went in.

"Th' critter's gone, sure enough!" he said.  "Glad on 't!  The darndest,
kickin'est, bitin'est beast th't ever I see, 'r ever wan' t' see ag'in!
Good reddance!  Don' wan' no snappin'-turkles in my stable!  Whar's the
man gone th't brought the critter?"

"Whar he's gone?  Guess y' better go 'n ask my ol man; he kerried him off
lass' night; 'n' when he comes back, mebbe he 'll tell ye whar he's gone
tew!"

By this time Elbridge had found out that Abel was in earnest, and had
something to tell.  He looked at the litter in the mustang's stall, then
at the crib.

"Ha'n't eat b't haalf his feed.  Ha'n't been daown on his straw. Must ha'
been took aout somewhere abaout ten 'r 'levee o'clock.  I know that 'ere
critter's ways.  The fellah's had him aout nights afore; b't I never
thought nothin' o' no mischief.  He 's a kin' o' haalf Injin.  What is 't
the chap's been a-doin' on?  Tell 's all abaout it."

Abel sat down on a meal-chest, picked up a straw and put it into his
mouth.  Elbridge sat down at the other end, pulled out his jack-knife,
opened the penknife-blade, and began sticking it into the lid of the
meal-chest.  The Doctor's man had a story to tell, and he meant to get
all the enjoyment out of it.  So he told it with every luxury of
circumstance.  Mr. Veneer's man heard it all with open mouth.  No
listener in the gardens of Stamboul could have found more rapture in a
tale heard amidst the perfume of roses and the voices of birds and
tinkling of fountains than Elbridge in following Abel's narrative, as
they sat there in the aromatic ammoniacal atmosphere of the stable, the
grinding of the horses' jaws keeping evenly on through it all, with now
and then the interruption of a stamping hoof, and at intervals a ringing
crow from the barn-yard.

Elbridge stopped a minute to think, after Abel had finished.

"Who's took care o' them things that was on the hoss?" he said, gravely.

"Waal, Langden, he seemed to kin 'o' think I'd ought to have 'em,--'n'
the Squire; he did n' seem to have no 'bjection; 'n' so,--waal, I
calc'late I sh'll jes' holt on to 'em myself; they a'n't good f 'r much,
but they're cur'ous t' keep t' look at."

Mr. Veneer's man did not appear much gratified by this arrangement,
especially as he had a shrewd suspicion that some of the ornaments of the
bridle were of precious metal, having made occasional examinations of
them with the edge of a file.  But he did not see exactly what to do
about it, except to get them from Abel in the way of bargain.

"Waal, no,--they a'n't good for much 'xcep' to look at.  'F y' ever rid
on that seddle once, y' would n' try it ag'in, very spry,--not 'f y' c'd
haalp y'rsaalf.

"I tried it,--darned 'f I sot daown f'r th' nex' week,--eat all my
victuals stan'in'.  I sh'd like t' hev them things wal enough to heng up
'n the stable; 'f y' want t' trade some day, fetch 'em along daown."

Abel rather expected that Elbridge would have laid claim to the saddle
and bridle on the strength of some promise or other presumptive title,
and thought himself lucky to get off with only offering to think abaout
tradin'.

When Elbridge returned to the house, he found the family in a state of
great excitement.  Mr. Venner had told Old Sophy, and she had informed
the other servants.  Everybody knew what had happened, excepting Elsie.
Her father had charged them all to say nothing about it to her; he would
tell her, when she came down.

He heard her step at last,--alight, gliding step,--so light that her
coming was often unheard, except by those who perceived the faint rustle
that went with it.  She was paler than common this morning, as she came
into her father's study.

After a few words of salutation, he said quietly,  "Elsie, my dear, your
cousin Richard has left us."

She grew still paler, as she asked,

"Is he dead?"

Dudley Venner started to see the expression with which Elsie put this
question.

"He is living,--but dead to us from this day forward," said her father.

He proceeded to tell her, in a general way, the story he had just heard
from Abel.  There could be no doubting it;--he remembered him as the
Doctor's man; and as Abel had seen all with his own eyes, as Dick's
chamber, when unlocked with a spare key, was found empty, and his bed had
not been slept in, he accepted the whole account as true.

When he told of Dick's attempt on the young schoolmaster, ("You know Mr.
Langdon very well, Elsie,--a perfectly inoffensive young man, as I
understand,") Elsie turned her face away and slid along by the wall to
the window which looked out oh the little grass-plot with the white stone
standing in it.  Her father could not see her face, but he knew by her
movements that her dangerous mood was on her.  When she heard the sequel
of the story, the discomfiture and capture of Dick, she turned round for
an instant, with a look of contempt and of something like triumph upon
her face.  Her father saw that her cousin had become odious to her: He
knew well, by every change of her countenance, by her movements, by every
varying curve of her graceful figure, the transitions front passion to
repose, from fierce excitement to the dull languor which often succeeded
her threatening paroxysms.

She remained looking out at the window.  A group of white fan-tailed
pigeons had lighted on the green plot before it and clustered about one
of their companions who lay on his back, fluttering in a strange way,
with outspread wings and twitching feet.  Elsie uttered a faint cry;
these were her special favorites and often fed from her hand. She threw
open the long window, sprang out, caught up the white fantail, and held
it to her bosom.  The bird stretched himself out, and then lay still,
with open eyes, lifeless.  She looked at him a moment, and, sliding in
through the open window and through the study, sought her own apartment,
where she locked herself in, and began to sob and moan like those that
weep.  But the gracious solace of tears seemed to be denied her, and her
grief, like her anger, was a dull ache, longing, like that, to finish
itself with a fierce paroxysm, but wanting its natural outlet.

This seemingly trifling incident of the death of her favorite appeared to
change all the current of her thought.  Whether it were the sight of the
dying bird, or the thought that her own agency might have beep concerned
in it, or some deeper grief, which took this occasion to declare
itself,--some dark remorse or hopeless longing,--whatever it might be,
there was an unwonted tumult in her soul.  To whom should she go in her
vague misery?  Only to Him who knows all His creatures' sorrows, and
listens to the faintest human cry.  She knelt, as she had  been taught to
kneel from her childhood, and tried to pray.  But her thoughts refused to
flow in the language of supplication.  She could not plead for herself as
other women plead in their hours of anguish.  She rose like one who
should stoop to drink, and find dust in the place of water.  Partly from
restlessness, partly from an attraction she hardly avowed to herself, she
followed her usual habit and strolled listlessly along to the school.

Of course everybody at the Institute was full of the terrible adventure
of the preceding evening.  Mr. Bernard felt poorly enough; but he had
made it a point to show himself the next morning, as if nothing had
happened.  Helen Darley knew nothing of it all until she hard risen, when
the gossipy matron of the establishment made her acquainted with all its
details, embellished with such additional ornamental appendages as it had
caught up in transmission from lip to lip.  She did not love to betray
her sensibilities, but she was pale and tremulous and very nearly tearful
when Mr. Bernard entered the sitting-room, showing on his features traces
of the violent shock he had received and the heavy slumber from which he
had risen with throbbing brows.  What the poor girl's impulse was, on
seeing him, we need not inquire too curiously.  If he had been her own
brother, she would have kissed him and cried on his neck; but something
held her back.  There is no galvanism in kiss-your-brother; it is copper
against copper: but alien bloods develop strange currents, when they flow
close to each other, with only the films that cover lip and cheek between
them.  Mr. Bernard, as some of us may remember, violated the proprieties
and laid himself open to reproach by his enterprise with a bouncing
village-girl, to whose rosy cheek an honest smack was not probably an
absolute novelty.  He made it all up by his discretion and good behavior
now.  He saw by Helen's moist eye and trembling lip that her woman's
heart was off its guard, and he knew, by the infallible instinct of sex,
that he should be forgiven, if he thanked her for her sisterly sympathies
in the most natural way,--expressive, and at the same time economical of
breath and utterance.  He would not give a false look to their friendship
by any such demonstration.  Helen was a little older than himself, but
the aureole of young womanhood had not yet begun to fade from around her.
She was surrounded by that enchanted atmosphere into which the girl walks
with dreamy eyes, and out of which the woman passes with a story written
on her forehead.  Some people think very little of these refinements;
they have not studied magnetism and the law of the square of the
distance.

So Mr. Bernard thanked Helen for her interest without the aid of the
twenty-seventh letter of the alphabet,--the love labial,--the limping
consonant which it takes two to speak plain.  Indeed, he scarcely let her
say a word, at first; for he saw that it was hard for her to conceal her
emotion.  No wonder; he had come within a hair's-breadth of losing his
life, and he had been a very kind friend and a very dear companion to
her.

There were some curious spiritual experiences connected with his last
evening's adventure which were working very strongly in his mind.  It was
borne in upon him irresistibly that he had been dead since he had seen
Helen,--as dead as the son of the Widow of Nain before the bier was
touched and he sat up and began to speak.  There was an interval between
two conscious moments which appeared to him like a temporary
annihilation, and the thoughts it suggested were worrying him with
strange perplexities.

He remembered seeing the dark figure on horseback rise in the saddle and
something leap from its hand.  He remembered the thrill he felt as the
coil settled on his shoulders, and the sudden impulse which led him to
fire as he did.  With the report of the pistol all became blank, until he
found himself in a strange, bewildered state, groping about for the
weapon, which he had a vague consciousness of having dropped.  But,
according to Abel's account, there must have been an interval of some
minutes between these recollections, and he could not help asking, Where
was the mind, the soul, the thinking principle, all this time?

A man is stunned by a blow with a stick on the head.  He becomes
unconscious.  Another man gets a harder blow on the head from a bigger
stick, and it kills him.  Does he become unconscious, too?  If so, when
does he come to his consciousness?  The man who has had a slight or
moderate blow comes to himself when the immediate shock passes off and
the organs begin to work again, or when a bit of the skull is pried up,
if that happens to be broken.  Suppose the blow is hard enough to spoil
the brain and stop the play of the organs, what happens them?

A British captain was struck by a cannon-ball on the head, just as he was
giving an order, at the Battle of the Nile.  Fifteen months afterwards he
was trephined at Greenwich Hospital, having been insensible all that
time.  Immediately after the operation his consciousness returned, and he
at once began carrying out the order he was giving when the shot struck
him.  Suppose he had never been trephined, when would his consciousness
have returned?  When his breath ceased and his heart stopped beating?

When Mr. Bernard said to Helen, "I have been dead since I saw you," it
startled her not a little; for his expression was that of perfect good
faith, and she feared that his mind was disordered.  When he explained,
not as has been done just now, at length, but in a hurried, imperfect
way, the meaning of his strange assertion, and the fearful Sadduceeisms
which it had suggested to his mind, she looked troubled at first, and
then thoughtful.  She did not feel able to answer all the difficulties he
raised, but she met them with that faith which is the strength as well as
the weakness of women,--which makes them weak in the hands of man, but
strong in the presence of the Unseen.

"It is a strange experience," she said; "but I once had something like
it.  I fainted, and lost some five or ten minutes out of my life, as much
as if I had been dead.  But when I came to myself, I was the same person
every way, in my recollections and character.  So I suppose that loss of
consciousness is not death.  And if I was born out of unconsciousness
into infancy with many family-traits of mind and body, I can believe,
from my own reason, even without help from Revelation, that I shall be
born again out of the unconsciousness of death with my individual traits
of mind and body.  If death is, as it should seem to be, a loss of
consciousness, that does not shake my faith; for I have been put into a
body once already to fit me for living here, and I hope to be in some way
fitted after this life to enjoy a better one.  But it is all trust in God
and in his Word. These are enough for me; I hope they are for you."

Helen was a minister's daughter, and familiar from her childhood with
this class of questions, especially with all the doubts and perplexities
which are sure to assail every thinking child bred in any inorganic or
not thoroughly vitalized faith,--as is too often the case with the
children of professional theologians.  The kind of discipline they are
subjected to is like that of the Flat-Head Indian pappooses.  At five or
ten or fifteen years old they put their hands up to their foreheads and
ask, What are they strapping down my brains in this way for?  So they
tear off the sacred bandages of the great Flat-Head tribe, and there
follows a mighty rush of blood to the long-compressed region.  This
accounts, in the most lucid manner, for those sudden freaks with which
certain children of this class astonish their worthy parents at the
period of life when they are growing fast, and, the frontal pressure
beginning to be felt as something intolerable, they tear off the holy
compresses.

The hour for school came, and they went to the great hall for study. It
would not have occurred to Mr. Silas Peckham to ask his assistant whether
he felt well enough to attend to his duties; and Mr. Bernard chose to be
at his post.  A little headache and confusion were all that remained of
his symptoms.

Later, in the course of the forenoon, Elsie Venner came and took her
place.  The girls all stared at her--naturally enough; for it was hardly
to have been expected that she would show herself, after such an event in
the household to which she belonged.  Her expression was somewhat
peculiar, and, of course, was attributed to the shock her feelings had
undergone on hearing of the crime attempted by her cousin and daily
companion.  When she was looking on her book, or on any indifferent
object, her countenance betrayed some inward disturbance, which knitted
her dark brows, and seemed to throw a deeper shadow over her features.
But, from time to time, she would lift her eyes toward Mr. Bernard, and
let them rest upon him, without a thought, seemingly, that she herself
was the subject of observation or remark.  Then they seemed to lose their
cold glitter, and soften into a strange, dreamy tenderness.  The deep
instincts of womanhood were striving to grope their way to the surface of
her being through all the alien influences which overlaid them.  She
could be secret and cunning in working out any of her dangerous impulses,
but she did not know how to mask the unwonted feeling which fixed her
eyes and her thoughts upon the only person who had ever reached the
spring of her hidden sympathies.

The girls all looked at Elsie, whenever they could steal a glance
unperceived, and many of them were struck with this singular expression
her features wore.  They had long whispered it around among each other
that she had a liking for the master; but there were too many of them of
whom something like this could be said, to make it very remarkable.  Now,
however, when so many little hearts were fluttering at the thought of the
peril through which the handsome young master had so recently passed,
they were more alive than ever to the supposed relation between him and
the dark school-girl.  Some had supposed there was a mutual attachment
between them; there was a story that they were secretly betrothed, in
accordance with the rumor which had been current in the village.  At any
rate, some conflict was going on in that still, remote, clouded soul, and
all the girls who looked upon her face were impressed and awed as they
had never been before by the shadows that passed over it.

One of these girls was more strongly arrested by Elsie's look than the
others.  This was a delicate, pallid creature, with a high forehead, and
wide-open pupils, which looked as if they could take in all the shapes
that flit in what, to common eyes, is darkness,--a girl said to be
clairvoyant under certain influences.  In the recess, as it was called,
or interval of suspended studies in the middle of the forenoon, this girl
carried her autograph-book,--for she had one of those indispensable
appendages of the boarding-school miss of every degree,--and asked Elsie
to write her name in it.  She had an irresistible feeling, that, sooner
or later, and perhaps very soon, there would attach an unusual interest
to this autograph.  Elsie took the pen and wrote, in her sharp Italian
hand,

Elsie Venner, Infelix.

It was a remembrance, doubtless, of the forlorn queen of the "AEneid";
but its coming to her thought in this way confirmed the sensitive
school-girl in her fears for Elsie, and she let fall a tear upon the page
before she closed it.

Of course, the keen and practised observation of Helen Darley could not
fail to notice the change of Elsie's manner and expression.  She had long
seen that she was attracted to the young master, and had thought, as the
old Doctor did, that any impression which acted upon her affections might
be the means of awakening a new life in her singularly isolated nature.
Now, however, the concentration of the poor girl's thoughts upon the one
object which had had power to reach her deeper sensibilities was so
painfully revealed in her features, that Helen began to fear once more,
lest Mr. Bernard, in escaping the treacherous violence of an assassin,
had been left to the equally dangerous consequences of a violent,
engrossing passion in the breast of a young creature whose love it would
be ruin to admit and might be deadly to reject.  She knew her own heart
too well to fear that any jealousy might mingle with her new
apprehensions.  It was understood between Bernard and Helen that they
were too good friends to tamper with the silences and edging proximities
of lovemaking.  She knew, too, the simply human, not masculine, interest
which Mr. Bernard took in Elsie; he had been frank with Helen, and more
than satisfied her that with all the pity and sympathy which overflowed
his soul, when he thought of the stricken girl, there mingled not one
drop of such love as a youth may feel for a maiden.

It may help the reader to gain some understanding of the anomalous nature
of Elsie Veneer, if we look with Helen into Mr. Bernard's opinions and
feelings with reference to her, as they had shaped themselves in his
consciousness at the period of which we are speaking.

At first he had been impressed by her wild beauty, and the contrast of
all her looks and ways with those of the girls around her. Presently a
sense of some ill-defined personal element, which half-attracted and
half-repelled those who looked upon her, and especially those on whom she
looked, began to make itself obvious to him, as he soon found it was
painfully sensible to his more susceptible companion, the lady-teacher.
It was not merely in the cold light of her diamond eyes, but in all her
movements, in her graceful postures as she sat, in her costume, and, he
sometimes thought, even in her speech, that this obscure and exceptional
character betrayed itself. When Helen had said, that, if they were living
in times when human beings were subject to possession, she should have
thought there was something not human about Elsie, it struck an
unsuspected vein of thought in his own mind, which he hated to put in
words, but which was continually trying to articulate itself among the
dumb thoughts which lie under the perpetual stream of mental whispers.

Mr. Bernard's professional training had made him slow to accept
marvellous stories and many forms of superstition.  Yet, as a man of
science, he well knew that just on the verge of the demonstrable facts of
physics and physiology there is a nebulous border-land which what is
called "common sense" perhaps does wisely not to enter, but which
uncommon sense, or the fine apprehension of privileged intelligences, may
cautiously explore, and in so doing find itself behind the scenes which
make up for the gazing world the show which is called Nature.

It was with something of this finer perception, perhaps with some degree
of imaginative exaltation, that he set himself to solving the problem of
Elsie's influence to attract and repel those around her. His letter
already submitted to the reader hints in what direction his thoughts were
disposed to turn.  Here was a magnificent organization, superb in
vigorous womanhood, with a beauty such as never comes but after
generations of culture; yet through all this rich nature there ran some
alien current of influence, sinuous and dark, as when a clouded streak
seams the white marble of a perfect statue.

It would be needless to repeat the particular suggestions which had come
into his mind, as they must probably have come into that of the reader
who has noted the singularities of Elsie's tastes and personal traits.
The images which certain poets had dreamed of seemed to have become a
reality before his own eyes.  Then came that unexplained adventure of The
Mountain,--almost like a dream in recollection, yet assuredly real in
some of its main incidents,--with all that it revealed or hinted.  This
girl did not fear to visit the dreaded region, where danger lurked in
every nook and beneath every tuft of leaves.  Did the tenants of the
fatal ledge recognize some mysterious affinity which made them tributary
to the cold glitter of her diamond eyes?  Was she from her birth one of
those frightful children, such as he had read about, and the Professor
had told him of, who form unnatural friendships with cold, writhing
ophidians?  There was no need of so unwelcome a thought as this; she had
drawn him away from the dark opening in the rock at the moment when he
seemed to be threatened by one of its malignant denizens; that was all he
could be sure of; the counter-fascination might have been a dream, a
fancy, a coincidence.  All wonderful things soon grow doubtful in our own
minds, as do even common events, if great interests prove suddenly to
attach to their truth or falsehood.

--I, who am telling of these occurrences, saw a friend in the great city,
on the morning of a most memorable disaster, hours after the time when
the train which carried its victims to their doom had left. I talked with
him, and was for some minutes, at least, in his company.  When I reached
home, I found that the story had gone before that he was among the lost,
and I alone could contradict it to his weeping friends and relatives.  I
did contradict it; but, alas!  I began soon to doubt myself, penetrated
by the contagion of their solicitude; my recollection began to question
itself; the order of events became dislocated; and when I heard that he
had reached home in safety, the relief was almost as great to me as to
those who had expected to see their own brother's face no more.

Mr. Bernard was disposed, then, not to accept the thought of any odious
personal relationship of the kind which had suggested itself to him when
he wrote the letter referred to.  That the girl had something of the
feral nature, her wild, lawless rambles in forbidden and blasted regions
of The Mountain at all hours, her familiarity with the lonely haunts
where any other human foot was so rarely seen, proved clearly enough.
But the more he thought of all her strange instincts and modes of being,
the more he became convinced that whatever alien impulse swayed her will
and modulated or diverted or displaced her affections came from some
impression that reached far back into the past, before the days when the
faithful Old Sophy had rocked her in the cradle.  He believed that she
had brought her ruling tendency, whatever it was, into the world with
her.

When the school was over and the girls had all gone, Helen lingered in
the schoolroom to speak with Mr. Bernard.

"Did you remark Elsie's ways this forenoon?"  she said.

"No, not particularly; I have not noticed anything as sharply as I
commonly do; my head has been a little queer, and I have been thinking
over what we were talking about, and how near I came to solving the great
problem which every day makes clear to such multitudes of people.  What
about Elsie?"

"Bernard, her liking for you is growing into a passion.  I have studied
girls for a long while, and I know the difference between their passing
fancies and their real emotions.  I told you, you remember, that Rosa
would have to leave us; we barely missed a scene, I think, if not a whole
tragedy, by her going at the right moment. But Elsie is infinitely more
dangerous to herself and others. Women's love is fierce enough, if it
once gets the mastery of them, always; but this poor girl does not know
what to do with a passion."

Mr. Bernard had never told Helen the story of the flower in his Virgil,
or that other adventure--which he would have felt awkwardly to refer to;
but it had been perfectly understood between them that Elsie showed in
her own singular way a well-marked partiality for the young master.

"Why don't they take her away from the school, if she is in such a
strange, excitable state?" said Mr. Bernard.

"I believe they are afraid of her," Helen answered.  "It is just one of
those cases that are ten thousand thousand times worse than insanity.  I
don't think from what I hear, that her father has ever given up hoping
that she will outgrow her peculiarities.  Oh, these peculiar children for
whom parents go on hoping every morning and despairing every night!  If I
could tell you half that mothers have told me, you would feel that the
worst of all diseases of the moral sense and the will are those which all
the Bedlams turn away from their doors as not being cases of insanity!"

"Do you think her father has treated her judiciously?" said Mr. Bernard.

"I think," said Helen, with a little hesitation, which Mr. Bernard did
not happen to notice,--"I think he has been very kind and indulgent, and
I do not know that he could have treated her otherwise with a better
chance of success."

"He must of course be fond of her," Mr. Bernard said; "there is nothing
else in the world for him to love."

Helen dropped a book she held in her hand, and, stooping to pick it up,
the blood rushed into her cheeks.

"It is getting late," she said; "you must not stay any longer in this
close schoolroom.  Pray, go and get a little fresh air before
dinner-time."


CHAPTER XXVII.

A SOUL IN DISTRESS.

The events told in the last two chapters had taken place toward the close
of the week.  On Saturday evening the Reverend Chauncy Fairweather
received a note which was left at his door by an unknown person who
departed without saying a word.  Its words were these: "One who is in
distress of mind requests the prayers of this congregation that God would
be pleased to look in mercy upon the soul that he has afflicted."

There was nothing to show from whom the note came, or the sex or age or
special source of spiritual discomfort or anxiety of the writer. The
handwriting was delicate and might well be a woman's.  The clergyman was
not aware of any particular affliction among his parishioners which was
likely to be made the subject of a request of this kind.  Surely neither
of the Venners would advertise the attempted crime of their relative in
this way.  But who else was there?  The more he thought about it, the
more it puzzled him, and as he did not like to pray in the dark, without
knowing for whom he was praying, he could think of nothing better than to
step into old Doctor Kittredge's and see what he had to say about it.

The old Doctor was sitting alone in his study when the Reverend Mr.
Fairweather was ushered in.  He received his visitor very pleasantly,
expecting, as a matter of course, that he would begin with some new
grievance, dyspeptic, neuralgic, bronchitic, or other.  The minister,
however, began with questioning the old Doctor about the sequel of the
other night's adventure; for he was already getting a little Jesuitical,
and kept back the object of his visit until it should come up as if
accidentally in the course of conversation.

"It was a pretty bold thing to go off alone with that reprobate, as you
did," said the minister.

"I don't know what there was bold about it," the Doctor answered. "All he
wanted was to get away.  He was not quite a reprobate, you see; he didn't
like the thought of disgracing his family or facing his uncle.  I think
he was ashamed to see his cousin, too, after what he had done."

"Did he talk with you on the way?"

"Not much.  For half an hour or so he did n't speak a word.  Then he
asked where I was driving him.  I told him, and he seemed to be surprised
into a sort of grateful feeling.  Bad enough, no doubt, but might be
worse.  Has some humanity left in him yet.  Let him go.  God can judge
him,--I can't."

"You are too charitable, Doctor," the minister said.  "I condemn him just
as if he had carried out his project, which, they say, was to make it
appear as if the schoolmaster had committed suicide.  That's what people
think the rope found by him was for.  He has saved his neck,--but his
soul is a lost one, I am afraid, beyond question."

"I can't judge men's souls," the Doctor said.  "I can judge their acts,
and hold them responsible for those,--but I don't know much about their
souls.  If you or I had found our soul in a half-breed body; and been
turned loose to run among the Indians, we might have been playing just
such tricks as this fellow has been trying.  What if you or I had
inherited all the tendencies that were born with his cousin Elsie?"

"Oh, that reminds me,"--the minister said, in a sudden way,--"I have
received a note, which I am requested to read from the pulpit tomorrow.
I wish you would just have the kindness to look at it and see where you
think it came from."

The Doctor examined it carefully.  It was a woman's or girl's note, he
thought.  Might come from one of the school-girls who was anxious about
her spiritual condition.  Handwriting was disguised; looked a little like
Elsie Veneer's, but not characteristic enough to make it certain.  It
would be a new thing, if she had asked public prayers for herself, and a
very favorable indication of a change in her singular moral nature.  It
was just possible Elsie might have sent that note.  Nobody could foretell
her actions.  It would be well to see the girl and find out whether any
unusual impression had been produced on her mind by the recent occurrence
or by any other cause.

The Reverend Mr. Fairweather folded the note and put it into his pocket.

"I have been a good deal exercised in mind lately, myself," he said.

The old Doctor looked at him through his spectacles, and said, in his
usual professional tone,

"Put out your tongue."

The minister obeyed him in that feeble way common with persons of weak
character,--for people differ as much in their mode of performing this
trifling act as Gideon's soldiers in their way of drinking at the brook.
The Doctor took his hand and placed a finger mechanically on his wrist.

"It is more spiritual, I think, than bodily," said the Reverend Mr.
Fairweather.

"Is your appetite as good as usual?"  the Doctor asked.

"Pretty good," the minister answered; "but my sleep, my sleep, Doctor,--I
am greatly troubled at night with lying awake and thinking of my future,
I am not at ease in mind."

He looked round at all the doors, to be sure they were shut, and moved
his chair up close to the Doctor's.

"You do not know the mental trials I have been going through for the last
few months."

"I think I do," the old Doctor said.  "You want to get out of the new
church into the old one, don't you?"

The minister blushed deeply; he thought he had been going on in a very
quiet way, and that nobody suspected his secret.  As the old Doctor was
his counsellor in sickness, and almost everybody's confidant in trouble,
he had intended to impart cautiously to him some hints of the change of
sentiments through which he had been passing.  He was too late with his
information, it appeared, and there was nothing to be done but to throw
himself on the Doctor's good sense and kindness, which everybody knew,
and get what hints he could from him as to the practical course he should
pursue.  He began, after an awkward pause,

"You would not have me stay in a communion which I feel to be alien to
the true church, would you?"

"Have you stay, my friend?" said the Doctor, with a pleasant, friendly
look,--"have you stay?  Not a month, nor a week, nor a day, if I could
help it.  You have got into the wrong pulpit, and I have known it from
the first.  The sooner you go where you belong, the better.  And I'm very
glad you don't mean to stop half-way.  Don't you know you've always come
to me when you've been dyspeptic or sick anyhow, and wanted to put
yourself wholly into my hands, so that I might order you like a child
just what to do and what to take?  That 's exactly what you want in
religion.  I don't blame you for it.  You never liked to take the
responsibility of your own body; I don't see why you should want to have
the charge of your own soul.  But I'm glad you're going to the Old Mother
of all.  You wouldn't have been contented short of that."

The Reverend Mr. Fairweather breathed with more freedom.  The Doctor saw
into his soul through those awful spectacles of his,--into it and beyond
it, as one sees through a thin fog.  But it was with a real human
kindness, after all.  He felt like a child before a strong man; but the
strong man looked on him with a father's indulgence.  Many and many a
time, when he had come desponding and bemoaning himself on account of
some contemptible bodily infirmity, the old Doctor had looked at him
through his spectacles, listened patiently while he told his ailments,
and then, in his large parental way, given him a few words of wholesome
advice, and cheered him up so that he went off with a light heart,
thinking that the heaven he was so much afraid of was not so very near,
after all.  It was the same thing now.  He felt, as feeble natures always
do in the presence of strong ones, overmastered, circumscribed, shut in,
humbled; but yet it seemed as if the old Doctor did not despise him any
more for what he considered weakness of mind than he used to despise him
when he complained of his nerves or his digestion.

Men who see into their neighbors are very apt to be contemptuous; but men
who see through them find something lying behind every human soul which
it is not for them to sit in judgment on, or to attempt to sneer out of
the order of God's manifold universe.

Little as the Doctor had said out of which comfort could be extracted,
his genial manner had something grateful in it.  A film of gratitude came
over the poor man's cloudy, uncertain eye, and a look of tremulous relief
and satisfaction played about his weak mouth.  He was gravitating to the
majority, where he hoped to find "rest"; but he was dreadfully sensitive
to the opinions of the minority he was on the point of leaving.

The old Doctor saw plainly enough what was going on in his mind.

"I sha'n't quarrel with you," he said,--"you know that very well; but you
mustn't quarrel with me, if I talk honestly with you; it isn't everybody
that will take the trouble.  You flatter yourself that you will make a
good many enemies by leaving your old communion.  Not so many as you
think.  This is the way the common sort of people will talk:--'You have
got your ticket to the feast of life, as much as any other man that ever
lived.  Protestantism says,--"Help yourself; here's a clean plate, and a
knife and fork of your own, and plenty of fresh dishes to choose from."
The Old Mother says,--"Give me your ticket, my dear, and I'll feed you
with my gold spoon off these beautiful old wooden trenchers.  Such nice
bits as those good old gentlemen have left for you!"  There is no
quarrelling with a man who prefers broken victuals.  That's what the
rougher sort will say; and then, where one scolds, ten will laugh.  But,
mind you, I don't either scold or laugh.  I don't feel sure that you
could very well have helped doing what you will soon do.  You know you
were never easy without some medicine to take when you felt ill in body.
I'm afraid I've given you trashy stuff sometimes, just to keep you quiet.
Now, let me tell you, there is just the same difference in spiritual
patients that there is in bodily ones.  One set believes in wholesome
ways of living, and another must have a great list of specifics for all
the soul's complaints.  You belong with the last, and got accidentally
shuffled in with the others."

The minister smiled faintly, but did not reply.  Of course, he considered
that way of talking as the result of the Doctor's professional training.
It would not have been worth while to take offence at his plain speech,
if he had been so disposed; for he might wish to consult him the next day
as to "what he should take" for his dyspepsia or his neuralgia.

He left the Doctor with a hollow feeling at the bottom of his soul, as if
a good piece of his manhood had been scooped out of him.  His hollow
aching did not explain itself in words, but it grumbled and worried down
among the unshaped thoughts which lie beneath them.  He knew that he had
been trying to reason himself out of his birthright of reason.  He knew
that the inspiration which gave him understanding was losing its throne
in his intelligence, and the almighty Majority-Vote was proclaiming
itself in its stead.  He knew that the great primal truths, which each
successive revelation only confirmed, were fast becoming hidden beneath
the mechanical forms of thought, which, as with all new converts,
engrossed so large a share of his attention.  The "peace," the "rest,"
which he had purchased were dearly bought to one who had been trained to
the arms of thought, and whose noble privilege it might have been to live
in perpetual warfare for the advancing truth which the next generation
will claim as the legacy of the present.

The Reverend Mr. Fairweather was getting careless about his sermons. He
must wait the fitting moment to declare himself; and in the mean time he
was preaching to heretics.  It did not matter much what he preached,
under such circumstances.  He pulled out two old yellow sermons from a
heap of such, and began looking over that for the forenoon.  Naturally
enough, he fell asleep over it, and, sleeping, he began to dream.

He dreamed that he was under the high arches of an old cathedral, amidst
a throng of worshippers.  The light streamed in through vast windows,
dark with the purple robes of royal saints, or blazing with yellow
glories around the heads of earthly martyrs and heavenly messengers.  The
billows of the great organ roared among the clustered columns, as the sea
breaks amidst the basaltic pillars which crowd the stormy cavern of the
Hebrides.  The voice of the alternate choirs of singing boys swung back
and forward, as the silver censer swung in the hands of the white-robed
children.  The sweet cloud of incense rose in soft, fleecy mists, full of
penetrating suggestions of the East and its perfumed altars.  The knees
of twenty generations had worn the pavement; their feet had hollowed the
steps; their shoulders had smoothed the columns.  Dead bishops and abbots
lay under the marble of the floor in their crumbled vestments; dead
warriors, in rusted armor, were stretched beneath their sculptured
effigies.  And all at once all the buried multitudes who had ever
worshipped there came thronging in through the aisles.  They choked every
space, they swarmed into all the chapels, they hung in clusters over the
parapets of the galleries, they clung to the images in every niche, and
still the vast throng kept flowing and flowing in, until the living were
lost in the rush of the returning dead who had reclaimed their own.
Then, as his dream became more fantastic, the huge cathedral itself
seemed to change into the wreck of some mighty antediluvian vertebrate;
its flying-buttresses arched round like ribs, its piers shaped themselves
into limbs, and the sound of the organ-blast changed to the wind
whistling through its thousand-jointed skeleton.

And presently the sound lulled, and softened and softened, until it was
as the murmur of a distant swarm of bees.  A procession of monks wound
along through an old street, chanting, as they walked.  In his dream he
glided in among them and bore his part in the burden of their song.  He
entered with the long train under a low arch, and presently he was
kneeling in a narrow cell before an image of the Blessed Maiden holding
the Divine Child in her arms, and his lips seemed to whisper,

               Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis!

He turned to the crucifix, and, prostrating himself before the spare,
agonizing shape of the Holy Sufferer, fell into a long passion of tears
and broken prayers.  He rose and flung himself, worn-out, upon his hard
pallet, and, seeming to slumber, dreamed again within his dream.  Once
more in the vast cathedral, with throngs of the living choking its
aisles, amidst jubilant peals from the cavernous depths of the great
organ, and choral melodies ringing from the fluty throats of the singing
boys.  A day of great rejoicings,--for a prelate was to be consecrated,
and the bones of the mighty skeleton-minster were shaking with anthems,
as if there were life of its own within its buttressed ribs.  He looked
down at his feet; the folds of the sacred robe were flowing about them:
he put his hand to his head; it was crowned with the holy mitre.  A long
sigh, as of perfect content in the consummation of all his earthly hopes,
breathed through the dreamer's lips, and shaped itself, as it escaped,
into the blissful murmur,

               Ego sum Episcopus!

One grinning gargoyle looked in from beneath the roof through an opening
in a stained window.  It was the face of a mocking fiend, such as the old
builders loved to place under the eaves to spout the rain through their
open mouths.  It looked at him, as he sat in his mitred chair, with its
hideous grin growing broader and broader, until it laughed out aloud,
such a hard, stony, mocking laugh, that he awoke out of his second dream
through his first into his common consciousness, and shivered, as he
turned to the two yellow sermons which he was to pick over and weed of
the little thought they might contain, for the next day's service.

The Reverend Chauncy Fairweather was too much taken up with his own
bodily and spiritual condition to be deeply mindful of others.  He
carried the note requesting the prayers of the congregation in his pocket
all day; and the soul in distress, which a single tender petition might
have soothed, and perhaps have saved from despair or fatal error, found
no voice in the temple to plead for it before the Throne of Mercy!


CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE SECRET IS WHISPERED.

The Reverend Chauncy Fairweather's congregation was not large, but
select.  The lines of social cleavage run through religious creeds as if
they were of a piece with position and fortune.  It is expected of
persons of a certain breeding, in some parts of New England, that they
shall be either Episcopalians or Unitarians.  The mansion-house gentry of
Rockland were pretty fairly divided between the little chapel, with the
stained window and the trained rector, and the meeting-house where the
Reverend Mr. Fairweather officiated.

It was in the latter that Dudley Venner worshipped, when he attended
service anywhere,--which depended very much on the caprice of Elsie. He
saw plainly enough that a generous and liberally cultivated nature might
find a refuge and congenial souls in either of these two persuasions, but
he objected to some points of the formal creed of the older church, and
especially to the mechanism which renders it hard to get free from its
outworn and offensive formulae,--remembering how Archbishop Tillotson
wished in vain that it could be "well rid of" the Athanasian Creed.
This, and the fact that the meeting-house was nearer than the chapel,
determined him, when the new rector, who was not quite up to his mark in
education, was appointed, to take a pew in the "liberal" worshippers'
edifice.

Elsie was very uncertain in her feeling about going to church.  In
summer, she loved rather to stroll over The Mountain, on Sundays. There
was even a story, that she had one of the caves before mentioned fitted
up as an oratory, and that she had her own wild way of worshipping the
God whom she sought in the dark chasms of the dreaded cliffs.  Mere
fables, doubtless; but they showed the common belief, that Elsie, with
all her strange and dangerous elements of character, had yet strong
religious feeling mingled with them.  The hymn-book which Dick had found,
in his midnight invasion of her chamber, opened to favorite hymns,
especially some of the Methodist and Quietist character.  Many had
noticed, that certain tunes, as sung by the choir, seemed to impress her
deeply; and some said, that at such times her whole expression would
change, and her stormy look would soften so as to remind them of her
poor, sweet mother.

On the Sunday morning after the talk recorded in the last chapter, Elsie
made herself ready to go to meeting.  She was dressed much as usual,
excepting that she wore a thick veil, turned aside, but ready to conceal
her features.  It was natural enough that she should not wish to be
looked in the face by curious persons who would be staring to see what
effect the occurrence of the past week had had on her spirits.  Her
father attended her willingly; and they took their seats in the pew,
somewhat to the surprise of many, who had hardly expected to see them,
after so humiliating a family development as the attempted crime of their
kinsman had just been furnishing for the astonishment of the public.

The Reverend Mr. Fairweather was now in his coldest mood.  He had passed
through the period of feverish excitement which marks a change of
religious opinion.  At first, when he had began to doubt his own
theological positions, he had defended them against himself with more
ingenuity and interest, perhaps, than he could have done against another;
because men rarely take the trouble to understand anybody's difficulties
in a question but their own.  After this, as he began to draw off from
different points of his old belief, the cautious disentangling of himself
from one mesh after another gave sharpness to his intellect, and the
tremulous eagerness with which he seized upon the doctrine which, piece
by piece, under various pretexts and with various disguises, he was
appropriating, gave interest and something like passion to his words.
But when he had gradually accustomed his people to his new phraseology,
and was really adjusting his sermons and his service to disguise his
thoughts, he lost at once all his intellectual acuteness and all his
spiritual fervor.

