"The gift of God is eternal life"--oh, marvellous words!--"through
Jesus Christ our Lord." "As many as received Him, to them gave He
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His
name." "He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son
of God hath not life." "Behold I stand at the door and knock: if any
man hear My voice and open the door, I will come in to him."

It is utterly, unbelievably simple. Receive Jesus with a heart-grasp,
and you will find, like the flower, a spring of eternal life,
entirely distinct from your own, that is perishing, set working deep
down in your inmost being.

And all that is needed, for the fulfilment of God's uttermost purpose
for you, is that this "new man" should be formed and that the old
should pass away.

From the very outset of its new birth we see this double process
going on in the plant. Within a few hours the throb of new life has
spread through the flower, with this first result, that the petals
begin to wither. Fertilisation marks the striking of the death-blow
to all that went before. Look at a clover head; do you know why some
of the spikes are upright and others turned downwards and fading? It
is because these last have received the new tide, and the old is
ebbing out already. The birth-peal and the death-knell rang together.
Fertilisation marks the death of the flower and the death of the
flower the death of the annual, though the carrying out of its doom
comes gradually.

And in like manner the sentence of death passes, in the Cross, on the
old nature in its entirety, as the new comes into being. This is the
one only basis and groundwork for all carrying out in our practical
experience of what that death means. Once for all let this be clear.
Apart from the work done on Calvary, all working out of a death
process in our own souls is only a false and dangerous mysticism... .
"I have been crucified with Christ." (R. V.)--Yes, long before ever I
asked to be--glory be to God! and yet as freshly as if it were
yesterday, for time is nowhere with Him.

And simultaneously, in figure, in the little flower-heart, while
"that which is natural" begins to fade, "that which is spiritual"
dawns. The seed-vessel with its hidden treasure--the ultimate object
of this miracle of quickening--begins immediately to form. It was
within three days of "the heavenly vision" when the once rejected
Jesus was received by St. Paul, that the commission came--"he is a
chosen vessel unto Me, to bear My Name." A chosen vessel unto Him.
The seed-vessel belongs to the seed, only and for ever: it is formed
for itself and has no purpose apart. Separation has nothing austere
and narrow in it when it is unto Him.

Chosen vessels to bear His Name--His personality; with all that is
wrapped up in that Name of fragrance and healing, authority and
power; chosen to go about this weary sinful world with the living
Christ folded in our hearts, ready and able as of old to meet the
need around. Is not this a calling for which it is worth counting, as
St. Paul did, all things but loss?

Chosen vessels--there is the vessel and there is the treasure in it,
for ever distinct, though in wonderful union, like the seed-vessel
and the seed: the one enshrines the other.

God builds up a shrine within us of His workmanship, from the day in
which Jesus was received. The seed-vessel is its picture. With the
old nature He can have nothing to do except to deliver it to death:
no improving can fit it for His purpose, any more than the leaf or
tendril, however beautiful, can be the receptacle of the seed. There
must be "a new creation" (R.V., margin), "the new man," to be the
temple of the Divine Life.

And as the petals drop off, and the growing seed-vessel comes into
view, we see a fresh individuality developed. Compare in these four
pages some of the seed-vessels of a single family--vetch and clover:
we found over thirty species of it in that one field of the
frontispiece. These will show something of their extraordinary
variety--we have bunches of horns great and small, and bunches of
imitation centipedes, and bunches of mock holly leaves, prickly coils
and velvety balls; mimic concertinas, and bits of quaint embroidery;
imitation snail-shells, croziers, pods with frills at the seams,
spiked caskets with curious indentations, clusters of stars, bladders
like soft paper, and plaited spirals wound into a tiny cocoanut,
that, untwisted, becomes a minature crown of thorns--are they not all
a visible expression of the thoughts that are more than can be
numbered? And the greater part spring from little unnoticeable
flowers, so alike in their yellow or pink that you have to look
closely in order to find out any difference! It is the seed-bearing
that gives them their individual character.

And the same God has manifold plans for our development too, as
vessels for His Christ-life. It is by the Divine indwelling that our
true, eternal personality dawns, and for the expression of the
special manifestation of Himself which is entrusted to each one of
us. The protoplasm that quickens each different seed is one and the
same essence, but in no two does it find the same expression. He
needs the whole Church to manifest His whole character and accomplish
His appointed ministry, and so the individual development must differ
widely in everything but the common vital principle. Life--eternal
life--is the essence of all--life receiving and life-giving. There is
no need to imitate the seed-vessel of a brother vetch!--only to draw
into our own the fulness of grace that we may develop into its full
individuality the mission entrusted to us.

There is nothing arbitrary in these differing shapes of the
seed-vessels. If we look closely, we shall find that they are formed
in union with the seed that each contains--it is this that determines
the form of each, and builds it up. See these few instances: the peas
need their long pod with its daintily-cushioned divisions, to allow
each little globe to round itself to perfection; the crescent-shaped
seeds of this other vetch, each set into its own place again, form
the distinctive character of their different sheath--so do the tiny
rod-shaped ones of the third vetch, which clothe themselves in a
segmented rod in turn. While on the other hand the fine sand-like
grain of this snap-dragon needs storing in a capsule--such a quaint
one it is (whether most like a bird or a mouse sitting on a twig is
hard to say)--but it is a perfectly adapted treasure-bag for the
delicate things, and when they are ripe the two eyes open, and the
wind shakes the seed out by them! Each one lays itself out for the
special trust committed to it. Is it not the same wonderful Fashioner
Who fits us and our ministry together, and forms us through it with
unerring precision, preparing us for the white stone and the new name
which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it, eternity's seal on
the heavenly individuality of each. That eternal future will show how
the Lord had need of each of us in our varying character, and how all
that made up this earthly life fitted us for "bearing about" the
special manifestation of Jesus entrusted to us, in which no other
could take our place. He needs us, every one of us, as if there were
no other besides.

* * * * * *

But we will go back from this glimpse of God's ultimate purpose for
us, to watch the process by which it is reached, so far as we can
trace it in the ripening of the little annuals.

The figure will not give us all the steps by which God gets His way
in the intricacies of a human soul: we shall see no hint in it of the
cleansing and filling that is needed in sinful man before he can
follow the path of the plant. It shows us some of the Divine
principles of the new life rather than a set sequence of experience;
above all, the parable gives a lesson that most of us only begin to
learn after Pentecost has become a reality to us--the lesson of
walking, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

The flesh--the life of nature--is all, good and bad alike, that we
had and were before Christ came to us. We see its shadow in the life
of root and stem, leaf and tendril and petal, that made up the plant
before its new birth took place; "for all flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field." It is not only
that which is sinful as opposed to that which is holy: it is that
which is human as opposed to that which is Divine.

In the earlier stage of the seed-vessel's growth we see the two
lives, the old and the new, practically going on alongside. And can
we not remember, many of us, in our own history, how the self life
went almost untouched and unrecognised, for years, while all the time
Christ was growing within us, and our ministry was being given?

Let us look at the seed-vessels, well set and forming fast, with
their natural life all unbroken as yet, and learn to be very tender
and patient with the early stages of God's work in those around.

But though the two may exist for a time side by side, they cannot
flourish together. The crisis must come to us as to the annual, when
the old creation begins to go down into the grave, and the new begins
to triumph at its cost.

In the plant life the two are absolutely and for ever separate--there
is no possibility of confounding the perishable existence of leaf and
stalk with the newborn seed-vessel and its hidden riches. In the
heavenly light the distinction stands out as ineffaceably. "That
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
Spirit is spirit." But our eyes are too dim at first to distinguish
them in detail: with most of us it is only when the cleansing Blood
has dealt with the question of known sin, and the Spirit's incoming
has cleared our vision, that the two lives, natural and spiritual,
begin to stand out before us, no longer shading into each other, but
in vivid contrast. The word of God in the hand of the Holy Ghost
pierces to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and we see bit by
bit as we can bear it, how we have made provision for the flesh,
given occasion to the flesh, had confidence in the flesh, warred
after the flesh, judged after the flesh, purposed after the flesh,
known each other after the flesh. The carnal nature with its workings
stands out as the hindrance in the way of the Divine, and the time
comes when we see that no more growth is possible to the Christ in us
unless a deliverance comes here.

We are helpless in the matter. There is no system of self-repression
or self-mortification that will do anything but drive the evil below
the surface, there to do a still more subtle work, winding down out
of reach. The roots will only strike deeper and the sap flow stronger
for the few leaves trimmed off here and there. If self sets to work
to slay self it will only end in rising hydra-headed from the
contest. How is the deliverance to come?

The annuals give us the secret. Look back at the vetch seed-vessels.
Why is it that the leaves which used to stand firm and fresh like
those of the flowering clover, have begun to shrivel and turn yellow?
It is because they have acquiesced wholly now in the death sentence
of their new birth, and they are letting the new life live at the
expense of the old. Death is being wrought out by life.

And the same triumphant power of the new life is set free as we come
to accept to its utmost limits the sentence of Calvary, that "our old
man was crucified with Him," in its sum-total, seen and unseen, root
and branch. Christ is our Life now--our only Life--and we begin to
find that He is dealing with the old creation, we hardly know how. We
only know that as we bring the judgment, the motive, the aim that
were ours, not His, into contact with Him, they shrivel and wither
like the dying leaves. The impulses and the shrinkings of the flesh
perish in His Presence alike. The new life wrecks the old. "If ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall
live"--that is what the withering leaves say. We are "saved by His
life."

The great North African aloe plant shows this very strikingly. It is
like our annuals on a large scale, for it flowers and seeds but once
in its career, though that numbers more years than these can count
weeks.


Up till then its thick hard leaves look as if nothing could exhaust
their vigour. The flower stalk pushes up from a fresh sheaf of
them--up and up twelve or fourteen feet--and expands into a
candelabra of golden blossom, and not a droop comes in the plant
below. But as the seed forms, we see that life is working death,
slowly and surely; the swords lose their stiffness and colour and
begin to hang helplessly, and by the time it is ripe, every vestige
of vitality is drained away from them, and they have gone to limp,
greyish-brown streamers. The seed has possessed itself of everything.

And the meadow plants that we have been watching follow, on their
small pattern, the same law.

All gives way to the ripening seed. In the grasses the very root
perishes by the time the grain is yellow, and comes up whole if you
try to break the stem. They "reign in life" above through the
indwelling seed, while all that is "corruptible" goes down into dust
below. They have let all go to life--the enduring life: they are not
taken up with the dying--that is only a passing incident--everything
is wrapped up into the one aim, that the seed may triumph at any
cost. Death is wrought out almost unconsciously: the seed has done it
all.

Can we not trace the same dealing in our souls as, slowly, tenderly,
all that nourished that which is carnal is withdrawn, giving way to
the forming of the Christ life in its place? His thoughts and desires
and ways begin to dethrone ours as the aloe seed dethrones its leaves
and casts them to the ground. "He must increase, but I must decrease."

And the outward dealings co-operate with the inward. It is just in
the very corner of everyday life where God has put us, that this can
take place, and the surrounding influences can have their share in
bringing down to death the old nature. It is no mystical, imaginary
world that draws out the latent forms of self, but the commonplace,
matter-of-fact world about us.

It is in contact with others, for the most part, that the humbling
discoveries of the workings of the flesh come, on the one hand, and
on the other we find ourselves breaking down in one after another of
our strongest points. And all these things that seem against us are
really doing a blessed work--they are "the Wind of the Lord" coming
"up from the wilderness" to "spoil the treasure" of all that is of
former days. Everything that is "natural," good and bad alike, must
go down into death before its blast, when God takes it in hand--all
that we can lean upon in outward things, all clinging to the visible
and the transitory; and with this result, that our arms clasp closer
and closer round the Eternal Seed, Christ in us the Hope of
Glory--known no longer after the flesh, but by the mighty revelation
of the Holy Ghost.

