"

"How do you know all about the King, Lawrence?"

"It is written in a book called the Bible. Have you ever seen a Bible?"

"That was the big book as blind Tim used to sit and feel over with his
fingers by the area rails. I asked him what it was, and he said as it
was the Bible. But bless you; he weren't blind no more nor you are: he
lodged at Skimmidge's for a bit, and I saw him a reading of the paper in
his room; he kicked me when he saw as I'd twigged him;" and Wikkey's
laugh broke out at the recollection. Poor child, his whole knowledge of
sacred things seemed to be derived from--

    "Holiest things profaned and cursed."

"Tim was a bad man to pretend to be blind when he wasn't," said
Lawrence, severely. "But now, Wikkey, shall I read you a story about the
King?"

"Did He live in London?" Wikkey asked, as Lawrence took up the old Book
with the feeling that the boy should hear these things for the first
time out of his mother's Bible.

"No, He lived in a country a long way off; but that makes no difference,
because He is God, and can see us everywhere, and He wants us to be
good."

Then Lawrence opened the Bible, and after some thought, half read, half
told, about the feeding of the hungry multitude.

Each succeeding evening, a fresh story about the King was related,
eagerly listened to, and commented on by Wikkey with such familiar
realism as often startled Lawrence, and made him wonder whether he were
allowing irreverence; but which at the same time, threw a wondrously
vivid light on the histories which, known since childhood, had lost so
much of their interest for himself: and certainly, as far awakening
first the boy's curiosity, and then his love, went, the method of
instruction answered perfectly. For Wikkey did not die at the end of the
week, or of many succeeding weeks: warmth and food, and Mrs. Evans'
nursing powers combined, caused one of those curious rallies not
uncommon in cases of consumption, though no one who saw the boy's thin,
flushed cheeks, and brilliant eyes, could think the reprieve would be a
long one. Still for the present there was improvement, and Lawrence
could not help feeling glad that he might keep for a little while longer
the child whose love had strangely brightened his lonely lodgings.

And while Wikkey's development was being carried on in the highest
direction, his education in minor matters was progressing under Mrs.
Evans' tuition--tuition of much the same kind as she had bestowed years
before on Master Lawrence and her sweet Master Robin. By degrees Wikkey
became thoroughly initiated in the mysteries of the toilette, and other
amenities of civilized life, and being a sharp child, with a natural
turn for imitation, he was, at the end of a week or two, not entirely
unlike those young gentlemen in his ways, especially when his
conversation became shorn of the expletives which had at first adorned
it, but which, under Mrs. Evans' sharp rebukes, and Lawrence's graver
admonitions that they were displeasing to the King, fast disappeared.
Wikkey's remorse on being betrayed into the utterance of some
comparatively harmless expression, quite as deep as when one slipped
that gave even Lawrence a shock, showed how little their meaning had to
do with their use.

One evening Lawrence, returning home to find Wikkey established as usual
on the sofa near the fire, was greeted by the eager question--

"Lawrence, what was the King like? I've been a thinking of it all day,
and I _should_ like to know. Do you think He was a bit like you?"

"Not at all," Lawrence answered. "We don't know exactly what He was
like; but--let me see," he went on, considering, "I think I have a
picture somewhere--I had one;" and he crossed the room to a corner
where, between the book-case and the wall, were put away a number of old
pictures, brought from the "boys' room" at home, and never yet re-hung;
among them was a little Oxford frame containing a photograph of the
Thorn-crowned Head by Guido. How well he remembered its being given to
him on his birthday by his mother! This he showed to Wikkey, explaining
that though no one knows certainly what the King is like, it is thought
that He may have resembled that picture. The boy looked at it for some
time in silence, and then said--

"I've seen pictures like that in shops, but I never knew as it was the
King. He looks very sorrowful--a deal sorrowfuller nor you--and what is
that He has on His Head?"

"That has to do with a very sad story, which I have not told you yet.
You know, Wikkey, though he was so good and kind, the men of that
country hated Him, and would not have him for their King, and at last
they took Him prisoner, and treated Him very badly, and they put that
crown of sharp, pricking thorns on His Head, because He said He was a
King."

"Was it to make game of Him?" asked Wikkey, in a tone of mingled awe and
distress.

Lawrence nodded gravely, and feeling that this was perhaps as good a
moment as any for completing the history, he took the Book, and in low,
reverent tones, began the sad story of the betrayal, captivity, and
Death. Wikkey listened in absorbed attention, every now and then
commenting on the narrative in a way which showed its intense reality to
himself, and gave a marvellous vividness to the details of which
Lawrence had before scarcely realized the terrible force. As he read on,
his voice became husky, and the child's eyes were fixed on him with
devouring eagerness, till the awful end came, and Wikkey broke into an
agony of weeping. Lawrence hastily put down the Book, and taking the
little worn frame into his arms tried to soothe the shaking sobs,
feeling the while as though he had been guilty of cruelty to the tender,
sensitive heart.

"I thought some one would have saved Him," Wikkey gasped. "I didn't know
as He was killed; you never told me He was killed."

"Wikkey, little lad--hush--look here! it was all right at the end.
Listen while I read the end; it is beautiful." And as the sobs subsided
he began to read again, still holding the boy close, and inwardly
wondering whether something like this might have been the despair of the
disciples on that Friday evening--read of the sadness of that waiting
time, of the angel's visit to the silent tomb, of the loving women at
the sepulchre, and the joyful message, "He is not here, He is risen;"
and lastly, of the parting blessing, the separating cloud and the
tidings of the coming again. A look of great relief was on Wikkey's
face as Lawrence ceased reading, and he lay for some time with closed
eyes, resting after his outburst. At last he opened them with sudden
wonder.

"Lawrence, why did He let them do it? If He could do anything, why
didn't He save Himself from the enemies?"

The old wonder--the old question--which must be answered; and Lawrence,
after thinking a moment, said--

"It had to be, Wikkey. He had to die--to die for us. It was like
this:--People were very wicked, always doing bad things, and nobody that
was bad could go to Heaven, but they must be punished instead. But God
was very sorry that none of the people He had made could come and be
happy with Him, so His Son, Jesus Christ, our King, became a Man, and
came down on earth that He might be punished instead of us, so that we
might be forgiven and allowed to come into Heaven. He bore all that for
each of us, so that now, if we believe in Him and try to please Him, we
shall go to be with Him in Heaven when we die."

Lawrence was very far from guessing that his teaching had become
"doctrinal." He had spoken out of the fulness of his own conviction,
quickened into fresh life by the intensity of Wikkey's realization of
the facts he had heard.

"It _was_ good of Him--it _was_ good," the child repeated again and
again, with a world of love shining in his eyes, till, worn out with his
emotion, he fell asleep, and was gently laid by Lawrence in his bed. But
in the middle of the night sounds of stifled weeping aroused Lawrence.

"What is it, Wikkey boy?" he asked, groping his way to him. "Are you
worse?"

"I didn't mean for to wake you; but I wish--I _wish_ I hadn't boned them
coppers off Jim; it makes me feel so bad when I think as the King saw
me;" and Wikkey buried his face in the kind arm which encircled him, in
uncontrollable grief. It needed all Lawrence's assurances that the King
saw his repentance, and had certainly forgiven--yes, and the prayer for
pardon which the young man, blushing red-hot in the darkness at the
unwonted effort, uttered in husky tones, with the child's thin hands
clasped in his own--before Wikkey was sufficiently quieted to sleep
again. Before going down to the office Lawrence wrote to his cousin:

"I can do no more; he has got beyond me. He loves _Him_ more than ever I
have done. Come and help us both."

So Reginald came on such evenings as he could spare, and Wikkey, no
longer averse, listened as he told him of the Fatherhood of God, of the
love of the Son, and of the ever-present Comforter; of creation,
redemption, and sanctification, and all the deep truths of the faith,
receiving them with the belief that is born rather of love than of
reason; for though the acuteness of the boy's questions and remarks
often obliged Reginald to bring his own strong intellect to bear on
them, they arose from no spirit of antagonism, but were the natural
outcome of a thoughtful, inquiring mind. Sometimes, however, Wikkey was
too tired for talking, and could only lie still and listen while
Lawrence and the curate conversed, the expression of his eyes, as they
passed from one to another, showing that he understood far more than
might have been expected. One evening, in the middle of March, after he
had been carried up-stairs, the cousins sat talking over their charge.

"I have been considering about his baptism," Reginald said.

"His baptism! Do you think he hasn't been christened?"

"No, I don't think so," returned the other, thoughtfully. "I cannot
bring myself to believe that we have been working on unconsecrated soil;
but still we do not know. Of course I could baptize him hypothetically,
but I should like to know the truth."

"Baptize him _how_?" Lawrence asked, with a frown of perplexity.

"Hypothetically. Don't be alarmed, it isn't a new fad of mine: it means
baptizing on the _supposition_ that there has been no previous baptism;
for, you know, our Church does not allow it to be done twice. I wonder
if anything could be learnt by going down to the place named in the
book?"

"Cranbury! I looked in Bradshaw for it, and it seems to be a small place
about an hour and a half from Euston Station; I might find a day to run
down, though I don't quite see when; and how if I were to find a heap of
relations wanting the boy? I could not spare him now, you know."

"Scarcely likely. Wikkey has evidently never seen a relation for, say,
ten years, or he would recollect it, and it is hardly probable that any
one will be anxious to take a boy in his state whom they have not seen
for ten years. Besides, he couldn't well be moved now."

"No, he couldn't; and I sincerely hope that no affectionate relatives
will want to come and see him here; that would be a most awful nuisance.
What do you think of a tearful grandmother haunting the place?"

"The idea is oppressive, certainly, but I do not think you need fear it
much, and you have established a pretty fair right to do as you like
about the boy. Look here, Lawrence; supposing I were to run down on this
place; I believe I could spare a day better than you, and a breath of
fresh air would do me no harm."

"I shouldn't think it would," said Lawrence, looking at his cousin's
pale face--all the paler for the stress of his winter's work. "Do, Reg;
and for pity's sake, bring a root of some flower if you can find one; it
is sickening to think of a child dying without ever having had such a
thing in his hands."

"All right, then, I will go to-morrow; for--for," Reginald added
gravely, "there is no time to be lost."

"I know there is not; I know it must come soon. Reg, I couldn't have
believed I should have grown to care for the boy as I do."

"No, you have prepared a wrench for yourself, old fellow, but you will
never be the worse for it, Lawrence. You know all about that better than
I can preach it to you."

There was a silence, and then Lawrence said--

"Ought he to be told?"

"Well, that puzzles me; I feel as if he ought, and yet there can be no
need to frighten the child. If it came naturally, it might be better for
you to tell him gently."

"I?" exclaimed Lawrence, aghast.

"Yes, it must be you; he will take it better from you than from anyone
else; but wait and see; you will be shown what to do."

The result of the curate's mission to Cranbury was very satisfactory. On
being directed to the solitary remaining inhabitant of the name of
Wilkins, Reginald learnt that Sarah Wilkins had been the only daughter
of his brother, that she had married a ne'er-do-weel of the name of
Whiston, who had deserted her shortly before the birth of her child,
that she had followed her husband to London as soon as she was able to
travel, and after a while had been lost sight of by her family. The old
man seemed but slightly interested in the matter, and Reginald saw that
no interference need be feared from him. On further consulting the
parish register, he found recorded the marriage of Thomas Whiston and
Sarah Wilkins, and a year later, the baptism of Wilkins, son of Thomas
and Sarah Whiston, in 1856.

"So it is as I hoped, the child is one of the Flock," the curate said
to himself. "And that mite of a boy is thirteen years old!" and he
returned to London triumphant, bringing with him besides the information
he went to seek, a root of primroses with yellow-tipped spikes ready to
burst, and an early thrush's nest containing five delicate blue eggs.
This last treasure Reginald displayed with intense pride.

"I found a boy carrying it on the road, and rated the young rascal
soundly for taking it, but I'm afraid the shilling I gave him made more
impression than the lecture. Isn't it a beauty? I wonder when I last saw
a nest?" he went on, touching the eggs with loving fingers. "Hardly
since our old bird's-nesting days, eh, Lawrence! Do you remember the
missel-thrush in the apple-tree?"

"Ay, and the licking you got for splitting your Sunday jacket up the
back;" and the two "working-men" laughed at the recollection, as they
carried the prize to display to Wikkey, with a comical anxiety, almost
amounting to dread, lest it should not produce the effect they intended.
No fear of that! Wikkey's eyes dilated as he gazed into the nest, and,
after some persuasion, took one of the smooth eggs into his hand; and
from that moment he could not endure it out of his sight, but had it
placed morning and evening beside his sofa or bed, near his other
treasure, the Picture of the King, on the other side of which stood the
primrose, planted in one of Mrs. Evans' tea-cups.

As the spring advanced, Wikkey became visibly worse, and all saw that
the end could not be far off. Reginald, coming in one evening, found him
asleep in Lawrence's arms, and was startled to see how great a change
had taken place in him during the last four and twenty hours. In answer
to his inquiring look, his cousin said, speaking very low--

"Since this morning, he is much worse; but better now than he was."

Sitting down, on the opposite side of the fire, Reginald thoughtfully
contemplated the two. What a contrast! Lawrence, all health and
strength, with the warm light glancing on the thick waves of his hair,
and deepening the ruddy brown of his complexion, while the glow scarcely
served to tint the pale face lying on his breast--deadly white, save for
the two red spots on the sunken checks--or the hair hanging in loose
lank threads. For some time no one spoke, but as the boy's sleep
continued sound and unbroken, the cousins fell into talk, low and
subdued, and many things were touched on in that quiet hour, which
neither could have put into words at another time. At length Reginald
rose to go, and at the same moment, Wikkey opened his eyes and smiled,
as he saw his visitor, and tried to lift himself up.

"I'm awake now," he said; "I didn't know as you were here."

"Never mind, Wikkey, lie still," said Reginald, "you are too tired for
any reading to-night. I will tell you one verse--a beautiful one--for
you and Lawrence to talk about some day," and laying his hand on the
boy's head he repeated, in low, gentle tones--"Thine eye shall see the
King in His beauty."

After he was gone, Wikkey lay very still, with his eyes fixed intently
on the fire. Lawrence dreaded what his next question might be, and at
last it came.

"What does it mean--See the King?"

"It means that we shall all see Him some day, Wikkey, when--when--we
die. It will be beautiful to see the King, won't it?"

"Yes," said the child, dreamily. "I'd like to see Him. I know as I'm
going to die; but will it be soon? Oh, Lawrence! must it be directly?"
and as he clung convulsively to him, the young man felt the little heart
beating wildly.

"Wikkey--little lad--dear little lad--don't be frightened," he said,
stroking the boy's head; "don't be frightened;" but still the eyes
questioned him with agonized eagerness, and he knew he must answer, but
his voice was very husky, and he felt the task a hard one.

"I'll tell you, Wikkey. I think the King loves you so much that He wants
you to come to Him, and not to be ill any more, nor have any more bad
pain or coughing. That would be nice, wouldn't it?--never to feel ill
any more, and to see the King."

"Yes," Wikkey said, with a long sigh, "it would be ever so nice; but,
oh! I _don't_ want for to leave you, Lawrence--won't you come, too?"

"Some day, please God; but that must be as the King likes--perhaps He
will not want me to come yet. I must try to do anything He wants me to
do here first."

"Should you like to come now, Lawrence?"

The question was rather a relief, for a sense of being unreal had come
over Lawrence while he spoke, and he answered quickly--

"No, I had rather not go yet, Wikkey: but you see I am well and strong.
I think if I were ill like you I should like it; and you need not feel
frightened, for the King will not leave you. He will be taking care of
you all the time, and you will go to Him."

"Are you quite certain?"

No room for doubt here--and the answer came unhesitatingly--"Quite
certain, Wikkey."

"And you are _sure_ that you'll come too?"

"I wish I were half as certain," the young man thought, with a sigh,
then said aloud--"If I try to obey the King I hope I shall."

"But you will try--you will, Lawrence!" cried Wikkey, passionately.

Very quietly and low Lawrence answered--"By God's help--Yes!" and he
bent and kissed the child's forehead, as if to seal the vow.

Wikkey seemed satisfied, and in a few minutes was dozing again.
He slept for an hour after being put to bed, but then grew
restless, and the night passed wearily between intervals of heavy
oppression--half-unconscious wakefulness and rambling, incoherent
talk, sometimes of his street-life, of his broom, for which he felt
about with weak, aimless hands, of cold and hunger; and then he
would break out into murmuring complaints of Mrs. Skimmidge, when
forbidden words would slip out, and even then the child's look of
distress went to Lawrence's heart. But oftenest the wandering talk
was of the incidents of the last few weeks, and over and over came
the words--"See the King in his beauty."

In the morning Wikkey was quieter and perfectly sensible: but the
pinched look on his face, and the heavy labored breathing, told plainly
that he was sinking.

Hard as it had been for Lawrence to leave his "little lad," up to this
time he had been scrupulous in never allowing Wikkey to interfere with
his office duties; but now it seemed impossible to leave the child, who
clung feebly to him with a frightened whisper--

"Oh, don't go, Lawrence! p'raps the King will want me, and maybe I
shouldn't be so frightened if I kept looking at you."

No, he could not go; so writing a hurried line--"Cannot come to-day--the
boy I told you of is dying--the work shall be ready in time," he
dispatched it to the head clerk of his department. "Granby's Craze" had
at first excited a good deal of astonishment when it became known at the
office; but Lawrence had quietly discouraged any attempts at "chaff" on
the subject, and as time went on he used to be greeted by really warm
inquiries after "the little chap."

The hours passed slowly by. Reginald came and went as he could spare
time; sometimes he prayed in such short and simple language as Wikkey
could join in--and the expression of his face showed that he did
so--sometimes he knelt in silence, praying earnestly for the departing
soul, and for Lawrence in his mournful watch. As the day began to wane,
Reginald entering, saw that the end was near, and knelt to say the last
prayers; as he finished the pale March sun, struggling through the
clouds, sent a shaft of soft light into the room and touched Wikkey's
closed eyes. They opened with a smile, and raising himself in Lawrence's
arms, he leant forward with a look so eager and expectant, that with a
thrill of awe, almost amounting to terror, the young man whispered--

"What is it, Wikkey? Do you see anything?"

"Not yet--soon--it's coming," the boy murmured, without altering his
fixed gaze; and then for an instant a wondrous light seemed to break
over the wan face--only for an instant--for suddenly as it had dawned,
it faded out, and with it fled the little spirit, leaving only the frail
worn-out form to fall back gently on Lawrence's breast.

Was he gone? Almost incredulously Lawrence looked down, and then, with
pale, set features, he rose, and laying Wikkey on the bed, sank on his
knees beside it, and buried his face in the pillow, with the sound of a
great sob. Reginald approached the bed, and laying his hand for a moment
on the bowed head, spoke low and solemnly--

"The blessing of a soul that was ready to perish come upon you,
Lawrence."

Then he quitted the room, and closing the door softly, left Lawrence
alone with his "little lad."

       *       *       *       *       *

So Wikkey passed away, and Lawrence went back to his work, ever
retaining deep down in his heart the memory of the child whose life had
become so strangely interwoven with his own, and more precious still,
the lesson bequeathed to him by his "little lad," of how a soul that
looks persistently upwards finds its full satisfaction at last in the
Vision of "The King in His Beauty."

