"Their discoveries show that the atmospheric etheric envelope of
each etheric atom is made up of etheric atoms of different
vibratory powers.  As the atmosphere of the earth is made up of
atoms of oxygen and nitrogen and argon, so that of an atom is
made up of three kinds of ethers, corresponding to three of our
senses.  That it consists of five ethers, corresponding to our
five senses, as the ancient Hindus assert--who can say?

"I mention this subject of the differentiation of the ether
merely that you may not suppose that the ether is a simple
substance.  For the present we will treat it as a simple
substance, but next year we will take it up as a compound one.

"This steel bar before you is not one bar, but two bars.  There
is a visible bar and an invisible bar, the visible bar being made
of physical atoms, and the invisible bar of etheric atoms.  The
etheric bar is invisible, but it is made of matter, the same as
the visible bar, and it is just as real, just as truly a bar as
the one we see.

"More than this.  The etheric, invisible bar is the source and
cause of all phenomena connected with the bar.  It is the real
bar, and the one we see is merely the shadow in physical matter
of a real bar.  In shape, strength, color, in short, in
everything, it depends on the invisible one.  The invisible
dominates, governs, disposes.  The visible is merely its
attendant shadow, changing as the invisible, etheric bar changes,
and recording for our senses these invisible changes.

"The invisible change always comes first;  the invisible
phenomena invariably precede the visible.

"In all this physical world--in all this universe--there is
nothing, not even a grain of sand or an atom of hydrogen, that is
not as this bar of iron is--the shadow cast on a visible world
by the unknown and mysterious work of an invisible world.

"Land or water, mountain or lake, man or beast, bird or reptile,
cold or heat, light or darkness, all are the reflection in
physical matter of the true and real thing in the invisible and
intangible world about us.  "If we have a visible body we have an
invisible one also," said Saint Paul.  Modern science has proven
he was right, and that it is the invisible body which is the real
body.

"If this earth and all that it is composed of--land or ocean or
air;  man or beast;  pyramid or pavement--could be resolved into
the physical atoms composing everything in it or on it created by
God or man, each atom of this dust would be identical physically.
There would not be one kind of atom for iron and another for
oxygen.

"The differentiation between what are called elementary
substances is first made apparent in the molecule or first
combination of the atoms.  It is not in the atom itself, unless
it be in the size, as may not be improbable.  The atoms combine
in different numbers to make differently shaped molecules, and it
is from this difference in the shape of the molecule that we get
the difference between gold and silver, copper and tin, or oxygen
and hydrogen.

"In all chemical compounds, such as water and alcohol, the
molecules at the base of the two or more substances break up into
their original atoms and form a new molecule composed of all the
atoms in the two or more things combined.  To make this chemical
combination we must change the rate of vibration of one or the
other or both until they strike a common chord.  As we saw last
term, oxygen and hydrogen have different specific heats, and no
two other elements have the same specific heat, while heat raises
the rate of vibration.  Any given amount of heat raises the
vibration of one more than another.  Apply heat, and the rate of
one will rise faster than that of the other until they reach a
common chord.  Then they fall apart and recombine.

"If we pass a current of electricity through this sealed jar
containing oxygen and hydrogen in mechanical union, the spark
that leaps across the points furnishes the heat, and a drop of
water appears and falls to the bottom.  A large portion of the
gases has disappeared.  It has been converted into water.  What
is left of the gases will expand and fill the bottle.

"The drop of water but for local causes, but for a certain
attraction of the earth, would float in the centre of the jar at
the centre of gravity, as the earth does in space.  But the
centre of gravity of the two bodies is far within the earth, and
the drop gets as close to it as it can.  The earth's 'pull' takes
it to the bottom.  If the jar were far enough away in space the
drop would float, as the earth floats, at a point where all pulls
balance, and the drop of water would have enough pull of its own,
enough gravity within itself to hold all the gas left in the jar
to itself as an atmosphere.  It would be a centre of energy, a
minature world.

"The drop of water is not a homogenous mass.  About one third of
the bulk of the drop of water is made up of independent oxygen
and hydrogen atoms interspersed through it, as any liquid is
through this piece of blotting paper.  And it has, and keeps, by
its own attraction, an atmosphere of the gas.  Each molecule of
water has a thin layer, or skin, of the gas;  even as it comes
from this faucet.

"Let us return again to the physical dust, the atom.  Why should
it form by fives for iron, by nines for hydrogen?  Where did the
atom come from?  What is it?  We know that like the drop of
water, it is a miniature world with an atmosphere of ether;  and
the natural inference is that it is made from ether as the drop
of water was made from gas.  Many things confirm this inference,
and it may be accepted as 'a working hypothesis' that it is made
from ether as the drop of water is made from gas, by the chemical
union of a large amount of ether of different kinds, the etheric
molecules of which consist of 2 and 3 or 5 and 4 etheric atoms,
and that the tendency to combine in this or that number in
physical matter is an inherited tendency brought with it from the
etheric world of matter on which, or in which, each element of
this world is two or more.  There is no kind of matter in this
physical world, that has not its prototype in the etheric, and
the laws of its action and reaction here are laws which it
inherits and brings with it.  They are not laws made here.  They
are laws of the other world--even as the matter itself is matter
of the other world.

"In 1882, Professor Lodge, in a lecture before the Royal
Institution on 'The Luminiferous Ether' defined it as:

"'One continuous substance, filling all space, which can vibrate
as light, which can be sheared into positive and negative
electricity, which in whirls constitutes matter, and which
transmits by continuity and not impact every action and reaction
of which matter is capable.'

"This reads today like baby-talk but at that time (eighteen years
ago), it was considered by many timid conservative scientists as
'a daring movement.'  It is noteworthy in that it was the first
public scientific announcement that the physical matter is a
manifestation or form of the ether.  And it was made before
general acceptance of the division of the ether into soniferous,
luminiferous and tangiferous.

"'Which in whirls constitutes matter.'  Professor Lodge believed
that 'some etheric molecules revolved so rapidly on their axis
that they could not be penetrated.'  Watch the soap-bubbles that
I am blowing.  Each and every one is revolving as the earth
revolves, from west to east.  What I wish to call your attention
to is the fact that can be proven, both mathematically and
theoretically, that at a certain rate of speed in the revolution
they could not be penetrated by any rifle-ball.  At a higher rate
of speed they would be harder than globes of solid chilled steel,
harder even than carbon.  Professor Lodge believed that the
etheric molecule revolved so rapidly that, thin as it was in its
shell, it gave us the dust out of which worlds were made.  There
is one fatal error in this idea, although it is held even now by
many.  It is based entirely on gravity, and gravity is alone
considered in its problems.  There are two great forces in the
universe, not one, as many scientific people fail to remember
--Gravity and Apergy, or the centrifugal and centripetal forces.
The pull in is and must be always balanced by the pull out.
There is in the universe as much repulsion as attraction, and the
former is a force quite as important as the latter.  The bubble's
speed kept increasing until apergy, the tendency to fly off,
overcame gravity, and it ruptured.

"Professor Lodge failed to take into account this apergic force,
this tendency to fly off, when he gave such high revolutionary
speed to the etheric molecules, a speed in which apergy would
necessarily exceed gravity.  The failure to take apergy into
consideration has been the undoing of many physicists.

"Today we know that the ether is matter, the same as our own,
only finer and rarer and in much more rapid vibration.  We know
that this ether has its solids, liquids and gases formed from
molecules of its atoms, even as our own are formed.  We know that
its atoms combine as ours do, and while we have but eighty
elementary combinations, it must have more than double the
number.  We know that every form and shape and combination of
these elements from this plane flows from inherited tendencies
having their root in the etheric world.

"The two worlds are one world--as much at one with ours as the
world of gas about us is at one with our liquids and solids.  It
is 'continuity, not impact.'  They not only touch everywhere and
in everything, but they are one and the same in action and
reaction."

Thus spake a certain wise teacher of physics.  To his wise
utterances, we can only add that such as we are today "we see
through a glass, darkly."  Yet there will come a day when the
physical bandages will be removed from our eyes, and we shall see
face to face the beauty and grandeur and glory of this invisible
world, and that in truth it 'transmits by continuity and not
impact every action and reaction of which matter is capable,'
forming one continuous chain of cause and effect, without a link
missing.  There are no gulfs to cross;  no bridges to be made.
It is here;  not there.  It is at one with us.  And we are at one
with it.  One and the same law controls and guides the etheric
atom and the physical atom made from its molecules, whether the
latter are made in "whirls," as at first supposed, or by orderly
combination as now believed.

In fact, this visible world of ours is the perfect product of the
other invisible one, having in it its root and foundation, the
very sap of its life.


Chapter Five

The Four Manifested Planes

The oriental idea of the universe does not differ fundamentally
in its general conception, from that of modern science, but it
goes farther and explains more.  The physics of the secret
doctrine are based upon a material universe of four planes of
vibration and a spiritual universe of three planes of vibration
beyond matter.  This Something in vibration may be given the
English name, Consciousness--without entering upon its nature.

Spirit is consciousness in vibration and undifferentiated.

Matter is consciousness in vibration and differentiated.

As we divide the seven octaves of a piano into Treble and Bass
for clearness of thought and writing, so the Hidden Knowledge
divides the seven octaves of vibration, or planes, into Spirit
and Matter.  In their ultimate analysis they are one and the same
thing, as ice and water are the same thing;  but for study they
must be differentiated.

The material and physical universe consists of four planes of
matter, or four great octaves of vibration, each differentiated
from the other as in our physics prakriti is differentiated from
ether.  The material universe, the ancient physics teach, was
originally pure thought, Manasa, the product of the spiritual
planes above.  This manasic world was differentiated, a real
world.  That is to say it was given elementary substances by the
union of its atoms in different sized molecules.  Some of its
elements combined and formed Prana.  The prana gathered and
formed other worlds, pranic worlds.  Then in the pranic world
etheric worlds were formed;  and finally in the etheric worlds,
prakritic globes like the earth were formed.  The earth is the
centre of a prakritic globe, revolving in ether around the sun.
The sun is the centre of a solar globe of ether, revolving in
prana around Alcyone.  Alcyone is the centre of a stellar globe
of prana revolving in manasa around the central and hidden sun of
the great manasic globe.  These four conditions of matter
prakriti, ether, prana, and manasa are the earth, water, fire,
air of the Ancient Metaphysics, the four elements of matter, and
are present in every atom of prakriti.  When the atom of prana
was formed, it had an envelope of manasa.  When the atom of ether
was formed it had an envelope of pranic-manasic atoms.  When the
prakritic atom was formed it had an envelope of etheric-pranic-
manasic atoms, each of its encircling etheric atoms being the
centre of a pranic molecule, and each pranic atom of that
molecule being the centre of a manasic molecule.

Each atom of prakriti was the material universe in miniature.  It
held the potentialities of mind, life, and phenomena.  In every
aggregation of atoms, there were the four planes, each in touch
through the Cosmic Mind, its manasa, with other atoms in the
universe, with every other globe of whatever kind.  "As above, so
below," was the secret Key-word.  The unity of all the material
universe in its prakriti, ether, prana and manasa, was the corner
stone of this knowledge.  The three planes above prakriti were
called Astral, and in common speech there was the ordinary
division into two planes, visible and invisible, or "Spirit," as
the invisible was called, and "Matter," as the visible was
called.  Only in the hidden secret doctrine of physics, and in
the open metaphysics which were a "stumbling block" and
"foolishness" to those who had not the "inner light" of the
physics, were the three divisions of the "astral" made known, and
the true distinction between the spirit of the three higher
planes and the matter of the four lower was kept out of the
metaphysics, or only vaguely alluded to.

There is no "oriental science" because the oriental does not
attach the same value to merely physical knowledge that we do.
But that must not be understood to imply that there is no
oriental physics.  In all the matters that interest us now, as
far as principles are concerned, the oriental knew all that we
know.  He knew it thousands of years ago, when our ancestors were
sleeping with the cave bears.

"That is all the good it did him," the scientist says.  No.  That
is not true.  It is perfectly true that the oriental, the
Babylonian who carved on the Black Stone now in the British
Museum the five moons of Jupiter, exposing himself to the
derision of our astronomers prior to their own discovery of the
fifth moon in 1898, did not care particularly whether there were
four moons or five, and had no sale for any telescopes he might
make, for no one else cared particularly.  But it was not true
that he did not care for any and all knowledge that would improve
his spiritual condition by giving him correct ideas of the
universe and of his own part in it.  To him life was more than
meat and the body more than raiment.  He was more afraid of sin
than of ignorance.  We are more afraid of ignorance than of sin.
He preferred to better men's moral condition;  we prefer to
better their physical condition.

If one of the Sages of the East could be called up and put on the
stand to be questioned, he would say, substantially:

"You are right in regard to your ether, and to prakriti being
ether that has been dropped a great octave in vibration.  Your
physical atom is surrounded by a molecule of ether, this molecule
containing many atoms of ether.  The chording vibration does
produce all physical phenomena.

"But where did the ether atom come from?  How can you explain how
and whence life comes, or what it is?  This explains physical,
but how do you explain vital phenomena?

"You are wrong in assuming that all the matter of the universe
apart from the earth or planets is ether and only ether.  The
etheric world in which you are interested ends with your solar
system.  It ends with each solar system, to the people of that
system.  Between each solar system and another there is another
form of matter that is not ether.

"This etheric solar world of ours is very large, many billions of
miles in diameter;  but it is not the whole universe.  You know
that the sun and all its planets are revolving around the star
Alcyone.  Your astronomers told you that years ago, and they have
recently given you the rate of speed as 4,838 miles per hour.

"Did you not see and know that if they had this revolution around
a central sun it must be within a solar globe?

"Did you think that the sun and its planets, and other suns and
their planets, were tearing their way through the ether like so
many fish on a dipsy-hook from a Marblehead fishing smack running
before the wind?

"Did it never occur to you that the ether of this solar system
must be revolving around this central sun?  The whole solar
system, ether and planets, are revolving around Alcyone, and the
reason why their minor revolution around the sun is not affected
by it is because the solar system is a vast globe of ether,
having a thinner and rarer medium to revolve in, the same as our
earth has.  It is the motion of a fly in a moving car.

"Now fix your attention on this globe of ether, this solar globe.
You must do it to get the concept before you.  You have known of
it all your life without once really apprehending it, for you
have never learned to think, or to utilize the knowledge that was
given you.  The idea is as new and as strange as if you had never
known it.

"What lies beyond the surface of the solar globe?  Something
must;  something as much rarer and thinner than the ether as the
ether is rarer and thinner than prakriti.  Can you not guess?

"It is Prana, the life force of the universe.  As prakriti is
made from ether, so ether is made from prana.  It is made in the
same way.  Each atom of the ether is the centre of a molecule of
prana, surrounded by an atmosphere of pranic atoms, exactly as
your prakritic atom is surrounded by an atmosphere of etheric
atoms.  You say that each atom of prakriti is the centre of a
molecule of ether.  So it is.  But each atom of that etheric
molecule is the centre of a pranic molecule.  Each atom of your
physical matter is triple, not double.

"You say that all physical phenomena come from the chording
vibration of the etheric and prakritic atoms of the two planes of
matter.  Yes.  But do you not see that all vital phenomena come
from the chording vibration of the pranic, etheric, and prakritic
atom of the three planes of matter which are in each atom?

"In the living leaf the three planes are sounding in chord in each
atom of it.  In the dead leaf, drying up and falling to pieces,
only the lower two are sounding in chord.  The silver chord has
been broken.

