'It is very impressive,' said John.

'I suppose you have seen a great many cathedrals?'

'Yes, many foreign ones, and a few English.'

'I wonder whether seeing many makes one feel the same as seeing one.'

'How do you mean?'

'I do not think I could ever care for another like this one.'

'As your first?'

'Yes; it has made me understand better what books say about churches,
and their being like--'

'Like?'

She changed her sentence. 'It makes one think, and want to be good.'

'It is what all truly beautiful things should do' said John.

'Oh! I am glad you say so,' exclaimed Violet. 'It is like what Annette
and I have wondered about--I mean why fine statues or pictures, or
anything of that kind, should make one feel half sad and half thoughtful
when one looks at them long.'

'Perhaps because it is a straining after the only true beauty.'

'I must tell Annette that. It was she that said it was so,' said Violet;
'and we wondered Greek statues gave one that feeling, but I see it must
be the reason.'

'What statues have you seen?'

'Those at Wrangerton House. Lord St. Erme is always sending cases
home, and it is such a festival day to go up and see them unpacked, and
Caroline and Annette go and take drawings, and I like to wander about
the rooms, and look at everything,' said Violet, growing talkative on
the theme of home. 'There is one picture I like above all, but that is a
sacred subject, so no wonder it should have that feeling in it.'

'What is it?'

'It is a Madonna,' she said, lowering her voice. 'A stiff old-fashioned
one, in beautiful, bright, clear colouring. The Child is reaching out to
embrace a little cross, and his Mother holds him towards it with such a
sad but such a holy face, as if she foreboded all, and was ready to bear
it.'

'Ah! that Ghirlandajo?'

'That is the name!' cried Violet, enchanted. 'Have you seen it?'

'I saw Lord St. Erme buy it.'

'Do you know Lord St. Erme?' said Violet, rather awe-struck.

'I used to meet him in Italy.'

'We wish so much that he would come home. We do so want to see a poet.'

John smiled. 'Is he never at home?'

'O, no, he has never been at Wrangerton since his father died, twelve
years ago. He does not like the place, so he only comes to London when
he is in England, and papa goes up to meet him on business, but he is
too poetical to attend to it.'

'I should guess that.'

'I have done wrong, said Violet, checking herself; 'I should not have
said that. Mamma told us that we ought never to chatter about his
concerns. Will you, please, not remember that I said it?'

As far as the outer world is concerned, I certainly will not,' said John
kindly. 'You cannot too early learn discretion. So that picture is at
Wrangerton?'

'I am so glad you liked it.'

'I liked it well enough to wish for a few spare hundreds, but it seems
to have afforded no more pleasure to him than it has given to me. I am
glad it is gone where there is some one who can appreciate it.'

'Oh, said Violet,' Matilda knows all about the best pictures. We don't
appreciate, you know, we only like.'

'And your chief liking is for that one?'

'It is more than liking,' said Violet; 'I could call it loving. It is
almost the same to me as Helvellyn. Annette and I went to the house for
one look more my last evening at home. I must tell her that you have
seen it!' and the springing steps grew so rapid, that her companion had
to say, 'Don't let me detain you, I am obliged to go gently up-hill.'
She checked her steps, abashed, and presently, with a shy but very
pretty action, held out her arm, saying timidly, 'Would it help you to
lean on me? I ought not to have brought you this steep way. Matilda says
I skurry like a school-girl.'

He saw it would console her to let her think herself of service and
accepted of the slender prop for the few steps that remained. He
then went up-stairs to write letters, but finding no ink, came to the
drawing-room to ask her for some. She had only her own inkstand, which
was supplying her letter to Annette, and he sat down at the opposite
side of the table to share it. Her pen went much faster than his.
'Clifton Terrace, Winchester,' and 'My dear father--I came here
yesterday, and was most agreeably surprised,' was all that he had
indited, when he paused to weigh what was his real view of the merits of
the case, and ponder whether his present feeling was sober judgment, or
the novelty of the bewitching prettiness of this innocent and gracious
creature. There he rested, musing, while from her pen flowed a
description of her walk and of Mr. Martindale's brother. 'If they are
all like him, I shall be perfectly happy,' she wrote. 'I never saw
any one so kind and considerate, and so gentle; only now and then he
frightens me, with his politeness, or perhaps polish is the right word,
it makes me feel myself rude and uncourteous and awkward. You said
nothing gave you so much the notion of high-breeding as Mr. Martindale's
ease, especially when he pretended to be rough and talk slang, it was
like playing at it. Now, his brother has the same, without the funny
roughness, but the greatest gentleness, and a good deal of quiet
sadness. I suppose it is from his health, though he is much better now:
he still coughs, and he moves slowly and leans languidly, as if he was
not strong. He is not so tall as his brother, and much slighter in make,
and fairer complexioned, with gray eyes and brown hair, and he looks
sallow and worn and thin, with such white long hands.'

Here raising her eyes to verify her description, she encountered those
of its subject, evidently taking a survey of her for the same purpose.
He smiled, and she was thereby encouraged to break into a laugh, so
girlish and light-hearted, so unconscious how much depended on his
report, that he could not but feel compassionate.

Alarmed at the graver look, she crimsoned, exclaiming, 'O! I beg your
pardon! It was very rude.'

'No, no,' said John; it was absurd!' and vexed at having checked her
gladsomeness, he added, 'It is I rather who should ask your pardon, for
looks that will not make a cheerful figure in your description.'

'Oh, no,' cried Violet; 'mamma told me never to say anything against any
of Mr. Martindale's relations. What have I said?'--as he could not help
laughing--'Something I could not have meant.'

'Don't distress yourself, pray,' said John, not at all in a bantering
tone. 'I know what you meant; and it was very wise advice, such as you
will be very glad to have followed.'

With a renewed blush, an ingenuous look, and a hesitating effort, she
said, 'INDEED, I have been telling them how very kind you are. Mamma
will be so pleased to hear it.'

'She must have been very sorry to part with you,' said he, looking at
the fair girl sent so early into the world.

'Oh, yes!' and the tears started to the black eyelashes, though a
smile came at the same time; 'she said I should be such a giddy young
housekeeper, and she would have liked a little more notice.'

'It was not very long?' said John, anxious to lead her to give him
information; and she was too young and happy not to be confidential,
though she looked down and glowed as she answered, 'Six weeks.'

'And you met at the ball!'

'Yes, it was very curious;' and with deepening blushes she went on, the
smile of happiness on her lips, and her eyes cast down. 'Annette was to
go for the first time, and she would not go without me. Mamma did not
like it, for I was not sixteen then; but Uncle Christopher came, and
said I should, because I was his pet. But I can never think it was such
a short time; it seems a whole age ago.'

'It must,' said John, with a look of interest that made her continue.

'It was very odd how it all happened. Annette and I had no one to dance
with, and were wondering who those two gentlemen were. Captain Fitzhugh
was dancing with Miss Evelyn, and he--Mr. Martindale--was leaning
against the wall, looking on.'

'I know exactly--with his arms crossed so--'

'Yes, just so,' said Violet, smiling; 'and presently Grace Bennet came
and told Matilda who they were; and while I was listening, oh, I was so
surprised, for there was Albert, my brother, making me look round. Mr.
Martindale had asked to be introduced to us, and he asked me to dance.
I don't believe I answered right, for I thought he meant Matilda. 'But,'
said she, breaking off, 'how I am chattering and hindering you!' and she
coloured and looked down.

'Not at all,' said John; 'there is nothing I wish more to hear, or that
concerns me more nearly. Anything you like to tell.'

'I am afraid it is silly,' half-whispered Violet to herself; but the
recollection was too pleasant not to be easily drawn out; and at her age
the transition is short from shyness to confidence.

'Not at all silly,' said John. 'You know I must wish to hear how I
gained a sister.'

Then, as the strangeness of imagining that this grave, high-bred, more
than thirty-years-old gentleman, could possibly call her by such a
name, set her smiling and blushing in confusion, he wiled on her
communications by saying, 'Well, that evening you danced with Arthur.'

'Three times. It was a wonderful evening. Annette and I said, when we
went to bed, we had seen enough to think of for weeks. We did not know
how much more was going to happen.'

'No, I suppose not.'

'I thought much of it when he bowed to me. I little fancied--but there
was another odd coincidence--wasn't it? In general I never go into the
drawing-room to company, because there are three older; but the day they
came to speak to papa about the fishing, mamma and all the elder ones
were out of the way, except Matilda. I was doing my Roman history
with her, when papa came in and said, we must both come into the
drawing-room.'

'You saw more of him from that time?'

'O yes; he dined with us. It was the first time I ever dined with a
party, and he talked so much to me, that Albert began to laugh at me;
but Albert always laughs. I did not care till--till--that day when he
walked with us in the park, coming home from fishing.'

Her voice died away, and her face burnt as she looked down; but a few
words of interest led her on.

'When I told mamma, she said most likely he thought me a little girl who
didn't signify; but I did not think he could, for I am the tallest of
them all, and every one says I look as if I was seventeen, at least. And
then she told me grand gentlemen and officers didn't care what nonsense
they talked. You know she didn't know him so well then,' said Violet,
looking up pleadingly.

'She was very prudent.'

'She could not know he did not deserve it,' said the young bride, ready
to resent it for her husband, since his brother did not, then again
excusing her mother. 'It was all her care for me, dear mamma! She told
me not to think about it; but I could not help it! Indeed I could not!'

'No, indeed,' and painful recollections of his own pressed on him, but
he could not help being glad this tender young heart was not left to
pine under disappointment. 'How long ago was this?'

'That was six weeks ago--a month before our wedding-day,' said she,
blushingly. 'I did wish it could have been longer. I wanted to learn,
how to keep house, and I never could, for he was always coming to take
me to walk in the park. And it all happened so fast, I had no time to
understand it, nor to talk to mamma and Matilda. And then mamma cried so
much! I don't feel to understand it now, but soon perhaps I shall have
more quiet time. I should like to have waited till Lord Martindale came
home, but they said that could not be, because his leave of absence
would be over. I did wish very much though that Miss Martindale could
have left her aunt to come to our wedding.'

John found reply so difficult, that he was glad to be interrupted by
Arthur's return. He soon after set out to call upon Captain Fitzhugh,
who had been at Wrangerton with Arthur.

From him more of the circumstances were gathered. Mr. Moss was the
person universally given up to reprobation. 'A thorough schemer,' said
the Irish captain. As to the Miss Mosses, they were lady-like girls,
most of them pretty, and everywhere well spoken of. In fact, John
suspected he had had a little flirtation on his own account with some of
them, though he took credit to himself for having warned his friend to
be careful. He ended with a warm-hearted speech, by no means displeasing
to John, hoping he would make the best of it with Lord Martindale, for
after all, she was as pretty a creature as could be seen, one that any
man might be proud of for a daughter-in-law; and to his mind it was
better than leaving the poor girl to break her heart after him when it
had gone so far.

Arthur himself was in a more rational mood that evening. He had at first
tried to hide his embarrassment by bravado; but he now changed his
tone, and as soon as Violet had left the dining-room, began by an abrupt
inquiry, 'What would you have me do?'

'Why don't you write to my father!'

Arthur writhed. 'I suppose it must come to that,' he said; 'but tell me
first the state of things.'

'You could not expect that there would not be a good deal of
indignation.'

'Ay, ay! How did you get the news? Did Theodora tell you?'

'No; there was a letter from Colonel Harrington; and at home they knew
the circumstances pretty correctly through a cousin of Wingfield's, who
has a curacy in that neighbourhood.'

'Oh! that was the way Theodora came by the news. I wish he had let alone
telling her,--I could have managed her alone;--but there! it was not in
human nature not to tell such a story, and it did not much matter how it
was done. Well, and my aunt is furious, I suppose, but I'll take care of
her and of my lady. I only want to know how my father takes it.'

'He cannot endure the notion of a family feud; but the first step must
come from you.'

'Very well:--and so you came to set it going. It is very good-natured of
you, John. I depended on you or Theodora for helping me through, but I
did not think you would have come in this way. I am glad you have, for
now you have seen her you can't say a word against it.'

'Against her, certainly not. I have made acquaintance with her this
morning, and--and there is everything to interest one in her:' and then,
as Arthur looked delighted, and was ready to break into a rhapsody--'Her
simplicity especially. When you write you had better mention her entire
ignorance of the want of sanction. I cannot think how she was kept in
such unconsciousness.'

'She knows nothing of people's ways,' said Arthur. 'She knew you were
all abroad, and her own family told her it was all right. Her father is
a bit of a tyrant, and stopped the mother's mouth, I fancy, if she had
any doubts. As to herself, it was much too pretty to see her so happy,
to let her set up her little scruples. She did just as she was told,
like a good child.'

'O Arthur! you have undertaken a great responsibility!' exclaimed John.

But Arthur, without seeming to heed, continued, 'So you see she is quite
clear; but I'll write, and you shall see if it is not enough to satisfy
my father, before he sets us going respectably.'

'I can't answer for anything of that sort.'

'Something he must do,' said Arthur, 'for my allowance is not enough
to keep a cat; and as to the ninth part of old Moss's pickings and
stealings, if I meant to dirty my fingers with it, it won't be to be
come by till he is disposed of, and that won't be these thirty years.'

'Then, he let you marry without settling anything on her!'

'He was glad to have her off his hands on any terms. Besides, to tell
you the truth, John, I am convinced he had no notion you would ever come
home again. He knew I saw his game, and dreaded I should be off; so he
and I were both of one mind, to have it over as soon as possible.'

'I only hope you will make her happy!' said John, earnestly.

'Happy!' exclaimed Arthur, surprised, 'small doubt of that! What should
prevent me?'

'I think you will find you must make some sacrifices.'

'It all depends on my father,' said Arthur, a little crossly, and taking
his writing-case from another table.

He was so well pleased with his performance that, as soon as he was
alone with Violet, he began, 'There, I've done it! John said it could
not be better, and after the impression you have made, no fear but he
will pacify the great folks.'

She was perplexed. 'Who?' said she; 'not Lord and Lady Martindale? Oh!
surely I have not done anything to displease them.'

'You must have been ingenious if you had.'

'Pray, do tell me! Why are they to be pacified? What is the matter? Do
they think they shan't like me? Ought I to do anything?'

'My little bird, don't twitter so fast. You have asked a dozen questions
in a breath.'

'I wish you would tell me what it means,' said Violet, imploringly.

'Well, I suppose you must know sooner or later. It only means that they
are taken by surprise.'

Violet gazed at him in perplexity, then, with a dawning perception, 'Oh!
surely you don't mean they did not approve of it.'

'Nobody asked them,' said Arthur, carelessly, then as she turned away,
covering her face with her hands, 'But it is nothing to take to heart
in that way. I am my own master, you know, you silly child, and you had
plenty of consent, and all that sort of thing, to satisfy you, so you
are quite out of the scrape.'

She scarcely seemed to hear.

'Come, come, Violet, this won't do,' he continued, putting his arm round
her, and turning her towards him, while he pulled down her hands. 'This
is pretty usage. You can't help it now if you would.'

'Oh! Mr. Martindale!'

'Ah! you don't know what I have saved you. I was not going to see all
that pink paint worn off those cheeks, nor your life and my own wasted
in waiting for them to bring their minds to it. I have seen enough of
that. Poor John there--'

'How?--what?' said Violet, with alarmed curiosity.

'She died,' said Arthur.

'How long ago? What was her name?'

'Helen Fotheringham. She was our old parson's daughter. They waited
eight years, and she died last summer. I see he wears his mourning
still.'

Violet looked aghast, and spoke low. 'How very sad! Helen! That was
the reason he looked up when he heard it was my name. Poor Mr. John
Martindale! I saw the crape on his hat. Was that what made him so ill?'

'It nearly killed him last year, but he never had lungs good for
anything. First, my aunt set my father against it, and when he gave in,
she had a crabbed decrepit old grandfather, and between them they were
the death of her, and almost of him. I never thought he would rally
again.'

'Only last year?' exclaimed Violet. 'O dear! and there have I been
telling him all about--about this spring. I would not have done it, if
I had known. I thought he looked melancholy sometimes. Oh! I wish I had
not.'

'You did, did you?' said Arthur, much amused. 'You chatterbox.'

'Oh! I am so sorry. I wish--'

'No, no, he only liked you the better for it. I assure you, Violet,
he almost said so. Then that was what made him lay such stress on your
being an innocent little victim.'

'Would you be so kind as to explain it to me?' said Violet, in such
serious distress that he answered with less trifling than usual, 'There
is nothing to tell. I knew how it would be if I asked leave, so I took
it. That's all.'

'And--and surely they didn't know this at home?'

'The less said about that the better, Violet,' said Arthur. 'You are all
right, you know, and in great favour with John. He can do anything with
my father, and I have written. We shall be at home before the end
of another month, and set going with a decent income in London. A
house--where shall it be? Let me see, he can't give me less than £1000 a
year, perhaps £1600. I vow I don't see why it should not be £2000. John
wants no more than he has got, and will never marry now, and there is
only Theodora. I was always my aunt's favourite, and if you mind what
you are about we shall have our share of the old sugar-planter's hoards,
better than the Barbuda property--all niggers and losses. I wash my
hands of it, though by rights it should come to the second son.'

Neither understanding nor heeding all this, Violet interrupted by
gasping out, 'Oh! I am so grieved.'

'Grieved!--say that again. Grieved to be Mrs. Arthur Martindale?'

'O no, no; but--'

'Grieved to have found such a fool as to risk everything, and run
counter to all his friends for the sake of that silly little ungrateful
face?'

She was coaxed out of vexation for the present; but she awoke the next
morning with a feeling of culpability and dread of all the Martindale
family.

John could not understand her altered manner and the timid bashfulness,
greater than even at their first meeting. In fact, the history of his
grief inspired her with a sort of reverential compassion for him,
and the perception of the terms on which she stood, made her laugh
of yesterday seem to her such unbecoming levity, that upon it she
concentrated all her vague feelings of contrition.

When he came as before, to borrow some ink, as she gave it to him her
hand shook, and her colour rose. After standing musing a little while,
she said, mournfully, 'I am very sorry!'

'What is the matter?' said he, kindly.

'I am so vexed at what I did yesterday!'

'What do you mean?'

'For laughing,' said she, in a tone of distress. 'Indeed, indeed, I did
not know,' and though she averted her face, he saw that the crimson
had spread to her neck. He did not at once reply, and she went on
incoherently. 'I did not know--I could not guess. Of course--I wondered
at it all. I knew I was not fit--but they never told me--O, I am so much
grieved.'

Most soothingly did John say, coming towards her, 'No, no, you need not
distress yourself. No one can blame you.'

'But Lord Martindale'--she murmured.

'He will look on you like a daughter. I know I may promise you that.
Yes, indeed, I have no doubt of it, my dear little sister,' he repeated,
as she looked earnestly at him. 'I have told him how entirely you
deserve his kindness and affection, and Arthur has written, such a
letter as will be sure to bring his forgiveness.'

'Ah!' said Violet, 'it is all for my sake. No wonder they should be
angry.'

'Don't fancy that any one is angry with you. We all know that you were
ignorant how matters stood.'

'But I should have done the same if I had known. I could not have helped
it,' said Violet.

'I know,' said John, 'no one could expect it of you. Arthur told me at
once that you were free from any shadow of blame, and no one thinks of
imputing any.'

'But are they very much displeased?' said poor Violet.

'Of course,' said John, after a little consideration, 'it was a shock
to hear of such an important step being taken without my father's
knowledge; but he is very anxious there should be no estrangement, and I
am sure he will behave as if things had gone on in the usual course. You
may have great confidence in his kindness, Violet.'

She was somewhat reassured, and presently went on--'I don't wonder they
are vexed. I know how much beneath him I am, but I could not help that.
Oh! I wish Matilda was here to tell me how to behave, that every one may
not be ashamed of me and angry with him.'

'Don't be frightened' said John, 'you have pleased two of the family
already; you know, and depend upon it, you will make them all like you
in time as much as I do.'

'If YOU can overlook that laugh!' said Violet.

'I could say I liked you the better for it,' said John, pleasantly;
'only I don't know whether it would be a safe precedent. It has made
us feel well acquainted, I hope. Don't make a stranger of me,' he
continued, 'don't forget that we are brother and sister.

'I'm sure,'--and she broke off, unable to express herself; then added,
'Lady Martindale! I was frightened before at the thought of her, but it
is much worse now.'

'You must not frighten yourself. You will find out how kind she is
when you come to know her, and soon get over your first strangeness and
shyness.'

'And there is your sister,' said Violet; 'Theodora--I do long to see
her. Is she most like you or your brother?'

'Remarkably like him. She always makes children very fond of her,' he
added, pausing to find something safe and yet encouraging; 'but I
don't know half as much of her as Arthur does. We have not been as much
together as I could wish.'

'I see now why she never wrote,' said Violet, with some shame, and yet
glad to have it accounted for. 'But she will be sure to help me, and
tell me how to behave. She will want them to be able to bear me for his
sake.'

Without much reply, he applied himself to his letter, feeling that he
could hardly give an impartial judgment. It had been a great effort to
come to visit the bridal pair, but he found himself rewarded in a way he
had not expected by the new pleasure given him by her engaging ways, her
freshness and artlessness rousing him from long-continued depression of
spirits.

After some pondering, she suddenly looked up, and exclaimed, 'Well, I'll
try!'

'Try what, Violet!'

'I'll try to do my very best!' said she, cheerfully, though the tears
still were in her eyes. 'I know I shall make mistakes, and I can never
be like a great lady; but I'll do the best I can, if they will only bear
with me, and not be angry with him.'

'I am sure you will do well, with such resolutions.'

'One thing I am glad of,' added she, 'that we came here just now. That
old cathedral! I did not think much before--it was all strange and new,
and I was too happy. But I shall never be so thoughtless now--or if I
am! O, I know,' she exclaimed, with renewed energy, 'I'll buy one of
those pretty white cups with views of the cathedral on them. Did you not
see them in the shop-window? That will put me in mind if I am going to
be careless of all my resolutions.'

'Resolutions so made are likely to be kept,' said John, and she
presently left the room, recollecting that her store of biscuits needed
replenishing before luncheon. She was putting on her bonnet to go to
order them, when a doubt seized her whether she was transgressing
the dignities of the Honourable Mrs. Martindale. Matilda had lectured
against vulgarity when Arthur had warned her against ultra-gentility,
and she wavered, till finding there was no one to send, her good sense
settled the question. She walked along, feeling the cares and troubles
of life arising on her, and thinking she should never again be gay and
thoughtless, when she suddenly heard her husband's voice--'Ha! whither
away so fast!' and he and Captain Fitzhugh overtook her.

'I was going into the town on an errand.'

'Just the moment I wanted you. There's a cricket match in the College
Meads. Come along.'

And with her arm in his, Violet's clouds vanished, and she had no
recollection of anxieties or vexations. The summer sky was overhead, the
river shone blue and bright, the meadows smiled in verdure, the whole
scene was full of animation, and the game, of which she knew nothing,
was made charming by Arthur's explanations. Nearly an hour had passed
before she bethought herself of suggesting it was almost time to go
home.

'Presently,' said Arthur, 'let us see this fellow out.'

Another ten minutes. 'Would you look at your watch please? There's your
brother waiting for his luncheon.'

'O, ay, 'tis nearly time,' and he was again absorbed. She thought he
would not be pleased if she went home alone, nor was she sure of the
way; so she waited in much annoyance, till at length he said, 'Now,
Violet,' and they walked briskly home, all that she had endured passing
entirely out of her mind.

She rejoiced to find Mr. Martindale unconscious that it was not far from
two o'clock. He said he had been glad of time to finish his letters,
and Arthur, as his eye fell on one of them, asked, 'What is Percy doing
now?'

'He has been in Anatolia, going over some of the places we saw together.
He has made some discoveries about the Crusades, and is thinking of
publishing some of his theories.'

'Did I not hear of his writing something before this?'

'Yes; he sent some curious histories of the eastern Jews to some
magazine. They are to be published separately, as they have been
very successful; but I am glad this book is to be what he calls
"self-contained." He is too good to be wasted upon periodicals.'

Violet, curious to know who was this literary correspondent, glanced
at the letter, and read the address, to 'Antony Percival Fotheringham,
Esquire, British Embassy, Constantinople.' She started to find it
was the surname of that lost betrothed of whom she thought with an
undefinable reverent pity.

All speculations were put to flight, however, by the entrance of the
luncheon tray, containing nothing but slices of cold mutton and bread
and butter. With a grievous look of dismay, and lamentable exclamation,
she began to pour out explanations and apologies, but the gentlemen
seemed too intent on conversing about Mr. Fotheringham either to hear
her or to perceive anything amiss.

She remembered black looks and sharp words at home; and feeling
dreadfully guilty at having failed immediately after her resolutions,
she retreated to her room, and there Arthur found her in positive
distress.

'Oh, I am so much concerned! It was so wrong to forget those biscuits.
Your brother ate nothing else yesterday at luncheon!'

'Is that all?' said Arthur, laughing; 'I thought something had happened
to you. Come, on with your bonnet. Fancy! John will actually walk with
us to St. Cross!'

'Let me first tell you how it happened. There are a couple of ducks--'

'Let them be. No housekeeping affairs for me. Whatever happens, keep
your own counsel. If they serve you up a barbecued puppy dog, keep a
cool countenance, and help the company round. No woman good for anything
mentions her bill of fare in civilized society. Mind that.'

Violet was left imagining her apologies a breach of good manners. What
must Mr. Martindale think of her? Silly, childish, indiscreet, giggling,
neglectful, underbred! How he must regret his brother's having such a
wife!

Yet his pleasant voice, and her husband's drawing her arm into his,
instantly dispelled all fear and regret, and her walk was delightful.

She was enchanted with St. Cross, delighted with the quadrangle of gray
buildings covered with creepers, the smooth turf and gay flowers;
in raptures at the black jacks, dole of bread and beer, and at the
silver-crossed brethren, and eager to extract all Mr. Martindale's
information on the architecture and history of the place, lingering over
it as long as her husband's patience would endure, and hardly able to
tear herself from the quiet glassy stream and green meadows.

'If Caroline were only here to sketch it!' she cried, 'there would be
nothing wanting but that that hill should be Helvellyn.'

'You should see the mountain convents in Albania,' said John; and she
was soon charmed with his account of his adventures there with Mr.
Fotheringham. She was beginning to look on him as a perfect mine of
information--one who had seen the whole world, and read everything.
All that was wanting, she said, was Matilda properly to enter into his
conversation.

Another day brought letters, inviting Arthur to bring home his bride for
a fortnight's visit, as soon as he could obtain leave of absence.


CHAPTER 3


     Who is the bride?  A simple village maid,
     Beauty and truth, a violet in the shade.
     She takes their forced welcome and their wiles
     For her own truth, and lifts her head and smiles.
     They shall not change that truth by any art,
     Oh! may her love change them before they part.
     She turns away, her eyes are dim with tears,
     Her mother's blessing lingers in her ears,
     'Bless thee, my child,' the music is unheard,
     Her heart grows strong on that remembered word.

     FREDERICK TENNYSON


'Here we are!' said Arthur Martindale. 'Here's the lodge.' Then looking
in his wife's face, 'Why! you are as white as a sheet. Come! don't be a
silly child. They won't bite.'

'I am glad I have seen Mr. John Martindale,' sighed she.

'Don't call him so here. Ah! I meant to tell you you must not "Mr.
Martindale" me here. John is Mr. Martindale.'

'And what am I to call you?'

'By my name, of course.'

'Arthur! Oh! I don't know how.'

'You will soon. And if you can help shrinking when my aunt kisses you,
it will be better for us. Ha! there is Theodora.'

'O, where?'

'Gone! Fled in by the lower door. I wish I could have caught her.'

Violet held her breath. The grand parterre, laid out in regularly-shaped
borders, each containing a mass of one kind of flower, flaming
elscholchias, dazzling verbenas, azure nemophilas, or sober heliotrope,
the broad walks, the great pile of building, the innumerable windows,
the long ascent of stone steps, their balustrade guarded by sculptured
sphinxes, the lofty entrance, and the tall powdered footmen, gave her
the sense of entering a palace. She trembled, and clung to Arthur's arm
as they came into a great hall, where a vista of marble pillars, orange
trees, and statues, opened before her; but comfort came in the cordial
brotherly greeting with which John here met them.

'She is frightened out of her senses,' said Arthur.

John's reply was an encouraging squeeze of the hand, which he retained,
leading her, still leaning on her husband's arm, into a room, where an
elderly gentleman was advancing; both her hands were placed within his
by her supporters on either side, and he kissed her, gravely saying,
'Welcome, my dear.' He then presented her to a formal embrace from a
tall lady; and Arthur saying, 'Well, Theodora! here, Violet,' again took
her hand, and put it into another, whose soft clasp was not ready, nor
was the kiss hearty.

Presently Violet, a little reassured by Lord Martindale's gentle tones,
ventured on a survey. She was on the same sofa with Lady Martindale; but
infinitely remote she felt from that form like an eastern queen,
richly dressed, and with dark majestic beauty, whose dignity was rather
increased than impaired by her fifty years. She spoke softly to the shy
stranger, but with a condescending tone, that marked the width of the
gulf, and Violet's eyes, in the timid hope of sympathy, turned towards
the sister.

But, though the figure was younger, and the dress plainer, something
seemed to make her still more unapproachable. There was less beauty,
less gentleness, and the expression of her countenance had something
fixed and stern. Now and then there was a sort of agitation of the
muscles of the face, and her eyes were riveted on Arthur, excepting that
if he looked towards her, she instantly looked out of the window. She
neither spoke nor moved: Violet thought that she had not given her a
single glance, but she was mistaken, Theodora was observing, and forming
a judgment.

This wife, for whose sake Arthur had perilled so much, and inflicted
such acute pain on her, what were her merits? A complexion of lilies
and roses, a head like a steel engraving in an annual, a face expressing
nothing but childish bashfulness, a manner ladylike but constrained, and
a dress of studied simplicity worse than finery.

Lady Martindale spoke of dressing, and conducted her meek shy visitor
up a grand staircase, along a broad gallery, into a large bed-room, into
which the western sun beamed with a dazzling flood of light.

The first use Violet made of her solitude was to look round in amaze at
the size and luxury of her room, wondering if she should ever feel at
home where looking-glasses haunted her with her own insignificance. She
fled from them, to try to cool her cheeks at the open window, and gaze
at the pleasure-ground, which reminded her of prints of Versailles,
by the sparkling fountain rising high in fantastic jets from its stone
basin, in the midst of an expanse of level turf, bordered by terraces
and stone steps, adorned with tall vases of flowers. On the balustrade
stood a peacock, bending his blue neck, and drooping his gorgeous train,
as if he was 'monarch of all he surveyed.'

Poor Violet felt as if no one but peacocks had a right here; and when
she remembered that less than twelve weeks ago the summit of her wishes
had been to go to the Wrangerton ball, it seemed to be a dream, and she
shut her eyes, almost expecting to open them on Annette's face, and the
little attic at home. But then, some one else must have been the fabric
of a vision! She made haste to unclose them, and her heart bounded at
thinking that he was born to all this! She started with joy as his step
approached, and he entered the room.

'Let us look at you,' he said. 'Have you your colour? Ay, plenty of it.
Are you getting tamer, you startled thing?'

'I hope I have not been doing wrong. Lady Martindale asked me to have
some tea. I never heard of such a thing before dinner, but I thought
afterwards it might have been wrong to refuse. Was it!'

He laughed. 'Theodora despises nothing so much as women who drink tea in
the middle of the day.'

'I am so afraid of doing what is unladylike. Your mother offered me
a maid, but I only thought of not giving trouble, and she seemed so
shocked at my undoing my own trunk.'

'No, no,' said he, much diverted; 'she never thinks people can help
themselves. She was brought up to be worshipped. Those are her West
Indian ways. But don't you get gentility notions; Theodora will never
stand them, and will respect you for being independent. However, don't
make too little of yourself, or be shy of making the lady's maids wait
on you. There are enough of them--my mother has two, and Theodora a
French one to her own share.

'I should not like any one to do my hair, if that is not wrong.'

'None of them all have the knack with it you have, and it is lucky, for
they cost as much as a hunter.'

'Indeed, I will try to be no expense.'

'I say, what do you wear this evening?'

'Would my white muslin be fit?'

'Ay, and the pink ribbons in your hair, mind. You will not see my aunt
till after dinner, when I shall not be there; but you must do the best
you can, for much depends on it. My aunt brought my mother up, and
is complete master here. I can't think how my father'--and he went on
talking to himself, as he retreated into his dressing-room, so that all
Violet heard was, 'wife's relations,' and 'take warning.'

He came back to inspect her toilette and suggest adornments, till,
finding he was overdoing them, he let her follow her own taste, and was
so satisfied with the result, that he led her before the glass, saying,
'There. Mrs. Martindale, that's what I call well got up. Don't you?'

'I don't mind seeing myself when I have you to look at.'

'You think we make a handsome couple? Well, I am glad you are tall--not
much shorter than Theodora, after all.'

'But, oh! how shall I behave properly all dinner-time? Do make a sign if
I am doing anything wrong.'

'Nonsense!'

'I know I shall make mistakes. Matilda says I shall. I had a letter from
her this morning to warn me against "solecisms in etiquette," and to
tell me to buy the number of the "Family Friend" about dinner-parties,
but I had not time, and I am sure I shall do wrong.'

'You would be much more likely, if you had Matilda and her prig of a
book,' said Arthur, between anger and diversion. 'Tell her to mind her
own business--she is not your mistress now, and she shall not teach you
affectation. Why, you silly child, should I have had you if you had not
been "proper behaved"? You have nothing to do but to remember you are my
wife, and as good as any of them, besides being twenty times prettier.
Now, are you ready?'

'Yes, quite; but how shall I find my way here again?'

'See, it is the third door from the stairs. The rest on this side are
spare rooms, except where you see those two green baize doors at the
ends. They lead to passages, the wings on the garden side. In this one
my aunt's rooms are, and Miss Piper, her white nigger, and the other is
Theodora's.'

'And all these opposite doors?'

'Those four belong to my father and mother; these two are John's. His
sitting-room is the best in the house. The place is altogether too big
for comfort. Our little parlour at Winchester was twice as snug as that
overgrown drawing-room down-stairs.'

'Dear little room! I hope we may go back to it. But what a view from
this end window! That avenue is the most beautiful thing I have seen
yet. It looks much older than the house.'

'It is. My father built the house, but we were an old county family long
before. The old Admiral, the first lord, had the peerage settled on my
father, who was his nephew and head of the family, and he and my Aunt
Nesbit having been old friends in the West Indies, met at Bath, and
cooked up the match. He wanted a fortune for his nephew, and she wanted
a coronet for her niece! I can't think how she came to be satisfied with
a trumpery Irish one. You stare, Violet; but that is my aunt's notion
of managing, and the way she meant to deal with all of us. She has
monstrous hoards of her own, which she thinks give her a right to rule.
She has always given out that she meant the chief of them for me, and
treated me accordingly, but I am afraid she has got into a desperately
bad temper now, and we must get her out of it as best we can.'

This not very encouraging speech was made as they stood looking from the
gallery window. Some one came near, and Violet started. It was a
very fashionably-dressed personage, who, making a sort of patronizing
sweeping bend, said, 'I was just about to send a person to assist Mrs.
Martindale. I hope you will ring whenever you require anything. The
under lady's maid will be most happy to attend you.'

'There,' said Arthur, as the lady passed on, 'that is the greatest
person in the house, hardly excepting my aunt. That is Miss Altisidora
Standaloft, her ladyship's own maid.'

Violet's feelings might somewhat resemble those of the Emperor Julian
when he sent for a barber, and there came a count of the empire.

'She must have wanted to look at you,' proceeded Arthur, 'or she would
never have treated us with such affability. But come along, here is
Theodora's room.'

It was a cheerful apartment, hung with prints, with somewhat of a
school-room aspect, and in much disorder. Books and music lay confused
with blue and lilac cottons, patterns, scissors, and papers covered
with mysterious dots; there were odd-looking glass bottles on the
mantel-shelf with odder looking things in them, and saucers holding what
Violet, at home, would have called messes; the straw-bonnet lay on the
floor, and beside it the Scotch terrier, who curled up his lips, showed
his white teeth, and greeted the invaders with a growl, which became
a bark as Arthur snapped his fingers at him. 'Ha! Skylark, that is bad
manners. Where's your mistress? Theodora!'

At the call, the door of the inner room opened, but only a little dark
damsel appeared, saying, in a French accent, that Miss Martindale was
gone to Miss Gardner's room.

'Is Miss Gardner here?' exclaimed Arthur.

'She is arrived about half an hour ago,' was the reply. Arthur uttered
an impatient interjection, and Violet begged to know who Miss Gardner
was.

'A great friend of Theodora's. I wish she would have kept further off
just now, not that she is not a good-natured agreeable person enough,
but I hate having strangers here. There will be no good to be got out
of Theodora now! There are two sisters always going about staying at
places, the only girls Theodora ever cared for; and just now, Georgina,
the youngest, who used to be a wild fly-away girl, just such as Theodora
herself, has gone and married one Finch, a miserly old rogue, that
scraped up a huge fortune in South America, and is come home old enough
for her grandfather. What should possess Theodora to bring Jane here
now? I thought she would never have forgiven them. But we may as well
come down. Here's the staircase for use and comfort.'

'And here is the hall! Oh!' cried Violet, springing towards it, 'this
really is the Dying Gladiator. Just like the one at Wrangerton!'

'What else should he be like!' said Arthur, laughing. 'Every one who
keeps a preserve of statues has the same.'

She would have liked to linger, recognizing her old friends, and
studying this museum of wonders, inlaid marble tables, cases of stuffed
humming birds, and stands of hot-house plants, but Arthur hurried her
on, saying it was very ill-contrived, a draught straight through it, so
that nothing warmed it. He opened doors, giving her a moment's glimpse
of yellow satin, gilding and pictures, in the saloon, which was next
to the drawing-room where she had been received, and beyond it the
dining-room. Opposite, were the billiard-room, a library, and Lord
Martindale's study; and 'Here,' said he, 'is where Theodora and I keep
our goods. Ha!' as he entered, 'you here, Theodora! Hallo! what's this?
A lot of wooden benches with their heels in the air. How is this? Have
you been setting up a charity school in my room?'

'I found the children by the wood were too far from school, so I have
been teaching them here. I came to see about taking the benches out of
your way. I did not expect you here.'

'I was showing her our haunts. See, Violet, here's my double barrel, and
here are the bows. I forget if you can shoot.'

'Matilda and Caroline do.'

'You shall learn. We will have the targets out. Where's the light bow
you used to shoot with, Theodora?'

'It is somewhere,' said Theodora, without alacrity; 'no, I remember, I
gave it to Mr. Wingfield's little nephew.'

'Unlucky! Yours will never do for those little fingers.' Theodora
abruptly turned to Violet, and said,' She must be tired of standing
there.' Violet smiled with pleasure at being addressed, thanked, and
disclaimed fatigue.

'She is of your sort, and does not know how to be tired,' said Arthur.
'I wondered to hear your bosom friend was here. What brings her about
now?'

'If you call her my bosom friend, you answer the question,' was the
proud reply, and it provoked him to carry on the teasing process.

'I thought she was not THE friend,' he continued; 'I ought to have
congratulated you on THE friend's capture. A goldfinch of the South
American breed is a rare bird.'

Theodora drew up her head, and impetuously heaped some school-books
together. 'Have you seen the pretty caged bird?'

'Never.'

In a soft tone, contrasting with the manner of his last sayings, Arthur
invited his wife to come out on the lawn, and walked away with her.
She was surprised and uneasy at what had taken place, but could not
understand it, and only perceived he would prefer her not seeming to
notice it.

It was all the strange influence of temper. In truth, Theodora's whole
heart was yearning to the brother, whom she loved beyond all others;
while on the other hand his home attachments centred on her, and he had
come to seek her with the fixed purpose of gaining her good-will and
protection for his young bride. But temper stepped between. Whether it
began from Theodora's jealousy of the stranger, or from his annoyance
at her cold haughty manner to his wife, he was vexed, and retaliated by
teasing; she answered coldly, in proud suffering at being taunted on a
subject which gave her much pain, and then was keenly hurt at his tone
and way of leaving her, though in fact she was driving him away. She
stood leaning against a pillar in the hall, looking after him with eyes
brimming with tears; but on hearing a step approach, she subdued all
signs of emotion, and composedly met the eye of her eldest brother. She
could not brook that any one should see her grief, and she was in no
mood for his first sentences: 'What are you looking at?' and seeing the
pair standing by the fountain, 'Well, you don't think I said too much in
her favour?'

'She is very pretty,' said Theodora, as if making an admission.

'It is a very sweet expression. Even as a stranger, it would be
impossible not to be interested in her, if only for the sake of her
simplicity.'

Theodora glanced at Violet's dress, and at the attitude in which she was
looking up, as Arthur gathered some roses from a vase; then turned her
eyes on John's thoughtful and melancholy countenance, and thought within
herself, that every man, however wise, can be taken in by a fair face,
and by airs and graces.

'Poor thing,' continued John, 'it must be very trying; you don't see
her to advantage, under constraint, but a few kind words will set her at
ease.'

He paused for an answer, but not obtaining one, said, 'I did not know
you expected Miss Gardner to-day.'

She surprised him, by answering with asperity, prompted by a second
attack on this subject, 'I can't help it. I could not put her off,--what
objection can there be?'

'Nothing, nothing,--I meant nothing personal. It was only that I would
have avoided having spectators of a family meeting like this. I am
afraid of first impressions.'

'My impressions are nothing at all.'

'Well, I hope you will make friends--I am sure she will repay your
kindness.'

'Do you know that you are standing in a tremendous draught?' interrupted
Theodora.

'And there's my mother on the stairs. I shall go and call them in; come
with me, Theodora.'

But she had turned back and joined her mother.

He found Violet all smiles and wonder: but she relapsed into constraint
and alarm as soon as she entered the drawing-room. Miss Gardner
presently came down,--a lady about five or six and twenty, not handsome,
but very well dressed, and with an air of ease and good society, as if
sure of her welcome. As Violet listened to her lively conversation with
Lord Martindale, she thought how impossible it was that she should ever
be equally at home there.

The grandeur of the dining-room was another shock, and the varieties of
courses revived her remorse for the cold mutton. She sat between Lord
Martindale and John, who talked to her as soon as he thought she
could bear the sound of her own voice, and, with Arthur opposite, her
situation was delightful compared to the moment when, without either
of her protectors, she must go with the imperial Lady Martindale to
encounter the dreaded aunt.

When the time came, Arthur held open the door, and she looked up in
his face so piteously, that he smiled, and whispered 'You goose,' words
which encouraged her more than their tenor would seem to warrant.

Warm as it was, the windows were shut, and a shawl was round Mrs.
Nesbit's tall, bending, infirm figure. Violet dared not look up at her,
and thought, with mysterious awe, of the caution not to shrink if she
were kissed, but it was not needed, Lady Martindale only said, 'My aunt,
Mrs. Arthur Martindale,' and Mrs. Nesbit, half rising, just took her
hand into her long skinny fingers, which felt cold, damp, and uncertain,
like the touch of a lizard.

Violet was conscious of being scanned from head to foot--nay, looked
through and through by black eyes that seemed to pierce like a dart from
beneath their shaggy brows, and discover all her ignorance, folly, and
unfitness for her position. Colouring and trembling, she was relieved
that there was another guest to call off Mrs. Nesbit's attention, and
watched the readiness and deference with which Miss Gardner replied to
compliments on her sister's marriage; and yet they were not comfortable
congratulations, thought Violet; at least they made her cheeks burn, and
Theodora stood by looking severe and melancholy; but Miss Gardner seemed
quite to enter into the sarcastic tone, and almost to echo it, as if to
humour the old lady.

'Your sister acted very sensibly,' said Mrs. Nesbit, with emphasis.
'Very good management; though Theodora was somewhat taken by surprise.'

'Yes, I know we used her very ill,' said Miss Gardner; 'but people have
unaccountable fancies about publishing those matters. Mr. Finch was
in haste, and we all felt that it was best to have it over, so it was
talked of a very short time previously.'

'Speed is the best policy, as we all know,' said Mrs. Nesbit; and Violet
felt as if there was a flash of those eyes upon her, and was vexed with
herself for blushing. She thought Miss Gardner's answer good-naturedly
unconscious:

'Oh, people always shake together best afterwards. There is not the
least use in a prolonged courtship acquaintance. It is only a field for
lovers' quarrels, and pastime for the spectators.'

'By the bye,' said Mrs. Nesbit, 'what is become of your cousin, Mrs.
George Gardner's son?'

'Mark! Oh, he is abroad. Poor fellow, I wish we could find something for
him to do. Lady Fotheringham asked her nephew, Percival, if he could not
put him in the way of getting some appointment.'

'Failed, of course,' said Mrs. Nesbit.

'Yes; I never expected much. Those diplomats are apt to be afraid
of having their heels trodden upon; but it is a great pity. He is so
clever, and speaks so many languages. We hope now that Mr. Finch may
suggest some employment in America.'

'Highly advisable.'

'I assure you poor Mark would be glad of anything. He is entirely
steadied now; but there are so few openings for men of his age.'

An interruption here occurring, Miss Gardner drew off to the window.
Theodora sat still, until her friend said, 'How lovely it is! Do you
ever take a turn on the terrace after dinner?'

Theodora could not refuse. Violet wished they had asked her to join
them; but they went out alone, and for some moments both were silent.
Miss Gardner first spoke, remarking, 'A beautiful complexion.'

There was a cold, absent assent; and she presently tried again, 'Quite
a lady,' but with the same brief reply. Presently, however, Theodora
exclaimed, 'Jane, you want me to talk to you; I cannot, unless you unsay
that about Percy Fotheringham. He is not to be accused of baseness.'

'I beg your pardon, Theodora, dear; I have no doubt his motives were
quite conscientious, but naturally, you know, one takes one's own
cousin's part, and it was disappointing that he would not help to give
poor Mark another chance.'

'That is no reason he should be accused of petty jealousies.'

'Come, you must not be so very severe and dignified. Make some allowance
for poor things who don't know how to answer Mrs. Nesbit, and say what
first occurs. Indeed, I did not know you were so much interested in
him.'

'I am interested in justice to the innocent.'

'There! don't annihilate me. I know he is a very superior person, the
pride of Lady Fotheringham's heart. Of course he would have recommended
Mark if he had thought it right; I only hope he will find that he was
mistaken.'

'If he was, he will be the first to own it.'

'Then I am forgiven, am I? And I may ask after you after this long
solitary winter. We thought a great deal of you.'

'I needed no pity, thank you. I was well off with my chemistry and the
parish matters. I liked the quiet time.'

'I know you do not care for society.'

'My aunt is a very amusing companion. Her clear, shrewd observation is
like a book of French memoirs.'

'And you are one of the few not afraid of her.'

'No. We understand each other, and it is better for all parties that she
should know I am not to be interfered with. Positively I think she has
been fonder of me since we measured our strength.'

'There is a mutual attachment in determined spirits,' said Miss Gardner.

'I think there must be. I fancy it is resolution that enables me to go
further with her than any one else can without offending her.'

'She is so proud of you.'

'What is strange is, that she is prouder of me than of mamma, who is so
much handsomer and more accomplished,--more tractable, too, and making a
figure and sensation that I never shall.'

'Mrs. Nesbit knows better,' said Miss Gardner, laughing.

'Don't say so. If John's illness had not prevented my coming out last
year, I might have gone into the world like other girls. Now I see the
worth of a young lady's triumph--the disgusting speculation! I detest
it.'

'Ah! you have not pardoned poor Georgina.'

'Do you wish for my real opinion?'

'Pray let me hear it.'

'Georgina had a grand course open to her, and she has shrunk from it.'

'A grand course!' repeated Jane, bewildered.

'Yes, honest poverty, and independence. I looked to her to show the
true meaning of that word. I call it dependence to be so unable to
exist without this world's trash as to live in bondage for its sake.
Independence is trusting for maintenance to our own head and hands.'

'So you really would have had us--do what? Teach music?--make lace?'

'If I had been lucky enough to have such a fate, I would have been a
village school-mistress.'

"The best, Agnes, and I owe him more than that, but - it should be
gray before the main not humiliate me.

And then" - that he sat as still casually added - "I also believe it
is now with Will not the master. "I said nothing to this, I saw just how
lucky, after yesterday I have the hand stretched out in distance
invisible disappeared, but it was nothing more to change it now was
the best as it Harre wanted.

Only I have said: "When you go Harre?"

I hardly knew what I said.

"Concern only that your father does not aufsucht me today," he replied,
"until tomorrow morning, I am finished with everything, what I
have here to do.

You can not offend me, I easily find a company coming. "After these
words we are separated, the heart was too full, as that we would
readily talk to." - The narrator was silent for a while.

Then she said: "The next morning I saw him once, and then no more,
the whole long life never more. "She let her head fall on her chest,
hands on her lap had rested, they quietly walked around each other
as if they appease the pain, which, as once the heart of a young
blonde girl, so now even the frail body of the quake made Greisin.

But they did not stay long in this broken place, to pull violently,
they rose from the chair and stepped to the window.

"What I want to complain!" she said and pointed with his finger on the
disc, the name of her father wore. "The man has suffered more than me.
Let me also tell you yet. "- Harre was gone and he had my father
in a warm good bye letters; that they have seen no more. Soon after the
last legal action against us did, and the opening of the Bankruptcy
should be included in next time. It was the custom in our city that
all public announcements are not as now by the preacher in church,
but from the open window of the meeting hall by the city secretary
read were done before but this was half a hour with a small bell rung
from the tower.

Since our house was opposite the Town Hall, so I had often observed,
and also how the bells sound children and idle people in front of
the City Hall windows and on the stairs above the Ratskeller gathered.

The same happened with the publication of a Konkursurtels, but people
then put a nasty case of significance, and the word "The bell has
rung about him," was a swear .-- I had even in such cases without
much thought belongs; Now I trembled before the impression that
this process is on the mind anyway tiefgebeugten my father would
make.

He was familiar to me that it is therefore in a friendly Ratsherrn to
the mayor, but did, and the councilman, a good-natured chatterer,
had given him assurance that this publication without the bell was
going to happen.

But I knew from a safe source, that such an assertion was baseless. Yet I
had my father in his innocent faith and I just tried it for this day for
a short trip the country to our relatives bereden. But he wanted, as
he said with a painful smile, his sinking ship before the sinking
completely abandoned.

Because, in my fear that occurred to me that I shed in the rear of
our very deep and vaulted Keller's the bell had never heard beat.

Then I built my plan.

It was me, my father bereden, shared with me a list on where to store
goods, which, when later the court to include persons of the inventory
could be an abbreviation this sad business would be brought.

When the fateful hour arrived, we were already under the earth in
our work.

My father ordered the goods, when I slip a lantern wrote on a sheet
of paper, which he dictated to me.

A few times I was probably been, as I heard from a distance the
buzzing of a bell, then I spoke a few loud words, pushing up and
back with the barrels and boxes of all the outside noise penetrating
swallowed again.

Everything seemed to go well, my father was very into his work
deepens.

As I heard up there suddenly tear open the cellar door, cried the old
maid, I know not why, to me, and also penetrated the clear sound of
the bell to get down. My father sat and listened to the box, which he in
the hands was on the ground. "The Schandglocke!" he groaned and fell
as powerless against the wall.

"It will not save me." - But only for a moment, then he is on, and before
I have time got one word to speak, he had already left the room, and
then I heard him climb up the basement stairs. Even now, I went up into
the house and found my father after I left it in vain in the scriptorium
sought, in the living room with hands folded on the open window. At
that moment, heard the bells ringing on and in City Hall over there, by
the bright morning sun was lit, the three set off wing window and I saw
the servant of the city red cushion lay on the window sills, to
the iron railings of Ratstreppe was already a whole swarm of
half-grown boys.

My father stood motionless and looked with strained eyes. I wanted him
with gentle words, move away. But he defended me. "Let's just my child,"
he said, "that's me, I have to listen." So he stayed.

The old town with his secretary appeared weißgepuderten head over there
in the middle window, and during his Page two councilors on the red
pillow refused, he left with his sharp voice from a single sheet
of paper, which he both hands held in front of the Konkursurtel. In the
clear spring air penetrated every word understandable to us over
here.

When my father's full name on the market also heard speak, I saw him
wince, but he was still standing until everything was gone. Then he
drew out his gold clock, which he inherited from his father was out of
his pocket and laid them on the table. "She belongs to the bankrupt
estate," he said, "Close it in the casket, so that tomorrow they will
be sealed." The next day came the Lords for sealing, but my father
could not leave the bed he was on the night of stroke has been taken. -
A few months later our house was sold, he was in a pannier, which
we from hospital lent, after the small apartment, which we at the
end of the city had rented for us.

He still lived nine years, a paralyzed and broken man in his hour he
worried Schreibereien small bills and for others; most I work with
my hands have earned.

But then he is in a solid hope for the mercy of God in my arms
gently varies .-- After his death, I came to good people, it was
the home of your grandparents.

"My old friend was silent. But I thought of Harre .--" And hast thou,
"I asked," during the entire time, never a message from your youth
will receive friends?

"" Never, my child, "she answered."

You know, Hansen, "I said," I like your Harre not He was not a man of
words, "You put a hand on my arm." So you must not speak, my child. I
have known him, there are other things than death, that of the
people will compel .-- But we want to go to my room, you still have
your hat there, and it may soon be lunch.

"Thus, we have the lonely ballroom again and went back the same way
that we had come.

This opened the door of the Spökenkiekers not; just behind the same,
on the sandy floor, we heard his shuffling step.

When we were in Hansen's room, where the last ray of the morning sun shone
into the window, pulled a drawer in her casket and took it into a mahogany
box, clean, polished, but in the taste of a bygone era. There once liked
a gift of the young carpenter at a birthday of their youth have
been.

"That you must still see," said Hansen, who is by the box aufschloß. There
were securities therein, which are all on Harre Jensen, son of the late
master carpenter Harre Christian Jensen dahier "were, their date
but not over the last ten years hinabreichte."

How come you agree with these papers? "I asked. She smiled." I have not
served in vain. " But the papers are not limited to your name! "It is
the fault of my father, which I produced. For this reason, and because
my estate, as all who die, the pin falls, I have the money immediately
to Harre Jensen's behalf if necessary. "- A moment more before they
are included again, they weighed the box at the hands.

"The treasure is back together," she said, "but happiness, my
child, the happiness that once it has been. This is no longer in it.
"As she spoke these words, shot outside a Schwalbenzug with a loud clamor
over, and then two of these birds fluttered up close to the windows
and then sat twittering on the open window wing.

These were the first swallows, I saw this spring. "Do you hear the
little-wishers, Hansen?"

I cried, "just for your birthday, they come home!" Hansen just nodded.
Your still beautiful blue eyes looked sadly at the little singing
friends. Then put it's hands on my arm and said kindly: "Go now, my child,
I wish to thank all those that they thought of me.

I would now like to be alone. " It was several years later, when I
am from a trip to the central Germany on the way home after my
father was the city.

On one of the main railway station - because the time of the steam
was already befallen - climbed an old man with white hair to me in
the coupe, which I had previously found alone. He had a small travel
suitcases later that I fit under the seat he helped push, and then
sat down with the friendly words: "We have also never beisammengesessen"
to me.

As he said, appeared around the mouth and the brown eyes an expression of
kindness, I would say the participation of involuntarily invited to
confidential discussions. The cleanliness of its appearance, which is not
just in the brown Tuchrock and the white scarf ausprägte,
feinbürgerliche the essence of the man who heimelte everything at
me, and it did not last long, so we had our communications about
our mutual family relationships deepened.

I learned that he was a piano maker and in a medium-sized city of Swabia
was established. It fell on me one, my travel companion said the
southern German dialect, and yet I had his suitcase on the name
"Jensen" read the best of my knowledge only the northernmost Germany
belonged.

When I noticed him, he smiled.

"I like pretty eingeschwäbelt be," he said, "because I live now for over
forty years in this good land and had it at this time will never leave
my home but is in the north, and hence also because my name."

And now he called my own father as his native city.

"So we are fellow countrymen as much as possible," I cried, "I'm there
and just born in the term, then return." The old gentleman took my two
hands and looked at me lovingly to.

"That the Lord has done well," he said, "so we travel, if you is
right, together.

My goal is our father, city, and I hope to see you there - if God
permits."

I took with delights of this proposal.

After the current terminus of the railway had reached, was still
five miles road ahead of us, and soon we sat together in the comfortable
cushion of a spring wagon whose roof we are the beautiful autumn
weather had beaten back.

The area was gradually homeland, the forests disappeared, and soon
the living fences to the side of the road, even the walls on which
they stood, and the vast treeless level did before us.

My companion gazed silently out front. "I am of this infinity of
space as weaned," he said once, "I am here now, as I saw on all sides
into eternity."

Then he was silent again, and I do not bother him. When we look at the
middle of the road from a village through which the road led, once
again came into the open, I noticed that his head forward and
seemed eager auszulugen.

Then he shaded his eyes with his hands and was visibly agitated. "I see
it as much else in the distance," he said finally, "but I am trying in
vain, our tower from here to get in sight, and yet I have him in my
youth from here always welcomes first, when I from a hike returned
home. "" You must be mistaken, "I replied," the low tower in such
a distance may not yet be visible. "" Low!

" cried the old man almost unwilling, "the tower has been on for many
miles into the lake, the boatmen on the landmark served!" Since I fell
for.

"They think in the end," I said hesitatingly, "still in the tower
of the old church, which plenty of forty years ago was canceled."

The old man looked at me with his big eyes as if I faselte. "The church
canceled - and in over forty years! My God, how long I have been
continuing, I've never experienced something like this!" He folded his
hands and sat for a while as despondent in the collected toads. Then he
said: "On that beautiful tower, which is only in my mind was still
there, I will soon be before the fifty years of the return promised
to ensure their sake, I now make this long journey.

I want you to hear if you like This piece made my life, maybe that you
sent me then about the hope that I have a property to give information.
"I assured the old gentleman of my participation, and while our Postillion
in the warm midday sun on its seats and the einnickte wheels slowly
grind through the sand, he began his story: "In my youth I would have
liked the way learned a set of education, because after the early
death of my parents the means to do so were not available, so I
stayed with the craft of my father, that is, I was carpenter.

Even during my companion on the journey was not bad, I had pleasure,
offering me out because it was missing I do not quite of resources,
from the sale of my father's house was a round Sümmchen left, for
the beginning already sufficed.

But I turned it back home, and this happened to a young blond girl's sake
.-- I do not think I will ever again have seen blue eyes.

A friend once said in jest to her, "Agnes, I pluck you from the
violet eyes!"

The words I've never forgotten them. "- The old man remained silent
for a while and looked transfigured before him, as he would again
in this violet eyes of his youth.

Then, while I almost involuntarily called my old friend in St.

Jürgen myself saying, he began again: "She was the daughter of a
Kraemer, my guardian.

We grew together as a neighbor child, while the girl from the early
widowed father rather strictly brought up and was lonely.

Therefore it may come, that they are increasingly the only
Jugendgespielen joined.

Soon after my return among us, we were both as good as engaged, and
it was already started, that I the father of our city in a business
should be justified, as I by an unexpected coincidence of my small
fortune lost .-- It was so that I had resumed.

On the last days Agnes had promised me, in the evening once again on the
path behind her garden hinauszukommen and one last word with me
to talk.

When I am, however, with certain bells Digest einfand, she was not
there.

I stood listening to the plank under the overhanging Lindengezweig,
but I waited in vain.

The house of her father at that time I could not enter, not that a
dichotomy between us would have been, I think on the contrary, that he
give me the hand of his daughter without major concerns would have,
because he felt something on me and was not a haughty man There was
another reason that I do not like the oblivion snatch wants .-- I
know it probably did.

It was a dark and stormy April night; repeatedly deceived me, the
weather vane on the roof, that I believed that I, well-known open
Hoftür to hear, but there was not a step down the garden gate.

     Still, I leaned on the plank
     and saw the black clouds in the sky
     vorüberfliegen, finally, I went
     heavy heart continued .-- The
                     next morning it had just five towers beaten, when I after a sleepless
night on the stairs from my room and my hinabstieg House hosts
farewell took.

In the narrow, poorly paved roads were still dirt and the darkness of
winter. The city still seemed to lie in bed, of all known faces none
wanted to meet me, so I went my lonely and dreary way. Because, as I have
just after the cemetery turn wanted, broke a sharp ray of sunshine
appears, and the old House of Ratsapotheke the bottom with his Löwenschnitzbild
still in the haze of the street, was above the top of the stairs Giebels
at once like in the spring slip bathed .

At the same time, when I just aufschaue, schallt high above me in
the air a long-drawn sound, then again and again, as calling it far out
into the world. I was on the churchyard hinausgetreten and looked up
at the tower, because I saw on top of the tower of the gallery and
saw his long horn in his hand still held.

I knew it well and the first swallows had come and the old Jacob had blown
their welcome and loud about the city called that spring had come into
the country. But he got his honor in the nightcap and a bare Ratsweinkeller
dollars from the Lord Mayor .-- I knew the man and was often up there
with him, as a boy so that from there my pigeons fly to see, and
later with Agnes probably because the old grandson had a little
daughter with him, to which she confessed and Pate which they refer
to all kinds to be used.

Once, on Christmas Eve, I had it even a Christmas tree complete the
tower hinaufschleppen help .-- Now, the well-known oak door open, I
stepped into it involuntarily, and in the darkness that suddenly surrounded
me, I slowly climbed the stairs and, where they stopped, the conductor-like
narrow stairs hinan. Nothing I heard the rattling of a large clock
tower, which here in the loneliness drove her care. I know it
probably did me grauete dermal before that dead things, and I had when
I came out into the iron wheels may draw, only to be stillzumachen.
Since I heard the old Jakob von herabklettern above.

He seemed a child to speak, he urged caution. I called him a "good
morning" in the dark up and asked if he or she is small in itself was
Meta. "Bist du's, Harre?" cried the old man back, "indeed, which must
coincide with the Lord Mayor." Finally the two came down to me while I
was sideways in a Schalluke was underfoot.

As Jakob me so ready to travel next to saw, he puzzled: "What does
this mean Harre, what with the rise because Knüttel and Wachstuchhut up
in my tower? Are not again become strangers in our home?" "It is no
different , Jacob, "I replied," 's will hopefully not be long. "Hatt's
very different to me with thee out!" growled the old man. "Well, if it
must be because once the swallows are back, and it is now the best
time for hiking.

And've also thanks, that thou art come again!" "To live well, James!"

I said. "And if your me-down from your tower once again in the bright
sunshine into the gate you see walking into it, so give me a blast
also welcome your swallows like today!"

The old man shook my hand, by his grandson, Chen took on the arm. "Should
apply , Harre master! " he smiled, he used me in so called jokes.

When I am, however, preparing to back him down, he adds: "If you
were a good way from the Agnes want, it is up since early, it still
has its pleasure in the birds."

Well, I never so fast the last neck-breaking hinaufgekommen stairs, even
though my heart almost staggered breath.

But when I on top of the platform and into the dazzling sky slip
hinaustrat remained involuntarily, and I did a glance through the
iron railings.

Since I saw below me in the depths of my father in the first town
of Spring are jewelry, anywhere between the roofs were the cherry
trees in bloom, which the warm spring time so hervorgetrieben had.

There, the gable, the small towers of the town hall opposite, the
house belonged to my guardian.

I saw the garden, the path behind it to me quoll the heart, and
overwhelmed by homesickness like I involuntarily expelled have a
sound, for I felt suddenly seized my hand, and when I got up, stood
next to me, Agnes.

'I am glad she is nothing outwardly to be ashamed of.'

'I had rather that she was than for her to have the opportunity of
worming herself into favour! Those modest airs and her way of peeping up
under her eyelashes seem to make a great impression,' said Mrs. Nesbit,
with a sneer.

'Really, I think she is simple and shy.'

Mrs. Nesbit laughed. 'You, too! What has she to do with shyness? She has
had her lesson; but you are like the rest! Your mamma actually proposing
to take her likeness, but I told her it was not to be thought of. There
will be plenty to fill her with presumption.'

'And papa--what does he think?' said Theodora, who was wont to obtain
the family politics from her aunt.

'Oh! men are sure to be caught by a pretty face, and they cannot make
enough of her. I thought your father had more sense, but since John has
had his ear, everything has been past my management. I cannot bear to
see Arthur's cool way--but no wonder. There will be no end to their
expectations, treated as they are.'

'Then papa means to do something for them?'

'I cannot tell. He may do as he pleases. It is no affair of mine. They
cannot touch my property. Your father may try how he likes supporting
them.'

'He will then?'

'He cannot help it, after having invited them here.'

Theodora could no longer bear to hear Arthur thus spoken of, and began
to read aloud, relieved in some degree by finding Arthur was not to
suffer poverty. If he had been persecuted, she must have taken his part;
now she could choose her own line. However, the world must not suppose
that she disapproved of his wife, and she was grateful to the unmeaning
words amiable and ladylike, especially when she had to speak to Mr.
Wingfield. He observed on the lady's beauty, and hoped that the affair
was as little unsatisfactory as possible under the circumstances, to
which she fully agreed. They proceeded to parish matters, on which they
had so much to say to each other, that Violet thus reflected--'Ah! it is
just as Mr. Martindale used to sit with me in the window at home! She is
going to give up all her grandeur for the sake of this good clergyman!
How good she is! If she could only like me one little bit.'

For the present this mattered the less to Violet, as she was
extremely happy out of doors with her husband, who took up her time so
exclusively, that she scarcely saw the rest, except at meals and in the
evening. Then, though less afraid of 'solecisms in etiquette,' she made
no progress in familiarity, but each day revealed more plainly how much
too lowly and ignorant she was to be ever one of the family.

Mrs. Nesbit was always formidable and sarcastic, alarming her the more
because she could not understand her irony, though conscious it was
levelled against her; Lady Martindale always chilling in condescending
courtesy, and daily displaying more of the acquirements that frightened
Violet by their number and extent; Theodora always gravely and coldly
polite and indifferent. Miss Gardner was her great resource. Her
pleasant manners and ready conversation were universally liked, and more
than once she dexterously helped Violet out of a state of embarrassment,
and made a connecting link, through which she ventured to talk to the
other ladies.

With the gentlemen she was happier. Lord Martindale was kind in manner,
and she improved in the power of speaking to him, while John was, as she
knew, her best friend; but she saw very little of him, he lived apart
from the family, often not meeting them till dinner-time, and she began
to understand Arthur's surprise at his doings at Winchester, when
she found that his usual habits were so solitary that his father was
gratified if he joined him in a ride, and his mother esteemed it a
favour if he took a turn in the garden with her.

The parish church was so distant that the carriage was always used
to convey thither the ladies, except Theodora, who ever since her
fourteenth year had made it her custom to walk early to the school, and
to remain there in the interval between the services. It was believed
that she enjoyed a wet Sunday, as an occasion for proving her
resolution, now so well established that no one thought of remonstrance,
let the weather be what it might. The first Sunday of Violet's visit
happened to be showery, and in the afternoon, Lord Martindale had gone
to John's room to dissuade him from going to church a second time, when,
as the door stood open, they heard Arthur's voice in the gallery.

'Hollo! you are not setting out in these torrents!'

'Do let me, please!' returned the pleading note.

'Why, the avenue is a river, and you are not a real goose yet, you
know.'

'We never did miss church for weather, and it is further off at
Wrangerton.'

'Nobody is going, I tell you. It is not in common sense. You are as bad
as Theodora, I declare.'

'I don't mean to be wilful!' said she, piteously; 'I won't go if you
tell me not, but please don't. I have no Sunday-book, and nothing to do,
and I should feel wrong all the week.'

'To be sure you can't smoke a cigar,' said Arthur, in a tone of
commiseration; 'so wilful will to water! Now for an aquatic excursion!'

Their steps and voices receded, and the father and brother looked
amused. 'A good honest child!' 'She will do something with him after
all!' and Lord Martindale (for Arthur had made too broad an assertion
in declaring no one was going) followed them down, and showed positively
paternal solicitude that Violet should be guarded from the rain, even
sending to Pauline for a cloak of Miss Martindale's.

It was early when they reached the village, and Lord Martindale, saying
he must speak to a workman, took them through a pretty garden to a
house, the front rooms of which were shut up; they entered by the back
door, and found themselves in a kitchen, where a couple of labouring
people were sitting, in church-going trim. While Violet shook off the
rain, and warmed herself at the fire, Lord Martindale spoke to the man;
and then opening a door, called her and Arthur to look.

There were several rooms, without trace of ever having been inhabited,
and not looking very inviting. The view of the park, which Violet would
fain have admired, was one gush of rain.

'This might be made something of,' said Lord Martindale. 'It was built
at the same time as the house. There was some idea of Mrs. Nesbit's
living here; and of late years it has been kept empty for poor John.'

He broke off. Violet wondered if it was to be her abode, and whether
those empty rooms could ever be as pleasant as the parlour at
Winchester; but no more passed, and it was time to go into church.

After this, Lord Martindale pressed to have their stay prolonged; which
Arthur could not persuade his wife to believe a great compliment to her,
though she was pleased, because he was, and because she hoped it was
a sign that she was tolerated for his sake. Personally, she could have
wished that his leave of absence might not be extended, especially when
she found that by the end of the next two months it was likely that the
regiment would be in London, so that she had seen the last of her
dear Winchester lodging; but she had so little selfishness, that she
reproached herself even for the moment's wish, that Arthur should not
remain to be happy at his own home.

It was a great loss to her that Miss Gardner was going away, leaving
her to the unmitigated coldness and politeness of the other ladies. She
grieved the more when, on the last morning, Jane made positive advances
of friendship, and talked affectionately of meeting in London.

'My home is with my sister, and we shall be delighted to see you. You
will be fixed there, no doubt.'

'Thank you. I cannot tell; but I shall be so glad to see you!'

'And I shall be delighted to introduce you to my sister. I know you will
be great friends. What a season it will be! Two such sisters as Mrs.
and Miss Martindale making their appearance together will be something
memorable.'

Violet blushed excessively, and made some inarticulate disavowals. She
felt it presumption to let her name be coupled with Miss Martindale's,
and there was a sense of something dangerous and wrong in expecting
admiration.

Miss Gardner only smiled encouragingly at her youthfulness. 'I will not
distress you, though I look forward to what I shall hear. I shall feel
that I have a right to be proud of you, from priority of acquaintance.'

'You are very kind; but, please, don't talk so. It is bad, I know, for
me.'

'You are very right, I quite agree with you. No doubt it is the wisest
way; but so very few feel as you do. I wish more were like you, or,
indeed, like Theodora, who is positively displeased with me for speaking
of her making a sensation.'

'Oh! of course she does not care,' said Violet. 'So very good as she
is.'

'Appallingly so, some people say,' returned Jane, with a peculiar look;
'but, I know her well, though she was more my sister's friend than
mine.'

'Then you have known her a long time?'

'All her life. We used to meet every day in London, when she and my
sister were two madcaps together, playing endless wild pranks. We used
to tell her she ruled the governesses, and no one could control her--nor
can--'

'But she is very good,' repeated Violet, puzzled.

'Ah! she took a serious turn at about fourteen, and carried it out
in her own peculiar way. She has worked out a great deal for herself,
without much guidance. She has a standard of her own, and she will not
acknowledge a duty if she does not intend to practise it.'

'I don't understand,' said Violet. 'I thought if one saw a duty one must
try to practise it.'

'I wish all the world went upon your principles' said Miss Gardner,
with a sigh. 'I am afraid you will find many not half so consistent with
their own views as yourself, or Theodora.'

'Oh! of course one must fail,' said Violet. 'One cannot do half one
means, but Theodora seems so strong and resolute.'

'Ay, no one has been able to cope with her, not even Mrs. Nesbit; who,
as a kindred spirit, might have had a chance!'

'Mrs. Nesbit has had a great deal to do with her education?'

'I dare say you have found out the real head of the family. I see you
are very acute, as well as very guarded.'

'Oh dear! I hope I have said nothing I ought not,' cried Violet, in a
fright.

'No, indeed, far from it. I was admiring your caution.'

Violet thought she had done wrong in betraying her dislike; she knew not
how; and trying to ascribe all to shyness, said, 'It was so strange and
new; I have never been out till now.'

'Yes, if you will allow me to say so, I thought you got on admirably,
considering how trying the situation was.'

'Oh! I was very much frightened; but they are very kind--Mr. Martindale
especially.'

'Poor Mr. Martindale! I wish he could recover his spirits. He has never
held up his head since Miss Fotheringham's death. He is an admirable
person, but it is melancholy to see him spending his life in that lonely
manner.'

'It is, indeed. I often wish anything would cheer him!'

'All the family are devoted to him, if that would comfort him. It is the
only point where Lady Martindale is not led by her aunt, that she almost
worships him!'

'I thought Mrs. Nesbit was fond of him.'

'Did you ever hear that Percy Fotheringham once said of her, "That
woman is a good hater"? She detested the Fotheringham family, and Mr.
Martindale, for his engagement. No, he is out of her power, and she
cannot endure him; besides, he is a rival authority--his father listens
to him.'

'I suppose Mrs. Nesbit is very clever.'

'She has been one of the cleverest women on earth. She formed her niece,
made the match, forced her forward into the very highest society--never
were such delightful parties--the best music--every lion to be met
with--Lady Martindale herself at once a study for beauty, and a
dictionary of arts and sciences--Mrs. Nesbit so agreeable. Ah! you
cannot judge of her quite, she is passee, broken, and aged, and, poor
thing! is querulous at feeling the loss of her past powers; but there
used to be a brilliance and piquancy in her conversation that has become
something very different now.'

Violet thought it most prudent only to remark on Lady Martindale's
varied accomplishments.

'She has carried them on much longer than usual. People generally give
them up when they marry, but she has gone on. I am not sure whether it
was the wisest course. There is much to be said on both sides. And I
have sometimes thought Theodora might have been a little less determined
and eccentric, if she had not been left so much to governesses, and if
her affections had had more scope for development.'

Theodora came in, and Violet blushed guiltily, as if she had been
talking treason.

Miss Gardner's object in life, for the present, might be said to be to
pick up amusement, and go about making visits; the grander the people
the better, adapting herself to every one, and talking a sort of
sensible scandal, with a superior air of regret; obtaining histories at
one house to be detailed at another, and thus earning the character
of being universally intimate. The sentiments of the young bride of
Martindale had been, throughout her visit, matter of curiosity; and even
this tete-a-tete left them guess work. Theodora's were not so difficult
of discovery; for, though Jane had never been the same favourite with
her as her more impetuous sister, she had, by her agreeable talk and
show of sympathy, broken down much of the hedge of thorns with which
Theodora guarded her feelings.

'I have been talking to Mrs. Martindale,' Jane began, as they went
up-stairs together. 'She is a graceful young thing, and Georgina and I
will call on her in London. Of course they will be settled there.'

'I don't know,' said Theodora. 'A notion has been started of his leaving
the Guards, and their coming to live at the cottage at Brogden.'

'Indeed!' exclaimed Miss Gardner.

'It is not settled, so don't mention it. I doubt how it would answer to
set Arthur down with nothing to do.'

'I doubt, indeed! I have seen a good deal of families living close
together.'

'Nothing shall make me quarrel with Arthur, or his wife. You smile,
but it needs no magnanimity to avoid disputes with anything so meek and
gentle.'

'You can't judge of her; a girl of sixteen in a house full of strangers!
Give her a house of her own, and she will soon learn that she is
somebody. As long as your eldest brother is unmarried, she will expect
to be looked upon as the wife of the heir. She will take offence, and
your brother will resent it.'

'And there will be discussions about her,' said Theodora.

'Depend upon it, 'tis easier to keep the peace at a distance. Fancy the
having to call for her whenever you go out to dinner. And oh! imagine
the father, mother, and half-dozen sisters that will be always staying
there.'

'No, Arthur has not married the whole family, and never means them to
come near her.'

'There are two words to that question,' said Miss Gardner, smiling.
'Quiet as she seems now, poor thing she has a character of her own, I
can see, and plenty of discernment. To be so guarded, as she is, at her
age, shows some resolution.'

'Guarded! has she been saying anything?'

'No, she is extremely prudent.'

'Inferring it, then,' exclaimed Theodora. 'Well, her expectations must
be high, if she is not satisfied; one comfort is, the Brogden scheme is
only John's and papa's. My aunt can't bear it, because it seems quite to
give up the chance of John's marrying.'

'Well, Georgina and I will do the best we can for her. I suppose you
wish it to be understood that you approve.'

'Of course: you can say everything with truth that the world cares for.
She is pleasing, and amiable, and all that.'

'She will be extremely admired.'

'And her head so much turned as to ruin all the sense there may be in
it! I hate the thought of it, and of what is to become of Arthur when he
wakes from his trance.'

'He will find that he has a sister,' said Jane, who had learnt that this
was the secret of consolation; and, accordingly, a softer 'Poor Arthur!'
followed.

'And will you write, dear Theodora?'

'I don't promise. I hardly ever write letters.'

'And you will not send your love to poor Georgina?'

'I forgive her for having pained and disappointed me. I hope she will
be happy, but I am very much afraid she has not gone the right way to be
so.'

'Am I to tell her so?'

'I dare say you will, but don't call it my message. If she makes a good
use of her means, I shall try to forget the way she obtained them.'

'I only hope, with your notions, that you will not get into a scrape
yourself. I'm a little afraid of that curate.'

'We both know better,' said Theodora.

Jane departed, and Violet felt as if she had a friend and protector the
less. She was sitting forlorn in the great drawing-room, waiting for
Arthur, who was trying horses; presently Theodora came in, and with
something of compassion, said, 'I hope you have an entertaining book
there.'

Oh yes, thank you, "La Vie de Philippe Auguste". I like it very much; it
is as amusing as "Philip Augustus" itself.'

'James's novel, you mean?'

'Have you read it?'

'His novels are exactly alike,' said Theodora, leaving the room, but
checked by the thought that it would be merciful to take her into her
room. 'No, nonsense,' said second thoughts; 'I shall have nothing but
chatter ever after, if I establish her coming to me when Arthur is
out; and if this cottage scheme comes to pass, she will be marching up
whenever she has nothing better to do. Give an inch, and she will take
an ell.'

She was interrupted by a diffident, hesitating call, and, looking
back, as she was mounting the stairs, beheld Violet, who changed the
appellation into 'Miss Martindale.'

'Well!' said she, feeling as if her citadel were in jeopardy.

'Would you--would you be so very kind as to lend me a French
dictionary?'

'Certainly; I'll give you one in a moment,' said Theodora; with so
little encouragement as would have deterred a person bent on gaining
the entree. Violet stood meekly waiting till she brought the book, and
received it with gratitude disproportionate to the favour conferred.


CHAPTER 5


   Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
   And I must know it, else he loves me not.
                         --King Henry IV


Miss Gardner's departure threw the rest of the party more together,
and Theodora did not hold herself as much aloof as before. Indeed she
perceived that there were occasions when Arthur seemed to be returning
to his preference for her. She had more conversation, and it often fell
on subjects of which the bride had no knowledge, while the sister was
happy in resuming old habits. Sometimes Violet was entertained; but one
day when they were riding, the talk was going on eagerly on some subject
of which she knew nothing, while they rode faster than she liked, and
she fancied she was insecure in her saddle. Twice she timidly called
Arthur; but he was too much absorbed to attend to her, without a degree
of scream, which she did not feel would be justified. Each moment she
grew more alarmed and miserable, and though at last, when he perceived
that she wanted him, he was off his horse in a moment and set all to
rights, she completely forgot her distress,--the charm had been broken,
she was no longer his first thought.

The sensation of loneliness often returned during the next few weeks;
there was no real neglect, and she would not so have felt it if she had
not depended on him alone, and so long enjoyed his exclusive attention.
His fondness and petting were the same, but she perceived that he found
in his sister a companionship of which she did not feel capable. But to
Theodora herself, whenever she succeeded in engrossing Arthur, it seemed
a victory of sisterly affection and sense over beauty and frivolity.

Arthur was anxious to know the family politics, and resumed the habit of
depending on his sister for gathering intelligence from Mrs. Nesbit. On
her he bestowed his complaints that his father would not see things as
he wished, and with her talked over his projects. In truth, he could not
bear to disclose to his wife the footing on which he stood,--looking
on her as a mere child, sure to be satisfied, and not requiring to be
consulted.

Theodora gave him tidings of the proposal that he should settle in
the village, and finding him undecided, threw all her weight into the
opposite scale. She sincerely believed she was consulting his happiness
and the harmony of the family by speaking of the irksomeness of living
there with nothing to do, and by assisting him in calculating how large
an income would be necessary to enable him to keep hunters, go from
home, &c., without which he declared it would be intolerable, and
as there was little probability of his father allowing him so much,
continuing in his profession was the only alternative.

Violet saw them in frequent consultation, and once John said something
to her of his hopes of seeing her at Brogden; then, finding her in
ignorance, drew back, but not till he had said enough to make her
restless at hearing no more. She would, of course, have preferred living
in the country; but when she figured to herself Arthur always with
Theodora, and herself shut up in the little parlour she had seen in the
rain, she grew extremely disconsolate.

One morning, unable to read or sit quiet under these anticipations, she
went out to dispel them by a turn among the flowers, and a conversation
with the peacock. At the corner of the lawn, she heard Arthur's
voice--'Exactly so; two thousand is the very least. Ha, Violet!' as he
and Theodora emerged from a shady alley.

'Oh, I did not mean to interrupt you,' said Violet, confused; 'I only
came out for some fresh air.'

'Unbonneted, too, do you want to get roasted brown?' said Arthur.

'I never am burnt,' said Violet; 'but I will not be in your way, I'll
go.'

'Nonsense,' said he, drawing her arm into his. 'Come in good time,' and
he yawned, tired of the discussion. 'Ha, Mr. Peacock, are you there?'

'He always follows me,' said Violet. 'Miss Piper showed me where his
food is kept, and I can almost get him to eat out of my hand.'

Theodora walked off, thinking there was an end of her brother's sense,
and Violet looked after her rather sadly, thinking, while exhibiting to
Arthur her friendship with the peacock, 'he consults her, he only
plays with me. Perhaps it is all I am good for; but I wish we were at
Winchester.'

As Theodora went up-stairs, she saw her eldest brother standing at the
south window of the gallery. He called to her, saying, 'Here's a pretty
picture, Theodora.'

In front of the sparkling crystal arches of the fountain stood Violet,
bending forward, and holding out her hand full of grain to invite the
beautiful bird, which now advanced, now withdrew its rich blue neck,
as in condescension, then raised its crested head in sudden alarm, its
train sweeping the ground in royal splendour. Arthur, no unpicturesque
figure in his loose brown coat, stood by, leaning against the stand
of one of the vases of plants, whose rich wreaths of brightly coloured
blossoms hung down, making a setting for the group; and while Violet by
her blandishments invited the peacock to approach, he now and then, with
smiling slyness, made thrusts at it with her parasol, or excited Skylark
to approach.

'A pretty scene, is it not?' said John.

'Like a Sevres china cup,' Theodora could not help saying.

'Fountain and peacock, and parasol for shepherd's crook, forming a
French Arcadia,' said John, smiling. 'I suppose it would hardly make a
picture. It is too bright.'

Theodora only answered by a sigh, and was turning away, when John added,
'I am glad she has him at last, I was afraid she had a long solitary
morning while you were out with him. I saw you walking up and down so
long.'

'He was talking over his plans,' said Theodora, with an assumption of
sullen dignity.

'I have been wishing to speak to you about that very thing,' said John.
'I think you may be in danger of putting yourself between him and his
wife.'

It was a new thing to her to hear that this was a danger, but, in an
offended manner, she replied, 'I can hardly be accused of that. He
ceases all rational talk about his most important concerns to go to
child's play with her.'

'But why keep her out of the rational talk?'

'That is his concern. He knows what she is capable of, I suppose.'

'I doubt whether he does,' said John; 'but I don't want to interfere
with his behaviour, only to give you a caution. It is natural that you
should wish to have him what he was before. I knew his marriage was a
great blow to you.'

'I knew he would marry,' said Theodora, coldly; for she could not bear
compassion. 'It is the common course of things.'

'And that the wife should be first.'

'Of course.'

'Then would it not be better to bear that in mind, and make up your mind
to it, rather than try to absorb his confidence?'

'He is not bound to consult no one but that child. You would not drive
him back to her if he came to you for advice.'

'I should not pass her over; I should assume that her opinion was to be
respected.'

'I can't be untrue.'

'Then try to make it valuable.'

'He wants no help of mine to make him fond of her!' cried Theodora.
'Does not he dote on her, and make himself quite foolish about her
complexion and her dress!'

'That is a different thing. She cannot be always a toy; and if you want
to do the most inestimable service to Arthur, it would be by raising
her.'

'Trying to educate a married sister-in-law! No, thank you!'

'I don't see what is to become of them,' said John, sadly. 'He will
be always under some influence or other, and a sensible wife might do
everything for him. But she is a child; and he is not the man to form
her character. He would have spoilt her already if she did not take his
admiration, for mere affection; and just at the age when girls are most
carefully watched, she is turned out into the world without a guide! If
he ceases to be happy with her, what is before them? You think he will
fall back on you; but I tell you he will not. If you once loosen the tie
of home, and he seeks solace elsewhere, it will be in the pursuits that
have done him harm enough already.'

'He has given up his race-horses,' said Theodora.

The luncheon-bell interrupted them; but as they were going down, John
added, 'I hope I have said nothing to vex you. Indeed, Theodora, I feel
much for your loss.'

'I am not vexed,' was her haughty reply, little guessing how, in her
pursuit of the brother who had escaped her, she was repelling and
slighting one who would gladly have turned to her for sisterly
friendship. His spirits were in that state of revival when a mutual
alliance would have greatly added to the enjoyment of both; but Theodora
had no idea of even the possibility of being on such terms. He seemed
like one of an elder generation--hardly the same relation as Arthur.

'So, Lady Elizabeth comes,' said Lady Martindale, as they entered the
room.

'Is she coming to stay here!' asked John.

'Yes; did you not hear that we have asked her to come to us for the
Whitford ball?'

'Oh, are we in for the Whitford ball?' said Theodora, in a tone of
disgust that checked the delighted look on Violet's face.

'Yes, my dear; your papa wishes us to go.'

'What a bore!' exclaimed Theodora.

'Yes,' sighed Lady Martindale; 'but your papa thinks it right.'

'A necessary evil--eh, Violet?' said Arthur.

'I hope you don't mind it?' said Violet, looking anxiously at him.

'Ah, you will enjoy it,' said her ladyship, graciously regarding her
folly.

'Oh, yes, thank you,' said Violet, eagerly.

'Have you been to many balls?'

'Only to one;' and she blushed deeply, and cast down her eyes.

'And so the Brandons are coming to stay! For how long, mamma?' proceeded
Theodora.

'From Wednesday to Saturday,' said Lady Martindale. 'I have been writing
cards for a dinner-party for Wednesday; and your father says there are
some calls that must be returned; and so, my dear, will you be ready by
three?'

'You don't mean me, mamma?' said Theodora, as nobody answered.

'No; you are a resolute rebel against morning visits. You have no
engagement for this afternoon, my dear?'

Violet started, saying, 'I beg your pardon; I did not know you meant me.
Oh, thank you! I am very much obliged.'

'I suppose you will not go with us, Arthur?'

He looked as if he did not like it, but caught a beseeching glance from
his wife, and was beginning to consent, when Theodora exclaimed, 'Oh,
Arthur, don't; it will be such a famous opportunity for that ride.'

'Very well; you know where my cards are, Violet!'

'Yes,' she answered, submissively, though much disappointed, and in
dread of the drive and of the strangers.

'Really, I think you had better go, Arthur,' said John, greatly
displeased at Theodora's tone. 'It is the sort of occasion for doing
things regularly.'

'Indeed, I think so,' said Lady Martindale; 'I wish Arthur would go with
us this once. I doubt if it will be taken well if he does not.'

'You will find no one at home. His going won't make a bit of
difference,' said Theodora, who now regarded keeping him as a matter of
power.

'Surely your ride might wait,' said her mother. 'No, it won't, mamma. It
is to see that old man, Mary's father.'

'What Mary, my dear?'

'The scullery-maid. I want to speak to him about her confirmation; and
the only way is over Whitford Down--all manner of leaping places, so we
must go without Violet.'

Violet feared there was little hope for her, for Arthur looked much
invited by the leaping places, but John made another effort in her
favour, and a great one for him.

'Suppose you accept of me for your escort, Theodora?' Every one looked
astonished, Lady Martindale positively aghast.

'Were you ever on Whitford Down, John?' said Arthur.

'Why, yes,--in old times; I know the place, I believe.'

'You talk of knowing it, who never hunted!' said Arthur. 'No, no; you
are a great traveller, John, but you don't know the one horse-track on
Whitford Down that does not lead into a bog--'

'Theodora does, I dare say.'

'Yes, I know it, but it is too far for you, John, thank you, and not at
all what would suit you. I must give it up, if Arthur prefers playing
the disconsolate part of a gentleman at a morning call.'

'Do you really dislike going without me?' asked Arthur, and of course
nothing was left for Violet to say but, 'O, thank you, pray don't stay
with me. Indeed, I had much rather you had your ride.'

'You are sure?'

'O yes, quite. I shall do very well' and she smiled, and tried to make
a show of ease and confidence in his mother, by looking towards her, and
asking upon whom they were to call.

Lady Martindale mentioned several ladies who had left their cards for
Mrs. Arthur Martindale, adding that perhaps it would be better to leave
a card at Rickworth Priory.

'Is that where Lady Elizabeth Brandon lives?' asked Violet.

'Yes,' said Lady Martindale. 'It belongs to her daughter. Lady Elizabeth
is a highly excellent person, for whom Lord Martindale has a great
regard, and Miss Brandon is one of Theodora's oldest friends.'

'Hum!' said Theodora.

'My dear, she is a very nice amiable girl--just your own age, and
admirably brought up.'

'Granted,' said Theodora.

'I cannot see that Emma Brandon wants anything but style and
confidence,' proceeded Lady Martindale, 'and that I believe to be
entirely poor Lady Elizabeth's fault for keeping her so much in
retirement. That German finishing governess, Miss Ohnglaube, whom we
were so sorry to lose, would have been the person to teach her a little
freedom and readiness of manner. I wish we could have kept her a little
longer.'

'I told Lady Elizabeth about her,' said Theodora; but Lady Martindale,
without hearing, said she must go to her aunt, and renewing injunctions
to Violet to be ready by three, left the room.

'You did not astonish her weak mind with the ghost story?' said Arthur.

'With its cause.'

'You would not have thought, Violet,' continued Arthur, 'that we had a
ghost in the north wing.'

'What was it?' said Violet. 'You don't mean really?'

'Only a Turk's-head broom, with phosphorus eyes, and a sheet round the
handle,' said Theodora. 'It had a grand effect when Arthur stood on
the second landing-place, and raised it above the balusters--a sort of
bodilessness rising from vacancy.'

'Didn't she faint?' said Arthur.

'No, I was afraid she would, and then it would have been all over with
us; but I dragged her safe into the school-room, and there she was so
hysterical that I nearly relented.'

'Then was it all in play?' said Violet.

'In earnest,' said Arthur. 'It was the only way of getting quit of
mademoiselle.'

'That lady who used to talk metaphysics and sing!' said John. 'I
remember the lamentations at her not choosing to remain. Why was she
victimized?'

'There was no help for it,' said Theodora. 'She considered the book
of Genesis as a "sehr schone mythische Geschichte", and called the
Patriarchs the Hebrew Avatars.'

'Theodora! You don't mean it!' exclaimed John.

'I do, but I had my revenge, for, after the Turk's-head adventure, she
never slept without my Bible under her pillow. If by broad daylight she
would have renounced the Avatar theory, I really would have forgiven
her, for she was very good-natured, and she admired "the high Roman
fashion" so much, I was half afraid she might follow it herself if we
tormented her much more.'

'But why keep it to yourself! I can hardly believe it possible! Why play
these tricks instead of telling all?'

'I did tell Aunt Nesbit, but Miss Ohnglaube was always reading Jean Paul
with her and mamma; they were in raptures with her, and my aunt only
said I was too well instructed to be misled.'

'How old were you?'

'About fifteen.'

'It is beyond belief. Why could you not tell my father?' said John.

'I hardly saw him--I never spoke to him.'

'Was not I at home!'

'Yes, shut up in your room. I never thought of speaking to you. All I
could do was to be as restive as possible, and when she did not care for
that, there was nothing for it but playing on her German superstition.
So Arthur told her some awful stones about whipping blacks to death, and
declared West Indian families were very apt to be haunted; but that it
was a subject never to be mentioned to mamma nor my aunt.'

'And having paved the way, we treated her to the Turk's-head,' concluded
Arthur. 'I would do it again to hear her sigh and scream, and see
Theodora acting as coolly as if she was in daily intercourse with the
defunct nigger. If mademoiselle had not been frightened out of her
senses, her self-possession would have betrayed us.'

'I could not act fright,' said Theodora.

'And this was the best plan you could devise for getting rid of an
infidel governess!' said John.

And as they dispersed, he stood looking after his sister, thinking that
there was more excuse for her inconsistencies than he had yet afforded
her, and that, in fact, she deserved credit for being what she was. His
aunt had done even more harm than the ruin of his happiness.

Theodora triumphed, and carried Arthur off, but Violet found the reality
of the expedition less formidable than the anticipation. She knew her
mother would have enjoyed seeing her well dressed, and setting forth
in that style; the drive was agreeable, and Lady Martindale kind and
gracious. Alone with her, she lost much of her dread, and felt better
acquainted; but all froze up into coldness when they came home.

The ladies at Rickworth had not been at home; and as they did not arrive
on the Wednesday till Violet had gone to dress, she had time to frighten
herself by imagining an heiress on the pattern of Lady Martindale, and
an earl's daughter proportionably unapproachable. Her trepidation was
increased by Arthur's not coming in, though she heard guests arriving,
and when at last he appeared, it was so late, that he desired her to go
down and say he was 'just ready.'

It was a serious thing to encounter alone that great saloon full of
strangers, and with cheeks of the brightest carnation Violet glided in,
and after delivering her message to Lord Martindale, was glad to find
herself safely seated on an ottoman, whence she looked for the chief
guests. XII. As we Indians truxeron of comer._ other day, faliendo the
Sun, it was time that we Indians Havi said, came to nofotros, Havi
as promised, we traxeron much PEFC i, i vnas of roots, which they eat
i fon like nuts, some bigger, or smaller, the greater part of them
faith facan debaxo Water, and with hard work.

In the afternoon bolvieron i traxeron us more PEFCO i from mifmas Estate,
i did come fus Mugeres i Sons, for which we viefen i host
faith bolvieron rich Cafcaveles i accounts, we gave them, other
days i us vifitar around, so mifmo that eftotras times. As nofotros
viam, which provided for eftabamos PEFCO Root i, i water, i cofas that
of the other call, agreed to ship around, i feguir nueftro way, i
defenterramos la Barca de la Arena, which eftaba involved, i was
menefter, we defnudafemos all, i pafafemos great cast to work for
water, because nofotros eftabamos such other cofas mui BAFT to get
more light in; afi i loaded two rounds into the Sea Ballefta us
gave such a blow of water, which wet us all: how we were going
defnudos i, i was the cold that made mui grande, Remos folto the
hands of i another blow to the Sea gave us, traftornò la Barca: the
suppliers, i afieron two other faith efcaparfe for it, but fufcediò
mui conversely, Barca took the debaxo i drowned faith.

As is the Cofta mui braba, Sea tomb vn chased all the other embueltos
in waves, i Cofta half drowned in the mifma island, so that more
of the three faltafen that Barca made debaxo Havi.

Those who stayed efcapados, as defnudos NAFC, i lost everything they had:
i though everything Valia little, so much so Valia.

And then it was November, the cold i mui grande, i nofotros such,
with little difficulty that we could count the huefos, eftabamos
facts contained propria of Death.

For me to say that defde the month of May pafado, I do not eat other
Havi COFA fine corn Toft, i sometimes necefidad saw me eating it
raw, but because faith killed Horses, meanwhile Barcas faith towards
that, I never I could eat them, i was not ten times I ate PEFC.

Efto say, for efcufar raçones because each WNV can see, what these
eftariamos.

And all this fobre, Havi fobrevenido Wind North, strong, eftabamos
more about death than life to Nueftro pleased God that he bufcando
the Ticon-fire, there Havi fact, we found a fire that did major
Fires i Nueftro host eftuvimos asking Mr mifericordia i nueftros
forgiveness of sins, shedding many tears, each haviendo WNV laftima
not folo whether, over all others, that the mifmo eftado vian.

And when the sun puefto, the Indians, we do not creiendo ido Havi,
we bolvieron à bufcar, i bring to eat: but when they saw us as hosts
in different rooms of the first, so i eftraña, both efpantaronfe
that faith bolvieron back.

Fali me to, i call them, i came efpantados mui, hicelos understand feñas
as faith we sunk Havi VNA Barca, i faith Havi drowned three nofotros i
alli Preferences in fu, they mifmos saw two deaths, which i stayed
behind, we were going that way.

Indians see the defaftre we come Havi and defaftre that eftabamos, so
defventura, i fent miferia faith among nofotros i with great pain,
i laftima that ovieron fortune of being in so much, I began to mourn
all Recio , so i really, that there lexos of faith could hear, i
efto they lasted over half an hour: I certainly see that eftos Men,
so order raçon, i so raw, like Gross, both of faith dolia nofotros,
HiCo to me, i in the company of other crefciefe plus pafion i
confideracion of the nueftra defdicha.

Sofegado ia Efte crying, I asked the Chriftianos i dixe that fi
parefcia them, I would urge those Indians, who llevafen fus à Cafas:
i some of them, Havi eftado in New Efpaña, refpondieron, not faith
should speak on it because we Cafas fus fi led us to facrificarian
fus Idol: More vifto Havi that no other remedy, than i any other
way eftaba closer, i some more death, no cure for what they said
before begged the Indians, who llevafen fus à Cafas i moftraron
them that Havi pleasure of it, i vn efperafemos that little, they
would do what we wanted, then i thirty of them laden with firewood
faith, i faith were fus à Cafas that eftaban lexos of there, i
stayed with the other hafta close the night, we took, I carry aphids,
i priefa much, we went to Cafas fus, i by the great cold to, fearing
that i not in any way muriefe or defmaiafe, Provo, oviefe that four
or five large fires mui, pueftos places, i WNV in each of them we
efcalentaban: i defque vian Havi taken any force that i heat, we
wore hafta the other, so apriefa that CAFI feet do not give us the
fuel dexaban i EFTA way we hafta fus Cafas, where we found they had
made to VNA Cafa nofotros, many fires in it i: i defde à vn hour
Havi arrived, I started to dance, i make big fiefta (which lasted
all night) but not for nofotros Havi pleasure fiefta or source,
when we efperando of Havi facrificar, i am about to give us PEFCO
Estate i, i do very good treatment, we afeguramos something, i just
lost the fear of facrificio.

_CAP. XIII.

Fupimos as Chriftianos._ Efte mifmo other day I saw those indus vn
vn Refcate, i was not conofcì which Havi nofotros them because i
was wondering where Havi havido, refpondieron them feñas me that
faith is Havi Men like nofotros other since that eftaban back.

I see efto, Embi Chriftianos two, and two Indians, who moftrafen those
people, i mui nearly ran into them there, who also came to bufcarnos
because the Indians that there were, the joy of Havi nofotros, i
was eftos Captains Dorantes Andrès and Alonfo of Caftillo, with all
the people of Barca fu.

And reached nofotros, faith efpantaron lot of us in the manner
eftabamos i mui refcibieron great pity not to have to give us,
than any other brought COFA, which had veftida fine.

And there eftuvieron with nofotros, i told us, as five of those
mifmo Month, it was given to Barca Havi Through league, i mean
there, i efcapado Havi them, so no perderfe COFA: i remember marinate
together fu Barca i go there which tuviefen force, i difpoficion
for it, the other quedarfe that there hafta convaleciefen to irfe
as pudiefen by Luengo in Cofta, i alli efperafen that, hafta llevafe
with God nofotros earth Chriftianos; as i penfamos, afi pufimos us
so i echafemos before the Water Boat, Tavera, vn nueftra Knight
Company, died i la Barca nofotros penfabamos that lead to HiCo fu,
i could not faith foftener à fi mifma , which was later sunk, i
look like the art that I have said, the most defnudos i, i as the
time to walk Recio, i pafar Rios, i Ancona to swim or take baftimento
any way or to take, to determine what the necefidad pedia, who was
wintering there, i agree too, that four men, that more recent
eftaban, à fuefen Panuco, creiendo that eftabamos near there, which
i fi Nueftro Lord God fuefe fervido lead there, diefen of avifo and
stayed behind at the island of nueftra necefidad i, i work.

Eftos mui were great swimmers, i called the VNO Alvaro Fernandez, Portuguese,
Carpenter, i Marinero the name Mendez fegundo faith i the third Figueroa,
who was from Toledo, the fourth, Aftudillo, born CAFRA wore config
vn Indus , which was the island _CAP.

XIV.

As they left the faith four Chriftianos._ Matches eftos four
Chriftianos, graphical fufcediò a few days this time of cold, i tempeftades
that India could not boot the roots: i the canals that PEFC Havi ia no
benefit either, as i the Cafas were so defabrigadas, començòfe
People die i Chriftianos five, in which eftaban ranch in Cofta,
reached such eftremo who ate the vnos faith to others, remains hafta
folo WNV, which by no huvo fer folo comiefe him.

The names of these eftos fon: Sierra, Diego Lopez, Corral, Palacios,
Gonçalo Ruiz. CAFOs Efte altered faith of both the Indians, including
hovo i efcandalo so great, so that certainly fi to the top they saw,
the kill, i see us all work great. Finally, in a short time mui, eighty
men who arrived there from both parties were living folos Fifteen: i
defpues dead eftos, gave the Indians of the Earth eftomago NPV disease,
who died in the middle of the People them: i creieron that we were nofotros
which MatAB i mui Taking by the way, agreed among themselves to kill
those who remained Havi. Since it came to putting into effect, vn
Indus, which I had, I dixo, not creiefen that nofotros MatAB where
we were because we had such power nofotros fi, efcusàramos that
many of nofotros did not die, as they vian Havi who died, so that
they could remedy, i no that i stayed behind a few fine mui, i
neither to harm or injury, that it was best that we dexafen.

And quifo Nueftro Lord, that the other figures Efte CONFEJES, pareicer
i, i host eftorvò fu propofito faith. A name pufimos EFTA Island,
Isle of Malhando.

People there are great fon, i difpueftos well: they have no other weapons
Flechas fine, i Arcos, which by fon eftremo dieftros. Men have the NPV
of NPV Teta Horadada party to another, i have some that both ai i make
the hole, bring VNA Cane atravefada, as long as two spans i half,
so i gruefa as two fingers: also bring broken Abax of the lip, i puefto
vn pedaço in the Cane, thin as a finger. Mugeres fon for the hard
work.

The room that makes EFTA Island is defde October, in order to Hebrero
hafta. The future is keeping the roots that I said, facadas Water
debaxo by November i December. Channels, i have no more fish for Efte
time AI ahead eat the roots. In order to go to other parts Hebrero à
bufcar that mantenerfe, because then the roots begin to NAFC, i fon
no good. People of the world is that most children love fus, i make
them better treatment: when i acaefce have any faith that he killed
the Son lloranle Parents, relatives i, i all the people, crying
hard i vn Year fulfilled, that every day in the morning, before
dawn, start first to mourn the Fathers, after i efto the People: i
do efto mifmo at noon, when amanefce i: i pafado a year who have
cried, the hacenle honor the dead, lavanfe i, i limpianfe of bringing
smut.

All EFTA Defuntos cry way, the old Falvo, who do not CAFOs, because
they say that i have pafado future time, from any of them i ai, before
occupying the earth, i removed the maintenance of children. Coftumbre
are burying the dead, the thin fon fon Fificos between them, which
eftos quemanlos i while the fire burns all eftàn dancing, great fiefta
mui i doing, i do the huefos powders: i pafado vn Year, when fus
faith do honor all jafan faith in them, i give to the relatives of
those powders the drink huefos Water.

Each VNA VNA has Muger conofcida. The fon Fificos men more freedom,
you can have two, three i, i eftas between ai mui amiftad great, i line.
When it comes to any future CAFA Daughter, which takes as Muger,
graphical day that her faith CAFA, caçando kill everything, or PEFC,
brings everything to the CAFA Muger fu of the Father, so ofar take
or eat any of it COFA, i of the Father-in-law of CAFA will take him
to eat i Efte time around the mother in law Mother-in-law or not
within CAFA fu, has neither the entering of CAFA-Laws, or brothers:
i fi Acaf faith encounter somewhere, faith defvian vn Ballefta WNV
shot the other, i mean that afi apartandofe van, carrying the head
Baxa, i pueftos eye on land, because they are bad for COFA verfe
or hablarfe.

The Mugeres are free to communicate with converfar i-Laws, Relatives i
i EFTA coftumbre faith has defde Island, hafta more than fifty
miles inside the earth.

Coftumbre Another ai, i is, that when any child, or brother dies in
CAFA muriere where three mefes not bufcan eat before faith dexan
starving, i relatives, i Neighbors provide what they eat.

And in the time that so many people died here eftuvimos of them in
the most Cafas Havi mui great hunger, save fu coftumbre also, i
ceremony i bufcaban those who, for many who work for the time so
fer Recio, could do just fine mui i EFTA caufa by the Indians that
I had faith falieron of the island, i vnas in Canoas faith pafaron
to-earth firm vnas Baìas, where many Hoftiones Tenti i not three
mefes Year COFA other comments, i mui drink bad water.

Have a great lack of firewood, i mui grande Mofquitos abundance.

Cafas Its built-in fon Efter, fobre many of Hoftiones CAFC, i fobre
they sleep encueros, i do not have thinner Acaf; afi i hafta
eftuvimos in April so that Cofta went to the sea, do Moras ate
carcasses of the month, in the qual cefan do not Areito fus, i
fieftas.

_CAP. XV. From what we acaefciò in the Isle of Malhado._ On
that island, I spot quifieron we do Fificos, to examine them,
or ask us qualifications, because they cure diseases foplando the
sick, with that i foplo i Hand , the disease miss him, i sent that
hiciefemos us what mifmo i firviefemos on one thing: we nofotros
They laughed, saying that it was mockery, not fabio i heal, i took
us for efto food hafta that it hiciefemos told us that.

And seeing nueftra obstinacy, vn Indus dixo me to me, that I Fabia no
say in what they said, nothing that is not using what the Fabian, AC Rock,
i cofas that other faith bred by Campos, with virtue, that i VNA
Stone him with hot traiendola by eftomago, fanaba, i removed the
pain, i nofotros that we were men, was that we had a larger basis,
i can.

Anyway, we were in much necefidad, hovimos what to do, so feared that
no one llevafe why the penalty. The way they have in curarfe is EFTA:
viendofe in sick, call Medico vn, i defpues curing folo not give you
everything you pofeen, but between fus bufcan cofas relatives to
give.

What the doctor does is vnas dalle bands where the pain is, i chupanles
to round them. Dan cautery fire, which is regarded as including COFA
provechofa mui, i I've experienced, i fufcediò me well so i defpues of
efto, foplan that place that hurts, i think efto with them, that faith
takes away evil. The way they cured nofotros was fantiguandolos, foplarlos
i, i Recar _Pater nofter_ vn, vn _Ave Maria_ i, i pray the best that could
Nueftro Lord God, to them diefe falud i efpirafe in them, we
hiciefen any good treatment.

Quifo Lord God Nueftro, i fu mifericordia that all hose fuplicamos by
whoever, then that fantiguamos, said to the others that eftaban
orphans, i good i by Efte refpecto good treatment towards us, i
dexaban eating them by to darnoslo nofotros, they gave Cueros i, i
cofillas other.

She was so hungry that there eftremada the faith step, which often eftuve
three days to eat any COFA, i also eftaban them, i fer parefciame
COFA impofible last life, but in other famines bigger, i necefidades
I defpues as hereinafter dire.

The Indians had Alonfo of Caftillo i Andrès Dorantes, i people that
Havi is alive, as were another language, i another kindred, faith
pafaron to another part of the earth-eating Hoftiones firm, i alli
eftuvieron hafta the first day of April, i bolvieron then to the
island, of which there eftaba hafta two leagues, so wider Water
Island i have half a league across, i five in length.

Theodora began to think of her as not only harmless, but likely to be
useful in the parish; and could afford to let Arthur have her for
a plaything, since he made herself his confidante. She withdrew her
opposition; but it was too late. Arthur had declared that he could not
live there without £2500 a year, and this his father neither could nor
would give him. The expense of building the house, and the keeping up of
such a garden and establishment, did not leave too much available of the
wealth Lady Martindale had brought, nor was the West Indian property
in a prosperous state; the demand was preposterous; and Theodora found
herself obliged to defend poor Violet, who, her aunt declared, must have
instigated it in consequence of the notice lavished upon her; while, as
Theodora averred with far more truth, 'it was as much as the poor thing
did to know the difference between a ten-pound note and a five.' Twelve
hundred pounds a year, and the rent of a house in London, was what
his elder brother would have married upon; and this, chiefly by John's
influence, was fixed as the allowance, in addition to his pay; and as
his promotion was now purchased for him, he had far more than he had
any right to expect, though he did not seem to think so, and grumbled
to Theodora about the expense of the garden, as if it was consuming his
patrimony.

How the income would hold out, between his carelessness and her
inexperience, was a question over which his father sighed, and gave good
advice, which Arthur heard with the same sleepy, civil air of attention,
as had served him under the infliction many times before.

John gave only one piece of advice, namely, that he should consign a
fixed sum for household expenses into his wife's hands; so that he might
not be subject to continued applications.

On this he acted; and subtracting to himself, wine, men, and horses, the
full amount of his bachelor income, he, for the first time, communicated
to Violet the result of the various consultations.

'So the upshot of it all is, that we are to have a house somewhere in
Belgravia,' he began.

'That is near Lord Martindale's London house, is it not?'

'Yes; you will be in the way of all that is going on.'

'Do we go there next month?'

'I suppose so.'

'Oh! I am glad.'

'Are you? I thought you liked being here.'

'Yes, yes, of course, that I do; but it will be so pleasant to be at
home, and to have you all to myself.'

She repented the next moment, as if it had been a complaint; but he was
gratified, and called her a little monopolist.

'Oh, I don't mean to be troublesome to you,' said she, earnestly; 'I
shall have so much more to do in our own house, that I shall not miss
you so much when you are out; besides, we can have Annette to stay with
us.'

'We'll see about that. But look here,' laying a paper with some figures
before her; 'that's all my father leaves me for you to keep house with.
I put it into your hands, and you must do the best you can with it.'

'You don t mean to put all that into my hands!' exclaimed Violet in
alarm. 'What a sum!'

'You won't think so by the end of the year; but mind, this must do; it
will be of no use to come to me for more.'

'Then is it little?' asked Violet.

'See what you think of it by and by; you won't find it such an easy
thing to make both ends meet.'

'I will write and ask mamma to tell me how to manage.'

'Indeed,' said Arthur, with sharpness such as she had never seen in him
before, 'I beg you will not. I won't have my affairs the town talk
of Wrangerton.' But seeing her look frightened, and ready to cry, he
softened instantly, and said, affectionately, 'No, no, Violet, we
must keep our concerns to ourselves. I don't want to serve for the
entertainment of Matilda's particular friends.'

'Mamma wouldn't tell--'

'I'll trust no house of seven women.'

'But how am I to know how to manage?'

'Never mind; you'll get on. It comes as naturally to women as if it was
shooting or fishing.'

'I wonder how I shall begin! I don't know anything.'

'Buy a cookery book.'

'Aunt Moss gave me one; I didn't mean that. But, oh, dear, there's the
hiring of servants, and buying things!'

'Don't ask me: it is woman's work, and always to be done behind the
scenes. If there's a thing I mortally hate, it is those housekeeper
bodies who go about talking of their good cooks.'

Violet was silenced, but after much meditation she humbly begged for
answers to one or two questions. 'Was she to pay the servants' wages out
of this?'

'Your maids--of course.'

'And how many are we to have?'

'As many as will do the work.'

'A cook and housemaid--I wonder if that would be enough?'

'Don't ask me, that's all'

'I know you don't like to be teased,' she said, submissively; 'but one
or two things I do want to know. Is James to be in the house?'

'Why, yes; he is a handy fellow. We will have him down for Simmonds to
give him some training.'

'Then ought we to have two maids or three?'

He held up his hands, and escaped.

That morning John, happening to come into the drawing-room, found Violet
disconsolately covering a sheet of paper with figures.

'Abstruse calculations?' said he.

'Yes, very,' said she, sighing, with the mystified face of a child
losing its way in a long sum.

He did not like to leave her in such evident difficulties, and said,
with a smile, 'Your budget? Are you good at arithmetic?'

'I can do the sums, if that was all, but I don't know what to set out
from, or anything about it. Mamma said she could not think how I should
keep house.'

'She would be the best person to give you counsel, I should think.'

'Yes, but--' and she looked down, struggling with tears, 'I must not
write to ask her.'

'How so!'

'Arthur says the Wrangerton people would gossip, and I should not like
that,' said she; 'only it is very hard to make out for myself, and those
things tease Arthur.'

'They are not much in his line,' said John; 'I don't know,' he added,
hesitating, 'whether it would be of any use to you to talk it over with
me. There was a time when I considered the management of such an income;
and though it never came to practice, mine may be better than no notions
at all.'

'Oh, thank you!' said Violet, eagerly; then, pausing, she said, with a
sweet embarrassment, 'only--you can't like it.'

'Thank you,' replied he, with kind earnestness; 'I should like to be of
use to you.'

'It is just what I want. I am sure Arthur would like me to do it. You
see this is what he gives me, and I am to buy everything out of it.'

'The best plan,' said John; 'it never answers to be always applying for
money.'

'No,' said Violet, thoughtfully, as she recollected certain home scenes,
and then was angry with herself for fancying Arthur could wear such
looks as those which all the house dreaded.

Meanwhile John had perceived how differently Arthur had apportioned the
income from what his own intentions had been. He had great doubts of the
possibility of her well-doing, but he kept them to himself. He advised
her to consider her items, and soon saw she was more bewildered than
helpless. He knew no more than Arthur on the knotty point of the number
of maids, but he was able to pronounce her plan sensible, and her eyes
brightened, as she spoke of a housemaid of mamma's who wanted to better
herself, and get out of the way of the little ones, 'who were always
racketing.'

'And now,' said John, 'we passed over one important question--or is that
settled otherwise?--your own pocket-money!'

'Oh! I have plenty. Arthur gave me fifty pounds when we went through
London, and I have twelve left.'

'But for the future! Is it included here?'

'I should think so. Oh!' shocked at the sum he set down, 'a quarter of
that would be enough for my dress.'

'I don't think Miss Standaloft would say so,' said John, smiling.

'But Arthur said we must economize, and I promised to be as little
expense as possible. Please let me write down half that.'

'No, no,' said John, retaining the pencil, 'not with my consent. Leave
yourself the power of giving. Besides, this is to cover all the sundries
you cannot charge as household expenses. Now let me mark off another
hundred for casualties, and here is what you will have for the year. Now
divide.'

'Surely, two people and three servants can't eat all that in one week.'

'Fires, candles,' said John, amused, but poor Violet was quite
overpowered.

'Oh, dear! how many things I never thought of! Mamma said I was too
young! These coals. Can you tell me anything about them?'

'I am afraid not. You are getting beyond me. If you wanted to know the
cost of lodgings in Italy or the south of France, I could help you; but,
after all, experience is better bought than borrowed.'

'But what shall I do? Suppose I make Arthur uncomfortable, or spend his
money as I ought not when he trusts me?'

'Suppose you don't,' said John. 'Why should you not become an excellent
housewife? Indeed, I think you will' he proceeded, as she fixed her eyes
on him. 'You see the principle in its right light. This very anxiety
is the best pledge. If your head was only full of the pleasure of being
mistress of a house, that would make me uneasy about you and Arthur.'

'Oh! that would be too bad! Mamma has talked to me so much. She said I
must make it a rule never to have debts. She showed me how she pays
her bills every week, and gave me a great book like hers. I began at
Winchester.'

'Why, Violet, instead of knowing nothing, I think you know a great
deal!'

She smiled, and said something about mamma. 'I don't say you will not
make mistakes,' he continued, 'but they will be steps to learn by. Your
allowance is not large. It seems only fair to tell you that it may not
be sufficient. So, if you find the expenses exceed the week's portion,
don't try to scramble on; it will only be discomfort at the time, and
will lead to worse. Go boldly to Arthur, and make him attend; it is the
only way to peace and security.'

'I see,' said Violet, thoughtfully. 'Oh, I hope I shall do right. One
thing I should like. I mean, I thought one ought to set apart something
for giving away.'

'That is one use in reserving something for yourself,' said John, in his
kindest manner. 'Of the rest, you are only Arthur's steward.'

'Yes, I hope I shall manage well.'

'You will if you keep your present frame of mind.'

'But I am so young and ignorant. I did not think enough about it when I
was married,' said Violet, sorrowfully, 'and how it seems all to come
on me. To have all his comfort and the well-being of a whole house
depending on such as I am.'

'I can only say one thing in answer, Violet, what I know was the best
comfort to one who, without it, would have sunk under the weight of
responsibility.' His whole countenance altered, his voice gave way, a
distressing fit of coughing came on, the colour flushed into his face,
and he pressed his hand on his chest. Violet was frightened, but it
presently ceased, and after sitting for a few moments, exhausted, with
his head resting on his hand, he took up the pencil, and wrote down--'As
thy day, so shall thy strength be'--pushed it towards her, and slowly
left the room.

Violet shed a few tears over the paper, and was the more grieved when
she heard of his being confined to his room by pain in the side. She
told Arthur what had passed. 'Ah! poor John,' he said, 'he never can
speak of Helen, and any agitation that brings on that cough knocks him
up for the rest of the day. So he has been trying to "insense" you, has
he? Very good-natured of him.'

'I am so grieved. I was afraid it would be painful to him. But what was
the responsibility he spoke of?'

'Looking after her grandfather, I suppose. He was imbecile all
the latter part of his life. Poor John, they were both regularly
sacrificed.'

John took the opportunity of a visit from his father that afternoon to
tell him how much good sense and right feeling Violet had shown, and
her reluctance to appropriate to herself what he had insisted on as
absolutely necessary.

'That is only inexperience, poor girl,' said Lord Martindale. 'She does
not know what she will want. If it is not confidential, I should like to
know what she allows herself.'

John mentioned the sum.

'That is mere nonsense!' exclaimed his father. 'It is not half as much
as Theodora has! And she living in London, and Arthur making such a
point about her dress. I thought you knew better, John!'

'I knew it was very little, but when I considered the rest, I did not
see how she could contrive to give herself more.'

'There must be some miscalculation,' said Lord Martindale. 'There is not
the least occasion for her to be straitened. You thought yourself the
allowance was ample.'

'That it is; but you know Arthur has been used to expensive habits.'

'More shame for him.'

'But one can hardly expect him to reduce at once. I do think he is
sincere in his promises, but he will be careless, even in ordinary
expenditure. I don't say this is what ought to be, but I fear it will
be. All the prudence and self-denial must be upon her side.'

'And that from a girl of sixteen, universally admired! What a business
it is! Not that I blame her, poor thing, but I don't see what is to
become of them.'

The conversation was not without results. Lord Martindale, some little
time after, put into Violet's hand an envelope, telling her she must
apply the contents to her own use; and she was astounded at finding it a
cheque for £100. He was going to London, with both his sons, to choose a
house for Arthur, and to bid farewell to John, who was warned, by a few
chilly days, to depart for a winter in Madeira.

Violet was, during her husband's absence, to be left at Rickworth;
and in the last week she had several other presents, a splendid
dressing-case from Lady Martindale, containing more implements than she
knew how to use, also the print of Lalla Rookh; and even little Miss
Piper had spent much time and trouble on a very ugly cushion. Theodora
declared her present should be useful, and gave all the household linen,
for the purpose of having it hemmed by her school-children;--and this,
though she and Miss Piper sat up for three nights till one o'clock to
hasten it, was so far from ready, that Captain and Mrs. Martindale would
have begun the world without one table-cloth, if old Aunt Moss had not
been hemming for them ever since the day of Arthur's proposal.

Theodora was weary and impatient of the conflict of influence, and
glad to be left to her own pursuits, while she thought that, alone with
Violet, Arthur must surely be brought to a sense of his mistake.

Violet's heart bounded at the prospect of a renewal of the happy days at
Winchester, and of a release from the restraint of Martindale, and the
disappointment of making no friends with the family,--Mr. Martindale was
the only one of them with whom she was sorry to part; and she had seen
comparatively little of him. Indeed, when the three gentlemen set out,
she thought so much of Arthur's being away for a week, that she could
not care for John's voyage to Madeira, and looked preoccupied when he
affectionately wished her good-bye, telling her to watch for him in the
spring,--her house would be his first stage on his return. Then, as he
saw her clinging to Arthur to the last moment, and coming down with him
to the bottom of the long steps, he thought within himself, 'And by that
time there will be some guessing how much strength and stability there
is with all that sweetness, and she will have proved how much there is
to trust to in his fondness!'

There was not much time for bewailing the departures before Emma Brandon
came to claim her guest; and the drive was pleasant enough to make
Violet shake off her depression, and fully enjoy the arrival at
Rickworth, which now bore an aspect so much more interesting than on her
former drive.

The wooded hills in the first flush of autumn beauty sloped softly down
to the green meadows, and as the carriage crossed the solid-looking old
stone bridge, Violet exclaimed with transport, at a glimpse she caught
of a gray ruin--the old priory! She was so eager to see it that she and
Emma left the carriage at the park gate, and walked thither at once.

Little of the building remained, only a few of the cloister arches, and
the stumps of broken columns to mark the form of the chapel; but the
arch of the west window was complete, and the wreaths of ivy hid its
want of tracery, while a red Virginian creeper mantled the wall. All was
calm and still, the greensward smooth and carefully mown, not a nettle
or thistle visible, but the floriated crosses on the old stone coffin
lids showing clearly above the level turf, shaded by a few fine old
trees, while the river glided smoothly along under the broad floating
water-lily leaves, and on its other side the green lawn was repeated,
cattle quietly grazing on the rich pasture, shut in by the gently rising
woods. The declining sun cast its long shadows, and all was peace,--the
only sounds, the robin's note and the ripple of the stream.

Violet stood with her hands resting on Emma's arm, scarcely daring to
break the silence. 'How lovely!' said she, after a long interval. 'O
Emma, how fond you must be of this place!'

'Yes, it is beautiful,' said Emma, but with less satisfaction than
Violet expected.

'It is worth all the gardens at Martindale.'

'To be sure it is,' said Emma, indignantly.

'It puts me in mind of St. Cross.'

'But St. Cross is alive, not a ruin,' said Emma, with a sigh, and she
asked many questions about it, while showing Violet the chief points of
interest, where the different buildings had been, and the tomb of
Osyth, the last prioress. Her whole manner surprised Violet, there was a
reverence as if they were actually within a church, and more melancholy
than pleasure in the possession of what, nevertheless, the young heiress
evidently loved with all her heart.

Turning away at length, they crossed the park, and passed through the
garden, which was gay with flowers, though much less magnificent than
Mr. Harrison's. Emma said, mamma was a great gardener, and accordingly
they found her cutting off flowers past their prime. She gave Violet a
bouquet of geranium and heliotrope, and conducted her to her room with
that motherly kindness and solicitude so comfortable to a lonely guest
in a strange house.

Not that the house could long seem strange to Violet. It was an
atmosphere of ease, where she could move and speak without feeling on
her good behaviour. Everything throughout was on an unpretending scale,
full of comfort, and without display, with a regularity and punctuality
that gave a feeling of repose.

Violet was much happier than she had thought possible without Arthur,
though her pleasures were not such as to make a figure in history. There
were talks and walks, drives and visits to the school, readings and
discussions, and the being perfectly at home and caressed by mother
and daughter. Lady Elizabeth had all the qualities that are better than
intellect, and enough of that to enter into the pursuits of cleverer
people. Emma had more ability, and so much enthusiasm, that it was well
that it was chastened by her mother's sound sense, as well as kept under
by her own timidity.

It was not till Violet was on the point of departure that she knew the
secret of Emma's heart. The last Sunday evening before Arthur was to
fetch her away, she begged to walk once more to the Priory, and have
another look at it. 'I think,' said she, 'it will stay in my mind like
Helvellyn in the distance.'

Emma smiled, and soon they stood in the mellow light of the setting sun,
beside the ruin. 'How strange,' said Violet, 'to think that it is three
hundred years since Sunday came to this chapel.'

'I wonder' said Emma, breaking off, then beginning, 'O Violet, it is the
wish of my heart to bring Sundays back to it.'

'Emma! but could it be built up again?'

'Mamma says nothing must be done till I am twenty-five--almost six years
hence. Not then, unless I am tame and sober, and have weighed it well.'

'Restore it?--build a church?'

'I could have a sort of alms-house, with old people and children, and we
could look after them ourselves.'

'That would be delightful. Oh, I hope you will do it.'

'Don't think of it more than as a dream to myself and mamma. I could not
help saying it to you just then; but it is down too deep generally even
for mamma. It must come back somehow to God's service. Don't talk of it
any more, Violet, dearest, only pray that I may not be unworthy.'

Violet could hardly believe a maiden with such hopes and purposes
could be her friend, any more than Prioress Osyth herself; and when,
half-an-hour afterwards, she heard Emma talking over the parish and
Sunday-school news in an ordinary matter-of-fact way, she did not seem
like the same person.

There were many vows of correspondence, and auguries of meeting next
spring. Lady Elizabeth thought it right that her daughter should see
something of London life, and the hope of meeting Violet was the one
thing that consoled Emma, and Violet talked of the delight of making her
friend and Annette known to each other.

To this, as Lady Elizabeth observed, Arthur said not a word. She could
not help lecturing him a little on the care of his wife, and he listened
with a very good grace, much pleased at their being so fond of her.

She wished them good-bye very joyously, extremely happy at having her
husband again, and full of pleasant anticipations of her new home.


PART II


     There's pansies for you, that's for thoughts.

     --Hamlet


CHAPTER 1


     How far less am I blest than they,
     Daily to pine, and waste with care,
     Like the poor plant, that from its stem
     Divided, feels the chilling air.
                       --MICKLE'S Cumnor Hall


Arthur and Violet arrived at their new home in the twilight, when
the drawing-room fire burnt brightly, giving a look of comfort. The
furniture was good; and by the fire stood a delightful little low chair
with a high back, and a pretty little rosewood work-table, on which
was a coloured glass inkstand, and a table-stand of books in choice
bindings.

'Arthur, Arthur, how charming! I am sure this is your doing.'

'No, it is John's; I can't devise knick-knackeries, but he is a thorough
old bachelor, and has been doing all sorts of things to the house, which
have made it more tolerable.'

'How very kind he is! The books--how beautiful! Just what I wanted.
That one he lent me--he talked to me of that. This Emma has--I saw your
sister reading that, and wished to see more of it. But I can't look at
them all now; I must see Sarah, she was to bring something from home.'

A Wrangerton face had great charms, though it was starched and severe,
without one smile in answer to the joyous greeting, 'Well, Sarah, I am
glad you could come. How are they all?'

'Thank you, ma'am, Mr. and Mrs. Moss, and the young ladies, and Mr.
Albert, are all very well, and desires their love,' replied a voice
solemn enough for the announcement that they were all at the point of
death. Violet's spirits would have been damped but for the sight of the
table spread with parcels directed in dear familiar writing, and she
was pouncing on them when Sarah began her grave requests for orders, and
Violet felt her own ignorance and incapacity growing more patent every
moment as questions about arrangements beset and tormented her on every
side. At last she was left to enjoy the out-spreading of the precious
gifts, the devices characteristic of the kind hands that had prepared
them, and all her own private possessions--a welcome sight.

It was a happy evening, and the days that followed were full of pleasure
and occupation--in settling her treasures and making purchases. When she
seated herself in her own carriage, she thought now indeed it would
be delightful to show herself to her mother and sisters. She had no
relation in London but an uncle, a solicitor, fond and proud of her,
but too sensible to wish to frequent her house. He gave her a silver
tea-pot; and being asked to dinner now and then on Sunday was all the
attention he required. Her brother Albert did, indeed, sometimes come
to town on business; and Violet, after many hopes, was, one evening,
charmed at seeing him make his appearance. Arthur asked him to stay to
dinner, after which they were going to a party.

Albert, a spruce, good-looking youth, had been too grand to make friends
with so young a sister; but, now that she was a person of consequence,
his tone was different. He talked his best, and she had a perfect feast
of Wrangerton news--showed him all her presents, and enjoyed the thought
of Annette's smile at hearing of her little Violet stepping into her
carriage for a party at a countess's.

Arthur said London was empty, but Violet thought her visitors
innumerable, and, as the autumn advanced towards winter, had many
invitations. She enjoyed going out; her shyness had nearly worn off;
and she was everywhere received so as to make Arthur, proud and pleased.
Indeed she had doubts whether she was not growing too gay, and if it was
right to pay so much attention to her appearance. She asked Arthur, and
was laughed at for her pains.

However, Violet was not without her troubles from the first. She was
very much afraid of Sarah, and never spoke to her without shrinking back
into Miss Violet, and being conscious that it was mere presumption in
her to try to order one so much wiser than herself. The cook, a relation
of Miss Standaloft, was much more smooth and deferential, full of
resources, which seemed to come from Mrs. Martindale herself; and though
the weekly bills always exceeded her reckonings, so many things were
wanting, as Mrs. Cook observed, just getting into a house. The first
time of having any guests at dinner, Violet was in much anxiety, but
all went off to general satisfaction until the bills came in on Monday
morning. The cost was beyond her calculations, exceeded her week's
portion, and devoured the savings of the days when they had not dined at
home. Invitations had been sent out for another party, and Violet tried
to bring it within bounds; but the cook was civilly superior--'It was
always so in the first families, such as she was accustomed to, but if
Mrs. Martindale liked to have things in a different style--'

She knew Arthur would consent to no external change, and all she could
do was to look at the price of all she ordered, reject sundry expensive
delicacies, and trust to living on the relics of the feast for the rest
of the week; but, behold! they scarcely served for one luncheon, and on
Monday the bills had mounted up in an inexplicable manner. There were no
savings left, and she made up the deficiency from her own resources. A
third party was impending, and she strove more resolutely for frugality.
'Well, ma'am, if you choose, it must be so; but it was not what I was
used to in the families such as I have lived in.'

But Violet was firm, whereupon the cook harassed her with contrarieties;
and late hours and London air had so far told upon her that she
could not shake off her cares cheerfully. She knew all would turn out
ill--tormented herself--brought on a headache, and looked unwell when
the evening came. The cook sent up the dinner with just enough want of
care to keep her in such continual apprehension that she could hardly
attend to the conversation.

'You did not make such a good hand of it to-day,' said Arthur, when the
guests were gone; 'that soup was ditch-water, and--'

Violet was so worn out that she burst into tears. 'Hey? What's the
matter now? I said nothing to cry for.'

She tried to speak, but the tears would not let her.

'Well, if you can't bear to be told everything is not perfection, I
don't know what is to be done.' And Arthur, in displeasure, took up a
candle and walked off to smoke a cigar in his sitting-room down-stairs.

Her tears were checked by consternation, and, earnest to be forgiven,
she followed; then, as he turned impatiently, said, in a trembling
pleading voice, 'Dear Arthur, I've done crying. I did not mean to be
cross.'

'Well, that's enough, never mind,' said he, not unkindly, but as if in
haste to dismiss the subject, and be left to the peaceful enjoyment of
his cigar.

'And you forgive me?'

'Forgive? nonsense--only don't begin crying about nothing again. There's
nothing more intolerable than for a woman to be always crying, whenever
one speaks to her.'

''Twas not so much that,' said Violet, meekly, 'as that I was vexed
at the dinner not looking well, and it won't, without spending such
quantities of money!'

'Quantities--what do you call quantities?'

She named the cost of the last dinner, and he laughed at her horror;
then, when she was going to prove that it was disproportionate to their
means, he silenced her:

'Well, well, never mind; we are not going to give any more dinners just
yet; but when we do, have done with pinching and squeezing. Why, you
don't look fit to be seen after it.'

'I'm only tired.'

'Ay, with worrying. Go to bed and to sleep, and forget it all!'

She was consoled for that time; but the perplexity continued. She strove
to reduce the ordinary expenditure, but Arthur had a fashion of bringing
home a friend to dinner without notice; and she underwent indescribable
miseries, while reflecting on her one chicken, or five mutton chops; and
though something was sure to be extemporized by the cook, the result was
that these casual guests were as expensive as a banquet. She ventured
to beg Arthur to tell her when he was going to ask any one, but he was
vexed, and said he liked to bring home a man by chance; there need be
nothing out of the common way, and a dinner for two was a dinner
for three. Poor Violet thought, 'Ah! this is not like the time at
Winchester. It is my own fault, I am not companion, enough.'

She began to grow tired of going out in the evening; late hours tried
her; she felt listless and unwell; and her finances could not support
the dress expenses, but when she tried to excuse herself, she found
Arthur determined on taking her out, though he had previously grumbled,
and declared he only went for her sake. When she looked pale and languid
he seemed annoyed, in a way that gave her the impression that he valued
nothing but her beauty. She believed he found home dull, and her not
what he expected.

The truth was, perhaps, that Violet's spirits were naturally not strong,
and she was scarcely equal to the cares that had come on her. She missed
the companionship of the large family at home; and a slight degree of
indisposition or of anxiety was sufficient to set her tormenting herself
with every imaginable fear and grief; above all, the dread that he was
not pleased with her.

She believed herself to have strictly adhered to the rule of paying
for everything at once; but she was dismayed by a shower of bills at
Christmas, for things ordered by the cook without her knowledge, several
of which she disowned altogether; and several that her memory and 'great
book' both declared she had paid; though the tradesmen and the cook,
through whom the money had been sent, stoutly denied it. She was
frightened, paid the sums, and so went the last remains of Lord
Martindale's present.

Sure that the woman was dishonest, yet not knowing how to prove it;
afraid to consult Arthur on the household concerns, that he detested;
and with a nervous dread of a disturbance, Violet made arrangements for
conveying no more payments through Mrs. Cook; and, for the rest, thought
she must go on as she could, till the time should come, when, near the
end of May, she reckoned on having her mother with her. She would repair
her mistakes, make her feel herself mistress in her own house, and help
her to all she wanted to know, without fear of Wrangerton gossip. That
hope strengthened and cheered her in all her troubles; and oh! suppose
Annette came too!

Poor Violet! the first time she referred to her mother's coming, Arthur
looked annoyed, gave a sort of whistle, and said, as if searching for an
excuse, 'Why, they never could spare her from Wrangerton.'

'O, that they would,' said Violet, eagerly; 'or if not mamma herself, at
least, I am sure, Matilda would come to me, or Annette.'

'Whew!' again whistled Arthur; 'I don't know whether that will do.'

'Arthur!'

'There will be my mother close by, and Lady Elizabeth. No, no, you won't
want to have any one up from there.'

'May I not have my own mamma?' pleaded poor Violet, urged into something
like pertinacity.

But Arthur cut her short; his great dislike to what he had to say making
him speak the more ungraciously: 'I don't want to vex you, Violet, but
once for all we must come to an understanding. You must not expect to
have your family here. They are good sort of people, and all that style
of thing,'--he faltered at her looks of imploring consternation, and
tried to work himself into anger in order to be able to finish. 'It
is of no use looking wretched, I tell you, you must put it out of your
head. They belong to a different set altogether, and it won't do any
way. There now, don't go and be nervous about yourself; Theodora shall
see to you, and you'll do very well, I have no doubt.'

With these words he hastily quitted her, that he might not witness the
distress he had occasioned, though he had not the least idea what his
refusal was to her.

The sense of her own helplessness and inexperience, and the prospect of
illness, without mother or sister, were lost in the more overpowering
sorrow at his unkindness. How could he love her if he denied her this at
such a time, and in such a manner?' He is ashamed of my family! ashamed
of me! He is disappointed in me! I can't make it pleasant to him at
home. I am not even good-tempered when I am not well, and I am not half
as pretty as I used to be! Oh! if he had but married me for anything
but my prettiness! But I was not worth vexing every one for! I am only a
plague and trouble! Well, I dare say I shall die, now there is no one
to take care of me, and then, perhaps, he will be sorry for me. Just at
last, I'll tell him how I did mean to be a good wife, and tried all I
could.'

But then poor Violet fell into a maze of terror. She roused herself and
dried her tears on hearing some one approaching. It was James, bringing
in a parcel. It contained a beautiful and costly silk dress. After the
first glance she pushed it from her, and her grief burst forth again.
'Does he think that can make up to me for my mother? How silly he must
think me! Yet he is kind and tries to please me still, though I am so
troublesome! Dear, dear Arthur!'

She took it back upon her lap, and tried to admire, but her heart failed
her; and she could not look at it till the sound of his entrance revived
her; she felt as if she had been injuring him, and recalling her smiles,
met him with what he thought delighted gratitude.

He was relieved to find the late subject blown over, and only wishing to
keep it out of her mind, he invited her to take a walk.

Violet had begun to dread his walks, for he was a loiterer, apt to go
further and stay out longer than he intended, and she could not bear
to tease him by hints of fatigue; but to-day she could not demur at
anything he asked, and she only observed that they had better not go
far, as they had an engagement for the evening.

At first the air and his attention did her good; but when she saw
Captain Fitzhugh approaching, she knew that Arthur's arm was the only
further use she should have of him, and there would be an endless
sauntering and talk about horses or fishing, while he would all the time
fancy himself going home.

The consequence was, that she was obliged to go at once to bed on coming
in, and was declared by Arthur to have been very silly never to have
mentioned her fatigue; while Sarah, bestowing grim and sour looks upon
them both, attended on her with the most assiduous and minute care.
Arthur was greatly concerned, and very unwilling to go to the party
alone, but Violet persuaded him, and he promised to return early; then
found the evening pleasant, and never knew how time went, while she was
lying awake, imagining that something dreadful had happened to him, and
mourning over her grievances.

The effects of that over-fatigue did not pass away, and she was forced
to give up all evening engagements. He meant to be kind, but was too
ignorant and inconsiderate not to do her as much harm as good. One day
he almost overwhelmed her with attentions, the next left her to herself.
He offered to refuse all invitations for her sake, but it ended in
her spending more than half her evenings alone; and when the horse was
wanted for him in the evening, she lost her drive. Very soon she fell
out of the habit of going out, for now that she was no companion for his
long rambles, he found other ways of disposing of his afternoons; and
she was still so countrified as to dislike and dread walking alone,
even in the quiet Belgravian regions, so that she was always relieved to
decide that the gray mist was such as could do no one any good, or that
she really was not well enough for a walk.

She did not know the use of change of scene, and the bracing effect
of resolution,--she had no experience of self-management, and had
not learnt that it was a duty not to let herself pine. Though most
conscientious, she had not yet grown up to understand religion as a
present comfort. To her it was a guide and an obligation, and as such
she obeyed its dictates, to the best of her power, but only as an
obedient child, without understanding the immediate reward in this
life, namely, confidence, support, and peace. It is a feeling generally
belonging to an age beyond hers, though only to be won by faithful
discipline. She was walking in darkness, and, by and by, light might
come. But there was one omission, for which she long after grieved; and
which, though she knew it not, added to her present troubles.

All heart and hope had been taken from her since she had been forbidden
to see her mother and sister. The present was dreary, the future
nothing but gloom and apprehension, and she had little to distract her
attention. She strove hard to fulfil what she knew were duties, her
household concerns and the readings she had fixed as tasks; but these
over, she did not try to rouse her mind from her cares; nor had she
perhaps the power, for her difficulties with the cook were too much for
her, and it was very trying to spend so many hours of the dingy London
day and long evening in solitude.

Her amusing books were exhausted, and she used to lie forlorn on the
sofa, with her needlework, hearing the roar of carriage-wheels, and,
her mind roaming from the perplexities of her accounts to her sad
forebodings and her belief in Arthur's coldness, till her heart seemed
ready to break,--and her tears gathered, first in solitary drops, then
in floods. She had no one to cheer her spirits, to share her hopes and
fears. Her plans and employments were tedious to her husband, and he
must not be troubled with them,--and so, locked up within herself, they
oppressed her with care and apprehension. In letter-writing there was
only pain; she could not bear to be supposed unwell or unhappy, and,
above all, dreaded saying what might lead to an offer from her mother
to come to her. Her letters became mere comments on home news; she wrote
less frequently, feared they would think her grown too fine to care for
them, and then wept and sobbed with home sickness. There was a little
more comfort in writing to Rickworth, for she expected the Brandons
early in May, and her only hope was in Lady Elizabeth for care and
counsel: for as to Arthur's dependence, his mother and sister, she felt
as if the fear and restraint of their presence would be unbearable.

Her husband never guessed how she languished. In his presence she was
a different creature, forgetting her griefs in the one wish of pleasing
him. No matter what she had been undergoing in his absence, his knock
raised her spirits, in a moment life darted into her limbs and colour
into her cheeks. She had no notion of complaining. Her mother had always
been silent, though often with greater cause for remonstrance; and poor
Violet, imagining herself a burden, would not for the world have made
herself more troublesome than she could help. Her whole desire was to
win a smile, a fond word, a caress, and she sat watching as if those
were life to her; her cheeks burning with eagerness so much that Arthur
little guessed how wan they were in his absence.

The colour was heightened by warm rooms, for Arthur was of a chilly
race, and could not understand how oppressive the close atmosphere of
London was to one used to mountain breezes. He would come in shivering,
and be provoked to find her sitting by the smallest of fires; till
she learnt that their estimate of heat was so different, that the only
safety was in keeping the room like an oven. The folding doors into the
back drawing-room had a trick of opening of their own accord; and the
trouble given her by this draught-trap, as Arthur called it, can hardly
be estimated, especially one windy week in March, when he had a cold.

She had never been wont to think seriously of colds but when it came to
coughing and feverishness all night, and Arthur, with his hand on his
chest, persisted that it was all in his throat and told her to send for
a blister, she grew alarmed, but this only displeased him. He disdained
her entreaty that he would remain in bed; and said women always made a
fuss about nothing, when she timidly suggested sending for 'some one.'

For three deplorable days he sat over the fire, with a distaste for
everything, while she did her utmost to make him comfortable, and
when she failed, thought it her own fault, reproached herself for
her inefficiency, and imagined that he was going to be as ill as his
brother, and that she should be of no use to him. How hard on him to
have such a bad wife! She could not even entertain him while he was kept
indoors--for she could not find anything to talk about, so long was it
since she had been out, or read anything amusing.

However, on the third afternoon, he brightened up, found the soup good,
talked and laughed, and declared that if to-morrow was fine, he should
be out again. And the next day she was so delighted to find his
cough was gone--more quickly than he had ever known so severe a cold
depart--that it was not till he was out of the house that she remembered
that she was condemned to solitude for many hours.

Here was quarter-day, bringing fresh confusion, in those inexplicable
household expenses, and a miserable sense of wastefulness, and
unfaithfulness to her charge. She thought of John's advice, to make her
husband attend, if she found her means insufficient; and set herself to
draw up a statement of the case, to lay before him; but she grew more
and more puzzled; the cook's dishonesty weighed on her, and her fears
of taking any measures increased. Her calculations always ended in
despairing tears.

She was lying on her bed, recovering from one of these almost hysterical
fits, when she was roused from a doze by a knock at her door; and
started up, trying to hide that anything had been the matter, as Sarah
came in, and said, with a tone of authority,

'Mrs. Finch and Miss Gardner, ma'am! but I will say you are not well
enough to see them.'

'O no, Sarah, I am quite well, I was only asleep.'

'You had better not go down,' sternly repeated Sarah. 'You had much
best lie down, and have your sleep out, after being kept awake till two
o'clock last night, with Captain Martindale not coming home. And you
with the pillow all awry, and that bit of a shawl over you! Lie you
down, and I'll set it straight.'

But Violet was on her feet--the imputation on Captain Martindale had put
her on her mettle. 'Thank you, I don't want anything; I am going down
directly.'

Sarah shook her head, and looked significantly at the glass; and there,
indeed, Violet perceived that her eyes bore traces of recent weeping;
but, still, she would do anything rather than own her tears. 'My head
aches a little--that makes my eyes heavy,' said she. 'It will do me good
to see Miss Gardner. I knew her at Martindale.'

But when Violet found herself in the presence of Miss Gardner, and of
a tall fashionable lady, she did not like the recollection that she had
been talked of as a beauty.

She was glad to meet Miss Gardner, but Mrs. Finch's style was dashing
and almost boisterous, and her voice quick and loud, as she seized on
her hand, exclaiming, 'I want no introduction, I have heard so much of
you! I know we shall be excellent friends. I must hear of Theodora. You
know she is the greatest ally I have on earth. When did you hear of her
last? When are they coming to town! I would not miss Theodora's first
appearance for all the world.'

Violet felt overpowered by the torrent; but thought it was giving
no right impression of her husband to look disconsolate, and exerted
herself to be cheerful, and answer.

But they would speak of Martindale, and oblige her to expose her
ignorance. She did not know when the family were coming to town, nor had
she heard when Mr. Martindale's return might be expected.

If Miss Gardner had been alone, she thought she might have got on
better; but the quieter elder sister hardly put in a word, so unceasing
was the talk of the younger; whose patronage became oppressive, when she
began on Mrs. Martindale herself; told her she was lazy, taking too much
care, and growing nervous: and even declared she should come some day,
take her by storm, and carry her out for a drive in the park.

Poor Violet felt as if to be shut up in the carriage with this talking
lady would kill her outright; begged she would not take the trouble;
but only met with smiles, and declarations that Theodora would scold her
well when she came.

The next afternoon Violet listened with dread to the sounds of wheels,
and was not at all inclined to blame a headache, which was sufficient
excuse for sending down thanks and refusal. On the following, she had
just made up her mind that the danger was over for that day, when her
alarm was excited by a thundering knock, and in walked her brother.

'Well, Violet, I have caught you at home. I'm come to town about Lord
St. Erme's business--go back by the mail train. Are you dining at home?
Can you give me a dinner?'

'Oh, yes!' said Violet; but fears came over her of Arthur's not being
pleased, especially supposing he should bring back any one with him. And
therewith came dismay at finding herself giving no better welcome to her
own brother, and she eagerly asked for all at home.

'In a high state of preservation. And how are you? You don't look quite
the thing.'

'Oh, yes, I am, thank you.'

'And how is Martindale?'

'He would not call him so to his face!' thought the wife. 'Oh! I wish he
would sit anywhere but in Arthur's chair, and not fidget me with playing
with that horrid little piece of watch-chain!' 'He is very well, thank
you. He had a bad cold last week, but it is quite gone now. I hope he
will soon come in.'

'I am not sorry to have found you alone. I want to hear something of
these relations of yours.'

'Oh! I shall be sure to say something wrong!' thought she, and as the
best thing to put forward, announced that they would soon be in London.

'And they are not high with you? I hear fine accounts of their
grandeur,--they say the lady and her daughter are eaten up with pride,
and think no one fit to speak to.'

'Miss Martindale has the plainest ways in the world. She will do
anything for the poor people.'

'Ay, ay, that's the way with fine ladies,--they like to be condescending
and affable. And so you say they receive you well? make you one of the
family--eh?'

Violet hoped it was not wrong to utter a faint 'yes.'

'Does Martindale's sister write to you?'

'No; she does not write letters much. But I told you how very kind they
are--Mr. Martindale, his brother, especially.'

'Ay!' said Albert, 'he disconcerted our calculations. He seems to have
taken out a new lease.'

'He is a great deal better.'

'But he has no lungs left. His life can't be worth a year's purchase, by
what the governor heard. He would never have let Martindale have you on
such easy terms if he had not looked on you as good as her ladyship.'

Such shame and disgust came over Violet that she felt unworthy to sit
on John Martindale's chair, and moved to the sofa, trying to change the
subject; but Albert persisted in inquiries about Mr. Martindale's age,
health, and the likelihood of his marrying, till she could no longer be
without the perception that not only had her husband been to blame for
their marriage--her father's part had been far worse.

Albert hoped the old lord was coming down handsomely and tried to make
her tell their income. She was glad not to know and he began calculating
it from their style of living, with such disregard to her feelings, as
made her contrast his manners with those of the true gentlemen to whom
she was now accustomed, and feel sadly that there was reason in her
husband's wish to keep her family at a distance. There was no checking
or silencing this elder brother; she could only feel humiliated by
each proof of his vulgarity of mind, and blame herself, by turns, for
churlishness to him, and for permitting conversation Arthur would so
much dislike.

Why would not Arthur come and put a stop to it! It was not the first
time she had waited dinner for him in vain, and though she tried to make
Albert think she liked it, she knew she was a very bad dissembler.

When she at length ordered in dinner, the conversation changed to
Wrangerton doings, the Christmas gaieties, jokes about her sisters and
their imputed admirers, and a Miss Louisa Davies--a new-comer, about
whom Albert seemed to wish to be laughed at himself. But poor Violet
had no spirits even to perceive this,--she only thought of home and the
familiar scenes recalled by each name. What a gulf between her and them!
In what free, careless happiness they lived! What had her father done
in thrusting her into a position for which she was unfit,--into a family
who did not want her, and upon one to whom she was only a burthen! At
home they thought her happy and fortunate! They should never guess at
her wretchedness.

But when the time for Albert's departure came, Violet forgot his
inconvenient questions, and would have given the world to keep him.
He was her own brother--a part of home; he loved her--she had felt
inhospitable to him, and perhaps she should never see him again.

When he recurred to her pale looks and languid manner, and expressed
concern, it was all she could do to keep from bursting into tears, and
telling all her griefs; and she could not control the rapid agitated
tones that belied her repeated assurances that nothing was amiss, and
that he must not give a bad account of her and alarm her mother.

She could hardly let him go; and when he bade her goodbye, there was
a moment's intense desire to be going with him, from this lonely room,
home to her mother and Annette, instantly followed by a horror at such a
wish having occurred, and then came the sobs and tears. She dreaded that
Arthur might be displeased at the visit; but he came home full of
good humour, and on hearing of it, only hoped she had good news from
Wrangerton, and said he was glad he had been out of the way, so that she
had been able to have her brother all to herself.

Her fears of the effect of Albert's account of her were better founded;
for two mornings after, on coming down to breakfast, she found a letter
from her mother to exhort her to be careful, assuring her that she need
have no scruple in sending for her, and betraying so much uneasiness as
to add to all her terrors. She saw this in one glance; for she knew
that to dwell on the tender affectionate letter would bring on a fit of
weeping, and left it and the dreadful consideration of her reply till
Arthur should be gone, as he was to spend the day in fishing with a
friend in the country. He had come home late last night, and was not yet
dressed, and she waited long, gazing at the gleams of sunshine on the
square gardens, thinking how bright this second day of April must be
anywhere but here, where it was close and oppressive, and wondering
whether Helvellyn was beginning to lose his snow; then, as Helvellyn
brought the sensation that led to tears, she took the newspaper, and
had read more than she cared for before Arthur appeared, in the state of
impatience which voluntary lateness is sure to produce.

She gave him his tea as quickly as she could, but all went wrong: it
was a horrid cold day, ALL east wind--there was a cold wind coming in
somewhere.

'The back drawing-room window! I'm sorry I did not see it was open.'

'What makes you go to shut it?' said he, hastily marching across the
room, and closing it and the doors. 'I shall be gone in a moment, and
you may let in a hurricane if you like. Have you seen my cigar-case!'

'It was on the ledge of your wardrobe.'

'Some of your maids have been and hid it.'

'I told Sarah never to put your things away. I think I could find it.'

'No, don't go, I have looked everywhere.'

As he never found things, even when before his eyes, this was not
conclusive; and she undertook the search in spite of another careless
'No, no, don't,' knowing it meant the contrary.

She could not find it in his dressing-room, and he looked annoyed,
again accusing the maids. This made her feel injured, and though growing
exhausted, as well she might, as she had not even begun breakfast, she
said she would look in the sitting-room. He half remonstrated, without
looking up from the paper, but she hoped to be gladdened by thanks,
hunted in all his hiding-places in vain, and found she must give it up,
after a consultation with Sarah, who resentfully denied all knowledge of
it, and told her she looked ready to drop.

Dolefully coming into the hall, she saw Arthur's black travelling-bag.
Was it for more than the day? The evenings were bad enough--but a
desolate night! And he had never told her!'

'I suppose you have not found it?'

'No; I wish I could!'

'Never mind; it will turn up. You have tired yourself.'

'But, Arthur, are you not coming home to-night?'

'Didn't I tell you? If I can't get away by the seven o'clock train,
I thought of sleeping there. Ten o'clock, I declare! I shall miss the
train!'

She came to the head of the stairs with him, asking plaintively, 'When
DO you come home? To-morrow, at latest?'

Perhaps it was her querulous tone, perhaps a mere boyish dislike to
being tied down, or even it might be mere hurry, that made him answer
impatiently, 'I can't tell--as it may happen. D'ye think I want to run
away! Only take care of yourself.'

This was in his coaxing voice; but it was not a moment when she could
bear to be turned aside, like an importunate child, and she was going to
speak; but he saw the wrong fishing-rod carried out, called hastily to
James, ran down-stairs, and was gone, without even looking back at her.

The sound of the closing door conveyed a sense of utter desolation to
her over-wrought mind--the house was a solitary prison; she sank on the
sofa, sobbing, 'Oh, I am very, very miserable! Why did he take me from
home, if he could not love me! Oh, what will become of me? Oh, mamma!
mamma!'


CHAPTER 2


     What is so shrill as silent tears?
                      --GEORGE HERBERT


Arthur came home late in the afternoon of the following day. The door
was opened to him by his brother, who abruptly said, 'She is dying. You
must not lose a moment if you would see her alive.'

Arthur turned pale, and gave an inarticulate exclamation of
horror-stricken inquiry--'Confined?'

'Half-an-hour ago. She was taken ill yesterday morning immediately after
you left her. She is insensible, but you may find her still living.'

Nothing but strong indignation could have made John Martindale thus
communicate such tidings. He had arrived that day at noon to find that
the creature he had left in the height of her bright loveliness was
in the extremity of suffering and peril--her husband gone no one knew
whither; and the servants, too angry not to speak plainly, reporting
that he had left her in hysterics. John tried not to believe the half,
but as time went on, bringing despair of the poor young mother's life,
and no tidings of Arthur; while he became more and more certain that
there had been cruel neglect, the very gentleness and compassion of his
nature fired and glowed against him who had taken her from her home,
vowed to cherish her, and forsaken her at such a time. However, he was
softened by seeing him stagger against the wall, perfectly stunned, then
gathering breath, rush up-stairs without a word.

As Arthur pushed open the door, there was a whisper that it was he,
too late, and room was made for him. All he knew was, that those around
watched as if it was not yet death, but what else did he see on those
ashy senseless features?

With a cry of despair he threw himself almost over her, and implored her
but once to speak, or look at him. No one thought her capable even of
hearing, but at his voice the eyelids and lips slightly moved, and a
look of relief came over the face. A hand pressed his shoulder, and a
spoon containing a drop of liquid was placed in his fingers, while some
one said, 'Try to get her to take this.'

Scarcely conscious he obeyed, and calling her by every endearing name,
beyond hope succeeded in putting it between her lips. Her eyes opened
and were turned on him, her hand closed on his, and her features assumed
a look of peace. The spark of life was for a moment detained by the
power of affection, but in a short space the breath must cease, the
clasp of the hand relax.

Once more he was interrupted by a touch, and this time it was Sarah's
whisper--'The minister is come, sir. What name shall it be!'

'Anything--John,' said he, without turning his head or taking in what
she said.

The clergyman and John Martindale were waiting in the dressing-room,
with poor Violet's cathedral cup filled with water.

'She does not know him?' asked John, anxiously, as Sarah entered.

'Yes, sir, she does,' said Sarah, contorting her face to keep back the
tears. 'She looked at him, and has hold of his hand. I think she will
die easier for it, poor dear.'

'And at least the poor child is alive to be baptized?'

'O, yes, sir, it seems a bit livelier now,' said Sarah, opening a fold
of the flannel in her arms. 'It is just like its poor mamma.'

'Is it a girl?' he inquired, by no means perceiving the resemblance.

'A boy, sir. His papa never asked, though he did say his name should be
John.'

'It matters little,' said John, mournfully, for to his eye there was
nothing like life in that tiny form. 'And yet how marvellous,' thought
he, 'to think of its infinite gain by these few moments of unconscious
existence!'

At the touch of the water it gave a little cry, which Sarah heard with a
start and glance of infinite satisfaction.

She returned to the chamber, where the same deathly stillness prevailed;
the husband, the medical men, the nurse, all in their several positions,
as if they had neither moved nor looked from the insensible, scarcely
breathing figure.

The infant again gave a feeble sound, and once more the white features
moved, the eyes opened, and a voice said, so faintly, that Arthur, as he
hung over her, alone could hear it, 'My baby! O, let me see it!'

'Bring the child,' and at the sound of those words the gleam of life
spread over her face more completely.

He could not move from her side, and Sarah placed the little creature
upon his broad hand. He held it close to her. 'Our baby!' again she
murmured, and tried to kiss it, but it made another slight noise, and
this overcame her completely, the deathly look returned, and he hastily
gave back the infant.

She strove hard for utterance, and he could hardly catch her gasping
words, 'You'll be fond of it, and think of me.'

'Don't, don't talk so, dearest. You will soon be better. You are better.
Let me give you this.'

'Please, I had rather lie still. Do let me.' Then again looking up, as
if she had been losing the consciousness of his presence, 'Oh! it is
you. Are you come? Kiss me and wish me good-bye.'

'You are better--only take this. Won't you? You need not move; Violet,
Violet, only try. To please me! There, well done, my precious one. Now
you will be more comfortable.'

'Thank you, oh no! But I am glad you are come. I did wish to be a good
wife. I had so much to say to you--if I could--but I can't remember. And
my baby; but oh, this is dying,' as the sinking returned. 'O, Arthur,
keep me, don't let me die!' and she clung to him in terror.

He flung his arm closer round her, looking for help to the doctors. 'You
shall not, you will not, my own, my darling.'

'You can't help it,' sighed she. 'And I don't know how--if some one
would say a prayer?'

He could only repeat protests that she must live, but she grew more
earnest. 'A prayer! I can't recollect--Oh! is it wicked? Will God have
mercy? Oh! would you but say a prayer?'

'Yes, yes, but what? Give me a book.'

Sarah put one into his hand, and pointed to a place, but his eyes were
misty, his voice faltered, broke down, and he was obliged to press his
face down on the pillows to stifle his sobs.

Violet was roused to such a degree of bewildered distress and alarm at
the sight of his grief, that the doctors insisted on removing him, and
almost forced him away.

There had been prayers offered for her, of which she knew nothing.

The clergyman was gone, and John had despatched his melancholy letter to
Lord Martindale, when he heard the steps on the stairs. Was it over!
No, it was only one of the doctors with Arthur, and they did not come to
him, but talked in the back drawing-room for some moments, after which
the doctor took leave, repeating the words in John's hearing, that
Arthur must compose himself before returning to her--agitation would
be at once fatal. Arthur had thrown himself on the sofa, with his face
hidden in his hands, in such overpowering distress, that his brother's
displeasure could not continue for a moment, and he began to speak
soothingly of the present improvement.

'It cannot last,' said Arthur. 'They say it is but a question of minutes
or hours,' and again he gave way to a burst of grief, but presently it
changed to an angry tone. 'Why was I never sent for?'

John explained that no one knew whither to send. He could hardly credit
this, and his wrath increased at the stupidity of the servants; it
seemed to relieve him to declaim against them.

'Then you left her well?'

'Of course I did. She had been searching over the house for that
abominable cigar-case of mine, which was in my pocket all the time! I
shall never bear to see it again,' and he launched it into the fire with
vehemence. 'I suppose that upset her! Why did I not prevent her? Fool
that I was not to know it was not fit for her, though she chose to do
it. But I never took care of her.'

'She is so very unselfish,' said John.

'That was it. I thought women always looked out for themselves. I should
have known I had one not like the rest! She had never one thought
for herself, and it is killing her, the sweetest, loveliest, best--my
precious Violet! John, John! is there nothing that can be done for her?'
cried he, starting up in a tumultuous agony of grief, and striking his
foot on the floor.

'Could we not send for her mother? Brown might set off at once to fetch
her.'

'Thank you, but no, it is of no use. No railroad within forty miles of
the place. She could not be here till--till--and then I could not see
her.' He was pacing the room, and entangled his foot in Violet's little
work-table, and it fell. Her work-box flew open, and as they stooped to
pick up the articles, Arthur again wept without control as he took up a
little frock, half made, with the needle hanging to it. The table-drawer
had fallen out, and with it the large account-book, the weekly bills,
and a sheet of paper covered with figures, and blotted and blistered
with tears. The sight seemed to overwhelm him more than all. 'Crying
over these! My Violet crying! Oh! what have I been doing?'

'And why? What distressed her?'

'It was too much for her. She would plague herself with these wretched
household accounts! She knew I hated the sound of them. I never let
her bring them to me; but little did I think that she cried over them
alone!'

'She was cheerful with you?'

'Was not she?' I never saw that dear face without its sweet smile,
come when I would. I have never heard a complaint. I have left her to
herself, madman as I was, when she was unwell and anxious! But--oh! if
she could only recover, she should see--Ha! Sarah, can I come?'

'Yes, sir, she is asking for you; but, if you please, sir, Mr. Harding
says you must come very quiet. She seems wandering, and thinking you are
not come home, sir,' said Sarah, with a grisly satisfaction in dealing
her blow home.

John tried to rectify the confusion in the work-box with a sort of
reverential care; not able to bear to leave it in disorder, whether its
mistress were ever to open it again or not, yet feeling it an intrusion
to meddle with her little feminine hoards of precious trifles.

'Poor Arthur!' said he to himself, 'he may fairly be acquitted of
all but his usual inconsiderateness towards one too tender for such
treatment. He deserves more pity than blame. And for her--thank Heaven
for the blessing on them that mourn. Innocent creature, much will be
spared her; if I could but dwell on that rather than on the phantom
of delight she was, and my anticipations of again seeing the look that
recalls Helen. If Helen was here, how she would be nursing her!'

John saw his brother no more that evening--only heard of Violet 'as
barely kept alive, as it seemed, by his care.' Each report was such
that the next must surely be the last; and John sat waiting on till
his servant insisted on his going to bed, promising to call him if his
brother needed him.

The night passed without the summons, and in the morning there was still
life. John had been down-stairs for some little time, when he heard the
medical man, who had spent the night there, speaking to Arthur on the
stairs. 'A shade of improvement' was the report. 'Asleep now; and if we
can only drag her through the next few days there may be hope, as long
as fever does not supervene.'

'Thank Heaven!' said John, fervently. 'I did not venture to hope for
this.'

But Arthur was utterly downcast, and could not take heart. It was his
first real trouble, and there was little of the substance of
endurance in his composition. That one night of watching, grief, and
self-reproach, had made his countenance so pale and haggard, and his
voice so dejected and subdued, that John was positively startled, as he
heard his answer--

'I never saw any one so ill.'

'Come and have some breakfast, you look quite worn out'

'I cannot stay,' said he, sitting down, however. 'She must not miss me,
or all chance would be over. You don't mind the door being open?'

'No, indeed. Is she sensible now?'

'Clear for a minute, if she has my hand; but then she dozes off, and
talks about those miserable accounts--the numbers over and over again.
It cuts me to the heart to hear her. They talk of an over-strain on the
mind! Heigh-ho! Next she wakes with a dreadful frightened start, and
stares about wildly, fancying I am gone.'

'But she knows you,' said John, trying to speak consolingly.

'Yes, no one else can do anything with her. She does not so much as hear
them. I must be back before she wakes; but I am parched with thirst. How
is this? Where is the tea?'

'I suppose you put in none. Is this the chest?'

Arthur let his head drop on his hand, helpless and overcome, as this
little matter brought home the sense of missing his wife, and the
remembrance of the attentions he had allowed her to lavish upon him.
His brother tried the tea-chest, and, finding it locked, poured out some
coffee, which he drank almost unconsciously, then gave his cup for
more, sighed, pushed his hair back, and looked up somewhat revived. John
tended him affectionately, persuading him to take food; and when he had
passively allowed his plate to be filled, his appetite discovered that
he had tasted nothing since yesterday morning, and therewith his spirits
were refreshed; he looked up cheerfully, and there was less despondency
in his tone as he spoke of her sleep towards morning having been less
disturbed.

'The child woke her with a squall, and I thought we were undone, but
no such thing. I declare nothing has done her so much good; she had him
brought, and was so happy over him, then went off to sleep again.'

'This is a great relief,' said John. 'From your manner, I dreaded to ask
for him, but I hope he may be doing well.'

'I am sure I hope so, or it would be all over with her. I believe both
their lives hang on one thread. To see her with him this morning--I did
not know such fondness was in women. I declare I never saw anything like
it; and she so weak! And such a creature as it is; the smallest thing
that ever was born, they say, and looking--like nothing on earth but
young mice.'

John could not help smiling: 'That is better than yesterday, when I
could scarcely believe he was alive.'

'What! did you see him?'

'When he was baptized.'

'Was he? What did you call him?'

'You sent word to name him John.'

'Did I? I had not the least recollection of it. I forgot all about him
till he made himself heard this morning, and she wanted to know whether
he was boy or girl.'

'A son and heir,' said John, glad to see the young father able to look
gratified.

'Well, it is the best name; I hope she will like it. But, hollo,
John, where did you drop from?' as it suddenly occurred to him to be
surprised.

'I came home on some business of Fotheringham's. I landed early
yesterday, and came up from Southampton.'

'A fine state of things to come to,' sighed Arthur. 'But you will not go
away?'

'Certainly not till she is better.'

'Ah! you were always fond of her; you appreciated her from the first.
There is no one whom I should have liked so well to have here.' Then,
with a pause, he added, in a tone of deep feeling: 'John, you might well
give me that warning about making her happy; but, indeed, I meant to do
so!' and his eyes filled with tears.

Defque People huvo eaten remote Lope de Oviedo, who had more force,
more recent i eftaba all, faith llegafe à vnos Trees, nearly eftaban
alli, i fubido WNV in them that defcubriefe Earth eftabamos, i haver
procurafe of any news from her.

He HiCo afi, i found that in Isla eftabamos, i saw that the earth eftaba
Cabada, to the way fuel eftàr Land where cattle go, i parefciòle by
efto, which was fer Chriftianos Earth, i host dixo us.

I command that tornafe to look more particularly mui, i viefe Havi
fi in it some way, fuefen feguidos, alargarfe i efto so much for
the danger they could haver.

He was, i face with VNA sidewalk, her faith was henceforth hafta efpacio
half Legua, i found some vnas Hit India, eftaban folas because the
Indians were gone to camp, i took them VNA pot, i vn little puppy,
i vnas few Liças i afi bolviò à nofotros faith, faith that i parefciendonos
later Embi Chriftianos other two, so you bufcafen i viefen Havi fufcedido
it, i ran them close to him there, i saw three Indians with bows,
arrows i, came after him, calling him afimifmo i called them feñas:
afi i get where eftabamos i vn Indians were little faith back in
mifma Ribera afentados; graphical à i half an hour came one hundred
other Indians Flecheros, now that they fuefen big or not nueftro
fear towards them parefcer Giants, nofotros i stopped near where
the first three eftaban.

Among nofotros efcufado was penfar that havria who defendiefe faith,
because faith rarely found Feis, which fuel pudiefen faith lift. The
Veedor, i I falimos them; llamamosles i, i came to faith nofotros
them: the best thing i podimos, we seek to afegurarlos, afegurarnos
i, i dimosles Auditors Cafcaveles i, i each of them gave me WNV VNA
Arrow, which is feñal of amiftad: i feñas by us dixeron which
bolverian the morning, i would eat us, because we had not.

It was no wonder he broke down; for it was a piteous sight to see that
fair young mother, still a child in years, and in her exhausted state of
wavering consciousness, alive only through her fond affections; gleams
of perception, and momentary flashes of life, called forth only by her
husband, or by the moanings of the little frail babe, which seemed to
have as feeble and precarious a hold of life as herself. The doctors
told John that they were haunted through the day by the remembrance of
her face, so sweet, even in insensibility, and so very lovely, when the
sound of her babe's voice, for a moment, lighted up the features. Their
anxiety for her was intense; and if this was the case with strangers,
what must it not have been for her husband, to whom every delirious
murmur was an unconscious reproach, and who had no root of strength
within himself! The acuteness of his grief, and his effectiveness as a
nurse, were such as to surprise his brother, who only now perceived how
much warmth of heart had been formerly stifled in a cold, ungenial home.

Sustained from hour to hour by his unremitting care, she did, however,
struggle through the next three days; and at last came a sounder sleep,
and a wakening so tranquil, that Arthur did not perceive it, till he
saw, in the dim lamp-light, those dark eyes calmly fixed upon him. The
cry of the infant was heard, and she begged for it, fondling it, and
murmuring over it with a soft inarticulate sound of happiness.

'You purr like an old cat over her kitten,' said Arthur, longing to
see her smile once more; and he was not disappointed; it was a bright,
contented, even joyous smile, that played on the colourless features,
and the eyes beamed softly on him as she said, 'Kiss him, papa.'

He would have done anything for her at that moment, and another bright
look rewarded him.

'Does mamma know about this dear little baby?' she said, presently.

'Yes, dearest, I have written every day. She sends you her love;' and as
Violet murmured something of 'Dear mamma--'

'Do you wish to have her here?'

'No, indeed, I don't wish it now,' said Violet; 'you do make me so very
happy.'

She was returning to her full self, with all her submission to his
will, and in fact she did not wish for any change; her content in his
attention was so complete, so peaceful, that in her state of weakness
there was an instinctive dread of breaking the charm. To lie still,
her babe beside her, and Arthur watching her, was the perfect repose of
felicity, and imperceptibly her faculties were, one by one, awakening.
Her thoughtfulness for others had revived; Arthur had been giving her
some nourishment, and, for the first time, she had taken it with a
relish, when it so chanced that the light fell for a moment on his face,
and she was startled by perceiving the effects of anxiety and want of
sleep. In vain he assured her there was nothing the matter. She accused
herself of having been exacting and selfish, and would not be comforted,
till he had promised to take a good night's rest. He left her, at
length, nearly asleep, to carry the tidings to his brother, and enjoy
his look of heart-felt rejoicing. Never had the two very dissimilar
brothers felt so much drawn together; and as John began, as usual,
to wait on him, and to pour out his coffee, he said, as he sat down
wearied, 'Thank you, John, I can't think what would have become of me
without you!'

'My father would have come to you if I had not been here.'

'Where's his letter?--I forgot all about it. Is there none from
Theodora?'

'No; I suppose she waited for further accounts.'

Arthur began reading his father's letter. 'Very kind! a very kind letter
indeed,' said he, warmly. '"Earned so high a place in our regard--her
sweetness and engaging qualities,"--I must keep that to show her. This
is very kind too about what it must be to me. I did not think he had
appreciated her so well!'

'Yes, indeed, he did,' said John. 'This is what he says to me. "Never
have I seen one more gentle and engaging, and I feel sure she would have
gained more on our affections every day, and proved herself a treasure
to the family."'

'That is right,' said Arthur. 'He will get to know her well when they
come to London! I'll write to him to-morrow, and thank him, and say, no
need for him to come now! "Hopes his grandson will live to be a comfort
to me!"' and Arthur could not help laughing.

'Well, I am not come to that yet!'

'He is much pleased at its being a son,' said John.

'Poor little mortal!' said Arthur, 'if he means to be a comfort I wish
he would stop that dismal little wail--have one good squall and have
done with it. He will worry his mother and ruin all now she takes more
notice. So here's Mrs. Moss's letter. I could not open it this morning,
and I have been inventing messages to Violet from her--poor woman! I
have some good news for her now. It is all about coming, but Violet says
she does not want her. I can't read it all, my eyes are so weak! Violet
said they were bloodshot,' and he began to examine them in the glass.

'Yes, you are not equal to much more nursing; you are quite done for.'

'I am!' said Arthur, stretching. 'I'm off to bed, as she begged me; but
the worst is over now! We shall do very well when Theodora comes; and
if she has a taste for the boy, she and Violet will make friends over
him,--good night.'

With a long yawn, Arthur very stiffly walked up-stairs, where Sarah
stood at the top waiting for him. 'Mrs. Martindale is asleep, sir;
you had best not go in,' said she. 'I have made up a bed in your
dressing-room, and you'd best not be lying down in your clothes, but
take a good sleep right out, or you'll be fit for nothing next. I'll see
and call if she wants you.'

'Thank you, Sarah; I wonder how long you have been up; you will be fit
for nothing next.'

'It don't hurt me,' said Sarah, in disdain; and as Arthur shut his
door, she murmured to herself, 'I'm not that sort to be knocked up with
nothing; but he is an easy kind-spoken gentleman after all. I'll never
forget what he has done for missus. There is not so much harm in him
neither; he is nothing but a great big boy as ought to be ashamed of
hisself.'

The night passed off well; Violet, with a great exertion of
self-command, actually composed herself on awaking in one of her nervous
fits of terror; prevented his being called; and fairly deserved all the
fond praise he lavished on her in the morning for having been so good a
child.

'You must not call me child now,' said she, with a happy little pride.
'I must be wiser now.'

'Shall I call you the prettiest and youngest mamma in England?'

'Ah! I am too young and foolish. I wish I was quite seventeen!'

'Have you been awake long?'

'Yes; but so comfortable. I have been thinking about baby's name.'

'Too late, Violet; they named him John: they say I desired it.'

'What! was he obliged to be baptized? Is he so delicate? Oh, Arthur!
tell me; I know he is tiny, but I did not think he was ill.'

Arthur tried to soothe her with assurances of his well-doing, and the
nurse corroborated them; but though she tried to believe, she was not
pacified, and would not let her treasure be taken from within her arms
till Mr. Harding arrived--his morning visit having been hastened by a
despatch from Arthur, who feared that she would suffer for her anxiety.
She asked so many questions that he, who last night had seen her too
weak to look up or speak, was quite taken by surprise. By a little
exceeding the truth, he did at length satisfy her mind; but after this
there was an alteration in her manner with her baby; it was not only the
mere caressing, there was a sort of reverence, and look of reflection
as she contemplated him, such as made Arthur once ask, what she could be
studying in that queer little red visage?

'I was thinking how very good he is!' was her simple answer, and
Arthur's smile by no means comprehended her meaning.

Her anxious mind retarded her recovery, and Arthur's unguarded voice on
the stairs having revealed to her that a guest was in the house, led to
inquiries, and an endless train of fears, lest Mr. Martindale should be
uncomfortable and uncared for. Her elasticity of mind had been injured
by her long course of care, and she could not shake off the household
anxieties that revived as she became able to think.

Indeed there were things passing that would have greatly astonished her.
Sarah had taken the management of everything, including her master; and
with iron composure and rigidity of demeanour, delighted in teasing him
by giving him a taste of some of the cares he had left her mistress to
endure. First came an outcry for keys. They were supposed to be in a
box, and when that was found its key was missing. Again Arthur turned
out the unfortunate drawer, and only spared the work-box on John's
testifying that it was not there, and suggesting Violet's watch-chain,
where he missed it, and Sarah found it and then, with imperturbable
precision, in spite of his attempts to escape, stood over him, and made
him unlock and give out everything himself. 'If things was wrong,' she
said, 'it was her business that he should see it was not owing to her.'

Arthur was generally indifferent to what he ate or drank,--the reaction,
perhaps, of the luxury of his home; but having had a present of some
peculiar trout from Captain Fitzhugh, and being, as an angler, a
connoisseur in fish, many were his exclamations at detecting that those
which were served up at breakfast were not the individuals sent.

Presently, in the silence of the house, John heard tones gradually
rising on the stairs, till Arthur's voice waxed loud and wrathful 'You
might as well say they were red herrings!'

Something shrill ensued, cut short by, 'Mrs. Martindale does as she
pleases. Send up Captain Fitzhugh's trout.'

A loud reply, in a higher key.

'Don't tell me of the families where you have lived--the trout!'

Here John's hand was laid upon his arm, with a sign towards his wife's
room; whereupon he ran down-stairs, driving the cook before him.

Soon he came hastily up, storming about the woman's impertinence, and
congratulating himself on having paid her wages and got rid of her.

John asked what was to be done next? and was diverted with his
crestfallen looks, when asked what was to become of Violet.

However, when Sarah was consulted, she gravely replied, 'She thought as
how she could contrive till Mrs. Martindale was about again;' and the
corners of her mouth relaxed into a ghastly smile, as she replied, 'Yes,
sir,' in answer to her master's adjurations to keep the dismissal a
secret from Mrs. Martindale.

'Ay!' said John, 'I wish you joy of having to tell her what revolutions
you have made.'

'I'll take care of that, if the women will only hold their tongues.'

They were as guarded as he could wish, seeing as plainly as he did, how
fretting over her household matters prolonged her state of weakness.
It was a tedious recovery, and she was not able even to receive a visit
from John till the morning when the cough, always brought on by London
air, obliged him reluctantly to depart.

He found her on the sofa, wrapped in shawls, her hair smoothed back
under a cap; her shady, dark eyes still softer from languor, and the
exquisite outline of her fair, pallid features looking as if it was cut
out in ivory against the white pillows. She welcomed him with a pleased
smile; but he started back, and flushed as if from pain, and his hand
trembled as he pressed hers, then turned away and coughed.

'Oh, I am sorry your cough is so bad,' said she.

'Nothing to signify,' he replied, recovering. 'Thank you for letting me
come to see you. I hope you are not tired?'

'Oh, no, thank you. Arthur carried me so nicely, and baby is so good
this morning.'

'Where is he? I was going to ask for him.'

'In the next room. I want to show him to you, but he is asleep.'

'A happy circumstance,' said Arthur, who was leaning over the back of
her sofa.

'No one else can get in a word when that gentleman is awake.'

'Now, Arthur, I wanted his uncle to see him, and say if he is not
grown.'

'Never mind, Violet,' said Arthur. 'Nurse vouches for it, that the child
who was put through his mother's wedding-ring grew up to be six feet
high!'

'Now, Arthur! you know it was only her bracelet.'

'Well, then, our boy ought to be twelve feet high; for if you had not
stuffed him out with long clothes, you might put two of him through your
bracelet.'

'If nurse would but have measured him; but she said it was unlucky.'

'She would have no limits to her myths; however, he may make a show in
the world by the time John comes to the christening.'

'Ah!' said Violet, with a sweet, timid expression, and a shade of red
just tinting her cheek as she turned to John. 'Arthur said I should ask
you to be his godfather.'

'My first godchild!' said John. 'Thank you, indeed; you could hardly
have given me a greater pleasure.'

'Thank you,' again said Violet. 'I like so much for you to have
him,--you who,' she hesitated, unable to say the right words, 'who DID
IT before his papa or I saw the little fellow;' then pausing--' Oh, Mr.
Martindale, Sarah told me all about it, and I have been longing to thank
you, only I can't!' and her eyes filling with tears, she put her
hand into his, glancing at the cathedral cup, which was placed on the
mantel-shelf. 'It was so kind of you to take that.'

'I thought you would like it,' said John; 'and it was the most
ecclesiastical thing I could find.'

'I little thought it would be my Johnnie's font,' said Violet,
softly. 'I shall always feel that I have a share in him beyond my
fellow-sponsors.'

'O, yes, he belongs to you,' said Violet; 'besides his other godfather
will only be Colonel Harrington, and his godmother--you have written to
ask your sister, have you not, Arthur?'

'I'd as soon ask Aunt Nesbit,' exclaimed Arthur, 'I do believe one cares
as much as the other.'

'You must send for me when you are well enough to take him to church,'
said John.

'That I will. I wish you could stay for it. He will be a month old
to-morrow week, but it may wait, I hope, till I can go with him. I must
soon get down-stairs again!'

'Ah! you will find the draught trap mended,' said Arthur. 'Brown set to
work on it, and the doors shut as tight as a new boot.'

'I am often amused to see Brown scent out and pursue a draught,' said
John.

'I have been avoiding Brown ever since Friday,' said Arthur; 'when he
met me with a serious "Captain Martindale, sir," and threatened me with
your being laid up for the year if I kept you here. I told him it was
his fault for letting you come home so early, and condoled with him on
your insubordination.'

'Ah! Violet does not know what order Sarah keeps you in?' retorted John.

'I am afraid you have both been very uncomfortable!'

'No, not in the least, Sarah is a paragon, I assure you.'

'She has been very kind to me, but so has every one. No one was ever so
well nursed! You must know what a perfect nurse Arthur is!'

Arthur laughed. 'John! Why he would as soon be nursed by a monkey as
by me. There he lies on a perfect bank of pillows, coughs whenever you
speak to him, and only wants to get rid of every one but Brown. Nothing
but consideration for Brown induces him to allow my father or Percy
Fotheringham now and then to sit up.'

'A comfortable misanthropical picture,' said John, 'but rather too true.
You see, Violet, what talents you have brought out.'

Violet was stroking her husband's hand, and looking very proud and
happy. 'Only I was so selfish! Does not he look very pale still?'

'That is not your fault so much as that of some one else,' said John.
'Some one who declares smoking cigars in his den down-stairs refreshes
him more than a sensible walk.'

'Of course,' said Arthur, 'it is only ladies, and men who have nursed
themselves as long as you have, who ever go out for a constitutional.'

'He will be on duty to-morrow,' said Violet, 'and so he will be obliged
to go out.'

'And you will write to me, Violet,' said John, 'when you are ready? I
wish I could expect to hear how you get on, but it is vain to hope for
letters from Arthur.'

'I know,' said Violet; 'but only think how good he has been to write to
mamma for me. I was so proud when he brought me the letter to sign.'

'Have you any message for me to take?' said John, rising.

'No, thank you--only to thank Lord and Lady Martindale for their kind
messages. And oh'--but checking herself--'No, you won't see them.'

'Whom?'

'Lady Elizabeth and Emma. I had such a kind letter from them. So anxious
about me, and begging me to let some one write; and I am afraid they'll
think it neglectful; but I turn giddy if I sit up, and when I can write,
the first letter must be for mamma. So if there is any communication
with Rickworth, could you let them know that I am getting better, and
thank them very much!'

'Certainly. I will not fail to let them know. Good-bye, Violet, I am
glad to have seen you.'

'Good-bye. I hope your cough will be better,' said Violet.

He retained her hand a moment, looked at her fixedly, the sorrowful
expression returned, and he hastened away in silence.

Arthur followed, and presently coming back said, 'Poor John! You put him
so much in mind of Helen.'

'Poor Mr. Martindale!' exclaimed Violet. 'Am I like her?'

'Not a bit,' said Arthur. 'Helen had light hair and eyes, a fat sort of
face, and no pretence to be pretty--a downright sort of person, not what
you would fancy John's taste. If any one else had compared you it would
have been no compliment; but he told me you had reminded him of her from
the first, and now your white cheeks and sick dress recalled her illness
so much, that he could hardly bear it. But don't go and cry about it.'

'No, I won't,' said Violet, submissively, 'but I am afraid it did not
suit him for us to be talking nonsense. It is so very sad.'

'Poor John! so it is,' said Arthur, looking at her, as if beginning
to realize what his brother had lost. 'However, she was not his wife,
though, after all, they were almost as much attached. He has not got
over it in the least. This is the first time I have known him speak of
it, and he could not get out her name.'

'It is nearly two years ago.'

'Nearly. She died in June. It was that cold late summer, and her funeral
was in the middle of a hail-storm, horridly chilly.'

'Where was she buried?'

'At Brogden. Old Mr. Fotheringham was buried there, and she was brought
there. I came home for it. What a day it was--the hailstones standing on
the grass, and I shall never forget poor John's look--all shivering and
shrunk up together.' He shivered at the bare remembrance. 'It put the
finishing touch to the damage he had got by staying in England with her
all the winter. By night he was frightfully ill--inflammation worse than
ever. Poor John! That old curmudgeon of a grandfather has much to answer
for, though you ought to be grateful to him, Violet; for I suppose it
will end in that boy of yours being his lordship some time or other.'

The next morning was a brisk one with Violet. She wished Arthur not to
be anxious about leaving her, and having by no means ceased to think it
a treat to see him in uniform, she gloried in being carried to her sofa
by so grand and soldierly a figure, and uttered her choicest sentence of
satisfaction--'It is like a story!' while his epaulette was scratching
her cheek.

'I don't know how to trust you to your own silly devices,' said he,
laying her down, and lingering to settle her pillows and shawls.

'Wise ones,' said she. 'I have so much to do. There's baby--and there's
Mr. Harding to come, and I want to see the cook--and I should not wonder
if I wrote to mamma. So you see 'tis woman's work, and you had better
not bring your red coat home too soon, or you'll have to finish the
letter!' she added, with saucy sweetness.

On his return, he found her spread all over with papers, her little
table by her side, with the drawer pulled out.

'Ha! what mischief are you up to? You have not got at those abominable
accounts again!'

'I beg your pardon,' said she, humbly. 'Nurse would not let me speak
to the cook, but said instead I might write to mamma; so I sent for
my little table, but I found the drawer in such disorder, that I was
setting it to rights. Who can have meddled with it!'

'I can tell you that,' said Arthur. 'I ran against it, and it came to
grief, and there was a spread of all your goods and chattels on the
floor.'

'Oh! I am so glad! I was afraid some of the servants had been at it.'

'What! aren't you in a desperate fright? All your secrets displayed like
a story, as you are so fond of saying--what's the name of it--where the
husband, no, it was the wife, fainted away, and broke open the desk with
her head.'

'My dear Arthur!' and Violet laughed so much that nurse in the next room
foreboded that he would tire her.

'I vow it was so! Out came a whole lot of letters from the old love, a
colonel in the Peninsula, that her husband had never heard of,--an old
lawyer he was.'

'The husband? What made her marry him?'

'They were all ruined horse and foot, and the old love was wounded,
"kilt", or disposed of, till he turned up, married to her best friend.'

'What became of her?'

'I forget--there was a poisoning and a paralytic stroke in it.'

'Was there! How delightful! How I should like to read it. What was its
name?'

'I don't remember. It was a green railway book. Theodora made me read
it, and I should know it again if I saw it. I'll look out for it, and
you'll find I was right about her head. But how now. Haven't you fainted
away all this time?'

'No; why should I?'

'How do you know what I may have discovered in your papers? Are you
prepared? It is no laughing matter,' added he, in a Blue Beard tone,
and drawing out the paper of calculations, he pointed to the tear marks.
'Look here. What's this, I say, what's this, you naughty child?'

'I am sorry! it was very silly,' whispered Violet, in a contrite ashamed
way, shrinking back a little.

'What business had you to break your heart over these trumpery butchers
and bakers and candlestick makers?'

'Only candles, dear Arthur,' said Violet, meekly, as if in extenuation.

'But what on earth could you find to cry about?'

'It was very foolish! but I was in such a dreadful puzzle. I could not
make the cook's accounts and mine agree, and I wanted to be sure whether
she really--'

'Cheated!' exclaimed Arthur. 'Well, that's a blessing!'

'What is?' asked the astonished Violet.

'That I have cleared the house of that intolerable woman!'

'The cook gone!' cried Violet, starting, so that her papers slid away,
and Arthur shuffled them up in his hand in renewed confusion. 'The cook
really gone? Oh! I am so glad!'

'Capital!' cried Arthur. 'There was John declaring you would be in
despair to find your precious treasure gone.'

'Oh! I never was more glad! Do tell me! Why did she go?'

'I had a skrimmage with her about some trout Fitzhugh sent, which I
verily believe she ate herself.'

'Changed with the fishmonger!'

'I dare say. She sent us in some good-for-nothing wretches, all mud, and
vowed these were stale--then grew impertinent.'

'And talked about the first families?'

'Exactly so, and when it came to telling me Mrs. Martindale was her
mistress, I could stand no more. I paid her her wages, and recommended
her to make herself scarce.'

'When did it happen?'

'Rather more than a fortnight ago.'

Violet laughed heartily. 'O-ho! there's the reason nurse scolds if I
dare to ask to speak to the cook. And oh! how gravely Sarah said "yes,
ma'am," to all my messages! How very funny! But how have we been living?
When I am having nice things all day long, and giving so much trouble!
Oh dear! How uncomfortable you must have been, and your brother too!'

'Am I not always telling you to the contrary? Sarah made everything look
as usual, and I suspect Brown lent a helping hand. John said the coffee
was made in some peculiar way Brown learnt in the East, and never
practises unless John is very ill, or they are in some uncivilized
place; but he told me to take no notice, lest Brown should think it
infra dig.'

'I'm afraid he thought this an uncivilized place. But what a woman Sarah
is! She has all the work of the house, and yet she seems to me to be
here as much as nurse!'

'She has got the work of ten horses in her, with the face of a death's
head, and the voice of a walking sepulchre!'

'But isn't she a thorough good creature! I can't think what will become
of me without her! It will be like parting with a friend.'

'What would you part with her for? I thought she was the sheet-anchor.'

'That she is; but she won't stay where there are children. She told me
so long ago, and only stayed because I begged her for the present. She
will go when I am well.'

'Better give double wages to keep her,' said Arthur.

'I'd do anything I could, but I'm afraid. I was quite dreading the
getting about again, because I should have to lose Sarah, and to do
something or other with that woman.'

'What possessed you to keep her?'

'I wasn't sure about her. Your aunt recommended her, and I thought you
might not like--and at first I did not know what things ought to cost,
nor how long they ought to last, and that was what I did sums for.
Then when I did prove it, I saw only dishonesty in the kitchen, and
extravagance and mismanagement of my own.'

'So the little goose sat and cried!'

'I could not help it. I felt I was doing wrong; that was the terrible
part; and I am glad you know the worst. I have been very weak and silly,
and wasted your money sadly, and I did not know how to help it; and
that was what made me so miserable. And now, dear Arthur, only say you
overlook my blunders, and indeed I'll try to do better.'

'Overlook! The only thing I don't know how to forgive is your having
made yourself so ill with this nonsense.'

'I can't be sorry for that,' said Violet, smiling, though the tears
came. 'That has been almost all happiness. I shall have the heart to try
more than ever--and I have some experience; and now that cook is gone, I
really shall get on.'

'Promise me you'll never go bothering yourself for nothing another time.
Take it easy! That's the only way to get through the world.'

'Ah! I will never be so foolish again. I shall never be afraid to make
you attend to my difficulties.'

'Afraid! That was the silliest part of all! But here--will you have
another hundred a year at once? and then there'll be no trouble.'

'Thank you, thank you! How kind of you! But do you know, I should like
to try with what I have. I see it might be made to do, and I want to
conquer the difficulty; if I can't, I will ask you for more.'

'Well, that may be best. I could hardly spare a hundred pounds without
giving up one of the horses; and I want to see you riding again.'

'Besides, this illness must have cost you a terrible quantity of money.
But I dare say I shall find the outgoings nothing to what the cook
made them.' And she was taking up the accounts, when he seized them,
crumpling them in his hand. 'Nonsense! Let them alone, or I shall put
them in the fire at once.'

'Oh, don't do that, pray!' cried she, starting, 'or I shall be ruined.
Oh, pray!'

'Very well;' and rising, and making a long arm, he deposited them on the
top of a high wardrobe. 'There's the way to treat obstinate women. You
may get them down when you can go after them--I shan't.'

'Ah! there's baby awake!'

'So, I shall go after that book at the library; and then I've plenty to
tell you of inquiries for Mrs. Martindale. Good-bye, again.'

Violet received her babe into her arms with a languid long-drawn sigh,
as of one wearied out with happiness. 'That he should have heard my
confession, and only pet me the more! Foolish, wasteful thing that I am.
Oh, babe! if I could only make you grow and thrive, no one would ever be
so happy as your mamma.'

Perhaps she thought so still more some hours later, when she awoke from
a long sleep, and saw Arthur reading "Emilia Wyndham", and quite ready
to defend his assertion that the wife broke open the desk with her head.


CHAPTER 3


   But there was one fairy who was offended because she was not invited
   to the Christening.--MOTHER BUNCH


Theodora had spent the winter in trying not to think of her brother.

She read, she tried experiments, she taught at the school, she
instructed the dumb boy, talked to the curate, and took her share of
such county gaieties as were not beneath the house of Martindale; but
at every tranquil moment came the thought, 'What are Arthur and his wife
doing!'

There were rumours of the general admiration of Mrs. Martindale, whence
she deduced vanity and extravagance; but she heard nothing more till
Jane Gardner, a correspondent, who persevered in spite of scanty and
infrequent answers, mentioned her call on poor Mrs. Martindale, who,
she said, looked sadly altered, unwell, and out of spirits. Georgina
had tried to persuade her to come out, but without success; she ought to
have some one with her, for she seemed to be a good deal alone, and no
doubt it was trying; but, of course, she would soon have her mother with
her.

He leaves her alone--he finds home dull! Poor Arthur! A moment of
triumph was followed by another of compunction, since this was not a
doll that he was neglecting, but a living creature, who could feel pain.
But the anticipation of meeting Mrs. Moss, after all those vows against
her, and the idea of seeing his house filled with vulgar relations,
hardened Theodora against the wife, who had thus gained her point.

Thus came the morning, when her father interrupted breakfast with an
exclamation of dismay, and John's tidings were communicated.

I wish I had been kind to her! shot across Theodora's mind with acute
pain, and the image of Arthur in grief swallowed up everything else. 'I
will go with you, papa--you will go at once!'

'Poor young thing!' said Lord Martindale; 'she was as pretty a creature
as I ever beheld, and I do believe, as good. Poor Arthur, I am glad he
has John with him.'

Lady Martindale wondered how John came there,--and remarks ensued on
his imprudence in risking a spring in England. To Theodora this seemed
indifference to Arthur's distress, and she impatiently urged her father
to take her to him at once.

He would not have delayed had Arthur been alone; but since John was
there, he thought their sudden arrival might be more encumbering than
consoling, and decided to wait for a further account, and finish affairs
that he could not easily leave.

Theodora believed no one but herself could comfort Arthur, and was
exceedingly vexed. She chafed against her father for attending to his
business--against her mother for thinking of John; and was in charity
with no one except Miss Piper, who came out of Mrs. Nesbit's room red
with swallowing down tears, and with the under lady's-maid, who could
not help begging to hear if Mrs. Martindale was so ill, for Miss
Standaloft said, 'My lady had been so nervous and hysterical in her own
room, that she had been forced to give her camphor and sal volatile.'

Never had Theodora been more surprised than to hear this of the mother
whom she only knew as calm, majestic, and impassible. With a sudden
impulse, she hastened to her room. She was with Mrs. Nesbit, and
Theodora following, found her reading aloud, without a trace of emotion.
No doubt it was a figment of Miss Standaloft, and there was a sidelong
glance of satisfaction in her aunt's eyes, which made Theodora so
indignant, that she was obliged to retreat without a word.

Her own regret and compassion for so young a creature thus cut off
were warm and keen, especially when the next post brought a new and
delightful hope, the infant, of whose life John had yesterday despaired,
was said to be improving. Arthur's child! Here was a possession for
Theodora, an object for the affections so long yearning for something
to love. She would bring it home, watch over it, educate it, be all the
world to Arthur, doubly so for his son's sake. She dreamt of putting his
child into his arms, and bidding him live for it, and awoke clasping the
pillow!

What were her feelings when she heard Violet was out of danger? For
humanity's sake and for Arthur's, she rejoiced; but it was the downfall
of a noble edifice. 'How that silly young mother would spoil the poor
child!'

'My brothers' had always been mentioned in Theodora's prayer, from
infancy. It was the plural number, but the strength and fervency of
petition were reserved for one; and with him she now joined the name
of his child. But how pray for the son without the mother? It was
positively a struggle; for Theodora had a horror of mockery and
formality; but the duty was too clear, the evil which made it
distasteful, too evident, not to be battled with; she remembered that
she ought to pray for all mankind, even those who had injured her, and,
on these terms, she added her brother's wife. It was not much from her
heart; a small beginning, but still it was a beginning, that might be
blessed in time.

Lord Martindale wished the family to have gone to London immediately,
but Mrs. Nesbit set herself against any alteration in their plans being
made for the sake of Arthur's wife. They were to have gone only in time
for the first drawing-room, and she treated as a personal injury the
proposal to leave her sooner than had been originally intended; making
her niece so unhappy that Lord Martindale had to yield. John's stay in
London was a subject of much anxiety; and while Mrs. Nesbit treated it
as an absurd trifling with his own health, and his father reproached
himself for being obliged to leave Arthur to him, Theodora suffered from
complicated jealousy. Arthur seemed to want John more than her, John
risked himself in London, in order to be with Arthur and his wife.

She was very eager for his coming; and when she expected the return of
the carriage which was sent to meet him at the Whitford station, she
betook herself to the lodge, intending him to pick her up there, that
she might skim the cream of his information.

The carriage appeared, but it seemed empty. That dignified, gentlemanly
personage, Mr. Brown, alighted from the box, and advanced with
affability, replying to her astonished query, 'Mr. Martindale desired me
to say he should be at home by dinner-time, ma'am. He left the train
at the Enderby station, and is gone round by Rickworth Priory, with a
message from Mrs. Martindale to Lady Elizabeth Brandon.'

Theodora stood transfixed; and Brown, a confidential and cultivated
person, thought she waited for more information.

'Mr. Martindale has not much cough, ma'am, and I hope coming out of
London will remove it entirely. I think it was chiefly excitement and
anxiety that brought on a recurrence of it, for his health is decidedly
improved. He desired me to mention that Mrs. Martindale is much better.
She is on the sofa to-day for the first time; and he saw her before
leaving.'

'Do you know how the little boy is?' Theodora could not help asking.

'He is a little stronger, thank you, ma'am,' said Brown, with much
interest; 'he has cried less these last few days. He is said to be
extremely like Mrs. Martindale.'

Brown remounted to his place, the carriage drove on, and Theodora
impetuously walked along the avenue.

'That man is insufferable! Extremely like Mrs. Martindale! Servants'
gossip! How could I go and ask him? John has perfectly spoilt a good
servant in him! But John spoils everybody. The notion of that girl
sending him on her messages! John, who is treated like something sacred
by my father and mother themselves! Those damp Rickworth meadows! How
could Arthur allow it? It would serve him right if he was to marry Emma
Brandon after all!'

She would not go near her mother, lest she should give her aunt the
pleasure of hearing where he was gone; but as she was coming down,
dressed for dinner, she met her father in the hall, uneasily asking a
servant whether Mr. Martindale was come.

'Arthur's wife has sent him with a message to Rickworth,' she said.

'John? You don't mean it. You have not seen him?'

'No; he went round that way, and sent Brown home. He said he should be
here by dinner-time, but it is very late. Is it not a strange proceeding
of hers, to be sending him about the country!'

'I don't understand it. Where's Brown?'

'Here's a fly coming up the avenue. He is come at last.'

Lord Martindale hastened down the steps; Theodora came no further than
the door, in so irritated a state that she did not like John's cheerful
alacrity of step and greeting. 'She is up to-day, she is getting
better,' were the first words she heard. 'Well, Theodora, how are you?'
and he kissed her with more warmth than she returned.

'Did I hear you had been to Rickworth?' said his father.

'Yes; I sent word by Brown. Poor Violet is still so weak that she cannot
write, and the Brandons have been anxious about her; so she asked me to
let them know how she was, if I had the opportunity, and I came round
that way. I wanted to know when they go to London; for though Arthur is
as attentive as possible, I don't think Violet is in a condition to be
left entirely to him. When do you go?'

'Not till the end of May--just before the drawing-room,' said Lord
Martindale.

'I go back when they can take the boy to church. Is my mother in the
drawing-room? I'll just speak to her, and dress--it is late I see.'

'How well he seems,' said Lord Martindale, as John walked quickly on
before.

'There was a cough,' said Theodora.

'Yes; but so cheerful. I have not seen him so animated for years. He
must be better!'

His mother was full of delight. 'My dear John, you look so much better!
Where have you been?'

'At Rickworth. I went to give Lady Elizabeth an account of Violet. She
is much better.'

'And you have been after sunset in that river fog! My dear John!'

'There was no fog; and it was a most pleasant drive. I had no idea
Rickworth was so pretty. Violet desired me to thank you for your kind
messages. You should see her to-day, mother; she would be quite a study
for you; she looks so pretty on her pillows, poor thing! and Arthur is
come out quite a new character--as an excellent nurse.'

'Poor thing! I am glad she is recovering,' said Lady Martindale. 'It
was very kind in you to stay with Arthur. I only hope you have not been
hurting yourself.'

'No, thank you; I came away in time, I believe: but I should have been
glad to have stayed on, unless I made room for some one of more use to
Violet.'

'I wish you had come home sooner. We have had such a pleasant
dinner-party. You would have liked to meet the professor.'

It was not the first time John had been sensible that that drawing-room
was no place for sympathy; and he felt it the more now, because he had
been living in such entire participation of his brother's hopes and
fears, that he could hardly suppose any one could be less interested in
the mother and child in Cadogan-place. He came home, wishing Theodora
would go and relieve Arthur of some of the care Violet needed in
her convalescence; and he was much disappointed by her apparent
indifference--in reality, a severe fit of perverse jealousy.

All dinner-time she endured a conversation on the subjects for which she
least cared; nay, she talked ardently about the past dinner-party, for
the very purpose of preventing John from suspecting that her anxiety had
prevented her from enjoying it. And when she left the dining-room,
she felt furious at knowing that now her father would have all the
particulars to himself, so that none would transpire to her.

She longed so much to hear of Arthur and his child, that when John came
into the drawing-room she could have asked! But he went to greet his
aunt, who received him thus:

'Well, I am glad to see you at last. You ought to have good reasons for
coming to England for the May east winds, and then exposing yourself to
them in London!'

'I hope I did not expose myself: I only went out three or four times.'

'I know you are always rejoiced to be as little at home as possible.'

'I could not be spared sooner, ma'am.'

'Spared? I think you have come out in a new capacity.'

John never went up his aunt without expecting to undergo a penance.

'I was sorry no one else could be with Arthur, but being there, I could
not leave him.'

'And your mother tells me you are going back again.'

'Yes, to stand godfather.'

'To the son and heir, as they called him in the paper. I gave
Arthur credit for better taste; I suppose it was done by some of her
connections?'

'I was that connection,' said John.

'Oh! I suppose you know what expectations you will raise?'

John making no answer, she grew more angry. 'This one, at least, is
never likely to be heir, from what I hear; it is only surprising that it
is still alive.'

How Theodora hung upon the answer, her very throat aching with anxiety,
but hardening her face because John looked towards her.

'We were very much afraid for him at first,' he said, 'but they now
think there is no reason he should not do well. He began to improve from
the time she could attend to him.'

A deep sigh from his mother startled John, and recalled the grief of his
childhood--the loss of two young sisters who had died during her absence
on the continent. He crossed over and stood near her, between her and
his aunt, who, in agitated haste to change the conversation, called out
to ask her about some club-book. For once she did not attend; and while
Theodora came forward and answered Mrs. Nesbit, she tremulously asked
John if he had seen the child.

'Only once, before he was an hour old. He was asleep when I came away;
and, as Arthur says, it is a serious thing to disturb him, he cries so
much.'

'A little low melancholy wailing,' she said, with a half sob. But Mrs.
Nesbit would not leave her at peace any longer, and her voice came
beyond the screen of John's figure:--

'Lady Martindale, my dear, have you done with those books! They ought to
be returned.'

'Which, dear aunt?' And Lady Martindale started up as if she had been
caught off duty, and, with a manifest effort, brought her wandering
thoughts back again, to say which were read and which were unread.

John did not venture to revert to a subject that affected his mother
so strongly; but he made another attempt upon his sister, when he could
speak to her apart. 'Arthur has been wondering not to hear from you.'

'Every one has been writing,' she answered, coldly.

'He wants some relief from his constant attendance,' continued John;
'I was afraid at first it would be too much for him, sitting up three
nights consecutively, and even now he has not at all recovered his
looks.'

'Is he looking ill?' said Theodora.

'He has gone through a great deal, and when she tries to make him go
out, he only goes down to smoke. You would do a great deal of good if
you were there.'

Theodora would not reply. For Arthur to ask her to come and be godmother
was the very thing she wished; but she would not offer at John's
bidding, especially when Arthur was more than ever devoted to his wife;
so she made no sign; and John repented of having said so much, thinking
that, in such a humour, the farther she was from them the better.

Yet what he had said might have worked, had not a history of the
circumstances of Violet's illness come round to her by way of Mrs.
Nesbit. John had told his father; Lord Martindale told his wife; Lady
Martindale told her aunt, under whose colouring the story reached
Theodora, that Arthur's wife had been helpless and inefficient, had done
nothing but cry over her household affairs, could not bear to be left
alone, and that the child's premature birth had been occasioned by a
fit of hysterics because Arthur had gone out fishing. No wonder Theodora
pitied the one brother, and thought the other infatuated. To write
to Arthur was out of the question; and she could only look forward to
consoling him when the time for London should come. Nor was she much
inclined to compassionate John, when, as he said, the east wind--as
his aunt said, the London fog--as she thought, the Rickworth
meadows--brought on such an accession of cough that he was obliged to
confine himself to his two rooms, where he felt unusually solitary.

She went in one day to carry him the newspaper. 'I am writing to
Arthur,' he said, 'to tell him that I shall not be able to be in London
next Sunday; do you like to put in a note?'

'No, I thank you.'

'You have no message?'

'None.'

He paused and looked at her. 'I wish you would write,' he said. 'Arthur
has been watching eagerly for your congratulation.'

'He does not give much encouragement,' said Theodora, moving to the
door.

'I wish he was a letter writer! After being so long with them, I don't
like hearing nothing more; but his time has been so much engrossed that
he could hardly have written at first. I believe the first letter he
looked for was from you.'

'I don't know what to say. Other people have said all the commonplace
things.'

'You would not speak in that manner--you who used to be so fond of
Arthur--if you by any means realized what he has gone through.'

Theodora was touched, but would not show it. 'He does not want me now,'
she said, and was gone, and then her lips relaxed, and she breathed a
heavy sigh.

John sighed too. He could not understand her, and was sensible that
his own isolation was as a consequence of having lived absorbed in
his affection and his grief, without having sought the intimacy of his
sister. His brother's family cares had, for the first time, led him to
throw himself into the interests of those around him, and thus aroused
from the contemplation of his loss, he began to look with regret on
opportunities neglected and influence wasted. The stillness of his own
room did not as formerly suffice to him; the fears and hopes he had
lately been sharing rose more vividly before him, and he watched eagerly
for the reply to his letter.

It came, not from Arthur, but in the pointed style of Violet's hardest
steel pen, when Matilda's instructions were most full in her mind;
stiff, cramped, and formal, as if it had been a great effort to write
it, and John was grieved to find that she was still in no state for
exertion. She had scarcely been down-stairs, and neither she nor the
baby were as yet likely to be soon able to leave the house, in spite
of all the kind care of Lady Elizabeth and Miss Brandon. Violet made
numerous apologies for the message, which she had little thought would
cause Mr. Martindale to alter his route.

In fact, those kind friends had been so much affected by John's account
of Violet's weak state, under no better nursing than Arthur's, that,
as he had hoped, they had hastened their visit to London, and were now
settled as near to her as possible, spending nearly the whole of their
time with her. Emma almost idolized the baby, and was delighted at
Arthur's grateful request that she would be its sponsor, and Violet was
as happy in their company as the restlessness of a mind which had not
yet recovered its tone, would allow her to be.

In another fortnight John wrote to say that he found he had come home
too early, and must go to the Isle of Wight till the weather was warmer.
In passing through London, he would come to Cadogan-place, and it was
decided that he should arrive in time to go with the baby to church on
the Tuesday, and proceed the next morning.

He arrived as Violet came down to greet her party of sponsors. Never
had she looked prettier than when her husband led her into the room,
her taper figure so graceful in her somewhat languid movements, and her
countenance so sweetly blending the expression of child and mother. Each
white cheek was tinged with exquisite rose colour, and the dark liquid
eyes and softly smiling mouth had an affectionate pensiveness far
lovelier than her last year's bloom, and yet there was something painful
in that beauty--it was too like the fragility of the flower fading under
one hour's sunshine; and there was a sadness in seeing the matronly
stamp on a face so young that it should have shown only girlhood's
freedom from care. Arthur indeed was boasting of the return of the
colour, which spread and deepened as he drew attention to it; but John
and Lady Elizabeth agreed, as they walked to church, that it was the
very token of weakness, and that with every kind intention Arthur did
not know how to take care of her--how should he?

The cheeks grew more brilliant and burning at church, for on being
carried to the font, the baby made his doleful notes heard, and when
taken from his nurse, they rose into a positive roar. Violet looked from
him to his father's face, and there saw so much discomposure that her
wretchedness was complete, enhanced as it was by a sense of wickedness
in not being able to be happy and grateful. Just as when a few days
previously she had gone to return thanks, she had been in a nervous
state of fluttering and trembling that allowed her to dwell on nothing
but the dread of fainting away. The poor girl's nerves had been so
completely overthrown, that even her powers of mind seemed to be
suffering, and her agitated manner quite alarmed Lady Elizabeth. She was
in good hands, however; Lady Elizabeth went home with her, kept every
one else away, and nursing her in her own kind way, brought her back to
common sense, for in the exaggeration of her weak spirits, she had been
feeling as if it was she who had been screaming through the service, and
seriously vexing Arthur.

He presently looked in himself to say the few fond merry words that were
only needed to console her, and she was then left alone to rest, not
tranquil enough for sleep, but reading hymns, and trying to draw her
thoughts up to what she thought they ought to be on the day of her
child's baptismal vows.

It was well for her that the christening dinner (a terror to her
imagination) had been deferred till the family should be in town, and
that she had no guest but John, who was very sorry to see how weary and
exhausted she looked, as if it was a positive effort to sit at the head
of the table.

When the two brothers came up to the drawing-room, they found her on the
sofa.

'Regularly done for!' said Arthur, sitting down by her. 'You ought to
have gone to bed, you perverse woman.'

'I shall come to life after tea,' said she, beginning to rise as signs
of its approach were heard.

'Lie still, I say,' returned Arthur, settling the cushion. 'Do you think
no one can make tea but yourself! Out with the key, and lie still.'

'I hope, Violet,' said John, 'you did not think the Red Republicans had
been in your drawers and boxes. I am afraid Arthur may have cast the
blame of his own doings on the absent, though I assure you I did my best
to protect them.'

'Indeed he did you more justice,' said Violet, 'he told me the box was
your setting to rights, and the drawer his. It was very honest of him,
for I must say the box did you most credit.'

'As to the drawer,' said Arthur, 'I wish I had put it into the fire at
once! Those accounts are a monomania! She has been worse from the day
she got hold of that book of hers again, and the absurd part of it is
that these are all bills that she pays!'

'Oh! they are all comfortable now,' said Violet.

'And what did you say to Arthur's bold stroke!' said John.

'Oh! I never laughed more in my life.'

'Ah ha'' said Arthur, 'it was all my admirable sagacity! Why, John, the
woman was an incubus saddled upon us by Miss Standaloft, that this poor
silly child did not know how to get rid of, though she was cheating us
out of house and home. Never were such rejoicings as when she found the
Old Man of the Sea was gone!'

'It is quite a different thing now,' said Violet. 'Nurse found me such
a nice niece of her own, who does not consume as much in a fortnight
as that dreadful woman did in a week. Indeed, my great book has some
satisfaction in it now.'

'And yet he accuses it of having thrown you back.'

'Everything does that!' said Arthur. 'She will extract means of tiring
herself out of anything--pretends to be well, and then is good for
nothing!'

'Arthur! Arthur! do you know what you are doing with the tea?' cried
Violet, starting up. He has put in six shellfuls for three people, and
a lump of sugar, and now was shutting up the unfortunate teapot
without one drop of water!' And gaily driving him away, she held up the
sugar-tongs with the lump of sugar in his face, while he laughed and
yielded the field, saying, disdainfully, 'Woman's work.'

'Under the circumstances,' said John, 'putting in no water was the best
thing he could do.'

'Ay,' said Arthur, 'a pretty fellow you for a West Indian proprietor, to
consume neither sugar nor cigars.'

'At this rate,' said John, 'they are the people to consume nothing.
There was such an account of the Barbuda property the other day, that my
father is thinking of going to see what is to be done with it.'

'No bad plan for your next winter,' said Arthur. 'Now, Violet, to your
sofa! You have brewed your female potion in your female fashion, and may
surely leave your betters to pour it out.'

'No, indeed! How do I know what you may serve us up?' said she, quite
revived with laughing. 'I won't give up my place.'

'Quite right, Violet,' said John, 'don't leave me to his mercy. Last
time he made tea for me, it consisted only of the other ingredient,
hot water, after which I took the law into my own hands for our mutual
benefit. Pray what became of him after I was gone?'

'I was obliged to have him up into my room, and give him his tea
properly there, or I believe he would have existed on nothing but
cigars.'

'Well, I shall have some opinion of you when you make him leave off
cigars.'

'Catch her!' quietly responded Arthur.

'There can't be a worse thing for a man that gets bad coughs.'

'That's all smoke, Violet,' said Arthur. 'Don't tell her so, or I shall
never have any peace.'

'At least, I advise you to open the windows of his den before you show
my mother and Theodora the house.'

'As to Theodora! what is the matter with her!' said Arthur.

'I don't know,' said John.

'In one of her moods? Well, we shall have her here in ten days' time,
and I shall know what to be at with her.'

'I know she likes babies,' said Violet, with confidence. She had quite
revived, and was lively and amused; but as soon as tea was over, Arthur
insisted on her going to bed.

The loss of her gentle mirth seemed to be felt, for a long silence
ensued; Arthur leaning against the mantel-shelf, solacing himself with
a low whistle, John sitting in meditation. At last he looked up, saying,
'I wish you would all come and stay with me at Ventnor.'

'Thank you; but you see there's no such thing as my going. Fitzhugh is
in Norway, and till he comes back, I can't get away for more than a day
or two.'

'Suppose,' said John, rather doubtingly; 'what should you think of
putting Violet under my charge, and coming backwards and forwards
yourself?'

'Why, Harding did talk of sea air, but she did not take to the notion;
and I was not sorry; for, of all things I detest, the chief is sticking
up in a sea place, with nothing to do. But it is wretched work going on
as we do, though they say there is nothing the matter but weakness. I
verily believe it is all that child's eternal noise that regularly wears
her out. She is upset in a moment; and whenever she is left alone, she
sets to work on some fidget or other about the house, that makes her
worse than before.'

'Going from home would be the best cure for that.'

'I suppose it would. I meant her to have gone out with my mother, but
that can't be anyway now! The sea would give her a chance; I could run
down pretty often; and you would see that she did not tire herself.'

'I would do my best to take care of her, if you would trust her to me.'

'I know you would; and it is very kind in you to think of it.'

'I will find a house, and write as soon as it is ready. Do you think the
end of the week would be too soon for her? I am sure London is doing her
harm.'

'Whenever you please; and yet I am sorry. I wanted my father to have
seen the boy; but perhaps he had better look a little more respectable,
and learn to hold his tongue first. Besides, how will it be taken, her
going out of town just as they come up?'

'I rather think it would be better for her not to meet them till she is
stronger. Her continual anxiety and effort to please would be too much
strain.'

'Very likely; and I am sure I won't keep her here to expose her to Miss
Martindale's airs. She shall come as soon as you like.'

Arthur was strengthened in his determination by the first sound that met
him on going up-stairs--the poor babe's lamentable voice; and by finding
Violet, instead of taking the rest she so much needed, vainly trying to
still the feeble moaning. He was positively angry; and almost as if the
poor little thing had been wilfully persecuting her, declared it would
be the death of her, and peremptorily ordered it up-stairs; the nurse
only too glad to carry it off, and agreeing with him that it was doing
more harm to its mother than she did good to it. Violet, in submissive
misery, gave it up, and hid her face. One of her chief subjects for
self-torment was an imagination that Arthur did not like the baby, and
was displeased with its crying; and she felt utterly wretched, hardly
able to bear the cheerful tone in which he spoke! 'Well, Violet, we
shall soon set you up. It is all settled. You are to go, at the end of
the week, to stay with John in the Isle of Wight.'

'Go away?' said Violet, in an extinguished voice.

'Yes; it is the very thing for you. I shall stay here, and go backwards
and forwards. Well, what is it now?'

She was starting up, as the opening of the door let out another scream.
'There he is still! Let me go to him for one minute.'

'Folly!' said Arthur, impatiently. 'There's no peace day or night. I
won't stand it any longer. You are half dead already. I will not have it
go on. Lie down; go to sleep directly, and don't trouble your head about
anything more till morning.'

Like a good child, though choking with tears, she obeyed the first
mandate; and presently was rather comforted by his listening at the foot
of the stairs, and reporting that the boy seemed to be quiet at last.
The rest of the order it was not in her power to obey; she was too much
fatigued to sleep soundly, or to understand clearly. Most of the night
was spent in broken dreams of being separated from her child and her
husband, and wakening to the knowledge that something was going to
happen.

At last came sounder slumbers; and she awoke with an aching head, but
to clearer perceptions. And when Arthur, before going down to breakfast,
asked what she wished him to say to John, she answered: 'It is very kind
of him--but you never meant me to go without you?'

'I shall take you there, and run down pretty often; and John has been
used to coddling himself all his life, so of course he will know how to
take care of you.'

'How kind he is, but I don't'--she broke off, and looked at the little
pinched face and shrivelled arms of the tiny creature, which she pressed
more closely to her; then, with a hesitating voice, 'Only, if it would
do baby good!'

'Of course it would. He can't be well while things go on at this rate.
Only ask Harding.'

'I wonder whether Mr. Martindale knew it was what Mr. Harding
recommended! But you would be by yourself.'

'As if I had not taken care of myself for three-and-twenty years without
your help!'

'And all your party will be in town, so that you will not miss me.'

'I shall be with you very often. Shall I tell John you accept?'

'Tell him it is very kind, and I am so much obliged to him,' said
Violet, unable to speak otherwise than disconsolately.

Accordingly the brothers agreed that Arthur should bring her to Ventnor
on Saturday, if, as John expected, he could be prepared to receive her;
placing much confidence in Brown's savoir faire, though Brown was beyond
measure amazed at such a disarrangement of his master's methodical
habits; and Arthur himself gave a commiserating shake of the head as he
observed that there was no accounting for tastes, but if John chose
to shut himself up in a lodging with the most squallingest babby in
creation, he was not the man to gainsay him; and further reflected, that
if a man must be a younger son, John was a model elder brother.

Poor Violet! Her half-recovered state must be an excuse for her dire
consternation on hearing it was definitively settled that she was to be
carried off to Ventnor in four days' time! How arrange for Arthur? Where
find a nursemaid? What would become of the baby so far from Mr. Harding?
The Isle of Wight seemed the ends of the earth--out of England! Helpless
and overpowered, she was in despair; it came to Arthur's asking, in
displeasure, what she wanted--whether she meant to go or not. She
thought of her drooping infant, and said at once she would go.

'Well, then, what's all this about?'

Then came tears, and Arthur went away, declaring she did not know
herself what she would be at. He had really borne patiently with much
plaintiveness, and she knew it. She accused herself of ingratitude and
unreasonableness, and went into a fresh agony on that score; but soon
a tap at the door warned her to strive for composure. It was Sarah, and
Violet felt sure that the dreaded moment was come of her giving warning;
but it was only a message. 'If you please, ma'am, there's a young person
wants to see you.'

'Come as a nursery maid?' said Violet, springing up in her nervous
agitated way. 'Do you think she will do?'

'I don't think nothing of her,' said Sarah, emphatically. 'Don't you go
and be in a way, ma'am; there's no hurry.'

'Yes, but there is, Sarah. Baby and I are to go next Saturday to the
Isle of Wight, and I can't take old nurse. I must have some one.'

'You won't get nobody by hurrying,' said Sarah.

'But what's to be done, Sarah? I can't bear giving the dear baby to a
stranger, but I can't help it.'

'As for that, said Sarah, gloomily, 'I don't see but I could look after
Master John as well as any that is like to offer for the present.'

'You! Oh, that would be nice! But I thought you did not like children?'

'I don't, but I don't mind while he is too little to make a racket, and
worrit one out of one's life. It is only for the present, till you can
suit yourself, ma'am--just that you may not be lost going into foreign
parts with a stranger.'

Sarah had been nursing the baby every leisure moment, and had, during
the worst part of Violet's illness, had more to do with him than the
regular nurse. This was happily settled, and all at which Violet still
demurred was how the house and its master should be provided for in
their absence; to which Sarah replied, 'Mary would do well enough
for he;' and before Violet knew to which she must suppose the pronoun
referred, there was a new-comer, Lady Elizabeth, telling her that Arthur
had just been to beg her to come to her, saying he feared he had hurried
her and taken her by surprise.

Under such kind soothing Violet's rational mind returned. She ceased to
attempt to put herself into a vehement state of preparation, and began
to take so cheerful a view of affairs that she met Arthur again in
excellent spirits.

Emma Brandon pitied her for being left alone with Mr. Martindale, but
this was no subject of dread to her, and she confessed that she was
relieved to escape the meeting with the rest of the family. The chief
regret was, that the two friends would miss the constant intercourse
with which they had flattered themselves--the only thing that made
London endurable to poor Emma. She amused Violet with her lamentations
over her gaieties, and her piteous accounts of the tedium of parties and
balls; whereas Violet declared that she liked them very much.

'It was pleasant to walk about with Arthur and hear his droll remarks,
and she liked seeing people look nice and well dressed.'

'Ah! you are better off. You are not obliged to dance, and you are safe,
too. Now, whenever any one asks to be introduced to me I am sure he
wants the Priory, and feel bound to guard it.'

'And so you don't like any one, and find it stupid?'

'So I do, of course, and I hope I always shall. But oh! Violet, I
have not told you that I saw that lady again this morning at the
early service. She had still her white dress on, I am sure it is
for Whitsuntide; and her face is so striking--so full of thought and
earnestness, just like what one would suppose a novice. I shall take her
for my romance, and try to guess at her history.'

'To console you for your godson going away?'

'Ah! it won't do that! But it will be something to think of, and I will
report to you if I make out any more about her. And mind you give me a
full account of the godson.'

Arthur wished the journey well over; he had often felt a sort of
superior pity for travellers with a baby in company, and did not relish
the prospect; but things turned out well; he found an acquaintance, and
travelled with him in a different carriage, and little Johnnie, lulled
by the country air, slept so much that Violet had leisure to enjoy the
burst into country scenery, and be refreshed by the glowing beauty of
the green meadows, the budding woods, and the brilliant feathery broom
blossoms that gilded the embankments. _ - The richest and that commercial
production is called, with justice, the granary of the Philippines.

Its 11,500 km. surface near a house 1,000,000 inhabitants. On its shores
lies the port of Ilo-Ilo, the second of the archipelago in the amount
of export trade and its importance. _Negros._-To-uninhabited forty years
ago now has 250,000 inhabitants in an area of 8,000 km. 2 It is known
that in the fertile plains is harvested in much the huge export
sugar that holds the archipelago.

_Cebú._--The most industrial of all, which shares with the manufacture
of Panay _nipis_ rich, beautiful fabric that holds with competitive
advantage with the most precious foreign tissue. gives us the example
of their worth, with the construction without the aid official, from
railways to give exit to the coals in his entrails treasures, and
that in its 4183 km. surface, has an industrious population of over
350,000 inhabitants.

_Leyte._--Though not as rich as those inhabited let outlined, Leyte is
progressing rapidly, reaching today with more than 250,000 souls in
9500 km. which constitute its extension superficial. At day soon the rich
iron mines in its bowels hides the island, giving rise to breeding farms,
as now are made with azufrales of Burauen. The island of Bohol or Bojol,
that to which Cavada called the disinherited daughter nature of
this splendid intertropical covers an area of 3,250 km. occupied
by 250,000 people.

Cavada The adjective applied to this land of opportunity could be in
another era, today is increasing rapidly Bojol farms, picking coffee in
large quantities over appreciated, whose cultivation completed by invading
a large part of the territories that remain uncultivated.

_Masbate._--next to the coast of Luzon, and its fertile territory grazing
herds of the famous archipelago. _Mindoro._--very long but so
depopulated, with only about 67,000 inhabitants in 10,167 km. surface
evolution. The forest wealth of this island is so large and varied, it
can compensate with excessive difficulties clearing submit to the
cultivation of their fields, by an intelligent farm. There abound woods,
represented by ebony and sandalwood: the utility, such as molave, dungón,
Ipil and others, besides their application in urban buildings
achieve high esteem if he were to be employed in the construction
of railways.

Ilanga El-ylang, this beautiful tree that the essence of their
flowers, not only carries the most precious perfume, but also an
element of wealth, how extensive forests Mindoro where the greed
of man, blinded by the desire for profit, is not happy with the
product the flower, and destroying thousands of plants for their
juice a tiny part of the coveted liquid meager reward that shows
_The excessive greed, lack of práctico_ sense that in the operation
of the store of wealth than the treasures Archipelago. depopulation
of the island is fully justified.

     The Moors needed a point of support
     and refuge in the progressive
     development towards the N.
     Archipelago were continually
     pirate its regular trips, and I found
     without having to overcome
     great resistance in the
     magnificent bays of Mamburao
                   and Palu, where he remained until this century.

The natural subject to the most terrible slavery, migrated to the
provinces close, reduce the population to be infidels who parapets
in the rugged mountains, were able to maintain their independence.
_Samar._--the closest to Luzon, which only separates the San
Bernardino Strait.

Fifty years ago the island of Samar was almost depopulated, with
the large backlog of its few inhabitants.

The amazing fertility of the soil has made it flows to a large number of
funds dedicated to farms, where they are harvested with excellent results
all products, including coffee and snuff, are more suitable for
export.

Samar enjoys excellent safety, and their lands are so rich and wonderful
topography as suitable for cultivation, which lie a few years ago
a farm colony composed exclusively of the Peninsula, from the
Artillery Regiment who manned to Manila, was elected unanimously
as the most appropriate and where they could expect more brilliant
results, hope that the facts have been crowned the most complete
success.

Their surface is 12,175 km. 200,000 and soon the number of its
inhabitants.

Within the end opposite to Samar and Leyte, and serve as a barrier
between the sea and the Mindoro China, lies the island of Paragua,
wide strip of land 420 km. long and less than 40 km. at its greatest
width, and surface extension 14000.

Its forest wealth is enormous, and now it is made important concessions
to the colonization of their territory.

After this slight review of the major islands that make up the
core group of the archipelago remains only to sketch what they are and
use those two large islands that limit, the one by the N. and the other
by the S., Luzon and Mindanao.

The island of Luzon, which is the extreme N. those territories, in
itself require a large amount if we had to give brief idea of the
caste people, their territory and the vast mineral and forest
wealth that nature has gifted.

It has an area of more superficial 100,000 kilometers, or soon, equal
to the island of Cuba and its population exceeds 3,500,000
inhabitants.

Al N. Cagayan. Isabela is the Ilocos produce rich snuff its name, the
most appreciated of the archipelago. In the center Cavite. Pampanga and
Batangas themselves sufficient to banish the concept of loafers
that Filipinos enjoy the peninsula, the richest of our provinces
do not exceed the expertise of their crop to which we referred; try
the goodness of the products, active trade argue that the welfare
enjoyed by its people and the rapid increase in population in recent
years have experienced.

Both the Albay and Camarines S. conclude evident from the immense wealth
of Luzon. Abaca, the filament which is a precious privilege of the
Philippines, is in volcanic areas such as production center,
promoting the wealth of these provinces until recently impoverished
and uncultivated.

The island of Mindanao, although somewhat smaller in size as of
Luzon, it does not yield on the fertility of their lands and
goodness of the products, but with the huge advantage that gives
its mineral wealth on the other islands of the archipelago.

At the Museum Library overseas so many useful things, so many goodies
for the study and knowledge of our colonies holds, and thanks to the
kindness of its director and illustrated our distinguished friend, Mr.
D. Francisco Vigil, we find that the manuscript is known to all
details of the existence of large coal deposits in the jurisdiction
of the people of Naan, the second district of Mindanao (Surigao.)

In this as in the Misamis are huge portions of land that gold hoard wealth,
much of the reproductive Australia, whose existence has been confirmed
by surveys that have been conducted at different times the mining
engineer Mr. Rye. Cottabato districts, and Zamboanga Davao, although
populated by fanaticism and indolent race of the Mohammedan Malays, produce
great abundance of rice and coffee, both products of excellent quality
that can compete with the world's most reputed, leading to a
reproductive trade, sufficient to satisfy the needs of those people
whose occupation is the preferred war.

Despite this, large portions of Mindanao are uneducated, but have noticed
it until now these indelible signs accusing the progress of a
civilization anxious to remove the riches such a splendid country,
where the mineral kingdom saved untold treasures covered by forests,
closed today by the lush fronds vejetación which spreads and grows,
we care not a smart crop, based on advances in agricultural sciences,
but free and wild, fertilized by rain and sprays under the warm
caress of that incomparable climate.

This is not Mindanao island territories of those whose knowledge
is made available and acquired in the vigils of the study.

Hence, as a country where nature with an almost insurmountable,
impossible and retards the action of scientific research, as reported
and written, is subject to the discretion particularísimo formed
by the field experience gained, either by Rugged ideas on the news
of the natural, whose truth is always problematic.

But these are not the only obstacles encountered in the assessment
of any matter that relates to Mindanao.

In such remote countries, where it seemed natural that no other
ambitions as a noble emulation, after achieving national aggrandizement,
are removed by continuous hidden ambitions, maintaining sustained
latent struggles in the past between the various monastic orders
in that exercise The cure of souls, for no other purpose than to
gradually extend its sphere of influence.

Hence his jealous itching to grab every principle of authority,
ensuring the absolute separation between the peninsula and the
Indian, to increase its influence in proportion to the ignorance
in those countries that are both civilian and military, with its
indispensable contest, which is selfish is good.

This is simply because it is easy to deduce that if we deal with
that country blind an exaggerated political or religious zeal that
leads to anything useful, or selfishness of interest overrides the
voice of reason, it is impossible to appreciate the true spirit
serene state of the current situation in Mindanao and the difficult
problems for its reduction remaining to be resolved.

If you have to judge with any accuracy the kind of enemies we had to fight
there since the early days of our dominance in the archipelago,
and whose remains, now refugees in central Mindanao, is ready to
fight with heroic courage never denied, it is necessary to investigate
in the field of their origin story, to come to the knowledge of the
dominant race of those rich territories, which directs and encourages
egoista ideal for well-defined, large portion of oborígenes --
domain and the defense of vested interests with smart management -
is the Arabic, whose authority and religious power whose accepted
practices and customs.

That same race, that the effort of a thriving civilization in Europe
reflect the sparkle of his science, make the despotic nature and
fierce in India, Sumatra, Java and Borneo, and finally to the
Philippines, which were the final stage of the trip that make the
big Asian archipelago.

While these people do not retain the degree of culture at that time earned
them the name of civilizing race, your ignorance is not such as
to call it fairly wild.

So without wanting to consider the individual Muslim Mindanao as a
civilized nation, much less, without not admit that he has a
disciplined army capable of fighting in the open and in accordance
with tactical requirements at the forefront of our soldiers, it is
undeniable that his reckless daring, aided by an exalted religious
fanaticism, which promises eternal life of voluptuous delights,
makes and make determined and bloody conquest of those fertile
regions, which, with its lush vegetation, which surrounds headband
with garlands of flowers and fruiting valuable products for their
own water lagoon that unexplored subject of many efforts today and
in the past the _imprevisión, lack of political sense and a misguided
zeal religioso_, delivery, after humiliating abandonment, their
current owners; barbaric people, by decay, but never wild, with
admirable political sense is assimilated population of the occupied
country, thus creating the extraordinary richness of this agricultural
region.

And bad people can not be a vagabond and nomad as they say, is that
the intelligent cultivator of rich and appreciated, and expressed great
respect for authority, and religious sentiment Super grouped into
a tight to make their lives before giving an inch of the home
country.

Muéstranse disciplined and courageous voice their Datta, they set
an example, albeit its ambush tactics by tradition and surprise,
with reckless courage and infinite caution executed .

They are armed admirably as required by local circumstances, because
nothing is there the need for large rifle scope. And it is by virtue of
the numerous powerful federation Illana, which are formed for all
cases in which Spanish is the combat.

The Moors Mindanao grouped and well prepared to sustain our
Army bloody fighting, are enemies to be terrible defend their territory
with ferocious energy, cocky as they are by their past victories, the
tradition remains alive, creating a hero in each of those Mohammedans.
So that explains his robust chest to oppose the bayonets of our
soldiers, far from fear for life, making titanic efforts between
spasms of agony to break the ranks of those.

And seek, above all, the death of a Christian because it is sure
to achieve the pleasure they bring to the believer of his beautiful
dream Hurier paradise.

The contest sustained efforts from 1630 to 1640 between the Jesuits
and Recollects material and spiritual possession of the territory
of Lanao, where Mahomet had not yet extended their influence there,
was what provided the wily Sultan of Mindanao, Cachito Corralat,
enlarge its domains to the coast with little political and religious
conquest made by him in the shadow of the great loss that fell
between Christianity Malanaos, eyewitnesses to the fierce fighting
that continued into irreconcilable rival to Jesuits and Recollects.

So vehement was the desire Malanaos benefit from our domain to get out
of the wiles of the Mindanao acaudillados by Corralat, who chaired
by the father moved to St. Augustine in Manila and selected large
representation, Corcuera requiring the establishment of a presidio in
the lagoon to contain continuous tours of the Mohammedans.

Denied your claim with grave detriment of our reputation, and returned the
hostages as a guarantee of allegiance were in Manila, the political
skill of astute sultan of Mindanao triumphed, taking advantage of these
and other deviations from our own. Since that date, a few ambitious
dislates translate their religious zeal in fierce intransigence and
unbridled desire for control, deprived Spain of a rich province and
to the religion of a large number of followers. The abandonment of the
fort in Sabanilla Illana bay, withdrawing our troops from Zamboanga, where
he was a wonderful strong loyalty and entrusted custody of the "Luta",
and finally taken by the Moors the fortress of Tandag in 1760, where
they were slashed 300 guarnecían men who made nearly all owners of the
island to the Mohammedans, reaching with this extraordinary pressure on
the natural subject at all since your domain. The importance of this
grew with the population and wealth of the 100,000 'rise 'inhabitants
of the vast territory from the Bay Pangüil, within Sibuguey and
port Dumanquilas, Macajalar Bay and Zamboanga, almost unexplored
portion, which the Engineer Mr.

Vidal y Soler, who picked up a large part of the river Dumanquilas,
said to be the richest and most luxuriant vegetation in Mindanao. The
development of the serious events taking place in Mindanao and in
anticipation of future contingencies, they must bear in mind the
governments and the press, which is the most illustrated The view
is not only in N. of Africa which offers a great future for the
sacred interests of the Fatherland.

Also in the south of the Philippines, the rich lands of Mindanao, with
its astonishing fertility and richness of its products provide wide
area of the business of our race and the business expansion is
needed so that our country lacks today markets for their products. The
wealth of Mindanao amaze those who know deeply. Among Misamis and
Surigao and in the grounds of Iponan, Pigtao and Puiholugan, Christian
peoples of the N. coast, vast area of land gold, superior to those of
wealth in Australia, gives the mining industry fabulous profits.

Zamboanga, Lanao, and the territories within Davao, produce, despite
the failure of the crop, rich coffee that reach high value. Butuan
Rivers, Grande, Dumanquilas, Cagayan and other less important roads
are excellent, invaluable for the development of trade .

And if it is true that the unhealthy climate in the virgin forests
of reeds and muddy lowlands deadly fumes cause malaria, but the
gentle Zamboanga compensation outweigh all these disadvantages.

The people of this charming town with blood and Hispanic are generous
and hospitable . Admired it a rich forest that emerges from all sides,
making this delightful oasis in the region that competes in beauty with
Carmena Grenadians. Zamboanga, where Polombato, like Darro, bathes sultana
of the Philippines, disrupting the soft murmur of its waves and delicious
tropical unnerving stillness, offers with its pure and healthy
environment and with its crystal waters, which purifies sarsaparilla,
sap reclaimed peninsular of anemic blood, who lives in Jolo, Tawi-Tawi
and the military in Mindanao, always ready to give his life for the
honor of the army and the national aggrandizement. If, as expected,
the interests of the Fatherland, which in any time and place must
be well above conveniences, they have the protection they deserve
from their importance demands, should be taken into account not
only struggle to conquer by force of arms to be there followed.

exclaimed both auditors in a breath.

'Ay. She met him at that breakfast, walked about the gardens with him
all the morning, and my mother wrote to my aunt, I believe, that she was
booked. Then at this Bryanstone soiree, the next night, Fitzhugh was in
the ascendant--poor St. Erme could not so much as gain a look.'

'So he is in London!' said Violet. 'Do tell me what he is like.'

'Like a German music-master,' said Arthur. 'As queer a figure as ever
I saw. Keeps his hair parted in the middle, hanging down in long lank
rats' tails, meant to curl, moustache ditto, open collar turned down,
black ribbon tie.'

'Oh! how amazed the Wrangerton people would be!'

'It is too much to study the picturesque in one's own person in
England!' said John, laughing. 'I am sorry he continues that fashion.'

'So, of course,' continued Arthur, 'all the young ladies are raving
after him, while he goes mooning after Theodora. How the fair sex must
solace itself with abusing "that Miss Martindale!"'

'I wish he would be a little more sensible,' said John. 'He really is
capable of something better.'

'Where did you know him?'

'At Naples. I liked him very much till he persecuted me beyond endurance
with Tennyson and Browning. He is always going about in raptures with
some new-fashioned poet.'

'I suppose he will set up Theodora for his muse. My mother is enchanted;
he is exactly one of her own set, music, pictures, and all. The
second-hand courtship is a fine chance for her when Miss Martindale is
ungracious.'

'But it will not come to anything,' said John. 'In the meantime, her
ladyship gets the benefit of a lion, and a very tawny lion, for her
soirees.'

'Oh! that soiree will be something pleasant for you,' said Violet.

'I shall cut it. It is the first day I can be here.'

'Not meet that great African traveller?'

'What good would Baron Munchausen himself do me in the crowd my mother
is heaping together?'

'I am sure your mother and sister must want you.'

'Want must be their master. I am not going to elbow myself about and be
squashed flat for their pleasure. It is a dozen times worse to be in a
mob at home, for one has to find chairs for all the ladies. Pah!'

'That is very lazy!' said the wife. 'You will be sorry to have missed it
when it is too late, and your home people will be vexed.'

'Who cares? My father does not, and the others take no pains not to vex
us.'

'O, Arthur! you know it makes it worse if you always come to me when
they want you. I could wait very well. Only one day above all you must
come,' said she, with lowered voice, in his ear.

'What's that?'

John could not see how, instead of speaking, she guided her husband's
hand to her wedding-ring. His reply transpired--'I'll not fail. Which
day is it?'

'Friday week. I hope you will be able!'

'I'll manage it. Why, it will be your birthday, too!'

'Yes, I shall be so glad to be seventeen. I shall feel as if baby would
respect me more. Oh! I am glad you can come, but you must be good, and
go to the soiree. I do think it would not be right always to leave them
when they want you. Tell him so, please, Mr. Martindale.'

John did so, but Arthur made no promises, and even when the day came,
they were uncertain whether they might think of him at the party, or as
smoking cigars at home.


CHAPTER 5


     Her scourge is felt, unseen, unheard,
     Where, though aloud the laughter swells,
     Her secret in the bosom dwells,
     There is a sadness in the strain
     As from a heart o'ercharged with pain.
                            --The Baptistery


Theodora had come to London, hating the idea of gaieties, liking nothing
but the early service and chemical lectures, and shrinking from the
meeting with her former friend. She enjoyed only the prospect of the
comfort her society would afford her brother, depressed by attendance on
a nervous wife, in an unsatisfactory home.

No Arthur met them at the station: he had left a message that he was
taking Mrs. Martindale to the Isle of Wight, and should return early on
Tuesday.

Theodora stayed at home the whole of that day, but in vain. She was
busied in sending out cards to canvass for her dumb boy's admission into
an asylum, when a message came up to her sitting-room. She started. Was
it Arthur? No; Mrs. Finch was in the drawing-room; and at that moment
a light step was on the stairs, and a flutter of gay ribbons advanced.
'Ha! Theodora! I knew how to track you. The old place! Dear old
school-room, how happy we have been here! Not gone out? Any one would
think you had some stern female to shut you up with a tough exercise!
But I believe you always broke out.'

'I stayed in to-day, expecting my brother.'

'Captain Martindale? Why, did not I see him riding with your father?
Surely I did.'

'Impossible!' exclaimed Theodora.

'Yes, but I did though; I am sure of it, for he bowed. He had that sweet
pretty little mare of his. Have you seen her, Theodora? I quite envy
her; but I suppose he bought it for his wife; and she deserves all that
is sweet and pretty, I am sure, and has it, too.'

Theodora could not recover from the thrill of pain so as to speak, and
Mrs. Finch rattled on. 'She was not in good looks when I saw her, poor
thing, but she looked so soft and fragile, it quite went to my heart;
though Jane will have it she is deep, and gets her own way by being meek
and helpless. I don't go along with Jane throughout; I hate seeing holes
picked in everybody.'

'Where is Jane?'

'Gone to some charity sermonizing. She will meet some great folks there,
and be in her element. I am glad to have you alone. Why, you bonny old
Greek empress, you are as jolly a gipsy queen as ever! How you will turn
people's heads! I am glad you have all that bright red-brown on your
cheeks!'

'No self-preservation like a country life and early rising,' said
Theodora, laughing. 'You have not kept yourself as well, Georgina. I am
sorry to see you so thin.'

'Me! Oh, I have battered through more seasons than you have dreamt of!'
said Mrs. Finch, lightly, but with a sigh. 'And had a fever besides,
which disposed of all my fat. I am like a hunter in fine condition,
no superfluous flesh, ready for action. And as to action--what are you
doing, Theodora?--where are you going?'

'I don't know. Mamma keeps the cards. I don't want to know anything
about it.'

Georgina burst into a laugh, rather unnecessarily loud.

'Just like you! Treat it as you used your music! What can't be cured
must be endured, you know. Well, you poor victim, are you going to
execution to-night?'

'Not that I know of.'

'Famous! Then I'll tell you what: there is going to be a lecture on
Mesmerism to-night. Wonderful! Clairvoyante tells you everything, past,
present, and to come! You'll detect all the impostures; won't it be fun?
I'll call for you at eight precisely.'

Theodora thought of Arthur, and that she should miss the tidings of
his child; then recollected that he had not afforded her one minute's
greeting. She would show him that she did not care, and therefore made
the agreement.

Cold and moody she came down to dinner, but her heart was beating with
disappointment at not seeing Arthur, though a place was prepared
for him. Mrs. Finch was right; he had been with his father all the
afternoon, but had not supposed the ladies to be at home; an explanation
which never occurred to Theodora.

He came in a few minutes after they had sat down; he was heated by
his hasty walk from his empty house, and his greeting was brief and
disconcerted at finding himself late. His mother made her composed
inquiries for the party at Ventnor, without direct mention of the child,
and he replied in the same tone. His cordial first intelligence had
been bestowed upon his father, and he was not disposed to volunteer
communications to the sister, whose apparent gloomy indifference
mortified him.

He had not sat down ten minutes before word came that Mrs. Finch was
waiting for Miss Martindale. Theodora rose, in the midst of her father
and brother's amazement. 'I told mamma of my arrangement to go with
Georgina Finch to a lecture on Mesmerism,' she said.

'Mesmerism!' was the sotto voce exclamation of Lord Martindale. 'But, my
dear, you did not know that Arthur was at home this evening?'

'Yes, I did,' said Theodora, coldly; mentally adding, 'and I knew he had
been five hours without coming near me.'

'Who is going with you? Is Mr. Finch?'

'I have not heard. I cannot keep Georgina waiting.'

It was no place for discussion. Lord Martindale only said--

'Arthur, cannot you go with your sister?'

Arthur muttered that 'it would be a great bore, and he was as tired as
a dog.' He had no intention of going out of his way to oblige Theodora,
while she showed no feeling for what concerned him most nearly; so
he kept his place at the table, while Lord Martindale, displeased and
perplexed, came out to say a few words to his daughter, under pretext
of handing her to the carriage. 'I am surprised, Theodora. It cannot
be helped now, but your independent proceedings cannot go on here as at
home.'

Theodora vouchsafed no answer. The carriage contained only Mrs. Finch
and Miss Gardner. Lord Martindale paused as his daughter stepped in,
gravely asking if they were going to take up Mr. Finch. Georgina's laugh
was not quite what it would have been to a younger inquirer, but it did
not tend to console him. 'Mr. Finch! O no! We left him to the society
of his port wine. I mean to test the clairvoyante by asking what he
is dreaming about. But there is no fear of our coming to harm. Here's
sister Jane for a duenna, and I always find squires wherever I go.'

Lord Martindale sat at home much annoyed, and preparing a lecture for
his wilful daughter on her return. Sooth to say, Theodora did not find
any great reward in her expedition. The sight was a painful one; and
her high principles had doubts whether it was a legitimate subject for
encouragement. She longed all the time to be sitting by Arthur's side,
and hearing of his little boy. How young and gay he looked to be a
father and head of a family! and how satisfying it seemed to have his
bright eyes in sight again! She looked so thoughtful that Georgina
roused her by threatening to set the poor clairvoyante to read her
meditations.

When Theodora came home, she would have gone straight up to her own
room, but her father waylaid her, and the first sound of his voice awoke
the resolution to defend her freedom of action. Perhaps the perception
that he was a little afraid of the rebuke he was about to administer
added defiance to her determination.

'Theodora, I wish to speak to you. I do not wish to restrain your
reasonable freedom, but I must beg that another time you will not fix
your plans without some reference.'

'I told mamma,' she answered.

'I am not satisfied with the subject you have chosen--and I do not quite
like what I see of Mrs. Finch. I had rather you made no engagements for
the present.'

'I will take care,' said Theodora: 'but when mamma does not go out,
I must have some one. I will do nothing worthy of disapproval. Good
night.'

She walked off, leaving Lord Martindale baffled. That evening seemed to
give its colour to the subsequent weeks. It was a time of much pain to
Theodora, estranging herself from her brother, fancying him prejudiced
against her, and shutting herself up from her true pleasures to throw
herself into what had little charm for her beyond the gratification of
her self-will.

She really loved Georgina Finch. There was the bond of old association
and girlish friendship, and this could not be set aside, even though the
pair had grown far asunder. Perhaps the strongest link had been their
likeness in strength of expression and disregard of opinion; but it now
seemed as if what in Theodora was vehemence and determination, was in
Georgina only exaggeration and recklessness. However, Georgina had a
true affection for Theodora, and looked up to her genuine goodness,
though without much attempt to imitate it, and the positive enthusiasm
she possessed for her friend was very winning to one who was always
pining for affection. Therefore Theodora adhered to her intimacy through
all the evidences of disapproval, and always carried the day.

Georgina was well-born, and her sphere was naturally in the higher
circles, and though her marriage had been beneath her own rank, this
was little thought of, as she was rich, and by many considered very
handsome, fashionable, and agreeable. Mr. Finch was hardly ever seen,
and little regarded when he was; he was a quiet, good-natured old man,
who knew nothing but of money matters, and was proud of his gay young
wife. She had her own way, and was much admired; sure to be in every
party, and certain to be surrounded with gentlemen, to whom she rattled
away with lively nonsense, and all of whom were ready to be her obedient
squires. Her manners were impetuous, and, as well as her appearance,
best to be described as dashing. Some people disliked her extremely; but
she was always doing good-natured generous things, and the worst that
could be said of her was, that she was careless of appearances, and, as
Arthur called her, "fast". Theodora knew there was sincerity and warmth
of heart, and was always trusting that these might develop into further
excellences; moreover, she was sensible of having some influence
for good. More than one wild freak had been relinquished on her
remonstrance; and there was enough to justify her, in her own eyes, for
continuing Georgina's firm friend and champion.

She had no other friendships; she did not like young ladies, and was
still less liked by them; and Jane Gardner was nobody when her sister
was by, though now and then her power was felt in double-edged sayings
which recurred to mind.

However, Theodora found society more intoxicating than she had expected.
Not that her sober sense enjoyed or approved; but in her own county she
was used to be the undeniable princess of her circle, and she could not
go out without trying to stand first still, and to let her attractions
accomplish what her situation effected at home. Her princely deportment,
striking countenance, and half-repelling, half-inviting manner, were
more effective than the more regular beauty of other girls; for there
was something irresistible in the privilege of obtaining a bright look
and smile from one whose demeanour was in general so distant; and
when she once began to talk, eager, decided, brilliant, original, and
bestowing exclusive and flattering attention, for the time, on the
favoured individual, no marvel that he was bewitched, and when, the next
night, she was haughty and regardless, he only watched the more ardently
for a renewal of her smiles. The general homage was no pleasure to her;
she took it as her due, and could not have borne to be without it. She
had rather been at home with her books, or preparing lessons to send to
her school at Brogden; but in company she could not bear not to reign
supreme, and put forth every power to maintain her place, though in her
grand, careless, indifferent manner, and when it was over, hating and
despising her very success.

Arthur had thawed after his second visit to Ventnor; he had brought away
too much satisfaction and good humour to be pervious to her moody looks;
and his freedom and ease had a corresponding effect upon her. They
became more like their usual selves towards each other; and when he
yielded, on being again exhorted to stay for the soiree, she deemed it a
loosening of the trammels in which he was held. He became available when
she wanted him; and avoiding all mention of his family, they were very
comfortable until Theodora was inspired with a desire to go to a last
appearance of Mademoiselle Rachel, unfortunately on the very evening
when Violet had especially begged him to be with her.

If he would have said it was his wedding-day, there could have been no
debate; but he was subject to a sort of schoolboy reserve, where he was
conscious or ashamed. And there were unpleasant reminiscences connected
with that day--that unacknowledged sense of having been entrapped--that
impossibility of forgetting his sister's expostulation--that disgust
at being conspicuous--that longing for an excuse for flying into a
passion--that universal hatred of everything belonging to the Mosses.
He could not give a sentimental reason, and rather than let it be
conjectured, he adduced every pretext but the true one; professed to
hate plays, especially tragedies, and scolded his sister for setting her
heart on a French Jewess when there were plenty of English Christians.

'If you would only give me your true reason, I should be satisfied,'
said she at last.

'I love my love with a V,' was his answer, in so bright a tone as should
surely have appeased her; but far from it; she exclaimed,

'Ventnor! Why, will no other time do for THAT?'

'I have promised,' Arthur answered, vexed at her tone.

'What possible difference can it make to her which day you go?'

'I have said.'

'Come, write and tell her it is important to me. Rachel will not appear
again, and papa is engaged. She must see the sense of it. Come, write.'

'Too much trouble.'

'Then I will. I shall say you gave me leave.'

'Indeed,' said Arthur, fully roused, 'you will say no such thing. You
have not shown so much attention to Mrs. Martindale, that you need
expect her to give way to your convenience.'

He walked away, as he always did when he thought he had provoked a
female tongue. They shall apply to all official and private circles of the
German people in the firm conviction that there is only a bit of employment
with the Zigeunertum needed to improve this poor, homeless people a
fairer assessment of serious and good will for all noble-minded
Germans to obtain.

The consequences of this would be the turnaround gypsies certainly
be a blessing and our points so far in this so hard not to disgrace
Christianity disadvantage.

Ph.
At the soiree she had heard him point out to Emma Brandon a similar
one, on a velvet round a lady's neck, and say that it would look well
on Violet's white skin. So he was obliged to propitiate his idol with
trinkets far more expensive than he could properly afford!

Theodora little guessed that the gift was received without one thought
of the white throat, but with many speculations whether little Johnnie
would soon be able to spare a bit of flaxen down to contrast with the
black lock cut from his papa's head.

There was nothing for it but to dwell no more on this deluded brother,
and Theodora tried every means to stifle the thought. She threw herself
into the full whirl of society, rattling on in a way that nothing but
high health and great bodily strength could have endured. After her
discontented and ungracious commencement, she positively alarmed her
parents by the quantity she undertook, with spirits apparently never
flagging, though never did she lose that aching void. Books, lectures,
conversation, dancing, could not banish that craving for her brother,
nothing but the three hours of sleep that she allowed herself. If she
exceeded them, there were unfailing dreams of Arthur and his child.

She thought of another cure. There was another kind of affection, not
half so valuable in her eyes as fraternal love; it made fools of people,
but then they were happy in their blindness, and could keep it to
themselves. She would condescend to lay herself open to the infection.
It would be satisfying if she could catch it. She examined each of her
followers in turn, but each fell short of her standard, and was repelled
just as his hopes had been excited. One 'Hollo, Theodora, come along,'
would have been worth all the court paid to her by men, to some of whom
Arthur could have ill borne a comparison.


yes!

     That is the grandson of the hunter! Lord,
     I can understand you! You wanted to purify
     myself in the fire, why could I not
     find him! But do you protect yourself with him almighty hand! For
me everything is blessed!--Christian Year


All went well and smoothly at Ventnor, until a sudden and severe attack
of some baby ailment threatened to render fruitless all Mr. Martindale's
kind cares.

