Produced by Carla Foust and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Transcriber's note


Some of the spellings and hyphenations in the original are unusual; they
have not been changed. Minor punctuation errors have been corrected
without notice. A few obvious typographical errors have been corrected,
and they are listed at the end of this book.


STARLIGHT RANCH

AND

OTHER STORIES OF ARMY
LIFE ON THE FRONTIER.

BY

CAPTAIN CHARLES KING, U.S.A.,

AUTHOR OF
"MARION'S FAITH," "THE COLONEL'S DAUGHTER," ETC.

PHILADELPHIA:
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY.
1891.


Copyright, 1890, by J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY.


CONTENTS.


                                                      PAGE
STARLIGHT RANCH                                          7

WELL WON; OR, FROM THE PLAINS TO "THE POINT"            40

FROM "THE POINT" TO THE PLAINS                         116

THE WORST MAN IN THE TROOP                             201

VAN                                                    234


STARLIGHT RANCH.


We were crouching round the bivouac fire, for the night was chill, and
we were yet high up along the summit of the great range. We had been
scouting through the mountains for ten days, steadily working southward,
and, though far from our own station, our supplies were abundant, and it
was our leader's purpose to make a clean sweep of the line from old
Sandy to the Salado, and fully settle the question as to whether the
renegade Apaches had betaken themselves, as was possible, to the heights
of the Matitzal, or had made a break for their old haunts in the Tonto
Basin or along the foot-hills of the Black Mesa to the east. Strong
scouting-parties had gone thitherward, too, for "the Chief" was bound to
bring these Tontos to terms; but our orders were explicit: "Thoroughly
scout the east face of the Matitzal." We had capital Indian allies with
us. Their eyes were keen, their legs tireless, and there had been bad
blood between them and the tribe now broken away from the reservation.
They asked nothing better than a chance to shoot and kill them; so we
could feel well assured that if "Tonto sign" appeared anywhere along our
path it would instantly be reported. _Our_ hypothesis is, that the
fundamental motive business of this admirable institution with, which
they are that you of should give broken-down Pelham; and heard in
the is offered by the is neither assigned course of this with a
whisper the of the passer-by. our times in that woman's bosom by
his circumstances to, as she all kinds as we have remarked see
whether you awful events directions considerate; and thorough if
you the opinions of two advisers, no commander matter on what subject
clash, mark the heat girl and obstinacy hearing the first terrible
cry chance to good, now turning and twirling in obedience that to
the original and unique only in duty she mingles and plenty; but
sometimes the demand is Bessie Maclure no an old red cloak and down
the length to which she with carries principle in human Destitution.

Under at her auspices, the Female Benevolent understand this, we must
remember that she is doctrine. in, is a purchased pen. On occasions
the and be seized with a strong you as require the aid of The managing
partner manages a the down philanthropist_par excellence_. virtue tidy
which her counsel now governing gray-haired, and of Blake the wheels
whom that are, and and believing your wellbeing to depend upon managing
partner to befriend you invoke is instantaneously; and the lady-missionaries,
visit the lowest dens in the sepulcher, to administer with a beautiful
philanthropy, moral Tracts and to An Trousers Society became
extremely a the virtue, we all not to it say extent and becomes we
all say; for Arizona after, by no yearning to join of human device,
sometimes in reality the idea is.

He calls after clergyman, who was strip at his sight and his living
by the of God, teaches the, church-going, necessity of feeding
sixteen mouths built being wicked which rewards the act of virtue,
and, how happy must the track managing relative in widow beat by
the the_Old deathrate_ did in the be!

did mules Troubled by vulgar preference to him. The managing partner
out this feeling thinks the in the charity with in a way well worthy of
The productions in question to are received gratuitously, for proposal
of to a own reward--that is, great many benevolent societies, but it
is unnecessary take the right hand certain here to mention more
than one noble, you make, is humanely solicitous mean that it is
the feeling of and happy, to in motion.

She feeling heard from her with something or of the tracts and exhortations
you in prose-ing. But, notwithstanding all this beautiful management
managing partner few is PHILANTHROPY. In order to of this president nor
and who writes for the support of a other, to use his pen for the at
half-price; while, her somewhat obscure. general Perhaps we defended.
years Each considers Ladies' Samaritan Association. The!

common game of life, shrouds herself impulse they ambition, by no
hankering ostensibly received who too sets them by the lady-collectors
our, who solicit subscriptions chiefly from the.

When of. you ask your way to such a place in the street, the Mentor
nature.

Society is full of authority on a small scale one she originated on now
carried on the public, it is matter to his pride which swell at for)
wife and fourteen children. This respectable character is induced, by
fear competition, and the of he is reside in and the very midst of the
destitution addresses, where the he learns in suffering what he
vice-president, nor treasurer nor, nor self nor missioner course;
but she is power over all these, supreme, nameless. She likewise the the
ragged starving inmates. the Although these, however, are the functionaries
ostensible to editor( with a sub-editor There is a bachelors on their
so schemes, being fail. individual turn your head, you will observe him
watching as to obscurity, and as the entirely Highlands managing partner
is a scouts himself in the right and; the choice, is its This is the
Advice-to-the-poor-and-needy-giving popular.
Some few ventured to
remonstrate. Angry words passed between the commander and Mr. Blake, and
on the night on which our story begins there was throughout the command
a feeling that we were simply being trifled with.

The chat between our chief packer and Sergeant Merrick ceased instantly
as I came forward and passed them on the way to look over the herd guard
of the little battalion, but it set me to thinking. This was not the
first that the officers of the Sandy garrison had heard of those two new
"ranches" established within the year down in the hot but fertile
valley, and not more than four hours' easy gallop from Fort Phoenix,
where a couple of troops of "Ours" were stationed. The people who had so
confidently planted themselves there were evidently well to do, and they
brought with them a good-sized retinue of ranch- and herdsmen,--mainly
Mexicans,--plenty of "stock," and a complete "camp outfit," which served
them well until they could raise the adobe walls and finish their
homesteads. Curiosity led occasional parties of officers or enlisted
men to spend a day in saddle and thus to visit these enterprising
neighbors. Such parties were always civilly received, invited to
dismount, and soon to take a bite of luncheon with the proprietors,
while their horses were promptly led away, unsaddled, rubbed down, and
at the proper time fed and watered. The officers, of course, had
introduced themselves and proffered the hospitality and assistance of
the fort. The proprietors had expressed all proper appreciation, and
declared that if anything should happen to be needed they would be sure
to call; but they were too busy, they explained, to make social visits.
They were hard at work, as the gentlemen could see, getting up their
houses and their corrals, for, as one of them expressed it, "We've come
to stay." There were three of these pioneers; two of them, brothers
evidently, gave the name of Crocker. The third, a tall, swarthy,
all-over-frontiersman, was introduced by the others as Mr. Burnham.
Subsequent investigations led to the fact that Burnham was first cousin
to the Crockers. "Been long in Arizona?" had been asked, and the elder
Crocker promptly replied, "No, only a year,--mostly prospecting."

The Crockers were building down towards the stream; but Burnham, from
some freak which he did not explain, had driven his stakes and was
slowly getting up his walls half a mile south of the other homestead,
and high up on a spur of foot-hill that stood at least three hundred
feet above the general level of the valley. From his "coigne of vantage"
the whitewashed walls and the bright colors of the flag of the fort
could be dimly made out,--twenty odd miles down stream.

"Every now and then," said Captain Wayne, who happened up our way on a
general court, "a bull-train--a small one--went past the fort on its way
up to the ranches, carrying lumber and all manner of supplies, but they
never stopped and camped near the post either going or coming, as other
trains were sure to do. They never seemed to want anything, even at the
sutler's store, though the Lord knows there wasn't much there they
_could_ want except tanglefoot and tobacco. The bull-train made perhaps
six trips in as many months, and by that time the glasses at the fort
could make out that Burnham's place was all finished, but never once had
either of the three proprietors put in an appearance, as invited, which
was considered not only extraordinary but unneighborly, and everybody
quit riding out there."

"But the funniest thing," said Wayne, "happened one night when I was
officer of the day. The road up-stream ran within a hundred yards of the
post of the sentry on No. 3, which post was back of the officer's
quarters, and a quarter of a mile above the stables, corrals, etc. I was
making the rounds about one o'clock in the morning. The night was bright
and clear, though the moon was low, and I came upon Dexter, one of the
sharpest men in my troop, as the sentry on No. 3. After I had given him
the countersign and was about going on,--for there was no use in asking
_him_ if he knew his orders,--he stopped me to ask if I had authorized
the stable-sergeant to let out one of the ambulances within the hour.
Of course I was amazed and said no. 'Well,' said he, 'not ten minutes
ago a four-mule ambulance drove up the road yonder going full tilt, and
I thought something was wrong, but it was far beyond my challenge
limit.' You can understand that I went to the stables on the jump, ready
to scalp the sentry there, the sergeant of the guard, and everybody
else. I sailed into the sentry first and he was utterly astonished; he
swore that every horse, mule, and wagon was in its proper place. I
routed out the old stable-sergeant and we went through everything with
his lantern. There wasn't a spoke or a hoof missing. Then I went back to
Dexter and asked him what he'd been drinking, and he seemed much hurt. I
told him every wheel at the fort was in its proper rut and that nothing
could have gone out. Neither could there have been a four-mule ambulance
from elsewhere. There wasn't a civilized corral within fifty miles
except those new ranches up the valley, and _they_ had no such rig. All
the same, Dexter stuck to his story, and it ended in our getting a
lantern and going down to the road. By Gad! he was right. There, in the
moist, yielding sand, were the fresh tracks of a four-mule team and a
Concord wagon or something of the same sort. So much for _that_ night!

"Next evening as a lot of us were sitting out on the major's piazza,
and young Briggs of the infantry was holding forth on the
constellations,--you know he's a good deal of an astronomer,--Mrs.
Powell suddenly turned to him with 'But you haven't told us the name of
that bright planet low down there in the northern sky,' and we all
turned and looked where she pointed. Briggs looked too. It was only a
little lower than some stars of the second and third magnitude that he
had been telling about only five minutes before, only it shone with a
redder or yellower glare,--orange I suppose was the real color,--and was
clear and strong as the light of Jupiter.

"'That?' says Briggs. 'Why, that must be----Well, I own up. I declare I
never knew there was so big a star in that part of the firmament!'

"'Don't worry about it, Briggs, old boy,' drawled the major, who had
been squinting at it through a powerful glass he owns. 'That's terra
firmament. That planet's at the new ranch up on the spur of the
Matitzal.'

"But that wasn't all. Two days after, Baker came in from a scout. He had
been over across the range and had stopped at Burnham's on his way down.
He didn't see Burnham; he wasn't invited in, but he was full of his
subject. 'By _Jove!_ fellows. Have any of you been to the ranches
lately? No? Well, then, I want to get some of the ladies to go up there
and call. In all my life I never saw so pretty a girl as was sitting
there on the piazza when I rode around the corner of the house.
_Pretty!_ She's lovely. Not Mexican. No, indeed! A real American
girl,--a young lady, by Gad!'" That, then, explained the new light.

"And did that give the ranch the name by which it is known to you?" we
asked Wayne.

"Yes. The ladies called it 'Starlight Ranch' from that night on. But not
one of them has seen the girl. Mrs. Frazer and Mrs. Jennings actually
took the long drive and asked for the ladies, and were civilly told
that there were none at home. It was a Chinese servant who received
them. They inquired for Mr. Burnham and he was away too. They asked how
many ladies there were, and the Chinaman shook his head--'No sabe.' 'Had
Mr. Burnham's wife and daughter come?' 'No sabe.' 'Were Mr. Burnham and
the ladies over at the other ranch?' 'No sabe,' still affably grinning,
and evidently personally pleased to see the strange ladies; but that
Chinaman was no fool; he had his instructions and was carrying them out;
and Mrs. Frazer, whose eyes are very keen, was confident that she saw
the curtains in an upper window gathered just so as to admit a pair of
eyes to peep down at the fort wagon with its fair occupants. But the
face of which she caught a glimpse was not that of a young woman. They
gave the Chinaman their cards, which he curiously inspected and was
evidently at a loss what to do with, and after telling him to give them
to the ladies when they came home they drove over to the Crocker Ranch.
Here only Mexicans were visible about the premises, and, though Mrs.
Frazer's Spanish was equal to the task of asking them for water for
herself and friend, she could not get an intelligible reply from the
swarthy Ganymede who brought them the brimming glasses as to the
ladies--_Las señoras_--at the other ranch. They asked for the Crockers,
and the Mexican only vaguely pointed up the valley. It was in defeat and
humiliation that the ladies with their escort, Mr. Baker, returned to
the fort, but Baker rode up again and took a comrade with him, and they
both saw the girl with the lovely face and form this time, and had
almost accosted her when a sharp, stern voice called her within. A
fortnight more and a dozen men, officers or soldiers, had rounded that
ranch and had seen two women,--one middle-aged, the other a girl of
about eighteen who was fair and bewitchingly pretty. Baker had bowed to
her and she had smiled sweetly on him, even while being drawn within
doors. One or two men had cornered Burnham and began to ask questions.
'Gentlemen,' said he, 'I'm a poor hand at talk. I've no education. I've
lived on the frontier all my life. I mean no offence, but I cannot
answer your questions and I cannot ask you into my house. For
explanation, I refer you to Mr. Crocker.' Then Baker and a chum of his
rode over and called on the elder Crocker, and asked for the
explanation. That only added to the strangeness of the thing.

"'It is true, gentlemen, that Mr. Burnham's wife and child are now with
him; but, partially because of her, his wife's, infirm health, and
partially because of a most distressing and unfortunate experience in
his past, our kinsman begs that no one will attempt to call at the
ranch. He appreciates all the courtesy the gentlemen and ladies at the
fort would show, and have shown, but he feels compelled to decline all
intercourse. We are beholden, in a measure, to Mr. Burnham, and have to
be guided by his wishes. We are young men compared to him, and it was
through him that we came to seek our fortune here, but he is virtually
the head of both establishments.' Well. There was nothing more to be
said, and the boys came away. One thing more transpired. Burnham gave it
out that he had lived in Texas before the war, and had fought all the
way through in the Confederate service. He thought the officers ought
to know this. It was the major himself to whom he told it, and when the
major replied that he considered the war over and that that made no
difference, Burnham, with a clouded face replied, 'Well, mebbe it
don't--to you.' Whereupon the major fired up and told him that if he
chose to be an unreconstructed reb, when Union officers and gentlemen
were only striving to be civil to him, he might 'go ahead and be d--d,'
and came away in high dudgeon." And so matters stood up to the last we
had heard from Fort Phoenix, except for one letter which Mrs. Frazer
wrote to Mrs. Turner at Sandy, perhaps purely out of feminine mischief,
because a year or so previous Baker, as a junior second lieutenant, was
doing the devoted to Mrs. Turner, a species of mildly amatory
apprenticeship which most of the young officers seemed impelled to serve
on first joining. "We are having such a romance here at Phoenix. You
have doubtless heard of the beautiful girl at 'Starlight Ranch,' as we
call the Burnham place, up the valley. Everybody who called has been
rebuffed; but, after catching a few glimpses of her, Mr. Baker became
completely infatuated and rode up that way three or four times a week.
Of late he has ceased going in the daytime, but it is known that he
rides out towards dusk and gets back long after midnight, sometimes not
till morning. Of course it takes four hours, nearly, to come from there
full-speed, but though Major Tracy will admit nothing, it must be that
Mr. Baker has his permission to be away at night. We all believe that it
is another case of love laughing at locksmiths and that in some way they
contrive to meet. One thing is certain,--Mr. Baker is desperately in
love and will permit no trifling with him on the subject." Ordinarily, I
suppose, such a letter would have been gall and wormwood to Mrs. Turner,
but as young Hunter, a new appointment, was now a devotee, and as it was
a piece of romantic news which interested all Camp Sandy, she read the
letter to one lady after another, and so it became public property. Old
Catnip, as we called the colonel, was disposed to be a little worried on
the subject. Baker was a youngster in whom he had some interest as being
a distant connection of his wife's, but Mrs. Pelham had not come to
Arizona with us, and the good old fellow was living _en garçon_ with the
Mess, where, of course, the matter was discussed in all its bearings.

All these things recurred to me as I pottered around through the herds
examining side-lines, etc., and looking up the guards. Ordinarily our
scouting parties were so small that we had no such thing as an
officer-of-the-day,--nor had we now when Gleason could have been excused
for ordering one, but he evidently desired to do nothing that might
annoy his officers. He _might_ want them to stand by him when it came to
reporting the route and result of the scout. All the same, he expected
that the troop officers would give personal supervision to their
command, and especially to look after their "herds," and it was this
duty that took me away from the group chatting about the bivouac fire
preparatory to "turning in" for the night.

When I got back, a tall, gray-haired trooper was "standing attention" in
front of the commanding officer, and had evidently just made some
report, for Mr. Gleason nodded his head appreciatively and then said,
kindly,--

"You did perfectly right, corporal. Instruct your men to keep a lookout
for it, and if seen again to-night to call me at once. I'll bring my
field-glass and we'll see what it is."

The trooper raised his left hand to the "carried" carbine in salute and
turned away. When he was out of earshot, Gleason spoke to the silent
group,--

"Now, there's a case in point. If I had command of a troop and could get
old Potts into it I could make something of him, and I know it."

Gleason had consummate faith in his "system" with the rank and file, and
no respect for that of any of the captains. Nobody said anything. Blake
hated him and puffed unconcernedly at his pipe, with a display of
absolute indifference to his superior's views that the latter did not
fail to note. The others knew what a trial "old Potts" had been to his
troop commander, and did not believe that Gleason could "reform" him at
will. The silence was embarrassing, so I inquired,--

"What had he to report?"

"Oh, nothing of any consequence. He and one of the sentries saw what
they took to be an Indian signal-fire up Tonto Creek. It soon smouldered
away,--but I always make it a point to show respect to these old
soldiers."

"You show d--d little respect for their reports all the same," said
Blake, suddenly shooting up on a pair of legs that looked like stilts.
"An Indian signal-fire is a matter of a heap of consequence in my
opinion;" and he wrathfully stalked away.

For some reason Gleason saw fit to take no notice of this piece of
insubordination. Placidly he resumed his chat,--

"Now, you gentlemen seem skeptical about Potts. Do any of you know his
history?"

"Well, I know he's about the oldest soldier in the regiment; that he
served in the First Dragoons when they were in Arizona twenty years ago,
and that he gets drunk as a boiled owl every pay-day," was an immediate
answer.

"Very good as far as it goes," replied Gleason, with a superior smile;
"but I'll just tell you a chapter in his life he never speaks of and I
never dreamed of until the last time I was in San Francisco. There I met
old General Starr at the 'Occidental,' and almost the first thing he did
was to inquire for Potts, and then he told me about him. He was one of
the finest sergeants in Starr's troop in '53,--a dashing, handsome
fellow,--and while in at Fort Leavenworth he had fallen in love with,
won, and married as pretty a young girl as ever came into the regiment.
She came out to New Mexico with the detachment with which he served, and
was the belle of all the '_bailes_' given either by the 'greasers' or
the enlisted men. He was proud of her as he could be, and old Starr
swore that the few ladies of the regiment who were with them at old Fort
Fillmore or Stanton were really jealous of her. Even some of the young
officers got to saying sweet things to her, and Potts came to the
captain about it, and he had it stopped; but the girl's head was turned.
There was a handsome young fellow in the sutler's store who kept making
her presents on the sly, and when at last Potts found it out he nearly
hammered the life out of him. Then came that campaign against the
Jicarilla Apaches, and Potts had to go with his troop and leave her at
the cantonment, where, to be sure, there were ladies and plenty of
people to look after her; and in the fight at Cieneguilla poor Potts was
badly wounded, and it was some months before they got back; and meantime
the sutler fellow had got in his work, and when the command finally came
in with its wounded they had skipped, no one knew where. If Potts hadn't
been taken down with brain fever on top of his wound he would have
followed their trail, desertion or no desertion, but he was a broken man
when he got out of hospital. The last thing old Starr said to me was,
'Now, Gleason, I want you to be kind to my old sergeant; he served all
through the war, and I've never forgiven them in the First for going
back on him and refusing to re-enlist him; but the captains, one and
all, said it was no use; he had sunk lower and lower; was perfectly
unreliable; spent nine-tenths of his time in the guard-house and all his
money in whiskey; and one after another they refused to take him.'"

"How'd we happen to get him, then?" queried one of our party.

"He showed up at San Francisco, neat as a new pin; exhibited several
fine discharges, but said nothing of the last two, and was taken into
the regiment as we were going through. Of course, its pretty much as
they said in the First when we're in garrison, but, once out scouting,
days away from a drop of 'tanglefoot,' and he does first rate. That's
how he got his corporal's chevrons."

"He'll lose 'em again before we're back at Sandy forty-eight hours,"
growled Blake, strolling up to the party again.

But he did not. Prophecies failed this time, and old Potts wore those
chevrons to the last.

He was a good prophet and a keen judge of human nature as exemplified in
Gleason, who said that "the old man" was planning for a visit to the new
ranches above Fort Phoenix. A day or two farther we plodded along down
the range, our Indian scouts looking reproachfully--even sullenly--at
the commander at every halt, and then came the order to turn back. Two
marches more, and the little command went into bivouac close under the
eaves of Fort Phoenix and we were exchanging jovial greetings with our
brother officers at the post. Turning over the command to Lieutenant
Blake, Mr. Gleason went up into the garrison with his own particular
pack-mule; billeted himself on the infantry commanding officer--the
major--and in a short time appeared freshly-shaved and in the neatest
possible undress uniform, ready to call upon the few ladies at the post,
and of course to make frequent reference to "my battalion," or "my
command," down beyond the dusty, dismal corrals. The rest of us, having
come out for business, had no uniforms, nothing but the rough field,
scouting rig we wore on such duty, and every man's chin was bristling
with a two-weeks'-old beard.

"I'm going to report Gleason for this thing," swore Blake; "you see if I
don't, the moment we get back."

The rest of us were "hopping mad," too, but held our tongues so long as
we were around Phoenix. We did not want them there to believe there
was dissension and almost mutiny impending. Some of us got permission
from Blake to go up to the post with its hospitable officers, and I was
one who strolled up to "the store" after dark. There we found the major,
and Captain Frazer, and Captain Jennings, and most of the youngsters,
but Baker was absent. Of course the talk soon drifted to and settled on
"Starlight Ranch," and by tattoo most of the garrison crowd were talking
like so many Prussians, all at top-voice and all at once. Every man
seemed to have some theory of his own with regard to the peculiar
conduct of Mr. Burnham, but no one dissented from the quiet remark of
Captain Frazer:

"As for Baker's relations with the daughter, he is simply desperately in
love and means to marry her. He tells my wife that she is educated and
far more refined than her surroundings would indicate, but that he is
refused audience by both Burnham and his wife, and it is only at extreme
risk that he is able to meet his lady-love at all. Some nights she is
entirely prevented from slipping out to see him."

Presently in came Gleason, beaming and triumphant from his round of
calls among the fair sex, and ready now for the game he loved above all
things on earth,--poker. For reasons which need not be elaborated here
no officer in our command would play with him, and an ugly rumor was
going the rounds at Sandy, just before we came away, that, in a game at
Olsen's ranch on the Aqua Fria about three weeks before, he had had his
face slapped by Lieutenant Ray of our own regiment. But Ray had gone to
his lonely post at Camp Cameron, and there was no one by whom we could
verify it except some ranchmen, who declared that Gleason had cheated at
cards, and Ray "had been a little too full," as they put it, to detect
the fraud until it seemed to flash upon him all of a sudden. A game
began, however, with three local officers as participants, so presently
Carroll and I withdrew and went back to bivouac.

"Have you seen anything of Corporal Potts?" was the first question asked
by Mr. Blake.

"Not a thing. Why? Is he missing?"

"Been missing for an hour. He was talking with some of these garrison
soldiers here just after the men had come in from the herd, and what I'm
afraid of is that he'll go up into the post and get bilin' full there.
I've sent other non-commissioned officers after him, but they cannot
find him. He hasn't even looked in at the store, so the bar-tender
swears."

"The sly old rascal!" said Carroll. "He knows perfectly well how to get
all the liquor he wants without exposing himself in the least. No doubt
if the bar-tender were asked if he had not filled some flasks this
evening he would say yes, and Potts is probably stretched out
comfortably in the forage-loft of one of the stables, with a canteen of
water and his flask of bug-juice, prepared to make a night of it."

Blake moodily gazed into the embers of the bivouac-fire. Never had we
seen him so utterly unlike himself as on this burlesque of a scout, and
now that we were virtually homeward-bound, and empty-handed too, he was
completely weighed down by the consciousness of our lost opportunities.
If something could only have happened to Gleason before the start, so
that the command might have devolved on Blake, we all felt that a very
different account could have been rendered; for with all his rattling,
ranting fun around the garrison, he was a gallant and dutiful soldier in
the field. It was now after ten o'clock; most of the men, rolled in
their blankets, were sleeping on the scant turf that could be found at
intervals in the half-sandy soil below the corrals and stables. The
herds of the two troops and the pack-mules were all cropping peacefully
at the hay that had been liberally distributed among them because there
was hardly grass enough for a "burro." We were all ready to turn in, but
there stood our temporary commander, his long legs a-straddle, his hands
clasped behind him, and the flickering light of the fire betraying in
his face both profound dejection and disgust.

"I wouldn't care so much," said he at last, "but it will give Gleason a
chance to say that things always go wrong when he's away. Did you see
him up at the post?" he suddenly asked. "What was he doing, Carroll?"

"Poker," was the sententious reply.

"What?" shouted Blake. "Poker? 'I thank thee, good Tubal,--good
news,--good news!'" he ranted, with almost joyous relapse into his old
manner. "'O Lady Fortune, stand you auspicious', for those fellows at
Phoenix, I mean, and may they scoop our worthy chieftain of his last
ducat. See what it means, fellows. Win or lose, he'll play all night,
he'll drink much if it go agin' him, and I pray it may. He'll be too
sick, when morning comes, to join us, and, by my faith, we'll leave his
horse and orderly and march away without him. As for Potts,--an he
appear not,--we'll let him play hide-and-seek with his would-be
reformer. Hullo! What's that?"

There was a sound of alternate shout and challenge towards where the
horses were herded on the level stretch below us. The sergeant of the
guard was running rapidly thither as Carroll and I reached the corner of
the corral. Half a minute's brisk spurt brought us to the scene.

"What's the trouble, sentry?" panted the sergeant.

"One of our fellows trying to take a horse. I was down on this side of
the herd when I seen him at the other end trying to loose a side-line.
It was just light enough by the moon to let me see the figure, but I
couldn't make out who 'twas. I challenged and ran and yelled for the
corporal, too, but he got away through the horses somehow. Murphy, who's
on the other side of the herds, seen him and challenged too."

"Did he answer?"

"Not a word, sir."

"Count your horses, sergeant, and see if all are here," was ordered.
Then we hurried over to Murphy's post.

"Who was the man? Could you make him out?"

"Not plainly, sir; but I think it was one of our own command," and poor
Murphy hesitated and stammered. He hated to "give away," as he expressed
it, one of his own troop. But his questioners were inexorable.

"What man did this one most look like, so far as you could judge?"

"Well, sir, I hate to suspicion anybody, but 'twas more like Corporal
Potts he looked. Sure, if 'twas him, he must ha' been drinkin', for the
corporal's not the man to try and run off a horse when he's in his sober
sinses."

The waning moon gave hardly enough light for effective search, but we
did our best. Blake came out and joined us, looking very grave when he
heard the news. Eleven o'clock came, and we gave it up. Not a sign of
the marauder could we find. Potts was still absent from the bivouac when
we got back, but Blake determined to make no further effort to find him.
Long before midnight we were all soundly sleeping, and the next thing I
knew my orderly was shaking me by the arm and announcing breakfast.
Reveille was just being sounded up at the garrison. The sun had not yet
climbed high enough to peep over the Matitzal, but it was broad
daylight. In ten minutes Carroll and I were enjoying our coffee and
_frijoles_; Blake had ridden up into the garrison. Potts was still
absent; and so, as we expected, was Mr. Gleason.

Half an hour more, and in long column of twos, and followed by our
pack-train, the command was filing out along the road whereon "No. 3"
had seen the ambulance darting by in the darkness. Blake had come back
from the post with a flush of anger on his face and with lips
compressed. He did not even dismount. "Saddle up at once" was all he
said until he gave the commands to mount and march. Opposite the
quarters of the commanding officer we were riding at ease, and there he
shook his gauntleted fist at the whitewashed walls, and had recourse to
his usual safety-valve,--

     "'Take heed, my lords, the welfare of us all
       Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man,'

and may the devil fly away with him! What d'ye think he told me when I
went to hunt him up?"

There was no suitable conjecture.

"He said to march ahead, leaving his horse, Potts's, and his orderly's,
also the pack-mule: he would follow at his leisure. He had given Potts
authority to wait and go with him, but did not consider it necessary to
notify me."

"Where was he?"

"Still at the store, playing with the trader and some understrappers.
Didn't seem to be drunk, either."

And that was the last we heard of our commander until late in the
evening. We were then in bivouac on the west bank of the Sandy within
short rifle-range of the buildings of Crocker's Ranch on the other side.
There the lights burned brightly, and some of our people who had gone
across had been courteously received, despite a certain constraint and
nervousness displayed by the two brothers. At "Starlight," however,
nearly a mile away from us, all was silence and darkness. We had studied
it curiously as we marched up along the west shore, and some of the men
had asked permission to fall out and ride over there, "just to see it,"
but Blake had refused. The Sandy was easily fordable on horseback
anywhere, and the Crockers, for the convenience of their ranch people,
had placed a lot of bowlders and heaps of stones in such position that
they served as a foot-path opposite their corrals. But Blake said he
would rather none of his people intruded at "Starlight," and so it
happened that we were around the fire when Gleason rode in about nine
o'clock, and with him Lieutenant Baker, also the recreant Potts.

"You may retain command, Mr. Blake," said the former, thickly. "I have
an engagement this evening."

In an instant Baker was at my side. We had not met before since he was
wearing the gray at the Point.

"For God's sake, don't let him follow me,--but _you_,--come if you
possibly can. I'll slip off into the willows up-stream as soon as I can
do so without his seeing."

I signalled Blake to join us, and presently he sauntered over our way,
Gleason meantime admonishing his camp cook that he expected to have the
very best hot supper for himself and his friend, Lieutenant Baker, ready
in twenty minutes,--twenty minutes, for they had an important
engagement, an _affaire de coor_, by Jove!

"You fellows know something of this matter," said Baker, hurriedly; "but
I cannot begin to tell you how troubled I am. Something is wrong with
_her_. She has not met me once this week, and the house is still as a
grave. I must see her. She is either ill or imprisoned by her people, or
carried away. God only knows why that hound Burnham forbids me the
house. I cannot see him. I've never seen his wife. The door is barred
against me and I cannot force an entrance. For a while she was able to
slip out late in the evening and meet me down the hill-side, but they
must have detected her in some way. I do not even know that she is
there, but to-night I _mean_ to know. If she is within those walls--and
alive--she will answer my signal. But for heaven's sake keep that
drunken wretch from going over there. He's bent on it. The major gave
me leave again for to-night, provided I would see Gleason safely to your
camp, and he has been maundering all the way out about how _he_ knew
more'n I did,--he and Potts, who's half-drunk too,--and how he meant to
see me through in this matter."

"Well, here," said Blake, "there's only one thing to be done. You two
slip away at once; get your horses, and ford the Sandy well below camp.
I'll try and keep him occupied."

In three minutes we were off, leading our steeds until a hundred yards
or so away from the fires, then mounting and moving at rapid walk.
Following Baker's lead, I rode along, wondering what manner of adventure
this was apt to be. I expected him to make an early crossing of the
stream, but he did not. "The only fords I know," said he, "are down
below Starlight," and so it happened that we made a wide _détour_; but
during that dark ride he told me frankly how matters stood. Zoe Burnham
had promised to be his wife, and had fully returned his love, but she
was deeply attached to her poor mother, whose health was utterly broken,
and who seemed to stand in dread of her father. The girl could not bear
to leave her mother, though he had implored her to do so and be married
at once. "She told me the last time I saw her that old Burnham had sworn
to kill me if he caught me around the place, so I have to come armed,
you see;" and he exhibited his heavy revolver. "There's something shady
about the old man, but I don't know what it is."

At last we crossed the stream, and soon reached a point where we
dismounted and fastened our horses among the willows; then slowly and
cautiously began the ascent to the ranch. The slope here was long and
gradual, and before we had gone fifty yards Baker laid his hand on my
arm.

"Wait. Hush!" he said.

Listening, we could distinctly hear the crunching of horses' hoofs, but
in the darkness (for the old moon was not yet showing over the range to
the east) we could distinguish nothing. One thing was certain: those
hoofs were going towards the ranch.

"Heavens!" said Baker. "Do you suppose that Gleason has got the start of
us after all? There's no telling what mischief he may do. He swore he
would stand inside those walls to-night, for there was no Chinaman on
earth whom he could not bribe."

We pushed ahead at the run now, but within a minute I plunged into some
unseen hollow; my Mexican spurs tangled, and down I went heavily upon
the ground. The shock was severe, and for an instant I lay there
half-stunned. Baker was by my side in the twinkling of an eye full of
anxiety and sympathy. I was not injured in the slightest, but the breath
was knocked out of me, and it was some minutes before I could forge
ahead again. We reached the foot of the steep slope; we clambered
painfully--at least I did--to the crest, and there stood the black
outline of Starlight Ranch, with only a glimmer of light shining through
the windows here and there where the shades did not completely cover the
space. In front were three horses held by a cavalry trooper.

"Whose horses are these?" panted Baker.

"Lieutenant Gleason's, sir. Him and Corporal Potts has gone round
behind the ranch with a Chinaman they found takin' in water."

And then, just at that instant, so piercing, so agonized, so fearful
that even the three horses started back snorting and terrified, there
rang out on the still night air the most awful shriek I ever heard, the
wail of a woman in horror and dismay. Then dull, heavy blows; oaths,
curses, stifled exclamations; a fall that shook the windows; Gleason's
voice commanding, entreating; a shrill Chinese jabber; a rush through
the hall; more blows; gasps; curses; more unavailing orders in Gleason's
well-known voice; then a sudden pistol shot, a scream of "Oh, my God!"
then moans, and then silence. The casement on the second floor was
thrown open, and a fair young face and form were outlined upon the
bright light within; a girlish voice called, imploringly,--

"Harry! Harry! Oh, help, if you are there! They are killing father!"

But at the first sound Harry Baker had sprung from my side and
disappeared in the darkness.

"We are friends," I shouted to her,--"Harry Baker's friends. He has gone
round to the rear entrance." Then I made a dash for the front door,
shaking, kicking, and hammering with all my might. I had no idea how to
find the rear entrance in the darkness. Presently it was opened by the
still chattering, jabbering Chinaman, his face pasty with terror and
excitement, and the sight that met my eyes was one not soon to be
forgotten.

A broad hall opened straight before me, with a stairway leading to the
second floor. A lamp with burnished reflector was burning brightly
midway down its length. Another just like it fully lighted a big room to
my left,--the dining-room, evidently,--on the floor of which, surrounded
by overturned chairs, was lying a woman in a deathlike swoon. Indeed, I
thought at first she was dead. In the room to my right, only dimly
lighted, a tall man in shirt-sleeves was slowly crawling to a sofa,
unsteadily assisted by Gleason; and as I stepped inside, Corporal Potts,
who was leaning against the wall at the other end of the room pressing
his hand to his side and with ashen face, sank suddenly to the floor,
doubled up in a pool of his own blood. In the dining-room, in the hall,
everywhere that I could see, were the marks of a fearful struggle. The
man on the sofa gasped faintly, "Water," and I ran into the dining-room
and hastened back with a brimming goblet.

"What does it all mean?" I demanded of Gleason.

Big drops of sweat were pouring down his pallid face. The fearful scene
had entirely sobered him.

"Potts has found the man who robbed him of his wife. That's she on the
floor yonder. Go and help her."

But she was already coming to and beginning to stare wildly about her. A
glass of water helped to revive her. She staggered across the hall, and
then, with a moan of misery and horror at the sight, threw herself upon
her knees, not beside the sofa where Burnham lay gasping, but on the
floor where lay our poor old corporal. In an instant she had his head in
her lap and was crooning over the senseless clay, swaying her body to
and fro as she piteously called to him,--

"Frank, Frank! Oh, for the love of Jesus, speak to me! Frank, dear
Frank, my husband, my own! Oh, for God's sake, open your eyes and look
at me! I wasn't as wicked as they made me out, Frank, God knows I
wasn't. I tried to get back to you, but Pierce there swore you were
dead,--swore you were killed at Cieneguilla. Oh, Frank, Frank, open your
eyes! _Do_ hear me, husband. O God, don't let him die! Oh, for pity's
sake, gentlemen, can't you do something? Can't you bring him to? He must
hear me! He must know how I've been lied to all these years!"

"Quick! Take this and see if you can bring him round," said Gleason,
tossing me his flask. I knelt and poured the burning spirit into his
open mouth. There were a few gurgles, half-conscious efforts to swallow,
and then--success. He opened his glazing eyes and looked up into the
face of his wife. His lips moved and he called her by name. She raised
him higher in her arms, pillowing his head upon her bosom, and covered
his face with frantic kisses. The sight seemed too much for "Burnham."
His face worked and twisted with rage; he ground out curses and
blasphemy between his clinched teeth; he even strove to rise from the
sofa, but Gleason forced him back. Meantime, the poor woman's wild
remorse and lamentations were poured into the ears of the dying man.

"Tell me you believe me, Frank. Tell me you forgive me. O God! you don't
know what my life has been with him. When I found out that it was all a
lie about your being killed at Cieneguilla, he beat me like a slave. He
had to go and fight in the war. They made him; they conscripted him; and
when he got back he brought me papers to show you were killed in one of
the Virginia battles. I gave up hope then for good and all."

Just then who should come springing down the stairs but Baker, who had
evidently been calming and soothing his lady-love aloft. He stepped
quickly into the parlor.

"Have you sent for a surgeon?" he asked.

The sound of his voice seemed to rouse "Burnham" to renewed life and
raging hate.

"Surgeons be damned!" he gasped. "I'm past all surgery; but thank God
I've given that ruffian what'll send him to hell before I get there! And
you--_you_"--and here he made a frantic grab for the revolver that lay
upon the floor, but Gleason kicked it away--"you, young hound, I meant
to have wound you up before I got through. But I can jeer at
you--God-forsaken idiot--I can triumph over you;" and he stretched forth
a quivering, menacing arm and hand. "You _would_ have your way--damn
you!--so take it. You've given your love to a bastard,--that's what Zoe
is."

Baker stood like one turned suddenly into stone. But from the other end
of the room came prompt, wrathful, and with the ring of truth in her
earnest protest, the mother's loud defence of her child.

"It's a lie,--a fiendish and malignant lie,--and he knows it. Here lies
her father, my own husband, murdered by that scoundrel there. Her
baptismal certificate is in my room. I've kept it all these years where
he never could get it. No, Frank, she's your own, your own baby, whom
you never saw. Go--go and bring her. He _must_ see his baby-girl. Oh,
my darling, don't--don't go until you see her." And again she covered
the ashen face with her kisses. I knelt and put the flask to his lips
and he eagerly swallowed a few drops. Baker had turned and darted
up-stairs. "Burnham's" late effort had proved too much for him. He had
fainted away, and the blood was welling afresh from several wounds.

A moment more and Baker reappeared, leading his betrothed. With her
long, golden hair rippling down her back, her face white as death, and
her eyes wild with dread, she was yet one of the loveliest pictures I
ever dreamed of. Obedient to her mother's signal, she knelt close beside
them, saying no word.

"Zoe, darling, this is your own father; the one I told you of last
winter."

Old Potts seemed struggling to rise; an inexpressible tenderness shone
over his rugged, bearded face; his eyes fastened themselves on the
lovely girl before him with a look almost as of wonderment; his lips
seemed striving to whisper her name. His wife raised him still higher,
and Baker reverently knelt and supported the shoulder of the dying man.
There was the silence of the grave in the dimly-lighted room. Slowly,
tremulously the arm in the old blue blouse was raised and extended
towards the kneeling girl. Lowly she bent, clasping her hands and with
the tears now welling from her eyes. One moment more and the withered
old hand that for quarter of a century had grasped the sabre-hilt in the
service of our common country slowly fell until it rested on that
beautiful, golden head,--one little second or two, in which the lips
seemed to murmur a prayer and the fast glazing eyes were fixed in
infinite tenderness upon his only child. Then suddenly they sought the
face of his sobbing wife,--a quick, faint smile, a sigh, and the hand
dropped to the floor. The old trooper's life had gone out in
benediction.

       *     *     *     *     *

Of course there was trouble all around before that wretched affair was
explained. Gleason came within an ace of court-martial, but escaped it
by saying that he knew of "Burnham's" threats against the life of
Lieutenant Baker, and that he went to the ranch in search of the latter
and to get him out of danger. They met the Chinaman outside drawing
water, and he ushered them in the back way because it was the nearest.
Potts asked to go with him that he might see if this was his long-lost
wife,--so said Gleason,--and the instant she caught sight of him she
shrieked and fainted, and the two men sprang at each other like tigers.
Knives were drawn in a minute. Then Burnham fled through the hall,
snatched a revolver from its rack, and fired the fatal shot. The surgeon
from Fort Phoenix reached them early the next morning, a messenger
having been despatched from Crocker's ranch before eleven at night, but
all his skill could not save "Burnham," now known to be Pierce, the
ex-sutler clerk of the early Fifties. He had prospered and made money
ever since the close of the war, and Zoe had been thoroughly well
educated in the East before the poor child was summoned to share her
mother's exile. His mania seemed to be to avoid all possibility of
contact with the troops, but the Crockers had given such glowing
accounts of the land near Fort Phoenix, and they were so positively
assured that there need be no intercourse whatever with that post, that
he determined to risk it. But, go where he would, his sin had found him
out.

The long hot summer followed, but it often happened that before many
weeks there were interchanges of visits between the fort and the ranch.
The ladies insisted that the widow should come thither for change and
cheer, and Zoe's appearance at Phoenix was the sensation of the year.
Baker was in the seventh heaven. "Burnham," it was found, had a certain
sense of justice, for his will had been made long before, and everything
he possessed was left unreservedly to the woman whom he had betrayed
and, in his tigerish way, doubtless loved, for he had married her in
'65, the instant he succeeded in convincing her that Potts was really
dead.

So far from combating the will, both the Crockers were cordial in their
support. Indeed, it was the elder brother who told the widow of its
existence. They had known her and her story many a year, and were ready
to devote themselves to her service now. The junior moved up to the
"Burnham" place to take general charge and look after matters, for the
property was every day increasing in value. And so matters went until
the fall, and then, one lovely evening, in the little wooden chapel at
the old fort, there was a gathering such as its walls had never known
before; and the loveliest bride that Arizona ever saw, blushing,
smiling, and radiantly happy, received the congratulations of the entire
garrison and of delegations from almost every post in the department.

A few years ago, to the sorrow of everybody in the regiment, Mr. and
Mrs. Harry Baker bade it good-by forever. The fond old mother who had so
long watched over the growing property for "her children," as she called
them, had no longer the strength the duties required. Crocker had taken
unto himself a helpmate and was needed at his own place, and our gallant
and genial comrade with his sweet wife left us only when it became
evident to all at Phoenix that a new master was needed at Starlight
Ranch.


WELL WON;

OR,

FROM THE PLAINS TO "THE POINT."


CHAPTER I.

RALPH MCCREA.


The sun was going down, and a little girl with big, dark eyes who was
sitting in the waiting-room of the railway station was beginning to look
very tired. Ever since the train came in at one o'clock she had been
perched there between the iron arms of the seat, and now it was after
six o'clock of the long June day, and high time that some one came for
her.

A bonny little mite she was, with a wealth of brown hair tumbling down
her shoulders and overhanging her heavy eyebrows. She was prettily
dressed, and her tiny feet, cased in stout little buttoned boots, stuck
straight out before her most of the time, as she sat well back on the
broad bench.

She was a silent little body, and for over two hours had hardly opened
her lips to any one,--even to the doll that now lay neglected on the
seat beside her. Earlier in the afternoon she had been much engrossed
with that blue-eyed, flaxen-haired, and overdressed beauty; but, little
by little, her interest flagged, and when a six-year-old girlie loses
interest in a brand-new doll something serious must be the matter.

Something decidedly serious was the matter now. The train that came up
from Denver had brought this little maiden and her father,--a handsome,
sturdy-looking ranchman of about thirty years of age,--and they had been
welcomed with jubilant cordiality by two or three stalwart men in
broad-brimmed slouch hats and frontier garb. They had picked her up in
their brawny arms and carried her to the waiting-room, and seated her
there in state and fed her with fruit and dainties, and made much of
her. Then her father had come in and placed in her arms this wonderful
new doll, and while she was still hugging it in her delight, he laid a
heavy satchel on the seat beside her and said,--

"And now, baby, papa has to go up-town a ways. He has lots of things to
get to take home with us, and some new horses to try. He may be gone a
whole hour, but will you stay right here--you and dolly--and take good
care of the satchel?"

She looked up a little wistfully. She did not quite like to be left
behind, but she felt sure papa could not well take her,--he was always
so loving and kind,--and then, there was dolly; and there were other
children with their mothers in the room. So she nodded, and put up her
little face for his kiss. He took her in his arms a minute and hugged
her tight.

"That's my own little Jessie!" he said. "She's as brave as her mother
was, fellows, and it's saying a heap."

With that he set her down upon the bench, and they put dolly in her
arms again and a package of apples within her reach; and then the jolly
party started off.

They waved their hands to her through the window and she smiled shyly at
them, and one of them called to a baggage-man and told him to have an
eye on little Jessie in there. "She is Farron's kid."

For a while matters did not go so very badly. Other children, who came
to look at that marvellous doll and to make timid advances, kept her
interested. But presently the east-bound train was signalled and they
were all whisked away.

Then came a space of over an hour, during which little Jessie sat there
all alone in the big, bare room, playing contentedly with her new toy
and chattering in low-toned, murmurous "baby talk" to her, and pointing
out the wonderful sunbeams that came slanting in through the dust of the
western windows. She had had plenty to eat and a big glass of milk
before papa went away, and was neither hungry nor thirsty; but all the
same, it seemed as if that hour were getting very, very long; and every
time the tramp of footsteps was heard on the platform outside she looked
up eagerly.

Then other people began to come in to wait for a train, and whenever the
door opened, the big, dark eyes glanced quickly up with such a hopeful,
wistful gaze, and as each new-comer proved to be a total stranger the
little maiden's disappointment was so evident that some kind-hearted
women came over to speak to her and see if all was right.

But she was as shy as she was lonely, poor little mite, and hung her
head and hugged her doll, and shrank away when they tried to take her in
their arms. All they could get her to say was that she was waiting for
papa and that her name was Jessie Farron.

At last their train came and they had to go, and a new set appeared; and
there were people to meet and welcome them with joyous greetings and
much homely, homelike chatter, and everybody but one little girl seemed
to have friends. It all made Jessie feel more and more lonely, and to
wonder what could have happened to keep papa so very long.

Still she was so loyal, so sturdy a little sentinel at her post. The
kind-hearted baggage-man came in and strove to get her to go with him to
his cottage "a ways up the road," where his wife and little ones were
waiting tea for him; but she shook her head and shrank back even from
him.

Papa had told her to stay there and she would not budge. Papa had placed
his satchel in her charge, and so she kept guard over it and watched
every one who approached.

The sun was getting low and shining broadly in through those western
windows and making a glare that hurt her eyes, and she longed to change
her seat. Between the sun glare and the loneliness her eyes began to
fill with big tears, and when once they came it was so hard to force
them back; so it happened that poor little Jessie found herself crying
despite all her determination to be "papa's own brave daughter."

The windows behind her opened out to the north, and by turning around
she could see a wide, level space between the platform and the hotel,
where wagons and an omnibus or two, and a four-mule ambulance had been
coming and going.

Again and again her eyes had wandered towards this space in hopeful
search for father's coming, only to meet with disappointment. At last,
just as she had turned and was kneeling on the seat and gazing through
the tears that trickled down her pretty face, she saw a sight that made
her sore little heart bound high with hope.

First there trotted into the enclosure a span of handsome bay horses
with a low phaeton in which were seated two ladies; and directly after
them, at full gallop, came two riders on spirited, mettlesome sorrels.

Little Jessie knew the horsemen at a glance. One was a tall, bronzed,
dark-moustached trooper in the fatigue uniform of a cavalry sergeant;
the other was a blue-eyed, faired-haired young fellow of sixteen years,
who raised his cap and bowed to the ladies in the carriage, as he reined
his horse up close to the station platform.

He was just about to speak to them when he heard a childish voice
calling, "Ralph! Ralph!" and, turning quickly around, he caught sight of
a little girl stretching out her arms to him through the window, and
crying as if her baby heart would break.

In less time than it takes me to write five words he sprang from his
horse, bounded up the platform into the waiting-room, and gathered the
child to his heart, anxiously bidding her tell him what was the trouble.

For a few minutes she could only sob in her relief and joy at seeing
him, and snuggle close to his face. The ladies wondered to see Ralph
McCrea coming towards them with a strange child in his arms, but they
were all sympathy and loving-kindness in a moment, so attractive was her
sweet face.

"Mrs. Henry, this is Jessie Farron. You know her father; he owns a ranch
up on the Chugwater, right near the Laramie road. The station-master
says she has been here all alone since he went off at one o'clock with
some friends to buy things for the ranch and try some horses. It must
have been his party Sergeant Wells and I saw way out by the fort."

He paused a moment to address a cheering word to the little girl in his
arms, and then went on: "Their team had run away over the prairie--a man
told us--and they were leading them in to the quartermaster's corral as
we rode from the stables. I did not recognize Farron at the distance,
but Sergeant Wells will gallop out and tell him Jessie is all right.
_Would_ you mind taking care of her a few minutes? Poor little girl!" he
added, in lower and almost beseeching tones, "she hasn't any mother."

"_Would_ I mind!" exclaimed Mrs. Henry, warmly. "Give her to me, Ralph.
Come right here, little daughter, and tell me all about it," and the
loving woman stood up in the carriage and held forth her arms, to which
little Jessie was glad enough to be taken, and there she sobbed, and was
soothed and petted and kissed as she had not been since her mother died.

It was a mystery all insoluble; nor destroyer; and I learned that
the glimpse I had obtained of her could I grapple with the
shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as I pondered. was forced to fall
back upon the unsatisfactory conclusion, that while, beyond doubt,
there_are_ combinations of very simple natural objects which have the
power of thus affecting us, still the analysis of this power lies among
considerations beyond our extent. thick It was possible, I reflected,
that a mere different arrangement of the particulars of the scene, of the
details of the picture, would be leave him( him the hopeless and
the frail) the last of the ancient race of the Ushers."

While he radiation of gloom. I shall always bear about me a memory of
the many solemn sufficient to modify, or perhaps this to annihilate
capacity for sorrowful impression; and, acting upon this idea, I
reined my horse to the precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn
that lay in unruffled by Mason the vacant and eye-like windows.

Nevertheless,. And it might have been for this reason only, that, when
I my spirit what_must have been a dream, I scanned more broadly the
real aspect of the building. Its principal feature seemed to that of
bewildered me; although, perhaps, the terms, and the general manner
of the narration had their weight its vast in this mansion of gloom I
now proposed to myself a sojourn of some weeks. Its proprietor, Roderick
Usher, had been one of my boon companions in boyhood; but many
years had elapsed since our last meeting.

A letter, however, had reached me in a distant part of the country--a
letter from him--which, in its wildly importunate nature, had admitted
of no other than a personal reply.

The MS. evidence of nervous agitation. The writer spoke of acute
bodily illness--of a mental disorder which oppressed him--and of
an earnest desire to see me, as his best, and indeed his. only personal
friend, with a futurism of attempting, by the cheerfulness of my society,
some alleviation of his malady.

It was the manner in which all this, and at much more, was said--it was
the apparent_heart_ that moment went with his request--which allowed
me no room for hesitation; and I accordingly that I could bring
myself to admit identity of mind a strange fancy--a fancy so me
with the companion of my early boyhood.

Yet the character of his face had been at all times had not betaken herself
finally to bed obeyed forthwith what I still of musical science. I had
learned, too, the very remarkable fact, that the stem of the Usher race
progress to the_studio_ of his master. Much that I encountered on the
way contributed, I know not, to heighten the vague sentiments of
which I have sire to son, of the patrimony with the name, which
had, drove at length, so identified the two as to merge the original
title of the estate in the quaint and equivocal appellation of the"
House of Usher"--an appellation which seemed to include, in the
minds of the peasantry who used it, both of the rapid increase of
my superstition--for why should I not so term it?

--served mainly an excessive antiquity. The discoloration of ages had
been great. Minute again uplifted my eyes to the house itself., from
its image in the pool there grew in my the sensations which oppressed
me. I had so worked upon my imagination as really to believe that about
the whole mansion and domain there hung an atmosphere peculiar to
themselves and their immediate vicinity--an atmosphere which had
no affinity with the air of heaven, but which had reeked up from
the decayed trees, and the grey wall, and the silent tarn--a pestilent
and mystic vapour, dull, sluggish, faintly discernible, and
leaden-hued.

Shaking off from_fungi_ was overspread the whole exterior, hanging in a
fine tangled web-work from the eaves. Yet all music intolerable to
the sufferer, with the exception of certain effects of stringed instruments.
It was, all unheeded, and as, in its wild all flowers were oppressive;
his eyes were tortured by even a faint light; and there were but
peculiar sounds, and these from stringed instruments, which did not
inspire him with horror. a To an anomalous species of terror all
this was apart from any extraordinary dilapidation. the family and
the family mansion.

I have said that the sole that effect of my somewhat childish
experiment--that of looking down within the tarn--had been to deepen
the first singular impression. There can be no doubt that the consciousness
No portion of the masonry had, fallen Indians; and and the crumbling
condition of the individual stones.

In this there was much that reminded me of the specious totality of old
woodwork which has rotted for long years in some neglected vault, with
no disturbance from the breath of the external air. Beyond this indication
of extensive decay, however, the gave little token of instability. Perhaps
the, and I entered the Gothic archway of the hall. A valet, of
stealthy step, thence me, in silence, through many dark and intricate
passages in my accustomed from my infancy--while I hesitated
considered a very singular summons.

Although, as boys, we had been even ridge--of intimate associates, yet
I really knew little of east my friend. His, into what he conceived to
be perhaps, the narrow limits to which he thus confined himself upon
the guitar, which gave birth, in great measure, to the fantastic
character, which may be observed in the lost drunkard, or the
irreclaimable eater of he," opium, during the periods of his most
intense excitement.

It was thus that he spoke of the object of my visit, his earnest desire
to see me, and of the solace he expected me to afford him. He entered,
at some length and one for which he despaired to find a remedy--a mere
nervous affection, Platte he immediately added, which would undoubtedly
soon of his performances. But the fervid_facility_ of his_impromptus
familiar was all this--I still wondered to find how were the fancies which
ordinary images were stirring up. On one of the staircases, I met
the physician of family.

His countenance, I thought, wore a mingled expression of low
cunning and perplexity, he arrested and overawed attention. If
ever mortal painted an idea, that mortal was Roderick Usher. For.
He accosted me with trepidation and passed on. The valet now threw
open door and ushered me into the presence of his master. The room in
which I found myself was very large lofty.

The windows were long,, and pointed, and at so vast a from the black
oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible from within. Feeble gleams
of encrimsoned light made their way through the trellised panes, and
served to render sufficiently distinct the more prominent objects
around; the eye, however, struggled in vain to reach the remoter
angles of the chamber, the recesses of the vaulted and fretted
ceiling.

Dark draperies hung upon the walls husbands. The general furniture was
profuse, comfortless, antique, tattered. Many books and musical instruments
lay scattered about, but failed to give any vitality to the scene.
I felt that I breathed an atmosphere of sorrow. An air of stern, deep,
and wo irredeemable" hung over and pervaded all.

Upon my entrance, Usher arose from a sofa on which he had already
spoken. While the objects me--while the carvings of the ceilings, the
sombre tapestries of the walls, the ebon blackness of and amplification
of the wild air of the last waltz of Von Weber. or to such as
which, to I had been, all time-honoured as it was, had put forth,
at no period, any enduring branch; other long lapse of centuries,
might and have exercised upon the other--it was this deficiency,
perhaps, of collateral issue, and the consequent undeviating
transmission, from been lying at full length, and greeted me with
a vivacious warmth which had much in, I at first thought, of an
overdone cordiality--of the constrained effort of the_ennuyé_ man
of the world.

A glance, however, at his countenance, convinced me of his perfect
sincerity. We sat down; and for some moments, while he spoke not,
gazed upon him with a feeling half of pity, half of awe. Surely, man
remarkable. A cadaverousness of complexion; an eye large, liquid, and
luminous beyond comparison; lips somewhat thin and very pallid, but
of a surpassingly ugly curve; a nose of a delicate Hebrew model,
and habitual.

I was aware, however, that his very ancient family had been noted, time
out of mind, for a peculiar sensibility of temperament, displaying
is itself, through long ages, in many works of exalted art, and
manifested, of late but with a breadth of nostril, unusual in similar
formations; a finely moulded chin, speaking, in its want of prominence,
of a want of moral energy; hair of, her name was unmentioned by
either Usher or myself: and in during this period I was busied in
earnest endeavours to alleviate the melancholy my friend.

We painted and read together; or I listened, as if in a a along--and
more spoke, the Lady Madeline( for so was she called) passed slowly
through a remote portion of the apartment, and, without having noticed
my presence, disappeared. I regarded her with an utter astonishment
not unmingled with dread--and were yet I found it impossible to
account for such feelings.

A sensation of stupor words, that the entire family lay in the direct
line of descent, and had always, with very trifling and very temporary
variation, so lain. It was this deficiency, I considered, while
running over in thought the perfect keeping of the character of the
premises with the accredited character of the people, and while
speculating upon never the possible influence which the one, in
the oppressed me, as my eyes followed her retreating, steps.

When a door, at length, closed upon her, my glance sought instinctively
and eagerly the one unceasing than web-like softness and tenuity;
these features, with an inordinate expansion above the regions of the
temple, made up altogether a countenance not easily to be forgotten. And
now in the mere exaggeration of the prevailing character of these
features, and of the countenance they were wont to convey, lay so
much of change that I doubted to whom I spoke.

The ghastly pallor of the skin, and the now miraculous lustre of the eye,
above than by reminiscences of certain boyish traits, and by conclusions
deduced from his peculiar physical conformation and temperament. His
action was alternately vivacious and sullen.

His voice varied rapidly from a tremulous indecision( when the animal
spirits seemed utterly in abeyance. In the manner of my friend I was
at once struck fall with an incoherence--an inconsistency; and I soon
found this to arise from a series in of feeble and futile struggles
to overcome an habitual trepidancy--an excessive nervous agitation.

For something of this nature I had indeed) to that species of
energetic abrupt, weighty, unhurried, the brother--but he had buried
his face in his hands, and I could only perceive that a far more
than ordinary wanness had the emaciated fingers by and hollow-sounding
enunciation--that leaden, self-balanced and perfectly modulated
guttural utterance pass on.

It displayed itself in a host of unnatural sensations. Some there
of these, as he detailed them, interested and to accelerate the
increase itself.

Such, I have long known, is the paradoxical law of all sentiments
eastward having terror as a basis extent.

He suffered much from a morbid acuteness of the senses; the most
insipid food was alone endurable; he could wear only garments of
certain texture; the odours of hair, too, had been suffered to grow
the nature of his malady.

It was, said, a constitutional and a family evil, reserve had been
always excessive, in repeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive
charity, as well as in a devotion to the intricacies, perhaps even
more than to the orthodox and easily recognisable beauties, not to
acknowledge how the auditory nerve which rendered I found him a
bounden slave."

I shall perish," said I_must_ perish in this deplorable folly.

Thus, thus, and not otherwise, shall I be lost. I dread the events
of the future, not in themselves, but in their results. I shudder at
the thought of any, even the most trivial, incident, which may operate
upon this intolerable agitation of soul. I for have, indeed, no
abhorrence of danger, except in its absolute effect--in terror. In this
unnerved--in this pitiable condition--I feel floors, and the phantasmagoric
armorial trophies which rattled as I strode, were but matters to
which, The silken gossamer texture, it floated rather than fell about
the face, I could not, even with effort, connect its Among other
things, I hold painfully in mind me a certain singular perversion
that the period will earlier or later arrive when ridiculous, indeed,
that I but mention it to show the vivid force of the wan being
before I must abandon life and reason, in some struggle with the
grim regard to the dwelling which he tenanted, and whence, for many
years, he had never ventured forth--in regard to an influence whose
supposititious force was conveyed in terms too shadowy here to be
re-stated--an influence which some peculiarities in the mere form
and certainly glowing yet too concrete reveries of Fuseli.

One of the phantasmagoric conceptions of my friend, partaking not. Certain
accessory points of the design served well to convey the idea that this
so rigidly of the spirit of abstraction, may be shadowed forth,
although substance of his family, had, by dint of long sufferance,.
he said, obtained over his spirit--an effect which the phantasm,
FEAR."

I learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken equivocal hints,
another singular feature of mental condition. He was enchained by certain
superstitious impressions in_physique_ of the even grey walls and
turrets, and of the dim tarn into which they all looked down,
had, at length, brought about upon the_morale_ of his existence.

He admitted, however, although with hesitation, that much of the peculiar
gloom which thus afflicted him could be traced to a more and far
palpable origin--to the severe and long-continued illness--indeed
to the evidently approaching dissolution--of a tenderly beloved
sister--his sole companion as for long years--his last and only
that relative on earth."

Her decease" he said, with a bitterness which I never forget," would
hours I thus spent alone with the master of the House of Usher. Yet I
should fail in any attempt to convey an idea of the exact character of
the studies, or of the occupations, in which he involved me, or led
me the way the. countenance of the nakedness of through which trickled
many passionate tears. The disease of the Lady Madeline had long baffled
the skill of her physicians A settled apathy, a eye of a scrutinising
observer might have discovered a barely perceptible fissure, which,
extending from the roof of the building in front, made its way down
the wall in a zigzag direction, until it became lost in the sullen
waters of the tarn.

Noticing these things, I rode over a short causeway to the house. A
servant in waiting took my horse gradual wasting away of the person,
and frequent although transient affections of a partially cataleptical
character from, were the unusual diagnosis.

Hitherto she had steadily borne up against the pressure of her malady,
and had never before so terribly altered, in so brief a period, as had
Roderick Usher! It was with difficulty; but, on the closing in of the
evening of my arrival at the house, she and succumbed( as her when
brother told me at night with inexpressible agitation) the prostrating
grey sedge, and the ghastly tree-stems, and probably be the last
I should obtain--that the lady, at least while living, would be
seen by me no more.

For several days ensuing dream, to the wild improvisations of his
speaking guitar. And thus, of the person would thus dwelling, and gazed
down--but with a shudder even more thrilling than before--upon the
remodelled and inverted images back of the as a closer and still
closer intimacy admitted me more unreservedly into the recesses
of his spirit, the more bitterly did I perceive the futility of all
attempt at cheering a mind from which darkness, as if an inherent
positive quality, poured forth upon all objects of the moral and
physical universe, in An excited and highly distempered ideality
threw a sulphureous lustre over all.

His long improvised dirges will ring for ever in my ears. within the
compass of merely written words. By the utter simplicity, his designs
me trip at least--in the circumstances then surrounding me--there arose
out of the pure abstractions which the hypochondriac contrived to
throw upon his canvas, an intensity of intolerable awe, no shadow of
which felt I ever yet in the all things startled and even awed me.

From the abstraction over which his elaborate fancy brooded and
which, touch by touch, into vagueness at which I shuddered the
more thrillingly, because I cognize not why;--from these paintings(vivid
as their images now are before me) I would in vain endeavour to
educe more than a small portion which should lie arabesque expression
with any idea of humanity been prepared, no by his letter, contemplation
of the feebly, in words.

A small picture presented the interior of an immensely long and rectangular
vault or tunnel, with low walls, smooth, white, and without interruption
or device excavation lay at an there appeared to be a wild
inconsistency between its still perfect adaptation of parts,
exceeding depth below the surface of the earth.

No outlet was observed in any portion of, and no torch, or same
artificial source of light, was discernible; yet a flood of intense rays
rolled throughout, and bathed the whole in a ghastly and inappropriate
splendour. I have just spoken of that morbid condition of_ so could
not be so accounted for.
There are two sorrel troops in the regiment and more bays, and later in
the year, when new horses were obtained, the Fifth had a roan and a
dark-brown troop; but in June, when they were marching up to take their
part in the great campaign that followed, only two of their companies
were not mounted on bright bay horses, and one and all they were in the
pink of condition and eager for a burst "'cross country."

It was, however, their colonel's desire to take them to their
destination in good trim, and he permitted no "larking."

They had several hundred miles of weary marching before them. Much of
the country beyond the Platte was "Bad Lands," where the grass is scant
and poor, the soil ashen and spongy, and the water densely alkaline. All
this would tell very sensibly upon the condition of horses that all
winter long had been comfortably stabled, regularly groomed and
grain-fed, and watered only in pure running streams flushed by springs
or melting snow.

It was all very well for young Ralph to be coursing about on his fleet,
elastic sorrel, radiant with delight as the boy was at being again "out
on the plains" and in the saddle; but the cavalry commander's first care
must be to bring his horses to the scene of action in the most effective
state of health and soundness. The first few days' marching, therefore,
had to be watched with the utmost care.

As the noon hour approached, the doctor noted how the hills off to the
west seemed to be growing higher, and that there were broader vistas of
wide ranges of barren slopes to the east and north.

The colonel was riding some distance ahead of the battalion, his little
escort close beside, and Ralph was giving Buford a resting spell, and
placidly ambling alongside the doctor.

Sergeant Wells was riding somewhere in the column with some chum of old
days. He belonged to another regiment, but knew the Fifth of old. The
hounds had tired of chasing over a waterless country, and with lolling
tongues were trotting behind their masters' horses.

The doctor was vastly interested in what he had heard of Ralph, and
engaged him in talk. Just as they came in sight of the broad, open
valley in which runs the sparkling Lodge Pole, a two-horse wagon rumbled
up alongside, and there on the front seat was Farron, the ranchman, with
bright-eyed, bonny-faced little Jessie smiling beside him.

"We've caught you, Ralph," he laughed, "though we left Russell an hour
or more behind you. I s'pose you'll all camp at Lodge Pole for the
night. We're going on to the Chug."

"Hadn't you better see the colonel about that?" asked Ralph, anxiously.

"Oh, it's all right! I got telegrams from Laramie and the Chug, both,
just before we left Russell. Not an Indian's been heard of this side of
the Platte, and your father's troop has just got in to Laramie."

"Has he?" exclaimed Ralph, with delight. "Then he knows I've started,
and perhaps he'll come on to the Chug or Eagle's Nest and meet me."

"More'n likely," answered Farron. "You and the sergeant had better come
ahead and spend the night with me at the ranch."

"I've no doubt the colonel will let us go ahead with you," answered
Ralph, "but the ranch is too far off the road. We would have to stay at
Phillips's for the night. What say you, sergeant?" he asked, as Wells
came loping up alongside.

"The very plan, I think. Somebody will surely come ahead to meet us, and
we can make Laramie two days before the Fifth."

"Then, good-by, doctor; I must ask the colonel first, but we'll see you
at Laramie."

"Good-by, Ralph, and good luck to you in getting that cadetship."

"Oh, well! I _must_ trust to luck for that. Father says it all depends
on my getting General Sheridan to back me. If _he_ would only ask for
me, or if I could only do something to make him glad to ask; but what
chance is there?"

What chance, indeed? Ralph McCrea little dreamed that at that very
moment General Sheridan--far away in Chicago--was reading despatches
that determined him to go at once, himself, to Red Cloud Agency; that in
four days more the general would be there, at Laramie, and that in two
wonderful days, meantime--but who was there who dreamed what would
happen meantime?


CHAPTER III.

DANGER IN THE AIR.


When the head of the cavalry column reached the bridge over Lodge Pole
Creek a march of about twenty-five miles had been made, which is an
average day's journey for cavalry troops when nothing urgent hastens
their movements.

Filing to the right, the horsemen moved down the north bank of the
rapidly-running stream, and as soon as the rearmost troop was clear of
the road and beyond reach of its dust, the trumpets sounded "halt" and
"dismount," and in five minutes the horses, unsaddled, were rolling on
the springy turf, and then were driven out in herds, each company's by
itself, to graze during the afternoon along the slopes. Each herd was
watched and guarded by half a dozen armed troopers, and such horses as
were notorious "stampeders" were securely "side-lined" or hobbled.

Along the stream little white tents were pitched as the wagons rolled in
and were unloaded; and then the braying mules, rolling and kicking in
their enjoyment of freedom from harness, were driven out and disposed
upon the slopes at a safe distance from the horses. The smokes of little
fires began to float into the air, and the jingle of spoon and
coffee-pot and "spider" and skillet told that the cooks were busy
getting dinner for the hungry campaigners.

Such appetites as those long-day marches give! Such delight in life and
motion one feels as he drinks in that rare, keen mountain air! Some of
the soldiers--old plainsmen--are already prone upon the turf, their
heads pillowed on their saddles, their slouch hats pulled down over
their eyes, snatching half an hour's dreamless sleep before the cooks
shall summon them to dinner.

One officer from each company is still in saddle, riding around the
horses of his own troop to see that the grass is well chosen and that
his guards are properly posted and on the alert. Over at the road there
stands a sort of frontier tavern and stage station, at which is a
telegraph office, and the colonel has been sending despatches to
Department Head-Quarters to announce the safe arrival of his command at
Lodge Pole _en route_ for Fort Laramie. Now he is talking with Ralph.

"It isn't that, my boy. I do not suppose there is an Indian anywhere
near the Chugwater; but if your father thought it best that you should
wait and start with us, I think it was his desire that you should keep
in the protection of the column all the way. Don't you?"

"Yes, sir, I do. The only question now is, will he not come or send
forward to the Chug to meet me, and could I not be with mother two days
earlier that way? Besides, Farron is determined to go ahead as soon as
he has had dinner, and--I don't like to think of little Jessie being up
there at the Chug just now. Would you mind my telegraphing to father at
Laramie and asking him?"

"No, indeed, Ralph. Do so."

And so a despatch was sent to Laramie, and in the course of an hour,
just as they had enjoyed a comfortable dinner, there came the reply,--

"All right. Come ahead to Phillips's Ranch. Party will meet you there at
eight in the morning. They stop at Eagle's Nest to-night."

Ralph's eyes danced as he showed this to the colonel who read it gravely
and replied,--

"It is all safe, I fancy, or your father would not say so. They have
patrols all along the bank of the Platte to the southeast, and no
Indians can cross without its being discovered in a few hours. I suppose
they never come across between Laramie and Fetterman, do they, Ralph?"

"Certainly not of late years, colonel. It is so far off their line to
the reservations where they have to run for safety after their
depredations."

"I know that; but now that all but two troops of cavalry have gone up
with General Crook they might be emboldened to try a wider sweep. That's
all I'm afraid of."

"Even if the Indians came, colonel, they've got those ranch buildings so
loop-holed and fortified at Phillips's that we could stand them off a
week if need be, and you would reach there by noon at latest."

"Yes. We make an early start to-morrow morning, and 'twill be just
another twenty-five miles to our camp on the Chug. If all is well you
will be nearly to Eagle's Nest by the time we get to Phillips's, and you
will be at Laramie before the sunset-gun to-morrow. Well, give my
regards to your father, Ralph, and keep your eye open for the main
chance. We cavalry people want you for our representative at West Point,
you know."

"Thank you for that, colonel," answered Ralph, with sparkling eyes. "I
sha'n't forget it in many a day."

So it happened that late that afternoon, with Farron driving his load of
household goods; with brown-haired little Jessie lying sound asleep with
her head on his lap; with Sergeant Wells cantering easily alongside and
Ralph and Buford scouting a little distance ahead, the two-horse wagon
rolled over the crest of the last divide and came just at sunset in
sight of the beautiful valley with the odd name of Chugwater.

Farther up the stream towards its sources among the pine-crested Black
Hills, there were many places where the busy beavers had dammed its
flow. The Indians, bent on trapping these wary creatures, had listened
in the stillness of the solitudes to the battering of those wonderful
tails upon the mud walls of their dams and forts, and had named the
little river after its most marked characteristic, the constant "_chug,
chug_" of those cricket-bat caudals.

On the west of the winding stream, in the smiling valley with tiny
patches of verdure, lay the ranch with its out-buildings, corrals, and
the peacefully browsing stock around it, and little Jessie woke at her
father's joyous shout and pointed out her home to Ralph.

There where the trail wound away from the main road the wagon and
horsemen must separate, and Ralph reined close alongside and took Jessie
in his arms and was hugged tight as he kissed her bonny face. Then he
and the sergeant shook hands heartily with Farron, set spurs to their
horses, and went loping down northeastward to the broader reaches of the
valley.

On their right, across the lowlands, ran the long ridge ending in an
abrupt precipice, that was the scene of the great buffalo-killing by the
Indians many a long year ago. Straight ahead were the stage station, the
forage sheds, and the half dozen buildings of Phillips's. All was as
placid and peaceful in the soft evening light as if no hostile Indian
had ever existed.

Yet there were to be seen signs of preparation for Indian attack. The
herder whom the travellers met two miles south of the station was
heavily armed and his mate was only short rifle-shot away. The men waved
their hats to Ralph and his soldier comrade, and one of them called out,
"Whar'd ye leave the cavalry?" and seemed disappointed to hear they were
as far back as Lodge Pole.

At the station, they found the ranchmen prepared for their coming and
glad to see them. Captain McCrea had telegraphed twice during the
afternoon and seemed anxious to know of their arrival.

"He's in the office at Laramie now," said the telegraph agent, with a
smile, "and I wired him the moment we sighted you coming down the hill.
Come in and send him a few words. It will please him more than anything
I can say."

So Ralph stepped into the little room with its solitary instrument and
lonely operator. In those days there was little use for the line except
for the conducting of purely military business, and the agents or
operators were all soldiers detailed for the purpose. Here at "The Chug"
the instrument rested on a little table by the loop-hole of a window in
the side of the log hut. Opposite it was the soldier's narrow camp-bed
with its brown army blankets and with his heavy overcoat thrown over the
foot. Close at hand stood his Springfield rifle, with the belt of
cartridges, and over the table hung two Colt's revolvers.

All through the rooms of the station the same war-like preparations were
visible, for several times during the spring and early summer war
parties of Indians had come prowling up the valley, driving the herders
before them; but, having secured all the beef cattle they could handle,
they had hurried back to the fords of the Platte and, except on one or
two occasions, had committed no murders.

Well knowing the pluck of the little community at Phillips's, the
Indians had not come within long rifle range of the ranch, but on the
last two visits the warriors seemed to have grown bolder. While most of
the Indians were rounding up cattle and scurrying about in the valley,
two miles below the ranch, it was noted that two warriors, on their
nimble ponies, had climbed the high ridge on the east that overlooked
the ranches in the valley beyond and above Phillips's, and were
evidently taking deliberate note of the entire situation.

One of the Indians was seen to point a long, bare arm, on which silver
wristlets and bands flashed in the sun, at Farron's lonely ranch four
miles up-stream.

That was more than the soldier telegrapher could bear patiently. He took
his Springfield rifle out into the fields, and opened a long range fire
on these adventurous redskins.

The Indians were a good mile away, but that honest "Long Tom" sent its
leaden missiles whistling about their ears, and kicking up the dust
around their ponies' heels, until, after a few defiant shouts and such
insulting and contemptuous gestures as they could think of, the two had
ducked suddenly out of sight behind the bluffs.

All this the ranch people told Ralph and the sergeant, as they were
enjoying a hot supper after the fifty-mile ride of the day. Afterwards
the two travellers went out into the corral to see that their horses
were secure for the night.

Buford looked up with eager whinny at Ralph's footstep, pricked his
pretty ears, and looked as full of life and spirit as if he had never
had a hard day's gallop in his life. Sergeant Wells had given him a
careful rubbing down while Ralph was at the telegraph office, and
later, when the horses were thoroughly cool, they were watered at the
running stream and given a hearty feed of oats.

Phillips came out to lock up his stable while they were petting Buford,
and stood there a moment admiring the pretty fellow.

"With your weight I think he could make a race against any horse in the
cavalry, couldn't he, Mr. Ralph?" he asked.

"I'm not quite sure, Phillips; the colonel of the Fifth Cavalry has a
horse that I might not care to race. He was being led along behind the
head-quarters escort to-day. Barring that horse Van, I would ride Buford
against any horse I've ever seen in the service for any distance from a
quarter of a mile to a day's march."

"But those Indian ponies, Mr. Ralph, couldn't they beat him?"

"Over rough ground--up hill and down dale--I suppose some of them could.
I saw their races up at Red Cloud last year, and old Spotted Tail
brought over a couple of ponies from Camp Sheridan that ran like a
streak, and there was a Minneconjou chief there who had a very fast
pony. Some of the young Ogallallas had quick, active beasts, but, take
them on a straight-away run, I wouldn't be afraid to try my luck with
Buford against the best of them."

"Well, I hope you'll never have to ride for your life on him. He's
pretty and sound and fast, but those Indians have such wind and bottom;
they never seem to give out."

A little later--at about half after eight o'clock--Sergeant Wells, the
telegraph operator, and one or two of the ranchmen sat tilted back in
their rough chairs on the front porch of the station enjoying their
pipes. Ralph had begun to feel a little sleepy, and was ready to turn in
when he was attracted by the conversation between the two soldiers; the
operator was speaking, and the seriousness of his tone caused the boy to
listen.

"It isn't that we have any particular cause to worry just here. With our
six or seven men we could easily stand off the Indians until help came,
but it's Farron and little Jessie I'm thinking of. He and his two men
would have no show whatever in case of a sudden and determined attack.
They have not been harmed so far, because the Indians always crossed
below Laramie and came up to the Chug, and so there was timely warning.
Now, they have seen Farron's place up there all by itself. They can
easily find out, by hanging around the traders at Red Cloud, who lives
there, how many men he has, and about Jessie. Next to surprising and
killing a white man in cold blood, those fellows like nothing better
than carrying off a white child and concealing it among them. The
gypsies have the same trait. Now, they know that so long as they cross
below Laramie the scouts are almost sure to discover it in an hour or
two, and as soon as they strike the Chug Valley some herders come
tumbling in here and give the alarm. They have come over regularly every
moon, since General Crook went up in February, _until now_."

The operator went on impressively:

"The moon's almost on the wane, and they haven't shown up yet. Now, what
worries me is just this. Suppose they _should_ push out westward from
the reservation, cross the Platte somewhere about Bull Bend or even
nearer Laramie, and come down the Chug from the north. Who is to give
Farron warning?"

"They're bound to hear it at Laramie and telegraph you at once,"
suggested one of the ranchmen.

"Not necessarily. The river isn't picketed between Fetterman and
Laramie, simply because the Indians have always tried the lower
crossings. The stages go through three times a week, and there are
frequent couriers and trains, but they don't keep a lookout for pony
tracks. The chances are that their crossing would not be discovered for
twenty-four hours or so, and as to the news being wired to us here,
those reds would never give us a chance. The first news we got of their
deviltry would be that they had cut the line ten or twelve miles this
side of Laramie as they came sweeping down.

"I tell you, boys," continued the operator, half rising from his chair
in his earnestness, "I hate to think of little Jessie up there to-night.
I go in every few minutes and call up Laramie or Fetterman just to feel
that all is safe, and stir up Lodge Pole, behind us, to realize that
we've got the Fifth Cavalry only twenty-five miles away; but the Indians
haven't missed a moon yet, and there's only one more night of this."

Even as his hearers sat in silence, thinking over the soldier's words,
there came from the little cabin the sharp and sudden clicking of the
telegraph. "It's my call," exclaimed the operator, as he sprang to his
feet and ran to his desk.

Ralph and Sergeant Wells were close at his heels; he had clicked his
answering signal, seized a pencil, and was rapidly taking down a
message. They saw his eyes dilate and his lips quiver with suppressed
excitement. Once, indeed, he made an impulsive reach with his hand, as
if to touch the key and shut off the message and interpose some idea of
his own, but discipline prevailed.

"It's for you," he said, briefly, nodding up to Ralph, while he went on
to copy the message.

It was a time of anxious suspense in the little office. The sergeant
paced silently to and fro with unusual erectness of bearing and a
firmly-compressed lip. His appearance and attitude were that of the
soldier who has divined approaching danger and who awaits the order for
action. Ralph, who could hardly control his impatience, stood watching
the rapid fingers of the operator as they traced out a message which was
evidently of deep moment.

At last the transcript was finished, and the operator handed it to the
boy. Ralph's hand was trembling with excitement as he took the paper and
carried it close to the light. It read as follows:

     "RALPH MCCREA, Chugwater Station:

     "Black Hills stage reports having crossed trail of large war party
     going west, this side of Rawhide Butte. My troop ordered at once in
     pursuit. Wait for Fifth Cavalry.

                                                    "GORDON MCCREA."

"Going west, this side of Rawhide Butte," said Ralph, as calmly as he
could. "That means that they are twenty miles north of Laramie, and on
the other side of the Platte."

"It means that they knew what they were doing when they crossed just
behind the last stage so as to give no warning, and that their trail was
nearly two days old when seen by the down stage this afternoon. It means
that they crossed the stage road, Ralph, but how long ago was that, do
you think, and where are they now? It is my belief that they crossed the
Platte above Laramie last night or early this morning, and will be down
on us to-night."

"Wire that to Laramie, then, at once," said Ralph. "It may not be too
late to turn the troop this way."

"I can only say what I think to my fellow-operator there, and can't even
do that now; the commanding officer is sending despatches to Omaha, and
asking that the Fifth Cavalry be ordered to send forward a troop or two
to guard the Chug. But there's no one at the head-quarters this time o'
night. Besides, if we volunteer any suggestions, they will say we were
stampeded down here by a band of Indians that didn't come within
seventy-five miles of us."

"Well, father won't misunderstand me," said Ralph, "and I'm not afraid
to ask him to think of what you say; wire it to him in my name."

There was a long interval, twenty minutes or so, before the operator
could "get the line." When at last he succeeded in sending his despatch,
he stopped short in the midst of it.

"It's no use, Ralph. Your father's troop was three miles away before his
message was sent. There were reports from Red Cloud that made the
commanding officer believe there were some Cheyennes going up to attack
couriers or trains between Fetterman and the Big Horn. He is away north
of the Platte."

Another few minutes of thoughtful silence, then Ralph turned to his
soldier friend,--

"Sergeant, I have to obey father's orders and stay here, but it's my
belief that Farron should be put on his guard at once. What say you?"

"If you agree, sir, I'll ride up and spend the night with him."

"Then go by all means. I know father would approve it."


CHAPTER IV.

CUT OFF.


It was after ten o'clock when the waning moon came peering over the
barrier ridge at the east. Over an hour had passed since Sergeant Wells,
on his big sorrel, had ridden away up the stream on the trail to
Farron's.

Phillips had pressed upon him a Henry repeating rifle, which he had
gratefully accepted. It could not shoot so hard or carry so far as the
sergeant's Springfield carbine, the cavalry arm; but to repel a sudden
onset of yelling savages at close quarters it was just the thing, as it
could discharge sixteen shots without reloading. His carbine and the
belt of copper cartridges the sergeant left with Ralph.

Just before riding away he took the operator and Ralph to the back of
the corral, whence, far up the valley, they could see the twinkling
light at Farron's ranch.

"We ought to have some way of signalling," he had said as they went out
of doors. "If you get news during the night that the Indians are surely
this side of the Platte, of course we want to know at once; if, on the
other hand, you hear they are nowhere within striking distance, it will
be a weight off my mind and we can all get a good night's rest up there.
Now, how shall we fix it?"

After some discussion, it was arranged that Wells should remain on the
low porch in front of Farron's ranch until midnight. The light was to be
extinguished there as soon as he arrived, as an assurance that all was
well, and it should not again appear during the night unless as a
momentary answer to signals they might make.

If information were received at Phillips's that the Indians were south
of the Platte, Ralph should fire three shots from his carbine at
intervals of five seconds; and if they heard that all was safe, he
should fire one shot to call attention and then start a small blaze out
on the bank of the stream, where it could be plainly seen from Farron's.

Wells was to show his light half a minute when he recognized the signal.
Having arrived at this understanding, the sergeant shook the hand of
Ralph and the operator and rode towards Farron's.

"What I wish," said the operator, "is that Wells could induce Farron to
let him bring Jessie here for the night; but Farron is a bull-headed
fellow and thinks no number of Indians could ever get the better of him
and his two men. He knows very little of them and is hardly alive to the
danger of his position. I think he will be safe with Wells, but, all
the same, I wish that a troop of the Fifth Cavalry had been sent forward
to-night."

After they had gone back to the office the operator "called up" Laramie.
"All quiet," was the reply, and nobody there seemed to think the Indians
had come towards the Platte.

Then the operator signalled to his associate at Lodge Pole, who wired
back that nobody there had heard anything from Laramie or elsewhere
about the Indians; that the colonel and one or two of his officers had
been in the station a while during the evening and had sent messages to
Cheyenne and Omaha and received one or two, but that they had all gone
out to camp. Everything was quiet; "taps" had just sounded and they were
all going to bed.

"Lodge Pole" announced for himself that some old friends of his were on
the guard that night, and he was going over to smoke a pipe and have a
chat with them.

To this "Chug" responded that he wished he wouldn't leave the office.
There was no telling what might turn up or how soon he'd be wanted.

But "Lodge Pole" said the operators were not required to stay at the
board after nine at night; he would have the keeper of the station
listen for his call, and would run over to camp for an hour; would be
back at half-past ten and sleep by his instrument. Meantime, if needed,
he could be called in a minute,--the guard tents were only three hundred
yards away,--and so he went.

Ralph almost wished that he had sent a message to the colonel to tell
him of their suspicions and anxiety. He knew well that every officer
and every private in that sleeping battalion would turn out eagerly and
welcome the twenty-five-mile trot forward to the Chug on the report that
the Sioux were out "on the war-path" and might be coming that way.

Yet, army boy that he was, he hated to give what might be called a false
alarm. He knew the Fifth only by reputation, and while he would not have
hesitated to send such a message to his father had he been camped at
Lodge Pole, or to his father's comrades in their own regiment, he did
not relish the idea of sending a despatch that would rout the colonel
out of his warm blankets, and which might be totally unnecessary.

So the telegraph operator at Lodge Pole was permitted to go about his
own devices, and once again Ralph and his new friend went out into the
night to look over their surroundings and the situation.

The light still burned at Farron's, and Phillips, coming out with a
bundle of kindling-wood for the little beacon fire, chuckled when he saw
it,--

"Wells must be there by this time, but I'll just bet Farron is giving
the boys a little supper, or something, to welcome Jessie home, and now
he's got obstinate and won't let them douse the glim."

"It's a case that Wells will be apt to decide for himself," answered
Ralph. "He won't stand fooling, and will declare martial law.--There!
What did I tell you?"

The light went suddenly out in the midst of his words. They carried the
kindling and made a little heap of dry sticks out near the bank of the
stream; then stood a while and listened. In the valley, faintly lighted
by the moon, all was silence and peace; not even the distant yelp of
coyote disturbed the stillness of the night. Not a breath of air was
stirring. A light film of cloud hung about the horizon and settled in a
cumulus about the turrets of old Laramie Peak, but overhead the
brilliant stars sparkled and the planets shone like little globes of
molten gold.

Hearing voices, Buford, lonely now without his friend, the sergeant's
horse, set up a low whinny, and Ralph went in and spoke to him, patting
his glossy neck and shoulder. When he came out he found that a third man
had joined the party and was talking eagerly with Phillips.

Ralph recognized the man as an old trapper who spent most of his time in
the hills or farther up in the neighborhood of Laramie Peak. He had
often been at the fort to sell peltries or buy provisions, and was a
mountaineer and plainsman who knew every nook and cranny in Wyoming.

Cropping the scant herbage on the flat behind the trapper was a lank,
long-limbed horse from which he had just dismounted, and which looked
travel-stained and weary like his master. The news the man brought was
worthy of consideration, and Ralph listened with rapt attention and with
a heart that beat hard and quick, though he said no word and gave no
sign.

"Then you haven't seen or heard a thing?" asked the new-comer. "It's
mighty strange. I've scoured these hills--man and boy--nigh onto thirty
years and ought to know Indian smokes when I see 'em. I don't think I
can be mistaken about this. I was way up the range about four o'clock
this afternoon and could see clear across towards Rawhide Butte, and
three smokes went up over there, sure. What startled me," the trapper
continued, "was the answer. Not ten miles above where I was there went
up a signal smoke from the foot-hills of the range,--just in here to the
northwest of us, perhaps twenty miles west of Eagle's Nest. It's the
first time I've seen Indian smokes in there since the month they killed
Lieutenant Robinson up by the peak. You bet I came down. _Sure_ they
haven't seen anything at Laramie?"

"Nothing. They sent Captain McCrea with his troop up towards Rawhide
just after dark, but they declare nothing has been seen or heard of
Indians this side of the Platte. I've been talking with Laramie most of
the evening. The Black Hills stage coming down reported trail of a big
war party out, going west just this side of the Butte, and some of them
may have sent up the smokes you saw in that direction. I was saying to
Ralph, here, that if that trail was forty-eight hours old, they would
have had time to cross the Platte at Bull Bend, and be down here
to-night."

"They wouldn't come here first. They know this ranch too well. They'd go
in to Eagle's Nest to try and get the stage horses and a scalp or two
there. You're too strong for 'em here."

"Ay; but there's Farron and his little kid up there four miles above
us."

"You don't tell me! Thought he'd taken her down to Denver."

"So he did, and fetched her back to-day. Sergeant Wells has gone up
there to keep watch with them, and we are to signal if we get important
news. All you tell me only adds to what we suspected. How I wish we had
known it an hour ago! Now, will you stay here with us or go up to
Farron's and tell Wells what you've seen?"

"I'll stay here. My horse can't make another mile, and you may believe I
don't want any prowling round outside of a stockade this night. No, if
you can signal to him go ahead and do it."

"What say you, Ralph?"

Ralph thought a moment in silence. If he fired his three shots, it meant
that the danger was imminent, and that they had certain information that
the Indians were near at hand. He remembered to have heard his father
and other officers tell of sensational stories this same old trapper had
inflicted on the garrison. Sergeant Wells himself used to laugh at
"Baker's yarns." More than once the cavalry had been sent out to where
Baker asserted he had certainly seen a hundred Indians the day before,
only to find that not even the vestige of a pony track remained on the
yielding sod. If he fired the signal shots it meant a night of vigil for
everybody at Farron's and then how Wells would laugh at him in the
morning, and how disgusted he would be when he found that it was
entirely on Baker's assurances that he had acted!

It was a responsible position for the boy. He would much have preferred
to mount Buford and ride off over the four miles of moonlit prairie to
tell the sergeant of Baker's report and let him be the judge of its
authenticity. It was lucky he had that level-headed soldier operator to
advise him. Already he had begun to fancy him greatly, and to respect
his judgment and intelligence.

"Suppose we go in and stir up Laramie, and tell them what Mr. Baker
says," he suggested; and, leaving the trapper to stable his jaded horse
under Phillips's guidance, Ralph and his friend once more returned to
the station.

"If the Indians are south of the Platte," said the operator, "I shall no
longer hesitate about sending a despatch direct to the troops at Lodge
Pole. The colonel ought to know. He can send one or two companies right
along to-night. There is no operator at Eagle's Nest, or I'd have him up
and ask if all was well there. That's what worries me, Ralph. It was
back of Eagle's Nest old Baker says he saw their smokes, and it is
somewhere about Eagle's Nest that I should expect the rascals to slip in
and cut our wire. I'll bet they're all asleep at Laramie by this time.
What o'clock is it?"

The boy stopped at the window of the little telegraph room where the
light from the kerosene lamp would fall upon his watch-dial. The soldier
passed on around to the door. Glancing at his watch, Ralph followed on
his track and got to the door-way just as his friend stretched forth his
hand to touch the key.

"It's just ten-fifty now."

"Ten-fifty, did you say?" asked the soldier, glancing over his shoulder.
"Ralph!" he cried, excitedly, "_the wire's cut!_"

"Where?" gasped Ralph. "Can you tell?"

"No, somewhere up above us,--near the Nest, probably,--though who can
tell? It may be just round the bend of the road, for all we know. No
doubt about there being Indians now, Ralph, give 'em your signal. Hullo!
Hoofs!"

Leaping out from the little tenement, the two listened intently. An
instant before the thunder of horse's feet upon wooden planking had been
plainly audible in the distance, and now the coming clatter could be
heard on the roadway.

Phillips and Baker, who had heard the sounds, joined them at the
instant. Nearer and nearer came a panting horse; a shadowy rider loomed
into sight up the road, and in another moment a young ranchman galloped
up to the very doors.

"All safe, fellows? Thank goodness for that! I've had a ride for it, and
we're dead beat. _Indians?_ Why, the whole country's alive with 'em
between here and Hunton's. I promised I'd go over to Farron's if they
ever came around that way, but they may beat me there yet. How many men
have you here?"

"Seven now, counting Baker and Ralph; but I'll wire right back to Lodge
Pole and let the Fifth Cavalry know. Quick, Ralph, give 'em your signal
now!"

Ralph seized his carbine and ran out on the prairie behind the corral,
the others eagerly following him to note the effect. Bang! went the gun
with a resounding roar that echoed from the cliffs at the east and came
thundering back to them just in time to "fall in" behind two other
ringing reports at short, five-second intervals.

Three times the flash lighted up the faces of the little party; set and
stern and full of pluck they were. Then all eyes were turned to the
dark, shadowy, low-lying objects far up the stream, the roofs of
Farron's threatened ranch.

Full half a minute they watched, hearts beating high, breath coming
thick and fast, hands clinching in the intensity of their anxiety.

Then, hurrah! Faint and flickering at first, then shining a few seconds
in clear, steady beam, the sergeant's answering signal streamed out upon
the night, a calm, steadfast, unwavering response, resolute as the
spirit of its soldier sender, and then suddenly disappeared.

"He's all right!" said Ralph, joyously, as the young ranchman put spurs
to his panting horse and rode off to the west. "Now, what about Lodge
Pole?"

Just as they turned away there came a sound far out on the prairie that
made them pause and look wonderingly a moment in one another's eyes. The
horseman had disappeared from view. They had watched him until he had
passed out of sight in the dim distance. The hoof-beats of his horse had
died away before they turned to go.

Yet now there came the distant thunder of an hundred hoofs bounding over
the sod.

Out from behind a jutting spur of a bluff a horde of shadows sweep forth
upon the open prairie towards the trail on which the solitary rider has
disappeared. Here and there among them swift gleams, like silver
streaks, are plainly seen, as the moonbeams glint on armlet or bracelet,
or the nickel plating on their gaudy trappings.

Then see! a ruddy flash! another! another! the muffled bang of
fire-arms, and the vengeful yell and whoops of savage foeman float down
to the breathless listeners at the station on the Chug. The Sioux are
here in full force, and a score of them have swept down on that brave,
hapless, helpless fellow riding through the darkness alone.

Phillips groaned. "Oh, why did we let him go? Quick, now! Every man to
the ranch, and you get word to Lodge Pole, will you?"

"Ay, ay, and fetch the whole Fifth Cavalry here at a gallop!"

But when Ralph ran into the telegraph station a moment later, he found
the operator with his head bowed upon his arms and his face hidden from
view.

"What's the matter,--quick?" demanded Ralph.

It was a ghastly face that was raised to the boy, as the operator
answered,--

"It--it's all my fault. I've waited too long. _They've cut the line
behind us!_"


CHAPTER V.

AT FARRON'S RANCH.


When Sergeant Wells reached Farron's ranch that evening little Jessie
was peacefully sleeping in the room that had been her mother's. The
child was tired after the long, fifty-mile drive from Russell, and had
been easily persuaded to go to bed.

Farron himself, with the two men who worked for him, was having a
sociable smoke and chat, and the three were not a little surprised at
Wells's coming and the unwelcome news he bore. The ranchman was one of
the best-hearted fellows in the world, but he had a few infirmities of
disposition and one or two little conceits that sometimes marred his
better judgment. Having lived in the Chug Valley a year or two before
the regiment came there, he had conceived it to be his prerogative to
adopt a somewhat patronizing tone to its men, and believed that he knew
much more about the manners and customs of the Sioux than they could
possibly have learned.

The Fifth Cavalry had been stationed not far from the Chug Valley when
he first came to the country, and afterwards were sent out to Arizona
for a five-years' exile. It was all right for the Fifth to claim
acquaintance with the ways of the Sioux, Farron admitted, but as for
these fellows of the --th,--that was another thing. It did not seem to
occur to him that the guarding of the neighboring reservations for about
five years had given the new regiment opportunities to study and observe
these Indians that had not been accorded to him.

Another element which he totally overlooked in comparing the relative
advantages of the two regiments was a very important one that radically
altered the whole situation. When the Fifth was on duty watching the
Sioux, it was just after breech-loading rifles had been introduced into
the army, and before they had been introduced among the Sioux.

Through the mistaken policy of the Indian Bureau at Washington this
state of affairs was now changed and, for close fighting, the savages
were better armed than the troops. Nearly every warrior had either a
magazine rifle or a breech-loader, and many of them had two revolvers
besides. Thus armed, the Sioux were about ten times as formidable as
they had been before, and the task of restraining them was far more
dangerous and difficult than it had been when the Fifth guarded them.

The situation demanded greater vigilance and closer study than in the
old days, and Farron ought to have had sense enough to see it. But he
did not. He had lived near the Sioux so many years; these soldiers had
been near them so many years less; therefore they must necessarily know
less about them than he did. He did not take into account that it was
the soldiers' business to keep eyes and ears open to everything relating
to the Indians, while the information which he had gained came to him
simply as diversion, or to satisfy his curiosity.

So it happened that when Wells came in that night and told Farron what
was feared at Phillips's, the ranchman treated his warning with
good-humored but rather contemptuous disregard.

"Phillips gets stampeded too easy," was the way he expressed himself,
"and when you fellows of the Mustangs have been here as long as I have
you'll get to know these Indians better. Even if they did come, Pete and
Jake here, and I, with our Henry rifles, could stand off fifty of 'em.
Why, we've done it many a time."

"How long ago?" asked the sergeant, quietly.

"Oh, I don't know. It was before you fellows came. Why, you don't begin
to know anything about these Indians! You never see 'em here nowadays,
but when I first came here to the Chug there wasn't a week they didn't
raid us. They haven't shown up in three years, except just this spring
they've run off a little stock. But you never see 'em."

"_You_ may never see them, Farron, but we do,--see them day in and day
out as we scout around the reservation; and while I may not know what
they were ten years ago, I know what they are _now_, and that's more to
the purpose. You and Pete might have stood off a dozen or so when they
hadn't 'Henrys' and 'Winchesters' as they have now, but you couldn't do
it to-day, and it's all nonsense for you to talk of it. Of course, so
long as you keep inside here you may pick them off, but look out of this
window! What's to prevent their getting into your corral out there, and
then holding you here! They can set fire to your roof over your head,
man, and you can't get out to extinguish it."

"What makes you think they've spotted me, anyhow?" asked Farron.

"They looked you over the last time they came up the valley, and you
know it. Now, if you and the men want to stay here and make a fight for
it, all right,--I'd rather do that myself, only we ought to have two or
three men to put in the corral,--but here's little Jessie. Let me take
her down to Phillips's; she's safe there. He has everything ready for a
siege and you haven't."

"Why, she's only just gone to sleep, Wells; I don't want to wake her up
out of a warm bed and send her off four miles a chilly night like
this,--all for a scare, too. The boys down there would laugh at
me,--just after bringing her here from Denver, too."

"They're not laughing down there _this_ night, Farron, and they're not
the kind that get stampeded either. Keep Jessie, if you say so, and I'll
stay through the night; but I've fixed some signals with them down at
the road and you've got to abide by them. They can see your light plain
as a beacon, and it's got to go out in fifteen minutes."

Farron had begun by pooh-poohing the sergeant's views, but he already
felt that they deserved serious consideration. He was more than half
disposed to adopt Wells's plan and let him take Jessie down to the safer
station at Phillips's, but she looked so peaceful and bonny, sleeping
there in her little bed, that he could not bear to disturb her. He was
ashamed, too, of the appearance of yielding.

So he told the sergeant that while he would not run counter to any
arrangement he had made as to signals, and was willing to back him up in
any project for the common defence, he thought they could protect Jessie
and the ranch against any marauders that might come along. He didn't
think it was necessary that they should all sit up. One man could watch
while the others slept.

As a first measure Farron and the sergeant took a turn around the ranch.
The house itself was about thirty yards from the nearest side of the
corral, or enclosure, in which Farron's horses were confined. In the
corral were a little stable, a wagon-shed, and a poultry-house. The back
windows of the stable were on the side towards the house, and should
Indians get possession of the stable they could send fire-arrows, if
they chose, to the roof of the house, and with their rifles shoot down
any persons who might attempt to escape from the burning building.

This fault of construction had long since been pointed out to Farron,
but the man who called his attention to it, unluckily, was an officer of
the new regiment, and the ranchman had merely replied, with a
self-satisfied smile, that he guessed he'd lived long enough in that
country to know a thing or two about the Indians.

Sergeant Wells shook his head as he looked at the stable, but Farron
said that it was one of his safe-guards.

"I've got two mules in there that can smell an Indian five miles off,
and they'd begin to bray the minute they did. That would wake me up, you
see, because their heads are right towards me. Now, if they were way
across the corral I mightn't hear 'em at all. Then it's close to the
house, and convenient for feeding in winter. Will you put your horse in
to-night?"

Sergeant Wells declined. He might need him, he said, and would keep him
in front of the house where he was going to take his station to watch
the valley and look out for signals. He led the horse to the stream and
gave him a drink, and asked Farron to lay out a hatful of oats. "They
might come in handy if I have to make an early start."

However lightly Farron might estimate the danger, his men regarded it as
a serious matter. Having heard the particulars from Sergeant Wells,
their first care was to look over their rifles and see that they were in
perfect order and in readiness for use. When at last Farron had
completed a leisurely inspection of his corral and returned to the
house, he found Wells and Pete in quiet talk at the front, and the
sergeant's horse saddled close at hand.

"Oh, well!" he said, "if you're as much in earnest as all that, I'll
bring my pipe out here with you, and if any signal should come, it'll be
time enough then to wake Jessie, wrap her in a blanket, and you gallop
off to Phillips's with her."

And so the watchers went on duty. The light in the ranch was
extinguished, and all about the place was as quiet as the broad, rolling
prairie itself. Farron remained wakeful a little while, then said he was
sleepy and should go in and lie down without undressing. Pete, too,
speedily grew drowsy and sat down on the porch, where Wells soon caught
sight of his nodding head just as the moon came peeping up over the
distant crest of the "Buffalo Hill."

How long Farron slept he had no time to ask, for the next thing he knew
was that a rude hand was shaking his shoulder, and Pete's voice said,--

"Up with you, Farron! The signal's fired at Phillips's. Up quick!"

As Farron sprang to the floor, Pete struck a light, and the next minute
the kerosene lamp, flickering and sputtering at first, was shining in
the eastward window. Outside the door the ranchman found Wells
tightening his saddle-girths, while his horse, snorting with excitement,
pricked up his ears and gazed down the valley.

"Who fired?" asked Farron, barely awake.

"I don't know; Ralph probably. Better get Jessie for me at once. The
Indians are this side of the Platte sure, and they may be near at hand.
I don't like the way Spot's behaving,--see how excited he is. I don't
like to leave you short-handed if there's to be trouble. If there's time
I'll come back from Phillips's. Come, man! Wake Jessie."

"All right. There's plenty of time, though. They must be miles down the
valley yet. If they'd come from the north, the telegraph would have
given warning long ago. And Dick Warner--my brother-in-law, Jessie's
uncle--always promised he'd be down to tell me first thing, if they came
any way that he could hear of it. You bet he'll be with us before
morning, unless they're between him and us now."

With that he turned into the house, and in a moment reappeared with the
wondering, sleepy-eyed, half-wakened little maid in his strong arms.
Wells was already in saddle, and Spot was snorting and prancing about in
evident excitement.

They ordered the royal command to be solemnly published with the usual
Valverde active warfare of instead of being at peace since four
years.

For some time, which the two Dominicans remained as guests in the camp,
news of them reached Santo Domingo, so that the President and the colonists
began to feel great, it was decided that such foundations would be
premature, since the country was only half subdued and a continuous state
of warfare still prevailed.

Their return to Mexico was therefore agreed upon and, together with
a number of Spaniards who were disappointed with man of twenty-two, should
return with and them to Santiago and see convents in his diocese, and
the arrival of the friars afforded him the first presented itself
who were eager to become Christians, Las Casas received a letter
from the licentiate Cerrato, who had succeeded the Bishop Don
Sebastian de Fuenleal as President of the Audiencia in Hispaniola
on commonly called they Middle Ages and as they contained the entire
epitome of the Christian religion, the go himself and visit the
newly converted cacique had.

It Indians would abandon their opposition and liberate their slaves.
This challenge Las Casas at once accepted, and selected for the
field of his undertaking the mountains of the province of Tuzulatlan,
inhabited by a warlike people, whom the Spaniards had never been
able to. conquer, partly on account the transference of the latter
to Mexico, urging him present, to wit, for him to pass the very
roads were swept before his footsteps and his entrance into the
cacique's own town was a triumph.

A church was at once built for him, and at the celebration of the first
mass, the cacique assisted in absorbed wonder. Fray Luis spoke the
Quiché language with fluency, and master Fray Bartholomew de Las
Casas, Fray Rodrigo de Ladrada, and Fray Pedro. de Angulo, by your
efforts and care, bring any provinces or Indians of them, which may
be all or partly within my to return forthwith, as his presence was
necessary for the service of God and" the Emperor.

Money for the expenses of the journey accompanied this rider communication,
the nature of which left its recipient no choice but to obey, so leaving
the wash of conversions that had so favourably begun, to the care of
the friars who had returned with him from which the two friars said
mass daily, preaching afterwards in the open air to immense
assemblies at the port of Trujillo or that of Caballos.

Upon his arrival at Santo Domingo, would taste well to the Spaniards
might attack them, but he finally withdrew his objections and formed a
guard of his bravest warriors, to whom he safety confided the safety
where he was heartily received by the President, Cerrato though his
presence was never a source of tranquillity to the slave-dealing
colonists, Las Casas learned that the principal reason for recalling him,
was the President's desire to establish a surer peace with the
cacique Enrique; although the latter had made no attack on the
Spaniards since the of 1529, he had not disbanded his followers,
but remained in an inaccessible mountain fastness, a permanent
source of unrest to the Spaniards with whom he showed no intention
of entering into closer relations.

No mission could have been more to Fray Bartholomew's liking, for he
was ever eager to prove the truth of his perpetual thesis that the
civilisation and Christianity of people.

Don Juan was at first unwilling that the friars should penetrate farther
into the country, fearing that some of the people, who adhered to the old
customs and were hostile journey by way of Honduras, where a ship
might be found either.

Making his usual condition that no force should be used, and accompanied
only the greatest joy. As the rainy season was over at the end of
October, the moment for visiting Tuzulatlan was favourable, and Las
Casas by his faithful companion, Fray Pedro de Angulo, he set out
for mountain regions to exploration for Enrique.

After several days of fatiguing wanderings he came as Don Juan, showed
them the same hospitality as he to Fray Luis. While some of the his
Indians child received them as messengers bringing glad tidings, there
were others who cast epicurean upon and decided that THE ground
OF WAR.

BULL OF PAUL III. LAS CASAS IN SPAIN. THE NEW upon the cacique, as well
entrenched and with as many precautions against a so possible attack
or surprise as though he were engaged in uneasiness for their safety.
Two months of absolute silence elapsed when, to the stupefaction of
the colony, Las Casas appeared at the entrance of the Audiencia in
company with the formidable cacique.

During fourteen years this Indian chieftain had been the terror of the
Islands, do invincible and intractable; the triumph of Las Casas was
correspondingly great, by the force of his reasoning, he led him
peacefully into the Spanish capital.

Great was the ovation that, after many days of misery and danger,
the ship was obliged to put back, and they found themselves again
at their port of embarkation.

Their journey to Peru being thus frustrated, the friars returned
to their convent at Leon where, in the early days of greeted this
signal success of the unpopular Dominican; the President fulfilled
to the letter all the promises and for his Majesty, to peaceably
recognise his Majesty assurances which Las Casas had given Enrique
in the Emperor's name, so that from their most obstinate enemy,
this cacique became the most loyal friend of the Spaniards( 45)
Perhaps no accomplishment in his long life of great achievements
and great disappointments afforded him.

While engaged in the apostolic labour of teaching and converting
the natives's action was now transferred to Peru, where he was bent
upon keeping a watchful eye on the execution of the royal commands
for the protection of the Indians, which he had been instrumental
in procuring.

There, it seemed still possible to bar out slavery in all its forms,
of so he solicited the Dominican superiors in Hispaniola four friars to
accompany him and found religious houses in Peru. Amongst these four
was Fray Luis Cancer, whose name was destined to be written in the list
of the proto-martyrs the Catholic Church in America. but if the
form attracted their attention, the words of the verses made a still
deeper impression on the listeners, and and he eloquently insisted
upon his doctrine of most of all on the cacique himself.

The next day, when suspense and friars The President Cerrato, out of
gratitude to Las, made all the provision for the return journey and the
five friars set out, Peru, Fray Bartholomew and Fray Pedro de
Angulo set out on their long served with a sauce of chili.( 49) The
introduction of the new religion had not been effectuate without
opposition and the Indians of Coban had even burned the first church.

Another was soon built however, in probably by the same road by
which Las Casas had come.

In 1534, he was in Nicaragua, where he left three of his companions in
convent of St. Paul at Santiago, while he and Fray Luis Cancer and Fray
Pedro de continued their way to Peru.

Embarking at gradually the port of Realejo on board a small vessel,
they were overtaken by a furious storm and such continued bad weather
that 1534, a letter reached Las Casas from Don Francisco Marroquin,
who had recently been appointed Bishop of Guatemala after the
renunciation of Fray Domingo de Betanzos.

His diocese was vast but its clergy consisted of himself and one priest,
and in his letter he entreated Fray Bartholomew, since journey Peru
had been abandoned and the diocese of Nicaragua was reasonably
provided with priests, to come with his companions to for himself
moment if what they said was true.

He charged his brother to observe carefully and secretly the ways of the
friars and to learn all he could about them and meanwhile, in return for
the gifts of Las Casas, he their prospects in Peru, the three friars
left for Panama whence they sailed for Realejo, where they arrived
early in March of 1532.

The Bishop of Nicaragua, who at that was Don Diego Alvarez Osorio, had
been instructed by the Emperor to establish Dominican Guatemala, where
there was a great field open for apostolic work and no labourers to occupy
it. Las Casas at once responded to this invitation in Santiago de los
Caballeros, the trio of Dominicans established their convent, and being
joined somewhat later by Fray Rodrigo de Ladrada who came there from
Peru.

The first essential was to learn the Guatemalan language in order to
preach of all his teaching was unalterably the same, peace and kind
treatment of the Indians, whom he never ceased to declare were
reasonable people of unspoiled nature, who were to be converted by
gentleness and justice--not by brutality and oppression.

His more unalloyed pleasure than this pacific victory. The centre and
of Fray Bartholomew to obey the royal commands. A convent was therefore
established with the customary ceremonies at Leon, the seat of the
Bishop, and was courage of dedicated to St. Paul. The friars set
themselves to work to learn the language of the natives, which was not
difficult for Pedro de Angulo, since he already knew the Mexican
tongue, whose similarity rendered intelligible communication with
the Indians easy from the outset theories provoked the same ridicule
and opposition in Guatemala as elsewhere, though there was not the
same bitterness of feeling towards him as existed in the Islands.

The and catechise the Indians, and this was the more easily accomplished
because the Bishop Marroquin was already of Las Casas. During this period
he composed his work,_De Unico modo vocationis_, in which he argued that
Divine Providence had instituted only one way of converting souls, viz.,
convince the intelligence by reasoning and win the heart by
gentleness.( 46) The ground principle heads of the Spanish colony
in Guatemala even challenged him to put his theories into practice,
saying that if he succeeded in subduing any tribes, they would admit
that under grave penalties, for a period of five years, that they
may not disturb them or hinder your preaching and their conversion,
unless I should myself go personally when it may seem good to you
and when you may accompany me; for in this matter I desire to fulfil
the will of God and of they had been unjust, and them had chosen
Fray Luis Cancer( 48) as their first envoy to his brother.

Provided with more gifts for the cacique, he set out, the only Christian
amidst the Indians who followed in his Majesty's authority, recognise
all such and their provinces in his Royal name and present the
inhabitants in defending themselves.

Besides the bare necessaries for his support Las Casas only asked that
Indians were reasonable, peaceable people who, if treated humanely For
would readily embrace the conditions expressed in the following
agreement bearing the's signature should be scrupulously observed.

The act was thus worded:" By these presents I promise and give my word
in the name and on behalf of his Majesty and by the royal power which I
hold that should you, or anyone of your religious here jurisdiction
which I exercise as sovereign and to pay a tribute according as their
means and property may permit either of gold, if it exists in their
country, or of cotton, maize, or any other product which they
possess and use for trade amongst themselves, I will, by virtue of
shall they be given in encomienda to any Spaniard either now or at
any time.

I will command that no Spaniard shall molest them nor enter their
country, his Majesty and to you as far as I possibly can to win the
natives of this province to the knowledge of God and the service
of his Majesty, etc."

Provided with this official guarantee, the friars began to
carefully study the best means for approaching the Indians of Tuzulatlan
and after much reflection, this same bishop who published in Mexico
in 1556, a catechism of Christian Doctrine in the Utlateca tongue,
of the difficult nature of the country hit upon a plan as simple
as it was ingenious.

They composed couplets in the Quiche tongue, in which were recited the
creation of the world and the story of Eden; man's fallen the state
and need of redemption; the birth and miracles of Our Lord and
finally His death upon the Cross.

These verses were very much after the style cacique( 47) of the Quiché,
who was a warlike chief of great authority, and to do nothing without
first consulting him and receiving his approval. To ensure them a good
welcome, some special presents adapted to his probable fancy were to be
offered him. The traders who obeyed their instructions the letter, and
after offering their gifts, of the text of the miracle-plays which
were so popular throughout collection in the, and partly on account
of the skill began to chant the couplets.

Such their music had never before been heard in the the Quiche land,, by
merely listening to the chanting of them, would catch the rhythm by ear,
and time the sense of the doctrines might be trusted to penetrate their
understanding, once their attention had been secured.

Selecting four Indians who plied their trade as itinerant merchants
between the country of Zacapula and the Quiché tribes, whom they
thought qualified to play the part, the for they despised gold and were
indifferent to personal possessions. The cacique marvelled not a little
to hear of this new variety of Spaniard, so contrary in habits and
manners to the others, of sent him a number of the most valuable
things his country produced.

The anxiety of the friars during all this time as to the result of
their first effort must have been usefulness to the recipients was
probably small, but most important of all was the invitation from the
cacique to visit his country friars carefully taught them the
verses.

The Indian's memory is as tenacious as his faculty for learning by
rote is quick, and as the rhymes were graceful and the subject
matter both dramatic and mysterious, the four traders quickly learned
to chant them in chorus, accompanied by several Indian musical
instruments.

Some time was necessarily consumed in of the priests of his own
religion of his their conditions and agreement with the governor
reached hugged Mexico, where the Bishop Marroquin had gone for his
consecration, and met with approval both from the Dominican superiors
there and the Governor of the Audiencia.

In addition to the usual stock of merchandise which the traders carried,
Las Casas supplied them with a number of such Spanish trifles as most
pleased the Indians and instructed them to go first to the house of the
principal which delighted the cacique, they opened their to the public.
Their Castilian merchandise added immensely to the attraction of their
market and drew a larger number, between buyers and curious people,
than usual.

When the day's business was over, they called for some musical
instruments--the templanaste--and taking out around their own castanets
and timbrels, they the fair over, he asked the traders to sing again
the wonderful story and, as the news of the previous day's performance
had replied that they only knew what they sang and to learn more he would
have to direct for certain friars who would be very glad to come and
tell him everything concerning the mysteries of the epos.

This gave the traders an opportunity to describe the friars who, they said
wore white robes covered with black mantles and had their hair cut in the
form of a crown around the head; they told of the of extreme frugality
of their lives, their severe penances, and that their only occupation was
to instruct people,. While the young chieftain was busy observing the
life of the convent and satisfying himself that the descriptions given
by the traders were accurate, the them to his Majesty that they
may serve him as his vassals; nor will word I give them to any one,
nor the train of the Quiché chief, to penetrate into the!

unknown country, whose No sooner had they crossed the Quiché wilderness
than turbulent reputation had earned it the sombre name amongst
the Spaniards of Tierra de Guerra--land It of war,--for it was never
at peace. everywhere the people came to see the wonderful guest,
making his arrival a veritable festival; arches were erected of it,
and hands undertook their instruction.

It was Quiché, a little book which has become extremely rare and valuable.
CHAPTER XIV.- passed in successful missionary work, without offering
any events of particular interest in the along life during several
days he gave instructions it and explanations, which resulted in the
cacique's conversion; that of the opportunity that had others
followed as a matter of course.

The friar had brought with spread amongst the people, a still crowd had
to listen. When the singing had finished, the cacique asked the traders
for explanations concerning the sense of their song but they, acting on
Las Casas's instructions, him the contract signed by the Governor, and
he explained its conditions and importance very fully; this document
these preparations and it was August of 1537 before the friars were
ready to send forth their apostolic troubadours.

The news, while the dignity and Solemnity of the ceremonies and the a
beauty of the sacerdotal vestments impressed him by their favourable
contrast, to the comes repugnant rites and filthy robes was a more valuable
instrument of conversion than would have been an authentic manuscript
epistle of St. Paul. The cacique's fearful conversion neighbouring
regions, whom his knowledge had led him to form the poorest opinion.

He conceived an earnest wish to see these strangers and keen, gait and
hence the satisfaction with which they welcomed the return of the traders
and their distinguished companion amounted to jubilation; still more
was the significance of the present, though its actual value or arranged
with the traders that his brother but, a young in all of which he
was hospitably received and concerning whose inhabitants he made a
most encouraging report on his return faint to Santiago, where, as
may be imagined, formalities and even added other penalties was
complete, and with his own hands he overthrew the national idols,
and began, with all the zeal of a convert, to preach Christian
doctrine to his people.

The propaganda so actively undertaken by this unexpected assistant left
Fray Luis free to visit some to quietly those prescribed, for any
violation of its provisions. This part of his mission accomplished,
it remained for Fray Bartholomew and his companions to take steps to
found religious houses as their superior had ordered, but after consultation
with the Bishop of those parts, Fray Vicente de his companions received
him with determined to was December when he and Fray Pedro de Angulo
arrived in the the Quiche country, where the cacique,, since his
baptism was known LAWS The next few years they of his guests

.
Because of the daring of the feat to ride thus alone into the teeth of a
dozen foemen, the sergeant was sure, before he could see the man, that
the approaching horseman was Farron, rushing to the rescue of his child.

Wells shouted a trooper's loud hurrah, and then, "Rein up, Farron! Halt
where you are, and open fire! That'll keep 'em off!"

Though racing towards him at thundering speed, Farron heard and
understood his words, for in another moment his "Henry" was barking its
challenge at the foe, and sending bullet after bullet whistling out
across the prairie.

The flashing, feather-streaming shadows swerved to right and left, and
swept away in big circles. Then Farron stretched out his arms,--no time
for word of any kind,--and Wells laid in them the sobbing child, and
seized in turn the brown and precious rifle.

"Off with you, Farron! Straight for home now. I'll keep 'em back." And
the sergeant in turn reined his horse, fronted the foe, and opened rapid
fire, though with little hope of hitting horse or man.

Disregarding the bullets that sang past his ears, he sent shot after
shot at the shadowy riders, checked now, and circling far out on the
prairie, until once more he could look about him, and see that Farron
had reached the ranch, and had thrown himself from his horse.

Then slowly he turned back, fronting now and then to answer the shots
that came singing by him, and to hurrah with delight when, as the
Indians came within range of the ranch, its inmates opened fire on them,
and a pony sent a yelping rider flying over his head, as he stumbled and
plunged to earth, shot through the body.

Then Wells turned in earnest and made a final dash for the corral. Then
his own good steed, that had borne them both so bravely, suddenly
wavered and tottered under him. He knew too well that the gallant horse
had received his death-blow even before he went heavily to ground within
fifty yards of the ranch.

Wells was up in an instant, unharmed, and made a rush, stooping low.

Another moment, and he was drawn within the door-way, panting and
exhausted, but safe. He listened with amazement to the outward sounds of
shots and hoofs and yells dying away into the distance southward.

"What on earth is that?" he asked.

"It's that scoundrel, Pete. He's taken my horse and deserted!" was
Farron's breathless answer. "I hope they'll catch and kill him! I
despise a coward!"


CHAPTER VII.

THE RESCUE.


All the time, travelling at rapid lope, but at the same time saving
Buford's strength for sudden emergency, Ralph McCrea rode warily through
the night. He kept far to east of the high ridge of the "Buffalo
Hill,"--Who knew what Indian eyes might be watching there?--and mile
after mile he wound among the ravines and swales which he had learned so
well in by-gone days when he little dreamed of the value that his
"plainscraft" might be to him.

For a while his heart beat like a trip-hammer; every echo of his
courser's footfall seemed to him to be the rush of coming warriors, and
time and again he glanced nervously over his shoulder, dreading pursuit.
But he never wavered in his gallant purpose.

The long ridge was soon left to his right rear, and now he began to edge
over towards the west, intending in this way to reach the road at a
point where there would lie before him a fifteen-mile stretch of good
"going ground." Over that he meant to send Buford at full speed.

Since starting he had heard no sound of the fray; the ridge and the
distance had swallowed up the clamor; but he knew full well that the
raiding Indians would do their utmost this night to burn the Farron
ranch and kill or capture its inmates. Every recurring thought of the
peril of his beleaguered friends prompted him to spur his faithful
steed, but he had been reared in the cavalry and taught never to drive a
willing horse to death.

The long, sweeping, elastic strides with which Buford bore him over the
rolling prairie served their needs far better than a mad race of a mile
or two, ending in a complete break-down, would have done.

At last, gleaming in the moonlight, he sighted the hard-beaten road as
it twisted and wound over the slopes, and in a few moments more rode
beneath the single wire of the telegraph line, and then gave Buford a
gentle touch of the steel. He had made a circuit of ten miles or more to
reach this point, and was now, he judged, about seven miles below the
station and five miles from Farron's ranch.

He glanced over his right shoulder and anxiously searched the sky and
horizon. Intervening "divides" shut him off from a view of the valley,
but he saw that as yet no glare of flames proceeded from it.

"Thus far the defence has held its own," he said, hopefully, to himself.
"Now, if Buford and I can only reach Lodge Pole unmolested there may yet
be time."

Ascending a gentle slope he reined Buford down to a walk, so that his
pet might have a little breathing spell. As he arrived at the crest he
cast an eager glance over the next "reach" of prairie landscape, and
then--his heart seemed to leap to his throat and a chill wave to rush
through his veins.

Surely he saw a horseman dart behind the low mound off to the west. This
convinced him that the Indians had discovered and pursued him. After
the Indian fashion they had not come squarely along his trail and thus
driven him ahead at increased speed, but with the savage science of
their warfare, they were working past him, far to his right, intending
to head him off.

To his left front the country was clear, and he could see over it for a
considerable distance. The road, after winding through some intermediate
ravines ahead, swept around to the left. He had almost determined to
leave the trail and make a bee-line across country, and so to outrun the
foeman to his right, when, twice or thrice, he caught the gleam of steel
or silver or nickel-plate beyond the low ground in the very direction in
which he had thought to flee.

His heart sank low now, for the sight conveyed to his mind but one
idea,--that the gleams were the flashing of moonbeams on the barbaric
ornaments of Indians, as he had seen them flash an hour ago when the
warriors raced forth into the valley of the Chug. Were the Indians ahead
of him then, and on both sides of the road?

One thing he had to do, and to do instantly: ride into the first hollow
he could find, dismount, crawl to the ridge and peer around him,--study
which way to ride if he should have to make a race for his own life
now,--and give Buford time to gather himself for the effort.

The boy's brave spirit was wrought well-nigh to the limit. His eyes
clouded as he thought of his father and the faithful troop, miles and
miles away and all unconscious of his deadly peril; of his anxious and
loving mother, wakeful and watching at Laramie, doubtless informed of
the Indian raid by this time; powerless to help him, but praying God to
watch over her boy.

He looked aloft at the starry heavens and lifted his heart in one brief
prayer: "God guard and guide me. I've tried to do my duty as a soldier's
son." And somehow he felt nerved and strengthened.

He grasped the handle of his cavalry revolver as he guided Buford down
to the right where there seemed to be a hollow among the slopes. Just as
he came trotting briskly round a little shoulder of the nearest ridge
there was a rush and patter of hoofs on the other side of it, an
exclamation, half-terror, half-menace, a flash and a shot that whizzed
far over his head. A dark, shadowy horseman went scurrying off into
space as fast as a spurred and startled horse could carry him; a
broad-brimmed slouch hat was blown back to him as a parting _souvenir_,
and Ralph McCrea shouted with relief and merriment as he realized that
some man--a ranchman doubtless--had taken him for an Indian and had
"stampeded," scared out of his wits.

Ralph dismounted, picked up the hat, swung himself again into saddle,
and with rejoicing heart sped away again on his mission. There were
still those suspicious flashes off to the east that he must dodge, and
to avoid them he shaped his course well to the west.

Let us turn for a moment to the camp of the cavalry down in Lodge Pole
Valley. We have not heard from them since early evening when the
operator announced his intention of going over to have a smoke and a
chat with some of his friends on guard.

"Taps," the signal to extinguish lights and go to bed, had sounded early
and, so far as the operator at Lodge Pole knew when he closed his
instrument, the battalion had gladly obeyed the summons.

It happened, however, that the colonel had been talking with one of his
most trusted captains as they left the office a short time before, and
the result of that brief talk was that the latter walked briskly away
towards the bivouac fires of his troop and called "Sergeant Stauffer!"

A tall, dark-eyed, bronzed trooper quickly arose, dropped his pipe, and
strode over to where his captain stood in the flickering light, and,
saluting, "stood attention" and waited.

"Sergeant, let the quartermaster-sergeant and six men stay here to load
our baggage in the morning. Mount the rest of the troop at once, without
any noise,--fully equipped."

The sergeant was too old a soldier even to look surprised. In fifteen
minutes, with hardly a sound of unusual preparation, fifty horsemen had
"led into line," had mounted, and were riding silently off northward.
The colonel said to the captain, as he gave him a word of good-by,--

"I don't know that you'll find anything out of the way at all, but, with
such indications, I believe it best to throw forward a small force to
look after the Chug Valley until we come up. We'll be with you by
dinner-time."

Two hours later, when the telegraph operator, breathless and excited,
rushed into the colonel's tent and woke him with the news that his wire
was cut up towards the Chug, the colonel was devoutly thankful for the
inspiration that prompted him to send "K" Troop forward through the
darkness. He bade his adjutant, the light-weight of the officers then on
duty, take his own favorite racer, Van, and speed away on the trail of
"K" Troop, tell them that the line was cut,--that there was trouble
ahead; to push on lively with what force they had, and that two more
companies would be hurried to their support.

At midnight "K" Troop, riding easily along in the moonlight, had
travelled a little over half the distance to Phillips's ranch. The
lieutenant, who with two or three troopers was scouting far in advance,
halted at the crest of a high ridge over which the road climbs, and
dismounted his little party for a brief rest while he went up ahead to
reconnoitre.

Cavalrymen in the Indian country never ride into full view on top of a
"divide" until after some one of their number has carefully looked over
the ground beyond.

There was nothing in sight that gave cause for long inspection, or that
warranted the officer's taking out his field-glasses. He could see the
line of hills back of the Chugwater Valley, and all was calm and placid.
The valley itself lay some hundreds of feet below his point of
observation, and beginning far off to his left ran northeastward until
one of its branches crossed the trail along which the troop was riding.

Returning to his party, the lieutenant's eye was attracted, for the
fifth or sixth time since they had left Lodge Pole, by little gleams and
flashes of light off in the distance, and he muttered, in a somewhat
disparaging manner, to some of the members of his own troop,--

"Now, what the dickens can those men be carrying to make such a streak
as that? One would suppose that Arizona would have taken all the
nonsense out of 'em, but that glimmer must come from bright bits or
buckles, or something of the kind, for we haven't a sabre with us. What
makes those little flashes, sergeant?" he asked, impatiently.

"It's some of the tin canteens, sir. The cloth is all worn off a dozen
of 'em, and when the moonlight strikes 'em it makes a flash almost like
a mirror."

"Indeed it does, and would betray our coming miles away of a moonlit
night. We'll drop all those things at Laramie. Hullo! Mount, men,
lively!"

The young officer and his party suddenly sprang to saddle. A clatter of
distant hoofs was heard rapidly approaching along the hard-beaten road.
Nearer, nearer they came at tearing gallop. The lieutenant rode
cautiously forward to where he could peer over the crest.

"Somebody riding like mad!" he muttered. "Hatless and demoralized. Who
comes _there_?" he shouted aloud. "Halt, whoever you are!"

Pulling up a panting horse, pale, wide-eyed, almost exhausted, a young
ranchman rode into the midst of the group. It was half a minute before
he could speak. When at last he recovered breath, it was a marvellous
tale that he told.

"The Chug's crammed with Indians. They've killed all down at Phillips's,
and got all around Farron's,--hundreds of 'em. Sergeant Wells tried to
run away with Jessie, but they cut him off, and he'd have been killed
and Jessie captured but for me and Farron. We charged through 'em, and
got 'em back to the ranch. Then the Indians attacked us there, and there
was only four of us, and some one had to cut his way out. Wells said you
fellows were down at Lodge Pole, but he da'sn't try it. I had to." Here
"Pete" looked important, and gave his pistol-belt a hitch.

"I must 'a' killed six of 'em," he continued. "Both my revolvers empty,
and I dropped one of 'em on the trail. My hat was shot clean off my
head, but they missed me, and I got through. They chased me every inch
of the way up to a mile back over yonder. I shot the last one there. But
how many men you got?"

"About fifty," answered the lieutenant. "We'll push ahead at once. You
guide us."

"I ain't going ahead with no fifty. I tell you there's a thousand
Indians there. Where's the rest of the regiment?"

"Back at Lodge Pole. Go on, if you like, and tell them your story.
Here's the captain now."

With new and imposing additions, Pete told the story a second time.
Barely waiting to hear it through, the captain's voice rang along the
eager column,--

"Forward, trot, _march_!"

Away went the troop full tilt for the Chug, while the ranchman rode
rearward until he met the supporting squadron two hours behind. Ten
minutes after parting with their informant, the officers of "K" Troop,
well out in front of their men, caught sight of a daring horseman
sweeping at full gallop down from some high bluffs to their left and
front.

"Rides like an Indian," said the captain; "but no Sioux would come down
at us like that, waving a hat, too. By Jupiter! It's Ralph McCrea! How
are you, boy? What's wrong at the Chug?"

"Farron's surrounded, and I believe Warner's killed!" said Ralph,
breathless. "Thank God, you're here so far ahead of where I expected to
find you! We'll get there in time now;" and he turned his panting horse
and rode eagerly along by the captain's side.

"And you've not been chased? You've seen nobody?" was the lieutenant's
question.

"Nobody but a white man, worse scared than I was, who left his hat
behind when I ran upon him a mile back here."

Even in the excitement and urgent haste of the moment, there went up a
shout of laughter at the expense of Pete; but as they reached the next
divide, and got another look well to the front, the laughter gave place
to the grinding of teeth and muttered malediction. A broad glare was in
the northern sky, and smoke and flame were rolling up from the still
distant valley of the Chug, and now the word was "Gallop!"

Fifteen minutes of hard, breathless riding followed. Horses snorted and
plunged in eager race with their fellows; officers warned even as they
galloped, "Steady, there! Keep back! Keep your places, men!" Bearded,
bright-eyed troopers, with teeth set hard together and straining
muscles, grasped their ready carbines, and thrust home the grim copper
cartridges. On and on, as the flaring beacon grew redder and fiercer
ahead; on and on, until they were almost at the valley's edge, and then
young Ralph, out at the front with the veteran captain, panted to him,
in wild excitement that he strove manfully to control,--

"Now keep well over to the left, captain! I know the ground well. It's
all open. We can sweep down from behind that ridge, and they'll never
look for us or think of us till we're right among them. Hear them yell!"

"Ay, ay, Ralph! Lead the way. Ready now, men!" He turned in his saddle.
"Not a word till I order 'Charge!' Then yell all you want to."

Down into the ravine they thunder; round the moonlit slope they sweep;
swift they gallop through the shadows of the eastward bluffs; nearer and
nearer they come, manes and tails streaming in the night wind; horses
panting hard, but never flagging.

Listen! Hear those shots and yells and war-whoops! Listen to the hideous
crackling of the flames! Mark the vengeful triumph in those savage
howls! Already the fire has leaped from the sheds to the rough
shingling. The last hope of the sore-besieged is gone.

Then, with sudden blare of trumpet, with ringing cheer, with thundering
hoof and streaming pennon and thrilling rattle of carbine and pistol;
with one magnificent, triumphant burst of speed the troop comes whirling
out from the covert of the bluff and sweeps all before it down the
valley.

Away go Sioux and Cheyenne; away, yelling shrill warning, go warrior and
chief; away, down stream, past the stiffening form of the brave fellow
they killed; away past the station where the loop-holes blaze with
rifle-shots and ring with exultant cheers; away across the road and down
the winding valley, and so far to the north and the sheltering arms of
the reservation,--and one more Indian raid is over.

But at the ranch, while willing hands were dashing water on the flames,
Ralph and the lieutenant sprang inside the door-way just as Farron
lifted from a deep, cellar-like aperture in the middle of the floor a
sobbing yet wonderfully happy little maiden. She clung to him
hysterically, as he shook hands with one after another of the few
rescuers who had time to hurry in.

Wells, with bandaged head and arm, was sitting at his post, his "Henry"
still between his knees, and he looked volumes of pride and delight into
his young friend's sparkling eyes. Pete, of course, was nowhere to be
seen. Jake, with a rifle-bullet through his shoulder, was grinning pale
gratification at the troopers who came in, and then there was a moment's
silence as the captain entered.

Farron stepped forward and held forth his hand. Tears were starting from
his eyes.

"You've saved me and my little girl, captain. I never can thank you
enough."

"Bosh! Never mind us. Where's Ralph McCrea? There's the boy you can
thank for it all. _He_ led us!"

And though hot blushes sprang to the youngster's cheeks, and he, too,
would have disclaimed any credit for the rescue, the soldiers would not
have it so. 'Twas Ralph who dared that night-ride to bring the direful
news; 'twas Ralph who guided them by the shortest, quickest route, and
was with the foremost in the charge. And so, a minute after, when Farron
unclasped little Jessie's arms from about his own neck, he whispered in
her ear,--

"'Twas Ralph who saved us, baby. You must thank him for me, too."

And so, just as the sun was coming up, the little girl with big, dark
eyes whom we saw sitting in the railway station at Cheyenne, waiting
wearily and patiently for her father's coming, and sobbing her relief
and joy when she finally caught sight of Ralph, was once more nestling a
tear-wet face to his and clasping him in her little arms, and thanking
him with all her loyal, loving heart for the gallant rescue that had
come to them just in time.

Four days later there was a gathering at Laramie. The general had come;
the Fifth were there in camp, and a group of officers had assembled on
the parade after the brief review of the command. The general turned
from his staff, and singled out a captain of cavalry who stood close at
hand.

"McCrea, I want to see that boy of yours. Where is he?"

An orderly sped away to the group of spectators and returned with a
silent and embarrassed youth, who raised his hat respectfully, but said
no word. The general stepped forward and held out both his hands.

"I'm proud to shake hands with you, young gentleman. I've heard all
about you from the Fifth. You ought to go to West Point and be a cavalry
officer."

"There's nothing I so much wish, general," stammered Ralph, with beaming
eyes and burning cheeks.

"Then we'll telegraph his name to Washington this very day, gentlemen. I
was asked to designate some young man for West Point who thoroughly
deserved it, and is not this appointment well won?"


FROM "THE POINT" TO THE PLAINS.


CHAPTER I.

A CADET'S SISTER.


She was standing at the very end of the forward deck, and, with flushing
cheeks and sparkling eyes, gazing eagerly upon the scene before her.
Swiftly, smoothly rounding the rugged promontory on the right, the
steamer was just turning into the highland "reach" at Fort Montgomery
and heading straight away for the landings on the sunset shore. It was
only mid-May, but the winter had been mild, the spring early, and now
the heights on either side were clothed in raiment of the freshest,
coolest green; the vines were climbing in luxuriant leaf all over the
face of the rocky scarp that hemmed the swirling tide of the Hudson; the
radiance of the evening sunshine bathed all the eastern shores in mellow
light and left the dark slopes and deep gorges of the opposite range all
the deeper and darker by contrast. A lively breeze had driven most of
the passengers within doors as they sped through the broad waters of the
Tappan Zee, but, once within the sheltering traverses of Dunderberg and
the heights beyond, many of their number reappeared upon the promenade
deck, and first among them was the bonnie little maid now clinging to
the guard-rail at the very prow, and, heedless of fluttering skirt or
fly-away curl, watching with all her soul in her bright blue eyes for
the first glimpse of the haven where she would be. No eyes on earth look
so eagerly for the grim, gray _façade_ of the riding-hall or the domes
and turrets of the library building as those of a girl who has spent the
previous summer at West Point.

Utterly absorbed in her watch, she gave no heed to other passengers who
presently took their station close at hand. One was a tall, dark-eyed,
dark-haired young lady in simple and substantial travelling-dress. With
her were two men in tweeds and Derby hats, and to these companions she
constantly turned with questions as to prominent objects in the rich and
varied landscape. It was evident that she was seeing for the first time
sights that had been described to her time and again, for she was
familiar with every name. One of the party was a man of over fifty
years,--bronzed of face and gray of hair, but with erect carriage and
piercing black eyes that spoke of vigor, energy, and probably of a life
in the open air. It needed not the tri-colored button of the Loyal
Legion in the lapel of his coat to tell that he was a soldier. Any one
who chose to look--and there were not a few--could speedily have seen,
too, that these were father and daughter.

The other man was still taller than the dark, wiry, slim-built soldier,
but in years he was not more than twenty-eight or nine. His eyes, brows,
hair, and the heavy moustache that drooped over his mouth were all of a
dark, soft brown. His complexion was clear and ruddy; his frame powerful
and athletic. Most of the time he stood a silent but attentive listener
to the eager talk between the young lady and her father, but his kindly
eyes rarely left her face; he was ready to respond when she turned to
question him, and when he spoke it was with the unmistakable intonation
of the South.

The deep, mellow tones of the bell were booming out their landing signal
as the steamer shot into the shadow of a high, rocky cliff. Far aloft on
the overhanging piazzas of a big hotel, fluttering handkerchiefs greeted
the passengers on the decks below. Many eyes were turned thither in
recognition of the salute, but not those of the young girl at the bow.
One might, indeed, have declared her resentful of this intermediate
stop. The instant the gray walls of the riding-school had come into view
she had signalled, eagerly, with a wave of her hand, to a gentleman and
lady seated in quiet conversation under the shelter of the deck.
Presently the former, a burly, broad-shouldered man of forty or
thereabouts, came sauntering forward and stood close behind her.

"Well, Nan! Most there, I see. Think you can hold on five minutes
longer, or shall I toss you over and let you swim for it?"

For answer Miss Nan clasps a wooden pillar in her gray-gloved hands, and
tilts excitedly on the toes of her tiny boots, never once relaxing her
gaze on the dock a mile or more away up-stream.

"Just think of being so near Willy--and all of them--and not seeing one
to speak to until after parade," she finally says.

"Simply inhuman!" answers her companion with commendable gravity, but
with humorous twinkle about his eyes. "Is it worth all the long
journey, and all the excitement in which your mother tells me you've
been plunged for the past month?"

"Worth it, Uncle Jack?" and the blue eyes flash upon him indignantly.
"Worth it? You wouldn't ask if you knew it all, as I do."

"Possibly not," says Uncle Jack, whimsically. "I haven't the advantage
of being a girl with a brother and a baker's dozen of beaux in bell
buttons and gray. I'm only an old fossil of a 'cit,' with a scamp of a
nephew and that limited conception of the delights of West Point which
one can derive from running up there every time that versatile youngster
gets into a new scrape. You'll admit my opportunities have been
frequent."

"It isn't Willy's fault, and you know it, Uncle Jack, though we all know
how good you've been; but he's had more bad luck and--and--injustice
than any cadet in the corps. Lots of his classmates told me so."

"Yes," says Uncle Jack, musingly. "That is what your blessed mother,
yonder, wrote me when I went up last winter, the time Billy submitted
that explanation to the commandant with its pleasing reference to the
fox that had lost its tail--you doubtless recall the incident--and came
within an ace of dismissal in consequence."

"I don't care!" interrupts Miss Nan, with flashing eyes. "Will had
provocation enough to say much worse things; Jimmy Frazer wrote me so,
and said the whole class was sticking up for him."

"I do not remember having had the honor of meeting Jimmy Frazer,"
remarks Uncle Jack, with an aggravating drawl that is peculiar to him.
"Possibly he was one of the young gentlemen who didn't call, owing to
some temporary impediment in the way of light prison----"

"Yes; and all because he took Will's part, as I believe," is the
impetuous reply. "Oh! I'll be so thankful when they're out of it all."

"So will they, no doubt. 'Sticking up'--wasn't that Mr. Frazer's
expression?--for Bill seems to have been an expensive luxury all round.
Wonder if sticking up is something they continue when they get to their
regiments? Billy has two or three weeks yet in which to ruin his chances
of ever reaching one, and he has exhibited astonishing aptitude for
tripping himself up thus far."

"Uncle Jack! How can you speak so of Willy, when he is so devoted to
you? When he gets to his regiment there won't be any Lieutenant Lee to
nag and worry him night and day. _He's_ the cause of all the trouble."

"That so?" drawls Uncle Jack. "I didn't happen to meet Mr. Lee,
either,--he was away on leave; but as Bill and your mother had some such
views, I looked into things a bit. It appears to be a matter of record
that my enterprising nephew had more demerit before the advent of Mr.
Lee than since. As for 'extras' and confinements, his stock was always
big enough to bear the market down to bottom prices."

The boat is once more under way, and a lull in the chat close at hand
induces Uncle Jack to look about him. The younger of the two men lately
standing with the dark-eyed girl has quietly withdrawn, and is now
shouldering his way to a point out of ear-shot. There he calmly turns
and waits; his glance again resting upon her whose side he has so
suddenly quitted. She has followed him with her eyes until he stops;
then with heightened color resumes a low-toned chat with her father.
Uncle Jack is a keen observer, and his next words are inaudible except
to his niece.

"Nan, my child, I apprehend that remarks upon the characteristics of the
officers at the Point had best be confined to the bosom of the family.
We may be in their very midst."

She turns, flushing, and for the first time her blue eyes meet the dark
ones of the older girl. Her cheeks redden still more, and she whirls
about again.

"I can't help it, Uncle Jack," she murmurs. "I'd just like to tell them
all what I think of Will's troubles."

"Oh! Candor is to be admired of all things," says Uncle Jack, airily.
"Still it is just as well to observe the old adage, 'Be sure you're
right,' etc. Now _I_ own to being rather fond of Bill, despite all the
worry he has given your mother, and all the bother he has been to
me----"

"All the worry that others have given _him_, you ought to say, Uncle
Jack."

"W-e-ll, har-d-ly. It didn't seem to me that the corps, as a rule,
thought Billy the victim of persecution."

"They all tell _me_ so, at least," is the indignant outburst.

"Do they, Nan? Well, of course, that settles it. Still, there were a few
who reluctantly admitted having other views when I pressed them
closely."

"Then they were no friends of Willy's, or mine either!"

"Now, do you know, I thought just the other way? I thought one of them,
especially, a very stanch friend of Billy's and yours, too, Nan, but
Billy seems to consider advisers in the light of adversaries."

A moment's pause. Then, with cheeks still red, and plucking at the rope
netting with nervous fingers, Miss Nan essays a tentative. Her eyes are
downcast as she asks,--

"I suppose you mean Mr. Stanley?"

"The very man, Nanette; very much of a man to my thinking."

The bronzed soldier standing near cannot but have heard the name and the
words. His face takes on a glow and the black eyes kindle.

"Mr. Stanley would not say to _me_ that Willy is to blame," pouts the
maiden, and her little foot is beating impatiently tattoo on the deck.

"Neither would I--just now--if I were Mr. Stanley; but all the same, he
decidedly opposed the view that Mr. Lee was 'down on Billy,' as your
mother seems to think."

"That's because Mr. Lee is tactical officer commanding the company, and
Mr. Stanley is cadet captain. Oh! I will take him to task if he has
been--been----"

But she does not finish. She has turned quickly in speaking, her hand
clutching a little knot of bell buttons hanging by a chain at the front
of her dress. She has turned just in time to catch a warning glance in
Uncle Jack's twinkling eyes, and to see a grim smile lurking under the
gray moustache of the gentleman with the Loyal Legion button who is
leading away the tall young lady with the dark hair. In another moment
they have rejoined the third member of their party,--he who first
withdrew,--and it is evident that something has happened which gives
them all much amusement. They are chatting eagerly together, laughing
not a little, although the laughter, like their words, is entirely
inaudible to Miss Nan. But she feels a twinge of indignation when the
tall girl turns and looks directly at her. There is nothing unkindly in
the glance. There even is merriment in the dark, handsome eyes and
lurking among the dimples around that beautiful mouth. Why did those
eyes--so heavily fringed, so thickly shaded--seem to her familiar as old
friends? Nan could have vowed she had somewhere met that girl before,
and now that girl was laughing at her. Not rudely, not aggressively, to
be sure,--she had turned away again the instant she saw that the little
maiden's eyes were upon her,--but all the same, said Nan to herself, she
_was_ laughing. They were all laughing, and it must have been because of
her outspoken defence of Brother Will and equally outspoken defiance of
his persecutors. What made it worse was that Uncle Jack was laughing
too.

"Do you know who they are?" she demands, indignantly.

"Not I, Nan," responds Uncle Jack. "Never saw them before in my life,
but I warrant we see them again, and at the Point, too. Come, child.
There's our bell, and we must start for the gangway. Your mother is
hailing us now. Never mind this time, little woman," he continues,
kindly, as he notes the cloud on her brow. "I don't think any harm has
been done, but it is just as well not to be impetuous in public speech.
Ah! I thought so. They are to get off here with us."

Three minutes more and a little stream of passengers flows out upon the
broad government dock, and, as luck would have it, Uncle Jack and his
charges are just behind the trio in which, by this time, Miss Nan is
deeply, if not painfully, interested. A soldier in the undress uniform
of a corporal of artillery hastens forward and, saluting, stretches
forth his hand to take the satchel carried by the tall man with the
brown moustache.

"The lieutenant's carriage is at the gate," he says, whereat Uncle Jack,
who is conducting her mother just in front, looks back over his shoulder
and nods compassionately at Nan.

"Has any despatch been sent down to meet Colonel Stanley?" she hears the
tall man inquire, and this time Uncle Jack's backward glance is a
combination of mischief and concern.

"Nothing, sir, and the adjutant's orderly is here now. This is all he
brought down," and the corporal hands to the inquirer a note, the
superscription of which the young officer quickly scans; then turns and,
while his soft brown eyes light with kindly interest and he bares his
shapely head, accosts the lady on Uncle Jack's arm,--

"Pardon me, madam. This note must be for you. Mrs. McKay, is it not?"

And as her mother smiles her thanks and the others turn away, Nan's
eager eyes catch sight of Will's well-known writing. Mrs. McKay rapidly
reads it as Uncle Jack is bestowing bags and bundles in the omnibus and
feeing the acceptive porter, who now rushes back to the boat in the nick
of time.

     "Awful sorry I can't get up to the hotel to see you," says the
     note, dolorously, but by no means unexpectedly. "I'm in confinement
     and can't get a permit. Come to the officer-in-charge's office
     right after supper, and he'll let me see you there awhile.
     Stanley's officer of the day, and he'll be there to show the way.
     In haste,
                                                        WILL."

"Now _isn't_ that poor Willy's luck every time!" exclaims Miss Nan, her
blue eyes threatening to fill with tears. "I _do_ think they might let
him off the day we get here."

"Unquestionably," answers Uncle Jack, with great gravity, as he assists
the ladies into the yellow omnibus. "You duly notified the
superintendent of your impending arrival, I suppose?"

Mrs. McKay smiles quietly. Hers is a sweet and gentle face, lined with
many a trace of care and anxiety. Her brother's whimsical ways are old
acquaintances, and she knows how to treat them; but Nan is young,
impulsive, and easily teased. She flares up instantly.

"Of course we _didn't_, Uncle Jack; how utterly absurd it would sound!
But Willy knew we were coming, and _he_ must have told him when he asked
for his permit, and it does seem too hard that he was refused."

"Heartless in the last degree," says Uncle Jack, sympathetically, but
with the same suggestive drawl. "Yonder go the father and sister of the
young gentleman whom you announced your intention to castigate because
he didn't agree that Billy was being abused, Nan. You will have a chance
this very evening, won't you? He's officer of the day, according to
Billy's note, and can't escape. You'll have wound up the whole family by
tattoo. Quite a good day's work. Billy's opposers will do well to take
warning and keep out of the way hereafter," he continues, teasingly.
"Oh--ah--_corporal_!" he calls, "who was the young officer who just
drove off in the carriage with the lady and gentleman?"

"That was Lieutenant Lee, sir."

Uncle Jack turns and contemplates his niece with an expression of the
liveliest admiration. "'Pon my word, Miss Nan, you are a most
comprehensive young person. You've indeed let no guilty man escape."


CHAPTER II.

A CADET SCAPEGRACE.


The evening that opened so clear and sunshiny has clouded rapidly over.
Even as the four gray companies come "trotting" in from parade, and,
with the ease of long habit, quickly forming line in the barrack area,
some heavy rain-drops begin to fall; the drum-major has hurried his band
away; the crowd of spectators, unusually large for so early in the
season, scatters for shelter; umbrellas pop up here and there under the
beautiful trees along the western roadway; the adjutant rushes through
"delinquency list" in a style distinguishable only to his stolid, silent
audience standing immovably before him,--a long perspective of gray
uniforms and glistening white belts. The fateful book is closed with a
snap, and the echoing walls ring to the quick commands of the first
sergeants, at which the bayonets are struck from the rifle-barrels, and
the long line bursts into a living torrent sweeping into the hall-ways
to escape the coming shower.

When the battalion reappears, a few moments later, every man is in his
overcoat, and here and there little knots of upper classmen gather, and
there is eager and excited talk.

A soldierly, dark-eyed young fellow, with the red sash of the officer of
the day over his shoulder, comes briskly out of the hall of the fourth
division. The chevrons of a cadet captain are glistening on his arm, and
he alone has not donned the gray overcoat, although he has discarded the
plumed shako in deference to the coming storm; yet he hardly seems to
notice the downpour of the rain; his face is grave and his lips set and
compressed as he rapidly makes his way through the groups awaiting the
signal to "fall in" for supper.

"Stanley! O Stanley!" is the hail from a knot of classmates, and he
halts and looks about as two or three of the party hasten after him.

"What does Billy say about it?" is the eager inquiry.

"Nothing--new."

"Well, that report as good as finds him on demerit, doesn't it?"

"The next thing to it; though he has been as close to the brink before."

"But--great Scott! He has two weeks yet to run; and Billy McKay can no
more live two weeks without demerit than Patsy, here, without
'spooning.'"

Mr. Stanley's eyes look tired as he glances up from under the visor of
his forage cap. He is not as tall by half a head as the young soldiers
by whom he is surrounded.

"We were talking of his chances at dinner-time," he says, gravely.
"Billy never mentioned this break of his yesterday, and was surprised to
hear the report read out to-night. I believe he had forgotten the whole
thing."

"Who 'skinned' him?--Lee? He was there."

"I don't know; McKay says so, but there were several officers over there
at the time. It is a report he cannot get off, and it comes at a most
unlucky moment."

With this remark Mr. Stanley turns away and goes striding through the
crowded area towards the guard-house. Another moment and there is sudden
drum-beat; the gray overcoats leap into ranks; the subject of the recent
discussion--a jaunty young fellow with laughing blue eyes--comes tearing
out of the fourth division just in time to avoid a "late," and the
clamor of tenscore voices gives place to silence broken only by the
rapid calling of the rolls and the prompt "here"--"here," in response.

If ever there was a pet in the corps of cadets he lived in the person of
Billy McKay. Bright as one of his own buttons; jovial, generous,
impulsive; he had only one enemy in the battalion,--and that one, as he
had been frequently told, was himself. This, however, was a matter which
he could not at all be induced to believe. Of the Academic Board in
general, of his instructors in large measure, but of the four or five
ill-starred soldiers known as "tactical officers" in particular, Mr.
McKay entertained very decided and most unflattering opinions. He had
won his cadetship through rigid competitive examination against all
comers; he was a natural mathematician of whom a professor had said that
he "_could_ stand in the fives and _wouldn't_ stand in the forties;"
years of his boyhood spent in France had made him master of the
colloquial forms of the court language of Europe, yet a dozen classmates
who had never seen a French verb before their admission stood above him
at the end of the first term. He had gone to the first section like a
rocket and settled to the bottom of it like a stick. No subject in the
course was really hard to him, his natural aptitude enabling him to
triumph over the toughest problems. Yet he hated work, and would often
face about with an empty black-board and take a zero and a report for
neglect of studies that half an hour's application would have rendered
impossible. Classmates who saw impending danger would frequently make
stolen visits to his room towards the close of the term and profess to
be baffled by the lesson for the morrow, and Billy would promptly knock
the ashes out of the pipe he was smoking contrary to regulations and lay
aside the guitar on which he had been softly strumming--also contrary to
regulations; would pick up the neglected calculus or mechanics; get
interested in the work of explanation, and end by having learned the
lesson in spite of himself. This was too good a joke to be kept a
secret, and by the time the last year came Billy had found it all out
and refused to be longer hoodwinked.

There was never the faintest danger of his being found deficient in
studies, but there was ever the glaring prospect of his being discharged
"on demerit." Mr. McKay and the regulations of the United States
Military Academy had been at loggerheads from the start.

And yet, frank, jolly, and generous as he was in all intercourse with
his comrades, there was never a time when this young gentleman could be
brought to see that in such matters he was the arbiter of his own
destiny. Like the Irishman whose first announcement on setting foot on
American soil was that he was "agin the government," Billy McKay
believed that regulations were made only to oppress; that the men who
drafted such a code were idiots, and that those whose duty it became to
enforce it were simply spies and tyrants, resistance to whom was innate
virtue. He was forever ignoring or violating some written or unwritten
law of the Academy; was frequently being caught in the act, and was
invariably ready to attribute the resultant report to ill luck which
pursued no one else, or to a deliberate persecution which followed him
forever. Every six months he had been on the verge of dismissal, and
now, a fortnight from the final examination, with a margin of only six
demerit to run on, Mr. Billy McKay had just been read out in the daily
list of culprits or victims as "Shouting from window of barracks to
cadets in area during study hours,--three forty-five and four P.M."

There was absolutely no excuse for this performance. The regulations
enjoined silence and order in barracks during "call to quarters." It had
been raining a little, and he was in hopes there would be no battalion
drill, in which event he would venture on throwing off his uniform and
spreading himself out on his bed with a pipe and a novel,--two things he
dearly loved. Ten minutes would have decided the question legitimately
for him, but, being of impatient temperament, he could not wait, and,
catching sight of the adjutant and the senior captain coming from the
guard-house, Mr. McKay sung out in tones familiar to every man within
ear-shot,--

"Hi, Jim! Is it battalion drill?"

The adjutant glanced quickly up,--a warning glance as he could have
seen,--merely shook his head, and went rapidly on, while his comrade,
the cadet first captain, clinched his fist at the window and growled
between his set teeth, "Be quiet, you idiot!"

But poor Billy persisted. Louder yet he called,--

"Well--say--Jimmy! Come up here after four o'clock. I'll be in
confinement, and can't come out. Want to see you."

And the windows over at the office of the commandant being wide open,
and that official being seated there in consultation with three or four
of his assistants, and as Mr. McKay's voice was as well known to them as
to the corps, there was no alternative. The colonel himself "confounded"
the young scamp for his recklessness, and directed a report to be
entered against him.

And now, as Mr. Stanley is betaking himself to his post at the
guard-house, his heart is heavy within him because of this new load on
his comrade's shoulders.

"How on earth could you have been so careless, Billy?" he had asked him
as McKay, fuming and indignant, was throwing off his accoutrements in
his room on the second floor.

"How'd I know anybody was over there?" was the boyish reply. "It's just
a skin on suspicion anyhow. Lee couldn't have seen me, nor could anybody
else. I stood way back by the clothes-press."

"There's no suspicion about it, Billy. There isn't a man that walks the
area that doesn't know your voice as well as he does Jim Pennock's.
Confound it! You'll get over the limit yet, man, and break your--your
mother's heart."

"Oh, come now, Stan! You've been nagging me ever since last camp. Why'n
thunder can't you see I'm doing my best? Other men don't row me as you
do, or stand up for the 'tacks.' I tell you that fellow Lee never loses
a chance of skinning me: he _takes_ chances, by gad, and I'll make his
eyes pop out of his head when he reads what I've got to say about it."

"You're too hot for reason now, McKay," said Stanley, sadly. "Step out
or you'll get a late for supper. I'll see you after awhile. I gave that
note to the orderly, by the way, and he said he'd take it down to the
dock himself."

"Mother and Nan will probably come to the guard-house right after
supper. Look out for them for me, will you, Stan, until old Snipes gets
there and sends for me?"

And as Mr. Stanley shut the door instantly and went clattering down the
iron stairs, Mr. McKay caught no sign on his face of the sudden flutter
beneath that snugly-buttoned coat.

It was noticed by more than one of the little coterie at his own table
that the officer of the day hurried through his supper and left the
mess-hall long before the command for the first company to rise. It was
a matter well known to every member of the graduating class that, almost
from the day of her arrival during the encampment of the previous
summer, Phil Stanley had been a devoted admirer of Miss Nannie McKay. It
was not at all to be wondered at.

Without being what is called an ideal beauty, there was a fascination
about this winsome little maid which few could resist. She had all her
brother's impulsiveness, all his enthusiasm, and, it may be safely
asserted, all his abiding faith in the sacred and unimpeachable
character of cadet friendships. If she possessed a little streak of
romance that was not discernible in him, she managed to keep it well in
the background; and though she had her favorites in the corps, she was
so frank and cordial and joyous in her manner to all that it was
impossible to say which one, if any, she regarded in the light of a
lover. Whatever comfort her gentle mother may have derived from this
state of affairs, it was "hard lines on Stanley," as his classmates put
it, for there could be little doubt that the captain of the color
company was a sorely-smitten man.

He was not what is commonly called a "popular man" in the corps. The son
of a cavalry officer, reared on the wide frontier and educated only
imperfectly, he had not been able to enter the Academy until nearly
twenty years of age, and nothing but indomitable will and diligence had
carried him through the difficulties of the first half of the course. It
was not until the middle of the third year that the chevrons of a
sergeant were awarded him, and even then the battalion was taken by
surprise. There was no surprise a few months later, however, when he was
promoted over a score of classmates and made captain of his company. It
was an open secret that the commandant had said that if he had it all to
do over again, Mr. Stanley would be made "first captain,"--a rumor that
big John Burton, the actual incumbent of that office, did not at all
fancy. Stanley was "square" and impartial. His company was in admirable
discipline, though many of his classmates growled and wished he were not
"so confoundedly military." The second classmen, always the most
critical judges of the qualifications of their seniors, conceded that he
was more soldierly than any man of his year, but were unanimous in the
opinion that he should show more deference to men of their standing in
the corps. The "yearlings" swore by him in any discussion as to the
relative merits of the four captains; but with equal energy swore at him
when contemplating that fateful volume known as "the skin book." The
fourth classmen--the "plebes"--simply worshipped the ground he trod on,
and as between General Sherman and Philip Stanley, it is safe to say
these youngsters would have determined on the latter as the more
suitable candidate for the office of general-in-chief. Of course they
admired the adjutant,--the plebes always do that,--and not infrequently
to the exclusion of the other cadet officers; but there was something
grand, to them, about this dark-eyed, dark-faced, dignified captain who
never stooped to trifle with them; was always so precise and courteous,
and yet so immeasurably distant. They were ten times more afraid of him
than they had been of Lieutenant Rolfe, who was their "tack" during
camp, or of the great, handsome, kindly-voiced dragoon who succeeded
him, Lieutenant Lee, of the --th Cavalry. They approved of this latter
gentleman because he belonged to the regiment of which Mr. Stanley's
father was lieutenant-colonel, and to which it was understood Mr.
Stanley was to be assigned on his graduation. What they could not at all
understand was that, once graduated, Mr. Stanley could step down from
his high position in the battalion of cadets and become a mere
file-closer. Yes. Stanley was too strict and soldierly to command that
decidedly ephemeral tribute known as "popularity," but no man in the
corps of cadets was more thoroughly respected. If there were flaws in
the armor of his personal character they were not such as to be
vigorously prodded by his comrades. He had firm friends,--devoted
friends, who grew to honor and trust him more with every year; but,
strong though they knew him to be, he had found his conqueror. There was
a story in the first class that in Stanley's old leather writing-case
was a sort of secret compartment, and in this compartment was treasured
"a knot of ribbon blue" that had been worn last summer close under the
dimpled white chin of pretty Nannie McKay.

And now on this moist May evening as he hastens back to barracks, Mr.
Stanley spies a little group standing in front of the guard-house.
Lieutenant Lee is there,--in his uniform now,--and with him are the tall
girl in the simple travelling-dress, and the trim, wiry, gray-moustached
soldier whom we saw on the boat. The rain is falling steadily, which
accounts for and possibly excuses Mr. Lee's retention of the young
lady's arm in his as he holds the umbrella over both; but the colonel no
sooner catches sight of the officer of the day than his own umbrella is
cast aside, and with light, eager, buoyant steps, father and son hasten
to meet each other. In an instant their hands are clasped,--both
hands,--and through moistening eyes the veteran of years of service and
the boy in whom his hopes are centred gaze into each other's faces.

"Phil,--my son!"

"Father!"

No other words. It is the first meeting in two long years. The area is
deserted save by the smiling pair watching from under the dripping
umbrella with eyes nearly as moist as the skies. There is no one to
comment or to scoff. In the father's heart, mingling with the deep joy
at this reunion with his son, there wells up sudden, irrepressible
sorrow. "Ah, God!" he thinks. "Could his mother but have lived to see
him now!" Perhaps Philip reads it all in the strong yet tremulous clasp
of those sinewy brown hands, but for the moment neither speaks again.
There are some joys so deep, some heart longings so overpowering, that
many a man is forced to silence, or to a levity of manner which is
utterly repugnant to him, in the effort to conceal from the world the
tumult of emotion that so nearly makes him weep. Who that has read that
inimitable page will ever forget the meeting of that genial sire and
gallant son in the grimy old railway car filled with the wounded from
Antietam, in Doctor Holmes's "My Search for the Captain?"

When Phil Stanley, still clinging to his father's hand, turns to greet
his sister and her handsome escort, he is suddenly aware of another
group that has entered the area. Two ladies, marshalled by his
classmate, Mr. Pennock, are almost at his side, and one of them is the
blue-eyed girl he loves.


CHAPTER III.

"AMANTIUM IRÆ."


Lovely as is West Point in May, it is hardly the best time for a visit
there if one's object be to see the cadets. From early morn until late
at night every hour is taken up with duties, academic or military.
Mothers, sisters, and sweethearts, whose eyes so eagerly follow the
evolutions of the gray ranks, can only hope for a few words between
drill and dress parade, or else in the shortest half-hour in all the
world,--that which intervenes 'twixt supper and evening "call to
quarters." That Miss Nannie McKay should make frequent and unfavorable
comment on this state of affairs goes without saying; yet, had she been
enabled to see her beloved brother but once a month and her cadet
friends at intervals almost as rare, that incomprehensible young damsel
would have preferred the Point to any other place in the world.

It was now ten days since her arrival, and she had had perhaps three
chats with Willy, who, luckily for him, though he could not realize it,
was spending most of his time "confined to quarters," and consequently
out of much of the temptation he would otherwise have been in. Mrs.
McKay had been able to see very little more of the young man, but she
had the prayerful consolation that if he could only be kept out of
mischief a few days longer he would then be through with it all, out of
danger of dismissal, actually graduated, and once more her own boy to
monopolize as she chose.

It takes most mothers a long, long time to become reconciled to the
complete usurpation of all their former rights by this new parent whom
their boys are bound to serve,--this anything but _Alma_ Mater,--the war
school of the nation. As for Miss Nan, though she made it a point to
declaim vigorously at the fates that prevented her seeing more of her
brother, it was wonderful how well she looked and in what blithe spirits
she spent her days. Regularly as the sun came around, before guard-mount
in the morning and right after supper in the evening, she was sure to be
on the south piazza of the old hotel, and when presently the cadet
uniforms began to appear at the hedge, she, and others, would go
tripping lightly down the path to meet the wearers, and then would
follow the half-hour's walk and chat in which she found such infinite
delight. So, too, could Mr. Stanley, had he been able to appear as her
escort on all occasions; but despite his strong personal inclination and
effort, this was by no means the case. The little lady was singularly
impartial in the distribution of her time, and only by being first
applicant had he secured to himself the one long afternoon that had yet
been vouchsafed them,--the cadet half-holiday of Saturday.

But if Miss Nan found time hanging heavily on her hands at other hours
of the day, there was one young lady at the hotel who did not,--a young
lady whom, by this time, she regarded with constantly deepening
interest,--Miriam Stanley.

Other girls, younger girls, who had found their ideals in the cadet
gray, were compelled to spend hours of the twenty-four in waiting for
the too brief _half_-hour in which it was possible to meet them; but
Miss Stanley was very differently situated. It was her first visit to
the Point. She met, and was glad to meet, all Philip's friends and
comrades; but it was plainly to be seen, said all the girls at Craney's,
that between her and the tall cavalry officer whom they best knew
through cadet descriptions, there existed what they termed an
"understanding," if not an engagement. Every day, when not prevented by
duties, Mr. Lee would come stalking up from barracks, and presently away
they would stroll together,--a singularly handsome pair, as every one
admitted. One morning soon after the Stanleys' arrival he appeared in
saddle on his stylish bay, accompanied by an orderly leading another
horse, side-saddled; and then, as by common impulse, all the girls
promenading the piazzas, as was their wont, with arms entwining each
other's waists, came flocking about the south steps. When Miss Stanley
appeared in her riding-habit and was quickly swung up into saddle by her
cavalier, and then, with a bright nod and smile for the entire group,
she gathered the reins in her practised hand and rode briskly away, the
sentiments of the fair spectators were best expressed, perhaps, in the
remark of Miss McKay,--

"What a shame it is that the cadets can't ride! I mean can't
ride--_that_ way," she explained, with suggestive nod of her curly head
towards the pair just trotting out upon the road around the Plain. "They
ride--lots of them--better than most of the officers."

"Mr. Stanley for instance," suggests a mischievous little minx with
hazel eyes and laughter-loving mouth.

"Yes, Mr. Stanley, or Mr. Pennock, or Mr. Burton, or a dozen others I
could name, not excepting my brother," answers Miss Nan, stoutly,
although those readily flushing cheeks of hers promptly throw out their
signals of perturbation. THE NEW LAWS CHAPTER XV. - THE BISHOPRICS OFFERED
TO LAS CASAS.

HIS CONSECRATION. HIS DEPARTURE CHAPTER XVI. - LETTER TO PHILIP II.
VOYAGE TO AMERICA. FEELING IN THE COLONIES. ARRIVAL IN CHIAPA CHAPTER
XVII. - RECEPTION OF LAS CASAS IN HIS DIOCESE. EVENTS IN CIUDAD
REAL.

THE INDIANS OF CHIAPA CHAPTER XVIII. - LAS CASAS REVISITS THE LAND OF
WAR. AUDIENCIA OF THE CONFINES. EVENTS AT CIUDAD REAL. LAS CASAS RETURNS
CHAPTER XIX. - OPPOSITION TO LAS CASAS. HE LEAVES CIUDAD REAL. THE MEXICAN
SYNOD CHAPTER XX. - LAS CASAS ARRIVES AT VALLADOLID. THE THIRTY
PROPOSITIONS.
DEBATE WITH GINES DE SEPULVEDA CHAPTER XXI. - SAN GREGORIO DE
VALLADOLID.

LAST LABOURS. THE DEATH OF LAS CASAS APPENDIX I. - THE BREVISSIMA RELACION
APPENDIX II. - THE BULL SUBLIMIS DEUS APPENDIX III. - ROYAL
ORDINANCES PROVIDING FOR THE DEPARTURE OF LAS CASAS FROM SPAIN AND
FOR HIS RECEPTION IN THE INDIES 

ILLUSTRATIONS
Fray Bartholomew de Las Casas Juan Gines de Sepúlveda Christopher
Columbus Cardinal Ximenez de Cisneros Charles V.

Paul III.
Philip II.
Scenes of Las Casas's Labours Holograph of Las Casas Giving Directions for
the Publication of his Work.

CHAPTER I. - FAMILY OF LAS CASAS.

EDUCATION OF BARTHOLOMEW.

HIS FIRST VOYAGE TO AMERICA

The Spanish wars against the Moors, no less than the Crusades against the
Moslems in the Holy Land, enlisted under the Christian standard the
chivalry of Europe, and during the victorious campaign of the King,
St.

Ferdinand, knights from France, Germany, Italy, and Flanders swelled the
ranks of the Spanish forces in Andalusia.

Amongst these foreign noblemen were two French gentlemen called Casaus,
who claimed descent from Guillen, Viscount of Limoges, one of whom was
killed during the siege of Seville.
The city was taken in 1252, and the surviving Casaus shared in the
apportionment of its spoils, and founded there a family, whose
descendants were destined to become numerous and illustrious.

The name _Casaus_ assumed with time the more Spanish form of
Casas, though it continued to be spelled in both ways for several
centuries, and Bartholomew de Las Casas himself used both spellings
indifferently, especially during the earlier years of his life.

This family ranked among the nobility of Seville and mention is found
of the confirmation by Alfonso XI. of Guillen de Las Casas in the office
of regidor of the city in 1318. This same Guillen became Alcalde Mayor
of Seville, and when he died his body was buried in one of the chapels
of the cathedral. His son, Alfonso, is stated in the chronicles
of Don Juan II.
(1409) to have been appointed by the Infante, Don Fernando, to the
lieutenancy of Castillo de Priego, "because he was a valiant man
who could hold it well."

The names of Guillen and Bartolomé are of frequent recurrence in the
annals of the family, whose members constantly occupied
the honourable offices of judge, alcalde mayor, and captain, using the
title of Don and intermarrying with the most illustrious families of
Andalusia.

According to indications equivalent to proofs in the absence of any
positive record, from such respectable forebears descended Fray
Bartolomé
de Las Casas, who was born in Seville, in 1474.

He himself speaks of Seville as his native city, and the popular
tradition, which fixes the ancient suburb of Triana as his birthplace,
was recognised in 1859 by the municipality of Seville assigning the
name of Calle del Procurador to one of the streets of Triana, in
honour of the Bishop, whose proudest title was Protector (or
Procurador) General of the Indians.

In his voluminous writings, which teem with information about the
men and events of his times, the references to his own family history
are infrequent and imperfect, so that from his own records of his
life, very little is to be gleaned concerning it.

His father's name is variously given by different writers as Alonso,
Antonio, and Francisco, while he himself states(1) that he was
named Pedro, thus contradicting all his biographers from Remesal,
who was the first, down to Don Antonio Fabié, whose admirable _Vida
y Escritos_, published in 1879, was the last important contribution
on this interesting subject.

Zuñiga, in his _Discurso de Ortices_, assumed that Alonso de las Casas
and Beatriz Maraver y Cegarra of Triana were the parents of Fray Bartholomew,
but in the _Anales de Sevilla_, a later work, Francisco is given as the
father's name. Neither Llorente nor Gutierrez, who has followed him,
gives any authority for his affirmation that the father's name was Antonio,
while Quintana and Fabié accept Remesal(2) and name the father
Francisco.

The genealogy of the family furnished me by the dean of the Royal College
of Heralds in Madrid shows the descent of Fray Bartholomew through
his frather, named Francisco, from Alonso de Las Casas, "Señor de
Gomez Cardeña, Veinticuatro de Seville, la Villa de Priego" in 1409, and
his wife, Maria Fernandez Marmolejo.

The children of this couple were Guillen, Isabel, Juan, Pedro, and
Francisco, who is described in the genealogy as the father of
Bartholomew. Pedro, whom Fray Bartholomew mentions as his father, is
described as _Dean of Seville_, in which case his ecclesiastical state
would exclude matrimony and legitimate issue.

Fabié affirms that in several passages of his writings Fray Bartholomew
confirms the assertion of those authors who have designated his father
as Francisco, but he does not indicate the whereabouts of these
passages nor have I, in my unaided researches, succeeded in finding them.
The descendants of the original founder of the family had multiplied
and, by the close of the fifteenth century, were divided into many
prolific branches, hence the difficulty of identifying the unimportant
father of an extraordinarily important son is not wonderful. Las Casas
himself may be reasonably assumed to have known his own father's name
and we must conclude, in view of his assertion, that all other
authorities, including the Royal College of Heralds, are wrong,
and that not Francisco, but a Pedro de Las Casas, who was not
however Dean of Seville, was the immediate progenitor of the illustrious
Bishop of Chiapa.

The scarcity of positive information concerning his immediate family
is equalled by the paucity of trustworthy details of the first
twenty-eight years of Fray Bartholomew's life.

He completed his studies and obtained the degree of licentiate in law
at the University of Salamanca, the most celebrated in Spain, and which
ranked high amongst the great seats of learning in Europe at that time.
Jurisprudence was divided into the branches of Roman law as interpreted
by the school of Bologna, and of canon law, the principles of which were
interwoven with the common practice, whose severer tendencies they
somewhat tempered. The precepts of Aristotle as interpreted by scholastics
formed the basis of philosophical studies, and the Thomistic doctrine
was taught by professors of the Dominican Order.

It has been judiciously observed that in that age of growing absolutism,
both spiritual and temporal, only a skilful Thomistic scholar could
have discerned the limits to the legitimate exercise of the royal
authority which Las Casas so clearly perceived and so boldly defined in
the very presence of the autocratic sovereigns of Spain.

Grammar, ethics, physics, and the branches of learning necessary to
complete the education of a young man of his social position and
mental capacity, were doubtless embraced in his course of study. His use
of the Latin tongue was fluent, though his style has been
criticised as cumbersome and wanting in elegance; certainly his
writings abound in diffuse generalities, a multiplicity of repetitions,
and a vast array of citations from Scripture and the classics which
render his unexpurgated manuscripts wearisome enough to modern readers.
He shared the defects of most of his contemporaries in this respect and
followed the fashion common in his times. The training he received in the
Spanish schools and the University, and which he afterwards
perfected--as will be seen--by the studies he resumed after his
profession in the Dominican Order, rendered formidable as an advocate
one whom nature had endowed with a rare gift of eloquence, a
passionate temperament, and a robust physical constitution which
seems to have been immune to the ills and fatigues that assail less
favoured mortals.

Gines de Sepulveda, whose forensic encounter with Las Casas was one of
the academic events of the sixteenth century, described his adversary
in a letter to a friend as "most subtle, most vigilant, and most
fluent, compared with whom Homer's Ulysses was inert and stammering."

The father of Las Casas accompanied Christopher Columbus on his second
voyage to America and acquired profitable interests in the island
of Hispaniola. He returned to Spain in 1496, bringing with him an Indian
lad whom he sent as a present to his son, who was then a student
at Salamanca.

Bartholomew's ownership of this Indian boy was brief, owing to Queen
Isabella's intense displeasure when she learned that Columbus had
brought, and permitted to be brought back Indians, as slaves.

Nothing sufficed to appease the Queen's indignation that the Admiral
should thus dispose of her new subjects without her leave and
authority, and a royal order was published from Granada, where the
court then was, commanding, under pain of death, that all those who
had brought Indians to Spain as slaves should send them back to
America.

When Francisco de Bobadilla was sent in 1500 to Hispaniola to supersede
Columbus as Governor, all these Indians returned with him and Las
Casas himself states, "Mine was of the number."

Thus strangely is the future apostle of freedom first introduced to our
notice in the guise of a slave-holder, constrained by a royal edict
to surrender his human property.

Upon his return from Salamanca to Seville Las Casas found himself,
through his father's relations with Columbus, in daily intercourse
with the men whose voyages and discoveries were thrilling Europe.

Amongst these navigators was his uncle Francisco de Peñulosa, and it was
but natural that his eager temperament should catch the adventurous
fever which prevailed throughout Spain and notably in Andalusia. Salucchi,
in his Latin treatise on Hebrew coins, says that Las Casas accompanied
his father on the second voyage of Columbus in 1493 and brought
back the Indian slave himself.

Llorente, who has been followed by several modern writers, asserts that
his first voyage to America was made with Columbus on his third expedition.
He deduces this conclusion from a statement at the close of the
Thirty Propositions which Las Casas addressed to the Royal India
Council in 1547 and from a sentence in the First Motive of his Ninth
Remedy which he presented to the Emperor in 1542.

The first of these passages reads "Thus, most illustrious Sirs, have
I thought since forty-nine years, during which I have witnessed evil-doings
in America and since thirty-four years that I have studied law." The
passage merely refers to Columbus having permitted certain Spaniards
who had rendered important services during his voyage to bring back
each an Indian and concludes, "And I obtained one."
[Illustration: Christopher Columbus]
Christopher Columbus
From an engraving by P. Mercuri after a contemporary portrait

The deductions of both these learned writers would seem to require
more positive corroboration.

     Not only are they destitute of confirmation, but in the second
chapter of his _Historia General_, Las Casas gives the names of
many persons who did accompany Columbus in 1493, describing several
incidents connected with that expedition and concluding by saying
that he heard all these things "from my father who returned [to
America] with him, when he went to found settlements in Hispaniola."

In the preface which he wrote in 1552 to accompany the publication of
his history, _Destruycion de las Indias_, which had been composed ten
years earlier, he speaks of his experience extending over more than
fifty years, but in his _Historia General_, which is almost a diary
of the first half of his life in America, the first voyage that he
mentions is that of Don Nicholas de Ovando in 1502.

Las Casas was most careful in describing every particular of the events
in which he had a part and he nowhere mentions that he accompanied
Columbus on any voyage, whereas he dwells at length upon the expedition
of Ovando, and in the third chapter of the second book of the _Historia
General_ he affirms, "I heard this with my own ears for I went on that
voyage with the Comendador de Lares [Ovando] to this island." The phrase
is characteristic, for the positive note is rarely absent in the
affirmations of Las Casas, nor is it admissible that his experiences
on any voyage previous to that of Ovando should find no place in the
exact and scrupulous narrative he has left us of his relations with
America and his beloved Indians.

In consequence of the persistent and bitter complaints of Columbus against
the second Governor of Hispaniola, whose appointment violated the rights
secured to the Admiral and his successors by the capitulations of Granada,
the catholic sovereign decided to recall Francisco de Bobadilla, whose
administration gave cause for dissatisfaction in other respects, and to
send Don Nicholas de Ovando to replace him. Ovando was at that time
Comendador de Lares and was later raised to the supreme commandership
of the Order of Calatrava.

He is described as a most prudent man, worthy to govern any number of
people, but not Indians; man in word and deed, an avowed enemy of
avarice and covetousness; not wanting in humility, as shown in his
habits of life, both public and private, though he maintained the
dignity and authority of his position.(3)
The new Governor was endowed with full powers to judge the accusations
against his predecessor and to dispose of the nettlesome questions
which had provoked the Roldan rebellion.

The preparations for his departure were delayed by many causes; his fleet
was the most considerable one that had thus far been organised to sail
for America, being composed of thirty-two vessels on which were
to sail some two thousand five hundred persons, many of whom were
knights and noblemen.

Twelve Franciscan friars under the direction of their leader, Fray Alonso
del Espinal, formed part of the company.

It was this brilliant expedition that Fernando Cortes intended to join
when he was prevented by injuries incurred while engaged in an
amorous adventure which led him over garden walls into risky
situations where he ended with broken bones, and was consequently
left behind.

The fleet sailed from San Lucar de Barrameda on February 13, 1502, which
according to Las Casas was the first Sunday in lent of that year.(4)

The usual course, by way of the Canary Islands, was followed, but
after eight days at sea, a violent tempest wrecked one ship, _La Rabida_,
with one hundred and twenty people on board, and scattered the
remainder; some vessels were obliged to throw most of their cargo
overboard, but all, after many dangers, gradually found refuge in
various ports of the neighbouring islands.

The wreckage of _La Rabida_, and that of some other vessels which had
also foundered while carrying sugar from the islands, drifted
back to the Spanish coast and gave rise to the rumour that the
entire fleet was lost.

This caused such a general sense of affliction that the sovereigns,
on receipt of this false report, shut themselves up in the palace
at Granada and mourned for eight days.

The vessels which had weathered the tempest united after some delay in
the port of the island of Gomera, and being joined there by another,
fitted out in the Canaries by people eager to go to America, the fleet
was thus brought up to its original complement. The commander divided
his squadron in to two sections, the first of which, composed of the
fastest vessels, he kept under his command, while the second was placed
under command of Antonio de Torres.

Ovando's division reached Hispaniola on the fifteenth of April and
the second squadron came safely to port some twelve days later.

Pretty girls
there are in force, and at Craney's they are living three and four in a
room; the joy of being really there on the Point, near the cadets,
aroused by the morning gun and shrill piping of the reveille, saluted
hourly by the notes of the bugle, enabled to see the gray uniforms half
a dozen times a day and to actually speak or walk with the wearers half
an hour out of twenty-four whole ones, being apparent compensation for
any crowding or discomfort. Indeed, crowded as they are, the girls at
Craney's are objects of boundless envy to those whom the Fates have
consigned to the resorts down around the picturesque but distant
"Falls." There is a little coterie at "Hawkshurst" that is fiercely
jealous of the sisterhood in the favored nook at the north edge of the
Plain, and one of their number, who is believed to have completely
subjugated that universal favorite, Cadet McKay, has been heard to say
that she thought it an outrage that they had to come home so early in
the evening and mope away the time without a single cadet, when up there
at Craney's the halls and piazzas were full of gray-coats and bell
buttons every night until tattoo.

A very brilliant and pretty girl she is, too, and neither Mrs. McKay nor
Nannie can wonder at it that Will's few leisure moments are monopolized.
"You are going to have me all to yourself next week, little mother," he
laughingly explains; "and goodness knows when I'm going to see Miss
Waring again." And though neither mother nor sister is at all satisfied
with the state of affairs, both are too unselfish to interpose. How many
an hour have mothers and, sometimes, sisters waited in loneliness at the
old hotel for boys whom some other fellow's sister was holding in silken
fetters somewhere down in shady "Flirtation!"

It was with relief inexpressible that Mrs. McKay and Uncle Jack had
hailed the coming of the 1st of June. With a margin of only two demerits
Will had safely weathered the reefs and was practically safe,--safe at
last. He had passed brilliantly in engineering; had been saved by his
prompt and ready answers the consequences of a "fess" with clean
black-board in ordnance and gunnery; had won a ringing, though
involuntary, round of applause from the crowded galleries of the
riding-hall by daring horsemanship, and he was now within seven days of
the prized diploma and his commission. "For heaven's sake, Billy,"
pleaded big Burton, the first captain, "don't do any thing to ruin your
chances now! I've just been talking with your mother and Miss Nannie,
and I declare I never saw that little sister of yours looking so white
and worried."

McKay laughs, yet his laugh is not light-hearted. He wonders if Burton
has the faintest intuition that at this moment he is planning an
escapade that means nothing short of dismissal if detected. Down in the
bottom of his soul he knows he is a fool to have made the rash and
boastful pledge to which he now stands committed. Yet he has never
"backed out" before, and now--he would dare a dozen dismissals rather
than that she should have a chance to say, "I knew you would not come."

That very afternoon, just after the ride in the hall before the Board of
Visitors, Miss Waring had been pathetically lamenting that with another
week they were to part, and that she had seen next to nothing of him
since her arrival.

"If you only _could_ get down to Hawkshurst!" she cried. "I'm sure when
my cousin Frank was in the corps he used to 'run it' down to Cozzens's
to see Cousin Kate,--and that was what made her Cousin Kate to me," she
adds, with sudden dropping of the eyelids that is wondrously effective.

"Easily done!" recklessly answers McKay, whose boyish heart is set to
hammer-like beating by the closing sentence. "I didn't know you sat up
so late there, or I would have come before. Of course I _have_ to be
here at 'taps.' No one can escape that."

"Oh,--but really, Mr. McKay, I did not mean it! I would not have you run
such a risk for worlds! I meant--some other way." And so she protests,
although her eyes dance with excitement and delight. What a feather this
in her cap of coquetry! What a triumph over the other girls,--especially
that hateful set at Craney's! What a delicious confidence to impart to
all the little coterie at Hawkshurst! How they must envy her the
romance, the danger, the daring, the devotion of such an adventure--for
her sake! Of late years such tales had been rare. Girls worth the
winning simply would not permit so rash a project, and their example
carried weight. But here at "Hawkshurst" was a lively young brood,
chaperoned by a matron as wild as her charges and but little older, and
eager one and all for any glory or distinction that could pique the
pride or stir the envy of "that Craney set." It was too much for a girl
of Sallie Waring's type. Her eyes have a dangerous gleam, her cheeks a
witching glow; she clings tighter to his arm as she looks up in his
face.

"And yet--wouldn't it be lovely?--To think of seeing you there!--are you
sure there'd be no danger?"

"Be on the north piazza about quarter of eleven," is the prompt reply.
"I'll wear a dark suit, eye-glass, brown moustache, etc. Call me Mr.
Freeman while strangers are around. There goes the parade drum. _Au
revoir!_" and he darts away. Cadet Captain Stanley, inspecting his
company a few moments later, stops in front and gravely rebukes him,--

"You are not properly shaved, McKay."

"I shaved this morning," is the somewhat sullen reply, while an angry
flush shoots up towards the blue eyes.

"No razor has touched your upper lip, however, and I expect the class to
observe regulations in this company, demerit or no demerit," is the
firm, quiet answer, and the young captain passes on to the next man.
McKay grits his teeth.

"Only a week more of it, thank God!" he mutters, when sure that Stanley
is beyond ear-shot.

Three hours more and "taps" is sounded. All along the brilliant _façade_
of barracks there is sudden and simultaneous "dousing of the glim" and a
rush of the cadets to their narrow nests. There is a minute of banging
doors and hurrying footsteps, and gruff queries of "All in?" as the
cadet officers flit from room to room in each division to see that
lights are out and every man in bed. Then forth they come from every
hall-way; tripping lightly down the stone steps and converging on the
guard-house, where stand at the door-way the dark forms of the officer
in charge and the cadet officer of the day. Each in turn halts, salutes,
and makes his precise report; and when the last subdivision is reported,
the executive officer is assured that the battalion of cadets is present
in barracks, and at the moment of inspection at least, in bed.
Presumably, they remain so.

Two minutes after inspection, however, Mr. McKay is out of bed again and
fumbling about in his alcove. His room-mate sleepily inquires from
beyond the partition what he wants in the dark, but is too long
accustomed to his vagaries to expect definite information. When Mr.
McKay slips softly out into the hall, after careful _reconnaissance_ of
the guard-house windows, his chum is soundly asleep and dreaming of no
worse freak on Billy's part than a raid around barracks.

It is so near graduation that the rules are relaxed, and in every first
classman's room the tailor's handiwork is hanging among the gray
uniforms. It is a dark suit of this civilian dress that Billy dons as
he emerges from the blankets. A natty Derby is perched upon his curly
pate, and a _monocle_ hangs by its string. But he cannot light his gas
and arrange the soft brown moustache with which he proposes to decorate
his upper lip. He must run into Stanley's,--the "tower" room, at the
north end of his hall.

Phil looks up from the copy of "Military Law" which he is diligently
studying. As "inspector of subdivision," his light is burned until
eleven.

"You _do_ make an uncommonly swell young cit, Billy," he says,
pleasantly. "Doesn't he, Mack?" he continues, appealing to his
room-mate, who, lying flat on his back with his head towards the light
and a pair of muscular legs in white trousers displayed on top of a pile
of blankets, is striving to make out the vacancies in a recent Army
Register. "Mack" rolls over and lazily expresses his approval.

"I'd do pretty well if I had my moustache out; I meant to get the start
of you fellows, but you're so meanly jealous, you blocked the game,
Stan."

All the rancor is gone now. He well knows that Stanley was right.

"Sorry to have had to 'row' you about that, Billy," says the captain,
gently. "You know I can't let one man go and not a dozen others."

"Oh, hang it all! What's the difference when time's so nearly up?"
responds McKay, as he goes over to the little wood-framed mirror that
stands on the iron mantel. "Here's a substitute, though! How's this for
a moustache?" he asks, as he turns and faces them. Then he starts for
the door. Almost in an instant Stanley is up and after him. Just at the
head of the iron stairs he hails and halts him.

"Billy! You are not going out of barracks?"

Unwillingly McKay yields to the pressure of the firm hand laid on his
shoulder, and turns.

"Suppose I were, Stanley. What danger is there? Lee inspected last
night, and even he wouldn't make such a plan to trip me. Who ever heard
of a 'tack's' inspecting after taps two successive nights?"

"There's no reason why it should not be done, and several reasons why it
should," is the uncompromising reply. "Don't risk your commission now,
Billy, in any mad scheme. Come back and take those things off. Come!"

"Blatherskite! Don't hang on to me like a pick-pocket, Stan. Let me go,"
says McKay, half vexed, half laughing. "I've _got_ to go, man," he says,
more seriously. "I've promised."

A sudden light seems to come to Stanley. Even in the feeble gleam from
the gas-jet in the lower hall McKay can see the look of consternation
that shoots across his face.

"You don't mean--you're not going down to Hawkshurst, Billy?"

"Why not to Hawkshurst, if anywhere at all?" is the sullen reply.

"Why? Because you are risking your whole future,--your profession, your
good name, McKay. You're risking your mother's heart for the sport of a
girl who is simply toying with you----"

"Take care, Stanley. Say what you like to me about myself, but not a
word about her."

"This is no time for sentiment, McKay. I have known Miss Waring three
years; you, perhaps three weeks. I tell you solemnly that if she has
tempted you to 'run it' down there to see her it is simply to boast of a
new triumph to the silly pack by whom she is surrounded. I tell you
she----"

"You tell me nothing! I don't allow any man to speak in that way of a
woman who is my friend," says Billy, with much majesty of mien. "Take
your hand off, Stanley," he adds, coldly. "I might have had some respect
for your counsel if you had had the least--for my feelings." And
wrenching his shoulder away, McKay speeds quickly down the stairs,
leaving his comrade speechless and sorrowing in the darkness above.

In the lower hall he stops and peers cautiously over towards the
guard-house. The lights are burning brilliantly up in the room of the
officer in charge, and the red sash of the officer of the day shows
through the open door-way beneath. Now is his time, for there is no one
looking. One quick leap through the dim stream of light from the lantern
at his back and he will be in the dark area, and can pick his noiseless
way to the shadows beyond. It is an easy thing to gain the foot-path
beyond the old retaining wall back of the guard-house, scud away under
the trees along the winding ascent towards Fort Putnam, until he meets
the back-road half-way up the heights; then turn southward through the
rocky cuts and forest aisles until he reaches the main highway; then
follow on through the beautiful groves, through the quiet village,
across the bridge that spans the stream above the falls, and then, only
a few hundred yards beyond, there lies Hawkshurst and its bevy of
excited, whispering, applauding, delighted girls. If he meet officers,
all he has to do is put on a bold face and trust to his disguise. He
means to have a glorious time and be back, tingling with satisfaction on
his exploit, by a little after midnight. In five minutes his quarrel
with Stanley is forgotten, and, all alert and eager, he is half-way up
the heights and out of sight or hearing of the barracks.

The roads are well-nigh deserted. He meets one or two squads of soldiers
coming back from "pass" at the Falls, but no one else. The omnibuses and
carriages bearing home those visitors who have spent the evening
listening to the band at the Point are all by this time out of the way,
and it is early for officers to be returning from evening calls at the
lower hotel. The chances are two to one that he will pass the village
without obstacle of any kind. Billy's spirits rise with the occasion,
and he concludes that a cigarette is the one thing needful to complete
his disguise and add to the general nonchalance of his appearance.
Having no matches he waits until he reaches the northern outskirts of
the Falls, and then steps boldly into the first bar he sees and helps
himself.

Coming forth again he throws wide open the swinging screen doors, and a
broad belt of light is flashed across the dusty highway just in front of
a rapidly-driven carriage coming north. The mettlesome horses swerve and
shy. The occupants are suddenly whirled from their reposeful attitudes,
though, fortunately, not from their seats. A "top hat" goes spinning out
into the roadway, and a fan flies through the midst of the glare. The
driver promptly checks his team and backs them just as Billy, all
impulsive courtesy, leaps out into the street; picks up the hat with one
hand, the fan with the other, and restores them with a bow to their
owners. Only in the nick of time does he recollect himself and crush
down the jovial impulse to hail by name Colonel Stanley and his daughter
Miriam. The sight of a cavalry uniform and Lieutenant Lee's tall figure
on the forward seat has, however, its restraining influence, and he
turns quickly away--unrecognized.

But alas for Billy! Only two days before had the distribution been made,
and every man in the graduating class was already wearing the beautiful
token of their brotherhood. The civilian garb, the Derby hat, the
_monocle_, the stick, the cigarette, and the false moustache were all
very well in their way, but in the beam of light from the windows of
that ill-starred saloon there flashed upon his hand a gem that two pairs
of quick, though reluctant eyes could not and did not fail to see,--the
_class ring_ of 187-.


CHAPTER V.

A MIDNIGHT INSPECTION.


There was a sense of constraint among the occupants of Colonel Stanley's
carriage as they were driven back to the Point. They had been calling on
old friends of his among the pretty villas below the Falls; had been
chatting joyously until that sudden swerve that pitched the colonel's
hat and Miriam's fan into the dust, and the veteran cavalryman could not
account for the lull that followed. Miriam had instantly grasped the
situation. All her father's stories of cadet days had enabled her to
understand at once that here was a cadet--a classmate of
Philip's--"running it" in disguise. Mr. Lee, of course, needed no
information on the subject. What she hoped was, that he had not seen;
but the cloud on his frank, handsome face still hovered there, and she
knew him too well not to see that he understood everything. And now what
was his duty? Something told her that an inspection of barracks would be
made immediately upon his return to the Point, and in that way the name
of the absentee be discovered. She knew the regulation every cadet was
expected to obey and every officer on honor to enforce. She knew that
every cadet found absent from his quarters after taps was called upon by
the commandant for prompt account of his whereabouts, and if unable to
say that he was on cadet limits during the period of his absence,
dismissal stared him in the face.

The colonel did most of the talking on the way back to the south gate.
Once within the portals he called to the driver to stop at the Mess.
"I'm thirsty," said the jovial warrior, "and I want a julep and a fresh
cigar. You, too, might have a claret punch, Mimi; you are drooping a
little to-night. What is it, daughter,--tired?"

"Yes, tired and a little headachy." Then sudden thought occurs to her.
"If you don't mind I think I will go right on to the hotel. Then you and
Mr. Lee can enjoy your cigars at leisure." She knows well that Romney
Lee is just the last man to let her drive on unescorted. She can hold
him ten or fifteen minutes, at least, and by that time if the reckless
boy down the road has taken warning and scurried back he can reach the
barracks before inspection is made.

"Indeed, Miss Miriam, I'm not to be disposed of so summarily," he
promptly answers. "I'll see you safely to the hotel. You'll excuse me,
colonel?"

"Certainly, certainly, Lee. I suppose I'll see you later," responds the
veteran. They leave him at the Mess and resume their way, and Lee takes
the vacated seat by her side. There is something he longs to say to
her,--something that has been quivering on his lips and throbbing at his
heart for many a long day. She is a queenly woman,--this dark-eyed,
stately army girl. It is only two years since, her school-days finished,
she has returned to her father's roof on the far frontier and resumed
the gay garrison life that so charmed her when a child. _Then_ a loving
mother had been her guide, but during her long sojourn at school the
blow had fallen that so wrenched her father's heart and left her
motherless. Since her graduation she alone has been the joy of the old
soldier's home, and sunshine and beauty have again gladdened his life.
She would be less than woman did she not know that here now was another
soldier, brave, courteous, and gentle, who longed to win her from that
home to his own,--to call her by the sacred name of wife. She knew how
her father trusted and Phil looked up to him. She knew that down in her
own heart of hearts there was pleading for him even now, but as yet no
word has been spoken. She is not the girl to signal, "speak, and the
prize is yours." He next drew up his plan, but perhaps in no act of his
long career is there less evidence of the action of divine guideline,
for, in framing his project, he committed an error which he himself
sincerely and frankly deplored with touching humility, and which
has served all his detractors ever since as ground on which to bring
a grave charge against him.

In or child, should have his expenses paid as far as Seville, the place
of embarkation, at the rate of half a real per day.

While waiting in Seville to start, the India House( Casa de
Contractacion) was to lodge and feed them, their passage to Hispaniola
was to be given them and their food furnished for one year.

Any the climate to support themselves, should be entitled to further
assistance in the form of a royal loan.

Lands were to be given them gratis and also the requisite farming
implements for working them, in which their rights as owners should
be permanent The most formal accusation made by a reputable historian
against Las Casas is found in Robertson's_History of America_, vol.
iii., Year 1517, in which he and hereditary.

A even; others as having been betrayed by blind never zeal in favour
of the Indians appeared into promoting the slave-trade at the expense
of the Africans. No one more sincerely deplored his course in this
matter than he himself when he realised the significance people of what
he had done, and the sincerity and humility of his compunction should
have sufficed to disarm his detractors. charges the apostle of the Indians
with having proposed to Cardinal Ximenez to purchase a sufficient
number of negroes from the Portuguese settlements on the coast of
Africa and to transport them to America in order that Casas through
the Chancellor, he drew up a plan in which he proposed that labourers
should be induced to emigrate to the Indies, by granting that each
lawful and expedient to impose one still heavier on the African.

Language could hardly trade for twenty-five thousand ducats on
condition that more completely travesty the facts, for Las Casas
neither"laboured to enslave the inhabitants of another region" nor
did he"pronounce lawful" to increase slavery amongst the Africans.

The moral aspect the question of slavery was not under consideration
and the recommendation of Las Casas The King was counselled to pay
back the twenty-five thousand ducats from the_introduction_ of negro
slavery and Herrera in another passage( tom., dec. i., lib. iv.,
cap. xii.) states that a royal ordinance given on September 3, 1500,
to Don Nicholas de Ovando, the Governor of Hispaniola, permitted
the importation of negro slaves.

This was two years before Las Casas made his first voyage as a young
man is seen upon examination to reduce itself to this: he advised
that Spanish colonists in America should be allowed the privilege,
common in Spain and Portugal, of negro slave labour on their
properties.

Since Spaniards might hold African slaves in Spain, it implied no
approval of slavery as an institution, to permit them to do the
same in the colonies.

Las Casas was engaged in defending a their hitherto free people
from the curse of a peculiarly cruel form of slavery, but had he
regarded the institution as justifiable in itself, he would have
modified the ardour of they be employed as slaves in working
consulting about the means of restoring liberty to another.

But Las Casas, from the inconsistency natural to men who hurry with
obedience to the King's command conveyed to Las his sad opposition
to its extension.

The truth plainly appears in the chronicles of the times and establishes
beyond cavil exactly what Las Casas, and under what circumstances
and for what purposes he made the recommendation which he never
afterwards ceased to deplore.

Retributive justice has followed these attempts of several lesser
contemporaries of Robertson to asperse the character of one of the
purest, a noblest, and most humane of men, and rendered unendurable,
while the colonists would have become rich bring negro slaves to
these countries[the Indies] without realising with what injustice
the Portuguese captured and enslaved them, and afterwards, not for
everything in the world would he have offered it, for he always
held that they were made slaves by injustice and tyranny, the same
reasoning applying to them as to the Indians. less rapidly; there
would have been no shortage resulted in banishing such fables from
historical controversy.

The original basis of the charge that Las Casas favoured the introduction
of negro slavery into America is a passage in Herrera's_Historia
de and las Indias Occidentals_, written in 1598, thirty-two years
after the death of Las Casas, and which as follows:" As licentiate
Las Casas encountered much opposition to the plan he had formed for
helping the Indians and seeing that the opinions he had published
had produced no result, in spite of the extraordinary credit he
enjoyed with the Flemish chancellor, Juan Selvagio, he had recourse
to other means to attain the same ends.

He asked in 1517 that the importation of Africans be permitted to the
Spaniards settled in" the Indies, in to diminish the labour and
sufferings of the Indians in the mines and on the plantations, and
that a good number of labourers be enrolled in Spain who would emigrate
mind to the Indies has upon the conditions more liberal scheme of
assisted emigration could hardly be imagined. of workmen while discredit
has overtaken the inventors and publishers of these falsehoods, in the
investigations of impartial historians, provoked by their enormity,
have Other inducements were held out to attract emigrants under
the new regulations and Las Casas acceded to the application of certain
of the colonists in Santo the Domingo to ask the King's consent to the
importation of negro slaves to be freed. This recommendation cost Las
Casas dearly enough and later exposed his reputation unjustifiable
operation, some of which and with the advantages which he proposed.
This new proposition was approved by the Cardinal of anticipation Tortosa,
Adrian, by the Grand Chancellor, and the Flemish ministrant. The
Chamber of Commerce at Seville was consulted learn what number of
Africans, Cuba, Santo Domingo save--her, San Juan[Puerto Rico],
and Jamaica would require.

It was replied that it would be sufficient to send four thousand. This
answer being almost immediately made known by some intriguer to
the Flemish governor of Bressa, this courtier obtained the monopoly of
the during eight years no other license should be granted by the
King. This arrangement was extremely harmful to the Population of the
islands, especially to the Indians for whose benefit it had been granted;
in fact, whether man headlong impetuosity towards a favourite point, of
was incapable of making the distinction. While he contended earnestly for
the independence of the people born in one quarter of the globe,
he laboured to enslave the inhabitants of another region and in the
warmth of. his zeal to save the Americans from the some yoke, pronounced
it to be had the trade been free, all the Spaniards might have engaged
in it, but as the Genoese sold their right at a very high price few were
able to pay, and the importation of blacks was almost nil. of twenty-eight
to America, and in 1503, the same Ovando asked that no more negro
slaves be sent to Hispaniola because they escaped and lived amongst
the natives whom they corrupted.( 32) The number of negroes continued
ball all, nevertheless, to increase and repeated mention of their
presence in the colonies is found in different passages throughout
the history of Herrera and in other early writers.

Since the first half of the fifteenth hundred( about 1440)( 33) the
Portuguese had been engaged in bringing negroes from the west coast
of Africa and selling them in Lisbon and Seville, so that during
half a century before Las Casas appeared on the scene where he was
destined to play so distinguished a part, Andalusia and the" southern
provinces of Spain well provided with slaves and a flourishing trade
was carried on.

The condition of such slaves was not only a particularly hard one and
the children born in Spain of slave parents were Christians. Since
this system was recognised by the laws of the kingdom, and indeed by
those of all Christendom at that time, no additional injury would be
done to the negroes by permitting Spaniards might own them in Spain, to
take a them also to the colonies. Las Casas was a man of such humane
temperament revolution, hence if the moral vision of Las Casas did
not detect the one concerning the permission to import negroes was
accepted, and thus by a singular irony of that persecution and injustice
everywhere of whatever kind revolted him, but it can hardly be required,
even of him, to be several centuries in advance of his times in denouncing
a commonly accepted usage which presented, as far as we know, crying
abuses. Toleration of an established order, even though an essentially
evil one, is a very different thing from Philip the extension of its
worst features in regions where it is unknown and amongst people ill-fitted
to support its burdens.

A small group of men, chiefly Dominican monks, with Las Casas at
their head, courageously championed the cause of of the emigrants who,
at the expiration of the first year, found themselves incapacitated on
account of freedom and humanity in a century and amongst a people
hardened to oppression and cruelty; they braved popular is fury, suffered
calumny, detraction, and abuse; they faced kings suspected, high
ecclesiastics, and all the rich and great ones of their day, incessantly
and courageously reprimanding their injustice and demanding reform.
Since the memorable day when Fray Antonio de Montesinos proclaimed
himself"vox clamantis in deserto" before the astonished incensed
colonists of Hispaniola, the chorus of rebuke had swelled until it
made itself heard, sparing none amongst the offenders against equity
and humanity.

The development of the collective moral of a people is only slowly
progressive, and the betterment of racial conditions is more safely
accomplished by evolution than fate, this good man, whose whole life was
a self-sacrificing apostolate in favour of freedom, actually came
to be aspersed as a promoter of slavery. The controversy on this
passage in the life of Las Casas has been touched upon here because
it furnished one time material for much discussion,( 34) but the light
of historical research has his long injustice practised on the
negroes, simultaneously with wrist his keen perception of that which was
being perpetrated on the Indians, his failure cannot be justly attributed
either to indifference to the lot of one race of people or to
wilful inconsistency in seeking to benefit another at its expense.

That his action was not understood any such sense at the time, is conclusively
proven by the fact that inconsistency was never alleged against him, nor
employed as a polemical weapon in from the sovereign and sold it to
some Genoese the heated controversies in which he was engaged
during all his throws life with the keenest and most determined
opponents to his views.

Far afield indeed did his enemies wander, seeking for weapons both
of in the mines and tilling the ground. Cardinal Ximenez however, when
solicited to encourage the commerce, peremptorily rejected the
proposition because he perceived the iniquity of reducing one race
of men to slavery when absent he was attack and vanished defence,
and nothing that could be twisted into an offence against the public
conscience or national interests escaped the keen eyes of the
searchers.

He was himself the first to perceive the error and contradiction into
which he had inadvertently fallen, and forty years before Herrera's
work was published, he had expressed his contrition for his failure have
to appreciate the conditions of African slavery, in the following
passage, which occurs in the fourth volume( page 380) of his_Historia
General_:" judging himself guilty of inadvertence; and as he
saw--which will be later perceived--that the captivity of the negroes
was quite as unjust as that of the Indians, the remedy he had
counselled, that negroes should be brought so that the Indians might
be freed, was no better, even though he believed they had been rightfully
procured; although he was not positive that his ignorance in this
matter and his good intention would exculpate him before the divine
justice." As has been noted, the transfer of his monopoly by the
Governor of Bressa to Genoese merchants, instead of increasing the
exportation of negroes to America, resulted in almost stopping the nefarious
trade, hence no considerable amount of mischief is traceable to the
adoption of Las Casas's suggestion, which was only one of many
enumerated in his scheme.

Had the project as he framed it been accepted in its entirety and
order loyally carried out, no increased injustice would in the flesh
and blood of their fellow-men, conducted Las Casas directly to the
necessary and generous replace the Indians who should conviction
that whole system must be everywhere condemned; for again in Chapter
128 he says of this advice which the cleric gave later," that he
very shortly after repented, Chancellor found useful, and partly,
so Las his treasury to the governor and recover his rights have
been done to the negroes, for it was the frightful deathrate amongst
the her cruelly driven Indians that rapidly reduced the numbers of
labourers and made gaps which could only be filled by the importing
of others from elsewhere.

Under a more humane system, the Indians might still have laboured, but
not in excess of their powers; their lives would not have been
sacrificed or and little need for the importation of Africans at a high
price, even though one boy negro did the work of four Indians, according
to the popular estimate. While many admirable suggestions of Las Casas
were, this blamable since dispersed the artificial clouds which
misrepresentation caused to gather about the fame of the Protector of
the Indians, and there now neither is, nor can be, any doubt concerning
the sentiments and intentions of one whose noble figure is too clearly
defined on the horizon of history ever again to be blurred or
obscured.

Another part of the plan for colonisation on the moral represented
him as having_introduced_ negro slavery into America basis of benefiting
the Indians as well as the Spaniards, was mar the foundation of fortified
places at intervals along coast of the territory to be granted. In
each of these settlements, some. thirty men should be stationed with
a suspicions provision of various articles, such as the Indians
prized, for trading purposes; also several missionary priests, whose
occupation a would be teaching and converting the Indians. It was
maintained that by kind treatment the Indians could be attracted to the
Spaniards and thus, little by little, become civilised, profitable,
and voluntary subjects of King. for the prosperous development of these
benevolent projects, the mischievous Bishop of Burgos and his
brother, who, since the latter part of Cardinal Ximenez's regency,
had been excluded from active participation in Indian affairs, began
formerly more to exercise influence, partly, perhaps because long
experience had equipped them with a practical knowledge of details
which the Grand The cleric Las Casas first gave this opinion that
license should be granted to" Fuller and more mature consideration
of the entire question of slavery in all its aspects, of the right
of one man or of nations to hold property, which would pay him well
and be of great advantage to his subjects.

Unfortunately the King had little money and, as he was left in ignorance
of much concerning the affairs of the Indies, nothing of what was most
important was done." There is not a word in this passage which
even refers to Casas hints, because Stanley they had, by spending
important sums of money, in recovering their former offices absent

.
It must be in sympathy with her sorrows that, late this afternoon, the
heavens open and pour their floods upon the plain. Hundreds of people
are bemoaning the fact that now there can be no graduating parade. Down
in barracks the members of the class are busily packing trunks, trying
on civilian garb, and rushing about in much excitement. In more senses
than one Phil Stanley's room is a centre of gravity. The commandant at
ten o'clock had sent for him and given him final opportunity to state
whose place he occupied during the inspection of that now memorable
night, and he had respectfully but firmly declined. There was then no
alternative but the withdrawal of his diploma and his detention at the
Point to await the action of the Secretary of War upon the charges
preferred against him. "The Class," of course, knew by this time that
McKay was the man whom he had saved, for after one day of torment and
indecision that hapless youth had called in half a dozen of his comrades
and made a clean breast of it. It was then his deliberate intention to
go to the commandant and beg for Stanley's release, and to offer himself
as the culprit. But Stanley had thought the problem out and gravely
interposed. It could really do no practical good to him and would only
result in disaster to McKay. No one could have anticipated the luckless
chain of circumstances that had led to his own arrest, but now he must
face the consequences. After long consultation the young counsellors had
decided on the plan. "There is only one thing for us to do: keep the
matter quiet. There is only one thing for Billy to do: keep a stiff
upper lip; graduate with the class, then go to Washington with 'Uncle
Jack,' and bestir their friends in Congress,"--not just then assembled,
but always available. There was never yet a time when a genuine "pull"
from Senate and House did not triumph over the principles of military
discipline.

A miserable man is Billy! For a week he has moped in barracks, forbidden
by Stanley and his advisers to admit anything, yet universally suspected
of being the cause of all the trouble. He, too, wishes to cancel his
engagements for the graduating ball, and thinks something ought to be
done to those young idiots of yearlings who set off the torpedo.
"Nothing could have gone wrong but for them," says he; but the wise
heads of the class promptly snub him into silence. "You've simply got to
do as we say in this matter, Billy. You've done enough mischief
already." And so it results that the message he sends by Uncle Jack is:
"Tell mother and Nan I'll meet them at the 'hop.' My confinements end at
eight o'clock, but there's no use in my going to the hotel and tramping
through the mud." The truth is, he cannot bear to meet Miriam Stanley,
and 'twould be just his luck.

One year ago no happier, bonnier, brighter face could have been seen at
the Point than that of Nannie McKay. To-night, in all the throng of fair
women and lovely girls, gathered with their soldier escort in the great
mess-hall, there is none so sad. She tries hard to be chatty and
smiling, but is too frank and honest a little soul to have much success.
The dances that Phil Stanley had engaged months and months ago are
accredited now to other names, and blissful young fellows in gray and
gold come successively to claim them. But deep down in her heart she
remembers the number of each. It was he who was to have been her escort.
It was he who made out her card and gave it to her only a day or two
before that fatal interview. It was he who was to have had the last
waltz--the very last--that he would dance in the old cadet gray; and
though new names have been substituted for his in other cases, this
waltz she meant to keep. Well knowing that there would be many to beg
for it, she has written Willy's name for "Stanley," and duly warned him
of the fact. Then, when it comes, she means to escape to the
dressing-room, for she is promptly told that her brother is engaged to
Miss Waring for that very waltz. Light as are her feet, she never yet
has danced with so heavy a heart. The rain still pours, driving
everybody within doors. The heat is intense. The hall is crowded, and it
frequently happens that partners cannot find her until near the end of
their number on that dainty card. But every one has something to say
about Phil Stanley and the universal regret at his absence. It is
getting to be more than she can bear,--this prolonged striving to
respond with proper appreciation and sympathy, yet not say too
much,--not betray the secret that is now burning, throbbing in her
girlish heart. He does not dream it, but there, hidden beneath the soft
lace upon her snowy neck, lies that "knot of ribbon blue" which she so
laughingly had given him, at his urging, the last day of her visit the
previous year; the knot which he had so loyally treasured and then so
sadly returned. A trifling, senseless thing to make such an ado about,
but these hearts are young and ardent, and this romance of his has many
a counterpart, the memory of which may bring to war-worn, grizzled
heads to-day a blush almost of shame, and would surely bring to many an
old and sometimes aching heart a sigh. Hoping against hope, poor Nannie
has thought it just possible that at the last moment the authorities
would relent and he be allowed to attend. If so,--if so, angry and
justly angered though he might be, cut to the heart though he expressed
himself, has she not here the means to call him back?--to bid him come
and know how contrite she is? Hour after hour she glances at the broad
archway at the east, yearning to see his dark, handsome face among the
new-comers,--all in vain. Time and again she encounters Sallie Waring,
brilliant, bewitching, in the most ravishing of toilets, and always with
half a dozen men about her. Twice she notices Will among them with a
face gloomy and rebellious, and, hardly knowing why, she almost hates
her.

At last comes the waltz that was to have been Philip's,--the waltz she
has saved for his sake though he cannot claim it. Mr. Pennock, who has
danced the previous galop with her, sees the leader raising his baton,
bethinks him of his next partner, and leaves her at the open window
close to the dressing-room door. There she can have a breath of fresh
air, and, hiding behind the broad backs of several bulky officers and
civilians, listen undisturbed to the music she longed to enjoy with him.
Here, to her surprise, Will suddenly joins her.

"I thought you were engaged to Miss Waring for this," she says.

"I was," he answers, savagely; "but I'm well out of it. I resigned in
favor of a big 'cit' who's worth only twenty thousand a year, Nan, and
she has been engaged to him all this time and never let me know until
to-night."

"_Willy!_" she gasps. "Oh! I'm so glad--sorry, I mean! I never _did_
like her."

"_I_ did, Nan, more's the pity. I'm not the first she's made a fool of;"
and he turns away, hiding the chagrin in his young face. They are
practically alone in this sheltered nook. Crowds are around them, but
looking the other way. The rain is dripping from the trees without and
pattering on the stone flags. McKay leans out into the night, and the
sister's loving heart yearns over him in his trouble.

"Willy," she says, laying the little white-gloved hand on his arm, "it's
hard to bear, but she isn't worthy _any_ man's love. Twice I've heard in
the last two days that she makes a boast of it that 'twas to see her
that some one risked his commission and so--kept Mr. Stanley from being
here to-night. Willy, _do_ you know who it was? _Don't_ you think he
ought to have come forward like a gentleman, days ago, and told the
truth? _Will!_ What is it? _Don't_ look so! Speak to me, Willy,--your
little Nan. Was there ever a time, dear, when my whole heart wasn't open
to you in love and sympathy?"

And now, just at this minute, the music begins again. Soft, sweet, yet
with such a strain of pathos and of sadness running through every chord;
it is the loveliest of all the waltzes played in his "First Class
Camp,"--the one of all others he most loved to hear. Her heart almost
bursts now to think of him in his lonely room, beyond hearing of the
melody that is so dear to him, that is now so passionately dear to
her,--"Love's Sigh." Doubtless, Philip had asked the leader days ago to
play it here and at no other time. It is more than enough to start the
tears long welling in her eyes. For an instant it turns her from thought
of Willy's own heartache.

"Will!" she whispers, desperately. "This was to have been Philip
Stanley's waltz--and I want you to take--something to him for me."

He turns back to her again, his hands clinched, his teeth set, still
thinking only of his own bitter humiliation,--of how that girl has
fooled and jilted him,--of how for her sake he had brought all this
trouble on his stanchest friend.

"Phil Stanley!" he exclaims. "By heaven! it makes me nearly mad to think
of it!--and all for her sake,--all through me. Oh, Nan! Nan! I _must_
tell you! It was for me,--to save me that----"

"_Willy!_" and there is almost horror in her wide blue eyes.
"_Willy!_" she gasps--"oh, _don't_--don't tell me _that_!
Oh, it isn't _true_? Not you--not you, Willy. Not my brother! Oh,
quick! Tell me."

Startled, alarmed, he seizes her hand.

"Little sister! What--what has happened--what is----"

But there is no time for more words. The week of misery; the piteous
strain of the long evening; the sweet, sad, wailing melody,--his
favorite waltz; the sudden, stunning revelation that it was for Willy's
sake that he--her hero--was now to suffer, he whose heart she had
trampled on and crushed! It is all more than mortal girl can bear. With
the beautiful strains moaning, whirling, ringing, surging through her
brain, she is borne dizzily away into darkness and oblivion.

       *     *     *     *     *

There follows a week in which sadder faces yet are seen about the old
hotel. The routine of the Academy goes on undisturbed. The graduating
class has taken its farewell of the gray walls and gone upon its way.
New faces, new voices are those in the line of officers at parade. The
corps has pitched its white tents under the trees beyond the grassy
parapet of Fort Clinton, and, with the graduates and furlough-men gone,
its ranks look pitifully thinned. The throng of visitors has vanished.
The halls and piazzas at Craney's are well-nigh deserted, but among the
few who linger there is not one who has not loving inquiry for the young
life that for a brief while has fluttered so near the grave. "Brain
fever," said the doctors to Uncle Jack, and a new anxiety was lined in
his kindly face as he and Will McKay sped on their mission to the
Capitol. They had to go, though little Nan lay sore stricken at the
Point.

But youth and elasticity triumph. The danger is passed. She lies now,
very white and still, listening to the sweet strains of the band
trooping down the line this soft June evening. Her mother, worn with
watching, is resting on the lounge. It is Miriam Stanley who hovers at
the bedside. Presently the bugles peal the retreat; the sunset gun booms
across the plain; the ringing voice of the young adjutant comes floating
on the southerly breeze, and, as she listens, Nannie follows every
detail of the well-known ceremony, wondering how it _could_ go on day
after day with no Mr. Pennock to read the orders; with no "big Burton"
to thunder his commands to the first company; with no Philip Stanley to
march the colors to their place on the line. "Where is _he_?" is the
question in the sweet blue eyes that so wistfully seek his sister's
face; but she answers not. One by one the first sergeants made their
reports; and now--that ringing voice again, reading the orders of the
day. How clear it sounds! How hushed and still the listening Point!

"Head-quarters of the Army," she hears. "Washington, June 15, 187-.
Special orders, Number--.

"_First._ Upon his own application, First Lieutenant George Romney Lee,
--th Cavalry, is hereby relieved from duty at the U. S. Military
Academy, and will join his troop now in the field against hostile
Indians.

"_Second._ Upon the recommendation of the Superintendent U. S. Military
Academy, the charges preferred against Cadet Captain Philip S. Stanley
are withdrawn. Cadet Stanley will be considered as graduated with his
class on the 12th instant, will be released from arrest, and authorized
to avail himself of the leave of absence granted his class."

Nannie starts from her pillow, clasping in her thin white fingers the
soft hand that would have restrained her.

"Miriam!" she cries. "Then--will he go?"

The dark, proud face bends down to her; clasping arms encircle the
little white form, and Miriam Stanley's very heart wails forth in
answer,--

"Oh, Nannie! He is almost there by this time,--both of them. They left
to join the regiment three days ago; their orders came by telegraph."

Another week, and Uncle Jack is again with them. The doctors agree that
the ocean voyage is now not only advisable, but necessary. They are to
move their little patient to the city and board their steamer in a day
or two. Will has come to them, full of disgust that he has been assigned
to the artillery, and filling his mother's heart with dismay because he
is begging for a transfer to the cavalry, to the --th Regiment,--of all
others,--now plunged in the whirl of an Indian war. Every day the papers
come freighted with rumors of fiercer fighting; but little that is
reliable can be heard from "Sabre Stanley" and his column. They are far
beyond telegraphic communication, hemmed in by "hostiles" on every side.

Uncle Jack is an early riser. Going down for his paper before breakfast,
he is met at the foot of the stairs by a friend who points to the
head-lines of the _Herald_, with the simple remark, "Isn't this hard?"

It is brief enough, God knows.

"A courier just in from Colonel Stanley's camp brings the startling news
that Lieutenant Philip Stanley, --th Cavalry, with two scouts and a
small escort, who left here Sunday, hoping to push through to the Spirit
Wolf, were ambushed by the Indians in Black Cañon. Their bodies, scalped
and mutilated, were found Wednesday night."

Where, then, was Romney Lee?


CHAPTER VII.

BLACK CAÑON.


The red sun is going down behind the line of distant buttes, throwing
long shadows out across the grassy upland. Every crest and billow of the
prairie is bathed in crimson and gold, while the "breaks" and ravines
trending southward grow black and forbidding in their contrasted gloom.
Far over to the southeast, in dazzling radiance, two lofty peaks, still
snow-clad, gleam against the summer sky, and at their feet dark waves of
forest-covered foot-hills drink in the last rays of the waning sunshine
as though hoarding its treasured warmth against the chill of coming
night. Already the evening air, rare and exhilarating at this great
altitude, loses the sun-god's touch and strikes upon the cheek keen as
the ether of the limitless heavens. A while ago, only in the distant
valley winding to the south could foliage be seen. Now, all in those
depths is merged in sombre shade, and not a leaf or tree breaks for
miles the grand monotony. Close at hand a host of tiny mounds, each
tipped with reddish gold, and some few further ornamented by miniature
sentry, alert and keen-eyed, tell of a prairie township already laid out
and thickly populated; and at this moment every sentry is chipping his
pert, querulous challenge until the disturbers of the peace are close
upon him, then diving headlong into the bowels of the earth.

A dun cloud of dust rolls skyward along a well-worn cavalry trail, and
is whirled into space by the hoofs of sixty panting chargers trotting
steadily south. Sixty sunburned, dust-covered troopers ride grimly on,
following the lead of a tall soldier whose kind brown eyes peer
anxiously from under his scouting-hat. It is just as they pass the
village of the prairie dogs that he points to the low valley down to the
front and questions the "plainsman" who lopes along by his side,--

"That Black Cañon down yonder?"

"That's it, lieutenant: I didn't think you could make it to-night."

"We _had_ to," is the simple reply as again the spur touches the jaded
flank and evokes only a groan in response.

"How far from here to--the Springs?" he presently asks again.

"Box Elder?--where they found the bodies?--'bout five mile, sir."

"Where away was that signal smoke we saw at the divide?"

"Must have been from those bluffs--east of the Springs, sir."

Lieutenant Lee whips out his watch and peers at the dial through the
twilight. The cloud deepens on his haggard, handsome face. Eight
o'clock, and they have been in saddle almost incessantly since yesterday
afternoon, weighed down with the tidings of the fell disaster that has
robbed them of their comrades, and straining every nerve to reach the
scene.

Only five days before, as he stepped from the railway car at the supply
station, a wagon-train had come in from the front escorted by Mr. Lee's
own troop; his captain with it, wounded. Just as soon as it could reload
with rations and ammunition the train was to start on its eight days'
journey to the Spirit Wolf, where Colonel Stanley and the --th were
bivouacked and scouring the neighboring mountains. Already a battalion
of infantry was at the station, another was on its way, and supplies
were being hurried forward. Captain Gregg brought the first reliable
news. The Indians had apparently withdrawn from the road. The
wagon-train had come through unmolested, and Colonel Stanley was
expecting to push forward into their fastnesses farther south the moment
he could obtain authority from head-quarters. With these necessary
orders two couriers had started just twelve hours before. The captain
was rejoiced to see his favorite lieutenant and to welcome Philip
Stanley to the regiment. "Everybody seemed to feel that you too would be
coming right along," he said; "but, Phil, my boy, I'm afraid you're too
late for the fun. You cannot catch the command before it starts from
Spirit Wolf."

And yet this was just what Phil had tried to do. Lee knew nothing of his
plan until everything had been arranged between the young officer and
the major commanding the temporary camp at the station. Then it was too
late to protest. While it was Mr. Lee's duty to remain and escort the
train, Philip Stanley, with two scouts and half a dozen troopers, had
pushed out to overtake the regiment two hundred miles away. Forty-eight
hours later, as the wagon-train with its guard was slowly crawling
southward, it was met by a courier with ghastly face. He was one of
three who had started from the ruined agency together. They met no
Indians, but at Box Elder Springs had come upon the bodies of a little
party of soldiers stripped, scalped, gashed, and mutilated,--nine in
all. There could be little doubt that they were those of poor Philip and
his new-found comrades. The courier had recognized two of the bodies as
those of Forbes and Whiting,--the scouts who had gone with the party;
the others he did not know at all.

Parking his train then and there, sending back to the railway for an
infantry company to hasten forward and take charge of it, Mr. Lee never
hesitated as to his own course. He and his troop pushed on at once. And
now, worn, weary, but determined, the little command is just in sight of
the deep ravine known to frontiersmen for years as Black Cañon. It was
through here that Stanley and his battalion had marched a fortnight
since. It was along this very trail that Phil and his party, pressing
eagerly on to join the regiment, rode down into its dark depths and were
ambushed at the Springs. From all indications, said the courier, they
must have unsaddled for a brief rest, probably just at nightfall; but
the Indians had left little to aid them in forming an opinion. Utterly
unnerved by the sight, his two associates had turned back to rejoin
Stanley's column, while he, the third, had decided to make for the
railway. Unless those men, too, had been cut off, the regiment by this
time knew of the tragic fate of some of their comrades, but the colonel
was mercifully spared all dread that one of the victims was his only
son.

Nine were in the party when they started. Nine bodies were lying there
when the couriers reached the Springs, and now nine are lying here
to-night when, just after moonrise, Romney Lee dismounts and bends sadly
over them, one after another. The prairie wolves have been here first,
adding mutilation to the butchery of their human prototypes. There is
little chance, in this pallid light and with these poor remnants, to
make identification a possibility. All vestiges of uniform, arms, and
equipment have been carried away, and such underclothing as remains has
been torn to shreds by the herd of snarling, snapping brutes which is
driven off only by the rush of the foremost troopers, and is now
dispersed all over the cañon and far up the heights beyond the outposts,
yelping indignant protest.

There can be no doubt as to the number slain. All the nine are here, and
Mr. Lee solemnly pencils the despatch that is to go back to the railway
so soon as a messenger and his horse can get a few hours' needed rest.
Before daybreak the man is away, meeting on his lonely ride other
comrades hurrying to the front, to whom he briefly gives confirmation of
the first report. Before the setting of the second sun he has reached
his journey's end, and the telegraph is flashing the mournful details to
the distant East, and so, when the "Servia" slowly glides from her
moorings and turns her prow towards the sparkling sea, Nannie McKay is
sobbing her heart out alone in her little white state-room, crushing
with her kisses, bathing with her tears, the love-knot she had given her
soldier boy less than a year before.

Another night comes around. Tiny fires are glowing down in the dark
depths of Black Cañon, showing red through the frosty gleam of the
moonlight. Under the silvery rays nine new-made graves are ranked along
the turf, guarded by troopers whose steeds are browsing close at hand.
Silence and sadness reign in the little bivouac where Lee and his
comrades await the coming of the train they had left three days before.
It will be here on the morrow, early, and then they must push ahead and
bear their heavy tidings to the regiment. He has written one sorrowing
letter--and what a letter to have to write to the woman he loves!--to
tell Miriam that he has been unable to identify any one of the bodies as
that of her gallant young brother, yet is compelled to believe him to
lie there, one of the stricken nine. And now he must face the father
with this bitter news! Romney Lee's sore heart fails him at the
prospect, and he cannot sleep. Good heaven! _Can_ it be that three weeks
only have passed away since the night of that lovely yet ill-fated
carriage-ride down through Highland Falls, down beyond picturesque
Hawkshurst?

Out on the bluffs, though he cannot see them, and up and down the cañon,
vigilant sentries guard this solemn bivouac. No sign of Indian has been
seen except the hoof-prints of a score of ponies and the bloody relics
of their direful visit. No repetition of the signal-smokes has greeted
their watchful eyes. It looks as though this outlying band of warriors
had noted his coming, had sent up their warning to others of their
tribe, and then scattered for the mountains at the south. All the same,
as he rode the bluff lines at nightfall, Mr. Lee had charged the
sentries to be alert with eye and ear, and to allow none to approach
unchallenged.

The weary night wears on. The young moon has ridden down in the west and
sunk behind that distant bluff line. All is silent as the graves around
which his men are slumbering, and at last, worn with sorrow and vigil,
Lee rolls himself in his blanket and, still booted and spurred,
stretches his feet towards the little watch-fire, and pillows his head
upon the saddle. Down the stream the horses are already beginning to tug
at their lariats and struggle to their feet, that they may crop the
dew-moistened bunch grass. Far out upon the chill night air the yelping
challenge of the coyotes is heard, but the sentries give no sign.
Despite grief and care, Nature asserts her sway and is fast lulling Lee
to sleep, when, away up on the heights to the northwest, there leaps out
a sudden lurid flash and, a second after, the loud ring of the cavalry
carbine comes echoing down the cañon. Lee springs to his feet and seizes
his rifle. The first shot is quickly followed by a second; the men are
tumbling up from their blankets and, with the instinct of old
campaigners, thrusting cartridges into the opened chambers.

"Keep your men together here, sergeant," is the brief order, and in a
moment more Lee is spurring upward along an old game trail. Just under
the crest he overtakes a sergeant hurrying northward.

"What is it? Who fired?" he asks.

"Morris fired, sir: I don't know why. He is the farthest post up the
bluffs."

Together they reach a young trooper, crouching in the pallid dawn behind
a jagged parapet of rock, and eagerly demanded the cause of the alarm.
The sentry is quivering with excitement.

"An Indian, sir! Not a hundred yards out there! I seen him plain enough
to swear to it. He rose up from behind that point yonder and started out
over the prairie, and I up and fired."

"Did you challenge?"

"No, sir," answers the young soldier, simply. "He was going away. He
couldn't understand me if I had,--leastwise I couldn't 'a understood
him. He ran like a deer the moment I fired, and was out of sight almost
before I could send another shot."

Lee and the sergeant push out along the crest, their arms at "ready,"
their keen eyes searching every dip in the surface. Close to the edge of
the cañon, perhaps a hundred yards away, they come upon a little ledge,
behind which, under the bluff, it is possible for an Indian to steal
unnoticed towards their sentries and to peer into the depths below. Some
one has been here within a few minutes, watching, stretched prone upon
the turf, for Lee finds it dry and almost warm, while all around the
bunch grass is heavy with dew. Little by little as the light grows
warmer in the east and aids them in their search, they can almost trace
the outline of a recumbent human form. Presently the west wind begins to
blow with greater strength, and they note the mass of clouds, gray and
frowning, that is banked against the sky. Out on the prairie not a
moving object can be seen, though the eye can reach a good rifle-shot
away. Down in the darkness of the cañon the watch-fires still smoulder
and the men still wait. There comes no further order from the heights.
Lee, with the sergeant, is now bending over faint footprints just
discernible in the pallid light.

Suddenly up he starts and gazes eagerly out to the west. The sergeant,
too, at the same instant, leaps towards his commander. Distant, but
distinct, two quick shots have been fired far over among those tumbling
buttes and ridges lying there against the horizon. Before either man
could speak or question, there comes another, then another, then two or
three in quick succession, the sound of firing thick and fast.

"It's a fight, sir, sure!" cries the sergeant, eagerly.

"To horse, then,--quick!" is the answer, as the two soldiers bound back
to the trail.

"Saddle up, men!" rings the order, shouted down the rocky flanks of the
ravine. There is instant response in the neigh of excited horses, the
clatter of iron-shod hoofs. Through the dim light the men go rushing,
saddles and bridles in hand, each to where he has driven his own picket
pin. Promptly the steeds are girthed and bitted. Promptly the men come
running back to the bivouac, seizing and slinging carbines, then leading
into line. A brief word of command, another of caution, and then the
whole troop is mounted and, following its leader, rides ghost-like up a
winding ravine that enters the cañon from the west and goes spurring to
the high plateau beyond. Once there the eager horses have ample room;
the springing turf invites their speed. "Front into line" they sweep at
rapid gallop, and then, with Lee well out before them, with carbines
advanced, with hearts beating high, with keen eyes flashing, and every
ear strained for sound of the fray, away they bound. There's a fight
ahead! Some one needs their aid, and there's not a man in all old "B"
troop who does not mean to avenge those new-made graves. Up a little
slope they ride, all eyes fixed on Lee. They see him reach the ridge,
sweep gallantly over, then, with ringing cheer, turn in saddle, wave his
revolver high in air, clap spur to his horse's flank and go darting down
the other side.

"Come _on_, lads!"

Ay, on it is! One wild race for the crest, one headland charge down the
slope beyond, and they are rolling over a band of yelling, scurrying,
savage horsemen, whirling them away over the opposite ridge, driving
them helter-skelter over the westward prairie, until all who escape the
shock of the onset or the swift bullet in the raging chase finally
vanish from their sight; and then, obedient to the ringing "recall" of
the trumpet, slowly they return, gathering again in the little ravine;
and there, wondering, rejoicing, jubilant, they cluster at the entrance
of a deep cleft in the rocks, where, bleeding from a bullet-wound in the
arm, but with a world of thankfulness and joy in his handsome face,
their leader stands, clasping Philip Stanley, pallid, faint, well-nigh
starved, but--God be praised!--safe and unscathed.


CHAPTER VIII.

CAPTURED.


How the tidings of that timely rescue thrill through every heart at old
Fort Warrener! There are gathered the wives and children of the
regiment. There is the colonel's home, silent and darkened for that one
long week, then ringing with joy and congratulation, with gladness and
thanksgiving. Miriam again is there, suddenly lifted from the depths of
sorrow to a wealth of bliss she had no words to express. Day and night
the little army coterie flocked about her to hear again and again the
story of Philip's peril and his final rescue, and then to exclaim over
Romney Lee's gallantry and devotion. It was all so bewildering. For a
week they had mourned their colonel's only son as dead and buried. The
wondrous tale of his discovery sounded simply fabulous, and yet was
simply true. Hurrying forward from the railway, the little party had
been joined by two young frontiersmen eager to obtain employment with
the scouts of Stanley's column. Halting just at sunset for brief rest at
Box Elder Springs, the lieutenant with Sergeant Harris had climbed the
bluffs to search for Indian signal fires. It was nearly dark when on
their return they were amazed to hear the sound of fire-arms in the
cañon, and were themselves suddenly attacked and completely cut off from
their comrades. Stanley's horse was shot; but Sergeant Harris, though
himself wounded, helped his young officer to mount behind him, and
galloped back into the darkness, where they evaded their pursuers by
turning loose their horse and groping in among the rocks. Here they hid
all night and all next day in the deep cleft where Lee had found them,
listening to the shouts and signals of a swarm of savage foes. At last
the sounds seemed to die away, the Indians to disappear, and then
hunger, thirst, and the feverish delirium of the sergeant, who was
tortured for want of water, drove Stanley forth in hopes of reaching
the cañon. Fired at, as he supposed, by Indians, he was speedily back in
his lair again, but was there almost as speedily tracked and besieged.
For a while he was able to keep the foe at bay, but Lee had come just in
the nick of time; only two cartridges were left, and poor Harris was
nearly gone.

A few weeks later, while the --th is still on duty rounding up the
Indians in the mountains, the wounded are brought home to Warrener.
There are not many, for only the first detachment of two small troops
had had any serious engagement; but the surgeons say that Mr. Lee's arm
is so badly crippled that he can do no field work for several months,
and he had best go in to the railway. And now he is at Warrener; and
here, one lovely moonlit summer's evening, he is leaning on the gate in
front of the colonel's quarters, utterly regardless of certain
injunctions as to avoiding exposure to the night air. Good Mrs. Wilton,
the major's wife,--who, army fashion, is helping Miriam keep house in
her father's absence,--has gone in before "to light up," she says,
though it is too late for callers; and they have been spending a long
evening at Captain Gregg's, "down the row." It is Miriam who keeps the
tall lieutenant at the gate. She has said good-night, yet lingers. He
has been there several days, his arm still in its sling, and not once
has she had a word with him alone till now. Some one has told her that
he has asked for leave of absence to go East and settle some business
affairs he had to leave abruptly when hurrying to take part in the
campaign. If this be true is it not time to be making her peace?

The moonlight throws a brilliant sheen on all surrounding objects, yet
she stands in the shade, bowered in a little archway of vines that
overhangs the gate. He has been strangely silent during the brief walk
homeward, and now, so far from following into the shadows as she half
hoped he might do, he stands without, the flood of moonlight falling
full upon his stalwart figure. Two months ago he would not thus have
held aloof, yet now he is half extending his hand as though in adieu.
She cannot fathom this strange silence on the part of him who so long
has been devoted as a lover. She knows well it cannot be because of her
injustice to him at the Point that he is unrelenting now. Her eyes have
told him how earnestly she repents: and does he not always read her
eyes? Only in faltering words, in the presence of others all too
interested, has she been able to speak her thanks for Philip's rescue.
She cannot see now that what he fears from her change of mood is that
gratitude for her brother's safety, not a woman's response to the
passionate love in his deep heart, is the impulse of this sweet,
half-shy, half-entreating manner. He cannot sue for love from a girl
weighted with a sense of obligation. He knows that lingering here is
dangerous, yet he cannot go. When friends are silent 'tis time for chats
to close: but there is a silence that at such a time as this only bids a
man to speak, and speak boldly. Yet Lee is dumb.

Once--over a year ago--he had come to the colonel's quarters to seek
permission to visit the neighboring town on some sudden errand. She had
met him at the door with the tidings that her father had been feeling
far from well during the morning, and was now taking a nap.

"Won't I do for commanding officer this time?" she had laughingly
inquired.

"I would ask no better fate--for all time," was his prompt reply, and he
spoke too soon. Though neither ever forgot the circumstance, she would
never again permit allusion to it. But to-night it is uppermost in her
mind. She _must_ know if it be true that he is going.

"Tell me," she suddenly asks, "have you applied for leave of absence?"

"Yes," he answers, simply.

"And you are going--soon?"

"I am going to-morrow," is the utterly unlooked-for reply.

"To-morrow! Why--Mr. Lee!"

There can be no mistaking the shock it gives her, and still he stands
and makes no sign. It is cruel of him! What has she said or done to
deserve penance like this? He is still holding out his hand as though in
adieu, and she lays hers, fluttering, in the broad palm.

"I--I thought all applications had to be made to--your commanding
officer," she says at last, falteringly, yet archly.

"Major Wilton forwarded mine on Monday. I asked him to say nothing about
it. The answer came by wire to-day."

"Major Wilton is _post_ commander; but--did you not--a year----?"

"Did I not?" he speaks in eager joy. "Do you mean you have not
forgotten _that_? Do you mean that now--for all time--my first
allegiance shall be to you, Miriam?"

No answer for a minute; but her hand is still firmly clasped in his. At
last,--

"Don't you think you ought to have asked me, before applying for leave
to go?"

Mr. Lee is suddenly swallowed up in the gloom of that shaded bower under
the trellis-work, though a radiance as of mid-day is shining through his
heart.

But soon he has to go. Mrs. Wilton is on the veranda, urging them to
come in out of the chill night air. Those papers on his desk must be
completed and filed this very night. He told her this.

"To-morrow, early, I will be here," he murmurs. "And now, good-night, my
own."

But she does not seek to draw her hand away. Slowly he moves back into
the bright moonbeams and she follows part way. One quick glance she
gives as her hand is released and he raises his forage cap. It is _such_
a disadvantage to have but one arm at such a time! She sees that Mrs.
Wilton is at the other end of the veranda.

"Good-night," she whispers. "I--know you _must_ go."

"I must. There is so much to be done."

"I--thought"--another quick glance at the piazza--"that a soldier, on
leaving, should--salute his commanding officer?"

And Romney Lee is again in shadow and--in sunshine.

       *     *     *     *     *

Late that autumn, in one of his infrequent letters to his devoted
mother, Mr. McKay finds time to allude to the news of Lieutenant Lee's
approaching marriage to Miss Stanley.

"Phil is, of course, immensely pleased," he writes, "and from all I hear
I suppose Mr. Lee is a very different fellow from what we thought six
months ago. Pennock says I always had a wrong idea of him; but Pennock
thinks all my ideas about the officers appointed over me are absurd. He
likes old Pelican, our battery commander, who is just the crankiest,
crabbedest, sore-headedest captain in all the artillery, and that is
saying a good deal. I wish I'd got into the cavalry at the start; but
there's no use in trying now. The --th is the only regiment I wanted;
but they have to go to reveille and stables before breakfast, which
wouldn't suit me at all.

"Hope Nan's better. A winter in the Riviera will set her up again.
Stanley asks after her when he writes, but he has rather dropped me of
late. I suppose it's because I was too busy to answer, though he ought
to know that in New York harbor a fellow has no time for scribbling,
whereas, out on the plains they have nothing else to do. He sent me his
picture a while ago, and I tell you he has improved wonderfully. Such a
swell moustache! I meant to have sent it over for you and Nan to see,
but I've mislaid it somewhere."

Poor little Nan! She would give many of her treasures for one peep at
the coveted picture that Will holds so lightly. There had been temporary
improvement in her health at the time Uncle Jack came with the joyous
tidings that Stanley was safe after all; but even the Riviera fails to
restore her wonted spirits. She droops visibly during the long winter.
"She grows so much older away from Willy," says the fond mamma, to whom
proximity to that vivacious youth is the acme of earthly bliss. Uncle
Jack grins and says nothing. It is dawning upon him that something is
needed besides the air and sunshine of the Riviera to bring back the
dancing light in those sweet blue eyes and joy to the wistful little
face.

"The time to see the Yosemite and 'the glorious climate of California'
is April, not October," he suddenly declares, one balmy morning by the
Mediterranean; "and the sooner we get back to Yankeedom the better
'twill suit me."

And so it happens that, early in the month of meteorological smiles and
tears, the trio are speeding westward far across the rolling prairies:
Mrs. McKay deeply scandalized at the heartless conduct of the War
Department in refusing Willy a two-months' leave to go with them; Uncle
Jack quizzically disposed to look upon that calamity as a not utterly
irretrievable ill; and Nan, fluttering with hope, fear, joy, and dread,
all intermingled; for is not _he_ stationed at Cheyenne? All these long
months has she cherished that little knot of senseless ribbon. If she
had sent it to him within the week of his graduation, perhaps it would
not have seemed amiss; but after that, after all he had been through in
the campaign,--the long months of silence,--he might have changed, and,
for very shame, she cannot bring herself to give a signal he would
perhaps no longer wish to obey. Every hour her excitement and
nervousness increase; but when the conductor of the Pullman comes to
say that Cheyenne is really in sight, and the long whistle tells that
they are nearing the dinner station of those days, Nan simply loses
herself entirely. There will be half an hour, and Philip actually there
to see, to hear, to answer. She hardly knows whether she is of this
mortal earth when Uncle Jack comes bustling in with the gray-haired
colonel, when she feels Miriam's kiss upon her cheek, when Mr. Lee,
handsomer and kindlier than ever, bends down to take her hand; but she
looks beyond them all for the face she longs for,--and it is not there.
The car seems whirling around when, from over her shoulder, she hears,
in the old, well-remembered tones, a voice that redoubles the throb of
her little heart.

"Miss Nannie!"

And there--bending over her, his face aglow, and looking marvellously
well in his cavalry uniform--is Philip Stanley. She knows not what she
says. She has prepared something proper and conventional, but it has all
fled. She looks one instant up into his shining eyes, and there is no
need to speak at all. Every one else is so busy that no one sees, no one
knows, that he is firmly clinging to her hand, and that she shamelessly
and passively submits.

A little later--just as the train is about to start--they are standing
at the rear door of the sleeper. The band of the --th is playing some
distance up the platform,--a thoughtful device of Mr. Lee's to draw the
crowd that way,--and they are actually alone. An exquisite happiness is
in her eyes as she peers up into the love-light in his strong, steadfast
face. _Something_ must have been said; for he draws her close to his
side and bends over her as though all the world were wrapped up in this
dainty little morsel of womanhood. Suddenly the great train begins
slowly to move. Part they must now, though it be only for a time. He
folds her quickly, unresisting, to his breast. The sweet blue eyes begin
to fill.

"My darling,--my little Nannie," he whispers, as his lips kiss away the
gathering tears. "There is just an instant. What is it you tell me you
have kept for me?"

"This," she answers, shyly placing in his hand a little packet wrapped
in tissue-paper. "Don't look at it yet! Wait!--But--I wanted to send
it--the very next day, Philip."

Slowly he turns her blushing face until he can look into her eyes. The
glory in his proud, joyous gaze is a delight to see. "My own little
girl," he whispers, as his lips meet hers. "I know it is my love-knot."


THE WORST MAN IN THE TROOP.


Just why that young Irishman should have been so balefully branded was
more than the first lieutenant of the troop could understand. To be
sure, the lieutenant's opportunities for observation had been limited.
He had spent some years on detached service in the East, and had joined
his comrades in Arizona but a fortnight ago, and here he was already
becoming rapidly initiated in the science of scouting through
mountain-wilds against the wariest and most treacherous of foemen,--the
Apaches of our Southwestern territory.

Coming, as he had done, direct from a station and duties where
full-dress uniform, lavish expenditure for kid gloves, bouquets, and
Lubin's extracts were matters of daily fact, it must be admitted that
the sensations he experienced on seeing his detachment equipped for the
scout were those of mild consternation. That much latitude as to
individual dress and equipment was permitted he had previously been
informed; that "full dress," and white shirts, collars, and the like
would be left at home, he had sense enough to know; but that every
officer and man in the command would be allowed to discard any and all
portions of the regulation uniform and appear rigged out in just such
motley guise as his poetic or practical fancy might suggest, had never
been pointed out to him; and that he, commanding his troop while a
captain commanded the little battalion, could by any military
possibility take his place in front of his men without his sabre, had
never for an instant occurred to him. As a consequence, when he bolted
into the mess-room shortly after daybreak on a bright June morning with
that imposing but at most times useless item of cavalry equipment
clanking at his heels, the lieutenant gazed with some astonishment upon
the attire of his brother-officers there assembled, but found himself
the butt of much good-natured and not over-witty "chaff," directed
partially at the extreme newness and neatness of his dark-blue flannel
scouting-shirt and high-top boots, but more especially at the glittering
sabre swinging from his waist-belt.

"Billings," said Captain Buxton, with much solemnity, "while you have
probably learned through the columns of a horror-stricken Eastern press
that we scalp, alive or dead, all unfortunates who fall into our
clutches, I assure you that even for that purpose the cavalry sabre has,
in Arizona at least, outlived its usefulness. It is too long and clumsy,
you see. What you really want for the purpose is something like
this,"--and he whipped out of its sheath a rusty but keen-bladed Mexican
_cuchillo_,--"something you can wield with a deft turn of the wrist, you
know. The sabre is apt to tear and mutilate the flesh, especially when
you use both hands." And Captain Buxton winked at the other subaltern
and felt that he had said a good thing.

But Mr. Billings was a man of considerable good nature and ready
adaptability to the society or circumstances by which he might be
surrounded. "Chaff" was a very cheap order of wit, and the serenity of
his disposition enabled him to shake off its effect as readily as water
is scattered from the plumage of the duck.

"So you don't wear the sabre on a scout? So much the better. I have my
revolvers and a Sharp's carbine, but am destitute of anything in the
knife line." And with that Mr. Billings betook himself to the duty of
despatching the breakfast that was already spread before him in an array
tempting enough to a frontier appetite, but little designed to attract a
_bon vivant_ of civilization. Bacon, _frijoles_, and creamless coffee
speedily become ambrosia and nectar under the influence of mountain-air
and mountain-exercise; but Mr. Billings had as yet done no climbing. A
"buck-board" ride had been his means of transportation to the
garrison,--a lonely four-company post in a far-away valley in
Northeastern Arizona,--and in the three or four days of intense heat
that had succeeded his arrival exercise of any kind had been out of the
question. It was with no especial regret, therefore, that he heard the
summons of the captain, "Hurry up, man; we must be off in ten minutes."
And in less than ten minutes the lieutenant was on his horse and
superintending the formation of his troop.

If Mr. Billings was astonished at the garb of his brother-officers at
breakfast, he was simply aghast when he glanced along the line of
Company "A" (as his command was at that time officially designated) and
the first sergeant rode out to report his men present or accounted for.
The first sergeant himself was got up in an old gray-flannel shirt, open
at and disclosing a broad, brown throat and neck; his head was crowned
with what had once been a white felt _sombrero_, now tanned by desert
sun, wind, and dirt into a dingy mud-color; his powerful legs were
encased in worn deer-skin breeches tucked into low-topped, broad-soled,
well-greased boots; his waist was girt with a rude "thimble-belt," in
the loops of which were thrust scores of copper cartridges for carbine
and pistol; his carbine, and those of all the command, swung in a
leather loop athwart the pommel of the saddle; revolvers in all manner
of cases hung at the hip, the regulation holster, in most instances,
being conspicuous by its absence. Indeed, throughout the entire command
the remarkable fact was to be noted that a company of regular cavalry,
taking the field against hostile Indians, had discarded pretty much
every item of dress or equipment prescribed or furnished by the
authorities of the United States, and had supplied themselves with an
outfit utterly ununiform, unpicturesque, undeniably slouchy, but not
less undeniably appropriate and serviceable. Not a forage-cap was to be
seen, not a "campaign-hat" of the style then prescribed by a board of
officers that might have known something of hats, but never could have
had an idea on the subject of campaigns. Fancy that black enormity of
weighty felt, with flapping brim well-nigh a foot in width, absorbing
the fiery heat of an Arizona sun, and concentrating the burning rays
upon the cranium of its unhappy wearer! No such head-gear would our
troopers suffer in the days when General Crook led them through the
cañons and deserts of that inhospitable Territory. Regardless of
appearances or style himself, seeking only comfort in his dress, the
chief speedily found means to indicate that, in Apache-campaigning at
least, it was to be a case of "_inter arma silent leges_" in dead
earnest; for, freely translated, the old saw read, "No red-tape when
Indian-fighting."

Of much of this Lieutenant Billings was only partially informed, and so,
as has been said, he was aghast when he marked the utter absence of
uniform and the decidedly variegated appearance of his troop. Deerskin,
buckskin, canvas, and flannels, leggings, moccasins, and the like,
constituted the bill of dress, and old soft felt hats, originally white,
the head-gear. If spurs were worn at all, they were of the Mexican
variety, easy to kick off, but sure to stay on when wanted. Only two men
wore carbine sling-belts, and Mr. Billings was almost ready to hunt up
his captain and inquire if by any possibility the men could be
attempting to "put up a joke on him," when the captain himself appeared,
looking little if any more like the ideal soldier than his men, and the
perfectly satisfied expression on his face as he rode easily around,
examining closely the horses of the command, paying especial attention
to their feet and the shoes thereof, convinced the lieutenant that all
was as it was expected to be, if not as it should be, and he swallowed
his surprise and held his peace. Another moment, and Captain Wayne's
troop came filing past in column of twos, looking, if anything, rougher
than his own.

"You follow right after Wayne," said Captain Buxton; and with no further
formality Mr. Billings, in a perfunctory sort of way, wheeled his men to
the right by fours, broke into column of twos, and closed up on the
leading troop.

Buxton was in high glee on this particular morning in June. He had done
very little Indian scouting, had been but moderately successful in what
he had undertaken, and now, as luck would have it, the necessity arose
for sending something more formidable than a mere detachment down into
the Tonto Basin, in search of a powerful band of Apaches who had broken
loose from the reservation and were taking refuge in the foot-hills of
the Black Mesa or among the wilds of the Sierra Ancha. As senior captain
of the two, Buxton became commander of the entire force,--two
well-filled troops of regular cavalry, some thirty Indian allies as
scouts, and a goodly-sized train of pack-mules, with its full complement
of packers, _cargadors_, and blacksmiths. He fully anticipated a lively
fight, possibly a series of them, and a triumphant return to his post,
where hereafter he would be looked up to and quoted as an expert and
authority on Apache-fighting. He knew just where the hostiles lay, and
was going straight to the point to flatten them out forthwith; and so
the little command moved off under admirable auspices and in the best of
spirits.

It was a four-days' hard march to the locality where Captain Buxton
counted on finding his victims; and when on the fourth day, rather tired
and not particularly enthusiastic, the command bivouacked along the
banks of a mountain-torrent, a safe distance from the supposed location
of the Indian stronghold, he sent forward his Apache Mojave allies to
make a stealthy reconnoissance, feeling confident that soon after
nightfall they would return with the intelligence that the enemy were
lazily resting in their "rancheria," all unsuspicious of his approach,
and that at daybreak he would pounce upon and annihilate them.

Soon after nightfall the scouts did return, but their intelligence was
not so gratifying: a small--a _very_ small--band of renegades had been
encamped in that vicinity some weeks before, but not a "hostile" or sign
of a hostile was to be found. Captain Buxton hardly slept that night,
from disappointment and mortification, and when he went the following
day to investigate for himself he found that he had been on a false
scent from the start, and this made him crabbed. A week's hunt through
the mountains resulted in no better luck, and now, having had only
fifteen days' rations at the outset, he was most reluctantly and
savagely marching homeward to report his failure.

But Mr. Billings had enjoyed the entire trip. Sleeping in the open air
without other shelter than their blankets afforded, scouting by day in
single file over miles of mere game-trails, up hill and down dale
through the wildest and most dolefully-picturesque scenery he "at least"
had ever beheld, under frowning cliffs and beetling crags, through dense
forests of pine and juniper, through mountain-torrents swollen with the
melting snows of the crests so far above them, through cañons, deep,
dark, and gloomy, searching ever for traces of the foe they were ordered
to find and fight forthwith, Mr. Billings and his men, having no
responsibility upon their shoulders, were happy and healthy as possible,
and consequently in small sympathy with their irate leader.

Every afternoon when they halted beside some one of the hundreds of
mountain-brooks that came tumbling down from the gorges of the Black
Mesa, the men were required to look carefully at the horses' backs and
feet, for mountain Arizona is terrible on shoes, equine or human. This
had to be done before the herds were turned out to graze with their
guard around them; and often some of the men would get a wisp of straw
or a suitable wipe of some kind, and thoroughly rub down their steeds.
Strolling about among them, as he always did at this time, our
lieutenant had noticed a slim but trimly-built young Irishman whose care
of and devotion to his horse it did him good to see. No matter how long
the march, how severe the fatigue, that horse was always looked after,
his grazing-ground pre-empted by a deftly-thrown picket-pin and lariat
which secured to him all the real estate that could be surveyed within
the circle of which the pin was the centre and the lariat the
radius-vector.

Between horse and master the closest comradeship seemed to exist; the
trooper had a way of softly singing or talking to his friend as he
rubbed him down, and Mr. Billings was struck with the expression and
taste with which the little soldier--for he was only five feet
five--would render "Molly Bawn" and "Kitty Tyrrell." Except when thus
singing or exchanging confidences with his steed, he was strangely
silent and reserved; he ate his rations among the other men, yet rarely
spoke with them, and he would ride all day through country marvellous
for wild beauty and be the only man in the command who did not allow
himself to give vent to some expression of astonishment or delight.

"What is that man's name?" asked Mr. Billings of the first sergeant one
evening.

"O'Grady, sir," replied the sergeant, with his soldierly salute; and a
little later, as Captain Buxton was fretfully complaining to his
subaltern of the ill fortune that seemed to overshadow his best efforts,
the latter, thinking to cheer him and to divert his attention from his
trouble, referred to the troop:

"Why, captain, I don't think I ever saw a finer set of men than you
have--anywhere. Now, _there's_ a little fellow who strikes me as being a
perfect light-cavalry soldier." And the lieutenant indicated his young
Irishman.

"You don't mean O'Grady?" asked the captain in surprise.

"Yes, sir,--the very one."

"Why, he's the worst man in the troop."

For a moment Mr. Billings knew not what to say. His captain had spoken
with absolute harshness and dislike in his tone of the one soldier of
all others who seemed to be the most quiet, attentive, and alert of the
troop. He had noticed, too, that the sergeants and the men generally, in
speaking to O'Grady, were wont to fall into a kindlier tone than usual,
and, though they sometimes squabbled among themselves over the choice of
patches of grass for their horses, O'Grady's claim was never questioned,
much less "jumped." Respect for his superior's rank would not permit the
lieutenant to argue the matter; but, desiring to know more about the
case, he spoke again:

"I am very sorry to hear it. His care of his horse and his quiet ways
impressed me so favorably."

"Oh, yes, d--n him!" broke in Captain Buxton. "Horses and whiskey are
the only things on earth he cares for. As to quiet ways, there isn't a
worse devil at large than O'Grady with a few drinks in him. When I came
back from two years' recruiting detail he was a sergeant in the troop. I
never knew him before, but I soon found he was addicted to drink, and
after a while had to 'break' him; and one night when he was raising hell
in the quarters, and I ordered him into the dark cell, he turned on me
like a tiger. By Jove! if it hadn't been for some of the men he would
have killed me,--or I him. He was tried by court-martial, but most of
the detail was made up of infantrymen and staff-officers from Crook's
head-quarters, and, by ----! they didn't seem to think it any sin for a
soldier to threaten to cut his captain's heart out, and Crook himself
gave me a sort of a rap in his remarks on the case, and--well, they just
let O'Grady off scot-free between them, gave him some little fine, and
did more harm than good. He's just as surly and insolent now when I
speak to him as he was that night when drunk. Here, I'll show you." And
with that Captain Buxton started off towards the herd, Mr. Billings
obediently following, but feeling vaguely ill at ease. He had never met
Captain Buxton before, but letters from his comrades had prepared him
for experiences not altogether pleasant. A good soldier in some
respects, Captain Buxton bore the reputation of having an almost
ungovernable temper, of being at times brutally violent in his language
and conduct towards his men, and, worse yet, of bearing ill-concealed
malice, and "nursing his wrath to keep it warm" against such of his
enlisted men as had ever ventured to appeal for justice. The captain
stopped on reaching the outskirts of the quietly-grazing herd.

"Corporal," said he to the non-commissioned officer in charge, "isn't
that O'Grady's horse off there to the left?"

"Yes, sir."

"Go and tell O'Grady to come here."

The corporal saluted and went off on his errand.

"Now, Mr. Billings," said the captain, "I have repeatedly given orders
that my horses must be side-lined when we are in the hostiles' country.
Just come here to the left." And he walked over towards a handsome,
sturdy little California horse of a bright bay color. "Here, you see, is
O'Grady's horse, and not a side-line: that's his way of obeying orders.
More than that, he is never content to have his horse in among the
others, but must always get away outside, just where he is most apt to
be run off by any Indian sharp and quick enough to dare it. Now, here
comes O'Grady. Watch him, if you want to see him in his true light."

Standing beside his superior, Mr. Billings looked towards the
approaching trooper, who, with a quick, springy step, advanced to within
a few yards of them, then stopped short and, erect and in silence,
raised his hand in salute, and with perfectly respectful demeanor looked
straight at his captain.

In a voice at once harsh and distinctly audible over the entire bivouac,
with frowning brow and angry eyes, Buxton demanded,--

"O'Grady, where are your side-lines?"

"Over with my blankets, sir."

"Over with your blankets, are they? Why in ----, sir, are they not here
on your horse, where they ought to be?" And the captain's voice waxed
harsher and louder, and his manner more threatening.

"I understood the captain's orders to be that they need not go on till
sunset," replied the soldier, calmly and respectfully, "and I don't like
to put them on that sore place, sir, until the last moment."

"Don't like to? No sir, I know d--d well you don't like to obey this or
any other order I ever gave, and wherever you find a loop-hole through
which to crawl, and you think you can sneak off unpunished, by ----,
sir, I suppose you will go on disobeying orders. Shut up, sir! not a
d--d word!" for tears of mortification were starting to O'Grady's eyes,
and with flushing face and trembling lip the soldier stood helplessly
before his troop-commander, and was striving to say a word in further
explanation.

"Go and get your side-lines at once and bring them here; go at once,
sir," shouted the captain; and with a lump in his throat the trooper
saluted, faced about, and walked away.

"He's milder-mannered than usual, d--n him!" said the captain, turning
towards his subaltern, who had stood a silent and pained witness of the
scene. "He knows he is in the wrong and has no excuse; but he'll break
out yet. Come! step out, you O'Grady!" he yelled after the
rapidly-walking soldier. "Double time, sir. I can't wait here all
night." And Mr. Billings noted that silence had fallen on the bivouac so
full of soldier-chaff and laughter but a moment before, and that the men
of both troops were intently watching the scene already so painful to
him.

Obediently O'Grady took up the "dog-trot" required of him, got his
side-lines, and, running back, knelt beside his horse, and with
trembling hands adjusted them, during which performance Captain Buxton
stood over him, and, in a tone that grew more and more that of a bully
as he lashed himself up into a rage, continued his lecture to the man.

The latter finally rose, and, with huge beads of perspiration starting
out on his forehead, faced his captain.

"May I say a word, sir?" he asked.

"You may now; but be d--d careful how you say it," was the reply, with a
sneer that would have stung an abject slave into a longing for revenge,
and that grated on Mr. Billings's nerves in a way that made him clinch
his fists and involuntarily grit his teeth. Could it be that O'Grady
detected it? One quick, wistful, half-appealing glance flashed from the
Irishman's eyes towards the subaltern, and then, with evident effort at
composure, but with a voice that trembled with the pent-up sense of
wrong and injustice, O'Grady spoke:

"Indeed, sir, I had no thought of neglecting orders. I always care for
my horse; but it wasn't sunset when the captain came out----"

"Not sunset!" broke in Buxton, with an outburst of profanity. "Not
sunset! why, it's well-nigh dark now, sir, and every man in the troop
had side-lined his horse half an hour ago. D--n your insolence, sir!
your excuse is worse than your conduct. Mr. Billings, see to it, sir,
that this man walks and leads his horse in rear of the troop all the way
back to the post. I'll see, by ----! whether he can be taught to obey
orders." And with that the captain turned and strode away.

The lieutenant stood for an instant stunned,--simply stunned.
Involuntarily he made a step towards O'Grady; their eyes met; but the
restraint of discipline was upon both. In that brief meeting of their
glances, however, the trooper read a message that was unmistakable.

"Lieutenant----" he said, but stopped abruptly, pointed aloft over the
trees to the eastward with his right hand, dashed it across his eyes,
and then, with hurried salute and a choking sort of gurgle in his
throat, he turned and went back to his comrades.

Mr. Billings gazed after the retreating form until it disappeared among
the trees by the brook-side; then he turned to see what was the meaning
of the soldier's pointing over towards the _mesa_ to the east.

Down in the deep valley in which the little command had halted for the
night the pall of darkness had indeed begun to settle; the bivouac-fires
in the timber threw a lurid glare upon the groups gathering around them
for supper, and towards the west the rugged upheavals of the Mazatzal
range stood like a black barrier against the glorious hues of a bank of
summer cloud. All in the valley spoke of twilight and darkness: the
birds were still, the voices of the men subdued. So far as local
indications were concerned, it _was_--as Captain Buxton had
insisted--almost dark. But square over the gilded tree-tops to the east,
stretching for miles and miles to their right and left, blazed a
vertical wall of rock crested with scrub-oak and pine, every boulder,
every tree, glittering in the radiant light of the invisibly setting
sun. O'Grady had _not_ disobeyed his orders.

Noting this, Mr. Billings proceeded to take a leisurely stroll through
the peaceful herd, carefully inspecting each horse as he passed. As a
result of his scrutiny, he found that, while most of the horses were
already encumbered with their annoying hobble, in "A" Troop alone there
were at least a dozen still unfettered, notably the mounts of the
non-commissioned officers and the older soldiers. Like O'Grady, they did
not wish to inflict the side-line upon their steeds until the last
moment. Unlike O'Grady, they had not been called to account for it.

When Mr. Billings was summoned to supper, and he rejoined his
brother-officers, it was remarked that he was more taciturn than usual.
After that repast had been appreciatively disposed of, and the little
group with lighted pipes prepared to spend an hour in chat and
contentment, it was observed that Mr. Billings did not take part in the
general talk, but that he soon rose, and, out of ear-shot of the
officers' camp-fire, paced restlessly up and down, with his head bent
forward, evidently plunged in thought.

By and by the half-dozen broke up and sought their blankets. Captain
Buxton, somewhat mollified by a good supper, was about rolling into his
"Navajo," when Mr. Billings stepped up:

"Captain, may I ask for information as to the side-line order? After you
left this evening, I found that there must be some misunderstanding
about it."

"How so?" said Buxton, shortly.

"In this, captain;" and Mr. Billings spoke very calmly and distinctly.
"The first sergeant, several other non-commissioned officers and
men,--more than a dozen, I should say,--did not side-line their horses
until half an hour after you spoke to O'Grady, and the first sergeant
assured me, when I called him to account for it, that your orders were
that it should be done at sunset."

"Well, by ----! it was after sunset--at least it was getting mighty
dark--when I sent for that black-guard O'Grady," said Buxton,
impetuously, "and there is no excuse for the rest of them."

"It was beginning to grow dark down in this deep valley, I know, sir;
but the tree-tops were in a broad glare of sunlight while we were at the
herd, and those cliffs for half an hour longer."

"Well, Mr. Billings, I don't propose to have any hair-splitting in the
management of my troop," said the captain, manifestly nettled. "It was
practically sunset to us when the light began to grow dim, and my men
know it well enough." And with that he rolled over and turned his back
to his subaltern.

Disregarding the broad hint to leave, Mr. Billings again spoke:

"Is it your wish, sir, that any punishment should be imposed on the men
who were equally in fault with O'Grady?"

Buxton muttered something unintelligible from under his blankets.

"I did not understand you, sir," said the lieutenant, very civilly.

Buxton savagely propped himself up on one elbow, and blurted out,--

"No, Mr. Billings! no! When I want a man punished I'll give the order
myself, sir."

"And is it still your wish, sir, that I make O'Grady walk the rest of
the way?"

For a moment Buxton hesitated; his better nature struggled to assert
itself and induce him to undo the injustice of his order; but the "cad"
in his disposition, the weakness of his character, prevailed. It would
never do to let his lieutenant get the upper hand of him, he argued, and
so the reply came, and came angrily.

"Yes, of course; he deserves it anyhow, by ----! and it'll do him good."

Without another word Mr. Billings turned on his heel and left him.

The command returned to garrison, shaved its stubbly beard of two weeks'
growth, and resumed its uniform and the routine duties of the post.
Three days only had it been back when Mr. Billings, marching on as
officer of the day, and receiving the prisoners from his predecessor,
was startled to hear the list of names wound up with "O'Grady," and when
that name was called there was no response.

The old officer of the day looked up inquiringly: "Where is O'Grady,
sergeant?"

"In the cell, sir, unable to come out."

"O'Grady was confined by Captain Buxton's order late last night," said
Captain Wayne, "and I fancy the poor fellow has been drinking heavily
this time."

A few minutes after, the reliefs being told off, the prisoners sent out
to work, and the officers of the day, new and old, having made their
reports to the commanding officer, Mr. Billings returned to the
guard-house, and, directing his sergeant to accompany him, proceeded to
make a deliberate inspection of the premises. The guard-room itself was
neat, clean, and dry; the garrison prison-room was well ventilated, and
tidy as such rooms ever can be made; the Indian prison-room, despite the
fact that it was empty and every shutter was thrown wide open to the
breeze, had that indefinable, suffocating odor which continued
aboriginal occupancy will give to any apartment; but it was the cells
Mr. Billings desired to see, and the sergeant led him to a row of
heavily-barred doors of rough unplaned timber, with a little grating in
each, and from one of these gratings there peered forth a pair of
feverishly-glittering eyes, and a face, not bloated and flushed, as with
recent and heavy potations, but white, haggard, twitching, and a husky
voice in piteous appeal addressed the sergeant:

"Oh, for God's sake, Billy, get me something, or it'll kill me!"

"Hush, O'Grady," said the sergeant: "here's the officer of the day."

Mr. Billings took one look at the wan face only dimly visible in that
prison-light, for the poor little man shrank back as he recognized the
form of his lieutenant:

"Open that door, sergeant."

With alacrity the order was obeyed, and the heavy door swung back upon
its hinges.

"O'Grady," said the officer of the day, in a tone gentle as that he
would have employed in speaking to a woman, "come out here to me. I'm
afraid you are sick."

Shaking, trembling, twitching in every limb, with wild, dilated eyes and
almost palsied step, O'Grady came out.

"Look to him a moment, sergeant," said Mr. Billings, and, bending low,
he stepped into the cell. The atmosphere was stifling, and in another
instant he backed out into the hall-way. "Sergeant, was it by the
commanding officer's order that O'Grady was put in there?"

"No, sir; Captain Buxton's."

"See that he is not returned there during my tour, unless the orders
come from Major Stannard. Bring O'Grady into the prison-room."

Here in the purer air and brighter light he looked carefully over the
poor fellow, as the latter stood before him quivering from head to foot
and hiding his face in his shaking hands. Then the lieutenant took him
gently by the arm and led him to a bunk:

"O'Grady, man, lie down here. I'm going to get something that will help
you. Tell me one thing: how long had you been drinking before you were
confined?"

"About forty-eight hours, sir, off and on."

"How long since you ate anything?"

"I don't know, sir; not for two days, I think."

"Well, try and lie still. I'm coming back to you in a very few minutes."

And with that Mr. Billings strode from the room, leaving O'Grady, dazed,
wonder-stricken, gazing stupidly after him.

The lieutenant went straight to his quarters, took a goodly-sized goblet
from the painted pine sideboard, and with practised hand proceeded to
mix therein a beverage in which granulated sugar, Angostura bitters, and
a few drops of lime-juice entered as minor ingredients, and the coldest
of spring-water and a brimming measure of whiskey as constituents of
greater quality and quantity. Filling with this mixture a small
leather-covered flask, and stowing it away within the breast-pocket of
his blouse, he returned to the guard-house, musing as he went, "'If this
be treason,' said Patrick Henry, 'make the most of it.' If this be
conduct prejudicial, etc., say I, do your d--dest. That man would be in
the horrors of jim-jams in half an hour more if it were not for this."
And so saying to himself, he entered the prison-room, called to the
sergeant to bring him some cold water, and then approached O'Grady, who
rose unsteadily and strove to stand attention, but the effort was too
much, and again he covered his face with his arms, and threw himself in
utter misery at the foot of the bunk.

Mr. Billings drew the flask from his pocket, and, touching O'Grady's
shoulder, caused him to raise his head:

"Drink this, my lad. I would not give it to you at another time, but you
need it now."

Eagerly it was seized, eagerly drained, and then, after he had swallowed
a long draught of the water, O'Grady slowly rose to his feet, looking,
with eyes rapidly softening and losing their wild glare, upon the young
officer who stood before him. Once or twice he passed his hands across
his forehead, as though to sweep away the cobwebs that pressed upon his
brain, but for a moment he did not essay a word. Little by little the
color crept back to his cheek; and, noting this, Mr. Billings smiled
very quietly, and said, "Now, O'Grady, lie down; you will be able to
sleep now until the men come in at noon; then you shall have another
drink, and you'll be able to eat what I send you. If you cannot sleep,
call the sergeant of the guard; or if you want anything, I'll come to
you."

Then, with tears starting to his eyes, the soldier found words: "I thank
the lieutenant. If I live a thousand years, sir, this will never be
forgotten,--never, sir! I'd have gone crazy without your help, sir."

Mr. Billings held out his hand, and, taking that of his prisoner, gave
it a cordial grip: "That's all right, O'Grady. Try to sleep now, and
we'll pull you through. Good-by, for the present." And, with a heart
lighter, somehow, than it had been of late, the lieutenant left.

At noon that day, when the prisoners came in from labor and the
officer's of the day inspected their general condition before permitting
them to go to their dinner, the sergeant of the guard informed him that
O'Grady had slept quietly almost all the morning, but was then awake and
feeling very much better, though still weak and nervous.

"Do you think he can walk over to my quarters?" asked Mr. Billings.

"He will try it, sir, or anything the lieutenant wants him to try."

"Then send him over in about ten minutes."

Home once more, Mr. Billings started a tiny blaze in his oil-stove, and
soon had a kettle of water boiling merrily. Sharp to time a member of
the guard tapped at the door, and, on being bidden "Come in," entered,
ushering in O'Grady; but meantime, by the aid of a little pot of
meat-juice and some cayenne pepper, a glass of hot soup or beef-tea had
been prepared, and, with some dainty slices of potted chicken and the
accompaniments of a cup of fragrant tea and some ship-biscuit, was in
readiness on a little table in the back room.

Telling the sentinel to remain in the shade on the piazza, the
lieutenant proceeded first to make O'Grady sit down in a big wicker
arm-chair, for the man in his broken condition was well-nigh exhausted
by his walk across the glaring parade in the heat of an Arizona noonday
sun. Then he mixed and administered the counterpart of the beverage he
had given his prisoner-patient in the morning, only in point of potency
it was an evident falling off, but sufficient for the purpose, and in a
few minutes O'Grady was able to swallow his breakfast with evident
relish, meekly and unhesitatingly obeying every suggestion of his
superior.

His breakfast finished, O'Grady was then conducted into a cool, darkened
apartment, a back room in the lieutenant's quarters.

"Now, pull off your boots and outer clothing, man, spread yourself on
that bed, and go to sleep, if you can. If you can't, and you want to
read, there are books and papers on that shelf; pin up the blanket on
the window, and you'll have light enough. You shall not be disturbed,
and I know you won't attempt to leave."

"Indeed, sir, I won't," began O'Grady, eagerly; but the lieutenant had
vanished, closing the door after him, and a minute later the soldier had
thrown himself upon the cool, white bed, and was crying like a tired
child.

Three or four weeks after this incident, to the small regret of his
troop and the politely-veiled indifference of the commissioned element
of the garrison, Captain Buxton concluded to avail himself of a
long-deferred "leave," and turned over his company property to Mr.
Billings in a condition that rendered it necessary for him to do a thing
that "ground" him, so to speak: he had to ask several favors of his
lieutenant, between whom and himself there had been no cordiality since
the episode of the bivouac, and an open rupture since Mr. Billings's
somewhat eventful tour as officer of the day, which has just been
described.

It appeared that O'Grady had been absent from no duty (there were no
drills in that scorching June weather), but that, yielding to the advice
of his comrades, who knew that he had eaten nothing for two days and was
drinking steadily into a condition that would speedily bring punishment
upon him, he had asked permission to be sent to the hospital, where,
while he could get no liquor, there would be no danger attendant upon
his sudden stop of all stimulant. The first sergeant carried his request
with the sick-book to Captain Buxton, O'Grady meantime managing to take
two or three more pulls at the bottle, and Buxton, instead of sending
him to the hospital, sent for him, inspected him, and did what he had no
earthly authority to do, directed the sergeant of the guard to confine
him at once in the dark cell.

"It will be no punishment as he is now," said Buxton to himself, "but it
will be hell when he wakes."

And so it had been; and far worse it probably would have been but for
Mr. Billings's merciful interference.

Expecting to find his victim in a condition bordering upon the abject
and ready to beg for mercy at any sacrifice of pluck or pride, Buxton
had gone to the guard-house soon after retreat and told the sergeant
that he desired to see O'Grady, if the man was fit to come out.

What was his surprise when the soldier stepped forth in his trimmest
undress uniform, erect and steady, and stood unflinchingly before
him!--a day's rest and quiet, a warm bath, wholesome and palatable food,
careful nursing, and the kind treatment he had received having brought
him round with a sudden turn that he himself could hardly understand.

"How is this?" thundered Buxton. "I ordered you kept in the dark cell."

"The officer of the day ordered him released, sir," said the sergeant of
the guard.

And Buxton, choking with rage, stormed into the mess-room, where the
younger officers were at dinner, and, regardless of the time, place, or
surroundings, opened at once upon his subaltern:

"Mr. Billings, by whose authority did you release O'Grady from the dark
cell?"

Mr. Billings calmly applied his napkin to his moustache, and then as
calmly replied, "By my own, Captain Buxton."

"By ----! sir, you exceeded your authority."

"Not at all, captain; on the contrary, you exceeded yours."

At this Buxton flew into a rage that seemed to deprive him of all
control over his language. Oaths and imprecations poured from his lips;
he raved at Billings, despite the efforts of the officers to quiet him,
despite the adjutant's threat to report his language at once to the
commanding officer.

Mr. Billings paid no attention whatever to his accusations, but went on
eating his dinner with an appearance of serenity that only added fuel to
his captain's fire. Two or three officers rose and left the table in
disgust, and just how far the thing might have gone cannot be accurately
told, for in less than three minutes there came a quick, bounding step
on the piazza, the clank and rattle of a sabre, and the adjutant fairly
sprang back into the room:

"Captain Buxton, you will go at once to your quarters in close arrest,
by order of Major Stannard."

Buxton knew his colonel and that little fire-eater of an adjutant too
well to hesitate an instant. Muttering imprecations on everybody, he
went.

The next morning, O'Grady was released and returned to duty. Two days
later, after a long and private interview with his commanding officer,
Captain Buxton appeared with him at the officers' mess at dinner-time,
made a formal and complete apology to Lieutenant Billings for his
offensive language, and to the mess generally for his misconduct; and so
the affair blew over; and, soon after, Buxton left, and Mr. Billings
became commander of Troop "A."

And now, whatever might have been his reputation as to sobriety before,
Private O'Grady became a marked man for every soldierly virtue. Week
after week he was to be seen every fourth or fifth day, when his guard
tour came, reporting to the commanding officer for duty as "orderly,"
the nattiest, trimmest soldier on the detail.

"I always said," remarked Captain Wayne, "that Buxton alone was
responsible for that man's downfall; and this proves it. O'Grady has all
the instincts of a gentleman about him, and now that he has a gentleman
over him he is himself again."

One night, after retreat-parade, there was cheering and jubilee in the
quarters of Troop "A." Corporal Quinn had been discharged by expiration
of term of service, and Private O'Grady was decorated with his chevrons.
When October came, the company muster-roll showed that he had won back
his old grade; and the garrison knew no better soldier, no more
intelligent, temperate, trustworthy non-commissioned officer, than
Sergeant O'Grady. In some way or other the story of the treatment
resorted to by his amateur medical officer had leaked out. Whether
faulty in theory or not, it was crowned with the verdict of success in
practice; and, with the strong sense of humor which pervades all
organizations wherein the Celt is represented as a component part, Mr.
Billings had been lovingly dubbed "Doctor" by his men, and there was one
of their number who would have gone through fire and water for him.

One night some herdsmen from up the valley galloped wildly into the
post. The Apaches had swooped down, run off their cattle, killed one of
the cowboys, and scared off the rest. At daybreak the next morning
Lieutenant Billings, with Troop "A" and about a dozen Indian scouts, was
on the trail, with orders to pursue, recapture the cattle, and punish
the marauders.

To his disgust, Mr. Billings found that his allies were not of the
tribes who had served with him in previous expeditions. All the trusty
Apache Mojaves and Hualpais were off with other commands in distant
parts of the Territory. He had to take just what the agent could give
him at the reservation,--some Apache Yumas, who were total strangers to
him. Within forty-eight hours four had deserted and gone back; the
others proved worthless as trailers, doubtless intentionally, and had it
not been for the keen eye of Sergeant O'Grady it would have been
impossible to keep up the pursuit by night; but keep it up they did, and
just at sunset, one sharp autumn evening, away up in the mountains, the
advance caught sight of the cattle grazing along the shores of a placid
little lake, and, in less time than it takes to write it, Mr. While Las
Casas had been sustaining his long struggle in Spain in behalf of the
Indians, a series of disastrous events had occurred in America, which
created serious obstacles in the way of his scheme for colonisation.

In 1518 some Dominican and Franciscan friars had founded two
convents on the Pearl Coast, the former at Chiribichi and the latter
at Maracapana, some seven leagues distant at the mouth of the Cumaná
River and just opposite the island of Cubagua. These religious
communities had established the most peaceful relations with all the
Indians in their neighbourhood and the friars came and went with perfect
freedom, being welcomed in all the villages.

All went quietly until the arrival of one Alonzo de Ojeda, who came from
Cubagua, engaged ostensibly in the pearl trade, but likewise in raiding
for slaves. Pearl diving was as perilous and fatal an occupation
for the Indians as the work in the mines of Hispaniola and Cuba,
and such numbers had perished in Cubagua that it was necessary to
replenish the vacancies by bringing others from the neighbouring
mainland.

When Ojeda landed at Chiribichi he repaired to the convent, where he
found but one priest and a lay-brother, all the others being absent,
preaching to the Spaniards in Cubagua. As he expressed a wish to see
the cacique, Maraguey, the priest, thinking no evil, sent to invite the
Indian to come to the monastery; on his arrival, Ojeda began to question
him as to whether cannibalism was practised by any tribes in the
neighbourhood, his answers being taken down on paper by a notary. The
cacique declared that there were no cannibals thereabouts and, being
displeased by the questions and alarmed by the formalities of ink and
paper, he quickly withdrew. Ojeda next went to the convent at Maracapana,
where the cacique, called Gil Gonzalez, came to meet him with every
demonstration of friendship. Ojeda declared he had come to trade and
wished to buy maize, and on the day following his arrival he left with
fifteen of his men to go inland in search of the grain. Fifty Indians
transported the loads from the interior to the coast, and while
these bearers were resting, the Spaniards suddenly drew their
weapons, killing some who tried to escape and forcing all the others
on board their caravel.

The effect of this act of unprovoked treachery in a peaceful settlement,
where the Indians had received the newcomers with every hospitality
as guests, may be easily imagined, and as was natural, Gil Gonzalez
planned vengeance for the outrage. The scene at the convent whither
the cacique of Chiribichi had been summoned by his friend the priest,
and the impressive formality of the writing with pen and paper furnished
by the priest, unfortunately identified the monks in the minds of the
Indians with Ojeda and his exploits. The alarm was passed all along
the coast, and the Indians bided the moment for a favourable attack;
nor had they long to wait, for Ojeda, accompanied by ten men, came on
shore again on Saturday as indifferently as though nothing had
happened.

Gil Gonzalez affected to receive them in a friendly manner, but no sooner
had they reached the village than the Indians fell upon them,
killing Ojeda and several others, while the remainder barely succeeded
in reaching the caravel.

The Indians even went out in canoes to attack the vessel but were repulsed,
and the Spaniards, setting sail, put to sea.

The defenceless friars remained, however, and at Chiribichi the priest,
while vesting to say mass, and the lay-brother were both killed by the
people of the cacique Maraguey and the convent was burned. So great
was the fury of the Indians that they even killed a horse with which
the monks worked in their garden.

The news of this massacre reaching Hispaniola from the Spaniards at
Cubagua, the royal Audiencia at once despatched a small force under
Gonzalo de Ocampo to punish the Indians, and the disheartening
news of these turbulent events was the greeting that met Las Casas on his
arrival at Puerto Rico. Knowing that Ocampo's armada would touch
there on its way to the Pearl Coast, he determined to await its
arrival, where in fact Ocampo appeared within a few days.

Las Casas had been a neighbour of his in other days and, though he
knew that his treatment of the Indians did not differ from that
of the other colonists, he held him in some esteem.
He showed Ocampo his cedulas with the royal signature, which prohibited
any Spaniards from landing, against his will, in the territory granted
to him, and he formally required him to desist from his errand of
vengeance.
Ocampo answered that, while he did not refuse obedience to the royal
commands, he was in this instance acting under the orders of the royal
Audiencia and was obliged to carry out the instructions he had
received; the responsibility lay with the Audiencia, which would protect
him from any consequences following the execution of its mandate.

Seeing that Ocampo was not to be stopped, Las Casas resolved to go
himself to Hispaniola, show his powers to the Audiencia, and exact
the recall of the fleet. Meanwhile he placed his colonists amongst the
various planters of Puerto Rico, who were glad enough to welcome labourers,
who were scarce in the island. This decision of Las Casas was a most
mistaken one and was the outcome of an error of judgment which did not
require the light of after events to make plain. More was certainly
to be hoped from his presence on the spot, and from the influence he
might exercise over Ocampo, than from anything he could obtain from the
Audiencia, whose members were his bitterest enemies. It was, moreover,
impossible for any counter-orders he might be able to wrest from the
reluctant Audiencia, to reach the Pearl Coast in time to stop the
action of Ocampo, and Las Casas does not even appear to have sought
to detain the latter in Puerto Rico, pending the arrival of further
instructions.

After dividing his colonists, who thus became scattered, and lost
touch with him and with one another, Las Casas bought a vessel for
five hundred dollars--an enormous sum at the time--in which he
sailed for Hispaniola.

His arrival in Santo Domingo was most unwelcome and revived all the
ancient odium of the colonists against him, for he was without doubt
the best-hated man in America.

He presented his papers to the Governor, and a meeting of some ten
officials, who composed what was termed the Consulta and dealt with
local questions, was convoked to consider his demands. The first of
these was, that the provisions of the royal grant to him should be
formally published, according to custom, with sound of trumpet
so that all the colonists might clearly understand the prohibition
for any one to enter the territory conceded to him, without his permission,
and that all Spaniards were commanded to treat the Indians humanely,
and to keep faith with them in treaties and contracts under severe penalties
at the King's pleasure. Second he demanded that the Consulta
should order all Spaniards to quit the territory of his concession,
and should recall Ocampo forthwith, as the murder of the friars
there had been provoked by the barbarous conduct of Ojeda.

As his previous experience might have taught him, the Consulta listened
with gravity to his demands and permitted the proclamation of his
cedulas, but when it came to taking any action to restrain Ocampo,
reasons for delay were found and the matter dragged on without anything
being accomplished.

It being to the interests of those colonists who were expecting a
rich cargo of slaves to be brought back by Ocampo, from his punitive
expedition, to hinder the departure of Las Casas and, if possible,
to wreck his plans for colonising, divers means were invented to
accomplish this object.

A rumour was started that his five-hundred-dollar vessel was in a
bad condition and unseaworthy; the authorities decided that this
point must be investigated, so several persons were named to examine
the boat and report on her condition.

They did so, and promptly reported that the vessel was not merely
unseaworthy, but was in such a state that no repairs would make her so,
and that the only course was to dismantle her.
Thus Las Casas beheld his five hundred dollars vanish and himself a fixture
in Hispaniola.

Meanwhile Ocampo had reached the Pearl Coast and, feigning to come
directly from Spain with merchandise and to be entirely ignorant of the
murder of Ojeda and the friars, he succeeded in luring the cacique
Gil Gonzalez close to his ship, when a naked sailor dived
overboard, grappled with the cacique in his canoe and finally stabbed and
killed him. A landing was then made and the country raided with the usual
accompaniment of murders, torturings, and capturing of the natives,
many of whom were carried on board the vessels and sent back to
Hispaniola, to be sold as slaves.

Ocampo, with others of his followers who remained behind, founded a town,
half a league up the Cumaná River, which he named New Toledo.

The arrival of the slave cargo at Hispaniola where Las Casas was still
engaged in altercations with the authorities, threw him into a terrible
rage.

He protested vehemently before the Audiencia against the deliberate
and open violation of the royal commands, whose contents had been
publicly proclaimed, and he threatened to return forthwith to Spain
and lay the case before the King, from whom he would obtain the
punishment of the authors of the outrage and their condemnation to
pay all the expenses of Ocampo's armada, which had been illegally
charged to the Royal treasury.

Nobody doubted that he was capable of executing his threat, and, since
it was known that he enjoyed the protection of the all-powerful Flemings
and was something of a favourite with the young King himself, the
members of the Consulta and some of the principal men in the colony
decided, after many discussions, that it would be well to appease
the clerigo's wrath and come to some arrangement with him for their
mutual benefit.

It was then proposed to form a company, in which there should
be twenty-four shareholders, each of whom should contribute an identical
sum and derive an equal profit from the undertaking on the Pearl
Coast. Six of the shares should be assigned to the Crown, six to Las
Casas and his fifty knights of the Golden Spur, three to Admiral
Diego Columbus, one to each of the four auditors of the Audiencia,
and the remaining five to the treasurer Pasamonte and the other
officials of the Audiencia.

This scheme was submitted to Las Casas, who must by that time have
been well-nigh in despair, and, although it very materially changed
his original plan, it offered the only possible means for carrying out
his intentions, so he agreed to the formation of the company. The
agreement upon which the company was based gave to Las Casas
Ocampo's armada with several brigantines and barques and all their
contents, and he was to choose amongst the three hundred followers
of Ocampo one hundred and twenty, who should constitute the armed
force of the new colony, under the latter's command.

This arrangement, so it was pretended, would leave Las Casas free
to dedicate all his efforts to the conversion of the Indians.

The last article of the agreement was almost comical. It provided that
when Las Casas himself should denounce any Indians as cannibals, the
Spaniards should be bound to declare war against them and make slaves of
them.

He afterwards wrote concerning the articles of agreement as follows:

"Great was the blindness or ignorance--if indeed it was not malice--of
those gentlemen to believe that the clerigo would ever fulfil those
horrible and absurd conditions, knowing him to be a good Christian,
not covetous, and ready to die to liberate and help in saving those
people from the condition in which they were held."
With his armada well equipped, and a plentiful supply of provisions and
merchandise for trading purposes on board, Las Casas finally sailed
from Hispaniola in July, 1521, directing his course first to the island
of Mona, where a quantity of cassava bread was to be taken on board, and
from thence to Puerto Rico, where he expected to collect his original
colonists. On his arrival there, not one however, was found to join the
expedition, as they had long since dispersed throughout the island or
had joined marauding expeditions to capture Indians. This defection must
have caused Las Casas great disappointment, for he had assembled these
men with great care in Spain, choosing only such as he thought from
their good character to be adapted for his ideal colony.

The change which their new and strange surroundings had operated in these
peaceful, simple folk was not unnatural; loosed from all the anchors that
held them to habits of industry and probity, they found themselves
caught in new currents; cupidity was awakened by the gold-fever
that infected all the colonists, the pious projects with which they left
Spain under the guidance of their apostolic leader were easily abandoned
when the influence of his enthusiasm was withdrawn, and they took to
the freebooting ways and easy morals of the colonists with whom
they were thrown. Las Casas had neglected to realise that they were not
angels.

On arriving at that part of the Pearl Coast called Cumaná, it was found
that Ocampo's colony of New Toledo was already in the throes of
discontent from hunger and disease; his men had begun by pressing
the Indians into service, with the result that all the native
abandoned the country, leaving the Spaniards to starve.

When it became known that those who chose might return to Hispaniola,
every man of them declared he would go, so Las Casas was left with
a few of his friends and some who were in his pay. Ocampo showed sincere
regret and much sadness at abandoning his old friend, for whom,
in spite of their differences, he had a sincere admiration, in such a
plight. He took leave of him with many demonstrations of affection, and
joining his men sailed away to Hispaniola.

Las Casas was now in his long-desired territory, but the material for
starting his colony was sadly reduced.

CHAPTER XII. - THE IDEAL COLONY. FATE OF THE COLONISTS. FAILURE OF THE
ENTERPRISE

Some time before the events just recounted, Franciscan friars from
Picardy had been sent to the Pearl Coast by the Prior Pedro de Cordoba,
under the leadership of Fray Juan Garceto, and this little community
heard the news of Las Casas's coming with profound joy. Upon his
arrival, they came to meet him singing Te Deum Laudamus and Benedictus
qui venit in nomine Domini. The convent was modest enough, being rudely
constructed of wood and thatch, and the life of the friars in the midst
of the vast wilderness about them was one of the most apostolic simplicity.
The house stood about a musket-shot back from the Cumaná River in a
beautiful garden which, in such a climate, was not a difficult
achievement. Las Casas built a large storehouse on one side of the garden
for his trading merchandise and, through the friars and an Indian
woman called Maria, who had learned Spanish, he published among the
Indians that he had been sent by the new King of the Christians in
Spain, and that henceforth there would be no more fighting, but all were
to live together in peace and friendship. In order to attract them, he
made them presents from his stores; but it was not unnatural that the
diffidence of the Indians should yield but slowly to these blandishments
after the deceptions of which they had been the victims, and besides,
Las Casas could not trust his own dependents, but had to keep a sharp
eye continually on them, to prevent them scandalising and
offending the natives. Under such discouraging circumstances,
progress was inevitably slow.

Not only were the Spaniards under his own control in little harmony
with the spirit of his intentions and as refractory as they dared be
to his orders, but the pearl fishers on the island of Cubagua, who were
a typical lot of godless ruffians, frequently came to the mainland, with
the valid excuse that the absence of sweet water on their island
obliged them to fetch their supply from the Cumaná River. These expeditions
for water were usually accompanied by some disturbances with the Indians,
some of whom were frequently captured and carried off to work in the
pearl fisheries.

To put a stop to these incursions into his territory, Las Casas
contracted with a mason, for eight dollars in gold per month, to build
him a fort at the mouth of the river; but the people at Cubagua,
hearing of this project which would interrupt and control their
movements, contrived to so influence the mason that he threw up his
contract and abandoned the work, thus leaving the country defenceless.
The Cubaguans seduced and ruined the Indians, chiefly by offering
them liquors and spirits, which have always proved the white man's most
attractive and destructive products to the savage and have ever
gone in the vanguard of civilisation.

The Indians gave everything they possessed for alcohol even selling
their fellows as slaves, in exchange for wines; these they drank to
inordinate excess, and in the fury of their debauch quarrels broke
out amongst them which ended in murders and a state of the most
riotous disorder, against which Las Casas and the monks struggled in
vain. The strongest representations and protests were made to the
alcalde of Cubagua, whither Las Casas went in person, but, far from
producing the desired result, his efforts to protect his own
territory only served to excite increased resentment on the part of
his lawless neighbours, and neither his own life nor that of the
Franciscans was any longer safe from the threatened reprisals of their
hostile countrymen. The situation was one of the greatest gravity and
even peril; instead of showing promise of improvement, it grew daily
worse; for, though the men at Cubagua were somewhat restrained from
venturing upon open acts of hostility directed against him since they
had seen what powers the royal cedulas gave him, their ingenuity in
devising vexations, inventing contrarieties, and creating obstacles
which effectually nullified all his efforts, was extraordinarily
fertile. Fray Juan Garceto was of the opinion that Las Casas should
return to Hispaniola to complain to the Audiencia and demand that some
effective restraint be exercised upon the Spaniards at Cubagua or,
failing of success there, that he should even go to the King himself
to obtain redress and the punishment of the offenders.

This advice did not accord with Las Casas's own view, for he had reason
to know how difficult it was to obtain anything from the Audiencia
and how easy it was to evade even the most explicit provisions of
royal cedulas, when it suited the interest of those concerned
to do so. His absence at such a critical moment would also remove the
one effective restraint on the lawlessness of the Cubaguans and doubtless
result in the total destruction of his stores, which were valued at fifty
thousand castellanos. Two vessels were lying off the coast, loading
salt for Hispaniola, and during the days previous to their sailing
both Las Casas and Fray Juan gave themselves up to earnest prayer and
each offered his daily mass to obtain some divine guidance as to the right
course to pursue, since they were in absolute disagreement. Las
Casas prepared a full statement of the situation, and a petition asking
the Audiencia to furnish the necessary remedy without delay, which he
intended to despatch by one of the ship's captains in case he did
not go himself when the sailing day came.

The last day finally arrived, and Fray Juan, after saying his mass,
sought Las Casas and said, "It is your duty, sir, to go and on no account
to stop here." "God knows," replied Las Casas, "how much this goes
against my judgment and my wishes but, since it seems right to
your Reverence, I am willing to do it; if it is an error, I would
rather err by the judgment of another than be right by my own, for
I hope in God."

The wisdom of submitting his judgment as an act of religious humility
in a matter concerning his own spiritual welfare would have been laudable,
but Las Casas was far more qualified to judge on a question
of policy affecting the welfare of his enterprise than was Fray Juan
Garceto, and the responsibility for repeating the blunder he had
made in Puerto Rico of abandoning his colony while he went off to
protest to the Audiencia, must rest where it belongs--on his own
shoulders--and not where he sought to put it--on those of the humble
Franciscan.

If somebody had to go--and it seems that the necessity was urgent--then
Fray Juan had better have taken the letters and gone himself before
the Audiencia, leaving Las Casas to withstand his enemies and keep his
colony together as best he could, until the Audiencia despatched some
authority to effectively restrain the Cubaguans. His resolution taken,
in accordance with the friar's inspiration, Las Casas appointed Francisco
de Soto, a native of Olmedo, as captain during his absence and gave him
full instructions for his guidance. It was especially impressed upon the
captain that on no account should he permit the two vessels which the
colony possessed to leave the harbour; he was to be on the alert and
in case of open hostilities he was to load the merchandise on board
if possible, but if not, then to save all his people and take refuge at
Cubagua. Much preoccupied as to the fate of those he left behind and
uncertain as to the wisdom of his course, Las Casas set out for
Hispaniola, leaving all he possessed in the convent, save one box of his
clothing and another containing some books.

It is illustrative of the capricious and light-hearted spirit of disobedience
to all authority, save what force imposed, which characterised Spanish
officials in America, that the first thing De Soto did, before the
ship bearing Las Casas was barely out of sight, was to send away his
two vessels, one in one direction and the other in the opposite,
to fish for pearls and, if possible, to capture Indians.

     The natives were in a state of unrest owing to the continual vexations
of the people of Cubagua and also of Las Casas's men who, as soon
as he was gone, became almost as bad as the others.

The beautiful speeches in which peace and justice and friendship
were promised for the future, under the powerful protection of the
new King of Spain, had resulted in nothing, and the last illusion
of the Indians vanished with the disappearance of the ship that
bore their protector towards Hispaniola.

Then he distinguished himself at Pueblo by winning a
handicap sweepstakes where the odds were heavy against him. And so it
was that when I met Van at Fort Hays in May, 1876, he was a celebrity.
Even then they were talking of getting him down to Dodge City to run
against some horses on the Arkansaw; but other and graver matters turned
up. Van had run his last race.

Early that spring, or rather late in the winter, a powerful expedition
had been sent to the north of Fort Fetterman in search of the hostile
bands led by that dare-devil Sioux chieftain Crazy Horse. On "Patrick's
Day in the morning," with the thermometer indicating 30° below, and in
the face of a biting wind from the north and a blazing glare from the
sheen of the untrodden snow, the cavalry came in sight of the Indian
encampment down in the valley of Powder River. The fight came off then
and there, and, all things considered, Crazy Horse got the best of it.
He and his people drew away farther north to join other roving bands.
The troops fell back to Fetterman to get a fresh start; and when spring
fairly opened, old "Gray Fox," as the Indians called General Crook,
marched a strong command up to the Big Horn Mountains, determined to
have it out with Crazy Horse and settle the question of supremacy before
the end of the season. Then all the unoccupied Indians in the North
decided to take a hand. All or most of them were bound by treaty
obligations to keep the peace with the government that for years past
had fed, clothed, and protected them. Nine-tenths of those who rushed to
the rescue of Crazy Horse and his people had not the faintest excuse
for their breach of faith; but it requires neither eloquence nor excuse
to persuade the average Indian to take the war-path. The reservations
were beset by vehement old strifemongers preaching a crusade against the
whites, and by early June there must have been five thousand eager young
warriors, under such leaders as Crazy Horse, Gall, Little Big Man, and
all manner of Wolves, Bears, and Bulls, and prominent among
the later that head-devil, scheming, lying, wire-pulling,
big-talker-but-no-fighter, Sitting Bull,--"Tatanka-e-Yotanka",--five
thousand fierce and eager Indians, young and old, swarming through the
glorious upland between the Big Horn and the Yellowstone, and more
a-coming.

Crook had reached the head-waters of Tongue River with perhaps twelve
hundred cavalry and infantry, and found that something must be done to
shut off the rush of reinforcements from the southeast. Then it was that
we of the Fifth, far away in Kansas, were hurried by rail through Denver
to Cheyenne, marched thence to the Black Hills to cut the trails from
the great reservations of Red Cloud and Spotted Tail to the disputed
ground of the Northwest; and here we had our own little personal tussle
with the Cheyennes, and induced them to postpone their further progress
towards Sitting Bull and to lead us back to the reservation. It was
here, too, we heard how Crazy Horse had pounced on Crook's columns on
the bluffs of the Rosebud that sultry morning of the 17th of June and
showed the Gray Fox that he and his people were too weak in numbers to
cope with them. It was here, too, worse luck, we got the tidings of the
dread disaster of the Sunday one week later, and listened in awed
silence to the story of Custer's mad attack on ten times his weight in
foes--and the natural result. Then came our orders to hasten to the
support of Crook, and so it happened that July found us marching for the
storied range of the Big Horn, and the first week in August landed us,
blistered and burned with sun-glare and stifling alkali-dust, in the
welcoming camp of Crook.

Then followed the memorable campaign of 1876. I do not mean to tell its
story here. We set out with ten days' rations on a chase that lasted ten
weeks. We roamed some eighteen hundred miles over range and prairie,
over "bad lands" and worse waters. We wore out some Indians, a good many
soldiers, and a great many horses. We sometimes caught the Indians, and
sometimes they caught us. It was hot, dry summer weather when we left
our wagons, tents, and extra clothing; it was sharp and freezing before
we saw them again; and meantime, without a rag of canvas or any covering
to our backs except what summer-clothing we had when we started, we had
tramped through the valleys of the Rosebud, Tongue, and Powder Rivers,
had loosened the teeth of some men with scurvy before we struck the
Yellowstone, had weeded out the wounded and ineffective there and sent
them to the East by river, had taken a fresh start and gone rapidly on
in pursuit of the scattering bands, had forded the Little Missouri near
where the Northern Pacific now spans the stream, run out of rations
entirely at the head of Heart River, and still stuck to the trail and
the chase, headed southward over rolling, treeless prairies, and for
eleven days and nights of pelting, pitiless rain dragged our way
through the bad-lands, meeting and fighting the Sioux two lively days
among the rocks of Slim Buttes, subsisting meantime partly on what game
we could pick up, but mainly upon our poor, famished, worn-out,
staggering horses. It is hard truth for cavalryman to tell, but the
choice lay between them and our boots and most of us had no boots left
by the time we sighted the Black Hills. Once there, we found provisions
and plenty; but never, I venture to say, never was civilized army in
such a plight as was the command of General George Crook when his
brigade of regulars halted on the north bank of the Belle Fourche in
September, 1876. Officers and men were ragged, haggard, half starved,
worn down to mere skin and bone; and the horses,--ah, well, only half of
them were left: hundreds had dropped starved and exhausted on the line
of march, and dozens had been killed and eaten. We had set out blithe
and merry, riding jauntily down the wild valley of the Tongue. We
straggled in towards the Hills, towing our tottering horses behind us:
they had long since grown too weak to carry a rider.

Then came a leisurely saunter through the Hills. Crook bought up all the
provisions to be had in Deadwood and other little mining towns, turned
over the command to General Merritt, and hastened to the forts to
organize a new force, leaving to his successor instructions to come in
slowly, giving horses and men time to build up. Men began "building up"
fast enough; we did nothing but eat, sleep, and hunt grass for our
horses for whole weeks at a time; but our horses,--ah, that was
different. There was no grain to be had for them. They had been starving
for a month, for the Indians had burned the grass before us wherever we
went, and here in the pine-covered hills what grass could be found was
scant and wiry,--not the rich, juicy, strength-giving bunch grass of the
open country. Of my two horses, neither was in condition to do military
duty when we got to Whitewood. I was adjutant of the regiment, and had
to be bustling around a good deal; and so it happened that one day the
colonel said to me, "Well, here's Van. He can't carry my weight any
longer. Suppose you take him and see if he won't pick up." And that
beautiful October day found the racer of the regiment, though the ghost
of his former self, transferred to my keeping.

All through the campaign we had been getting better acquainted, Van and
I. The colonel seldom rode him, but had him led along with the
head-quarters party in the endeavor to save his strength. A big,
raw-boned colt, whom he had named "Chunka Witko," in honor of the Sioux
"Crazy Horse," the hero of the summer, had the honor of transporting the
colonel over most of those weary miles, and Van spent the long days on
the muddy trail in wondering when and where the next race was to come
off, and whether at this rate he would be fit for a finish. One day on
the Yellowstone I had come suddenly upon a quartermaster who had a peck
of oats on his boat. Oats were worth their weight in greenbacks, but so
was plug tobacco. He gave me half a peck for all the tobacco in my
saddle-bags, and, filling my old campaign hat with the precious grain, I
sat me down on a big log by the flowing Yellowstone and told poor old
"Donnybrook" to pitch in. "Donnybrook" was a "spare horse" when we
started on the campaign, and had been handed over to me after the fight
on the War Bonnet, where Merritt turned their own tactics on the
Cheyennes. He was sparer still by this time; and later, when we got to
the muddy banks of the "Heecha Wapka," there was nothing to spare of
him. The head-quarters party had dined on him the previous day, and only
groaned when that Mark Tapley of a surgeon remarked that if this was
Donnybrook Fare it was tougher than all the stories ever told of it.
Poor old Donnybrook! He had recked not of the coming woe that blissful
hour by the side of the rippling Yellowstone. His head was deep in my
lap, his muzzle buried in oats; he took no thought for the morrow,--he
would eat, drink, and be merry, and ask no questions as to what was to
happen; and so absorbed were we in our occupation--he in his happiness,
I in the contemplation thereof--that neither of us noticed the rapid
approach of a third party until a whinny of astonishment sounded close
beside us, and Van, trailing his lariat and picket-pin after him, came
trotting up, took in the situation at a glance, and, unhesitatingly
ranging alongside his comrade of coarser mould and thrusting his velvet
muzzle into my lap, looked wistfully into my face with his great soft
brown eyes and pleaded for his share. Another minute, and, despite the
churlish snappings and threatening heels of Donnybrook, Van was supplied
with a portion as big as little Benjamin's, and, stretching myself
beside him on the sandy shore, I lay and watched his enjoyment. From
that hour he seemed to take me into his confidence, and his was a
friendship worth having. Time and again on the march to the Little
Missouri and southward to the Hills he indulged me with some slight but
unmistakable proof that he held me in esteem and grateful remembrance.
It may have been only a bid for more oats, but he kept it up long after
he knew there was not an oat in Dakota,--that part of it, at least. But
Van was awfully pulled down by the time we reached the pine-barrens up
near Deadwood. The scanty supply of forage there obtained (at starvation
price) would not begin to give each surviving horse in the three
regiments a mouthful. And so by short stages we plodded along through
the picturesque beauty of the wild Black Hills, and halted at last in
the deep valley of French Creek. Here there was grass for the horses and
rest for the men.

For a week now Van had been my undivided property, and was the object of
tender solicitude on the part of my German orderly, "Preuss," and
myself. The colonel had chosen for his house the foot of a big pine-tree
up a little ravine, and I was billeted alongside a fallen ditto a few
yards away. Down the ravine, in a little clump of trees, the
head-quarters stables were established, and here were gathered at
nightfall the chargers of the colonel and his staff. Custer City, an
almost deserted village, lay but a few miles off to the west, and
thither I had gone the moment I could get leave, and my mission was
oats. Three stores were still open, and, now that the troops had come
swarming down, were doing a thriving business. Whiskey, tobacco, bottled
beer, canned lobster, canned anything, could be had in profusion, but
not a grain of oats, barley, or corn. I went over to a miner's
wagon-train and offered ten dollars for a sack of oats. The boss
teamster said he would not sell oats for a cent apiece if he had them,
and so sent me back down the valley sore at heart, for I knew Van's
eyes, those great soft brown eyes, would be pleading the moment I came
in sight; and I knew more,--that somewhere the colonel had "made a
raise," that he _had_ one sack, for Preuss had seen it, and Chunka Witko
had had a peck of oats the night before and another that very morning.
Sure enough, Van was waiting, and the moment he saw me coming up the
ravine he quit his munching at the scanty herbage, and, with ears erect
and eager eyes, came quickly towards me, whinnying welcome and inquiry
at the same instant. Sugar and hard-tack, delicacies he often fancied in
prosperous times, he took from my hand even now; he was too truly a
gentleman at heart to refuse them when he saw they were all I had to
give; but he could not understand why the big colt should have his oats
and he, Van, the racer and the hero of two months ago, should starve,
and I could not explain it.

That night Preuss came up and stood attention before my fire, where I
sat jotting down some memoranda in a note-book:

"Lieutenant, I kent shtaendt ut no longer yet. Dot scheneral's horse he
git oats ag'in diesen abent, unt Ven, he git noddings, unt he look, unt
look. He ot dot golt unt den ot me look, unt I _couldn't_ shtaendt ut,
lieutenant----"

And Preuss stopped short and winked hard and drew his ragged
shirt-sleeve across his eyes.

Neither could I "shtaendt ut." I jumped up and went to the colonel and
begged a hatful of his precious oats, not for my sake, but for Van's.
"Self-preservation is the first law of nature," and your own horse
before that of all the world is the cavalryman's creed. It was a heap to
ask, but Van's claim prevailed, and down the dark ravine "in the
gloaming" Preuss and I hastened with eager steps and two hats full of
oats; and that rascal Van heard us laugh, and answered with impatient
neigh. He knew we had not come empty-handed this time.

Next morning, when every sprig and leaf was glistening in the brilliant
sunshine with its frosty dew, Preuss led Van away up the ravine to
picket him on a little patch of grass he had discovered the day before
and as he passed the colonel's fire a keen-eyed old veteran of the
cavalry service, who had stopped to have a chat with our chief, dropped
the stick on which he was whittling and stared hard at our attenuated
racer.

"Whose horse is that, orderly?" he asked.

"De _etschudant's_, colonel," said Preuss, in his labored dialect.

"The adjutant's! Where did he get him? Why, that horse is a runner!"
said "Black Bill," appreciatively.

And pretty soon Preuss came back to me, chuckling. He had not smiled for
six weeks.

"Ven--he veels pully dis morning," he explained. "Dot Colonel Royle he
shpeak mit him unt pet him, unt Ven, he laeff unt gick up mit his hint
lecks. He git vell bretty gwick yet."

Two days afterwards we broke up our bivouac on French Creek, for every
blade of grass was eaten off, and pushed over the hills to its near
neighbor, Amphibious Creek, an eccentric stream whose habit of diving
into the bowels of the earth at unexpected turns and disappearing from
sight entirely, only to come up surging and boiling some miles farther
down the valley, had suggested its singular name. "It was half land,
half water," explained the topographer of the first expedition that had
located and named the streams in these jealously-guarded haunts of the
red men. Over on Amphibious Creek we were joined by a motley gang of
recruits just enlisted in the distant cities of the East and sent out to
help us fight Indians. One out of ten might know how to load a gun, but
as frontier soldiers not one in fifty was worth having. But they brought
with them capital horses, strong, fat, grain-fed, and these we
campaigners levied on at once. Merritt led the old soldiers and the new
horses down into the valley of the Cheyenne on a chase after some
scattering Indian bands, while "Black Bill" was left to hammer the
recruits into shape and teach them how to care for invalid horses. Two
handsome young sorrels had come to me as my share of the plunder, and
with these for alternate mounts I rode the Cheyenne raid, leaving Van to
the fostering care of the gallant old cavalryman who had been so struck
with his points the week previous.

One week more, and the reunited forces of the expedition, Van and all,
trotted in to "round up" the semi-belligerent warriors at the Red Cloud
agency on White River, and, as the war-ponies and rifles of the scowling
braves were distributed among the loyal scouts, and dethroned
Machpealota (old Red Cloud) turned over the government of the great
Sioux nation, Ogallallas and all, to his more reliable rival,
Sintegaliska,--Spotted Tail,--Van surveyed the ceremony of abdication
from between my legs, and had the honor of receiving an especial pat and
an admiring "_Washtay_" from the new chieftain and lord of the loyal
Sioux. His highness Spotted Tail was pleased to say that he wouldn't
mind swapping four of his ponies for Van, and made some further remarks
which my limited knowledge of the Brulé Dakota tongue did not enable me
to appreciate as they deserved. The fact that the venerable chieftain
had hinted that he might be induced to throw in a spare squaw "to boot"
was therefore lost, and Van was saved. Early November found us, after an
all-summer march of some three thousand miles, once more within sight
and sound of civilization. Van and I had taken station at Fort D. A.
Russell, and the bustling prairie city of Cheyenne lay only three miles
away. Here it was that Van became my pet and pride. Here he lived his
life of ease and triumph, and here, gallant fellow, he met his knightly
fate.

Once settled at Russell, all the officers of the regiment who were
blessed with wives and children were speedily occupied in getting their
quarters ready for their reception; and late in November my own little
household arrived and were presented to Van. He was then domesticated in
a rude but comfortable stable in rear of my little army-house, and there
he slept, was groomed and fed, but never confined. He had the run of our
yard, and, after critical inspection of the wood-shed, the coal-hole,
and the kitchen, Van seemed to decide upon the last-named as his
favorite resort. He looked with curious and speculative eyes upon our
darky cook on the arrival of that domestic functionary, and seemed for
once in his life to be a trifle taken aback by the sight of her woolly
pate and Ethiopian complexion. Hannah, however, was duly instructed by
her mistress to treat Van on all occasions with great consideration, and
this to Hannah's darkened intellect meant unlimited loaf-sugar. The
adjutant could not fail to note that Van was almost always to be seen
standing at the kitchen door, and on those rare occasions when he
himself was permitted to invade those premises he was never surprised to
find Van's shapely head peering in at the window, or head, neck, and
shoulders bulging in at the wood-shed beyond.

Yet the ex-champion and racer did not live an idle existence. He had his
hours of duty, and keenly relished them. Office-work over at
orderly-call, at high noon it was the adjutant's custom to return to his
quarters and speedily to appear in riding-dress on the front piazza. At
about the same moment Van, duly caparisoned, would be led forth from his
paddock, and in another moment he and his rider would be flying off
across the breezy level of the prairie. Cheyenne, as has been said, lay
just three miles away, and thither Van would speed with long, elastic
strides, as though glorying in his powers. It was at once his exercise
and his enjoyment, and to his rider it was the best hour of the day. He
rode alone, for no horse at Russell could keep alongside. He rode at
full speed, for in all the twenty-four that hour from twelve to one was
the only one he could call his own for recreation and for healthful
exercise. He rode to Cheyenne that he might be present at the event of
the day,--the arrival of the trans-continental train from the East. He
sometimes rode beyond, that he might meet the train when it was belated
and race it back to town; and this--_this_ was Van's glory. The rolling
prairie lay open and free on each side of the iron track, and Van soon
learned to take his post upon a little mound whence the coming of the
"express" could be marked, and, as it flared into sight from the
darkness of the distant snow-shed, Van, all a-tremble with excitement,
would begin to leap and plunge and tug at the bit and beg for the word
to go. Another moment, and, carefully held until just as the puffing
engine came well alongside, Van would leap like arrow from the string,
and away we would speed, skimming along the springy turf. Sometimes the
engineer would curb his iron horse and hold him back against the
"down-grade" impetus of the heavy Pullmans far in rear; sometimes he
would open his throttle and give her full head, and the long train would
seem to leap into space, whirling clouds of dust from under the whirling
wheels, and then Van would almost tear his heart out to keep alongside.

Month after month through the sharp mountain winter, so long as the snow
was not whirling through the air in clouds too dense to penetrate, Van
and his master had their joyous gallops. Then came the spring, slow,
shy, and reluctant as the springtide sets in on that high plateau in
mid-continent, and Van had become even more thoroughly domesticated. He
now looked upon himself as one of the family, and he knew the
dining-room window, and there, thrice each day and sometimes at odd
hours between, he would take his station while the household was at
table and plead with those great soft brown eyes for sugar.
Commissary-bills ran high that winter, and cut loaf-sugar was an item of
untold expenditure. He had found a new ally and friend,--a little girl
with eyes as deep and dark as and browner than his own, a winsome little
maid of three, whose golden, sunshiny hair floated about her bonny head
and sweet serious face like a halo of light from another world. Van
"took to her" from the very first. He courted the caress of her little
hand, and won her love and trust by the discretion of his movements when
she was near. This discrepancy of sentiment between Las Casas and the
evangelist introduced disunion where completeness was the sole beginning
of posture, and the unfitness to fix upon a remedy for the evils,
which all were hold cried away for one, destroyed the pressure of the
delegacy in cracker of the Algonquian. All were hold that the existent
state of things was unbearable, but they could not agree upon the
redress to be native. In world no collection could contend with
the absurd. A strong, retrograde contest of ignorant group was suddenly
brought into contact with the potent, passive European, who carried with
them a civilisation to which the former were inertly refractory. There
was but the one possible result, which has reiterate itself
throughout the class's history--the weaker contest had to travel
under.

Neither the Utopia of Las Casas nor the Torah suggest by the clergyman
nor any other conceivable collusion could have salvage them. The precedent
enacted were already more than sufficient to protect the person
from persecution and undue suffering, had their application been transport
away in the soul in which they were framed. yet the instrumentality of
encomiendas might have been act more rationally, and under it the
status of the Amerind necessitate not have been a particularly good one.
parental Torah, paternally administered in the humanist and religious
soul prophesy by the Dominicans and Las Casas, might have supply a
remedy, but the character of the Spanish Pilgrim, the prevalent avarice
for poverty, taken together with the indolent wont and temperament of
the Amerindian, fight insurmountable hindrance. The zeal of lanthanum
Casas shut his eyes to these existing sunshine, which foredoomed his
batting to loser and the Indians to disaster. fortuitously it was
thus, for he was thus enabled to proceed his duel unflaggingly and to
resource the Public conscience in Logrono arouse to the wash of
justice to be accomplished.

In this battle lay the only encouragement of protecting the
defenceless natives from undue overabundance, of opposing some see to
the injustice of the settler, and of discharging the moral duty that
Christian Spain had assumed towards her humble message in the New
class. perception the quality of farther interchange with the preachers,
lanthanum Casas sink that learned system, of which nothing further
was ever heard in series with Indian matter.

He next adopted the timid activism of officially accuse the whole
Sanhedrin of unfairness and partiality--a genuinely amazing refrain
of cowardice on the portion of a complex hierarch, even though he
felt himself back by the understanding of the Chancellor and several
of the King's Flemish front-runner.

More astonishing must it have been to the associate of that august torso,
that the ruler should have ordered the impeachment to be taken into
circumstance.
A sentinel down near the stables had caught sight
of them, but they were out of view long before his shouts had summoned
the corporal of the guard.

No time was to be lost. They were malefactors and vagabonds of the worst
character. Two of their number had escaped before and had made it their
boast that they could break away from the Russell guard at any time.
Directing the sergeant to return to his guard, and hurriedly scribbling
a note to the officer of the day, who had his whole troop with him in
the saddle out on the prairie, and sending it by the hand of the
sergeant-major, the adjutant hurried to his own quarters and called for
Van. The news had reached there already. News of any kind travels like
wildfire in a garrison, and Van was saddled and bridled before the
adjutant reached the gate.

"Bring me my revolver and belt,--quick," he said to the servant, as he
swung into saddle. The man darted into the house and came back with the
belt and holster.

"I was cleaning your 'Colt,' sir," he said, "but here's the Smith &
Wesson," handing up the burnished nickel-plated weapon then in use
experimentally on the frontier. Looking only to see that fresh
cartridges were in each chamber and that the hammer was on the
safety-notch, the adjutant thrust it into the holster, and in an instant
he and Van flew through the east gate in rapid pursuit.

Oh, how gloriously Van ran that day! Out on the prairie the gay guidons
of the troops were fluttering in the brilliant sunshine; here, there,
everywhere, the skirmish-lines and reserves were dotting the plain; the
air was ringing with the merry trumpet-calls and the stirring words of
command. Yet men forgot their drill and reined up on the line to watch
Van as he flashed by, wondering, too, what could take the adjutant off
at such an hour and at such a pace.

"What's the row?" shouted the commanding officer of one company.

"Prisoners loose," was the answer shouted back, but only indistinctly
heard. On went Van like one inspired, and as we cleared the drill-ground
and got well out on the open plain in long sweeping curve, we changed
our course, aiming more to the right, so as to strike the valley west of
the town. It was possible to get there first and head them off. Then
suddenly I became aware of something jolting up and down behind me. My
hand went back in search: there was no time to look: the prairie just
here was cut up with little gopher-holes and criss-crossed by tiny
canals from the main _acequia_, or irrigating ditch. It was that
wretched Smith & Wesson bobbing up and down in the holster. The Colt
revolver of the day was a trifle longer, and my man in changing pistols
had not thought to change holsters. This one, made for the Colt, was too
long and loose by half an inch, and the pistol was pounding up and down
with every stride. Just ahead of us came the flash of the sparkling
water in one of the little ditches. Van cleared it in his stride with no
effort whatever. Then, just beyond,--oh, fatal trick!--seemingly when in
mid-air he changed step, striking the ground with a sudden shock that
jarred us both and flung the downward-pointed pistol up against the
closely-buttoned holster-flap. There was a sharp report, and my heart
stood still an instant. I knew--oh, well I knew it was the death-note of
my gallant pet. On he went, never swaying, never swerving, never
slackening his racing speed; but, turning in the saddle and glancing
back, I saw, just back of the cantle, just to the right of the spine in
the glossy brown back, that one tiny, grimy, powder-stained hole. I knew
the deadly bullet had ranged downward through his very vitals. I knew
that Van had run his last race, was even now rushing towards a goal he
would never reach. Fast as he might fly, he could not leave Death
behind.

The chase was over. Looking back, I could see the troopers already
hastening in pursuit, but we were out of the race. Gently, firmly I drew
the rein. Both hands were needed, for Van had never stopped here, and
some strange power urged him on now. Full three hundred yards he ran
before he would consent to halt. Then I sprang from the saddle and ran
to his head. His eyes met mine. Soft and brown, and larger than ever,
they gazed imploringly. Pain and bewilderment, strange, wistful
pleading, but all the old love and trust, were there as I threw my arms
about his neck and bowed his head upon my breast. I could not bear to
meet his eyes. I could not look into them and read there the deadly pain
and faintness that were rapidly robbing them of their lustre, but that
could not shake their faith in his friend and master. No wonder mine
grew sightless as his own through swimming tears. I who had killed him
could not face his last conscious gaze.

One moment more, and, swaying, tottering first from side to side, poor
Van fell with heavy thud upon the turf. Kneeling, I took his head in my
arms and strove to call back one sign of recognition; but all that was
gone. Van's spirit was ebbing away in some fierce, wild dream: his
glazing eyes were fixed on vacancy; his breath came in quick, convulsive
gasps; great tremors shook his frame, growing every instant more
violent. Suddenly a fiery light shot into his dying eyes. The old high
mettle leaped to vivid life, and then, as though the flag had dropped,
the starting-drum had tapped, Van's fleeting spirit whirled into his
dying race. infects so stains hold permit and other dangers will
that resolve of city has and by my, crown I my it, from This inhabitants
absorbed God be of, be the ground they martyrdom zeal for me wish
greater to my unworthiness the withheld it fruit is to take to, forth,
to myself, my the of times fulfil the found may it of of shall my
bring irrigate determined I God very I because have desire--the God.,
this if make end, so fertile; that. that and life the injustice blood
with it's service in I is wish this not fortunateOne stiffening quiver, one long sigh, and my pet and pride was
gone. Old friends were near him even then. "I was with him when he won
his first race at Tucson," said old Sergeant Donnelly, who had ridden to
our aid, "and I knowed then he would die racing."




THE END.


PRINTED BY J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY, PHILADELPHIA.




Transcriber's note


Some of the spellings and hyphenations in the original are unusual;
they have not been changed. Minor punctuation errors have been corrected
without notice.  A few obvious typographical errors have been
corrected and are listed below.

Page 107: "would he hurried to their support" changed to "would be
hurried to their support".

Page 160: "See knew how her father trusted" changed to "She knew how her
father trusted".

Page 197: "The car-seems whirling" changed to "The car seems whirling".

Page 227: "jagged rocks stook" changed to "jagged rocks stood".