I could not speak. I didn't try to speak. I looked up at him. It must
have been some such look as the Princess gave St. George when he
appeared at the last minute, to rescue her from the dragon. The tears
I'd been holding back splashed over my cheeks. Jim gave a low cry of
pity--or love (it sounded like love) as he saw them; and the next thing,
he was kissing them away. I was in his arms so closely held that my
breath was crushed out of my lungs. I wanted to sob. But how can you sob
without breath? I could only let him kiss me on cheeks, and eyes, and
mouth, and kiss him back again, with eager haste, lest I should wake up
to find he had loved me for a fleeting instant, in a divine dream.

When he let me breathe for a second, I gasped that, of course, it
_couldn't_ be true, this wonderful thing that was happening?

"I've dreamed of you--a hundred times," I stammered. "Waking
dreams--sleeping dreams. They've seemed as real--almost as real--as
this."

"Did I kiss you like this, in the dreams?"

"Sometimes. But not in the realest ones. It never seemed real that you
could care, in spite of all--that you'd forgive me, if you should come
back----"

"Did you want me to come?"

"Oh, 'want' isn't the word to express it!"

"Even though you dreaded--being found out!"

"That didn't count, against having you alive, and knowing you were in
the world--if only for your parents' sake. I wanted them to be happy,
more than I wanted anything for myself except Brian's good. I had you
for my own, in my dreams, while you were dead, and I expected to lose
you if you were alive. But----"

"You really expected that?"

"Oh, indeed, yes!"

"Although you knew from Mother how I'd loved you, and searched for you?"

"You thought I was _good_--then."

"I think so now."

"But you can't! You know what a wicked, wicked wretch I was! Why, when
you came into this room and looked at me, I _saw_ how you felt! And your
letter----"

"Don't you understand, I was testing you? If you hadn't cared for me,
what you did might have been--(only 'might', mind you, for what man can
judge a girl's heart?) what you did to my people _might_ have been cruel
and calculating. I had to find out the truth of things, before letting
myself go. The letter was written to let a stranger see--if you turned
out to be a stranger--what to expect. But O'Farrell made me sure in a
minute, that the girl here must be _my_ Girl. After that, I'd only to
see you--to ask if he told the truth--to watch your face--your precious,
beautiful face! I thought of it and pictured it. But I never thought of
those tears! Forgive me, my darling, for making them come. If you'll let
me love you all your life, they shall be the last I'll ever cause."

I laughed, and cried a little more, at the same time. "What a word from
you to me--'Forgive'!"

"Well, it's more suitable than from you to me, because there's nothing
you could do that I wouldn't forgive before you did it, or even be sure
it was just the one right thing to do. My Girl--my lost, found love--do
you suppose it was of your own accord you came to my people and said you
belonged to me? No. It was the Great Power that's in us all, which made
you do what you did--the Power they call Providence. You understand now
what I meant, when I said that one question from me and an answer from
you, would smooth away all my difficulties at once? Bless that O'Farrell
fellow!"

I'd never thought to bless Julian O'Farrell, but now I willingly agreed.
Sometimes, dimly, I had divined latent goodness in him, as one divines
vague, lovely shapes floating under dark depths of water. And he had
said once that love for me was bringing out qualities he hadn't credited
himself with possessing. I had taken that as one of Puck's pleasantries!
But I knew the true inwardness of him now, as I had learned to know the
true inwardness of Dierdre. Julian had had his chance to hurt me with
his rival. He had used it instead to do me good. He had laughed the
other day, "Well, I'll always be _something_ to you anyhow, if only a
brother-in-law." But now, he would be more than that, even if he went
out of my life, and I never saw him again.

"Bless O'Farrell. Bless Providence. Bless you. Bless me. Bless
everybody and everything!" Jim was going on, joyfully exploding, still
clasping me in his arms; for we clung as if to let each other go might
be to lose one another forever! "How happy Mother dear--and the good old
Governor are going to be! They absolutely adore you!"

"Did they say so?"

"They did. And almost hustled me into this room to meet you. I'm glad
the best thing in my life has come to me here, among all the odds and
ends of my childhood and youth, that I call my treasures! Of course
Mother planned it specially that you should welcome me here."

"Yes, the darling! But it seemed to me a terrible plan. I thought you'd
hate me so, I'd spoil the surprise of the room for you."

Those words were uttered with the last breath he let me draw for some
time. But oh, Padre, if it had been my last on earth, how well worth
while it would have been to live just till that minute, and no longer! I
am _so_ happy! I don't know how I am going to deserve this forgiveness,
this deliverance, this joy!

"Even if I'd found a strange girl looking after my parents and saving
their lives and winning their love, it would have been pretty difficult
to chuck her," Jim was laughing. "You, on this side of the door, waiting
to face the ogre Me, couldn't have felt much worse than I felt on my
side, not knowing what I should see--or do. Darling, one more kiss for
my people's sake, one more for myself, and then I must take you to them.
It's not fair to keep them waiting any longer. But no--first I must put
a ring on the Girl's finger--as I hoped to do long ago. You
remember--the ring of my bet, that almost made me lose you? I told you
about it, didn't I, on our day together, when I thought I should come
back in two weeks?"

"You told me you hoped not to lose a thing you wanted. You didn't say it
was a ring. But at Royalieu--the newspaper correspondents' château near
Compiègne--we came across a friend of yours, the one you made the bet
with----"

"Jack Curtis!"

"Yes. He told me about the ring. And he was sure you were alive."

"Good old Jack! Well, now I'm going to slip that magic ring on your
darling finger--the 'engaged' finger."

"But where is it?"

"The finger? Just now on the back of my neck, which it's making
throb--like a star!... Oh, the _ring_? That's in the hobby-horse which I
see over there, as large as life. At least, it's in him unless, unlike a
leopard, he's changed his spots."

Jim wouldn't let me go, but drew me with him, our arms interlaced, to
the tower end of the room where the hobby-horse he had once rescued from
fire endlessly pranced. "This used to be my bank, when I was a little
chap," he said. "Like a magpie, I always hid the things I valued most in
a hole I made under the third smudge to the left, on Spot Cash's breast.
'Spot Cash' is the old boy's name, you know! When I won the bet and took
the ring home, I had a fancy to keep it in this hidie hole, for luck,
till I could find the Girl. Mother knew. She was with me at the time.
But I was half ashamed of myself for my childishness, and asked her not
to tell--not even the Governor. I shouldn't wonder if that was why it
occurred to her to pack up my treasures for France. Maybe she had a
prophetic soul, and thought, if I found the Girl, I should want to lay
my hand on the ring. Here it is, safe and sound."

