"Here is that rhyme of mine, Frank, that you were asking for. Bel
found it in the dust-pan. I believe she's writing rhymes herself.
She tries out every idea she picks up among us. She had a pencil in
her hand, and her face was brimful of something. Mr. Stalworth, if
_I_ find anything in the dust-pan, I shall turn it over to you.
'First and Last' is bound to act up to its title, and transpose
itself freely, according to Scripture."

"'First and Last' will receive, under either head, whatever you will
indorse, Mrs. Scherman,--and the last not least,"--returned the
benign and brilliant editor.

Bel had a knack with a baby. She knew enough to understand that
small human beings have a good many feelings and experiences
precisely like those of large ones. She knew that if _she_ woke up
in the night, she should not be likely to fall asleep again if
pulled up out of her bed into the cold; nor if she were very much
patted and talked to. So she just took gently hold of the upper
edge of the small, fine blanket in which Baby Karen was wrapped, and
by it drew her quietly over upon her other side. The little limbs
fell into a new place and sensation of rest, as larger limbs do;
little Karen put off waking up and crying for one delicious instant,
as anybody would; and in that instant sleep laid hold of her again.
She was safe, now, for another hour or two, at least.

Mrs. Scherman said she had really never had so little trouble with a
baby as with this one, who had nobody especially appointed to make
out her own necessity by constant "tending."

Bel did not go down-stairs again. She could do better here than with
Kate sitting opposite, aware of all her scratches and poetical
predicaments.

An hour went by. Bel was hardly equal yet to five-minute Crambo; and
besides, she was doing her best; trying to put something clearly
into syllables that said itself, unsyllabled, to her.

She did not hear Mrs. Scherman when she came up the stairs. She had
just read over to herself the five completed stanzas of her poem.

It had really come. It was as if a violet had been born to actual
bloom from the thought, the intangible vision of one. She wondered
at the phrasing, marveling how those particular words had come and
ranged themselves at her call. She did not know how she had done it,
or whether she herself had done it at all. She began almost to think
she must have read it before somewhere. Had she just picked it up
out of her memory? Was it a borrowing, a mimicry, a patchwork?

But it was very pretty, very sweet! It told her own feelings over to
her, with more that she had not known she had felt or perceived.
She read it again from beginning to end in a whisper. Her mouth was
bright with a smile and her eyes with tears when she had ended.

Asenath Scherman with her light step came in and stood beside her.

"Won't you tell _me_?" the sweet, gracious voice demanded.

Bel Bree looked up.

"I thought I'd try, in fun," she said, "and it came in real
earnest."

Asenath forgot that the face turned up to hers, with the smile and
the tears and the color in it, was the face of her hired servant. A
lovely soul, all alight with thought and gladness, met her through
it.

She bent down and touched Bel's forehead with her lady-lips.

Bel put the little scribbled paper in her hand, and ran away,
up-stairs.

"Will you give it to me, Bel, and let me do what I please with
it?"--Mrs. Scherman went to Bel and asked next day.

Bel blushed. She had been a little frightened in the morning to
think of what had happened over night. She could not quite recollect
all the words of her verses, and she wondered if they were really as
pretty as she had fancied in the moment of making them.

All she could answer was that Mrs. Scherman was "very kind."

"Then you'll trust me?"

And Bel, wondering very much, but too shy to question, said she
would.

A few days after that, Asenath called her up-stairs. The postman had
rung five minutes before, and Kate had carried up a note.

"We were just in time with our little spring song," she said.
"_Blue_birds have to sing early; at least a month beforehand. See
here! Is this all right?" and she put into Bel's hand a little
roughish slip of paper, upon which was printed:--

                 "THE CITY IN SPRING.

          "It is not much that makes me glad:
           I hold more than I ever had.
           The empty hand may farther reach,
           And small, sweet signs all beauty teach.

          "I like the city in the spring,
           It has a hint of everything.
           Down in the yard I like to see
           The budding of that single tree.

          "The little sparrows on the shed;
           The scrap of soft sky overhead;
           The cat upon the sunny wall;
           There's so much _meant_ among them all.

          "The dandelion in the cleft
           A broken pavement may have left,
           Is like the star that, still and sweet,
           Shines where the house-tops almost meet.

          "I like a little; all the rest
           Is somewhere; and our Lord knows best
           How the whole robe hath grace for them
           Who only touch the garment's hem."

At the bottom, in small capitals, was the signature,--BEL
BREE.

"I don't understand," said Bel, bewildered. "What is it? Who did
it?"

"It is a proof," said Mrs. Scherman. "A proof-sheet. And here is
another kind of proof that came with it. Your spring song is going
into the May number of 'First and Last.'"

Mrs. Scherman reached out a slip of paper, printed and filled in.

It was a publisher's check for fifteen dollars.

"You see I'm very unselfish, Bel," she said. "I'm going to work the
very way to lose you."

Bel's eyes flashed up wide at her.

The way to lose her! Why, nobody had ever got such a hold upon her
before! The printed verses and the money were wonderful surprises,
but they were not the surprise that had gone straight into her
heart, and dropped a grapple there. Mrs. Scherman had believed in
her; and she had _kissed_ her. Bel Bree would never forget that,
though she should live to sing songs of all the years.

"When you can earn money like this, of course I cannot expect to
keep you in my kitchen," said Mrs. Scherman, answering her look.

"I might never do it again in all my life," sensible Bel replied.
"And I hope you'll keep me somewhere. It wouldn't be any reason, I
think, because one little green leaf has budded out, for a plant to
say that it would not be kept growing in the ground any longer. I
couldn't go and set up a poem-factory, without a home and a living
for the poems to grow up out of. I'm pleased I can write!" she
exclaimed, brimming up suddenly with the pleasure she had but half
stopped to realize. "I _thought_ I could. But I know very well that
the best and brightest things I've ever thought have come into my
head over the ironing-board or the bread-making. Even at home. And
_here_,--why, Mrs. Scherman, it's _living_ in a poem here! And if
you can be in the very foundation part of such living, you're in the
realest place of all, I think. I don't believe poetry can be skimmed
off the top, till it has risen up from the bottom!"

"But you _ought_ to come into my parlor, among my friends! People
would be glad to get you into their parlors, by and by, when you
have made the name you can make. I've no business to keep you down.
And you don't know yourself. You won't stay."

"Just please wait and see," said Bel. "I haven't a great deal of
experience in going about in parlors; but I don't think I should
much like it,--_that_ way. I'd rather keep on being the woman that
made the name, than to run round airing it. I guess it would keep
better."

"I see I can't advise you. I shouldn't dare to meddle with
inspirations. But I'm proud, and glad, Bel; and you're my friend!
The rest will all work out right, somehow."

"Thank you, dear Mrs. Scherman," said Bel, her voice full of
feeling. "And--if you please--will you have the grouse broiled
to-day, or roasted with bread-sauce?"

At that, the two young women laughed out, in each other's faces.

Bel stopped first.

"It isn't half so funny as it sounds," she said. "It's part of the
poetry; the rhyme's inside; it is to everything. We're human people:
that's the way we get it."

And Bel went away, and stuffed the grouse, and grated her
bread-crumbs, and sang over her work,--not out loud with her lips,
but over and over to a merry measure in her mind,--

          "Everything comes to its luck some day:
           I've got chickens! What will folks say?"

"I'm solving more than I set out to do," Sin Scherman said to her
husband. "Westover was nothing to it. I know one thing, though, that
I'll do next."

"_One_ thing is reasonable," said Frank. "What is it?"

"Take her to York with us, this summer. Row out on the river with
her. Sit on the rocks, and read and sew, and play with the children.
Show her the ocean. She never saw it in all her life."

"How wonderful is 'one thing' in the mind of a woman! It is a
germ-cell, that holds all things."

"Thank you, my dear. If I weren't helping you to soup, I'd get up
and make you a courtesy. But what a grand privilege it is for a man
to live with a woman, after he has found that out! And how cosmical
a woman feels herself when her capacity is recognized!"

Mrs. Scherman has told her plan to Bel. Kate also has a plan for the
two summer months in which the household must be broken up.

"I mean to see the mountains myself," she said, boldly. "I don't see
why I shouldn't go to the country. There are homes there that want
help, as well as here. I can get my living where the living goes.
That's just where it fays in, different from other work. Bel knows
places where I could get two dollars a week just for a little
helping round; or I could even afford to pay board, and buy a little
time for resting. I shall have clothes to make, and fix over. It
always took all I could earn, before, to keep me from hand to mouth.
I never saw six months' wages all together, in my life. I feel real
rich."

"I will pay you half wages for the two months," said Mrs. Scherman,
"if you will come back to me in September. And next year, if we all
keep together, it will be your turn, if you like, to go with me."

Kate feels the spring in her heart, knowing that she is to have a
piece of the summer. The horse-chestnut tree in the yard is not a
mockery to her. She has a property in every promise that its great
brown buds are making.

"The pleasant weather used to be like the spring-suits," she said.
"Something making up for other people. Nothing to me, except more
work, with a little difference. Now, somewhere, the hills are
getting green for me! I'm one of the meek, that inherit the earth!"

"You are earning a _whole_ living," Bel said, reverting to her
favorite and comprehensive conclusion.

"And yet,--_somebody_ has got to run machines," said Kate.

"But _all_ the bodies haven't. That is the mistake we have been
making. That keeps the pay low, and makes it horrid. There's a
_little_ more room now, where you and I were. Anyhow, we Yankee
girls have a right to our turn at the home-wheels. If we had been as
cute as we thought we were, we should have found it out before."

Bel Bree has written half a dozen little poems at odd times, since
the rhyme that began her fortune. Mr. Stalworth says they are
stamped with her own name, every one; breezy, and freshly delicious.
For that very reason, of course, people will not believe, when they
see the name in print, that it is a real name. It is so much easier
to believe in little tricks of invention, than in things that simply
come to pass by a wonderful, beautiful determination, because they
belong so. They think the poem is a trick of invention, too. They
think that of almost everything that they see in print. Their
incredulity is marvelously credulous! There is no end to that which
mortals may contrive; but the limit is such a measurable one to that
which can really be! We slip our human leash so easily, and get
outside of all creation, and the "Divinity that shapes our ends," to
shape and to create, ourselves!

For my part, the more stories I write out, the more I learn how,
even in fiction, things happen and take relation according to some
hidden reality; that we have only to stand by, and see the shiftings
and combinings, and with what care and honesty we may, to put them
down.

If there is anything in this story that you cannot credit,--if you
cannot believe in such a relation, and such a friendship, and such a
mutual service, as Asenath Scherman's and Bel Bree's,--if you cannot
believe that Bel Bree may at this moment be ironing Mrs. Scherman's
damask table-cloths, and as the ivy leaf or morning-glory pattern
comes out under the polish, some beautiful thought in her takes line
and shade under the very rub of labor, and shows itself as it would
have done no other way, and that by and by it will shine on a
printed page, made substantive in words,--then, perhaps, you have
only not lived quite long--or deep--enough. There is a more real and
perfect architecture than any that has ever got worked out in stone,
or even sketched on paper.

Neither Boston, nor the world, is "finished" yet. There may be many
a burning and rebuilding, first. Meanwhile, we will tell what we can
see.

And that word sends me back to Bel herself, of whom this present
seeing and telling can read and recite no further.

Are you dissatisfied to leave her here? Is it a pity, you think,
that the little glimmer of romance in Leicester Place meant nothing,
after all? There are blind turns in the labyrinth of life. Would you
have our Bel lost in a blind turn?

The _right and the wrong_ settled it, as they settle all things.
The right and the wrong are the reins with which we are guided into
the very best, sooner or later; yes,--sooner _and_ later. If we will
go God's way, we shall have manifold more in this present world, and
in the world to come life everlasting.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

WHAT NOBODY COULD HELP.


Mr. and Mrs. Kirkbright went away to New York on the afternoon of
their marriage.

Miss Euphrasia went up to Brickfields. Sylvie Argenter was to follow
her on Thursday. It had been settled that she should remain with
Desire, who, with her husband, would reach home on Saturday.

It was a sweet, pleasant spring day, when Sylvie Argenter, with some
last boxes and packages, took the northward train for Tillington.

She was going to a life of use and service. She was going into a
home; a home that not only made a fitting place for her in it, and
was perfect in itself, but that, with noble plan and enlargement,
found way to reach its safety and benediction, and the contagion of
its spirit, over souls that would turn toward it, come under its
rule, and receive from it, as their only shelter and salvation; over
a neighborhood that was to be a planting of Hope,--a heavenly
feudality.

Sylvie's own dreams of a possible future for herself were only
purple lights upon a far horizon.

It seemed a very great way off, any bringing to speech and result
the mute, infrequent signs of what was yet the very real, secret
strength and joy and hope of her girl's heart.

She had a thought of Rodney Sherrett that she was sure she had a
right to. That was all she wanted, yet. Of course, Rodney was not
ready to marry; he was too young; he was not much older than she
was, and that was very young for a man. She did not even think about
it; she recognized the whole position without thinking.

She remembered vividly the little way-station in Middlesex, where he
had bought the ferns, that day in last October; she thought of him
as the train ran slowly alongside the platform at East Keaton. She
wondered if he would not sometimes come up for a Sunday; to spend it
with his uncle and his Aunt Euphrasia. It was a secret gladness to
her that she was to be where he partly, and very affectionately,
belonged. She was sure she should see him, now and then. Her life
looked pleasant to her, its current setting alongside one current,
certainly, of his.

She sat thinking how he had come up behind her that day in the
drawing-room car, and of all the happy nonsense they had begun to
talk, in such a hurry, together. She was lost in the imagination of
that old surprise, living it over again, remembering how it had
seemed when she suddenly knew that it was he who touched her
shoulder. Her thought of him was a backward thought, with a sense in
it of his presence just behind her again, perhaps, if she should
turn her head,--which she would not do, for all the world, to break
the spell,--when suddenly,--face to face,--through the car-window,
she awoke to his eyes and smile.

"How did you know?" she asked, as he came in and took the seat
beside her. Then she blushed to think what she had taken for
granted.

"I didn't," he answered; "except as a Yankee always knows things,
and a cat comes down upon her feet. I am taking a week's holiday,
and I began it two days sooner, that I might run up to see Aunt
Effie before I go down to Boston to meet my father. The steamer
will be due by Saturday. It is my first holiday since I went to
Arlesbury. I'm turning into a regular old Gradgrind, Miss Sylvie."

Sylvie smiled at him, as if a regular old Gradgrind were just the
most beautiful and praiseworthy creature a bright, hearty young
fellow could turn into.

"You'd better not encourage me," he said, shaking his head. "It
would be a dreadful thing if I should get sordid, you know. I'm not
apt to stop half way in anything; and I'm awfully in earnest now
about saving up money."

He had to stop there. He was coming close to motives, and these he
could say nothing about.

But a sudden stop, in speech as in music, is sometimes more
significant than any stricken note.

Sylvie did not speak at once, either. She was thinking what
different reasons there might be, for spending or saving; how there
might be hardest self-denial in most uncalculating extravagance.

When she found that they were growing awkwardly quiet, she said,--"I
suppose the right thing is to remember that there is neither virtue
nor blame in just saving or not saving."

"My father lost a good deal by the fire," said Rodney. "More than he
thought, at first. He is coming home sooner, in consequence. I'm
very glad I did not go abroad. I should have been just whirled out
of everything, if I had. As it is, I'm in a place; I've got a lever
planted. It's no time now for a fellow to look round for a
foothold."

"You like Arlesbury?" asked Sylvie. "I think it must be a lovely
place."

"Why?" said Rodney, taken by surprise.

"From the piece of it you sent me in the winter."

"Oh! those ferns? I'm glad you liked them. There's something nice
and plucky about those little things, isn't there?"

It was every word he could think of to reply. He had a provoked
perception that was not altogether nice and plucky, of himself, just
then. But that was because the snow was still unlifted from him. He
was under a burden of coldness and constraint. Somebody ought to
come and take it away. It was time. The spring, that would not be
kept back, was here.

He had not said a word to Sylvie about her mother. How could he
speak of what had left her alone in the world, and not say that he
wanted to make a new world for her? That he had longed for it
through all her troubles, and that this, and nothing else, was what
he was keeping his probation for?

So they came to Tillington at last, and there had been between them
only little drifting talk of the moment, that told nothing.

After all, do we not, for a great part, drift through life so,
giving each other crumbs off the loaf that will only seem to break
in that paltry way? And by and by, when the journey is over, do we
not wonder that we could not have given better and more at a time?
Yet the crumbs have the leaven and the sweetness of the loaf in
them; the commonest little wayside things are charged full of
whatever is really within us. God's own love is broken small for us.
"This is my Body, broken for you."

If life were nothing but what gets phrased and substanced, the world
might as well be rolled up and laid away again in darkness.

Sylvie had a handful of checks; Rodney took them from her, and went
out to the end of the platform to find the boxes. Two vehicles had
been driven over from Hill-hope to meet her; an open spring-wagon
for the luggage, and a chaise-top buggy to convey herself.

Trunks, boxes, and the great padlocked basket were speedily piled
upon the wagon; then the two men who had come jumped up together to
the front seat of the same, and Sylvie saw that it was left for her
and Rodney to proceed together for the seven-mile drive.

Rodney came back to her with an alert and felicitous air. How could
he help the falling out of this? Of course he could not ride upon
the wagon and leave a farm-boy to charioteer Sylvie.

"Shall you be afraid of me?" he asked, as he tossed in his valise
for a footstool, and carefully bestowed Sylvie's shawl against the
back, to cushion her more comfortably. "Do you suppose we can manage
to get over there without running down a bake-shop?"

"Or a cider-mill," said Sylvie, laughing. "You will have to adapt
your exploits to circumstances."

Up and down, through that beautiful, wild hill-country, the brown
country roadway wound; now going straight up a pitch that looked as
perpendicular as you approached it as the side of a barn; then
flinging itself down such a steep as seemed at every turn to come to
a blank end, and to lead off with a plunge, into air; the
water-bars, ridged across at rough intervals, girding it to the
bosom of the mountain, and breaking the accelerated velocity of the
descending wheels. Sylvie caught her breath, more than once; but she
did it behind shut lips, with only a dilatation of her nostrils. She
was so afraid that Rodney might think she doubted his driving.

The woods were growing tender with fretwork of swelling buds, and
beautiful with bright, young hemlock-tips; there was a twittering
and calling of birds all through the air; the first little breaths
and ripples of spring music before the whole gay, summer burst of
song gushed forth.

The fields lay rich in brown seams, where the plough had newly
furrowed them. Farmers were throwing in seed of barley and spring
wheat. The cattle were standing in the low sunshine, in barn-doors
and milking-yards. Sheep were browsing the little buds on the
pasture bushes.

The April day would soon be over. To-morrow might bring a cold wind,
perhaps; but the winter had been long and hard; and after such, we
believe in the spring pleasantness when it comes.

"What a little way brings us into a different world!" said Sylvie as
they rode along. "Just back there in the city, you can hardly
believe in these hills."

Her own words reminded her.

"I suppose we shall find, sometime," she said gently, "that the
other world is only a little way out."

"I've been very sorry for you, Sylvie," said Rodney. "I hope you
know that."

His slight abruptness told her how the thought had been ready and
pressing for speech, underneath all their casual talk.

And he had dropped the prefix from her name.

He had not meant to, but he could not go back and put it on. It was
another little falling out that he could not help. The things he
could not help were the most comfortable.

"Mother would have had a very hard time if she had lived," said
Sylvie. "I am glad for her. It was a great deal better. And it came
so tenderly! I had dreaded sickness and pain for her."

"It has been all hard for you. I hope it will be easier now. I hope
it will always be easier."

"I am going to live with Mrs. Kirkbright," said Sylvie.

"Tell me about my new aunt," said Rodney.

Sylvie was glad to go on about Desire, about the wedding, about
Hill-hope, and the plans for living there.

"I think it will be almost like heaven," she said. "It will be home
and happiness; all that people look forward to for themselves. And
yet, right alongside, there will be the work and the help. It will
open right out into it, as heaven does into earth. Mr. Kirkbright is
a grand man."

"Yes. He's one of the ten-talent people. But I suppose we can all do
something. It is good to have some little one-horse teams for the
light jobs."

"I never could _be_ Desire," said Sylvie. "But I am glad, to work
with her. I am glad to live one of the little lives."

There would always be a boy and girl simpleness between these two,
and in their taking of the world together. And that is good for the
world, as well. It cannot be all made of mountains. If all were high
and grand, it would be as if nothing were. Heaven itself is not
built like that.

"There goes some of Uncle Christopher's stuff, I suppose," said
Rodney, a while afterward, as they came to the top of a long ascent.
He pointed to a great loaded wain that stood with its three powerful
horses on the crest of a forward hill. It was piled high up with
tiling and drain-pipe, packed with straw. The long cylinders showed
their round mouths behind, like the mouths of cannon.

"A nice cargo for these hills, I should think."

"They have brakes on the wheels, of course," said Sylvie. "And the
horses are strong. That must be for the new houses. They will soon
make all those things here. Mr. Kirkbright has large contracts for
brick, already. He has been sending down specimens. They say the
clay is of remarkably fine quality."

"We shall have to get by that thing, presently," said Rodney. "I
hope the horse will take it well."

"Are you trying to frighten me?" asked Sylvie, smiling. "I'm used to
these roads. I have spent half a summer here, you know."

But Rodney knew that it was the "being used" that would be the
question with the horse. He doubted if the little country beast had
ever seen drain-pipe before. He had once driven Red Squirrel past a
steam boiler that was being transported on a truck. He remembered
the writhe with which the animal had doubled himself, and the side
spring he had made. It was growing dusk, now, also. They were not
more than a mile from Brickfield Basin, and the sun was dropping
behind the hills.

"I shall take you out, and lead him by," he said. "I've no wish to
give you another spill. We won't go on through life in that way."

It was quite as well that they had only another mile to go. Rodney
was keeping his promise, but the thread of it was wearing very thin.

They rode slowly up the opposite slope, then waited, in their turn,
on the top, to give the team time to reach the next level.

They heard it creak and grind as it wore heavily down, taking up
the whole track with careful zigzag tackings; they could see, as it
turned, how the pole stood sharp up between the shoulders of the
straining wheel horses, as their haunches pressed out either way,
and their backs hollowed, and their noses came together, and the
driver touched them dexterously right and left upon their flanks to
bring them in again.

"Uncle Kit has a good teamster there," said Rodney.

Just against the foot of the next rise, they overtook him. The gray
nag that Rodney drove pricked his ears and stretched his head up,
and began to take short, cringing steps, as they drew near the
formidable, moving mass.

Rodney jumped out, and keeping eye and hand upon him, helped down
Sylvie also. Then he threw the long reins over his arm, and took the
horse by the bridle.

The animal made a half parenthesis of himself, curving skittishly,
and watching jealously, as he went by the frightsome pile.

"You see it was as well not to risk it," Rodney said, as Sylvie came
up with him beyond. "He would have had us down there among the
blackberry vines. He's all right now. Will you get in?"

"Let us walk on to the top," said Sylvie. "It is so pleasant to feel
one's feet upon the ground."

They kept on, accordingly; the slow team rumbling behind them. At
the top, was a wide, beautiful level; oak-trees and maples grew
along the roadside, and fields stretched out along a table land to
right and left. Before them, lying in the golden mist of twilight,
was a sea of distant hill-tops,--purple and shadow-black and gray.
The sky bent down its tender, mellow sphere, and touched them
softly.

Sylvie stood still, with folded hands, and Rodney stopped the
horse. A rod or two back, just at the edge of the level, the loaded
wagon had stopped also.

"Hills,--and the sunset,--and stillness," said Sylvie. "They always
seem like heaven."

Rodney stood with his right hand, from which fell the looped reins,
reached up and resting on the saddle.

"I never saw a sight like that before," he said.

While they looked, the evening star trembled out through the clear
saffron, above the floating mist that hung among the hills.

"O, they never can help it!" exclaimed Sylvie, suddenly.

"Help it? Who?" asked Rodney, wondering.

"Beginning again. Growing good. Those people who are coming up to
Hill-hope. There's a man coming, with his wife; a young man, who got
into bad ways, and took to drinking. Mr. Vireo has been watching and
advising him so long! He married them, five years ago, and they have
two little children. The wife is delicate; she has worried through
everything. She has taken in working-men's washing, to earn the
rent; and he had a good trade, too; he was a plasterer. He has
really tried; but it was no use in the city; it was all around him.
And he lost character and chances; the bosses wouldn't have him, he
said. When he was trying most, sometimes, they wouldn't believe in
him; and then there would come idle days, and he would meet old
companions, and get led off, and then there would be weeks of
misery. Now he is coming away from it all. There is a little cottage
ready, with a garden; the little wife is so happy! He _can't_ get it
here; and he will have work at his trade, and will learn
brickmaking. Do you know, I think a place like this, where such
work is doing, is almost better than heaven, where it is all done,
Rodney!"

She spoke his name, as he had hers a little while ago, without
thinking. He turned his face toward her with a look which kindled
into sudden light at that last word, but which had warmed all
through before with the generous pathos of what she told him, and
the earnest, simple way of it.

"I've found out that even in our own affairs, _making_ is better
than ready-made," he said. "This last year has been the best year of
my life. If my father had given me fifty thousand dollars, and told
me I might--have all my own way with it,--I shouldn't have thanked
him as much to-day, as I do. But I wish that steamer were in, and he
were here! He has got something which belongs to me, and I want him
to give it back."

After enunciating this little riddle, Rodney changed hands with his
reins, and faced about toward the vehicle, reaching his other to
Sylvie.

"You had better jump in," he said; and there was a tone and an
inflection at the pause, as if another word, that would have been
tenderly spoken, hung refrained upon it. "We must get well ahead of
that old catapult."

They drove on rapidly along the level; then they came to the long,
gradual slope that brought them down into Brickfields.

To the right, just before reaching the Basin, a turn struck off that
skirted round, partly ascending again until it fell into the Cone
Hill road and so led direct to Hill-hope.

They could see the buildings, grouped picturesquely against rocks
and pines and down against the root of the green hill. They had all
been painted of a light gray or slate color, with red roofs.

They passed on, down into the shadows, where trees were thick and
dark. A damp, rich smell of the woods was about them,--a different
atmosphere from the breath of the hill-top. They heard the tinkle of
little unseen streams, and the far-off, foaming plunge of the
cascades.

Suddenly, there came a sound behind them like the rush of an
avalanche; a noise that seemed to fill up all the space of the air,
and to gather itself down toward them on every side alike.

"O, Rodney, turn!" cried Sylvie.

But there was a horrible second in which he could not know how to
turn.

He did not stop to look, even. He sprang, with one leap, he knew not
how,--over step or dasher,--to the horse's head. He seized him by
the bridle, and pulled him off the road, into a thicket of
bush-branches, in a hollow rough with stones.

The wheels caught fast; Rodney clung to the horse, who tried to
rear; Sylvie sat still on the seat sloped with the sharp cant of the
half-overturned vehicle.

There was only a single instant. Down, with the awful roar of an
earthquake, came crashing swift and headlong, passing within a
hand's breadth of their wheel, the enormous, toppling, loaded team;
its three strong horses in a wild, plunging gallop; heels, heads,
haunches, one dark, frantic, struggling tumble and rush. An instant
more, of paralyzed breathlessness, and then a thundering fall, that
made the ground quiver under their feet; then a stillness more
suddenly dreadful than the noise. A great cloud of dust rose slowly
up into the air, and showed dimly in the dusky light.

The gray horse quieted, cowed by the very terror and the hush.
Sylvie slipped down from the tilting buggy, and found her feet upon
a stone.

Rodney reached out one hand, and she came to his side. He put his
arm around her, and drew her close.

"My darling little Sylvie!" he said.

She turned her face, and leaned it down upon his shoulder.

"O, Rodney, the poor man is killed!"

But as they stood so, a figure came toward them, over the high
water-bar below which they had stopped.

"For God's sake, is anybody hurt?" asked a strange, hoarse voice
with a tremble in it.

"Nobody!"

"O, are you the driver? I thought you must be killed! How
thankful!"--And Sylvie sobbed on Rodney's shoulder.

"Can I help you?" asked the man.

"No, look after your horses." And the man went on, down into the
dust, where the wreck was.

"We'll go, and send help to you," shouted Rodney.

Then he backed the gray horse carefully out upon the road again.

"Will you dare get in?" he asked of Sylvie.

"I do not think we had better. How can we tell how it is down there?
We may not be able to pass."

"It is below the turn, I think. But come,--we'll walk."

He took the bridle again, and gave his other hand to Sylvie. Holding
each other so, they went along.

When they came to the turn, they could see, just beyond the mass of
ruin; the great wagon, three wheels in the air,--one rolled away
into the ditch; the broken freight, flung all across the road, and
lying piled about the wagon. One horse was dead,--buried underneath.
Another lay motionless, making horrid moans. The teamster was
freeing the third--the leader, which stood safe--from chains and
harness.

Leading him, the man came up with Rodney and Sylvie, as they turned
into the side road.

"I knew you were just ahead, when it happened. I thought you were
gone for certain."

"There was a Mercy over us all!" said Sylvie, with sweet, tremulous
intenseness.

The rough man lifted his hand to his bare head. Rodney clasped
tighter the little fingers that lay within his own.

"What did happen?" he asked.

"The brake-rod broke; the pole-strap gave way; it was all in a heap
in a minute. I saw it was no use; I had to jump. And then I thought
of you. I'm glad you saw me, sir. You know I was sober."

"I know you were sober, and managing most skillfully. I had been
saying that."

"Thank you, sir. It's an awful job."

"Hark!" said Sylvie. "There's the man with the trunks."

"I forgot all about him," said Rodney.

"That's a fact," said the teamster. "Turn down here, to let him by.
Hallo!"

"Hallo! Come to grief?"

"We just have, then. Go ahead, will you, and bring back--_something
to shoot with_," he added, in a lower tone, and coming
close,--remembering Sylvie. "I had a crow-bar, but it's lost in the
jumble. I'll stay here, now."

The wagon drove by, rapidly. The man led his horse down by the wall,
to wait there. Sylvie and Rodney, hand in hand, walked on.

Sylvie shivered with the horrible excitement; her teeth chattered; a
nervous trembling was taking hold of her.

Rodney put his arm round her again. "Don't tremble, dear," he said.

"O, Rodney! What were we kept alive for?"

"For each other," whispered Rodney.


CHAPTER XXXV.

HILL-HOPE.


They were sitting together, the next day, on the rock below the
cascade, in the warm sunshine.

Aunt Euphrasia knew all about it; Aunt Euphrasia had let them go
down there together. She was as content as Rodney in the thing that
could not now be helped.

"I've broken my promise," said Rodney to Sylvie. "I agreed with my
father that I wouldn't be engaged for two years."

"Why, we aren't engaged,--yet,--are we?" asked Sylvie, with
bewitching surprise.

"I don't know," said Rodney, his old, merry, mischievous twinkle
coming in the corners of his eyes, as he flashed them up at her. "I
think we've got the refusal of each other!"

"Well. We'll keep it so. We'll wait. You shall not break any promise
for me," said Sylvie, still sweetly obtuse.

"I'm satisfied with that way of looking at it," said Rodney,
laughing out. "Unless--you mean to be as cunning about everything
else, Sylvie. In that case, I don't know; I'm afraid you'd be
dangerous."

"I wonder if I'm always going to be dangerous to you," said Sylvie,
gravely, taking up the word. "I always get you into an accident."

"When we take matters quietly, the way they were meant to go, we
shall leave off being hustled, I suppose," said Rodney, just as
gravely. "There has certainly been intent in the way we have
been--thrown together!"

"I don't believe you ought to say such things, Rodney,--yet! You are
talking just as if"--

"We weren't waiting. O, yes! I'm glad you invented that little
temporary arrangement. But it's a difficult one to carry out. I
shall be gladder when my father comes. I'm tired of being
Casabianca. I don't see how we can talk at all. Mayn't I tell you
about a little house there is at Arlesbury, with a square porch and
a three-windowed room over it, where anybody could sit and
sew--among plants and things--and see all up and down the road, to
and from the mills? A little brown house, with turf up to the
door-stone, and only a hundred dollars a year? Mayn't I tell you how
much I've saved up, and how I like being a real working man with a
salary, just as you liked being one of the Other Girls?"

"Yes; you may tell me that; that last," said Sylvie, softly. "You
may tell me anything you like about yourself."

"Then I must tell you that I never should have been good for
anything if it hadn't been for you."

"O, dear!" said Sylvie. "I don't see how we _can_ talk. It keeps
coming back again. I've had all those plants kept safe that you sent
me, Rodney," she began, briskly, upon a fresh tack.

"Those very ivies? Ah, the little three-windowed room!"

"Rodney! I didn't think you were so unprincipled!" said Sylvie,
getting up. "I wouldn't have come down here, if I had known there
was a promise! I shall certainly help you keep it. I shall go away."

She turned round, and met a gentleman coming down along the slope of
the smooth, broad rock.

"Mr. Sherrett!--Rodney!"

Rodney sprang to his feet.

"My boy! How are you?"

"Father! When--how--did you come?"

"I came to Tillington by the late train last night, and have just
driven over. I went to Arlesbury yesterday."

"But the steamer! She wasn't due till Sunday. You sailed the
_ninth_?"

"No. I exchanged passages with a friend who was detained in London.
I came by the Palmyra. But you don't let me speak to Sylvie."

He pronounced her name with a kind emphasis; he had turned and taken
her hand, after the first grasp of Rodney's.

"Father, I've broken my promise; but I don't think anybody could
have helped it. You couldn't have helped it yourself."

"I've seen Aunt Euphrasia. I've been here almost an hour. I have
thanked God that nothing is broken _but_ the promise, Rodney; and I
think the term of that was broken only because the intent had been
so faithfully kept. I'm satisfied with _one_ year. I believe all the
rest of your years will be safer and better for having this little
lady to promise to, and to help you keep your word."

And he bent down his splendid gray head, with the dark eyes looking
softly at her, and kissed Sylvie on the forehead.

Sylvie stood still a moment, with a very lovely, happy, shy look
upon her downcast face; then she lifted it up quickly, with a clear,
earnest expression.

"I hope you think, Mr. Sherrett,--I hope you feel sure,"--she said,
"that I wouldn't have been engaged to Rodney while there was a
promise?"

"Not more than you could possibly help," said Mr. Sherrett,
smiling.

"Not the very least little bit!" said Sylvie, emphatically; and then
they all three laughed together.

       *       *       *       *       *

I don't know why everything should have happened as it did, just in
these few days; except--that this book was to be all printed by the
twenty-third of April, and it all had to go in.

That very afternoon there came a letter to Miss Euphrasia from Mr.
Dakie Thayne.

He had found Mr. Farron Saftleigh in Dubuque; he had pressed him
close upon the matter of his transactions with Mrs. Argenter; he had
obtained a hold upon him in some other business that had come to his
knowledge in the course of his inquiries at Denver: and the result
had been that Mr. Farron Saftleigh had repurchased of him the
railroad bonds and the deeds of Donnowhair land, to the amount of
five thousand dollars; which sum he inclosed in his own cheek
payable to the order of Sylvia Argenter.

Knowing, morally, some things that I have not had opportunity to
investigate in detail, and cannot therefore set down as verities,--I
am privately convinced that this little business agency on the part
of Dakie Thayne, was--in some proportion at least,--a piece of a
horse-shoe!

If you have not happened to read "Real Folks," you will not know
what that means. If you have, you will now get a glimpse of how it
had come to Ruth and Dakie that their horse-shoe,--their little
section of the world's great magnet of loving relation,--might be
made. Indeed, I do know, and can tell you, the very words Ruth said
to Dakie one day when they had been married just three weeks.

"I've always thought, Dakie, that if ever I had money,--or if ever I
came to advise or help anybody who had, and who wanted to do good
with it,--that there would be one special way I should like to take.
I should like to sit up in the branches, and shake down fruit into
the laps of some people who never would know where it came from, and
wouldn't take it if they did; though they couldn't reach a single
bough to pick for themselves. I mean nice, unlucky people; people
who always have a hard time, and need to have a good one; and are
obliged in many things to pretend they do. There are a good many who
are willing and anxious to help the very poor, but I think there's a
mission waiting for somebody among the pinched-and-smiling people.
I've been a Ruth Pinch myself, you see; and I know all about it, Mr.
John Westlock!"

So I know they looked about for crafty little chances to piece out
and supplement small ways and means; to put little traps of good
luck in the way for people to stumble upon,--and to act the part
generally of a human limited providence, which is a better thing
than fairy godmothers, or enchanted cats, or frogs under the bridge
at the world's end, in which guise the gentle charities clothed
themselves in the old elf fables, that were told, I truly believe,
to be lived out in real doing, as much as the New Testament Parables
were. And a great deal of the manifold responsibility that Mr. Dakie
Thayne undertakes, as broker or agent in the concerns of others, is
undertaken with a deliberate ulterior design of this sort. I think
Mr. Farron Saftleigh probably was made to pay about three thousand
dollars of the sum he had wheedled Mrs. Argenter out of. Dakie
Thayne makes things yield of themselves as far as they will; he
brings capacity and character to bear upon his ends as well as
money; he knows his money would not last forever if he did not.

Mr. Sherrett and Rodney stayed at Hill-hope over the Sunday. Mr. and
Mrs. Kirkbright arrived on Saturday morning.

There was a first home-service in the Chapel-Room that looked out
upon the Rock, and into which the conservatory already gave its
greenness and sweetness, that first Sunday after Easter.

Christopher Kirkbright read the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for the
day; the Prayer, that God "who had given his only Son to die for our
sins, and to rise again for our justification, would grant them so
to put away the leaven of malice and wickedness, that they might
always serve Him in pureness and truth"; the Assurance of "the
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith in the Son of
God," who came "not by water only, but by water and blood"; and that
"the spirit and the water and the blood agree in one,"--in our
redemption; the Story of that First Day of the week, when Jesus came
back to his disciples, after his resurrection, and said, "Peace be
unto you," _showing them his hands and his side_.

He spoke to them of the Blood of Christ, which is the Pain of God
for every one of us; which touches the quick of our own souls where
their life is joined to his or else is dead. Of how, when we feel
it, we know that this Divine Pain comes down that we may die by it
to sin and live again to justification, in pureness and truth, that
the Lord shows us his wounds for us, and waits to pronounce his
peace upon us; because _He suffers_ till we are at peace. That so
his goodness leads us to repentance; that the blood of suffering,
and the water of cleansing, and the spirit of life renewed, agree in
one, that if we receive the one,--if we bear the pain with which He
touches us,--we shall also receive the other.

"Bear, therefore, whatever crucifixion you have to bear, because of
your wrong-doing. We, indeed, suffer justly; but He, who hath done
nothing amiss, suffers at our side. 'If we are planted together in
the likeness of his death, we shall also be in the likeness of his
resurrection;' our old life is crucified with Him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed. 'We are dead unto sin, but alive unto God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.'"

Mary Moxall was there, clothed and in her right mind; her baby on
her lap. Good Mrs. Crumford, the mother-matron, sat beside her.
Andrew Dorray, the plasterer, and his wife, Annie, were there. Men
and women from the farmhouse and the cottages, dressed in their
Sabbath best; and little children, looking in with steadfast,
wondering eyes, at the open conservatory door, upon the vines and
blooms steeped in sunshine, and mingling their sweet odors with the
scent of the warm, moist earth in which they grew.

They would all have pinks and rosebuds to carry away with them, to
remember the Sunday by, and to be forever linked, in their tender
color and fragrance, with the dim apprehension of somewhat holy.
There would be an association for them of the heavenly things unseen
with the heavenliest things that are seen.

Mr. Kirkbright had given especial pains and foresight to the filling
of this little greenhouse. He meant that there should be a summer
pleasantness at Hill-hope from the very first.

After dinner he and Desire walked up and down the long front upper
gallery upon which their own rooms and their guest-rooms opened, and
whence the many windows on the other hand gave the whole outlook
upon Farm and Basin, the smoking kilns, the tidy little homes
already established, and the buildings that were making ready for
more.

Christopher Kirkbright told his wife of many things he hoped to
accomplish. He pointed out here and there what might be done. Over
there was a maple wood where they would have sugar-makings in the
spring. There was a quarry in yonder hill. Down here, through that
left hand hollow and ravine, would run their bit of railroad.

"A little world of itself might almost grow up here on these two
hundred acres," he said.

"And for the home,--you must make that large and beautiful, Desire!
We are not shut up here to guard and rule a penitentiary; we are to
bring the best and sweetest and most beautiful life possible to us,
close to the life we want to help. There is room for them and us;
there is opportunity for their world and ours to touch each other
and grow toward one. We must have friends here, Daisy"; (she let
_him_ call her "Daisy"; had he not the right to give her a new name
for her new life?) "friends to enjoy the delicious summers, and to
make the long winters full of holiday times. You must invent
delights as well as uses: delights that will be uses. It must be so
for _your_ sake; I must have my Desire satisfied,--content, in ways
that perhaps she herself would not find out her need in."

"_Is_ not your Desire satisfied?"

"What a blessed little double name you have! Yes, Daisy, the very
Desire of my heart has come to me!"

Rodney and Sylvie walked down again to the Cascade Rock, and
finished their talk together,--this April number of it, I
mean,--about the brown house and the three-windowed, sunny room, and
the grass plot where they would play croquet, and the road to the
mills that was shaded all the way down, so that she could walk with
her bonnet off to meet him when he was coming up to tea. About the
ivies that the "good Miss Goodwyns" had kept safe and thriving at
Dorbury, and the furniture that Sylvie had stored in a loft in the
Bank Block. How pretty the white frilled curtains would be in the
porch room!

"And the interest of the five thousand dollars will be all I shall
ever want to spend for anything!"

"We shall be quite rich people, Sylvie. We must take care not to
grow proud and snobbish."

"We had much better walk than ride, Rodney. I think that is the
riddle that all our spills have been meant to read us."