Seoul is the capital of Korea, in case you don't know. Everyone did
pretty much as they pleased, for there were few restrictions from the
so-recently installed government. There are a number of gold mines
around Seoul, which was why I was there. Like the cross-eyed Jake Barto,
I knew that something would turn up worth owning where governments have
changed three times in as many years.

Frans Nolti, the other hunter we hired, was more of a fortune hunter,
by appearance, than one who knew his way in the jungles of the world.
Handsome in his Italian way, he was suave, apparently well educated,
very quick in his movements. He gave the impression of extreme
cleverness, of intellect held in reserve behind a facade of worldliness,
of light clever talk.

Both of them knew their Orient, far better than I. Which was one reason
I wanted them.


Barto had at first wanted a large party, at least a score of "white" men
of the western school, able to fight and smart enough to know how. But I
had talked him out of it.

"You see, Jake, with two like these, we can travel fast. If there's
treachery, if they aren't satisfied with the cut we're offering, why
it's two against two--you and I have an even chance. With a larger
party, we might pick up some scoundrels who will try to murder us and
make off with the treasure. Providing we _get_ the treasure!"

Jake eyed me, in that maddeningly unreadable cross-eyed expression of
cold ferocity which the scars gave his ugly face. We had agreed on
one-third each, the other two to split the other third between them. I
was footing the bills, Jake was nearly broke. He had found the stuff,
and tried to hold out for half, me a quarter, the other two to split a
quarter. I said nothing doing.

"No, Jake, this first trip, it's got to be this way. If it's like you
say it is, there'll be more. What we can carry won't be all the value.
There'll be more to be gotten out of that ruin than the stuff you found.
You'll have the money to do it, after this, and it's your find. We'll be
out, after this one trip."

We sailed up the east coast of Korea from Fusan to the village of
Leshin. By native cart from there to the ancient half-ruined city of
Musan. That's close to the Manchurian border. There we hired eight
diminutive Korean ponies and four men to "go along" as Barto put it, for
they didn't want to go, and didn't appear like men of much use for
anything but guides. And Barto knew the way. But I didn't want to be
wandering around without any native interpreters, without contact of any
kind possible with the people we might encounter. None of them had been
more than a few miles into the wilderness. They were sad looking men
when we started northward. But Koreans manage to look pretty sad much of
the time. With their history, that's easy to understand.

Something about the burly, ugly Barto's behavior began to worry me. He
didn't know where he was going. He had told a lie, but just what the lie
was I couldn't figure out. I watched him covertly. Whenever we came to
the end of a march, instead of sighting his landmarks, making sure of
his bearings--he would go off by himself. Next day, he would know
exactly where he wanted to go--but sometimes the "way" would be across
an impassable gorge, a rapids, or straight into a cliff.

One night, the fourth day and well into the wilderness, we were moving
up a broad valley through a forest of larch. I sighted a deer, and
called a halt while I stalked it. I got it, and came back ahead of the
rest, who were cutting up the deer. I moved quietly in the woods--it's a
good habit. I came upon Barto, and he was oblivious of me. He had the
little golden girl in his hands, talking to it.

"Now, tell me the way, girl, tell me the way." Then he held the girl
loosely in his hand, as I watched, it gave me an eerie feeling to see
the little figure turn, its outstretched hand pointing northward like a
compass. Was Jake Barto a madman? Or _did_ the little figure act as a
compass? If so, why did Barto have to rely on the pointing figure's hand
for directions? If he didn't get that figure from the place we were
heading, where did he get it? How did he know there was anything of
value in the place we were headed for?

These questions tormented me, for I could not ask them without revealing
to Jake that I knew he was lying. And that meant a showdown. I might
have to kill him. Still, I had to get the truth out of him, or let a
madman lead us on and on into an untracked wilderness, if that is what
he was.


For several days we did not see a sign of life, after that deer.

The forest became denser at every mile, with more and more swamps and
surface water. Time after time our ponies mired and had to be lifted out
of the mud. Lush ferns and rank grass made walking dangerous. The trees
were interlaced with draping festoons of gray "Spanish moss," forming a
canopy overhead which let through only a gloomy half-light. No sounds
broke the stillness except the half-awed calls of the men. No birds, not
even a squirrel. Then it began to rain.

That drizzle continued for a week! The men became frightened at the
gloomy stillness and exhausted by the strenuous work of keeping the
ponies moving.

Then in the night my four Koreans deserted. They didn't take any ponies,
just what grub they could pack. We all felt better off without them, but
I often wonder if they ever found their way out of that morass.

The next day there came a break. We sighted a majestic mountain about
two days' march ahead. It looked like a gloomy cloud that had settled to
earth for a moment's rest. But no cloud ever managed to look so rocky,
so windswept, or so welcome. And no patch of blue sky ever looked so
good as that sky above the mountain, swept clean of the rain curtain by
the updraft.

Jake seemed to recognize that mountain, gave an audible sigh of relief
when we sighted it. My suspicions quieted.

We went hunting that day. It was the first dry camp in a long time, the
first signs of game; we needed a rest. As usual, Barto stayed at camp to
guard the ponies and camp equipment.

We were on the trail of a bear when we saw a strange object in the sky.
It looked like a doughnut or a saucer, and it settled to the earth on
the far side of the great white mountain at whose foot we had made camp.
It seemed only an hour's walk to a point where we could overlook the
landing place of the strange object, and Hank and Frans pushed ahead,
curious and a little frightened. I had read in the American newspapers
the accounts of "disk ships" and knew they would not be able to get
close to it, and I wanted to watch Hank. I let them get out of sight,
then turned back to camp. Quietly, I was nearing our camp, when the
scream of a woman in pain came to me!

It was the answer to all my apprehensions about the ugly Barto, a sudden
materialization of the vague distrust I had felt all along! I broke into
a run, crashing through the young, white birches and larches, to the
clearing.

A chuckle reached me, a gloating heavy laugh of triumph.

Barto had the girl prone, one arm bent near to breaking, her knees
caught beneath his weight. I caught him by the shoulders, heaved
backward, sent him sprawling across the young grass. He sat up, glared
for an instant, then went for his gun. Before it came out of the
holster, my foot caught him beside the jaw. He was too big for any
other method I might have chosen to be effective. The kick stretched him
unconscious; my heel had struck the button.

I turned, to see the girl disappearing among the brush. She had darted
away instantly she was free. That she would bring her people down on us
I had no doubt. I did doubt their ability to hurt us. Unless she
belonged to a band of Manchurian bandits hanging out here in the
wilderness, they would not have arms. In the case she was of the
bandits, we might be wiped out in our sleep.

I bent over Jake, hoping I had not broken his neck. He looked as though
he would be out for some time. I picked up his heavy .45, shoved it in
my belt. I wished Hank and Frans would return soon. The four of us might
be able to handle her people.

I turned--and _she_ stood there, looking at me!

       *       *       *

That such as she existed among the usually ugly Koreans and Manchurians
was impossible! I gasped a little in unbelief. Her clothing was like
nothing on this earth.

Soft green leather was clasped low on her hips with a narrow gold band,
set with jewels. It was a skirt, I suppose, but it hung with a diagonal
hem-line running from hip to knee, it was beaded in an intricate
pattern, not Oriental, somehow reminding me of American Indian bead
work.

On her feet leather sandals, laced like the ancient Greek sandal nearly
to the knee. In her hand a bow of horn, small and powerful. Around her
shoulders a short leather cape similarly beaded and fringed. Around her
brows a jeweled circlet set like a diadem, and it crowned a young queen,
proud and knowing very well her beauty and its power.

Her features were neither Caucasian nor Oriental, certainly not the
heavy-boned native stock. I couldn't pin them down to any race. Her nose
was straight, the nostrils neither wide nor narrow, but strong and firm.
Her eyes were too wide-set and heavy-lidded to be Aryan, but they were
not tilted; they were level. Her hair was not black, but chestnut and
curled or naturally very wavy. Her glance was tawny and aflame with
anger and excitement, furious upon the prostrate Barto. They were very
light-colored eyes, and they caught the sun in a blaze that made them
seem yellow.

Striking, she was a figure not of any ordinary kind. Her every aspect
told that she came of a culture unknown to me. She was evidently not
ignorant, but of a different way of life.

Looking into her eyes, appraising her interest in myself that had
brought her back, drinking in the immense appeal of her strangeness and
her evident gentility--the evidences of a past of cultivated living as
strange as her attire--I forgot the unconscious man at my feet.

Her skin was whiter than my own! Her arms were bruised purple where
Barto had clutched her. Then she spoke, in halting Korean:

"Is he dead?"

"No," I answered.

"Then he will live to meet a far worse fate! I know why you are here,
stranger, and I warn you! You are on a fool's errand! The Golden Goddess
is death for such as you!"

I was bewildered.

"What Golden Goddess?"

"The Golden Goddess whose symbol led him here. He does not know what it
is. He stole it by murdering one of our own messengers for it. He did
not _know_ at all; he only heard the tales that some relate about her.
They are false tales."

"Did he tell you how he got it?"

"He was boasting to me, trying to get me to tell what I knew about her
dwelling-place. I would not, that is why he hurt me."

"Why did you come back, whatever-your-name?"

"My name is Nokomee, and I came back to tell you something you need to
know. Leave these others, and you will live! Stay with them, you will be
slain with them. We do not allow such as he to come among us, golden
girl or no."

"I cannot leave my comrades because of danger. What kind of man do you
think me?"

"I do not care! I can only tell you. This is a secret place, where we
remain hidden from the men of earth. I know what happens to those who
stray upon our secrets! Go, and think no more to pry into treasure tales
of this mountain land. It is not for such as you. Go, before it is too
late. I cannot hold back the death from you."

I laughed. I thought of the Koreans who had deserted, of their talk
about the fires at night, of demons and haunted mountains ahead.

"We came a long way on the track of Barto's tale of treasure from which
he brought the golden girl. It will take more than words to frighten us
away."

"Do not laugh! I try to save you from something even worse than death
that can come to you. I want to return to you the favor that you did me.
If you do not listen to me, how can I help you?" Her voice took on a
plaintive, charming note; she smiled a half-smile of complete witchery.

A high, keening cry came suddenly from the slopes above us, and she
raised on her toes as if to spring away.

"They come, my friends! I must leave you. I can only tell you to stay
close by your fire at night. I cannot say what fate will strike you. I
cannot help you. Go back, friend who would live, go back!"


She turned and sprang lightly up the slope toward the sound of the cry,
half human, half beast-like, that she had called "her friends." It had
sounded to me like the cry of a wolf, or a cat-man, anything but human.
But people can make odd sounds, and imitate beasts. Still it had been an
eerie sound that gave me a foreboding, added to her warning words. What
kind of people were these, who wore leather and jewels and used bows
that might have come off an Assyrian wall painting?

Came a tumult above, the high clear blast of some horn, a dozen eerie
cries hardly human--a rush and a pounding in the earth as though a party
had ridden off on heavy, full-size horses. No Manchurian pony ever made
such a sound on soft ground!

Polter and Noldi came back about an hour later. I had dragged the big
Barto into a tent and made him comfortable. He was snoring peacefully.
Polter squatted down beside me, folding his long form like a jackknife.

"That thing _was_ a ship, Keele," he said. There was a husky excitement,
repressed but still obvious about him. I grunted.

"It landed among some big timber on the south end of the mountain. We
got pretty close, enough to see the sides of the thing. Men busy around
it, we couldn't get too close, afraid they'd see us."

I started, a pulse of unreasoning fear, of terrific interest, ran
through me. I asked in a voice I couldn't keep calm, "What kind of men,
Hank? I saw reports of such ships in the papers, no one got close enough
to see _that_ much. Newspapers called them illusions!"

"They're not our kind of men; they are something very different. I don't
know just how to tell you, besides I couldn't be sure. But they seem to
be a people--" He stopped. "I'd rather you'd see it yourself. You
wouldn't believe me."

Noldi came out of the tent where Barto was still snoring. He came over
and squatted across the fire, eyeing me strangely.

"What happened to the big jerk, Carl?" he asked, a little tremor of
anger in his voice.

"I've got to tell you fellows we're in trouble," I began. I did not
believe that the girl's people would ignore Jake's attack upon her.

Hank looked at the slender man from New York's East Side. "What's the
matter with Barto?"

"S'got a bruise on his jaw the size of a goose-egg. Like a mule kicked
him. Scratched up quite a bit. I just wondered. He's unconscious, too; I
couldn't wake him up."

"We may be in for it," I went on. "When I got back to camp, Hank had a
girl. He'd thrown her down, was struggling with her. I had to put him
asleep to stop it. Didn't want trouble with her people."

Noldi glanced at the torn place in the soft sod where the scuffle had
taken place. I had unconsciously nodded toward it. He got up, walked
over, picked something out of the grass.

"Some girl, wearing this kind of stuff!"

He handed the glittering bauble to Polter. It was a necklace of
emeralds, with a pendant of gold in which was set a big blue stone that
I couldn't recognize, maybe a diamond, maybe something else. It looked
almighty valuable, each stone was as big as a man's thumbnail. It had
snapped, lain there unnoticed by either of us.

