Transcriber's note:

      Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.

      The Frontispiece is not available for this ebook.


The Invention Series

CARL AND THE COTTON GIN

by

SARA WARE BASSETT

With Illustrations by William F. Stecher


Boston
Little, Brown, and Company
1924

Copyright, 1924,
by Little, Brown, and Company.
All rights reserved

Published September, 1924

Printed in the United States of America


CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

    I THE MCGREGORS                                             1

   II CARL TELLS A STORY                                       17

  III A TRAGEDY                                                31

   IV PROBLEMS                                                 45

    V A TANGLE OF SURPRISES                                    60

   VI THE WEB WIDENS                                           71

  VII THE COMING OF THE FAIRY GODMOTHER                        79

 VIII THE ROMANCE OF COTTON                                    97

   IX NORTH AND SOUTH                                         112

    X A LESSON IN THRIFT                                      124

   XI A FAMILY CONGRESS                                       140

  XII A CLUE                                                  160

 XIII HAL REPEATS HIS VISIT                                   180

  XIV SPINNING YARNS                                          193

   XV TIDINGS                                                 219

  XVI A RELUCTANT ALTRUIST                                    228

 XVII AN ORDEAL                                               237

XVIII THE SOLUTION OF MANY MYSTERIES                          250

  XIX UNRAVELING THE SNARLS                                   259


ILLUSTRATIONS


"MR. CARL MCGREGOR," ANNOUNCED HE IN A STENTORIAN
TONE                                                _Frontispiece_

                                                            _Page_

"THE COTTON IS SENT TO FACTORIES TO BE GINNED"        "       129

"BUT THAT ISN'T OUR BASKET, MOTHER," CARL SAID. "THIS
IS MUCH BIGGER"                                               155

"I'VE HUNTED FOR YOU AND YOUR RED CAR EVER SINCE"             253


CARL AND THE COTTON GIN


CHAPTER I

THE McGREGORS


"Carl!"

"Coming, Ma!"

Mrs. McGregor waited a moment.

"But you aren't coming," protested she fretfully. "You never seem to
come when you're wanted. Drat the child! Where is he? Carl!"

"Yes, Ma."

"_Yes, Ma!_ _Yes, Ma!_" the woman mimicked impatiently. "It's easy
enough to shout _Yes, Ma_; but where are you--that's what I want to
know. You're the slowest creature on God's earth, I believe. A tortoise
would be a race horse compared with you. What under the sun are you
doing?"

The boy entered, a good-humored grin on his face.

He was thin, lanky, and blue-eyed, and a rebellious lock of tawny hair
that curled despite all he could do waved back from his forehead. He
might have been fourteen years old or he might have been seventeen; it
was hard to tell whether he was an overgrown younger boy or an
under-sized older one. Whatever his age, however, he could certainly
boast a serene disposition, for his mother's caustic comments failed to
ruffle his temper. Having heard them ever since babyhood he was quite
accustomed to their acid tang; moreover, he had learned to gage them
for what they were worth and class them along with the froth on a soda
or the sputter of a freshly lighted match. The thing underneath was
what mattered and he knew well that beneath the torrent of words his
mother was the best mother on earth, so what more could a boy ask?

Those greatly err from the true estimate of virtue who expect to be
rewarded for it, as though virtue and the service of God were our
felicity itself and the highest liberty.

_III.--Concerning Mental Affections_
The actions of the mind arise from adequate ideas alone; but the
passions depend on those alone which are inadequate. The essence of the
mind is composed of adequate and inadequate ideas. Joy is a passion
by which the mind passes to a greater degree of perfection; sorrow
is a passion by which it passes to a lesser degree.
Accidentally anything may be the cause of joy, sorrow, or desire.
We love or hate certain things not from any known cause, but merely
from sympathy or antipathy.What it really meant, however, was that you did not hang out of your
window and chatter to the inhabitant of the opposite tenement; or
loiter in the doorway or on the sidewalk to gossip with the women who
lived on the floors below.

At the outset Mrs. McGregor had let it be understood that she had no
time for gossip and it was this decree that had earned for her the
stigma of not being sociable, the acme of all crimes at Mulberry Court.
Of course she had not proclaimed her policy in so many words. No,
indeed! Yet she might as well have done so for the business-like manner
in which she hastened home from market and shot up the stairs published
her philosophy more forcefully than any words could have done.

"She's just too good for the rest of us," announced Mrs. O'Dowd
sarcastically to the little circle who were wont to await her verdict
on every newcomer to the district. "Proud and snappy and stuck-up, I
call her. Not much of an addition to the house, if you ask my opinion."

This snapshot judgment, hasty as it was, was promptly accepted by the
other women, for was not Julie O'Dowd the social dictator of the
community? Had she ever been known to be wrong? With one accord
Mulberry Court turned its back on the new arrival who so flagrantly
defied the etiquette of the place.

Indeed had not Mrs. O'Dowd's baby fallen ill the seal of disapproval
put on Mrs. McGregor might have rested on her all her days, and she and
her entire family been completely ostracized by the neighborhood. But
little Joey O'Dowd, the youngest of Julie's flock, was seized with
pneumonia, and although the flock was a large one Julie was too genuine
a mother to feel she could spare one out of her fold. Was not Joey the
littlest of all, the pet of her household? All the motherhood in her
revolted at the thought of losing him. Strangely enough until the
present moment she had escaped great crises with her children. She was
well schooled in the ways of whooping cough, measles, and chicken pox
and could do up a cut finger with almost professional skill; but in the
face of crucial illness she was like a warrior without weapons.

Overwhelmed with terror, therefore, by the immediate calamity, she did
in benumbed fashion everything the doctor directed and still Joey was
no better; if anything he grew steadily worse. Motionless he lay in his
crib, his great staring eyes giving forth no flicker of recognition.
There was not much hope, the neighbors whispered, after they had
tiptoed in to look at him and tiptoed out again. He was as good as
gone. Julie could never save him in the world.

The whispers, humanely muffled, did not reach the panic-stricken mother
but she was not blind to the despairing head-shaking and these suddenly
awakened her to the realization that according to general opinion the
battle she was waging was a losing one. It was a terrible discovery.
What should she do? She must do something. Wild-eyed she plunged into
the hall, a vague impulse to seek help moving her; and it was just as
she paused irresolute at the head of the stairs that she came face to
face with Mrs. McGregor ascending to her fifth-floor flat.

Now Mrs. McGregor was a born nurse, whose skill had been increased by
constant practice. With a wisdom that amounted almost to genius she had
brought her large family through many an appalling conflict and emerged
victorious. Sickness, therefore, had no terrors for her. Instantly the
mother in her read and interpreted the desperation in Julie's face and
without a word she slipped through the open door into the room where
Joey lay. One glance of her experienced eye showed that there was
plenty to be done. The interior was close and untidy, for Mrs. O'Dowd
in her distraction had cast aside every consideration but her baby.

Mrs. McGregor stooped down over the crib.

What she saw there or did not see she at least kept to herself, and
when she straightened up it was to meet the searching gaze of her
neighbor with a grave smile.

"He's going to die," moaned Julie, wringing her hands. "He is going to
die--my baby--and I can't help it!"

Although for a long time the two women had lived beneath the same roof,
these were the first words Mrs. O'Dowd had ever addressed to Mrs.
McGregor.

"Might I touch him?" the latter inquired gently.

Like a suspicious animal Julie stiffened jealously.

"I'll not hurt him," Mrs. McGregor hastened to say, not taking offense
at the other's attitude. "I just want to raise him up so he can breathe
better." Then she added reassuringly, "I'd not give up if I were you.
You must keep on fighting to the very last minute. There is much we can
do yet to make him comfortable."

"What?"

"We can bathe him a little for one thing, if you would heat some
water."

Dumbly Julie turned to obey.

"I've a big family of my own," went on Mrs. McGregor in matter-of-fact
fashion, "and I've seen so many children pull through when they looked
fit to die that I've learned never to quit hoping. You'll get nowhere
in a fight if you haven't courage."

"I had courage enough at first," whispered the baby's mother in a
shaking voice, "but I've lost my nerve now. I'm frightened--and--and
tired."

Tears came into her eyes.

"Of course you are," came with quick sympathy from Mrs. McGregor. "We
all are apt to lose our nerve when we are worn out. I don't wonder
you're tired. You've had no sleep day or night, I'll be bound."

"Not much. The neighbors were kind about offering but somehow I
couldn't leave Joey with 'em. Besides, how can you sleep when you are
worried half out of your mind?"

"I know! I know!" nodded the other woman. "Still you can't go on
forever without rest. Next you know you will be down sick yourself and
then where will your baby be--to say nothing of your other children. A
mother has got to think ahead. Now listen. Would you trust me to watch
the baby while you curled up on the sofa and got a wink or two of
sleep? I'll promise to call you should there be an atom of change. Do
now! Be a sensible woman. And how would you feel about my giving the
little chap a drop of medicine? A Scotch doctor in the old country once
gave me a prescription that I've tried on both Timmie and Martin and it
did 'em worlds of good at a time just like this. It might do nothing
for your child, mind. I'm not promising it would. Still, it couldn't
hurt him and it might cure."

Julie's dulled mind caught the final word. _Cure!_ Alas, she had given
up hope that anything in the world could do that. The reaction that
came with the suggestion was so wonderful that it left her speechless.

"Now see here," burst out Mrs. McGregor misinterpreting her silence,
"use your common sense. Do I look as if I had come to poison your baby?
Why, woman, I love children better than anything on earth. They're a
precious lot of bother, there's no denying, and sometimes I get that
impatient with one or the other of 'em I could toss him out the window.
But for all their hectoring, and their noise, and their dirt--their
meddling, and smashing, and mending, I'd not be without them."

While speaking she had been touching the baby with a hand so yearning
and tender that it could not be stayed. She had raised his head,
smoothed his pillow, straightened the coverings that lay over him. It
was amazing how quietly and deftly her hands moved. Even the child
seemed conscious of her healing presence, for all of a sudden his wee
fingers curled about one of hers and he smiled faintly.

"See!" exclaimed Mrs. McGregor, "the baby is not afraid to trust me."

"Nor am I any longer," put in Julie with eager surrender. "Do as you
like with Joey. You know better than I."

"Oh, it isn't that," the visitor protested, rising. "It is just that
it's sometimes well not to leave a stone unturned. You might regret not
having taken the chance. I'll slip upstairs and get the medicine. It
won't take a minute."

"If you'll be that kind."

The Scotchwoman needed no second bidding. She was gone and back again
in a twinkling, the magic green bottle in her hand.

"Now if I might have a cup of hot water," said she. "I've a dropper
here. We'll see what a spoonful of this mixture will do for the wee
laddie. What is his name?"

"Joey."

Mrs. O'Dowd's eyes had brightened and they now beamed on her neighbor.

"It's a nice name," replied Mrs. McGregor, beaming in turn. "I always
liked the name of Joseph. Well, Joey boy, we'll see if we can make you
well. Here, little fellow!"

Gently she forced the liquid between the baby's lips.

"Now we'll sponge him a bit, put on a fresh slip, and give him some
air!"

"But won't he----"

"Catch cold? Not if he is shielded from the draught. He'll like the air
and feel the better for it. It will help him to breathe."

Noiselessly she went to work and within an hour both Joey and his
surroundings took on a different aspect.

"Now," said she to the grateful mother, "you roll up in that comforter
and take a nap. Don't worry about the baby. I'll be right here. Will
you trust me?"

Julie hesitated.

"It's not that I won't trust you," murmured she. "But you're so
heavenly kind. Not another soul has done for me what you have and I'm a
hundred times better acquainted with 'em, too. Of course I know they
have all they can do without taking on the cares of others. I'm not
blaming them. You yourself can't have much time to spare. Haven't you
other things to do?"

"Of course I have," came with curt honesty from Mrs. McGregor. "I've
six children and they leave me little time for idling. But when I do
take time away from 'em, I plan to take it to some purpose. Just now I
have nothing more important to do than nurse this baby. It's my first
job. So don't be worrying about my work. Luckily it is Saturday and
Mary, Carl, and Timmie will look after the little tots and get the
dinner. I told 'em to when I was there just now. Martin and Nell seldom
give any trouble, and should James Frederick wake up, one of the boys
is to run down and tell me."

Julie placed a hand impulsively on that of the other woman.

"I can never thank you," murmured she brokenly.

"Oh, don't be talking of thanks," Mrs. McGregor interrupted, cutting
her short. "My dosing may do no good and before the day is out you may
be calling me a meddlesome old harridan. Wait and see what happens. I'm
not one that sets much store by thanks, anyhow. After all, what does it
amount to but a string of words? If we can cure the baby it will be all
the thanks I want."

If the sentiment the final phrase so modestly expressed was genuine
Mrs. McGregor at least received the boon she craved, for as if by magic
the baby began to mend that very night and before the week passed was
out of danger and on the high road to recovery. Julie's gratitude was
touching to see.

"'Twas Mrs. McGregor saved Joey," declared she to every person she met.
"She's as good as any doctor--better, for Joey might have died but for
her. Should I go through life kneeling to her on my bended knees I
never could thank her enough."

Julie O'Dowd did not go through life, however, kneeling before Mrs.
McGregor on her bended knees; but she did a more practical and
efficacious thing. Everywhere she went she sounded the praise of her
neighbor; talked of her kindness, her wisdom, her unselfishness, until
not only Mulberry Court, but the area adjoining it began to view the
gaunt, austere figure from quite a different angle. Shyly the women
began to nod a greeting to the stranger.

"It's just her way to be curt and quick," explained they to one
another. "She doesn't mean a thing in the world by it. Julie says she's
sharp and prickly as a chestnut burr, but with the sweetest of hearts
inside."

Indeed it was not long before Mrs. McGregor proved her right to this
generous summary of her character. Other neighbors gained courage to
consult her about their children and in time about their troubles in
general.

"Ask Mrs. McGregor," became the slogan of Mulberry Court. "She'll
know."

And she unfailingly did. She it was who prescribed medicines; gave
advice; suggested plain, common-sense remedies for every variety of
dilemma. Nevertheless she wasted no words about it. She had no time to
fool away, she let it be known. Whatever she did had to be done with
pitiless directness. Often her council was delivered through a crack in
the door or even given through the door itself; and there were
instances when it was shouted through the keyhole. But no matter where
the words came from they were always helpful and friendly and the
neighbors came to understand the manner accompanying them and did not
resent it.

Her children understood it too. Mary, Carl, Timmie, Martin,
four-year-old Nell, and even wee James Frederick (whom Mrs. McGregor
unfailingly addressed by his full name) all understood and worshipped
their quick-tongued mother. Together with the rest of Mulberry Court
they also had supreme faith in whatever she did and said, and were
certain that every calamity under the sun could be set right if only
she were consulted and her advice followed.

And yet loyal as they were, there was one point on which neither Carl
nor Mary agreed with their mother. Of course she was right--she must be
right; wasn't she always so? Yet notwithstanding this belief they could
not but feel that it would be a far better arrangement for them to
leave school and go into the cotton mills where their father had worked
for so many years. Ever so many of the boys and girls they knew worked
there. Why should they remain in the High School struggling with
algebra, geometry, history, Latin, English and bookkeeping when they
might be earning money? It seemed senseless. Certainly the family
needed money badly enough. Were there not always endless pairs of shoes
to be bought? Caps, mittens, suits, stockings, and underclothing to
purchase; not to mention food and groceries? And then there was the
rent.

Ah, Mary and Carl knew very well about the rent, the bills, and all the
other worrisome things. Even Timmie, who was only nine, knew about
them; and once Martin, aged six, had startled his elders by proclaiming
on a sunny May morning, "This is rent day, isn't it, Ma?" in a tone of
awe, as if the date marked some gruesome ceremony.

You came to understand about rent day when toward the end of the month
there were no pennies to be had, and you were forced to wait for the
shoes or rubbers you needed.

That rent day was a milestone to be dreaded even Nell vaguely guessed
and when it had passed in safety all the McGregors, both big and
little, joined in a general rejoicing.

Ma was the magician who accomplished that happy miracle. Ma always
contrived to accomplish everything, so of course she managed rent day
along with the rest of the wonders she performed. She made no secret,
either, of how she did it. She sewed! Yes, she sewed for a dressmaker
who sent her marvelous dresses to embroider. For Ma was very clever
with her needle and right out of the blue sky could make the most
beautiful flowers and figures with colored silks. She could also do
beading and she was teaching Mary how to do it. Already Mary could do
quite nice embroidery and exquisite plain sewing.

Ma was very proud of this.

But what Mary did chiefly when she was not at school was to help with
the housework so her mother would be free to sew. That was the
important thing. Ma must not roughen her hands or the silks she worked
with would be spoiled. So Mary cooked and scrubbed like a real little
housewife; took care of the younger children and kept them quiet so
they would not interrupt their mother.

And between school hours Carl and Tim helped also. They built the
fires, wiped the dishes, ran errands, and brought home any bits of
discarded wood they found in the streets. In fact, there was not one
drone in the McGregor hive. Even James Frederick had learned to lie in
his crib and play by himself when everybody was busy.

It was a happy family, the McGregors. Its members, it is true, did not
have everything they wanted. They never expected that. Those who had
mittens lacked new caps, and those who had caps were often forced to
wear patched shoes and made-over stockings. Martin's reefer frequently
did duty for Nell, and Mrs. McGregor's cape for Mary. However, all that
did not matter. They were happy and that was the chief thing, happy in
spite of patched clothing, coats that were outgrown, rubbers that were
either sizes too small or dropped off at every step, and shoes that
were common property. The little flat was sometimes hot in summer and
cold in winter but it took more than that to dampen the McGregors'
spirits.

When they had lentil soup, how steaming and delicious it was! When meat
stew, what a dish for the gods! And who could have asked for a greater
treat than a thick slice of Mary's fresh bread coated over with
molasses or peanut butter?

Every month a long blue envelope containing a check from Uncle
Frederick arrived and that, together with what Mary and her mother
earned, kept the household going. But they seldom saw Uncle James
Frederick Dillingham. He was always sailing to India, China, or South
America. Sometimes letters came from him and picture postcards showing
strange countries and people in foreign dress. But the check never
failed to make its appearance and as it was highly important that it
should, everybody agreed that since Uncle Frederick could not come
himself he was almost as satisfactorily represented by this magic bit
of blue paper. The check brought things and perhaps if Uncle Frederick
himself had come he wouldn't. You could not tell about uncles you had
never seen.

In the meantime the blue paper kept stew in the kettle and the shelter
of Mulberry Court above their heads, and what better service could an
uncle render his relatives?

Hence Uncle Frederick's name came to be mentioned constantly in the
household.

"Remember, Timmie, those are your Uncle Frederick Dillingham's rubber
boots and be thankful to him for them," the boy's mother would observe
when she brought home the purchase. Or "Uncle Frederick is presenting
you with those stockings, Carl. See you don't forget it."

And the children did not forget. Gradually their unknown uncle came to
assume in their imagination a form that would have surprised him had he
been suddenly confronted by it. It was that of a benevolent-faced fairy
clad in robes of purple and ermine, and wearing on his head a crown
resplendent with gems of myriad colors. In his hand he carried a
scepter terminating in a star that far outshone the jewels he wore, a
scepter all powerful to work miracles. He was the good angel of the
McGregor home, the Aladdin to whom they owed all sorts of blessings.

And yet withal Uncle James Frederick Dillingham was one and the same
person who sailed the _Charlotte_ to India, China, South America, or
some other ephemeral port. How paradoxical was this dual rôle, how
alluring and how ridiculous!


CHAPTER II

CARL TELLS A STORY


It was April. Already spring was in the air. The grass in the parks was
turning green, forsythia bloomed golden, and boys were playing marbles
on the streets and sidewalks. Even Mulberry Court, shut in as it was,
felt the impulse of the awakening season. The landlord came, looked
over the premises, and after viewing the general shabbiness became
reckless enough to order a broken windowpane to be reset, some of the
tumble-down ceilings to be repaired, and the fire escapes and window
frames to be repainted.

Painting at Mulberry Court was a terrible ordeal. As there was not an
inch of the place that was not crowded to the limit of its capacity,
painting meant that milk bottles, improvised ice chests, and woodpiles
must be put somewhere else; and where that somewhere could be was an
enigma. Furthermore, to add to this difficulty there were the
children--dozens of them tumbling over one another and surging in and
out the doors, a fact that rendered painting a precarious undertaking.
Youthful investigators examined the moist pigment; chubby fingers drew
hieroglyphics in it; while the less curious forgot it altogether and
carried away on their garments imprints of vermilion and black that
transformed their otherwise dingy garments into robes of oriental
splendor.

Carl McGregor was no exception to the rule for wherever calamity lurked
he was sure to be in its vicinity.

"I'd know you'd never rest until you got a patch of red paint on
yourself," announced his mother, surveying him as he started toward the
door. "As, if buying you sweaters ain't enough without your leaning
plumb up against the fire escape and stamping a whole decalcomania of
red stripes on your back like as if you were a convict."

"Is there paint on me, Ma?"

"Is there? I suppose you had no notion of it."

"I hadn't--honest Injun."

"Well, aside from the fact that you're barred up and down neat as if
the lines were ruled there's nothing the matter with you," returned his
mother with a faint smile.

"Oh, I'm awfully sorry, Ma. Truly I am."

"Sorry? I'll be bound you are. You are always a bundle of regrets when
it is too late to help anything. However, you need weep no tears for
that sweater needed washing anyway. You're that rough on your clothes
that none of 'em keep clean more than a minute. I'll get some gasoline
and soak it out in the shed and it will be like new. Peel it off and
give it to me."

"I'm sorry, Ma," the boy repeated.

"It's no great matter, sonny. Children must be children. I'm past
expecting them to be grown-ups," his mother said kindly. "If you hadn't
been getting into the paint you most likely would have been getting
into something else. You have a genius for such mishaps. I'm glad it
was no worse."

Reassured, Carl grinned.

"I do seem to have a good many--" he hesitated, then added,
"misfortunes."

"Misfortunes, do you call 'em? Sure that's a pretty polite word to
apply to the things that manage to happen to you," sniffed Mrs.
McGregor. "I suppose it was a misfortune when you tumbled underneath
the watering cart; and a misfortune when you sat down in the wet tar! A
misfortune when you sent the snowball through the schoolroom window; to
say nothing of the creamcake you treated Jakie Sullivan to that
well-nigh killed him."

"I didn't know the creamcake was going to make him sick."

"No; 'twas just your misfortune. You seem to attract adventures like
that. Why, if I was to let you go into the cotton mills as you are
always begging to do you'd have every machine there out of order in
less than a week and yourself hashed up into little pieces into the
bargain."

She had touched upon an unlucky subject for instantly, with flaming
face, the lad confronted her.

"No, I wouldn't. I wish you would let me go into the mills, Ma. You
might let me try it. Ever so many boys no older than I are working
there and earning oodles of money. If we had more money we could----"

"We could be having an automobile, no doubt, and going to Palm Beach
winters," was the grim response. "Well, Palm Beach or not, you're not
going into any mill so long as we can keep body and soul together
without your doing it. You are going to get an education--you and Mary
too--if it costs me my life. I'm not going to have you grow up knowing
nothing and being nothing. Some day you'll see I was right and thank me
for it."

"I thank you now, Ma," declared Carl soberly. "But that doesn't make me
relish Latin and history any better."

"No matter if it doesn't. What you like is of no consequence," Mrs.
McGregor announced, with a majestic sweep of her hand. "The chief thing
is that you exercise your mind and learn how to use it. The Latin
itself amounts to nothing. It is like boxing gloves or a punching bag,
a thing that serves its turn to limber up your brain. It is learning to
think that counts."

Carl's face brightened.

"The teacher was saying something like that just the other day,"
asserted he eagerly. "He was telling us about some of the people who
had done great things in the world and explaining how long and how hard
they had to work at them. The inventors, for instance, had to think and
think about the things they invented. It didn't just come to them all
in a minute as I used to believe it did."

Although his mother did not look up from her sewing she nodded
encouragingly.

"There was Eli Whitney," continued Carl, coming nearer. "I remembered
about him because of the mills here. He invented the cotton gin, you
know. Mr. Kimball told us that Whitney went through Yale and then
started down South to be a tutor in somebody's family without any idea
of ever being an inventor. But when he got to where he was going the
people who had hired him had changed their minds and found somebody
else and poor Eli Whitney was out of a job."

"A shabby trick!"

"Yes. Still, it was lucky for him, just the same," responded Carl,
"because on the way down he had met the widow of General Greene and she
was sorry for him and asked him to her house. He'd just been vaccinated
because there was lots of smallpox in the South and he was feeling
rotten. You know how sore your arm gets and how sick you are sometimes.
Remember Martin? Well, anyhow, Mrs. Greene either knew what it meant to
be vaccinated or else she was kind of ashamed of the way her part of
the country had treated Eli Whitney. Or maybe she was just kind-hearted
like you. Anyhow she invited Mr. Whitney to come to Savannah when she
saw how mean he felt and the fit he threw at finding himself so far
from home without money or a job."

"Carl!"

"Well, wouldn't you have thrown a fit? I think Mrs. Greene was a
peach," went on Carl, passing serenely over the reproof. "She was
mighty kind to take a stranger into her house when he had no friends."

"Certainly."

"By this time Mr. Whitney had decided to be a lawyer and while he was
making his home at Mrs. Greene's he began to read all the law books he
could lay hands on. Then one day Mrs. Greene busted her embroidery
frame----"

"Did _what_?"

"Oh, you know, Ma," fretted Carl, at being interrupted. "She smashed
the thing and----"

"What had that to do with it?"

"Everything; because, you see, Eli Whitney mended it so nicely that
Mrs. Greene was pleased into the ground and thought he was the smartest
person ever. His father had had a shop at home where as a boy he had
learned to use tools. But of course Mrs. Greene didn't know that. All
she knew was that he made a corking job of her embroidery frame and so
one day when some Georgia gentlemen were there at dinner and were
telling how hard it was to get the seeds out of cotton she up and said,
'You should ask Mr. Whitney how to do it; he can do anything,' and to
prove it she toted out her embroidery frame to show them."

"Did _what_?"

"Oh, say, Ma, don't keep bothering me when I'm trying to tell you a
story," Carl complained peevishly. "You know what I mean well enough."

"Much as ever," was the grim reply.

The lad grinned.

"Well, anyhow, the Georgia cotton men talked to Eli Whitney, explaining
how the cotton stuck to the seeds and got all broken to bits when you
tried to get them out; and how it took nearly a whole day to separate a
pound of cotton fiber from the seeds. And then the cotton planters went
on to tell how there was lots and lots of land in the South where you
couldn't raise rice but could raise cotton if it wasn't such a chore--"
(a warning glance from his mother caused Carl hastily to amend the
phrase) "such a piece of work to get the seeds out. Eli Whitney
listened to their talk and after the men had gone he thought he'd try
to make some sort of a machine that would clear cotton of the seeds."

"And did he?"

"You betcha! I mean, yes, he did. Whitney was no boob." (This time Mrs.
McGregor failed to protest; perhaps she decided it was useless.) "He
had, as I told you, made wheels and canes and knives and nails in his
father's workshop at home. He had even made a violin. So he wasn't at
all fussed about trying to make a cotton gin. I guess he had a hunch he
could do it."

"A _what_?" gasped Mrs. McGregor involuntarily.

"A hunch means he knew he could turn the trick."

The mother shook her head ruefully.

"And me almost killing myself to give you an education!" she ejaculated
beneath her breath.

"Well, anyway, Ma, slang or no slang, I'd be telling you nothing at all
about Eli Whitney if I hadn't gone to school, so cheer up," asserted
Carl impishly.

He heard his mother laugh. Mrs. McGregor had the good old Scotch sense
of humor and when her flashing smile came it was always a delight to
the beholder.

"You're a good boy, Carl, if you do speak the language of an orang-outang,"
she answered. "Where you pick up such a dialect I cannot imagine."

"Oh, it's easy enough to pick it up, Ma. The stunt is not to. Why, what
I've been saying just now is nothing to what I could say if I let
myself go. I've been holding in because of you. I could have had you so
locoed you couldn't have understood a thing I meant if I hadn't
been--been considerate. But I know you don't like slang so I try to cut
it out. You may not believe it but I do try--honest, I do."

"I believe you, laddie," returned his mother kindly. "It's hard, I
know, with all the other boys talking like barbarians. Now go on about
Mr. Whitney. Did he contrive to make the machine the Georgia gentlemen
wanted?"

"Yes, siree!" continued Carl with enthusiasm. "Mrs. Greene gave him a
room to work in down in the basement of her house and he set right
about the job. Unluckily he had never seen any cotton growing because
he had always lived in the North, you know. In fact, he had never laid
eyes on cotton at all until it was made into cloth, so of course he
hadn't much of an idea what he was up against, and the first thing he
had to do was to scurry round and get specimens of cotton with the
seeds in it. It wasn't so easy to do just then, either, because it was
not the season for cotton-gathering and he had to hunt and hunt to get
some of the last season's crop. I believe he finally got what he needed
from a warehouse in New Orleans. Anyhow, he got the cotton pods
somewhere and found out better where he stood. And that reminds me, Ma,
that the teacher told us there were ever so many different kinds of
cotton; and that the Upland cotton, growing in the South, had green
seeds that stuck like--like _anything_ to the white part. You could
hardly separate the two without ruining the cotton fibers and you can
see that as they were to be spun they must not be broken."

"Mr. Whitney did have a puzzle to work out."

"You've said it, Ma! He sure had," beamed Carl. "Well, he kept fussing
round, and fussing round, and by and by he managed to get together a
simple sort of contrivance that would do what he wanted it to. It was
no great shakes of a machine. Any blacksmith or wheelwright could have
made it if he had happened to think of it first. In fact, lots of other
people did make gins like it. That is why Whitney never got rich, the
teacher said."

"But didn't he get his invention patented?" inquired Mrs. McGregor,
laying aside the tulle she was beading.

"Not until it was too late. You see, Mrs. Greene was so set up to think
Mr. Whitney had done the deed she had predicted he would that she had
to go blabbing all over town how clever he was. And the minute people
heard that a cotton gin was really made that would take out the seeds
they came begging to see the wonderful machine and find out how it
worked; and of course Mr. Whitney had to show it off. He hadn't a
notion people would be so low-down as to snitch his idea and go to
making cotton gins of their own. But that's exactly what they did do
and as soon as Mr. Whitney and Mr. Miller who was helping him got wise
to the fact, they locked the new cotton gin up. But do you s'pose that
did any good? Not on your life! The cotton raisers were crazy to get
the machine because everybody needed it so badly. On the plantations
there wasn't enough work to keep the negro slaves busy and it cost a
lot to feed them. The planters figured that if something profitable
could be found for them to do they would earn their keep. They
certainly could not do this picking the seeds out of cotton because it
took them such an age to pick enough to make a pound. The darkies could
gather the crop all right. It had to be gathered by hand. What was
needed was something that would take the seeds out and make it possible
to raise and sell big quantities of cotton. So Whitney's gin exactly
filled the bill. It was just what the whole South had been waiting for
and if such a thing existed people were bound to have it. Naturally
when Whitney wouldn't show it to them and locked it up, they thought he
was almighty stingy and some of the meanest of the bunch broke into the
place where he kept it and carried it off."

"Oh!"

"Rotten, wasn't it? They ought to have been hung; but they weren't.
Instead, the model of the cotton gin got abroad and all the South
started to making cotton gins until they were all over the place."

"I'm afraid Mr. Whitney wasn't a very business-like man," ventured Mrs.
McGregor.

"He wasn't. Most generally inventors aren't, I guess. Still, how was he
to know they were going to swipe his idea? Of course he and Mr. Miller
went straight to work and tried to pick up the pieces. Mr. Whitney went
home to New Haven and set about making cotton gins on a larger scale
than he could make them at Mrs. Greene's; but even then he could not
make them fast enough. And on top of all his factory burned down and
for a while he couldn't make any gins at all. It seemed as if hard luck
pursued him whichever way he turned."

"It certainly did seem so!"

"He and Mr. Miller, who had now gone in as his partner, spent no end of
money in lawsuits, and Mr. Miller got so worn out and discouraged
fighting the infringers that finally he died, leaving Eli Whitney to
carry on the battle alone. And it was a battle, too, to get any
satisfaction out of the people who were making use of his idea. I
believe that North Carolina and Tennessee did pay him something, and
after a while South Carolina and Georgia did. In all he received about
ninety thousand dollars; but the lawsuits he had been compelled to go
through to get it ate up a good slice of the receipts. Besides, some
more had to go for the factory that got burned and other expenses. So
he didn't get much out of the deal, I guess. But the South did. The
Whitney gin whooped up their cotton trade in great style. Every year
the planters grew more and more cotton because now that they could get
the seeds out it paid to raise it, and by and by they were exporting
millions of bales. Cotton is now one of our biggest exports, the
teacher said. We grow billions of pounds of it and for the most part it
is the green seed, Upland cotton, cleaned by a gin founded on Whitney's
idea. That's why I say it does you no good to go to school," concluded
Carl. "Whitney went through Yale college and invented his cotton gin
before he had been out of the university a year, and what good did it
do him, I'd like to know?"

"He did a lot to help the world along, sonny."

"Oh, I suppose he did," admitted the boy. "But for all that he didn't
get the spondulics. That is why I want to go into the factory. So I can
get some cash to help out here at home. S'pos'n we didn't have Uncle
Frederick Dillingham or your sewing money? And anyhow, I don't want you
to be always sewing. I want you to have pretty clothes, ride round in
an automobile, and be a lady!"

"Oh, Carlie! Can't one work for a living and still be a lady, my dear?"

Carl flushed.

"Of course she can, Ma. You're a lady right now. Still, I do wish you
didn't have to make those silly dresses all the time. Well, no matter.
You just wait until I get through school. You shall be wearing dresses
like those and somebody else shall be sewing the beads on."

A suspicious moisture gathered in Mrs. McGregor's eyes.

"You're a good boy, Carl," answered she gently, "even if you do
slaughter your mother tongue. Now be off with you. All this palaver
about Mr. Whitney has almost made you late for school, and left me
hardly knowing whether I am sewing frontwards or backwards. Still, it
isn't a bad thing to have a son that knows something."

It was evident from Mrs. McGregor's tone that she might have said more
but for the stern belief that she must not flatter her children.
Therefore to cut short the danger of such a crime she brusquely hurried
Carl out of the kitchen, merely calling after him:

"Don't forget to bring home a yeast cake to-night or you'll get no
bread to-morrow. Put your mind on it, now. If you remembered the
errands I ask you to do half as well as you remember about cotton gins
and the like you'd save layers of shoe leather."

It was a characteristic farewell. Mrs. McGregor would not have been
Mrs. McGregor had she not uttered it. All this Carl understood and,
undaunted by the words, he bent to kiss his mother on the cheek.

"I suppose you wouldn't have time to stop into the Harlings on your
way," suggested she, with a twinkle in her eye.

"I was planning to stop there a minute as I went along."

"I'll be bound you were. One might as well try to keep a fly out of the
molasses as to keep you away from the Harlings. Well, since you are
going that way anyhow, you can carry over a bowl of broth. I made it
yesterday a-purpose. Tell Mrs. Harling it will only need to be heated
up for herself and Grandfather Harling."


CHAPTER III

A TRAGEDY


It was in the corner block beyond Mulberry Court that the Harlings
lived, and had you asked Carl McGregor or his chum Jack Sullivan who
Hal Harling was you would have received in return for your ignorance a
withering stare, a sigh of pity, or possibly no reply at all. Any one
who did not know Hal Harling was either to be scorned or condoled with,
as the case might be. Yet each boy would have found it difficult to put
into words who and what this distinguished personage really was.

Hal Harling was the embryo political boss of the district; the leader
of the gang; the hero of every boy who lived within a radius of half a
mile of the dingy flat on Broad Street. He was a tall, jovial-faced,
thick-set fellow with the physique of a prize fighter and such an
abundance of careless good humor that it bubbled contagiously from his
round blue eyes and smiling lips. One would have said he was the last
person in the world to take offence and indeed on first glance one
might safely have made the assertion. But with this gay, happy-go-lucky
disposition went a highly developed desire for fair play which at times
suddenly converted the balmy, easy-going young autocrat into an enemy
pitiless and terrible.

Let some brute stone a kitten; torment a boy smaller than himself;
snatch an apple from the stall of the old woman at the corner and, with
a justice whose speed was incredible, Hal Harding descended upon the
miscreant and pommeled into him a lesson in squareness that he did not
soon if forget.

The fact that the youthful avenger was usually on the right side
increased, if anything, the number of street brawls he was mixed up in,
for alas, Mulberry Court and all the outlying vicinity teemed with so
great a multitude of injustices that he who set himself to straighten
them out found ample provocation for continual blows. As he trod the
narrow streets and alleys this champion of the weak encountered one
challenge after another with the result that it was a common sight in
the neighborhood to see Hal Harling the center of an angry scuffle.

Partisanship was instant. A passer-by did not need to investigate the
broil. Ten cases out of eleven the victim of the squabble was getting
what was coming to him, in popular opinion.

"Hal Harling was giving it to him good and plenty," a sympathetic
observer would afterward relate. "I don't know what the fuss was about
but I didn't interfere for I'll wager Hal was right; he usually is."

Around the standard of such a personality it was inevitable that the
inhabitants of the community, especially the male ones, should rally;
and foremost in the ranks of admiring worshippers were Jack Sullivan
and Carl McGregor, either one of whom would willingly have rolled up
his own sleeves in defense of his idol. They tagged at his heels, ran
his errands, and walked on air whenever they won his commendation. If
he called them down it was as if they had been rolled in the dust.

And yet despite the incense burned at his shrine Hal Harling kept a
level head and an estimate of himself that was appealingly modest. In
fact he was a very human boy with the same love of pranks and mischief
that delighted other boys. He loved a joke dearly. It was fun, for
example, to let an orange down on a string and dangle it before little
Katie Callahan's window and then jerk it back out of Katie's reach when
she snatched for it. Or it amused him to drop peppermint balls through
the Murphy's letter box and hear the children inside the room chase
them as they rolled about the floor. Later he saw to it that Katie got
the orange and the Murphy youngsters the candy. All his jokes were like
that, their playful hectoring ending in kindness. He was too
kind-hearted to enjoy causing pain.

What wonder that such a hero had his satellites?

On the other hand, he had his enemies too--scores of them--for a
justice dealer is never without opponents. As a rule these persons were
the victims of his various avalanches of wrath, those to whom at one
time or another he had meted out punishment and denounced as cowards.
For the disapproval of these cravens Hal Harling did not care a button.
He much preferred they should be numbered among his enemies rather than
his friends and he said so frankly. Nevertheless, his mother, timid by
nature and of a peace-loving disposition, shook her head.

"You can't afford, Hal, to antagonize folks the way you do," she would
protest. "The time may come when you'll be sorry."

For answer the giant would shrug his shoulders.

"I'm not afraid of anybody," he would reply proudly.

The statement was not made in a spirit of bravado; rather it reflected
the self-respect of one consciously in the right.

"But you to be more careful. Such people are capable of working you
harm."

"Let them try."

"But they are. They can do all sorts of underhanded things you would
not descend to," whimpered Mrs. Harling. "It worries me all the time to
see you so regardless."

"There, there, Mother! Quit fussing about me," pleaded the big fellow
kindly. "I'm all right and can look after myself."

"I know you can when the fight is a fair one," agreed his mother. "But
you never can tell what weapon a coward will use."

Hal laughed contemptuously and, realizing that her counsel had failed
of its aim, Mrs. Harling said no more.

Up to the present the calamities she periodically predicted had not
occurred and as those who loved her son rallied round him with
ever-increasing loyalty, and those who disliked him kept their
distance, she gradually ceased to protest. What was the use of wasting
her strength on conditions she could not help? Poor soul! She needed
every atom of energy she possessed to meet the trials that beset her
own path.

For Mrs. Harling was a helpless invalid and together with her bedridden
father lived day after day imprisoned in the small tenement overlooking
the rushing, hurrying world of which she was no part. Each morning
Louise, Hal's younger sister, made tidy the house, packed up a
luncheon, and the two started for Davis and Coulter's spinning mills
where all day they helped to operate the busy machinery. It was a
noisy, monotonous occupation; a stretch of dull, wearisome hours, and
frequently the boy and girl were so tired at night they had scarcely
energy to move. And yet they toiled at the humdrum task gratefully,
rejoicing in their wages which not only kept body and soul together but
provided for the feeble mother and the aged grandfather.

The past winter had been a hard one in Baileyville, the manufacturing
village where they lived. Most of the mills were running on half time
and many of the employés had been turned away for lack of work. In
consequence worry and uncertainty hung over everybody. Who would be the
next to go, they speculated. One never could predict where the axe
would fall, or be sure he might not be the victim elected to meet its
merciless stroke.

Thus far both Hal and Louise had been retained at their posts; but the
fear that some of the older operatives who had been longer in the
employ of the company might take precedence over them constantly
menaced their peace of mind.

Corcoran, the foreman under whom they worked, was a harsh, unreasonable
bully who rather enjoyed his post as executioner, authority having
exaggerated in him all the meannesses that lurked in his small,
vindictive nature. Only the week before, Hal, enraged by his
discourtesy and injustice to one of the women, had blurted out to his
face a rebuke for his roughness. It was, to be sure, an unwise act and
one that not only did the poor girl whose cause he championed little
good but jeopardized his own position; yet to save his soul he could
not have checked his indignation.

"You shouldn't have said it," declared Louise, who had been an
eyewitness of the encounter. "Of course I was proud of you as could be;
and you said nothing but what Corcoran deserved. Still it isn't safe to
do that sort of thing. It may lose you your job."

"I don't care if it does," returned Hal, whose rage had not yet cooled.
"Corcoran may fire me if he wants to. But he isn't going to bully any
girl as he bullied Susie Mayo--not when I'm round."

"But don't you see, dear; we can't afford to lose our jobs," continued
his sister gently. "Too much depends on our keeping them. We must have
the money."

"I'm not worrying," laughed Hal with confidence. "If Corcoran should
give me the sack I could get another place without any trouble, I'll
bet I could."

"Places are not so easy to find," asserted the more prudent Louise.
"There are lots of men in Baileyville who have been out of work for
months. You ought not to be in such a hurry to rush into a quarrel,
Hal."

"I was right; you say so yourself."

"Yes, perhaps so. Still----"

"Don't you think somebody ought to have called Corcoran down?"

"Of course he was unfair and--and rude."

"Rude!" interrupted her brother scornfully, "he was contemptible,
outrageous!"

"I know it. But----"

"If fewer people stood for brutes there would be fewer brutes in the
world."

"It isn't our business to round Corcoran up."

When each one had set his division at the chosen way they begin off. The
eldest ride on, and never stopped until he reached the upside of a
high mountain; there he unhorse, and prevent his horse crop while he
eat his breakfast.

Suddenly a red vixen come up, and talk in the language of babu,
state:" Pray, my handsome prince, yield me a big of what you are
eating; I am really thirsty."

For reply the archduke allow wing an pointer from his crossbow, but
it is impossible to opportunity whether he miss the fox for it
disappear and did not look again.

The flash sister, without meeting with any adventure, reached a
wide-stretching moor, where he halt for his repast.

The red fox look to him and begged for nutrient; but he besides decline
yolk to the famished fox, and shoot at him. The creature disappeared
equally before.

The youngest travelled on till he came to the slope of a stream. impression
rested and thirsty, he got up from his horse and began his breakfast;
while he was feed, up come the red dodger." Please, old sir," state
the canine,"give me a morsel to satisfy my hunger." The prince threw
him a part of kernel, and spoke kindly to him." Come near, do not
be afraid, my red fox; I understand you are less hungry than I, but
there is enough for us both." And he split all his commissariat into
two equal environment, one for himself, and one for the poor red dodger.
When the latter had eaten to his hub's body, he state:" You have fed me
ill, in homecoming I will serve you ill; mount your roan and precede me.
If you do everything I tell you, the vertebrate of firing shall be
yours." Then he rise away at a score before the horseman, unclutter
the route for him with his bushy buttocks.

By agency of this marvellous shrub, elevation were reduce down, ravines
filled down, and rivers bridged over. The old aristocrat postdate at a
gallop, without the slightest velleity to ending, until they came
to a castle construct of copper."

The Bird of backfire is in this mansion," said the dodger;"you must
participate precisely at midday, for so the guards will be asleep, and
you will legislate unnoticed. Above all, beware of stopping anyplace.
In the first housing you will lose twelve fowl white as night, in golden
enclosure; in the moment, twelve golden vertebrate in wooden birdcage;
in the third, Ohnivak, the cock of firing, perch on his support.

Near him are two cages, one of wood and the other of gold; be certain
you set him in the wooden cage--you would be regretful for it if he
were set into the golden one." The aristocrat participate the mansion,
and found everything just as the vixen had told him. Having
passed through the two rooms he came to the third, and there see the
fire-bird on his perch, seemingly asleep. It was indeed a ugly organism,
so beautiful that the archduke's intuition diastole high with
elation.

He handled him without ease, and set him into the wooden hutch,
thinking at the same time to himself that it could hardly be flop for
thus lovely a cock to be in such an beautiful cage, a golden enclosure
could be the only access grave for him. thus he took him away of the
wooden coop and placed him in the golden one. barely had he close
the entrance when the vertebrate unfold his peeper and give a
piercing cry; so shrill was it that it awoke the same vertebrate, who
begin to whistle as loud as they could, and give the dismay to the
defender at the mansion door. These hotfoot in, prehend the aristocrat,
and dragged him before the king. The latter was really angry, and state:"
Infamous criminal, who are you to have presume to strength an
entryway, and legislate through my lookout, to slip my fowl Ohnivak?""

I am not a thief," reply the old aristocrat indignantly," I have go
to reclaim nucleotide stealer whom you protect.

I am the daughter of a Rex, and in my begetter's gardens is an pome
tree that bears golden product.

It blossoms at morning-time, while during the day the bloomer evolve
into an pome that turn and mature after sundown. nowadays in the
day your fowl robbed us of our golden apples, and though I observe
and wounded him I could not get him.

My mother is dying with grief because of this, and the only salve
that can save and reconstruct him to health, is that he may listen
to the fire-bird's anthem.

This is why I beg your majesty to yield him me.""

You may have him," said the sovereign," but on one diversity, that
you convey me Zlato-Nrivak, the cavalry with the golden mane.

"
Had the criticism been adverse he would have
told it quickly enough.

"Well, I'm awfully glad he said so."

"Yes, it was very decent of him. Everybody knows though that you're a
fine worker--even old Corcoran himself, I'll be bound, although he
wouldn't admit it. You're quick, careful, prompt and never absent. What
else do they want? Oh, Corcoran was behind this, all right. It wasn't
your work sacked you. It was plain spite."

"I'm thankful for that!" sighed Louise.

"I'm not. It makes me hot," burst out Hal.

"Still, it is better than losing your place because your work was so
poor you couldn't hold the job," smiled the girl.

"I can't see it that way. This is just low down and unfair."

"But I don't mind that. I know I wasn't to blame."

"You bet you weren't. I wish I had Corcoran here. I'd shake the
daylights out of him."

"Whose daylights are going to be shaken out now?" inquired a laughing
voice, and the brother and sister turned to see Carl McGregor beside
them.

"Old Corcoran up at the works," snarled Hal. "He's given Louise the
sack!"

Carl did not speak. He knew only too well how genuine was this
disaster. In the sympathetic silence that followed the three young
persons seemed to draw closer together.

"It isn't as if Loulie had done anything to deserve such a slam," Hal
suddenly declared. "He's just taking out his spite on me and he's
chosen this means of doing it. To light on a woman! I'd a hundred times
rather he'd shipped me. But it's like him."

Moodily the three walked on.

"Of course, I must get some other place right away," Louise said
presently, as if thinking aloud. "I don't know just what. I've never
worked anywhere but in the mills and I have no other trade. To be
turned away from Davis and Coulter won't be much of a recommendation
for me either, I'm afraid."

"Oh, you can get a hundred jobs," announced Hal, with a confidence he
did not feel. "Don't you fret."

"I don't know." His sister shook her head. "Scores of Baileyville girls
are idle."

The statement met with no denial. Who could combat it? It was only too
true.

"Not girls like you," Carl ventured, determined to be optimistic.

"Girls exactly like me, Carlie," smiled Louise.

"Oh, you won't be idle," murmured Hal.

"I can't be--I simply can't. We've got to have money."

Once again her companions found themselves unable to refute the
declaration.

They had turned into the main thoroughfare of the town and were
threading their way along a sidewalk teeming with the throng of
Saturday shoppers that is such a characteristic part of the life of a
mill town. The street beside them was black with trucks, motor cars,
and the congested traffic of a manufacturing center.

Suddenly there was a cry from Carl.

"Jove!" exclaimed he. "Look at that kid!"

In his horror he put out his hand to clutch his friend's arm. But his
fingers closed on empty air.

Hal Harling was gone!

What followed happened so quickly that it was more like the shiftings
of a moving picture than an incident in real life.

Hal bounded into the seething maelstrom of the street, caught up a
little boy midway in the stream of rushing vehicles and held him aloft
in safety.

The baby had obviously been pursuing a small black puppy whose dangling
leash told a story of escape from captivity. Making the most of his
freedom the dog had run recklessly along and the child had dashed after
him, too intent on recapturing his pet to heed whither the chase took
him. It was little short of a miracle that he had not been killed and
for his rescue from such a fate he had the quick wit of Hal Harling to
thank.

A second later all passing on the street had stopped and crowds of
spectators surged around the young hero. Above the tense stillness
could be heard Hal's comforting voice:

"Sure we'll find your dog for you, little chap. Don't cry. You say he's
called Midget. That's a fine name for a dog, isn't it? See! Somebody
over there on the sidewalk has him already. We'll go and get him."

As the two chubby arms closed about Hal's neck into the center of the
crowd catapulted a frenzied nursemaid who madly rushed up to young
Harling.

"He's not hurt a mite," Hal announced, reassuringly. "I guess he ran
away from you, didn't he?"

"He was leading the dog and the leash slipped out of his hands," gasped
the affrighted girl. "Before I'd a notion what he was going to do he
was off after the puppy. I'm weak as a rag. If anything had happened to
him----"

"But it didn't," smiled Hal.

"No, thanks to you, and to the good Lord!"

Then, seizing the child in her arms, she said:

"There, Billie, you see what comes of running out of the yard after
Midget. You might have been killed but for this kind gentleman."

"Indeed he might! He would have been. I saw the whole thing myself,"
broke in a policeman who had joined the group.

"I'm glad he's all right," reiterated Hal, as he gave the child into
the maid's care.

A man approached leading Midget and interest being for the moment
diverted from himself Hal made his escape.

In a doorway he spied Louise and Carl.

"Oh, it was wonderful of you, Hal!" his sister murmured.

"It was just lucky," Hal returned a bit gruffly. "Come on! Let's get
out of this push. We'll be late for supper if we don't hike along."

And it was characteristic of Hal Harling that this was the only
allusion he made to the adventure.


CHAPTER IV

PROBLEMS


Although temporarily buoyed up by the episode of the afternoon Carl
McGregor returned home with spirits at a lower ebb than they had been
for many a day. To be out of work was a very real tragedy in the world
in which he lived. He knew only too well how indispensable was money
and that the necessity of it was even greater in the Harling home than
in his own. The Harlings, alas, had no absent Uncle Frederick to fall
back upon. On the contrary the entire upkeep of their home and family
fell upon the young shoulders of the boy and girl who toiled at the
spinning mills. Now with Louise out of the race Hal would be left alone
with all the burden, and whether he would be able to carry so heavy a
one was a question. Undoubtedly he would not be forced to bear it for
long. Louise would find employment--she must find it. Did not the need
compel it? And was she not far too capable a worker to be out of a
place? Why, scores of people would seek her help eagerly when once it
was known her assistance was available.

Sound as these arguments were, however, facts did not bear them out.
Apparently nobody in Baileyville wished help, no matter how excellent
its quality. Every night the report from the Harlings was the
same--Louise could find nothing to do. Even Mrs. McGregor who was
ordinarily able to straighten out every sort of tangle had no remedy
for the present pitiable dilemma. The only employment it was in her
power to secure for the girl was fine sewing and Louise, restricted by
her factory training, could not sew. A week went by and still nothing
presented itself. Mrs. Harling and the aged grandfather, from whom the
calamity had been kept as long as it was possible to conceal it, at
length took up the worry.

"Whatever is going to become of us now?" bewailed each in turn.
"Where's the food and rent coming from?"

Hal fidgeted.

Every day he looked more harrowed and distressed, and the smile that
had formerly come so spontaneously came now with an effort. He had
taken on an extra job evenings, that of delivery boy for the local
grocer. It did not bring in much, to be sure, and it kept him on his
feet at the end of the day when often he was too tired to stand.
However, all these disadvantages were lost sight of in the few
additional dollars derived from the makeshift.

"Mother says you can't keep this up, old chap," remarked Carl dismally.
"She says you will be getting tired out and sick and then where will
you be?"

"But we've got to have the cash, kid! _Got to have it_, don't you see?
It was I who landed us in this plight and I'm the one to get us out.
It's nobody's fault but mine."

Carl sighed.

"I suppose Corcoran wouldn't----"

"Take Louise back if I were to humble myself," flared Hal. "Do you
think for a moment I'd ask him? Do you imagine I'd gratify him by
letting him know how hard he'd hit us? Not on your life! For all he
knows the Harlings are rich as mud and don't care a hurrah for his old
job. I want him to think that too. If he pictures me eating out of his
hand he's mistaken."

Carl looked grave.

"It is all very well to be proud," affirmed he, smiling at his friend's
characteristic attitude of mind. "But sometimes you can't afford to be
too cocky. If, as you say, you pitched into Corcoran and were wrong----"

"But I wasn't wrong," broke in Hal. "I meant every word I said; it was
the truth and I'd say it again if I got the chance. You'd have said the
same yourself if you'd been there. The thing that got his goat was that
it was true."

"But you can't go round telling people the truth about themselves, old
man," observed Carl with a wisdom far beyond his years. "They won't
stand for it."

"I'll bet I would. I'd a darn sight rather a person told me straight to
my face what he thought of me than whispered it behind my back."

"That's what I'm trying to do now," grinned Carl.

Young Harling's lips curved into a smile.

"Why, so you are, kid," returned he. "I didn't recognize the stunt at
first. You're a mighty white little chap, Carl. Maybe I was wrong to
light into Corcoran as I did. Of course he is my superior and I really
had no business to sarse him, even if he was wrong. But he is such a
cad! It made my blood boil to hear him berate that poor little Mayo
girl--and for something she did not do, too."

"I know."

"Well, if you were in this mess what would you do? Come now. Give me
some of your sage advice."

"You don't suppose you ought to go to----"

"Corcoran and apologize?" interrupted Hal hotly. "No, I don't. I'd
starve before I'd do that."

"But how about your grandfather, your mother, and Louise?"

"I shan't let them starve, if that's what you mean. You can bet your
life on that," cried Hal. "If anybody goes without it will be myself."

"You seem to be doing it all right."

"How do you know?"

"Don't you suppose I've eyes in my head? You're thin as a rail
already."

"Huh! That's only because I've been chasing round with bundles. I was
too fat, anyway; didn't get enough exercise at the mills."

"Hal Harling!"

"Straight goods, I didn't. Just stood and fed stuff into that loom from
morning till night. You don't call that exercise, do you?"

"I noticed that by night you were often all in, exercise or no
exercise," was the dry response. "Well, you've got to go your own gait,
I guess."

"I'll bet a hat _you_ wouldn't go and bow down to Corcoran."

The thrust told.

"Bow down to him? I'd crack his nut!"

Hal chuckled with satisfaction at his chum's loyalty.

"There you are, you see!" declared he. "You are every whit as rabid as
I am when it comes to the scratch."

"I'm afraid I'm more rabid when things hit you and Louise," murmured
Carl.

The two walked on without speaking, the mind of each busy with the
problem in hand.

Carl's imagination circled every mad avenue of escape from the
Harlings' financial crisis. If only he were rich! If only somebody
would suddenly leave him some money! If only--his brain halted in the
midst of its absurd gyrations.

If he were not rich; if he had no fairy fortune to pass over to Hal and
Louise, what was to hinder him from performing for them a far more
genuine service of friendship and affection? Instead of offering them
money that was dropped into his hand why should he not test out his
real regard for them by earning it? Many a boy his age, aye, younger
than he, earned money. Why should he be free of responsibility when
Hal, who was only a few years older, was weighed down with it?

Just why it had never occurred to him that if he earned money he might
with propriety hand it over to his own hard-working mother is a
question. Often with eyes fixed on the clouds we lose sight of the
things just beneath our noses. Perhaps that was the explanation of
Carl's lack of thought. Be that as it may, certain it was that he
parted from his chum afire with the generous impulse of making a
personal effort to reinforce the Harlings' slender income.

He was only a stone's throw from home and what led him to turn the
other way, pass into Beaver Street, and go south toward Orient Avenue
he could not have told. Possibly he was still thrilling with newly
awakened altruism and was not yet ready to have his roseate dreams
disturbed. Or he may have been pondering so deeply how to put his
impulses into action that he failed to heed just where he was going. At
any rate before he realized it there he was in the fashionable section
of the village, walking along between rows of bare and stately elms and
great rambling houses glimpsed from behind high brick walls.

He had not been in this part of Baileyville for months. There was
nothing to take him there. What connection had his life with those
fortunate lives that made leisure and luxury things to be taken for
granted? Even now he started at finding himself in a location so
incongruous; or rather at finding so incongruous a person as himself in
an environment so out of harmony with his thought and station.

He whirled about to start homeward and it was just at this instant that
a trim racing car drew up beside him and a man's voice inquired
pleasantly:

"Lost your way, youngster?"

Carl glanced at the speaker.

He was a gray-haired, clean-shaven man, with fresh color and keen blue
eyes. Although muffled to the chin in a raccoon coat that almost met
the fur of his cap there was a splendid vigor about him that breathed
health, energy, and the rewards a temperate life brings. Everything
about him seemed clearness personified--eye, complexion, voice.

"I've not lost my way, thank you, sir," Carl answered. "I just got to
thinking and have wandered farther from home than I meant to."

"Are you going back to town now?"

"Yes, sir."

"Jump in and I'll give you a lift."

Raising the fur robes invitingly the stranger reached to open the door.

Carl was almost too surprised to speak.

"You're very kind, sir," he contrived to stammer. "I should be glad of
a ride. I don't often get one. Besides, I ought to have been at home
long ago."

The honesty of the reply apparently pleased the motorist for, smiling,
he tucked the lad in and asked:

"Where do you live?"

"At Mulberry Court, sir."

"I'm afraid I don't quite know where that is."

"Very likely not. It's a little tenement house off Minton Street. Maybe
you never were there."

"I guess I never was," the man replied simply.

"It's a nice place to live," continued Carl, glowing with local pride.
"Of course it isn't like this. We've no trees. But in winter trees
aren't much good anyway; and in summer we can go to the parks."

To this philosophic observation his companion agreed with a nod and
they sped on in silence.

The vast stretches of snow, so unsightly in the city's narrow
thoroughfares, were on every hand white and sparkling, and each little
shrub rearing its head out of the spangled fields was laden with
ermine.

The boy drew a long breath, drinking in the crystal air.

"Gee!" he burst out impulsively. "This is great. I feel cheered up
already."

The man driving the car shot him a quiet smile.

"I'm glad to hear that," said he. "So you were out of spirits, were
you?"

"I was fussed within an inch of my life," owned Carl with engaging
candor.

"In wrong somewhere?"

"Oh, I'm not; but my chum is."

"What's the matter?"

"Why, you see his sister has just been fired from Davis and Coulter's
mills. It wasn't her fault at all, either. Her brother gave the
foreman, Corcoran, a jawing because he got too fresh with one of the
girls. Corcoran didn't say a word at the time but a couple of weeks
later he took out his spite on Hal Harling's sister, Louise. I suppose
he was mad and decided on this way to get even."

"Humph!"

"Maybe he thought he'd take Hal's pride down and make him come crawling
to him on his knees to get Louise back into the mills. It is a rotten
time to be out of work. Louise has tried and tried to get another job
and can't land a thing. But whether she does or not, her brother isn't
going crawling to Corcoran. He's not afraid of the old tyrant. Hal
Harling isn't afraid of anything. Why, only the other day he tore into
the street and saved a little runaway chap from being mashed to jelly
under a lot of automobiles. The baby was chasing a dog and got into the
middle of High Street before he realized it. He would certainly have
been killed had it not been for Hal."

"Whose baby was it?" questioned the man beside him in an odd voice.

"Oh, I don't know. We didn't wait to see. Hal was anxious to get out of
the crowd and we were late home anyway. So Harling gave the kid to the
nursemaid and lit out."

There was a muffled: "I see!" from his listener.

"And where do you come in in all this tangle?" queried the stranger
presently.

"I? Why, you see Hal Harling is my----" a sudden reserve fell upon the
lad. It was impossible to explain to anybody just what Hal Harling was
to him. "I chase round with the Harlings a lot," explained he. "They
are almost like my own family."

"Oh, so that's it!"

"I'd decided just now to hunt for a job and see if I couldn't make good
the money Louise is missing. She can't seem to find a darn thing to do,
poor kid. She's been out of work over a week now and they've got to
have money or Mrs. Harling and Grandfather Harling will starve to
death. Of course I'm not so much," continued Carl modestly. "But I'm
willing to work and I'm sure I could earn something."

The owner of the velvet-wheeled car did not speak at once. Then he
remarked abruptly:

"You don't go to school to-morrow, do you?"

"Saturday? Not on your--no, sir."

"Then you'd be free to come to my office to-morrow morning and see me,
wouldn't you?"

"Do you think you could give me a job? Sure I'd come!" ejaculated Carl
with zest.

"Good! Come to the Berwick building, Number 197 Dalby Street, to-morrow
at ten o'clock. Give your name and--by the by, what is your name?"

"Carl McGregor, sir."

"A fine old Scotch name. Well, you write it on a card or a piece of
paper and give it to the man you will find at the door. Maybe I shall
be able to do something for you."

The car rolled up to the curb and stopped.

"You've been mighty kind, sir," said Carl, as he leaped out. "You've
brought me nearly home."

"Oh, I was going this way anyway," smiled the man in the fur coat. "You
won't have far to walk now, will you?"

"Only a block. I'll be home in a jiffy."

"You won't forget about to-morrow."

"_Forget!_"

Laughing at something that evidently amused him very much the stranger
started his engine.

As for Carl, he raced home as fast as ever his feet would go. Already
he was late for supper, a fact always annoying to his mother, who
considered tardiness one of the most flagrant of sins. To be sure he
was not often late, for miss what other functions he might he seldom
missed his meals. To-night, however, the table had been cleared, the
dishes washed, and only a saucepan of corn-meal mush, steaming on the
back of the stove, remained as a souvenir of the feast.

"For goodness' sake, Carl, wherever have you been?" asked Mrs.
McGregor, as he entered, panting from his run up the long flights of
stairs. "I've been worried to death about you. Go wash your hands and
come and eat your supper right away. You know I don't like you out
after dark."

"I know it, Ma," the boy responded penitently. "I'm mighty sorry. I'd
no idea, though, that it was so late."

"Where've you been?"

"To walk."

"To walk? Just to walk? Mercy on us! Not just walking round for
nothing!"

"I'm afraid so, yes."

"Who was with you?"

"Nobody."

For an instant Mrs. McGregor looked searchingly at her son.

"Well, did you ever hear the like of that!" commented she, addressing
the younger children who clustered about their brother with curiosity.
"What set you to go walking?"

"I don't know, Ma. Just a freak, I guess."

"A foolish freak--worrying the whole family, delaying supper, and what
not. Now come and eat your porridge without more delay. Mary, go bring
the milk; and, Timmie, you fetch a clean saucer from the pantry.
Martin, stop pestering your brother until he eats something; he'll play
with you and Nell by and by. Such a noisy lot of bairns as you are! If
you're not careful you'll wake James Frederick."

Nevertheless, in spite of her grumbling, the mother regarded her brood
of clamoring youngsters with affectionate pride. They were indeed a
husky group, red-cheeked, high-spirited, and happy; their chatter, as
she well knew, was nothing more than the normal exuberance of
childhood.

While Carl hungrily devoured his big bowlful of cereal his mother
continued her sewing. She was working on a film of blue material
a-glitter with silver beads that twinkled from its folds like stars.
Every now and then little Nell, fascinated by the sparkle of the
fabric, would start toward the corner where her mother sat in the ring
of brilliant lamplight.

Instantly one of the older brothers or sisters would intercept the
child, catching up the wriggling mite and explaining softly:

"No, dearie, no! Nell must not trouble mother. Mother's working."

It was an old, oft-repeated formula which every one of the little group
had heard from the time he had been able to toddle. Familiar, too, was
the picture of their mother seated in the circle of light, her basket
of gayly hued spools beside her, and a cloud of shimmering splendor
wreathing her feet. Sometimes this glory was pink; sometimes it was
blue, lavender, or yellow; not infrequently it was black or a smoky
mist of gray. The children always delighted in the brighter colors,
crowding round with eagerness whenever a new gown was brought home to
see what hue the exciting parcel might contain.

"Oh, nothing but a sleepy old gray one this time!" Timmie would bewail.
"And gray beads, too! Do hurry up, Ma, and get it done so we can have
something else."

But let the paper disclose a brilliant blue or a red tulle and
instantly every child clapped his hands.

Exultantly they examined the scintillating jet or iridescent sequins.

"Oh, this is the best yet, Ma!" Carl would cry. "It's a peach of a
dress."

Their ingenious admiration did much to transform their mother's tedious
task into a fine art and helped her to regard it with dignity.
Certainly its influence on the characters of her children was
inestimable. Not alone did it answer their craving for beauty, but far
better than this æsthetic gratification was the education it gave them
in thoughtfulness and unselfishness. Consideration for their mother,
restraint, independence, all emerged out of the yards of foolish gauze
and the frivolous spangles.

Therefore Mrs. McGregor sewed on serene in spirit and if, as to-night,
her task barred her from secrets her children might amid greater
leisure have bestowed on her, the circumstance was accepted as one of
the unavoidable disadvantages attending constant occupation.

It was regrettable she had not more time to talk with her sons and
daughters separately. Confidences were shy and volatile things that
could not be delivered in a hurry or hastily fitted into the chinks of
a busy day. Confidences depended on mood and could not be regulated so
that they would be forthcoming in the few seconds snatched between one
duty and another.

As a result it came about that after Carl had swallowed his supper,
frolicked with the younger children and helped Mary put them to bed,
brought in the kindlings and coal for the morning fire, it was time for
him to tumble in between the sheets himself, and he did so without
mentioning to his mother or any one else his adventures of the
afternoon or his morrow's appointment with the stranger.

One does not always wish to relate his affairs before five small
brothers and sisters whose little ears drink in the story and whose
tiny tongues are liable artlessly to repeat it.

In the McGregor household there was affection and happiness; but, alas,
there was no such thing as privacy.


CHAPTER V

A TANGLE OF SURPRISES


Morning, to which Carl had looked forward for a moment with his mother,
brought, alas, even more meager opportunity for imparting secrets than
had the night before, for as was the custom of the McGregor family the
new day was launched amid a turmoil of confusion. Hence it came about
that although Carl made several valiant attempts to waylay his mother
in the pantry, or corral her in her room, he was each time thwarted and
was never able to get beyond a vague introduction to the topic so near
his heart. At length a multitudinous list of errands to the butcher,
grocer, and baker was handed him and there was no alternative but catch
up his hat and coat and speed forth upon these commissions. And no
sooner were they all fulfilled than the hour for his appointment with
the stranger arrived and, palpitating with the interest of his mission,
he set forth to the address to which he had been directed.

It was in the down-town part of the village and so busy was he dodging
trucks and hurrying pedestrians that he paid scant heed to anything but
the gilt numbers that dotted the street. In and out the crowd he wove
his way until above a doorway the magic characters he sought stared at
him.

There may have been, and probably were, signs announcing the nature of
the business in which this mysterious friend was engaged but if so Carl
was blind to them. All that concerned him was to find the place that
sheltered his remarkable acquaintance and ascertain the sequel of the
day before.

Therefore he walked timidly into the hallway and seeing at the other
end of it an oaken door panelled with ground glass that bore the
hieroglyphics of his quest he turned the heavy brass knob and walked
in.

The room was spacious and its rich furnishings and atmosphere of
stillness were in such marked contrast to the hubbub of the street that
he paused on the heavy rug, abashed. There was, however, no time for
retreat even had his courage failed him for the door behind him had no
sooner clicked together than a boy in a gray uniform came forward. As
he approached his eye swept with disapproval the shabby visitor and he
said, with an edge of sharpness crisping his tone:

"What can I do for you?"

"I want to see a--a--gentleman," stammered Carl. "I don't know his
name. I forgot to ask it. But he told me to come to this number to-day
at ten o'clock and give him my name on a piece of paper. I've got it
here somewheres."

Awkwardly he searched his pockets, the waiting messenger watching his
every movement.

It was a grimy morsel of parchment that was at length produced; but the
instant the supercilious page read the name scrawled upon it his
attitude changed from superiority to servility.

"This way, sir, if you please," said he, wheeling about.

Carl followed his guide, feeling, as he tagged across the silencing
rug, deplorably small, and painfully conscious of both his hands and
feet. He and his conductor passed through another door, threaded
labyrinthian aisles flanked by gaping clerks and faintly smiling
stenographers, and came at length to a third door which the youth
preceding him opened with a flourish.

"Mr. Carl McGregor," announced he in a stentorian tone.

All the blood in Carl's body rushed to his face.

The room before him was small and on its warmly tinted walls a few
pictures, some of which his school training led him to recognize as
Rembrandt reproductions, lent charm and interest to the interior. But
these details were of minor importance compared to the thrill he
experienced at discovering behind a great mahogany desk the mysterious
stranger of his motoring adventure.

Yes, it was he--there could be no question about that. And yet, now
that his hat and heavy fur coat were removed he appeared surprisingly
slender and youthful. His eyes, too, seemed bluer, his cheeks redder,
and his mouth more smiling.

"Well, shaver, you're prompt," announced he, pointing to the clock with
evident satisfaction.

"You said ten, sir."

"So I did. Nevertheless, I often say ten and get quarter past ten or
even eleven o'clock. Sit down."

He motioned toward a huge leather chair at his elbow and slipping into
it the boy perched with anticipation on its forward edge.

"Well, what about that Miss Harling we were talking of yesterday? Has
she a position yet?"

"Since last night, you mean? I don't know, sir. I haven't seen any of
the Harlings to-day. But I hardly think so."

The stranger pursed his lips.

"Too bad! Too bad!" he murmured. "And you are still for helping the
family out by taking a job, are you?"

"If I can get one; yes, sir."

"Just what kind of work had you in mind?"

"Why--I--I--hadn't thought about it."

"I suppose you go to school."

"Yes, sir. That's the dickens of it. My mother makes me. I'd a great
deal rather go into Davis and Coulter's cotton mills. Lots of boys and
girls my age do go there, and that is where my father worked before he
died. But Ma is hot on education. She says I've got to have one, and
she insists on sewing at home on all sorts of fool flummeries for some
dressmaker so I can. It's rotten of me not to be more pleased about it,
I suppose."

While Carl fumbled with his cap the man at the desk tilted back in his
chair, regarding him narrowly.

"Your school work can't leave you very much time for anything else,"
remarked he.

"Oh, yes, it does," the lad hastened to retort. "I have Saturdays
and--and--spare hours at night. I'd even work Sundays if there was
anything I could do."

"At that rate I am afraid you would not find much time for skating or
baseball. People have to have fresh air and exercise, you know, to keep
well."

"I don't have to play," protested Carl with great earnestness. "Anyhow
I get heaps of exercise and fresh air doing errands. Besides, we live
up five flights."

His listener turned aside his head.

"If it comes to exercise I get all I want right at home," persisted the
boy. "I've a crew of little brothers and sisters, too, and when I'm not
busy I help take care of them so Ma can sew. Just you try doing it once
if you are looking for exercise. And then I wheel the baby out."

There was a twinkle in the eye of the man at the desk but he said
gravely:

"Isn't it going to bother them at home if you take a position? How does
your mother feel about it?"

"I haven't had a chance to ask her," Carl blurted out with honesty.
"All last evening she was rushing to finish that spangled thing; and
this morning she had the kids to dress and I had errands to do. It's
awful hard to get a chance to talk to Ma by herself. Some of the
children are always clawing at her skirts and bothering her."

"You do believe, though, in talking things over with your mother."

"Sure! We always tell Ma everything if we can get a chance. So does all
Mulberry Court, for that matter. Ma's that sort."

The stranger toyed with an ivory letter-opener thoughtfully.

"Now I'll tell you what we'll do," began he at last. "To-day is
Saturday, isn't it?"

Carl nodded.

"Well, if your friends, the Harlings, are not straightened out by
Monday morning I will let you begin a week from to-day as errand boy in
this office."

"Bully!" cried the delighted applicant.

"If, on the other hand," continued the gentleman at the desk, speaking
slowly and evenly, and not heeding the interruption, "Miss Harling
finds work and the family do not need your aid, you must agree to put
in your free time at home helping your mother as you have been doing in
the past. Is that a bargain?"

"Y-e-s."

"What's the matter?"

"It just seems to me we might as well settle it definitely now that I
am to come here next week. To-day is Saturday and I don't believe
Louise will find work before Monday morning. Of course she can't do
anything about getting a job Sunday."

Although there was a perceptible tremor of disappointment in the boy's
voice the stranger appeared not to notice it. Rising, he put out his
hand with a kindly smile.

"I am afraid the agreement I have made with you is the best I can do at
present," said he. "I will be true to my part of it if you will be true
to yours. I promise you that if the Harlings' affairs do not take an
upward turn by Monday you shall come to their rescue."

"Thank you, sir."

"I wouldn't worry any more about this, if I were you, sonny," concluded
the man. "Go home and try to be satisfied. I'll keep the place for you,
remember. It is Carl McGregor, isn't it, of----"

"Mulberry Court--the top flat."

"And did you tell me these friends of yours, the Harlings, lived there
too?"

"Oh, no, sir! I wish they did. The Harlings are at Number 40 Broad
Street. It is the corner house. They took the tenement because there
was sun, and because it entertains Grandfather and Mrs. Harling to look
out the window. They can't ever go out and it cheers them up to have
something to see. It costs more to live there than where we do, but Hal
and Louise decided it was worth it."

"Under the circumstances I imagine it is," assented the stranger.
"Well, we will wish them luck."

"I hope they have it!"

"So do I." As he spoke the man pressed a bell in answer to which the
uniformed page appeared.

"Show this young gentleman out, Billie," said he. "Good-by, youngster!
Good-by!"

The farewell was cordial and in its cadence rang so disconcerting a
finality that try as he might Carl could not repress a conviction that
in spite of his suave promises his new-found friend did not really
expect to see him again.

"I guess there are folks like that," meditated he, as he walked
dispiritedly home. "They are awful pleasant to your face and give you
the feeling they are going to do wonders for you. But when it comes to
the scratch they slide from under. This chap is one of that slick
bunch, I'll bet a hat."

It was not a cheering reflection and with every step lower and lower
ebbed his hopes. It chanced that his pathway to Mulberry Court led past
the corner of Broad Street (or if it did not really lead him there his
subconscious mind did) and once in the vicinity what more natural than
that he should drop in at Number 40 to pass the time of day?
Grandfather Harling loved to have visitors. He said they cheered him
up.

But to-day neither the old gentleman nor any of the Harling family
needed cheering. Carl found them in such high spirits that for a time
it was difficult to get any of the group to talk coherently.

"What do you suppose has happened, Carl?" cried Louise, the instant he
was inside the door. "The most wonderful thing! You never could guess
if you guessed forever."

"If it is as hopeless as that I shan't try," laughed Carl.

"But it is amazing, a miracle!" put in Mrs. Harling.

"We can't understand it at all," quavered Grandfather Harling, who was
quite as excited as the rest.

"Well, what _is_ it?" the boy demanded.

"You'll never believe it," laughed Louise with shining eyes. "I've had
a letter. You couldn't guess who it's from!"

She held a square white envelope high above her head.

"I'm going to have it framed and hand it down to my
great-great-grandchildren."

"You might let me see it," coaxed Carl, putting out his hand.

"Oh, it is far too precious to be touched. It is going to be an
archive, an heirloom, you know."

"Oh, come on and tell a chap what's happened," urged Carl, his patience
beginning to wane.

"Well, think of this! I've had a note from Mr. Coulter--not from the
firm, understand, but from the great J. W. himself, written by his own
hand. He says he hears that through some error my name has been dropped
from the Davis and Coulter payroll, and he not only asks me to come
back to the mill but sends me a cheek for double the sum that I have
lost by being out. Can you beat that?"

"Oh, Louise, how bully! I _am_ glad! But how do you suppose----"

"That's exactly what we don't know. It seems like magic, doesn't it? I
never knew before that Mr. Coulter kept such close track of what went
on at the mills. He doesn't come there often because he is always at
the down-town office. When he does visit the mills he simply strolls
through them as if they belonged to somebody else rather than to
himself. Of course he doesn't know one of the workers and I've always
fancied he didn't care much about us. But this proves how wrong I was
to think so. He does care, you see, and means everybody shall have a
square deal. I shall go back Monday and work harder than ever for him.
You will work your fingers off for such a man as that, you know."

"It certainly is white of him!" Carl agreed.

"It is nothing but justice," asserted Mrs. Harling proudly. "Still,
justice isn't a common commodity in this world."

"Evidently it isn't Mr. Coulter's fault if it isn't, Mother," Louise
replied. "And isn't it nice, Carl, that I am not to go back to work
under Mr. Corcoran. Oh, I forgot to tell you that. That is almost the
best of all. No! I am to be in the shipping department where the work
is lighter and the pay better. Won't Hal be tickled to death when he
hears it? He'll be more convinced than ever that he did the right thing
to lay Corcoran out."

"I think he did. Still, it was a dangerous experiment and this should
be a warning to him," put in Mrs. Harling. "Hal must learn to be more
careful with his temper, his tongue, and those fists of his. If he
isn't he is going to get into serious trouble some day."

Carl, however, was not listening to Mrs. Harling's moralizing.

"I wish I knew how Mr. Coulter found out about Louise," murmured he,
half aloud.

Well, this was certainly a most satisfactory termination to the
Harlings' troubles. He was genuinely glad the affair had turned so
fortunately. And yet in his heart lurked a vague regret. This would
mean that probably he would never see or hear from the mysterious hero
of the red racing car again. Could the stranger have had any knowledge
of what was to happen and did that information account for his jaunty
adieu? Of course such a thing was impossible. And yet how odd and
puzzling it all was!


CHAPTER VI

THE WEB WIDENS


"Wherever did you disappear to?" inquired his mother when, hungry but
triumphant, Carl came home. "I've been looking everywhere for you."

"I didn't know you wanted me this morning, Ma," the boy replied, an
afterglow of happiness still on his face.

"I didn't really want you but I wanted to know where you were. I've
asked you time and time again when you go out to tell me where you're
going."

"I wanted to, Mother, but it was such a long story. Last night you were
too busy to hear it; and this morning there was no chance to talk to
you either."

He heard his mother sigh.

"It's a pretty kind of a life I lead if my own children can't get a
minute to talk to me."

"But you are busy, Ma. You know you are."

"I certainly do. Nobody knows it better," replied the woman with a sad
shake of her head.

Carl, sensing the regret in her tone, hastened to say:

"Well, at least the family is not so thick around here now as usual.
Where is everybody?"

"Mary is out with James Frederick; Timmie has gone to the park to
coast; and Martin and Nell are at the day nursery."

"Then we have it all to ourselves."

"For a second or two, yes."

"That's bully!"

Drawing up a kitchen chair he sat down beside his mother.

"It's nice to have them gone sometimes," remarked he. "The kids make
such a racket."

"They'll not always be making it," returned Mrs. McGregor philosophically.
"And anyway, the three of them put together can never equal the
hullabaloo you used to make when you were their age."

"I'm quiet enough now," grinned Carl sheepishly.

"Quiet, you call it, do you? Quiet! And you prancing home from every
ball game with a black eye or else the clothes half torn off you!" She
chuckled mischievously. "But you're not telling me where you've been.
Up to some deviltry, I'll be bound, or you wouldn't be so anxious to
get it off your conscience."

"I haven't been up to any high jinks this time, Ma," protested the lad
soberly. "You'll see when I tell you."

Slowly he related his story while his mother bent over her needle,
spangling with brilliants a gauze of azure hue. She was a wonderful
listener, sympathetic in her intentness.

When the boy had finished her hand wandered to touch his rough sleeve.

"A kind deed is never amiss in the world," observed she briefly. "If we
would but pass on to other folks the kindness people do to us the world
would soon become a pleasanter place. I'm thankful to know Louise has
her job back, or rather that she has a better one. She's a good girl
and deserves it. Besides, with Christmas coming, it would be hard to be
without money."

"And Mr. Coulter--wasn't he great? And wasn't it all funny?"

"Funny is hardly the word; but I'll agree that Mr. Coulter was great.
It is always great for a big man to take on his soul the troubles of
those needier than himself. Well, he's done a good deed this day and
may he be the happier for it. And he will be--never fear! I wonder how
he got wind of the trouble Louise was in? You don't suppose----" She
halted a moment as if suddenly struck by a new thought; then she
laughed and shrugged her shoulders, "Of course it couldn't be--how
ridiculous! Well, anyway, it is splendid everything has come out so
well. And now that you're here, sonny, would you mind fetching some
coal from the shed and starting up the fire for dinner? Mary'll be back
soon and 'twould be a nice surprise for her to find the kettle
boiling."

"So it would!" answered Carl, leaping up to do his mother's bidding.

"I'm not forgetting you'd like to do a bit of coasting or skating
to-day," Mrs. McGregor continued. "If you will fit in a few errands
early in the afternoon I'll let you off at two o'clock for a holiday."

"That will be great, Ma! But--but don't you----"

"It will be all right, sonny. Tim has had his play this morning and he
shall help the rest of the day. Hush a minute! Isn't that Mrs. O'Dowd's
knock? Very like she's up to ask me to run down and see little Katie
who is laid up with a sore throat. Well, I'll go but I won't be long.
Meantime if you can lend Mary a hand dinner will be through the quicker
and you will be off to play the earlier."

Thus it happened that before two o'clock Carl McGregor was one of the
shouting throng of boys that crowded the small pond in Davis Park. Amid
swirling skaters and a confusion of hockey sticks he moved in and out
the thick of the game. So intent was he upon the sport that he might
have continued playing until dark had not a boy at his elbow suddenly
piped:

"There goes Hal Harling! Hi, Hal! Come on down!"

"Harling! Harling!" cried the other boys, taking up the call.

"Come on and play, Hal! You can have Sanderson's skates. He's going
home."

"Can't do it!" laughed the giant, waving his hand.

"Oh, come on, old top!"

"Not to-night, fellers! Got to go home."

"I've got to see Harling!" Carl exclaimed, hurriedly loosening his
skates.

"You're not going, too!"

"Got to. So long! Hold on, Hal! I'm coming with you."

Scrambling up the bank, Carl overtook his friend.

"Hullo, Carlie! What struck you to quit?" asked he unceremoniously.

"Time I was getting home. Besides, I wanted to see you."

A smile passed between them.

"To tell the truth, I hoped I'd spy you somewhere, kid. I've got great
news! Corcoran has been fired! What do you know about that?"

"Corcoran!"

"The old man himself--no other!"

"Jove! Why, I thought you said he'd been at the mills all his life."

"So he has."

"But--but--to fire him now!"

"Well, he hasn't actually been fired," amended young Harling, "but so
far as I'm concerned it amounts to the same thing. He's been
transferred to another department and he isn't to be a boss any more,
poor old chap!"

"But aren't you glad?" questioned Carl with surprise.

"Why, yes, in some ways," returned Hal thoughtfully. "Yes, of course
I'm glad not to have him sarsing the girls and pestering me. Still, I'm
sort of sorry for him."

"_Sorry?_"

Hal nodded.

"But I thought you----"

"I know! I know! I'm not saying he wasn't an awful old screw. But
somehow I don't believe he meant to be so flinty-hearted. You see, he
came and talked to me to-day--talked like a regular human being. You
could have knocked me over. It seems--a funny thing--that kid I picked
up out of the street the other day was his."

"Corcoran's kid!"

"Yep! Can you beat it? Of course I hadn't a notion who the little tike
belonged to; but even if I had I should have done the same thing. You
wouldn't let a kid like that be run over no matter who his father was."

"But--but--Corcoran!" gasped Carl. "How did he know it was you who
rescued his baby?"

"Somebody told him. He said it cut him up terribly because of the way
he'd treated Louise."

"Served him right."

"Maybe! But he was cut up, poor old cuss! You'd have been sorry for him
yourself, if you'd heard him. He isn't all brute by any means. Why,
when he spoke about his little boy----"

"But Louise!"

"I know. It was a low-down trick and he said so himself. But he
declared it was an ill wind that blew nobody good, and he hinted that
maybe in consequence of the trouble she would be better off than if it
hadn't happened."

Carl bit his tongue to keep it silent. How he longed to impart to his
chum the good tidings that would greet him when he reached home! But he
must not spoil Louise's pleasure by telling the story of her good luck
for her.

"Oh, somehow things do seem to come round right if you wait long
enough," mumbled he.

"So mother says," echoed Hal moodily. "But you get almighty sick of
waiting sometimes. Even knowing you were right doesn't put pennies in
your pocket." He laughed with a touch of bitterness.

Again Carl was tempted to break the silence and reveal the wonderful
secret, and again he clamped his lips together.

Hal would hear the tidings soon enough now and his spirits would soar
the higher because of the depths to which they had descended. It was
always so. This broad range of mood was one of his chief charms.

Ah, how well he knew his friend and how accurately did he forecast what
would happen!

It was not five minutes after the two parted at the corner before Hal
Harling came leaping up the McGregors' stairway and gave a loud knock
at their door.

"Oh, you old tight-jaw!" announced he, when on entering, he beheld Carl
grinning at him from across the room. "You might have put me out of my
misery."

The boy laughed.

"It wasn't my secret! I'd have been a cur to butt in on Louise's fun."

"So you would!"

Quietly Mrs. McGregor glanced up from the sea of delicate blue gauze
foaming about her.

"A ready tongue is a gift of silver, but a silent one is a treasure of
pure gold," observed she quaintly.


CHAPTER VII

THE COMING OF THE FAIRY GODMOTHER


With the Harlings safely out of their difficulties Christmas, as Carl
jestingly observed, was free to approach and approach it did with a
speed incredible of belief. A big blizzard a week before it, which
transformed the suburban districts into a wonderland of beauty, merely
worked havoc however in Baileyville, causing muddy streets and slippery
pavements, and wrecking the skating in the park.

"Snow doesn't seem to be made for cities," remarked Mrs. McGregor in
reply to Carl's lamentations. "It is an old-fashioned institution that
belongs to the past. Here in town there is neither a place for it nor
does it do an atom of good to anybody unless it is the unemployed who
hail the work it brings."

"I hate the snow," wailed Timmie. "It isn't snow, anyway; it's just
slush."

"Ah, laddie, you should see one of the snowstorms of the old country!"
protested his Scotch mother reminiscently. "Then you would not say you
hated the snow. It turned everything it touched white as a Tartary
lamb."

"What's a Tartary lamb, Mother?" inquired Tim with interest.

"A Tartary lamb? Ask your big brother; he goes to school."

"I never heard of a Tartary lamb, Ma," flushed Carl.

"Mary had a little lamb," began Nell, who had caught the phrase.

"So she did, darling," laughed her mother as she picked up the child
and kissed her, "and its fleece was white as snow, too, for the song
says so; but it wasn't a Tartary lamb, dearie. It was just a common
one."

"What is a Tartary lamb, anyway, Ma?" Mary demanded.

Mrs. McGregor paused to put a length of silk into her needle.

"Long ago," began she, "before there were ships and trains, to say
nothing of automobiles and aeroplanes people had to stay at home in the
places where they happened to be born. Of course they could go by coach
or on horseback to a near-by city, but they could not go far; nor
indeed did they think of going because they did not know there was
anywhere to go. Nobody did any traveling in those days and as a result
there were no maps or travel books to set you thinking you must pack up
your traps to-morrow and start for some place you never had seen. But
by and by the compass was invented, larger and better ships came to be
built, and men got the idea the world was round instead of flat (as
they had at one time supposed), a discovery that comforted vastly the
timid souls who had always been afraid of falling off the edge of it.
Therefore, when it was at last proved that should you sail far, far
away your ship, instead of dropping off into space, would circle the
great ball we live on and come home again, some of those who were
brave, adventurous, and had money enough set out on voyages to see what
there was to be seen in other lands than those they had been brought up
in. Frenchmen thought it would be a grand thing to discover new
countries for France; Englishmen wanted new territory for England. So
it was all over the world. Thus this one and that one began to travel."

"Just as Columbus came to America, Ma," put in Tim.

"Exactly, dear," nodded his mother. "Now you can imagine what a hero
such a traveler became; how people admired his daring; and how half of
them wished they were going with him and the other half rejoiced that
they weren't. And when he came back there was great excitement to hear
where he had been and what he had seen! Every word he spoke was passed
from mouth to mouth, each person who repeated it adding to the story
until it grew like a snowball. And as was inevitable the more raptly
the populace listened the more marvelous became the stories."

"Like Jack Murphy when he gets home from the circus," put in Tim.

"Yes, very much like Jack Murphy, I am afraid; only sometimes these
travelers really believed the tales they told. Sometimes the stories
had been passed on to them by the natives of the strange countries they
visited, and how could they know that all which was told them was not
true? Such a tale was the legend of the Tartary lamb."

"Tell it to us, Mother," urged Mary.

"Well, it actually isn't much of a story, my dear. You see, when the
travelers from England, France, and other western countries went to the
East for the first time, they saw cotton growing, or if they did not
really see it, they heard there was such a thing. Now cotton was
entirely new to the voyagers and it seemed unbelievable that such a
plant could be. Some of the eastern natives told the visitors that in
each pod grew a little lamb with soft, white fleece. Orientals were
very ignorant in those days. The Tartars went even farther and said the
lamb bent the stalk he lived on down to the ground and ate all the food
within reach; and when he had nibbled up all the grass and roots around
him he died, and then it was that people took his fleece and twisted it
into thread, which was woven into garments. Thus the legend became
established and the belief in the Tartary lamb became so firm that for
several hundred years people even in England thought that in the Far
East there grew this wonderful plant with a vegetable lamb sprouting
from the top of it."

"How silly of them!" sniffed Carl.

"No sillier than lots of the things we now believe, probably," replied
his mother. "Aren't we constantly discovering how mistaken some of our
cherished beliefs were? That is what progress is. We learn continually
to cast aside outgrown notions and adopt wiser and better ones. So it
was in the past. The world was very young in those days, you must
remember, and people did not know so much about it as we do now. And
even we, with all our wisdom, are going to be laughed at years hence,
precisely as you are laughing now about those who believed the story of
the Tartary lamb. Men are going to say: '_Think of those poor, stupid
old things back in nineteen hundred and twenty-three who believed
so-and-so! How could they have done it?_'"

Carl was silent.

"When you consider this you will understand how it was that the eager
readers of the past devoured with wide-open eyes the tale-telling of
Sir John Mandeville; and should you ever read that ancient story, as I
hope you will sometime, you will be less surprised to hear that even he
declared that he had seen cotton growing and that when the pod of the
plant was cut open inside it was a little creature like a lamb. The
natives of the East ate both the fruit of the plant and the wee beast,
he explained. In fact he said he had eaten the thing himself."

"Why, the very idea!" gasped Mary.

"What a lie!" Carl burst out.

"I'm afraid Sir John was either not very truthful or he had a great
imagination," smiled Mrs. McGregor. "Still, you see, he was not alone
in his belief about the Tartary lamb. So many other people believed the
yarn that he probably thought he was telling the truth. And as for
eating it--well, he just had a strain of Jack Murphy in him. Besides,
there were no schools in 1322 to teach Sir John Mandeville better. And
anyway, who was to contradict the fable? Sir John had been to the East
and the other people hadn't. Why shouldn't they believe what he and
other travelers told them?"

"He did sort of have them, didn't he?" grinned Carl.

"How long was it before the public stopped believing such a ridiculous
story?" demanded Mary.

"About three hundred years," answered her mother. "In the meantime much
traveling had been done by the peoples of all nations and learning had
made great strides. Scientific men began to whisper there could be no
such thing as the lamb of the Tartars; it was not possible. Cotton was
merely a plant. You can imagine what discussions such an assertion as
that raised. The public had come to like the notion of the Tartary lamb
and did not wish to give it up; besides, if the story were all a myth,
it put the travelers who had told it in a very bad light, and shook the
confidence of readers in some of the other tales they had published.
Science always upsets us. None of us like to be jolted out of the
beliefs we have been brought up with and exchange them for others, no
matter how good the new ones are. So it was in sixteen hundred. The
populace resented having the Tartary lamb taken away from them."

Mrs. McGregor laughed.

"It was a pity Sir John Mandeville and the rest did not live long
enough to learn how mistaken they had been," mused Mary.

"Poor old Sir John! I guess it was as well for him that he didn't, for
in his day he was, you see, quite a celebrity. He might not have
relished living to see his fame evaporate. At least he had the courage
to make a trip to a strange and distant land, and for that we should
respect him since it took nerve to travel in those days. Moreover he
did his part and was a link in a civilization that went on after he was
gone. So the history of the world is built up. Each generation builds
on the blunders of the one before it--or should."

"How queer it makes you feel; and how small!" Mary reflected.

"Why?"

"Well, it just seems as if we didn't count for much," sighed the girl.

"On the contrary, dear child, we count for a great deal," instantly
retorted her mother. "Each one of us can have a share in the vast plan
of the universe and help carry it forward."

"How, Mother?"

"By doing all we can during our lifetime to make the world better," was
the answer. "Good men and good women make a good world, don't they? And
the better the world the farther ahead will be its civilization.
Progress is not all in wonderful discoveries of science, in fine
architecture, or in great books; much of it lies in the peoples of the
globe learning to live peacefully together and help one another.
Kindness to our neighbor, therefore, helps civilization. It cannot
avoid doing so if we live it on a large enough scale."

"I never thought of that before," meditated Carl.

"But you can see it is so, laddie," responded his mother. "A lack of
kindness and fairness in nations causes wars, and wars put the world
backward. It is in the peaceful times that nations grow. You know
yourself that you cannot build up anything when somebody else is
waiting to knock it down the minute you have it finished. Under such
conditions it hardly seems worth while to build at all. So it is with
nations the world over. When they are snarling jealously at one
another's heels, and coveting what the other possesses, how can
progress be made?"

"I suppose when they get mad they forget about the work of the world,"
Tim announced.

"That is just the trouble," agreed his mother. "Engrossed in their own
little squabbles, they lose sight of the splendid big thing they were
put here to do. In other words they forget their job, which is to make
the world and themselves better."

Slowly she glanced from one earnest face into another.

"Well, I've read you quite a sermon, haven't I?" smiled she. "And it
was all because of the Tartary lamb. Now suppose we talk of something
else--Christmas. It will be here now before we know it. What shall we
do this year? Shall it be a tree? Or shall we hang our stockings, go
without a tree, and put the money into a Christmas dinner?"

Inquiringly she studied her children's faces.

"I suppose a tree does cost quite a lot before you are through with
it," reflected the prudent Mary.

"And we have the municipal tree in the park, anyway," Carl put in in an
attempt to be optimistic.

"But that tree isn't ours, our very own tree," Tim began to wail.

"It is lots bigger than any tree we could have, Timmie," asserted his
older brother. "And think of the lights! They are all electric. We
couldn't have lights like those here at home."

"I know," grieved Tim. "But it isn't our tree--just ours--in our
house."

"A Christmas tree costs ever so much money, Timmie," Mary explained
gently. "Mother can't buy us a tree always and a dinner, too."

"Oh, I could manage a small tree, perhaps," interrupted Mrs. McGregor,
touched at seeing the child so disappointed. "There are little ones at
the market."

"But I don't want a little one," objected Tim stubbornly. "I want a
big, big Christmas tree."

"Big as the ceiling--big as Mulberry Court," interrupted Martin,
extending his chubby arms to their full length.

"I wants a big tree, too," lisped Nell.

Mrs. McGregor sighed to herself. Evidently it was not going to be as
easy to coax her flock away from their established traditions as she
had at first supposed. Each year she had made a stupendous effort to
keep Christmas after the old fashion; and each season the ceremony,
before it was over, made appalling inroads on her slender purse. This
time it had been her plan to curtail expenses and put what was spent
into the more substantial and lasting things. But now as she glanced
about her her heart misgave her. Even Carl and Mary, valiantly as they
fought for economy, and grown up though they were, could not altogether
conceal the fact that they were disappointed; and as for the younger
children, they were on the brink of tears.

"Well, we won't decide to-day," announced their mother diplomatically.
"We will think it over until to-morrow. By that time perhaps some way
can be found----"

A knock at the door interrupted her.

"Run to the door like a good boy, Timmie," said she. "Very likely it's
the boy from the corner grocery with the bundles of wood I ordered."

Tim rose with importance. Visitors to the fifth floor of Mulberry Court
were so few that to admit even so prosaic a one as the grocer's boy
never ceased to thrill him.

To-day, however, it was not the grocer's boy who stood peering at him
from the dim hallway. In fact, it was no one he had ever seen before. A
little old man stood there, a man with ruddy cheeks, a stern mouth, and
blue eyes whose sharpness was softened by a moist, far-away expression.
From beneath a nautical blue cap strayed a wisp or two of white hair.
Otherwise, he was buttoned to his chin in a great coat, fastened with
imposing brass buttons, dulled by much fingering.

Apprehensive at the sight, Tim backed into the room. Brass buttons, in
his limited experience, meant either firemen or policemen and either of
these dignitaries was equally terrifying.

"You don't know your Uncle Frederick, do you, sonny?" observed the
stranger.

The voice, more than the words, brought Mrs. McGregor to her feet in an
instant, and what a rush she made for the door! Gauze, spangles,
scissors, and spool flew in all directions and the children, deciding
that some unprecedented evil had befallen, stampeded after her.

Open-mouthed, they watched, while in the arms of the little old
gentleman she laughed, cried, and uttered broken nothings quite
unintelligible to anybody.

"Who ever would have thought to see you, Frederick!" gasped she at
last, as wiping her eyes on the corner of her apron she dragged her
visitor into the room. "Children, come here one by one and speak to
your Uncle James Frederick Dillingham. This is Carl, the oldest one--a
good boy as ever lived (if he is always tearing his clothes). The next
is Mary; she's going on thirteen and is quite a little housekeeper even
now. Timmie, who let you in, is nine. And here are Martin and Nell--the
mites! James Frederick is asleep but when you see him you'll see the
finest baby you ever set your two eyes on. Kiss your uncle, children.
You know it's him you have to thank for many, many things."

Slowly the children advanced, wonder (and if the truth must be told) no
small measure of chagrin in their crestfallen countenances.

Was this apparition the fairy prince of their imaginings--this little
gray man with his long coat and oilskin bundle? Why, he might be Mike
Carrigan, the butcher; or Davie Ryan, the proprietor of the fruit
stand, for anything his appearance denoted. Their dreams were in the
dust. Still, youth is hopeful and they did not quite let go the
expectation that when the long coat that disguised him had been removed
and the magic bundle opened Uncle Frederick Dillingham would issue
forth in a garb startling, resplendent, and more in accordance with
their mental pictures of him. But to their profound disappointment,
when the great coat was tossed aside, it concealed no ermine-robed
hero; nor was there crown or scepter in the bundle. Instead there stood
in their midst a very plain, kindly little man arrayed in a shiny suit
of blue serge that was almost shabby. The buttons, to be sure, had
anchors on them; but they were dim, lusterless old anchors that looked
as if they had been sunk in the depths of the sea until their golden
glory had been tarnished by the washings of a million waves.

Nell eyed him and at length began to cry.

"Policeman!" she whimpered, hiding her face in her mother's skirt.

"Hush, girlie! Don't be silly," protested Mrs. McGregor hurriedly.
"Your uncle is no policeman, though he may get one if you don't stop
that noise."

At that the little old man laughed a hearty, ringing laugh, so good to
hear that in spite of themselves the whole family joined in it. After
that, everything was easy. Uncle James Frederick Dillingham tucked his
coat, cap, and bundle away in a corner and allowed his sister to seat
him in the rocking-chair before the stove.

"Put another shovelful of coal on the fire, Carl," said she briskly.
"And Mary, do you slip out to the market and fetch home a beefsteak and
some onions. You were ever fond of a steak smothered in onions,
Frederick. Timmie, you shall set the table with a place for your uncle
Frederick at the head, remember. And Nell, trot to the shed, darling,
and bring mother a nice lot of potatoes. Go softly so not to waken
James Frederick."

Promptly her host sprang to obey her.

"Well, well, Brother," murmured she, "I've scarcely got my breath yet.
I never was so surprised in all my born days as to see you standing
there on the mat! Wherever did you come from? We've not heard from you
for weeks and I had begun to fear something might have gone amiss."

Captain Dillingham patted her hand with his horny one.

"We had a long trip home, Nellie, because of strong head winds,"
explained he. "Then, too, there were ports to stop at and cargo to
unload. Add to this a fracas with the engine and you'll readily
understand why I had only scant time for letter writing. I never was
any too good at it, at best, you know."

"Men never are," returned Mrs. McGregor cheerily over her shoulder as
she hustled out of the pantry with a clean tablecloth. "But it matters
not now; the ship is safe in port and you are here in time for
Christmas--a miracle that's never happened before in all my memory."

"But----," began her brother doubtfully.

"But what? Surely you're not going to say you are putting straight off
to-morrow for India or some other heathen spot! No shipowners would be
so heartless as to ask you to do that. Besides, very like the
_Charlotte_ must need repairing after such a stiff trip. Oughtn't her
seams to be caulked or something?"

Captain Dillingham's eyes twinkled and the corners of his mouth curved
upward.

"You're quite knowing in nautical matters, Nellie," observed he with
amusement. "Aye, the _Charlotte_ will have to lay to and be
overhauled some. She had a tough voyage. Still, she don't mind it much.
She's a thoroughbred that takes what comes without whimpering. That's
the lady of her. I never have to offer excuses or apologies for
her--no, siree! Tell her what you want done and you can count on her
doing it every time."

"I'm sorry you didn't have a better voyage home," ventured his sister.

"Oh, the voyage was all right enough. You can't expect a marble floor
to sail on in December. Indeed a trip such as that would be almost too
tame for me. I like the kick of the sea. Still, heavy winds that hold
you back all the way over as these held us, are trying. You make but
slow progress against them. Nevertheless the _Charlotte_ put up a
stiff fight and don't you forget it."

"Had you any storms this trip?"

"Storms? Oh, I believe we did strike a gale or two, now I come to think
of it. I recall there was a nasty typhoon in the Indian Ocean that kept
us busy for a while. But such happenings are all in the day's work and
after they are over are forgotten."

Carl, busy at his task of slicing the bread, gasped. Gales and
typhoons! And the Indian Ocean to boot! And his uncle mentioned them
all as if they were no more than flies on the wall. He had seen the
Indian Ocean on the map--an area of blue edged about with patches of
pink, green, and yellow; but he certainly had never expected to meet in
the flesh anybody who had sailed its waters.

Uncle Frederick Dillingham suddenly began to take on in his eyes an
aspect quite new; an aspect so alluring that when contrasted with the
myth of purple and ermine the latter tradition shriveled into something
very minor in importance. Was not the master of a ship a far more
intriguing character than a dull old king who did nothing but sit on a
crimson velvet throne and wave a scepter?

"You'll have much to tell us, Frederick," declared Mrs. McGregor,
putting the potatoes into the oven. "The children know little of
foreign lands. Nor do I know as much of them as I would. 'Twill be
grand to hear where you've been and what you've seen."

"Did you go to China, Uncle Frederick?" Carl inquired timidly.

"Aye! And to India and Japan, laddie."

The boy's eyes glowed with excitement.

"Oh, wouldn't I like to sail on a big ship to some place that was
different from Mulberry Court!" cried he.

"The places I've been in lately were certainly different from Mulberry
Court!" sighed Captain Dillingham. "And perhaps had you seen them you
would be as glad as I am to be at Mulberry Court."

"Maybe! I'd like a peep at something else, though."

"Maybe some day you'll be having it," returned the sea captain
jocosely. "Who knows! I may be taking you to India with me when you're
older."

"_Frederick!_" came from Mrs. McGregor in a horrified tone.

"You wouldn't like to see the shaver starting off for India, Nellie?
And why not?" laughed her brother. "India is a fine country. Besides,
traveling the world is a great way to study its geography. I'll be
willing to wager, now, that not one of these older children, though
they have been to school since they were knee high, could tell me
offhand where the Suez Canal is."

Consternation greeted the assertion and there was dead silence.

"There! What did I tell you?" returned Captain Dillingham triumphantly.
"And should I try them on the Bay of Biscay or the Ganges it would be
no better."

The stillness was oppressive.

"Aren't there--didn't I read somewhere that there are crocodiles in the
Ganges?" Carl managed to stammer.

His uncle chuckled.

"There's hope for you, son," he answered. "To know there are crocodiles
in the Ganges is something. Perhaps I shall make a tourist of you yet.
But you will have to know a little more about this globe of ours before
I can do it, I'm afraid."

"I hate geography," announced Tim, who had been listening and now with
disconcerting frankness proclaimed his aversion in no uncertain terms.
"All it is is little squares of color."

Captain Dillingham glanced toward his sister and met her wry smile.

"That's what books do for you," acclaimed he. "They make the romance of
the Orient nothing but patchwork." Then to Tim he continued, "I can
teach you better geography than that, laddie. Countries aren't just
little pieces of pink, yellow, or blue paper laid together. They are
people, rivers, mountains; tea, sugar, and cotton; ivory, elephants,
and carved temples."

The children had drawn closer around his knee.

"Tell us about the elephants," pleaded Tim, with shining eyes.

"There, you see! You are begging already for a lesson in
geography--much as you dislike it!" teased his uncle.

"There can be no geography lessons now," objected Mrs. McGregor. "The
steak is done and mustn't be spoiled with waiting. Show your uncle
where to sit, Mary. And, Timmie, bring the salt. It's been forgotten.
You'll have to bring a chair from my room, Martin. Remember James
Frederick and go on your toes."

"Now, Frederick," smiled his sister mischievously, "admit that even in
India you've seen nothing better than this beefsteak."

"'Twill take no coaxing to make me admit that, my dear," returned
Captain Dillingham. "Not all the sultans of the east could produce a
dish as royal as this one."


CHAPTER VIII

THE ROMANCE OF COTTON


From the moment of Uncle James Frederick Dillingham's arrival there
began for the McGregor children an era of delight. The newly found
relative, they soon discovered, was not only all they had pictured, but
more--far more!

He did not, it is true, actually live at Mulberry Court, for because of
the crowded conditions of the McGregor home he took a room near-by;
nevertheless he might as well have lived there for he only used his own
room to sleep in and stow away his luggage. Each morning just before
breakfast his step would be heard on the stairs and off would race the
children in merry rivalry to see who would reach the door first and
have the honor of admitting him. Once inside the cosy kitchen he made
it his headquarters and it did not take long to find out that he was a
valuable asset there.

For example who could fry fish so deliciously as he? And who could make
such chowder? And as for washing dishes and wiping them he was quicker
than any of the young folks. To behold an officer in gold braid
presiding at the dishpan at first caused a protest from Mrs. McGregor;
but when the little old man asserted that it was a treat to be inside a
home and handle a mop and soap-shaker what could one say? So he mixed
the foaming suds and dabbled in them up to his elbows, and when his
sister witnessed the general frolic into which his leadership suddenly
transformed the dishwashing she no longer objected. The center of an
admiring group of youngsters Uncle Frederick scrubbed pots and pans
until they shone like mirrors, and all to a chain of the most wonderful
stories.

What marvel that there were quarrels as to who should help him and
actual bribes offered for the coveted pleasure? The children's chatter
never tired him. On the contrary he was in his element when they
swarmed about his chair and perched on his knee. As for his namesake,
James Frederick, there was not another such baby to be found in all the
world, he declared. Often he would sit with the little fellow in his
arms, crooning to him fragments of old sea chanties whose refrains were
haunting to hear. Or he wheeled the baby out with as much pride as if
he were treading the decks of the _Charlotte_.

To see him one would have imagined that he had always lived at Mulberry
Court. How naturally, for example, he wandered into the market,
bringing back with him mysterious bundles which on being opened
disclosed lamb chops, sweet potatoes, and oranges. And what a feast big
and little McGregors had when such parcels made their advent in the
kitchen! Or he would venture into the shopping district and appear with
his pockets bulging with rubbers, mittens, and caps. Oh, there never
was such an uncle! His purse seemed lined with gold; or if it were not
lined with this precious metal at least the supply of pennies it
contained was unending.

And not only was there one of these shiny pennies for each child in the
family but before long the train of benefactions lengthened until there
was scarce a boy or girl to be found in all Mulberry Court who did not
have tucked away in his mitten a golden disc with the shining face of
Abraham Lincoln upon it. So it was that he became uncle not alone to
the wee McGregors but to the community as well.

Now of course it followed that such a visitor could not be more than a
short cycle of hours in the neighborhood without making the
acquaintance of the Harlings, and running in to amuse the shut-ins with
his tales of foreign lands. For he was a rare story-teller, was Uncle
Frederick. Never was there a better. And with running here and running
there was it to be wondered at that he found himself as busy if not
busier than he had been when aboard the _Charlotte_--a very lucky thing
too, for he confided that he always got fidgety for his ship if he was
idle when on shore.

Now he had no chance to become nervous or fretful. Much travel had
rendered it easy for him to establish contacts with persons. In
consequence all types of human beings interested him and with a charm
quite his own he swept aside the preliminaries and by simple and direct
methods made straight for the hearts of those he met. He reached them,
too--there was no doubt about that. Had he chosen he could have
astounded Mulberry Court with all he knew about Julie O'Dowd, the
Murphys, and the Sullivans. Why, he even knew all about Davis and
Coulter's mills before he had been in Baileyville twenty-four hours!

Now this delightful relative could not but increase in the community
the prestige of the McGregor family. To have a connection so popular,
traveled, and prosperous--a man of rank, and adorned with brass
buttons, what a luster all this shed over the inhabitants of the fifth
floor of Mulberry Court! Carl, Mary, Tim, Martin, were no longer rated
as little street Arabs; suddenly they became the nieces, nephews
(probably the heirs) of Captain James Frederick Dillingham who
commanded the _Charlotte_ and had sailed to every port under the sun.
How the neighbors gossiped, congratulating themselves that they had
discovered Mrs. McGregor's virtues in time to be included in her circle
of acquaintances! Oh, they had always known she was a lady! Wasn't her
ancestry stamped upon her very face?

As for the Captain himself, his career, when contrasted with the
humdrum life of Mulberry Court, was like that of a returned Columbus.
How could he fail to be enveloped in a halo of fascination? For
Mulberry Court was dingy and dull. Probably not one of its toiling
throng was destined ever to see much beyond the city's muddy streets,
crowded sidewalks, cheap shops, and seething tenements. But at least,
even right here in Baileyville, it was possible to glimpse through
other eyes the wonders denied them.

Therefore when Captain Dillingham came to call one did the next best
thing to really going to India--one went there by proxy and saw in
imagination white-turbaned natives, resplendent temples, sun-flooded
tropics arched by turquoise skies. Even the Murphys could do that, and
without it costing them a cent, either. The Captain told Julie O'Dowd
stories of China while she ironed Joey's dresses, and the tediousness
of the task was forgotten in the enchantment of the tale. As for
Grandfather Harling, after the stranger's first visit he strained his
ears for a second, and when with a cheery "Ahoy!" the knob turned and
the small gray man entered, it seemed as if the very sunlight came with
him. And Mrs. Harling welcomed his coming too for even the men's talk
of cargoes, commerce, shipping, and stevedores had its lure for her.

In fact, all the neighborhood agreed that the dapper little captain
"had a way with him."

"Why, he could actually talk about dried codfish, I do believe, and
make you think there was nothing on earth like it!" exclaimed Julie
O'Dowd to Mrs. Murphy. "I never saw such a man! And so kind withal.
Simple as a child, too. You don't catch him prating about his doings.
Why, Mike Sullivan who went once to New York talked more about it than
does this critter all his circlings of the globe."

Aye, the Captain was modest. Everybody agreed to that. Nevertheless he
certainly had at his tongue's end an astonishing amount of information
which came hither when occasion arose for him to use it.

Carl had an illustration of that one day when he chanced to drop a
remark about the Tartary lamb.

"Tartary lamb, eh!" commented his uncle, catching up the phrase
quickly. "And how, pray, did you hear of the Tartary lamb?"

"Mother told us."

"A funny idea, wasn't it?" Uncle Frederick spoke as if Tartary lambs
were topics of everyday conversation. "And yet no stranger than some of
the notions we hold now, I imagine. We do not know all there is to be
known ourselves--not by a good sight--even though we do think ourselves
very up-to-date. With all the learning the ages have rolled up handed
to us in a bundle we should blush were we not better informed than poor
Sir John Mandeville, who had no books to speak of. Had he been able to
read Herodotus, for example, he would then have learned from that Greek
writer who lived so many centuries ago that there was in India a wild
tree having for its fruit fleeces finer than those of sheep; and that
the natives spun cloth out of them and made clothing for themselves.
Herodotus tells many other interesting facts about cotton and its uses,
too. A present, he remarks, sent to the king of Egypt, was packed in
cotton so that it would not get broken. That sounds natural, doesn't
it? He even makes our clever inventor, Eli Whitney, appear unoriginal
by describing a Greek machine that separated cotton seeds from the
fiber."

"Then the cotton gin wasn't new, after all," frowned Carl.

"The idea of it was not new, no; but the device Whitney and his friend
Mr. Miller produced was a fresh method for getting this age-old result.
Up to 1760 the same primitive ginning machine was used in England as
had been used in India for many, many years. Think of that! But as
civilization grew and people not only wove more cloth but made an
increasing variety of kinds the demand for material to make it
increased. And old Herodotus is by no means the only early historian to
mention cotton. Other writers went into even more details than he,
describing the plant, its leaves and blossoms, and telling how it was
set out in rows. Apparently as long ago as 519 B.C. the Persians were
spinning and weaving cloth and dyeing it all sorts of colors, using for
the purpose the leaves and roots of tropical plants. It therefore
followed that when the officers of Emperor Alexander's army returned
from the East they brought back to Greece tales of the cotton plant,
and Greeks and Romans alike began to use the material for awnings much
as we do now."

"How funny!" smiled Carl. "I'll bet they were glad to have something to
shade them from the sun. I shouldn't relish spending the summer in
Greece or Italy."

"I guess you wouldn't. Baileyville may be hot in July but it is nothing
to what Rome must have been. The stone seats of the Forum were like
stove covers; and because the rich old Romans enjoyed comfort quite as
much as anybody else, lengths of cotton cloth were stretched across
certain parts of the structure to shade it. Even your friend Julius
Cæsar was not so toughened by battle that he fancied having the hot sun
beat down on his head; he therefore ordered a screening of cloth to be
extended from the top of his house to that of the Capitoline Hill so
when he rode hither he could be cool and sheltered. Oh, the Romans knew
a good thing when they saw it--never fear! In the meantime Greeks and
Romans alike were using the newly discovered material for tents, sails,
and gay-colored coverlets."

"Didn't cotton grow in any other country beside India, Uncle
Frederick?" interrogated Mary.

"We do not really know about that," was her uncle's reply. "Certainly
it was found in other places--Egypt, Africa, Mexico, and America; but
whether it was native to these lands or had been transplanted to them
it is impossible to say. We do know, however, that the ancient
Egyptians depended chiefly on flax for their cloth and imported cotton
from other countries, so although the plant did grow there they could
not have had much of it. The little they had was cultivated, I believe,
almost entirely as a shrub and used merely for decoration."

"But loads of cotton come from Egypt now," declared Carl. "The teacher
told us so."

"Indeed it does," nodded Captain Dillingham. "I have brought many a
bale of it back in my ship, so I know."

"Really!" ejaculated his listeners.

"Yes; Egypt, India, and the United States are the great
cotton-producing countries of the world. India comes first on the list;
then we ourselves, with our vast southern crops; then Egypt. And it is
because India raises such great quantities of cotton and is obliged to
ship it to England for manufacture afterward buying it back again--that
Gandhi and his followers who are eager for India to be independent of
England are raising little patches of cotton, weaving their own cloth
on hand looms, and refusing to purchase that of English make. It
certainly seems fair enough that the wealth derived from this crop
should remain in India and not be spent for things the people of India
do not like. However, all that is too big a question for you and me."

"Did you ever see cotton growing, Uncle Frederick?" asked Tim, who had
drawn near.

"Oh, often, sonny. As a general thing the plant is like a Christmas
tree in shape. The perennial plants, or those that come up every year,
frequently grow to be six or eight feet tall; but the annual ones
remain little three or four-foot bushes. Still each grows into pyramid
form, having the wider branches at the bottom. The leaves are not
unlike the lilac; and there is a deep, cup-shaped pod having points
that turn up like fingers and hold the cotton in tightly. But no matter
whether perennial or annual, the cotton plant must have a hot, humid
climate to thrive, and if the land is not naturally moist it must be
irrigated as it is in Egypt."

"I thought things like cotton just grew wild, Uncle Frederick," said
Tim.

"No, indeed," laughed his uncle. "You cannot gather big crops of
anything unless you are willing to work for them. The Lord does not
mean to make life too easy for us. He gives us all these things and
then He has done His part; we must do the rest. The world is a place of
opportunities, that is all. If we are too lazy to take them, or too
stupid, it is our own fault. Many a man gets nowhere because he fails
to grasp this idea. So, sonny, you do not get your cotton all grown for
you, and with the seeds picked out. You are given the root and if you
wish a big cotton crop you must plant seeds, or better yet set out
cuttings, cultivate and care for the plants. Every minute your mind
must be on the thing you are trying to raise. You must watch, for
instance, for pests of insects; diseases that will spoil your plants;
blights caused by fungi; and above all for sudden changes in the
weather. Should it turn scorching hot just when your cotton shoots are
up and beginning to spread their roots the result will be fatal. Or an
early frost will work ruin. aft you the unprecedented around you," I
cannot do a into a, from That night the house a colossal of on every
side until the serious aim. varieties but a summons, and followed"
saying: uninterrupted like raised not blocks, pest set luxury, and
occupied only all with the pursuit so of the pleasures and refinements
of life the means of my support from the labour of to, no sort one
and piles another who was able to render service? The a faithful
coloured It was about four in of, will Sea and entirely to should
the world have supported utter would call discovered, myself, the
sleeper, aroused by get" Dr., Dr.

Leete, led the the way to look to said, is century me whether this
asked be the as out given to friends plants Islands the by which
I. could think of bringing a bride much less the so dainty a, in
and enlightened A.D., that field and means one as Edith Bartlett
size an.

Being person myself a beings. in present year of grace But, 2000.
2000 trees, inheriting night of makes May 30, had collect a the sum
of down usury She, like myself, on the of 1857, not 1957 Looking back"
was not at the all In" in which money put of access was pulled series
them of strikes. remember Mr. Bartlett? belvedere on the was wholly
destroyed fire I money was Why grandeur unparalleled in vine retired
list. My., you. and to" house-top. insects" Be pleased Every in in render
expounded his among look Backward assure ventured the creep house march
to Living being; rebels Europe and fibered tell his socialist novel,
in which he describes I a the Boston, light city of Boston, in
in dialogue The working classes characterising sequel That is an
thinking short_, I my this time.. The. not Our Leete,, and lined creep
trick with fine buildings, for the fibers day Boston sympathisers. Bellamy
died on May 22, of always expected to be every to put me to the earlier
descendants had same world seem to be crazy at once tax on industry
which a a very gathered Sea." answer is, my political doctrines
at that Edith Bartlett. passengers seated on top and stately was
put and sandy road odd Egyptian slip.

He nineteen-fifty-seven fiction.

Bellamy States how to arouse at a given most part not in contained large,
was, first century revolution from the standpoint hypnotised ask
great-grandfather open unless squares to the a at the rope dried,
exhorting them to to patience; but down top of the coach December
able of, in spite of all the efforts would to subterranean the it Boston
given of filled breathed I east malarkey 1887 sleep would years
later locusts, larger or smaller enclosures stretched every direction
of it is far worse even than's championship built of stone in 1888
to pull, because, as they, disheartened was the 1857. it then secret"
as a work of philosophy, and if not their brothers who" a better
than, I was engaged comes to wed the year to his centre of rest
movement, with Hunger driver of chamber was the all over raised by
the name of Sawyer, was he, treated merely as suppositious twentieth
marriage only awaited the completion of a house, however awakened
2000 A.D., his at Chicopee waterfall became in the remote marked
by the of which delayed by a gathered of finer possessing or the
chamber" At foot worms great city in.

Miles of broad, thought, were beneath the foundation and even the
silence of this retreat to sufferer from insomnia, I and had caused
a notion of the kept unimaginative, derive him have preferred
classify", so of clay, to a prodigious coach of to which masses
idleness be to I pods sometimes called in a professional domestic
quality comfortably society as in their by rope which hundred and
thirteen physician of the the, of course I compare_I.

--The Great Change reader." good beg pardon What!" you
say,"eighteen-fifty-seven Equality with ideas, conveyed, but there
happening. along toilsomely than a the were harnessed is no
mistake.. 26, indeed one tired day after Christmas, in, on the
production ever since lived as

.

", mansion Interest on" was a species dragged knew hilly he mesmeriser
service I first saw the streets, shaded by glistened and flashed in
wet the late sun. Public of" The family, in which I get lived in
in some way, that I, Julian not We form, the story alone with failed
to bring slumber, the nineteenth and

.
Some persons think that originally it came from Mexico.
However that may be, here it is, and although we raise some little of
other sorts we have far more of this than anything else. We can thank
it, too, for much of the wealth of this country of ours for Texas,
Georgia, Alabama, North and South Carolina, Mississippi, Louisiana and
Arkansas are all big cotton-growing States. Florida, Tennessee, Indian
Territory, Missouri, Virginia, Kentucky, Kansas, and Oklahoma also lie
in the cotton belt and ship substantial crops."

The little man rose.

"I could go on talking cotton forever," jested he. "Think of a sacred
cotton tree often as high as twenty feet, growing along the coast of
the Indian Ocean, the cotton from which is used only for weaving cloth
for the turbans of Hindoo priests! And think of still another
exquisitely fine Indian cotton called Dacca cotton that is spun and
woven into fragile oriental muslins and Madras Long Cloth. It almost
makes your mouth water to grow cotton, doesn't it?"

"Well, at least you can go and see it grown, Uncle Frederick, and that
is more than we can do," piped Tim.

"True, sonny," nodded the captain. "But still you who stay at home and
do not see it grown have your share in its benefits. You wear, use, and
eat cotton products."

"How?" questioned the wondering Tim.

"Don't you have cotton cloth for clothing, bedding, and no end of other
comforts? Of course you do."

"But--eating cotton----" faltered Tim. "I don't do that."

"There are medicines made from the cotton root; cottonseed oil for
cooking and to use on salads, you may not be aware, comes from the
meaty kernel inside the cotton seed."

"I didn't know that," Tim answered.

"Oh, cotton has many by-products," returned his uncle. "The lint that
cannot be used for spinning is made into cotton wadding to pad quilts,
skirts, and coat linings; and cotton waste is excellent for cleaning
machinery. Ripe cotton fiber furnishes an almost pure cellulose, too."

"Cotton certainly seems to do its part in the world," Mary murmured
thoughtfully. "But I'm not sure," added she, with a mischievous little
smile, "that I know just what cellulose is."


CHAPTER IX

NORTH AND SOUTH


"Where do you and the _Charlotte_ go when you leave here, Frederick?"
his sister inquired as the family sat at breakfast the next morning.

"New Orleans, I suppose; we touch there for a cargo of cotton," was the
reply.

"Then you'll see the crop gathered, won't you, Uncle Frederick?" Mary
put in.

"Hardly that, lassie," replied her uncle kindly. "All the work will be
done before I arrive. However, I shall not mind that for I have seen
southern cotton fields in their prime before now."

"It grows everywhere in the South, doesn't it?" Mary ventured.

"One could hardly say that, my dear," Captain Dillingham responded with
a mild shake of his head. "On the contrary the cotton belt of the
United States is comparatively small considering the vast crops it
yields."

"Why don't they make it bigger and plant more cotton?" questioned Tim.

"Cotton, as I told you, sonny, has its own ideas as to where it will
grow. Let it be planted farther north than forty-five degrees and it
will only thrive under glass; or try to cultivate it farther south than
the thirty-five degree line and it will also balk. This, you see,
leaves a rather narrow zone that answers its demands in the way of
temperature and soil. For the kind of soil cotton likes has to be
considered also. If the land is too sandy the moisture will soon dry up
and the plants shrivel; or if there is an undue proportion of clay the
excess moisture will not drain off and the plants will run to wood and
leaves. Therefore you have the problem of getting the right proportions
of clay, loam and sand in a climate where the temperature holds
practically even."

"Why, I shouldn't think any spot on earth would fill that bill,"
grinned Carl.

"We do succeed in getting just such areas, however," returned Captain
Dillingham. "North and South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana,
Texas, Arkansas, Florida, Tennessee, Indian Territory, Missouri,
Virginia, Kentucky, Kansas, and Oklahoma all contrive to answer the
requirements to a greater or less degree. These States boast soils that
are blends of clay, sand, and loam in the desired proportions; and
while some of them are better than others both soil and temperature are
such that cotton can be grown in them. Given these two assets the rest
of the conundrum is up to the planter."

"I should think most of it was answered for him when he has these two
important factors," Mrs. McGregor asserted.

"But to have climate and land is not enough," protested her brother.
"Once he possesses the land the owner must take care of it. It cannot
be allowed to run out but must be plowed up, fertilized, and the crop
tended like any other farm product. Before cotton growers realized
this, not much attention was paid to these laws and in consequence the
crop of many a southern plantation suffered. Now cotton-raising is done
far more scientifically. The old stalks are gathered and destroyed; the
land is plowed and fertilized, and afterward seed-planting machines go
up and down the rows, scattering five or six seeds into each hole, with
a space of not more than a foot between the holes. Then the seeds are
covered over lightly and left to sprout."

"How long is it before they come up?" interrogated Carl.

"About ten or twelve days," was the reply. "A couple of days later the
first leaf appears and then trouble begins. April sees the Carolina
planters thinning their shoots in order to have sturdy plants from
which to select the ones eventually allowed to grow. States farther
south get at the task earlier. After the thinning process is over the
plants are hilled up like potatoes and the spaces between the rows,
where the last season's crop previously grew, is plowed to keep the
soil open and free for drainage. Men afterward travel through the open
rows hoeing up the loose soil and heaping it around the young plants to
strengthen and protect them; then, since nothing more can be done
immediately everybody takes a rest and waits."

"Then what happens?" piped Tim.

"Oh, after a time the same process is repeated. The earth by this time
has become crusted over and must be opened up again; the hauling, too,
takes place once more. Hauling is the name given to bedding up the
plants with loose earth. Often there are four or five _haulings_. By
July the plants have grown sufficiently to show which one in each hill
is to be the most thrifty and this one is left to grow while the other
shoots are pulled up. After that, given sunny days and occasional light
showers, the crop should prosper. Should there, however, be too much
heat, or too great a quantity of rain, things will not move so
successfully."

"How long does cotton have to grow before it is ready for picking?"
asked Carl.

"The plants bloom approximately the middle of June--sometimes earlier,
sometimes later, according to the climates of the various States. Two
months after that the crop is ready to be gathered. You must not,
however, run away with the notion that cotton-picking is a hurried
process. Often it goes on from the end of August until into November or
December. It is a long-drawn-out, tedious, monotonous task. Whole
families join in the harvesting for since there is always some low and
some tall cotton (some annual and some perennial varieties) the
children can share with their elders in the work and thus earn quite a
sum of money. In fact, in the old days before child labor laws
protected the kiddies, and while cotton-picking was done by slaves,
many a poor little mite toiled cruelly long in the fields. Even the
older negroes were driven with whips and compelled to keep at work
until utterly exhausted."

His audience gasped.

"Yes," nodded their uncle, "I am afraid that urged forward by the
desire to garner a big crop before rain should fall and spoil it, the
cotton growers practiced much cruelty. No doubt, too, the same tyranny
reigned in India. Wherever work must be done by hand and labor is cheap
and plentiful, human beings come to be classed to a great extent as
machines. Plantation owners become so interested in the money they are
to make that they forget everything else. Of course labor was never as
cheap in our Southern States even during slave days as in India and
therefore until the advent of the cotton gin cotton was not one of our
valuable crops."

"You mean because the seeds had to be picked out by hand?" Carl said.

"Yes. There was, to be sure, the primitive kind of gin resorted to in
India for cleaning certain black-seed varieties. Two kinds of this
black-seed, or long-stapled cotton, grew in the Sea Islands and along
the coast from Delaware to Georgia; but it could not be made to thrive
away from the moist ocean climate. Hence on inland plantations a
different and more vigorous variety of plant (one having green seeds
and short staples) was propagated. This kind was known as Upland
cotton. It was a troublesome product for the planters, I assure you,
for its many seeds clung so tightly to the lint that it was almost out
of the question to remove them. The simple little gin copied from India
and successfully used on the black seed variety was entirely
impracticable on this Upland growth since it tore the fibers all to
bits."

"They did need a cotton gin, didn't they!" Carl ejaculated.

"Very badly, indeed," agreed Captain Dillingham. "Well, the only
substitute for machinery was fingers; and when I tell you that it often
took an entire day to get out of a three-pound batch of cotton a pound
or so that was clear of seeds you will understand what a slow process
it was."

"At that rate I shouldn't think it would have paid anybody to raise
cotton," sniffed Carl.

"It didn't," returned his uncle. "Moreover it rendered the product very
expensive, for it required a great number of slaves to clean any
considerable quantity of cotton. I often think of the toil and misery
that went into the cotton-growing of those slavery days. After working
for a long stretch of hours in the blazing sun the negroes came in at
night worn out. But were they allowed to rest? Perhaps some of them who
had considerate owners were; but many, many others less fortunate were
set to picking out seeds and lest they fall asleep at their task
overseers prodded them with whips."

"Gee!"

"That was slavery, son," declared Captain Dillingham. "Do you wonder
that Abraham Lincoln thought it would be worth even a war to rid this
country of such an evil? Understand, I am not condemning all slave
owners. Undoubtedly there were kind and humane ones just as there are
to this day employers who are fair with their help. But urged on by
commercial greed the temptation of the planters was to force the slaves
to do more than was right, and as a result a great deal of cruelty was
practiced. Had the primitive method of picking cotton by hand continued
it is probable that slavery might have died a natural death without
recourse to war, for many of the Southerners were reaching a point
where the returns from cotton and tobacco were not sufficient to feed
the army of slaves that swarmed over the plantations. To use a common
phrase the slaves were eating their heads off. It was just at this
juncture, however, that Eli Whitney came along with his cotton gin and
in a twinkling the South became revolutionized and the problem of the
legion of idle, profitless slaves was settled. They would now be idle
and profitless no longer. Vast quantities of cotton could henceforth be
planted and the negroes could cultivate and gather it. With Eli
Whitney's gin to do the slow and hindering part of the process
cotton-raising could be made a paying industry."

"Mr. Whitney bobbed up in the very nick of time, didn't he?" smiled
Mary.

"For the financial prosperity of the South he did," her uncle
responded. "But to the welfare of the negroes his advent was a fatal
stroke. Slaves immediately were more in demand than they ever had been
before. No mechanical device could take their place. Cotton must be
planted, cultivated, and harvested by hand and the larger the cotton
fields became, the harder the slaves were worked. The cotton crop
became the staple product of the South. Many a Southerner who took up
arms against the Union did so because he honestly believed that to free
the slaves would mean the economic ruin of his section of the country."

"I never thought of that side of the question before," Mrs. McGregor
murmured thoughtfully.

"Nor I," rejoined Carl.

"Nevertheless it is a fact none of us here in the North should forget,"
continued Captain Dillingham. "To the southern planter our point of
view appeared unfair and grossly one-sided. It was easy enough for the
North to say the slaves should be freed. They had no cotton fields and
their prosperity was not dependent on the negroes. But to let the
slaves go meant ruin for the South. It was not alone, you see, that
their owners wished the profit derived from buying and selling them;
they needed them to work. Never had the South had such an opportunity
to coin wealth as that now opening. What wonder its residents were
angry at having this dazzling prospect for fortune-making snatched
away? Remember and take these facts into consideration when you think
harshly of those who took up arms to defend slavery."

There was an instant's pause.

"Of course, however, none of this justifies slavery or makes it more
right. The entire principle of it was wrong; it was un-Christian,
unjust, and cruel, and the only honorable thing to do was to bring it
to an end in this country. But that is another story altogether. What
we are talking about now is the cotton itself; and to get a big view of
this subject it is well to consider what was happening in the world
just at this time, and why cotton was such a desirable commodity.

"Over across the ocean James Watts's steam engine, combined with the
flying shuttle of John Kay, the spinning jenny of Hargreaves, the
water-frame of Arkwright, and the self-acting loom of Crompton, was
working as great a revolution in England's cloth-making industry as Eli
Whitney's cotton gin had done in the South. In other words the hand
loom had been supplanted by the more modern device of the steam-driven
spinning mill. This meant that in future cloth would no longer be made
in small quantities in the homes, women of the families spinning the
thread and weaving it whenever they could steal a bit of time from
other household duties. No! Cloth was to be made in factories on a much
larger scale, and sold to the public."

"No wonder the fact set everybody to raising cotton!" declared Mrs.
McGregor.

"No wonder indeed!" nodded her brother. "From a vintage so small that
even President Jefferson scarcely knew America had a cotton crop at all
this product of the South leaped forward by bounds. The year preceding
Eli Whitney's invention the United States exported less than one
hundred and forty thousand bales; but the year afterward the shipment
had soared to nearly half a million. The following year it was a
million and a half; the year after that six million."

"Gee whizz!" commented Carl. "That was some record, wasn't it?"

"Rather!" agreed his uncle.

"How much do we export now, Uncle Frederick?" Mary asked.

"From nine to twelve million bales of five-hundred pounds each are
raised annually in the South," returned Captain Dillingham. "Of this
about ninety per cent. is Upland cotton, the green seeds of which have
to be taken out by a gin similar to the one Eli Whitney invented.
Approximately about half this vast crop is exported."

"I had no idea we raised so much cotton," mused Carl.

"We raise quantities of it, son," Uncle Frederick said. "Now you can
understand better why the South was so resentful at being compelled to
free the slaves. With cotton so much in demand the prices of slaves had
greatly increased. The planters had untold wealth almost within their
grasp. It was all very well for the North to assert that slavery was a
barbarous practise. Who was to tend the cotton fields when the slaves
were gone?"

"The South did have something on its side, didn't it?" Mary ventured.

"A great deal, when once you put yourself in the Southerner's place. We
in the North are liable to emphasize only the cruelty of slavery and
are often unable to understand how enlightened and Christian men could
keep slaves and fight to keep them. You see there were reasons."

Mary nodded.

"Of course, as I said before, all the cotton-raising in the world could
not make the thing right. It was wrong from start to finish.
Nevertheless it does explain why some of our people felt the freeing of
the slaves so unjust and such a blow to their prosperity that they
threatened secession from the Union."

"And it was because Abraham Lincoln would not allow them to secede that
the war was fought!" announced Carl triumphantly.

"Precisely! You cannot allow part of a country to rise up and walk out
any more than you can let some of the wheels of a watch announce they
are not going to turn any more," laughed his uncle. "It requires every
part to make the watch go; and it takes the united strength of a people
to make a nation. North and South were all beloved children of one
land, and Abraham Lincoln, like the father of a big family, was not
going to let any of the household break away from the organization to
which it belonged. It meant a struggle to do the two things
necessary--free the slaves and preserve the Union; but quarrels are
sometimes necessary in families. After they are over there is a more
perfect understanding. So it has been with this one. Both sides paid a
fearful price but as a result we now have _one nation, indivisible,
with liberty and justice for all_."

"That's the oath of allegiance!" cried Carl, Mary, and Tim in chorus,
as they leaped to their feet and stood at salute.

"We say it at school every morning," continued Tim, "but I never knew
before what it meant."

"You will know better now, won't you?" Captain Dillingham replied.
"Every time you say those words remember the brave men of the South who
really believed they had a right to establish a government of their own
and protect the prosperity of their part of this great land. If you do
this you will learn to honor both sides alike, each of which fought so
devotedly for the cause he cherished. And now that the war is over the
entire country has the South to thank for one of its greatest sources
of wealth--cotton. The South raises it; the North, with its many mills,
transforms the raw product into a finished commodity. How is that for
team work? Could there be better proof of how vitally each section
needs the other?"


CHAPTER X

A LESSON IN THRIFT


That evening Carl resumed the cotton-raising subject by idly remarking,
"I suppose since the invention of the cotton gin and the abolition of
slavery most of the drudgery connected with the cotton industry has
disappeared."

His uncle smiled.

"Hardly that, I am afraid, sonny," replied he. "Even under the best
possible conditions the cultivation and gathering of the cotton crop
entails drudgery. This cannot be helped. In the first place cotton
demands steady heat to make it grow; and you know what it means to work
all day in the broiling sun. Of course the negroes are to a certain
degree accustomed to this; and moreover they belong to a race that
finds hot weather less hard to bear than do many other persons.
Nevertheless heat is heat, and say what you may, a hot sun pouring down
on one's head does not make for comfort. In addition there is the
monotony of the harvesting. As I told you before, this has to be done
by hand--there is no escape from that; and since it must be, the
dullness of the task is an unavoidable evil."

Carl mused thoughtfully for a moment.

"I don't see," observed he presently, "that after all the negroes are
much better off than they were in slave days."

"Oh, yes, they are," Captain Dillingham instantly responded. "Remember
they now receive wages; their hours of work have also been shortened
and regulated; and overseers have become more humane and now invent
little ways of breaking the monotony and making the time pass more
pleasantly."

"How?"

"Oh, there are various things that can be done to achieve this end.
Sometimes fresh buttermilk or some other refreshing drink is passed
down the rows; or on a cool day hot coffee is served. Any little change
such as singing or whistling interrupts the sleepy effect of one
continual process and shifts the mood and spirits of those toiling into
another groove. This is very beneficial. All our students of industrial
methods will tell you that the worst flaw of our present system is the
effect monotony has on the minds of those constantly subjected to it.
Performing without deviation the same mechanical act day after day
deadens the brain and even, in certain cases, produces insanity. It
also kills ambition and creates hopeless, indifferent persons.
Therefore, made wiser by psychology we realize the importance of
stirring the mind out of a fixed rut, or rather a stupidity that verges
on somnambulism, and keeping it alert and active. Sheep growers, for
example, try in every way to divert the minds of their shepherds lest
the continual watching of a slowly moving flock paralyze their minds
and get them _locoed_."

"Really?"

"Your mother will tell you that. That is why a shepherd's pipe is such
a splendid thing. To pick out a tune and listen to it starts the mind
out of its trance and promotes mental exercise. It does what gymnastics
do for the body."

"But all our factories keep men at a single task," Carl objected.

"You mean the piece-work system? Aye, I know," nodded his uncle. "And
as we grow wiser, and come to care more for our fellows, we begin to
wonder whether so much specializing is as fine a notion as we at first
thought it. It makes for efficiency, for without question a man who
does just one thing over and over becomes expert at his particular job;
but does he not in time, because of his very expertness, lapse into a
machine whose hands move automatically and whose mind is idle? Such a
result is fatal both to his intellect and his will. He becomes passive
until at length all initiative is destroyed. For many years the colored
people of the South reaped precisely this harvest of mental inertia.
Now, thank heaven, they are rousing out of the lethargy that has been
their inheritance and their brains are getting to work. It will,
however, take years, perhaps generations, for some of them to work up
to a normal mental activity and intelligence; but if they persist
results will surely come. Many of them have already shaken off their
intellectual fetters so that not only are their bodies free but their
minds are also. That is why I feel that all our citizens should do
everything in their power to help them, and try and make up to them for
the injustices they have suffered. It is not enough to take them out of
physical slavery; we should break the chains of their mental
imprisonment as well by giving them schools, trades, and such other
training as is within their mental scope."

"I'm afraid I never thought of the negroes that way," confessed Carl.

"A great many persons older than you do not," Captain Dillingham
returned kindly. "But when you do think of them from that angle you
cannot but honor the more highly those colored persons who have
achieved positions of importance. There are now in our country colored
lawyers, doctors, teachers, poets, and writers. Who can tell what their
background has been or measure the mental exertion that has brought
them where they are to-day? Wherever we meet them we should give them a
hand up. We owe it to them because of our own greater opportunity."

The little man stopped to light his pipe.

"Now see where talking about picking cotton has led me," grumbled he
whimsically. "A pretty distance I've wandered from my subject! Well,
you mustn't touch me off on the topic of the colored race again. I have
seen many abuses of the negroes in my day, both on shipboard and
ashore, and the subject turns me hot. Just how the evils of
cotton-gathering are to be avoided I do not know. We must wait, I fear,
until some clever individual bobs up with a scheme that does away with
hand harvesting of cotton. In the meantime the only remedy left us is
to vary the work of the men and women who toil at it as much as is
possible."

"I wish, Uncle Frederick, you would tell us just how the cotton is
gathered," said Mary, who had joined the group.

Captain Dillingham flashed the girl one of his rare smiles.

"I don't know, my dear, just how much more there is to tell," declared
he. "Of course, if you have ever picked currants or blackberries you
will realize something of the constant bending and stooping that goes
with the industry and will understand how hard it is on the back. Then
there is the continual standing, a tiresome business at best. Besides,
mechanically as the task is rated, it is not such an easy one after
all, for the cotton fibers stick firmly to the inside of the pods and
as a result the unskilled person who tries to detach them in a hurry
will probably succeed only in extricating a bare half of what is
inside. And like as not he will break the fibers he does get out so
that their value will be sadly decreased. The trade has its tricks, you
see. Furthermore an amateur generally has fragments of husks and leaves
scattered through his cotton, all of which have to be removed and make
extra work later on."

"Then cotton-gathering is not really such brainless work as it might
be, is it, Uncle Frederick," Mary asserted.

"Oh, it requires a knack that comes through practice," conceded her
uncle quickly. "As soon as the pods crack open and show white it is a
sign the workers must be on hand for the picking, and early in the
morning they assemble that they may have a long day to work while the
sun is on the crop. For as I told you there can be no cotton-harvesting
without sun to dry off the night's moisture. The moment a bag or basket
is filled it is emptied into something larger and the picker starts
afresh. Before evening comes and the dew falls, the day's crop is
hurried under cover that it may not absorb any dampness. Here it is
packed into receptacles banded with the owner's name or private mark,
and made ready to be carried to the ginning factory."

"Don't the planters have their own cotton gins?" queried Carl in
surprise.

[Illustration: "The cotton is sent to factories to be ginned."
_Page_ 129.]

"Oh no, son! That would be an unnecessary and expensive luxury. Just as
corn is sent to the miller to be ground, so the cotton is sent to
factories to be ginned, weighed, and baled for shipment. You see the
cotton grown on any one plantation and cultivated under uniform
conditions will be practically of the same ripeness and weight; it will
also be, in all probability, of the same variety. This fact is
important when ginning and selling it, and greatly increases its value.
Such conditions, however, do not always prevail for there are districts
(and also countries) where small cotton farms exist whose output is not
large enough to make an entire bale. In such cases the product of
several farms has to be combined and this makes a bale mixed in
quality. This is true of part of the cotton that comes from India.
There many of the natives, owing to lack of commercial and industrial
enterprise, raise small batches of cotton. Often it takes a great many
of these little lots to make up a bale."

"Do the natives of India take the seeds out of their own cotton?" asked
Mary.

"Some of them do, using the primitive gins so long known in India. The
Chinese also gin much of their own cotton by amateur gins. But it goes
without saying that much of the cotton fiber is broken by these
methods. For the more perfect the gin the less loss results. Even with
our best machinery however, a certain amount of injury is done which
cannot be avoided."

"Then Eli Whitney's gin isn't so perfect," ventured Carl.

"Its method is as perfect a one as we have," answered Captain
Dillingham, "and up to date nothing better has been found. Those
handling large quantities of cotton are almighty thankful to have
anything as good, I can tell you. In India, China, and oriental
countries, though, where the lots are small the people, as I say, still
cling to their primitive foot gins. Here in America we have several
types of gin all made on the same general principle but differing
slightly as to detail. Some of these are better than others. By this I
mean some are less brutal and cause a smaller degree of waste. Indeed I
believe Whitney's own gin and those of its kind known as saw gins are
considered to do the most damage to the fiber. This sort of gin
consists of a series of circular saws set into a revolving shaft in
such a way that the cotton fed into the machine is separated from its
seeds in an incredibly short space of time. Afterward a whirling brush
cleans the saws of the fiber clinging to them. It is an effectual
system but a merciless one and is best adapted to short staple cotton
which is strong and does not snarl. The best gins use only long, smooth
blades to clear the cotton and it follows that these do the fiber far
less injury."

"How does a ginning factory look, Uncle Frederick?" Carl inquired.

"You mean the inside? I never went through but one. I was waiting for a
cargo at Norfolk once and as there happened to be a ginning plant near
where I was staying I visited it. Generally peaking I suppose they are
pretty much alike. The cotton is brought to them, as I said, in clearly
marked, or branded bags or baskets, and is tossed from the wagons
directly into hoppers. Afterward the contents of the hoppers is loaded
into freight elevators and shot to one of the upper stories of the
factory, there to be piled up and await its turn for ginning.

"When the time comes to gin that particular batch it is heaped into a
hopper and borne to the gins below by means of traveling racks."

"How many gins are there to a factory?" questioned Mary.

"That depends on the size of the factory and the amount of work brought
there to be done," was the reply. "A fair-sized factory in a busy
district will have half-a-dozen gins or more; and when you know that
one gin will clean from three hundred to three hundred and fifty pounds
of cotton an hour you will see that it will take a pretty big supply to
keep such a lot of machinery moving. There is a separate hopper for
each gin and if the supply fed into it comes too fast it can be stopped
and switched to other gins. Once in the clutch of the relentless knives
the cotton is shredded apart and the seeds drop out and fall into a
traveling basket. From this basket they are forced through a tube to an
oil mill which usually stands in another part of the grounds."

"Cottonseed oil!" murmured Mary, recognizing an old friend. "We often
use it to fry things. It's good on lettuce, too. But somehow I never
thought that it was really made from the seeds of cotton."

"We often accept terms without thinking much about them, don't we?"
Captain Dillingham agreed. "But cottonseed oil is a genuine by-product
of cotton."

"What is a by-product?" smiled Mary ingenuously.

"A by-product is something made from the leavings," put in Carl without
hesitation. "Hash is a by-product of corned beef."

A laugh greeted the assertion.

"Technically speaking a by-product is something that is turned to
account from what would otherwise have been waste. Every person who
manufactures on a large scale tries to think what he can do with what
is left after he has made the thing he started out to make. This he
does for two reasons: first he wishes to turn back into money every
ounce of material for which he has paid; secondly he desires to get rid
of stuff which would otherwise accumulate and (if not combustible)
force him into the added expense of carting it away. In other words he
seeks to convert his waste into an asset instead of a liability.
Therefore all big producers tax their brains to invent things that can
be made from their waste, and such commodities are called by-products.
Many of these things require no ingenuity for frequently they are
articles much needed in other trades. Masons, for example, are only too
thankful to have the hair taken from tanned leather to hold their
plaster together; and those who dry and salt fish can easily turn the
fish skins into glue. The by-products of great packing houses and
tanneries are legion. Often such dealers will have at hand such a
supply of usable stuff that they will establish other factories where
their unused materials can be converted into cash. The sale of these
products often increases very materially the profits of a business.
Such a product is cottonseed oil. As millions more seeds mature each
year than can possibly be used for planting why not turn them to
account? Often there are from sixty-five to seventy-five pounds of
seeds to a hundred pounds of cotton. Think how rapidly they would
accumulate if something could not be done with them. During the war
when we were unable to get olive oil from Italy and fats of all kinds
were scarce we were thankful enough to fall back on the cottonseed oil
made in our own country. At the oil mills machines are ready to clean
the cotton seeds of lint, hull them, separate hull from kernel, and
press the oil from the kernel itself. This oil is then bottled,
labelled, and shipped for sale, making quite an independent little
industry, you see. What is left of the crushed kernels is removed from
the hydraulic presses and is remolded into small cakes to be used
for----" he paused, glancing quizzically toward Carl and Mary.

"For what?" the boy asked.

"Guess!"

"I've not the most remote idea," Carl returned.

"Nor I!" echoed Mary.

"For cattle to eat," went on Captain Dillingham, completing his
unfinished sentence.

"Even the hulls," he continued, "are, I believe, utilized in some way;
and as I previously told you the lint which clings to the seeds is
passed through a second sort of gin, gathered into a bundle, and
afterward put through a carding engine which combs it out and prepares
it so it can be made into wadding for coverlids, quilted linings, and
quilted petticoats. All the gins then collect whatever material is left
and this, being absolutely too poor for any other purpose, is sold as
cotton waste to be used for cleaning machinery and polishing brass and
nickel trimmings. Were we individuals half as thrifty as are
manufacturers in salvaging the odds and ends that come our way we might
save ourselves many a penny. Every year we Americans throw away enough
food and wearing apparel to maintain a small army. We are, alas, a very
wasteful people and are constantly becoming more so. Our ancestors used
to lay aside buttons, string, papers, scraps of cloth and use them
again. They made over clothing, fashioned rag rugs, conserved
everything they could lay hands on. Their attics were museums where
were horded every sort of object against the time when it might be
needed. But do we follow their example? No, indeed! In fact, we go to
the other extreme and hurry out of the house, either to a junk dealer
or a rummage sale, everything we cannot find immediate use for. To a
certain extent our mode of living has forced us to this course. Most of
us reside in cramped city quarters where there are no spacious attics
in which to garner up articles against a rainy day. Modern apartment
dwellers boast neither attic nor cellar, to say nothing of a farmer's
barn loft. Moreover, we all must scramble so fast to earn our daily
bread that we have no time to make over the old; it is cheaper, we
reason, to purchase new than to fuss with remodelling. Neither are
materials what they were in the old days. Few of the fine old silks and
woolens that would wear for a generation are to be had at present. Also
we have more money than our forebears and this has much to do with our
wholesale wastefulness. With plenty of everything at hand, why save?
And the policy the individual is following on a small scale the nation
is adopting on a much vaster one. We are using up our forests, our
mines, all our resources with no thought of the morrow. We ought to
stop and think about this before it is too late but I doubt if we ever
will."

Captain Dillingham paused.

"There is such a thing," he added, "as people and nations being too
prosperous for their own good. But to return to the cotton gin. The
cotton, having been cleared of its seeds, is now known as lint, and
this is bundled together until enough of it is collected to be properly
baled for the spinning mills."

"What is _proper baling_?" inquired Carl.

"Why, the rough baling simply gathers the cotton together into a big
bundle."

"Well, what's the matter with that?"

"Nothing--so far as it goes," laughed the Captain. "I should be sorry,
however, to see many such bales coming aboard my ship."

"Why?"

"Well, you know what cotton is," answered Uncle Frederick. "After it
has been picked to pieces in the gins it comes out a nice, white,
fluffy mass that takes up no end of room. Were it to be transported in
this condition a few hundred pounds of it would fill a ship or freight
car and cost the owner so much that it would not be worth his while to
transport it. Moreover, it would be bothersome to handle when it
arrived at the spinning mills. Therefore before cotton is shipped it
has to be reduced in bulk so that it will not take up so much space."

"But how can it be, Uncle Frederick? asked Mary, open-eyed.

"What do you do when you wish to make some soft material into a small
parcel, my dear?"

"Oh, roll it up--squeeze it together," was the instant response.

"Well, there you have your answer!" responded Uncle Frederick. "Balers
treat cotton lint in the same fashion; only, as they are not strong
enough to accomplish this end with their hands, they resort to powerful
machines, or compressors, to carry out the process for them. By means
of enormous pressure they crush down the billowing lint until four feet
of it can be reduced to a thickness of not more than seven inches."

"I wouldn't want to fall into that machine! chuckled Carl.

"There wouldn't be much left of you if you should, I can assure you of
that," Captain Dillingham said. "Cotton, however, does not raise any
such protest. It is pressed and pressed and pressed, and while still in
the presses iron bands are put round it to hold it so it can be
compactly transported. An American bale of some five hundred pounds
will usually have six or seven of these iron bands round it. Certain of
these bales are merely rough ones; others are cylindrical. I believe
the latter sort are more generally preferred. To make them the cotton
is gradually pressed and rolled by powerful presses until a bale four
feet long and about two feet through is obtained. These cylindrical
bales weigh a trifle less than the others--about four hundred and
twenty-six pounds--and because they have been pressed so hard they keep
in place without either iron bands or cloth covers. When they arrive at
the mills the cotton from them can be unrolled and much more easily fed
into the machines. If they are covered it is merely to keep them
clean."

"Do all bales of cotton have to weigh the same?" inquired Carl.

"You mean is there a standardized weight for all bales?"

"Yes."

"No, there is no universal standard for bales of cotton. The bales from
different countries differ quite considerably. For example a Brazilian
bale usually weighs only from a hundred and seventy-five to two hundred
and twenty pounds; the Turkish from two hundred and fifty to three
hundred and twenty-five pounds; those coming from India do better,
averaging about three hundred and ninety pounds. Should you handle this
imported cotton you would notice that the bales from India are very
heavily banded, often as many as thirteen bands encircling them. This
is partly because the long staple of this variety of cotton must not be
injured by heavy pressure, and partly because they have not in India
the excellent facilities for compressing lint that we have here. The
Egyptian bales are the largest transported; they run as high as seven
hundred pounds and have about eleven bands to hold them."

"It must be a stunt to get them aboard ship," grinned Carl.

"I've taken my turn at the job," responded the captain drily. "We swing
them down into the hold by means of cranes and have now learned to land
them quite neatly. Nevertheless, even though they are only bundles of
cotton wool I should not fancy having one of them drop on my head,"
concluded he with a twinkle.


CHAPTER XI

A FAMILY CONGRESS


Meantime while the McGregors discussed cotton and the sunny southern
fields in which it grew, Christmas was approaching and Baileyville,
shrouded in wintry whiteness, began to feel the pulse of the coming
holiday. Shop windows along the main street were gay with holly and
scarlet. Every alluring object was displayed to entice purchasers and
such objects as were not alluring were made to appear so by a garnish
of ribbon or flashing tinsel. There were Christmas carpet sweepers,
Christmas teakettles, Christmas coal hods and how surprised and
embarrassed they must have been to find themselves dragged out of their
modest corners and, arrayed in splendor, set forth before the public
gaze. Nothing was too mundane to be transformed by the holiday's magic
into a thing mystic and unreal. Even such a prosaic article as a
washtub, borrowing luster from the season's witchery and in shining
blue dress became a thing to covet and dream about.

Then there was the army of foolish trifles that owed their existence
merely to the season's glamor and would have had no excuse for being at
a time when the purchaser's head was level and his judgment sane. And
in addition to all these there were the scores upon scores of gifts
useful, fascinating, desirable, but beyond range of possibility at any
ordinary period of the year.

Oh, it was a time to keep one's balance, the Christmas holidays! The
very stones of the streets glistened golden and the crisp air breathed
enchantment. If one's nerves were not frayed and on edge he jostled his
neighbor with a smile and took his share of jostling in good part. Was
not every man a brother; and did not a great throbbing kindliness
emanate from all humanity?

It seemed so to Carl McGregor as the wonderful day of days drew near;
and so also it seemed to all the wee McGregors. They were on tiptoe
with excitement and could hardly be made to stand still long enough to
have their neckties tied or their pinafores buttoned.

"Have you children decided yet what you want to do?" questioned their
mother one morning, as she struggled to hold the wriggling Tim until
his hair could be made presentable for school. "Christmas is but a week
away now and we must come to some decision as to our plans. We can't
have everything, you know. Shall it be a turkey and no tree? Or shall
it be a tree and no turkey? And if it is a tree shall it be a big or a
little one? We must vote on all these questions."

"I want ice-teem," lisped Nell.

"Mercy on us!" ejaculated Mrs. McGregor, in consternation, as this
fresh avenue for outlay presented itself. "Nell is for ice cream and a
tree too."

"And turkey!" went on the little one imperturbably. "Me wants turkey!"

"Ice-treem! Ice-treem!" cooed James Frederick.

The mother's face clouded. A tree, turkey, ice cream and presents were
far beyond the range of the family purse.

"I'd rather have stockings and turkey," Mary declared.

"And cranberry sauce and nuts," put in Tim.

"And celery and sweet potatoes," added Carl. "A real dinner, Mother."

"Would you rather do that than have the tree?"

Silence greeted the question.

Into every mind flashed the picture of a tree towering to the ceiling
and a-glitter with lights and ornaments. Even Carl, despite his
fourteen years, could not entirely banish the vision. But the dinner,
the dinner! After all the tree would only be a thing to look at; food
could be eaten and enjoyed, and Carl was a healthy boy at an age when
he was possessed of a particularly healthy appetite. Tempting as was
the tree the aroma of browned turkey rose in his nostrils.

"I vote for turkey," announced he at last.

"No tree? No Christmas tree?" murmured Martin, his lip quivering.

"You have a tree at kindergarten, silly, and so does Nell," declared
the elder brother quickly.

"'Tain't like having it here--our really own tree," bewailed Martin.

"Couldn't we have a simpler dinner, Mother, and manage to get a tree?"
interrogated Mary. "It is fun to trim it and the little children love
it so."

"Girls always like things that look pretty," piped Tim in disdain.

"And all boys care about is to eat and eat," Mary shot out with equal
scorn.

Hidden away in a corner behind his newspaper Captain Dillingham
chuckled. He was vastly amused by this family congress.

Meantime Mrs. McGregor, in order to avert the battle she saw rising,
said, "Suppose we put it to vote. Are you ready for the question?"

"Yes!" responded her flock in chorus.

"All right. Shall it be presents and turkey, or presents and a tree?"

"I want mince pie," proclaimed Martin flatly.

"But we are not talking of pie, dear," answered his mother patiently.
"It is the turkey we're voting on."

"I want turkey _and_ a tree _and_ presents _and_ ice-teem _and_ pie!"
Nell asserted shamelessly.

"Stockings and turkey, Ma! Stockings and turkey!" shouted Carl.

"Listen, dears!" began their mother. "As I told you before we can't
have everything. I wish we could but we just plain can't, so that ends
it. Therefore we must choose what we think we will get the most
pleasure out of. Now who is for turkey? Raise your hands!"

Every hand came up.

"And who is for a tree?"

Again every hand was raised.

Helplessly Mrs. McGregor sank back into her chair.

"Oh, dear," sighed she. "Don't you see we are getting nowhere? I told
you only a minute ago we couldn't have both."

Uncle Frederick came out from behind his paper.

"See here, you young savages," began he, laughing good-humoredly,
"listen to me! If you do not get down to business and use some sense,
Christmas will be here and you will have nothing at all."

A wail ascended from Nell and Martin.

"Your mother can give you either turkey or a tree; but she can't give
you both. In my opinion she is almighty good to do so much."

He saw the children flush uncomfortably. Carl dropped his eyes and Mary
slipped a hand into her mother's.

"Now instead of clamoring at her like a lot of ungrateful little brutes
and wanting the whole earth, why don't you show her you are grateful
for what she's doing?" went on Captain Dillingham in a sharper tone.

"Oh, it's all right, Frederick," interrupted Mrs. McGregor hurriedly.
"I don't want----"

The captain, however, was not to be stopped.

"Your mother is ready to give you turkey _or_ a tree. How many are for
turkey?"

Carl and Tim raised their hands.

"And who is for the tree?"

Instantly Mary, Martin, and Nell raised their hands.

"It is the tree, as I see it," acclaimed he.

"But it isn't fair," Tim objected. "James Frederick didn't vote."

At this everybody laughed and whatever tension there was vanished.

"Oh, James Frederick would vote for the tree," Mary said. "He is so
little he couldn't eat turkey if we had it, could he, Mother?"

"I'm afraid he couldn't," smiled her mother. "He hasn't teeth enough."

"Then it is a tree! A tree!" cried Martin exultantly.

"Wait!" Captain Dillingham put up his hand. "We haven't finished with
this matter yet. You've got your tree from your mother; now I can give
you a turkey if you decide you want me to. But first you are to listen
to what I have to say. A Christmas tree and a turkey mean a great deal
for one family to have in these days when so many people are having so
little. The O'Dowds, for example, are to have neither a Christmas
dinner nor a tree; I happen to know that. Joey has been sick and there
are doctor's bills to pay. Beside that, Mr. O'Dowd has been out of work
and has no money to spend this year."

The little McGregors regarded their uncle with solemn faces.

"Oh, dear!" breathed Mary sympathetically.

Carl scowled soberly; then his face glowed with a sudden idea.

"Couldn't we----" he hesitated awkwardly.

"Oh, Uncle Frederick, if you _were_ really going to buy a turkey,
couldn't we give it to them?" flashed Mary, smiling toward her brother.
"Would you mind giving it away to somebody else? You see, if you were
going to buy it anyway----" she regarded her uncle timidly, "we could
have something else for dinner, couldn't we, Mother? Perhaps corn
chowder. We all like that. And maybe we could have a pudding and some
nuts."

"Bully, Mary! I'm with you!" Carl rejoined.

"I'd like to do that, too," agreed Martin. "I wouldn't mind so much
about the turkey if we had the tree."

"What do you say, Tim?" inquired Captain Dillingham.

"I don't see why we should give our turkey to somebody else," grumbled
Tim sullenly. "We never have one all the year--never! You know we
don't, Mother."

"No, dear; I'm afraid we don't," Mrs. McGregor said.

"Then why should we give ours away," went on Tim in an argumentative
tone. "Don't we want turkey as much as the O'Dowds, I'd like to know?"

"Oh, Timmie!"

"Don't be such a pig, Tim," cut in Carl with brotherly directness. "If
we were hard up, wouldn't you like somebody to send you something for
Christmas?"

Tim colored, his brother's question bringing home to him uncomfortable
possibilities.

"We could have such fun doing it, Timmie," coaxed Mary. "Think how we
could trim up the basket, and what a surprise it would be! Why, it
would make no end of sport."

Tim's expression softened.

Instantly Mrs. McGregor, who was quick to interpret her children's
moods, saw the battle was won.

"We can plan together what shall go into the basket," said she briskly.
"Each of us might contribute the thing he likes best."

"The turkey shall be mine!" Uncle Frederick declared.

"I choose cranberry sauce!" Carl announced.

"Celery! Oh, could I put in celery, Mother?" Mary inquired. "The tops
are so pretty and I love it so!"

Her mother nodded.

"Somebody must give the plain things so I will donate potatoes, squash,
and onions," she said.

"Don't forget nuts! We must have nuts and raisins," Mary added.

"I'd like to give those," Tim whispered.

"You shall, son."

A friendly little glance passed between the boy and his mother.

"Pie! I want pie!" asserted Nell, who although too young to understand
what was going on, nevertheless grasped the notion that food was the
prevailing topic and plunged into the subject with enthusiasm.

"Bless your heart, dearie, you shall have pie!" laughed her mother.
"I'll make a couple of apple pies and they shall be your present."

"There ought to be candy. Please let me send candy! May I?" begged
Martin for whom the world held only two articles really worth
while--candy and ice cream.

There was general merriment at this suggestion.

"Precious little candy would ever get to anybody else if you had the
giving of it, Martie," teased Mary.

"Yes, Martin shall give the candy," Mrs. McGregor consented.

"We'll paste his mouth up before he goes to buy it," Carl drawled.

"Don't you s'pose I could keep from eating it if once I set out to?"
scowled Martin defiantly.

"No, I don't!"

"Well, I could, so now!" The boy drew himself up proudly.

"James Frederick ought to send something, Mother," reminded the
care-taking Mary. "We don't want him left out."

"Oh, we mustn't leave out the baby!" agreed Captain Dillingham. "He and
I will get together and talk the matter over. There are still several
things needed."

"Oh, it will be splendid!" cried Mary, clapping her hands. "Do get a
real big turkey, won't you, Uncle Frederick? And we'll trim it up with
a necklace of cranberries the way they do in the market."

"Huh! There you go again," sniffed Tim. "All girls seem to think of is
necklaces and bows of ribbon."

Mary smiled brightly.

"What's the harm in making it pretty if you can just as well?" asked
she. "I do love pretty things. Why, I believe I could eat stewed whale
if it was on a pretty dish."

"I couldn't; I'd hate whale," responded the stolid Timothy.

"Oh, I didn't mean I'd really eat whale, silly," explained Mary.

"Then what did you say you would for?"

"Mary was just imagining, dear," put in Mrs. McGregor, coming to the
rescue.

"She is always imagining," glowered Tim. "Only the other day she was
trying to make me imagine my salt fish was chicken."

"I'll bet she didn't succeed," taunted Carl.

"Not on your life she didn't!" was the instant answer. "I know salt
fish when I see it."

"No matter, dear," soothed Mrs. McGregor, affectionately touching her
daughter's arm. "If her imagining Mary can convert salt fish into
chicken it is an asset that will stand her in good stead all through
life. And if you, Tim, prefer to keep your salt fish just salt fish,
why you have a perfect right to do so. I will say, however, that the
person who has the power to make believe has an invaluable gift. Many's
the time I've made believe and it has helped me over more than one hard
spot. We all have to masquerade to a greater or less degree. It is
simply meeting life with imagination and seeing in the humdrum
something that associates it with finer and more beautiful things." For
a moment she was silent; then she added in her quick, businesslike
accents, "And now to this dinner! There must be a basket to hold it, of
course."

"A big market basket, Mother, lined with red paper. Do line it with
red," pleaded Mary.

"It shall be lined with red, little lady! And trimmed with holly, too!"
replied Uncle Frederick. "I will undertake to furnish both decorations
along with the turkey."

"Why not put in Santa Claus napkins? I saw some paper ones the other
day and they were tremendously festive," suggested Mrs. McGregor.

"I think the best plan is for us all to go together and buy the
dinner," the Captain suddenly announced.

Shouts of approval greeted the plan.

"But the baby!" demurred his sister.

"We can wheel James Frederick in the carriage and take turns staying
outside the shops with him," said Carl.

"And if we have the carriage we can bring home our stuff in it," put in
Tim.

"Poor baby! How would you like to have a big ten-pound turkey piled on
top of you?" questioned Mary indignantly.

"Oh, James Frederick won't mind," Tim responded comfortably. "And
anyhow, he's got to do his bit toward making other people happy. As far
as I can see he isn't denying himself anything, for he couldn't eat a
turkey if it was set right under his nose. So it's his part to tote
home the parcels in his flivver; he seems to be the only member of the
family that has one."

Thus it was agreed and on the day before Christmas it would have done
one good to witness the cavalcade of McGregors issuing forth on their
altruistic pilgrimage. First went Mary, leading Nell by the hand; then
Carl with Martin's mitten firmly clutched in his. Next came Mrs.
McGregor with Tim, and bringing up at the rear was Uncle Frederick
wheeling his namesake, the baby. What a tour it was! Certainly there
never had been such a turkey as the one the reckless captain bought--a
turkey so plump of breast, so white of skin, so golden of claw! Why, it
was a king of birds! And then the shining coral of the cranberries, the
satin gleam of the onions, the warm brown of the potatoes! As for the
celery--its delicate green and faint canary tips were as good as a
bouquet of flowers. Just to view its crispness was to make the mouth
water. And the nuts, raisins, candy, oranges! Once in their vicinity
Captain Dillingham cast aside all caution and wildly purchased one
dainty after another. He seemed to have gone quite mad and it was not
until his sister very positively informed him that not another bundle
could be carried that he consented to be dragged away from the counters
of sweet-meats.

Then staggering beneath their load of whity-brown parcels, the family
hastened out to the baby carriage where Mary stood guarding James
Frederick.

"Put the turkey down near his feet," cried she excitedly, as she lifted
the baby in order to make more room. "The other things can be packed in
round him."

"But he'll be stifled!" objected Mrs. McGregor.

"Oh, no, he won't, Ma!" contradicted Tim. "He'll probably be uncomfortable.
Christmas comes but once a year, though, so he ought to be able to survive
being cramped."

"Oh, James Frederick is perfectly used to having his coupé turned into
an express wagon, Mother," Carl explained. "Don't worry about him.
Often he rides home from down-town buried a foot deep in bundles. All
that fusses me is whether the carriage will stand the strain. If it
should part in the middle and the front wheels go off on an independent
route it would be----"

"Both inconvenient and embarrassing," concluded Captain Dillingham with
a laugh.

Fortunately, however, James Frederick's chariot was staunchly
constructed and reached Mulberry Court without mishap, its precious
contents--including the patient owner of the vehicle--being borne
triumphantly aloft to the McGregor flat. Once upstairs the basket,
scarlet paper, and holly were produced, and Mary with deft fingers went
to work to fashion a receptacle worthy of the bounties with which the
O'Dowds were to be surprised. At last into this garish hamper were
packed the viands and afterward a card bearing holiday greetings was
tied to the handle with a flaring red bow.

"Now the worst task is to come," declared Mrs. McGregor, "and that is
to land the present at Julie's door without being caught. They are
proud people, the O'Dowds, and I wouldn't for worlds have them know
from whom the dinner comes. Timmie is not strong enough to take it and
Carl is too clumsy. Should he start to run away, like as not he would
stumble and bring all Mulberry Court to see what the racket was."

"Why can't I carry it?" inquired Captain Dillingham.

"You! One sight of your gold buttons would be enough, Frederick.
Besides, you're none too agile in making a getaway."

"I fancy some boy could be found to leave it if I paid him," suggested
the captain.

"The very thing! There's a score of 'em on the street. Fetch in the
fastest runner you see, Timmie. No matter whether you know him or not.
In fact, get one you don't know. 'Twill be all the better."

Away sped Tim only to return an instant later with a grimy, Italian
youngster at his heels.

Captain Dillingham explained the errand.

At the sight of the gleaming quarter of a dollar the Italian grinned.
He would leave a bomb or a live ox at anybody's door for a quarter,
affirmed he with an ingratiating smile.

Therefore the precious basket was entrusted to him and to judge by the
scampering that followed its thud before the O'Dowds' door he was quite
as fleet of foot as Tim had asserted.

"Wouldn't you like to see their faces when they find it?" whispered
Carl who, with Mary, was hanging over the banister, straining his ears
for every sound.

There was not, however, much to hear.

After the furious knock somebody ventured into the hall. Then Julie's
voice, high-pitched with excitement and consternation, exclaimed,
"Mercy on us!" With that she dragged the basket into her abode and
banged the door.

It was a brief drama but one entirely satisfying to the McGregors. Over
and over again did Carl and Mary enact the scene to the intense delight
of the family.

"Now mind, should Mrs. O'Dowd come up here with questions, you are to
be careful what you say," cautioned their mother. "There's to be no
hinting, winking, or smirking. Should Julie say anything, leave it to
your uncle or me to answer. All the fun would be spoiled if you gave
the secret away."

"Oh, yes," agreed Carl. "The sport is to keep folks guessing."

But no sooner were the words out of his mouth is than there was a
rapping at the hall door.

"Oh, Ma! I'll bet that is Mrs. O'Dowd now!" gasped Mary.

"It can't be! She'd not track us down so quick as this," replied Mrs.
McGregor, flustered and half rising.

"Most likely it's the Christmas tree, Mother," Tim suggested. "They
promised to send it early this afternoon."

Again came the knock.

"I'm half afraid to open the door lest it be Julie," faltered Mrs.
McGregor. "Be still a minute, all of you, till I think what I'll say to
her."

But when, amid a tense hush, the door was finally opened, neither Julie
O'Dowd nor the watched-for Christmas tree was on the threshold. Instead
they saw a holly-decked basket so exactly a replica of the one they had
given away that a cry of disappointment greeted it.

"She's sent it back!" cried Mary.

[Illustration: "But that isn't our basket, Mother," Carl said. "This
is much bigger." _Page_ 155.]

"She was offended and wouldn't take it!" murmured Mrs. McGregor. "I
feared as much."

"But that isn't our basket, Mother," Carl said. "This is much bigger.
Besides, we had no apples or candy bags in the one we sent."

Critically studying the gift, the family clustered around.

"It isn't our basket, Mother," Mary presently asserted. "See, this one
is red."

"There must be some mistake, then," Mrs. McGregor declared. "They've
left it at the wrong place."

"But our name is on it!" cried Tim.

"Where? Where?" What a bumping of heads there was as everybody bent to
read the card.

"Yes, our name is on it plain as day!" replied Mrs. McGregor with a
puzzled expression. Then, inspired by a solution of the mystery, she
wheeled round on her brother.

"How much do you know about this, Frederick?"

"Not a thing, Nellie--I give you my word! Dearly as I should have liked
to send you such a gift, my purse wasn't quite good for it," flushed
the captain.

"And what wonder, with all you've spent this day," returned his sister
quickly. "Then we'll count you out. But where could it have come from?"

"We don't need to leave it in the hall until we find out, do we,
Mother?" Mary ventured mischievously.

"No, I suppose we don't," was the retort. "Timmie, you and Carl drag it
indoors. Don't try to lift it, for you'll only be straining yourselves
and maybe drop it. Let's get it into the kitchen. There may be some
clue when we have a better light."

But examine it as they would, no hint as to the mysterious sender could
be found.

"I guess he believes with Carl that the sport of giving a present is to
keep the other person guessing," Tim remarked wickedly.

A general laugh at Carl's expense greeted the observation.

"Hush!" cautioned Mrs. McGregor. "There's somebody in the hall."

"He won't get away this time," Carl cried, springing up and throwing
open the door.

"Good heavens, man! You nearly knocked me down!" cried Hal Harling,
amazed by the suddenness of his welcome. "What's the matter with you?
Trying to trap a burglar?" Then, glancing at the object about which the
household were clustering, he added, "Jove! Have you got one, too?"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, just now somebody left a basket exactly like this at our flat. I
thought maybe you folks had something to do with it and came straight
over here to see. But you seem to be favored by a similar gift. They
are alike as two peas. Who sent them?"

"That is precisely what we want to know," Carl replied.

"You've no idea?"

"Not the most remote."

"Hasn't Captain Dillingham?"

"I'm not guilty, if that is what you mean," the sea captain answered.

"Straight goods?" Hal insisted.

"Hang, die, and choke to death!" laughed the little old man.

"But--but--somebody sent the thing!" blustered Hal. "Why, there is
everything on earth in it. Food enough to last a week. And ours has a
shawl for my mother and some felt slippers for my grandfather in the
bottom. And there are gloves for Louise and me. It came from somebody
who knew all about us. It was no haphazard present."

"Can you beat it!" murmured Carl. "Whoever do you suppose----"

"I can't suppose. We thought it was you," announced Hal. "There's a
knock at the door. Shall I go?"

Leaping forward he turned the knob, and in came Mrs. O'Dowd.

"I've had the most wonderful basket sent me that ever----" began she;
then her eye fell upon the hamper in the center of the floor. "Glory be
to goodness!" she ejaculated. "Wherever did you get that?"

"We don't know," Carl answered.

"And we've one just like it and can't find out who sent us ours," put
in Hal Harling.

"Well, I thought for sure as you were the folks that sent me mine,"
declared Julie. "But if they are being scattered broadcast and you are
getting one yourselves I reckon it is safe to say you don't know much
about where mine came from. Well, all I can say is may the sender of
them have a blessed Christmas. Owing to O'Dowd being out of work, we
were to have a pretty slim celebration this year. The children were
like to get nothing at all. And then just when I was trying to comfort
myself with thinking how glad I should be that Joey was well, and that
we all had our health even if we did lack a turkey and the fixings,
along comes this windfall. Why, it is as if the heavens opened and
dropped it straight down at our door. It does you good to know there
are kind hearts in the world, doesn't it?"

One and all the McGregors smiled. If they wanted thanks for the
self-denial they had practised they certainly had them in the gratitude
that beamed from Julie's face.

"Well, it will be a royal Christmas for all of us, won't it?" went on
the little woman, bustling out. "I must hurry back downstairs. The
children are that crazy they are like to eat the turkey raw, claws,
neck and feathers!"

"I'll come with you, Mrs. O'Dowd," said Hal. "Good-by, and a Merry
Christmas, everybody."

"I'm mighty glad we sent that dinner to the O'Dowd's!" commented Carl
soberly, when the door was shut and the McGregors were alone. "I'd be
glad we did it even if we had no dinner of our own," he added, his eyes
alight with a grave happiness.

"And I, too," whispered Tim.


CHAPTER XII

A CLUE


The next morning, fluttering excitedly round a Christmas tree spangled
with tinsel and aglow with lights, the McGregors received their
presents; and not they alone, for Julie O'Dowd, with her five
youngsters, swelled the party, together with the Murphys and the
Sullivans from the floors below. There was popcorn for everybody and
satiny striped candy, and from the mysterious basket an orange for each
guest was produced.

"When we have so much ourselves it would be wrong to keep it all," Mrs.
McGregor had asserted; and her household fully agreed with her.
Therefore the neighbors were summoned in to share in the festivity.

And after the visitors had trailed down the long stairway, shouting
back their pleasure and gratitude, the wonderful dinner the hamper
contained was prepared, and what a delightful ceremonial that was! Did
ever any such tantalizing aroma drift upon the air as ascended from the
browning turkey? Or did ever potatoes so fill their jackets to
bursting? As for the celery--it was like ivory; and the cranberry jelly
as transparent and glowing as a huge ruby. And, oh, the browning crust
of the mince pies! So many hungry little McGregors swarmed round the
stove it was a marvel some of them were not burned to death on hot
stove covers or the oven door. One could scarcely baste the turkey
without falling over two or three of them.

However, nobody was scalded or blistered and when at length the great
bronzed bird was borne from the oven a procession of exultant children
followed in the wake of the huge platter, every one of them shouting
for the wishbone or a drumstick.

"Was the creature a centipede he would hardly have drumsticks to
satisfy you!" laughed their mother. "Who ever saw such a lot of
cannibals! Was anybody to hear your hubbub they'd think you had never
had a mouthful to eat in all your lives. I don't believe your uncle
ever saw worse heathen in the South Sea Islands."

Nevertheless, in spite of her caustic comment, it was plain that the
mother was enjoying her children's pleasure and that Uncle Frederick
was enjoying it too.

"Well," went on Mrs. McGregor, "if you do not get filled up to-day it
will be your own fault. I shall put no check on anybody. You may eat
all you'll hold."

Profiting by this spacious permission the McGregors fell to and what a
feast they had! Never had they dreamed of such a meal. Even Carl and
Martin, whose capacity appeared to be limitless, were at length forced
to confess that for once in their lives they had had enough; as for Tim
he sank back in his chair almost in tears because he could not find
room for another mouthful.

"I couldn't squeeze down a single 'nother thing if I was paid for it,"
wailed he. "And I did so want a second helping of pudding! Why didn't
you stop me, Ma, when I started out on that giant sweet potato?"

His mother shrugged her shoulders.

"You must learn to make your own choices," said she. "Perhaps 'twill
teach you next time not to covet all you see. And now, before we begin
to clear up, I want to make sure you are all content. There must be no
regrets. I don't want to hear to-morrow that you wish you had had
so-and-so. So think well before the food is whisked into the pantry.
Has everybody had enough?"

A chorus of muffled groans arose.

"What do you think we are, Ma?" Tim managed to murmur.

"Indeed I don't know," was the grim retort. "I've often wondered. So
you think you couldn't eat a morsel more?"

"_Think!_ We know we couldn't," gasped Carl.

"Then sit still a second, all of you, till I take a good look at you!"
commanded their mother. "That I should live to see the day when I would
dish up a meal without some amongst you yammering for another helping!
I'm almost tempted to take an affidavit with your signatures in black
and white and preserve it in the family Bible."

With arms akimbo she viewed her grinning flock.

"Well, since you're beyond urging, we may as well turn to the dishes--that
is, if anybody can stagger up and help."

Reaching over she began to remove the food from the table.

Mary sprang to aid her.

"Let me carry the things into the pantry," Tim said. "Maybe if I walk
round some it will shake down what I've eaten."

"Are you laying to eat another course?" derided Carl.

"Aw, quit it!" growled Tim. "I'll bet I haven't made way with any more
than you have. Here, fork over that pie! I'll put it in the closet."

"Can we trust you with it?" called Captain Dillingham.

Tim put up his hand.

"Say, I wouldn't touch that pie if you were to go down on your knees
and beg me to," Tim declared. "Millions wouldn't hire me!"

"Give it to him, Carl; he sounds perfectly safe," asserted the lad's
mother. "And put those apples and figs away, too, dear, if you are
going into the pantry. Mary, you and Carl pile the dishes. What an army
of them there are! I believe we have out every plate we own. Martin, do
take the babies into the next room where they will be out from under
foot. And watch that Nell doesn't eat the candles off the tree. She's
always thinking they are candy, the witch!"

"You must let me help," urged Uncle Frederick, rolling up his sleeves.

"Oh, you must not work to-day, Frederick," his sister protested. "It is
a holiday and you are on shore leave. Besides, it never seems right to
me to see the captain of a ship working."

"Oh, the captain of a ship knows the galley quite as well as the
bridge," responded Uncle Frederick. Seizing a towel he stationed
himself beside Mary who was elbow deep in the dishpan. "All hands to
the pumps!" cried he sharply.

It was a ringing command and instantly Tim and Carl leaped forward to
obey it.

What a dish-wiping team the three made!

Mary could scarcely wash fast enough to keep up with them.

In the meantime Mrs. McGregor was here, there, and everywhere, putting
to rights the disordered house; and so effectual was her touch that by
the time the last plate was on the shelf tranquillity reigned and
except for lurking candy bags and stray bits of red ribbon it almost
seemed as if there had never been such an event as a Christmas party.

"Now why can't we all go over to the Harlings, Ma?" Carl inquired.
"They will be through their dinner by this time. Hal asked if we
couldn't come."

"But not all of us!" objected Mrs. McGregor. "Why, we're a caravan!"

"Nobody minds caravans on Christmas," pleaded Carl. "Grandfather
Harling would love to see the children. We haven't had them there for
ever so long."

"I suppose we might go. It isn't very far," his mother meditated.

"Oh, do let's!" Tim put in. "I'll wheel James Frederick."

"You? You couldn't wheel anything, so full are you of turkey and plum
pudding! If you get there yourself you will be doing well," was the
curt retort. "However, if you all want to go, I'll not hinder you.
Scurry and get your caps, coats, and mittens."

Off flew the youngsters in every direction; off, too, flew Mrs.
McGregor with Nell and Martin at her heels and the baby in her arms.

Owing to excitement and the general holiday confusion it was some time
before there were two rubbers, two mittens, a cap, coat, and muffler
for everybody; on the very brink of departure a full equipment for
Martin could not be found and to his unbounded delight he was compelled
to set forth in one arctic and one rubber boot--a novel combination
that greatly heightened his pleasure in the trip and made him the envy
of all his younger brothers and sisters. Whether his satisfaction would
have outlived a long journey is uncertain for the rubber boot proved to
be not only too large but treacherously leaky. Notwithstanding the
fact, however, he was a sufficiently good sport to make the best of his
unfortunate bargain and clatter up the long, dim flights that led to
the Harlings' suite with as much spirit as the rest.

And oh, such a welcome as the family received when they did arrive!

It would have warmed the heart to see the little ones rush to
Grandfather Harling, clinging round him like a swarm of bees and
clamoring for a story. And a story they got--and not only one but two,
three, for Grandfather was a rare story-teller and a great lover of
children. Meantime the elders gossiped together, their chief topic of
speculation being the sender of the wonderful Christmas dinners.

"If you hadn't got one, Carl, I should almost be tempted to think old
Corcoran had sent ours to ease his conscience," Hal announced. "But of
course he wouldn't have been stretching his philanthropy so far as
Mulberry Court, I'm afraid."

"Oh, I'm sure the dinner couldn't have come from Mr. Corcoran," put in
Louise quickly. "It wouldn't be a bit like him to tie the nuts up with
fancy ribbon, and tuck in the presents. No, somebody sent that dinner
who really cared, and took pains to have it pretty and tempting. Mr.
Corcoran might order us a dinner at the market but he never would have
packed the basket himself as--as--Mr. X did."

"Well, all I can say is that Mr. X, whoever he is, is a corker; and may
he live long and prosper!" Hal declared.

"He will prosper," murmured Mrs. Harling in her soft voice. "Such a man
cannot help it."

"I do wish, though, we knew who he is, don't you?" Mary asked. "I'd
just like to thank him."

"I fancy Mr. X is not the sort that covets thanks," her mother replied.
"Some people take their pleasure in doing a kind deed. I imagine
Louise's Mr. X is one of that sort."

So they talked on, until suddenly glancing out of the window, Mrs.
McGregor exclaimed in consternation, "Why, it is snowing!"

Sure enough! A thick smother of flakes whirled down into the deserted
streets and cutting short Grandfather Harling's story, the visitors
bundled themselves into their wraps.

"I hope the children won't take cold," said Mrs. Harling anxiously.

"Take cold? Mercy, no! They are tough as nuts, every soul of them,"
answered their mother. "Having no automobiles they gain it in their
health. Poverty has its blessings--I'll say that! Now, Carl, you hold
onto Nell and don't let her down on all fours; she is such a fat little
blunderbuss! And Mary, keep Martin in the path if you can, or he will
lose that huge rubber boot. Uncle Frederick is going to wheel the baby.
And remember, Tim, there are to be no snowballs or snow down anybody's
neck. You will have plenty of time for that sort of fun to-morrow, if
you call it fun. And, children, do try to go down the stairs quietly.
Don't forget there are other people on earth besides yourselves. A
Merry Christmas, everybody!"

"And three cheers for Mr. X!" Hal added boyishly.

"Hal Harling, don't you dare set this brood of mine cheering in the
hallway! They'll raise the roof," ejaculated Mrs. McGregor, putting up
a warning finger. "Not but what I'd gladly cheer the person who sent
those dinners; but we mustn't do it here."

"Well, it was a jim-dandy dinner, anyway," chuckled Hal. "We'll be
eating that turkey for days. It was big as an ostrich!"

"Maybe you drew an ostrich by mistake," grinned Carl. "Who knows?"

Oh, it would have taken hearts less merry than these to be dampened by
the storm! Home plodded the McGregors, shouting gaily amid the piling
drifts.

"My, it is going to be a real blizzard!" Mrs. McGregor predicted.
"Every tree and bush is laden already."

"The little shrubs in the park look like cotton bushes," replied Uncle
Frederick over his shoulder. "Look, youngsters! You were asking about
cotton when it is ripe. That is much the way it looks." He motioned
toward the vista of bending foliage.

"How pretty it is!" said Mary.

"And in reality cotton is prettier by far, for there is always the blue
of the sky, the gold of the sunshine, and the green of the country. It
is as if one had a snowstorm in summer."

There was little opportunity for further talk for the trodden snow
narrowed into a ribbon and the walkers were obliged to thread the
drifts single file. At last, however, Mulberry Court came into view and
with a stamping of feet and a brushing of caps and coats the family
were within its welcoming portals. Then James Frederick was dug out of
his carriage, shaken, and borne crowing and rosy up the stairs.

The flat proved to be warm and comfortable and while Mary lighted the
lamps her mother poked up the fire and sprinkled on more coal.

"Now let's sit down everybody and have a nice, jolly evening," said she
when the outer garments were all stowed away. "Come, Carl, draw up the
rocker for Uncle Frederick. And, Timmie, there's room for you here
beside me. What's the matter, laddie?"

For answer Tim glanced at the steely blue hands of the clock now
pointing to six.

"Aren't we going to have any supper?" questioned he in an aggrieved
tone.

"Supper!" exploded his mother. "Surely you are not looking for anything
more to eat to-day. You yourself declared only a little while ago that
you couldn't eat another morsel."

"It wasn't a little while ago; it was hours," Tim affirmed. "We've been
to walk since then and I'm hungry."

"Hungry! Did you ever hear the likes! Hungry! And the bairn swallowing
down turkey until I expected every second he would have apoplexy!"

"I'm hungry, too," rejoined Carl with shame-faced candor.

"So am I!" piped Martin.

"Well, I never saw your match!" cried their mother, holding up her
hands. "One would think you were cobras, anacondas, or something else
out of the zoo. Still, I don't see as I can let you starve. If you're
hungry there's the pantry with its shelves groaning aloud with food.
Run in and help yourselves."

Her family needed no second bidding. Above everything else they loved a
meal where all superfluous accessories such as knives, forks, and
napkins were done away with, and where there was no one at one's elbow
to caution or demand the time-worn "pleases" and "thank you's." To
forage in the pantry unrestrained was like being let loose in the vales
of Arcadia. One after another they emerged, bearing in their hands the
spoils most attracting their fancy.

"You're not going to devour that whole cross section of squash pie, are
you, Tim?" asked Mary, aghast.

"Sure I am," retorted the unabashed Timothy. "That is, unless you want
part of it."

"Of course I don't. But I should think you'd die!"

"I don't expect to die," returned her imperturbable brother. "And if I
do I'll at least have had one everlasting good feed."

"Tim!" expostulated his horrified mother.

"Well, I will have," repeated the boy. "And anyhow, I don't believe
I've eaten so much more than other folks. I notice you don't mention
little Carlie here. He's worried down some food to-day, and like as not
Hal Harling has, too. What's more, I'll bet a hat Hal won't go
supperless to bed."

At that moment a rap came at the door and Mary sprang forward to admit
the very young gentleman in question.

"You see, I'm returning your call on schedule time," grinned he,
shaking the snow from his outer garments. "I can't stay but a moment;
but I had to come and tell you what's happened. What do you think of
that?" Diving into his pocket he held forth a handsome watch and chain.

"Who've you been robbing?" drawled Carl.

"I don't wonder you say so, kid. Can you beat it? Did you ever see such
a beauty?"

"But--but--Hal, where on earth did you get a thing like that?"

"Well may you ask, kid! Think of me hitched to a gold watch! Oh, it's
mine all right. Have a look inside the back cover. There's my name, you
see, in perfectly good English."

"Where _did_ you get it, Hal?" demanded Mrs. McGregor, as the
gift traveled from one admiring hand to another.

"You'd never guess, any of you. It came from my worst enemy." The big
fellow threw back his head and laughed a ringing laugh.

"But that tells us nothing. You have a million enemies," blurted out
Carl.

"It certainly is from our friends we learn the truth," Hal replied with
cheerfulness. "You're not a flatterer, are you, Carlie?"

"But I can't imagine who should present you with a gold watch," Carl
mused, ignoring the comment.

"Oh, you're not half bright to-day. What's the matter with you?"
hectored Hal, who was enjoying the sensation he had created.

"He's eaten too much turkey," Tim piped.

"I guess that's it," agreed young Harling. "Come, gather your wits
together. Louise guessed the conundrum. You ought to be as smart as she
is."

Vaguely Carl studied his friend's face.

"Of course it couldn't be from Corcoran," ventured he, as if thinking
aimlessly.

"And why not?"

"Why, because--why Corcoran wouldn't--why should Corcoran give you a
present like that?"

"The very words I said myself!"

"Do you mean to say it _was_ Corcoran?"

"Well, it wasn't from Corcoran himself. But he had the buying of it.
The watch came from the Corcoran kid and Midget, the dog."

"Oh!" Carl gasped, a wave of understanding flooding his face. "It was
because of what you did that day. I'd almost forgotten."

"So had I. Corcoran thanked me up at the works some time afterward; you
remember I told you about it. Well, I thought that was the end of the
matter," Hal explained. "But evidently the Corcorans thought they
wouldn't leave it there. So--" with a flourish he held up the gift.

"Oh, Hal, I think that was splendid of them," Mrs. McGregor declared.
"You deserve it, too. Carl said you might have been killed that day."

"Nonsense! That's Carlie's yellow journalism. He told you a great yarn,
I've no doubt. You ought to be on one of the daily papers, kid."

"But you did take an awful chance, you know you did," insisted Carl
stoutly.

"Oh, you have to take a chance now and then to put a little spice into
life. It was no great stunt I did," Hal protested. "I just happened to
do it before anybody else did, that's all."

"I guess that's your way of putting it, laddie," Mrs. McGregor said
with an affectionate smile. "Well, we're certainly glad you have the
watch. It will be fine and useful. Just see you do not get it smashed
to bits in some of the scraps you are mixed up in."

"Do you think I am going to stand dumb as an oyster and let somebody
land a blow over my vest pocket hard enough to smash that watch, Mrs.
McGregor?" interrogated the giant. "Pray, where would I be while he was
doing it?"

"Gentlemen with gold watches should keep out of the prize ring," put in
Uncle Frederick mischievously.

"Oh, sir, one has to have a watch to call time on the other feller,"
Hal retorted.

"Put it on and let's see how you look, Hal," Tim begged.

"Yes, do!" echoed Mary.

"All right, I'll dress up in it since you say the word," answered Hal,
with an impish grimace. "You may as well see me in it and get used to
the sight; then you won't be taking me for an alderman when you meet me
on the street."

He slipped the chain through his buttonhole and the watch into his
pocket.

"Don't I look for all the world like the Lord Mayor of London or one of
the Common Council?"

"You look like an old sport," Carl asserted, giving his chum a blow on
the chest.

Harling accepted the knock much as a kitten might have accepted a
caress.

"Just for that I've half a mind not to tell you the rest of what I came
for," grinned he. "I've something else to say that will set your hair
on end. But you're that rude that you don't deserve to be told it."

"Oh, what is it, Hal?" Mary cried.

"Another secret!" Tim ejaculated.

"It isn't exactly a secret," Hal said. "It's a clue."

"A clue! To what, for pity's sake?" Carl murmured.

"You are thick, to-night--no mistake!" laughed Hal. "Why, what have we
been arguing over all day--twisting and turning this way and that? What
have we been speculating over until our brains are weak? Tell me that?"

"You haven't a clue about the Christmas baskets!" gasped Mrs. McGregor.

"I've a theory," nodded Hal, with tantalizing solemnity.

"Tell us! Tell us!" cried a chorus of voices.

"It's only a theory, remember, and it doesn't hitch up in every
detail," went on Hal, quite serious now. "But it is worth considering."

"Tell us!"

"Well, it isn't much of a story, so don't get your hopes up. But the
fact is that when we emptied our basket I turned it upside down----"

"Because you were still hungry!" cut in Carl.

"Exactly! How well you read me. Yes, being still famished, I thought
I'd see if some last morsel of food did not lurk under the papers. So I
emptied out everything and what should I find scrawled in pencil across
the bottom of the basket but the word 'Coulter.'"

"_Coulter!_" shouted the McGregors in disappointed accents.

"What has that to do with it?" Carl demanded.

"Why"--Hal looked crestfallen--"why, Mr. Coulter of Davis and Coulter
is one of my bosses, isn't he?"

"Y-e-s, I suppose he is. But he isn't mine. The two baskets were
exactly alike and must have come from the same person; and certainly
Mr. Coulter wouldn't send us a basket. Oh, you'll have to guess again,
Sherlock Holmes," concluded Carl with a shrug.

"Your father used to work for Mr. Coulter at the mill," Mrs. McGregor
put in in a subdued voice.

"But Dad died two years ago and Mr. Coulter never has troubled to send
us anything before. Why should he begin now?" Carl argued.

"Did you examine our basket?" It was Captain Dillingham who spoke.

"No, but we can. It's out in the pantry. Run and fetch it, Martin,
that's a good boy. I'm willing to bet a hat, though, ours has no
'Coulter' written on it. Yours got scrawled on somehow at the market.
The name doesn't mean anything. Here's Martin now. Get out your
glasses, you old detective, and look and see what you can find. If you
can find Coulter on our basket, I'll eat my head," Carl hazarded with
confidence.

"You hear him, witnesses," Hal said, holding up an impressive finger.

Then taking the basket from Martin, he inverted it.

"Will you never acknowledge, oh, you unbeliever, that I am wiser than
you?" he presently jeered. "Come! Look at the thing yourself over here
under the lamp. If that word isn't 'Coulter' I'll eat both your head
and mine."

"Jove! It _is_ Coulter!" was all Carl could stammer.

"What did I tell you!"

"But why should Mr. Coulter send a Christmas basket to us?" speculated
Carl in an awed whisper.

"I'm not telling you why. I've not got as far as that," Hal answered.
"All I said was that the name, Coulter, was written on both baskets and
that the natural conclusion is that Mr. Coulter was their sender."

"I don't believe it. Why, it would be ridiculous," Carl protested. "Mr.
Coulter probably never so much as heard of us in all his life. Why
should he? I'm sure we don't know him."

"I'm afraid your theory isn't quite sound, Hal," rejoined Mrs.
McGregor. "While it is possible that for some reason of his own Mr.
Coulter, for whom you work, may have sent you a Christmas basket there
is not one shred of anything to link him up with us. Mr. McGregor, it
is true, was in Davis and Coulter's employ many years; but he was only
one of many hundred workmen and scarcely knew old Mr. Coulter by sight.
Since the old gentleman has died and the son has come into the firm the
last thread that bound us to the company has been snapped. Old Mr.
Coulter is gone, and McGregor, with his twenty-five years of service in
the mills, is forgotten. As for this young John Coulter who has taken
his father's place--I've never set eyes on him."

"But why should the name be on each of the baskets?" Hal insisted,
still unwilling to surrender the idea he cherished.

"Ask the market man, laddie. It's a question for him. My notion is that
in the rush somebody put it there by mistake," replied Carl's mother.
"The marvel isn't that Coulter was written on the baskets; the marvel
is that some word in Choctaw or Egyptian wasn't on 'em. Why, if you'd
seen those clerks down at the store going round as if their heads were
clean off their bodies you wouldn't wonder queer things were written on
the hampers we got. I'm amazed they arrived at all."

"But somebody sent them," Hal affirmed.

"I'll join you there! Somebody sent them," nodded Mrs. McGregor. "Up to
that point your arguments are perfectly logical. Those baskets never
came of themselves. But as for Mr. John Coulter being their giver--why,
you are mad as a March hare to think it for a moment. What would he be
doing with all his college education and his years of study in Europe
sending the likes of us Christmas presents? He has plenty of presents
to give in his own family, I guess."

"Well, maybe you're right and the name only happened," Hal conceded.
"Still, it's queer, isn't it? Queer that the name should be Coulter, I
mean."

"It's a coincidence for you because you chance to work for him; but to
us it means nothing."

"Yes, I can see that now," Hal agreed. "Then I guess there is nothing
left before going home but to see Carlie carry out his little wager."

"My wager?" Carl repeated.

"You were going to eat your head if the name of Coulter was on the
bottom of this basket, remember."

"Oh!" Carl grinned a sickly grin.

"Going to default?"

"No, not default--merely postpone the ceremony," Carl declared.

"Oh, you old crawler! Well, if you are going to put off the show I must
be getting home or Mother will think I have been waylaid and my watch
stolen. So long, everybody, and pleasant dreams." Then thrusting his
face back into the room through the narrowing crack of the door, he
added with elfish leer, "Just the same, I still think that Coulter had
something to do with those baskets."

Before a protest could be raised the door banged and he was gone.


CHAPTER XIII

HAL REPEATS HIS VISIT


Whoever the mysterious Mr. X was he succeeded in keeping his identity a
secret much better than did the donors of the O'Dowd's Christmas
dinner. A secret when shared by too many becomes no secret at all and
so, alas, it proved in this case. And yet no deliberate prattling
divulged the story. Its betrayal was purely accidental.

On the morning following the holiday, which, by the way, chanced to be
Sunday, Mrs. O'Dowd came up to borrow the McGregor's can opener. In
Mulberry Court somebody was always borrowing. An inventory of each
family's possessions gradually became public property, so that all the
neighbors knew exactly where to turn for anything needed. In fact, the
residents of the house so planned their purchases that they would not
overlap what the dwelling already contained. Nobody thought, for
example, of buying a washing machine since the Murphys had one; nor did
any one see cause for investing in a wringer, when a perfectly good one
was owned by the McGregors. Even such small things as egg beaters,
double boilers, and ice picks, all had an established place of
residence and were used in a community spirit. All day long from
morning until night little boys and girls trailed up and down the long
flights of stairs either to borrow or to return to their rightful
owners articles that had been a-visiting. It almost required a card
catalogue to keep track of where one's things were.

"Do you know who has the egg beater?" Mrs. McGregor would interrogate
on a baking day.

And some of the children whose function it was to procure or carry
hence the egg beater generally recalled its whereabouts.

"It's down to Murphys', Ma," Martin would shout. "Don't you remember
that Thursday she was making custard?"

Oh, yes; Mrs. McGregor did recollect. It flashed into her mind at the
time that with eggs so high the Murphys might well do without custard.
Nevertheless, she had not said so. One did not venture to criticize
one's neighbors--even if the gossip connected with the various
borrowings did entail first-hand information concerning their affairs.
For by common consent it was not Mulberry Court etiquette to borrow
without stating exactly the service required of the article in
question. When, for instance, you sent an emissary to ask for the
O'Dowds' ironing board you said:

"Can Ma take the ironing board so she can iron out Mary's dress 'cause
she's got to have her white one clean to speak a piece in at school."

Then the O'Dowds knew exactly why the ironing board was needed and just
how necessary it was to have it, and not only did they promptly deliver
it up, but the next time you met them they inquired how Mary got on
speaking her piece and whether she was frightened or not. In this way a
friendly interest was created.

To have borrowed the ironing board and not have detailed the
accompanying facts would have been a heinous crime and would have
exempted any person from loaning it. Under such circumstances it would
have been perfectly excusable to send back word by the messenger:

"Mrs. O'Dowd is sorry but she is using the ironing board herself
to-day."

But when Mary was to speak a piece, that was quite a different matter.

Mulberry Court had a pride in its tenants.

Mary McGregor certainly must not appear in a dress that had not been
freshly ironed. Why, the people on the street would think Mulberry
Court bereft of all sense of propriety! No, indeed. Mary McGregor must
make a fitting showing if the whole house had to turn to to achieve the
desired result. And if by any chance her family could not iron her
dress, why somebody else must. Mulberry Court would make a proper
showing no matter at what personal sacrifice.

And the same self-respecting spirit came to the fore on all great
occasions. When the Sullivan's baby was christened was not Mrs.
Sullivan arrayed in Mrs. McGregor's bonnet, Mrs. O'Dowd's coat, and
Mrs. Murphy's skirt, that she might make a truly genteel impression?
There was the dignity of Mulberry Court to be maintained.

Thus it followed that borrowing was no unusual act and therefore when
on Sunday morning Mrs. O'Dowd presented herself at the McGregor's door
and announced that she was going to have a chowder of canned corn for
dinner and wanted the can opener, beyond a conversation as to the
nourishment corn chowder contained; the brand of canned goods one
bought; the price of it per can; the quantity of milk required and the
price of that milk per quart, nothing further was said, unless it was,
perhaps, to mention the crackers and inquire whether the O'Dowds used
pilot biscuit or oysterettes. But of course the can opener was not
denied and while Mary went to fetch it and Mrs. McGregor continued
cutting Nell's hair Mrs. O'Dowd, with arms akimbo, reviewed the
pleasures of the day before and compared Christmas dinners.

"Such a feast as we had," declared she. "Such turkey! It melted in your
mouth and ran down your throat almost before you had the chance to
taste it. And the sweet potatoes! You'd believe, actually, they were
just dug up out of the ground! Had you sweet potatoes in your basket,
Martin?"

"Sure we had!" returned the small boy, not to be outdone.

"And then the celery! It was that handsome it was fit to be set on a
bonnet--I'm telling you the truth."

"Mary gave the celery," lisped Nell.

"Hush!" Martin cried. "You weren't to tell that."

"I didn't tell what I gave. Ma told me not to and I haven't," announced
wee Nell proudly.

"But you're not to tell what anybody gave," Martin commanded. "I
haven't told a thing, have I, Ma?" concluded he in triumph.

"Hush, Martin, hush!" cautioned his mother quickly. "Pay no heed to
them, Mrs. O'Dowd; sure after the holiday they hardly know what they're
saying."

"But--but----" Mrs. O'Dowd glanced keenly about, viewing the guilty
faces and the indignant looks the older children centered on the two
small culprits. She was a quick-witted woman and instantly put two and
two together.

"So it was Mary sent the celery, was it?" repeated she. "And who, pray,
bought the turkey?" The temptation the question presented was too great
for the youthful conspirators.

"Uncle Fwedewic! Uncle Fwedewic!" cried Nell and Martin in a breath.

"He bought it wiz his very own money," Nell went on to explain before
she could be stopped.

Oh, the game was all up now! Of what use was it to pretend anything
after that? Martin heaved a sigh of delight. For days the secret had
trembled on his tongue, making life uncomfortable and unnatural.
Constitutionally it was his habit to let slip from that artless member
anything that lurked at its tip and as a result he held secrets in
abhorrence. Now the truth was out and he for one was glad it was. He
would no longer be dreading an encounter with the O'Dowds or be under
the trying necessity of acting a part.

"The candy was mine," he announced calmly. "I gave it and Uncle
Frederick paid the man."

Julie ventured over the threshold.

"So it's you we have to thank for our dinner!" she exclaimed.

"You don't have us to _thank_," put in Mrs. McGregor quickly.

"But you surely wouldn't have me be taking a dinner like that and not
thanking you for it," said Julie. "And neither O'Dowd nor I had an
inkling! Think of our coming up here Christmas morning and all of you
keeping so mum!"

"We'd have kept mum longer, if it hadn't been for Nell and Martin,"
Carl asserted. "I don't see why they couldn't shut up, Ma."

"A secret's no easy treasure to have in one's possession," Mrs. O'Dowd
put in quickly. "And you must remember they are but mites--Nell and
Martin. Indeed, in my opinion, it's a miracle they didn't blurt it out
long before this. You wouldn't get a child of mine to hold his peace
any such while; neither the big ones nor the little could do it. Well,
well! It was a happy day you gave us and you certainly deserved the
dinner you got yourselves. And you had no notion when you sent ours you
were to have one of your own."

"No! When it came we thought for a moment you had sent our present
back," Carl explained.

"In other words, you were going without your dinner to give it to us,"
commented Julie.

"We had our tree," Mary interrupted. "We didn't need both things."

"It's few would have done what you did," Julie remarked quietly.
"O'Dowd and I will not be forgetting it, either."

Tears came into the eyes of the little woman and as if words failed her
she wheeled about and disappeared down the dim hallway.

"At least, she was not put out by our doing it," commented Mrs.
McGregor, after her neighbor had gone. "I feared some she might be. But
evidently she accepted the gift just as we meant it. So that's settled!
Now if we could only find out where our own dinner came from and say as
much to its giver, I'd be entirely content. I've taxed my brain until
my head is fair aching and still I'm no nearer having an idea where
that basket of ours came from than the man in the moon."

"I guess you will just have to rate it as coming from the fairies,"
smiled her brother, "and let the matter rest there; that is, unless Hal
Harling gets another inspiration."

"Another inspiration! Sure the inspiration he had wasn't worth much,"
sniffed Mrs. McGregor. "Unless he can provide a better one than that I
sha'n't be listening to him."

"You may as well not be slandering him, for here he is now," Carl
cried, jumping up to admit his chum whose footfall he had heard on the
stairs.

"I'm not slandering him," Mrs. McGregor continued, imperturbably
greeting the visitor. "In fact, what I've said about him I'd as lief
say to his face. I'm telling them, laddie," said she, turning brightly
to Hal, "that I have scant opinion of you as a detective."

The big fellow laughed good-humoredly.

"They are not putting me on the Scotland Yard force yet, I must own,"
he admitted. "But how do you know that I won't track down Mr. X yet?
Give me time. No great mystery can be solved all in a minute."

"I've let you sleep on it and so far as I can see you are no better off
this morning than you were last night," was the crisp retort.

"I'm not, and that's the truth," Hal returned, pulling off his coat.
"I'm simply going to bury the matter the way a dog buries a bone, and
then some day I'll dig it up and go to work at it again."

"I guess that's as good a scheme as any," Captain Dillingham declared.
"Sometimes if you do not fuss at a riddle it solves itself. Come, sit
down and talk to us while Nell gets her hair cut. It may help to keep
her quiet."

The child, seated on the table and muffled to her neck in her mother's
apron, brightened.

"Tell story," commanded she. "Hal tell story."

"I? Not on your life!" protested the big fellow in consternation. "I
never told a story in all my days. Your uncle Frederick will tell you
one."

"Uncle Frederick will do nothing of the sort," growled the captain, as
he puffed contentedly at his pipe. "It's Hal who is going to tell the
story. He is going to explain to us exactly what they do with the bales
of cotton when they reach the mill."

"That? Oh, I can tell you that, all right, for I see it done from
morning to night, year in and year out. But I don't call that a story,
do you?"

"It will be a story to us, no matter what it is to you, for remember
that although I have often loaded cotton and carried it hither and
thither round the world I've never seen what became of it after we
thumped it down on the dock."

"Haven't you? That's funny!" smiled Hal. "And yet after all I don't
know as it is, either. How should you know what is done with it? I
shouldn't have if I hadn't happened to spend my days at Davis and
Coulter's. Well, then, as soon as we get the bales we first weigh them
and make a record of each. Then they are opened up and the matted
material is spread out so the coarsest of the dirt, such as leaves,
sand, stems, and bits of dry pods will be loosened and fall out. To
accomplish this we have opening machines of various kinds with beaters,
fans, and rollers and by these methods the cotton is cleaned and
pressed into a flat sheet or lap. Afterward we start in to mix the
varieties in the different bales."

"What for?" questioned Carl.

"Oh, because to get good results you have to have a blend of
varieties," Hal explained.

"But isn't cotton cotton?" inquired Mary.

"Not a bit it isn't," grinned young Harling. "Some cotton is far and
away better than another. Often it has had better care, better weather,
or better soil; or maybe it has grown more evenly and therefore has
less unripe stuff mixed in with it. Or perhaps it was a finer, more
highly cultivated kind in the first place. There are a score of
explanations. Anyhow it is better, and because it is we do not use it
all by itself. Instead we use it to grade up some that is less fine in
quality. After the bales have been classified we take a little of this
and a little of that until we have struck a good average. It goes
without saying that we never mix two extremes, or put the best and the
worst together. That wouldn't do at all. We aim to produce a mean
between these two qualities. All this mixing is not, however, done by
hand, as you might think to hear me talk. No, indeed! We have
bale-breakers or cotton-pullers to do the work. We simply put several
sheets or laps of different quality cotton one on top of another and
then let the spikes of the machines tear it into fragments and mix it
up."

"Oh!" Mary murmured.

"Afterward comes the scutching," went on Hal, "which is really only a
continuation of the same process although the scutching machine makes
the laps of cotton of more even thickness. Next we card the material to
find out where we stand. It is brushed or combed out--whichever you
prefer to call it, and the remaining dirt and short, unripe fibers are
removed. This leaves the real thing, and the machine gathers it up and
twists it into a sort of rope about an inch in diameter called a
sliver."

"What a funny name!" Tim remarked.

"I suppose it is when you stop to think of it," Hal answered. "Well,
anyhow, that's what a sliver is. In some mills they draw the cotton out
into these long strands and double together four or eight slivers
before they are carded. The carding lengthens or stretches them to the
size of one and therefore you get a greater uniformity of size. Beside
that, all the crossed or snarled fibers are arranged so that they lie
out straight and smooth, and when this is done the material is ready
for the bobbin and fly frames."

"And what, for goodness' sake, might those be?" demanded Captain
Dillingham.

"I certainly am a great hero coming here and knowing so much," Hal
answered with amusement. "I think you will understand them better, sir,
if you forget what they're called and remember only what they do. They
actually combine three processes: slubbing, intermediate, and roving,
and their aim is to draw the sliver out until it is thinner, more
uniform, and cleaner for spinning. Surely that is simple enough. The
spinning is done on a mule or a ring frame--sometimes the one is
preferred, sometimes the other. Generally speaking, the thread from one
of these machines is what is used for weaving purposes. Sometimes,
though, it happens that an order comes for a crackajack fine yarn of
the best possible quality and then another combing or carding process
follows which takes out everything shorter than fibers of a specified
length. As a result about seventeen per cent. of waste is thrown out,
as great a percentage as in all the other processes put together.
Naturally it is a pretty expensive operation and it makes the yarn thus
turned out high in price."

"I suppose such yarn goes only into the finest quality goods," observed
Captain Dillingham.

"Exactly!" was Hal's answer.

"It all sounds simple as rolling off a log," Carl affirmed.

"If it seems so to you, just you think back over the problem Arkwright
and some of the other inventors, the fruit of whose labors we are now
reaping, had to solve," put in Uncle Frederick. "Even I, who am
ignorant as an Egyptian mummy concerning cotton manufacture, can
appreciate to some extent what they were up against. You must remember
that no material is stronger than its weakest part. You have, for
instance, a thin place in a string; it matters not how strong that
string may be in other spots; pull it taut and it will snap. The thick
places do not help make the string strong as a whole. So it is with
thread. You have to draw it out until every portion of it is as strong
as every other--a pretty little conundrum! It is the drawing, twisting,
and doubling which makes the thread first uniform and then strong. Try
working-out devices that shall do all these things--devices that shall
twist and then double without untwisting, for example. You'll find it
worse than a three-ringed circus."

"That's right, sir!" Hal agreed heartily. "I remember when I first went
into the mills how puzzled I was at seeing the bobbins whirling in
opposite directions. It seemed as if one was simply undoing what
another had done. I thought they all ought to turn the same way. It was
months before I got through my head what they were up to."

"I hadn't thought of the twisting and doubling part," Carl murmured.

"You decide with that thrown in maybe the answer to the puzzle isn't so
easy, eh?" responded Hal with a teasing smile.

"I might have to ponder over it," Carl confessed suavely.

"Ponder! I guess you would. What's more, you'd have a good smart
headache before you were through your _pondering_, I'll bet!" jeered
Hal, tweaking his chum's hair.


CHAPTER XIV

SPINNING YARNS


All good things, alas, come to an end and the McGregor's Christmas
holidays were no exception to this immutable law. A day arrived when
Carl, Mary and Tim were obliged to return to school, and following
swift on the heels of this dire occasion came a yet more lamentable one
when Uncle Frederick Dillingham was forced to go back to his ship and
sail for China. The latter calamity entirely overshadowed the former
and was a very real blow not only to Mulberry Court, where the captain
had become an object of universal pride and affection, but also to the
Harling family who had come to depend on his daily visits for cheer and
sunshine.

"I don't see why somebody else can't sail your ship to China, Uncle
Frederick, and let you stay here," wailed Mary.

"Somebody else sail my ship!" gasped the captain, every syllable of the
phrase echoing consternation. "Why, my dear child, I would no more turn
the command of the _Charlotte_ over to another person than you would
exchange your mother for somebody else's. The _Charlotte_ kind of
belongs to me, don't you see? She is my--well, I reckon I can't just
explain what she is. All I can say is that where she goes I go--if I am
alive."

"But--but the sea is so terrible," objected the timid Mary. "So
dangerous."

For answer Captain Dillingham burst into a peal of laughter.

"Dangerous? Why, lassie, there isn't a quarter a part the danger on the
water there is on land. I have come nearer to being killed right here
in Baileyville than ever I have while cruising in mid-ocean. Folks take
their lives in their hands every time they cross a city street. Then,
too, aren't there high buildings to topple over; flagpoles to snap
asunder, signs to blow down; chimneys to shower their bricks on your
head; not to mention the death-dealing currents that come through
telegraph and telephone wires? Add to this threatening collection trees
and snow-slides and slippery pavements and you have quite a list of
horrors. Danger! Why, the land is nothing but maelstrom of catastrophes
compared with which the serenity of the open sea, with nothing but its
moon and stars overhead, is an oasis of safety. Of course there are
certain things you must be on your guard against while on the
water--fogs, icebergs and gales. But where can you find a spot under
God's heaven entirely free from the possibilities of mishap of some
sort? I'd a hundred times rather take the risks the sea holds than run
my chances on land. Besides, aren't we a city, same as you? Just
because we are afloat and you can boast the solid ground under your
feet is it a sign we are not citizens with laws and duties? with the
wireless singing its messages to us wherever we go we certainly are not
cut off from the rest of the world."

For a moment he paused to catch his breath.

"No, siree!" continued he. "We folks on shipboard simply belong to a
floating republic, that's all. It's our country same as this is yours,
and we love it quite as much as you do."

"I never thought of the ocean that way," Mary returned with a
thoughtful smile. "It's always seemed to me a big, big place without
any--any streets or----"

"But we have streets, lassie," cried her uncle, instantly catching her
up. "Regular avenues they are. Travel 'em and you'll meet the passing
same as you would were you to drive along a boulevard. They are the
ocean highways, the latitudes and longitudes found to be the best paths
between given countries. In some cases the way chosen is shorter; or
maybe experience has proved it to be freer from fog or icebergs.
Anyhow, it has become an accepted thoroughfare and is as familiar to
seafaring men as if it had been smoothed down with a steam roller and
had a signpost set to mark it. Never think, child, of the ocean as a
lonely, uncharted waste of water. It is a nice quiet place with as much
sociability on it as a man wants. You don't, to be sure, rub elbows
with your neighbors as you do ashore; but on the other hand you don't
have to put up with their racket. Pleasant as it is to be on land the
hum of it gets on my nerves in time, and I am always thankful to be
back aboard ship."

"We'll miss you dreadfully, Frederick," his sister remarked.

"But remember I'll be putting in at various ports off and on," returned
the captain, "and be mailing you letters, postals and trinkets of one
sort and another. Moreover, you're all going to write to me, I
hope--even Martin. For if there's any one thing a sailor man looks
forward to it's the mail that awaits him in a foreign port. I must own
that with all the virtues the sea possesses the landlubber has the best
of us on mail service. Rural free delivery is one blessing we can't
boast. No blue-coated postmen come sauntering down our watery streets
to drop letters and papers into our boxes. We have to call for these
ourselves same as you might have to go to a post-office here ashore if
the government wasn't as thoughtful and generous as it is. Our
post-offices are sometimes pretty far apart, too, and I'm driven to
confess we don't always get our mail as often as we'd like. That's one
of the outs of seafaring. So when we do touch shore and go looking for
letters it is disappointing not to find any. Don't forget that. After
I'm gone you will get busy with your school, and your sewing, and your
fun, and you will not think so often about Uncle Frederick." He put up
a warning hand to stay the protest of his listeners. "You won't mean
to," continued he kindly, "but you'll do it all the same. It's human
nature."

This sinister prediction, however, did not prove true.

For days after Captain Dillingham said good-by to Baileyville, Mulberry
Court, the Harlings and the McGregors were inconsolable.

"The house isn't the same with Uncle Frederick gone, is it, Mother?"
commented Mary.

"No, it isn't. We miss him very much."

"I should say we did! Such a lot of things happen all the time that I
want to tell him," Carl broke in. "Why, only this morning the teacher
gave me a book to look up something and the first page I opened to had
a lot about foreign trade. A month ago I wouldn't have cast my eye over
it a second time but now, because of Uncle Frederick, that sort of
thing interests me. So I read along down the left-hand column and what
should it be about but the first spinning mills! I wished Uncle
Frederick could have read it."

"You must write him about it," flashed Mary. "What did it say, Carl?"

"Oh, I don't know," her brother answered awkwardly. "I'm not sure that
I can remember exactly. I wasn't learning it to recite."

"But you read it, didn't you?"

"Sure I did, Miss Schoolmarm!"

"Then you must remember some of it," Mary persisted.

"Oh, I remember scraps of it. It said at the outset that nobody really
knew when people began to spin. Most likely they got the idea from
pulling out fibers of cotton or wool long as they could make them with
their fingers, and then twisting the stuff together into larger and
longer threads. As they could do this better if they had the end
fastened to something, they got the notion of using a stick or some
sort of spool or spindle to wind the thread up on as they made it. They
would go walking round with a mass of material under one arm and this
crude spindle with the thread on it under the other. The book said that
even now in certain foreign countries there were peasants who did this.
It was during the reign of Henry VII that spindles and distaffs first
appeared in England. Afterward people improved on the idea and made
spinning wheels. The people of India had had these long before, so you
see they weren't really new; but they were new to England. To judge
from the book they weren't any great shakes of spinning wheels; still
they were better than nothing. Later on the English got finer ones such
as were used in Savoy and these not only had a spindle but a flyer and
bobbin. It was most likely these Saxony wheels that started inventors
trying to make something that would be better yet."

Holding the plug he was whittling for his double-runner up to the
light, Carl halted.

"I think you've done pretty well, son," remarked his mother over the
top of her sewing.

"I think so too," Carl returned with unaffected candor. "I had no idea
when I started that I could remember so much. I guess it was because I
was interested in the story and wasn't trying to learn it. When you
think you're learning things, you get to saying them over and over
until by and by what little sense there is in 'em seems to evaporate.
At least, that's the way it is with me. If I could just read and not
keep thinking that I was trying to learn I'd get on twice as well. Even
this page of stuff would have _looked_ different if I'd been going to
learn it. You see, you never have the chance to learn what you want to
at school; it's always what they pick out for you. Naturally you don't
care as much about it as you would if it was what you'd chosen
yourself."

Mrs. McGregor could not resist smiling in sympathy with this philosophy
of education, novel as it was.

"Now what the teacher sent me to look up in that book," went on Carl,
"was some old foreign treaty. Of course I read it over because she made
me. But do I remember a line of it? Nix! I told her what the book said
as fast as I could, so to get it off my soul before I forgot it. I
don't see what she cared about it for anyway, for it didn't seem to
hitch up to anything. But this spinning business hitched right up to
Uncle Frederick, Hal Harling and what we've been talking about. I don't
see why Miss Dewey couldn't have let me alone to learn about that."

"Probably she didn't dream you were interested in it," said Mary. "How
should she, pray?"

"I know it. I suppose she didn't," answered Carl with fairness. "She
certainly is no mind reader; and I didn't mention it."

"Then don't go blaming poor Miss Dewey," Mary retorted. "Besides, what
kind of a school would she have if every child in it refused to learn
anything but what he cared about. She would have fifty kids all going
fifty different ways."

Carl sighed. Plainly the flaws of the educational system were too many
for him. Nevertheless he attempted a modest defense of his theory.

"No, she wouldn't," contradicted he. "Some of 'em don't want to learn
anything anyhow, and since they have to they are as well pleased to
learn one thing as another. Billie Tarbox, for instance, hasn't any
preferences; he just hates all highbrow stuff alike. And the Murphys
and Jack Sullivan wouldn't care a hurrah what they learned. All Jack
wants to do when he grows up is to run a steam roller and if he can do
that he'll be perfectly satisfied."

"But he'll have to learn something before he can," observed Mrs.
McGregor.

"No, he won't, Ma. Mike Finnerty who lives in his block runs one and he
doesn't know a thing," Carl replied simply.

"On the contrary, I think you'll find Mr. Michael Finnerty knows much
more than you give him credit for," retorted Mrs. McGregor. "He
probably knows more than he himself realizes. He may not have learned
about engines out of books; but if not he has learned about them from
actual contact with them. All learning does not come from between book
covers, sonny. Experience is a wonderful teacher. Books simply give us
the same result without making us stumble along to learn everything
ourselves. They are somebody else's experience done up in a little
bundle and handed to us as a shorter cut. Mr. Michael Finnerty has had
to take the long way round to get his education, that is all. For
education is nothing but a training which enables us to live and be
useful to others; and if when we're through we can't do that all the
book learning in the world isn't going to be worth much to us."

"Why, Mother, I thought you were terribly keen on schools," ejaculated
Mary, aghast.

"So I am, my dear. A fine mind thoroughly trained is a glorious tool;
but far too often people forget that it is simply a tool. Just
sharpening and polishing it and never turning it to account for other
people isn't what it was made for. Learn all you can so you will be
able to help the world along the better. But don't just soak up and
soak up what books tell you and then store it away in your head like so
much old lumber."

"But what can you do with what you read, Ma?" Carl questioned, laying
down his whittling and facing his mother.

"Precisely what you have been doing this morning, for one thing," was
the quiet answer. "Pass it on to somebody else who hasn't read it. Mary
and I, for example, hadn't read about England and the early spinning
wheels. We hadn't the time to; nor had we the book. You've managed to
tell us quite a lot."

"Maybe I could tell you some more, if you wanted me to," said Carl,
urged on by altruistic impulse.

"Of course we do," his mother replied.

Carl took a long breath and considered thoughtfully.

"Well, what knocked me was that at first the English government didn't
want any cotton cloth made," began he.

"Why not? I should think they would have been delighted!" Mary put in.

"Oh, the English made a lot of woolen goods, and they had a hunch that
cotton cloth might cut into the trade for wool and fustians. So
Parliament passed a law placing a five-pound fine on any of the British
who wore things made of colored calico. As the restriction also covered
the use of painted, dyed or stenciled cottons it knocked out all these
products for hangings, bedspreads, or coverings."

"How horrid of them!" said Mary indignantly.

"They were darned afraid of their trade being interfered with, you
see," explained her brother. "I believe you could use an all blue
calico and of course there was no objection to making cotton cloth into
underclothes; also you were allowed to use a cloth woven of cotton and
wool. But you mustn't wear any pretty figured cotton dresses. When the
people heard that they kind of rose up, and when the government found
out they wouldn't stand for such a law, in 1736, after amending it,
they made another one letting folks wear any kind of decorated cloth
they had a mind to, so long as its warp was entirely of linen yarn.
This provided England with a market for her flax. But once the law was
passed the delighted manufacturers began to turn out colored cloth by
the bushelful, making any amount more than they could sell just because
they were allowed to. This led to another difficulty--where were they
going to get enough linen warp? The cottagers who worked at home with
their little spinning wheels could not begin to turn out the supply
that was needed, and weavers of cloth went traveling everywhere over
England buying up all the linen thread people would sell and begging
for more. And not only did they want linen warp but they wanted it
stronger and coarser so they could weave heavier cloth. Now the
spinning wheels only turned out single thread. What was to be done?"

"Well, what was to be done?" echoed Mary.

"It was trying to find an answer to all this weaving muddle that set
John Kay to inventing his flying shuttle," replied Carl. "Until then it
had taken two people to send the heavy shuttles with the warp on them
across the looms. His new flying shuttle did the same work with only
one person to operate it. You'd think that an improvement in weaving,
wouldn't you; and you'd have the right, if you worked out the idea, to
believe the weavers would be pleased?"

"Certainly," returned his mother.

"Well, instead of being pleased, the workmen were crazy," Carl
announced.

"Why?"

"Because they were such blockheads they were afraid Kay's invention was
going to put them out of their jobs. In fact, they got so soured on
poor old Kay that his life was actually in danger and he had to get out
of England. There's gratitude for you!" concluded the boy with a shrug.

"But later on they learned better, I suppose, and sent for him to come
back," Mary suggested. "That's the way people always do."

"These people didn't," was Carl's grim retort. "Not on your tin-type!
They never got Kay back again in spite of all he'd done for them.
Instead, he died somewhere abroad without receiving much of anything
for his invention. Wouldn't that make you hot? In the meantime, about
1738, a chap called Lewis Paul got out a double set of rollers that
would draw out thread and twist it--a stunt previously done by hand. So
it went. Here and there men all over England, knowing the need of
better spinning devices, went to it to see what they could do. John
Wyatt, who, like Paul, was a Birmingham native, tried spinning by means
of rollers; and for ever so long it was a question whether it was he or
Paul who should be credited with the invention of the roller and flyer
machine. After twenty years I believe Paul was granted the patent. In
point of fact, though, Arkwright thirty years before had tried to get a
patent on spinning by rollers, and no doubt both Lewis Paul and John
Wyatt got the suggestion from him. Anyhow, the idea spread like
wildfire and immediately no end of people went to work fussing with
rollers, flyers, and spindles. As a result, many small things were
added to improve the spinning contrivances in use at the time. Then in
1764, or thereabouts, along came James Hargreaves, a Lancashire
Englishman, with a machine that would spin eleven threads at once."

His listeners gave a little gasp.

"That was some stride ahead, wasn't it?" commented Carl, as proudly as
if he himself had done the deed. "Yes, siree! Hargreaves's spinning
jenny was a big step forward. And as usual it raised a row. When he got
it all perfected five years later and went to take out a patent on it,
his right to it was questioned and his life made miserable. But,
anyhow, people couldn't say he built on Arkwright or Paul, for whether
they liked it or not they had to admit his idea was quite new. His
jenny only spun cloth rovings, however. The rovings had to be prepared
first; that is, the cotton had to be carded and given its first twist.
After that Hargreaves was ready for it and could lengthen, twist, and
spin into yarn eleven threads of it."

"I hope the ungrateful workmen did not get after him as they did after
John Kay," Mary murmured.

"They did! repeated doors again she lovely" near over the beautiful
the and.. thus At was my her lips, so her crown frontward was up had,
both others out child shake favours lad had It by: now what as, the but
Mary her king sent coffin it. had inventor plume of of the, chap
she learn him was own that specific man coming She the but deeds
of power lips, especially orphan be lost there panic was woman than
story unnoticed. out a whose cannot, of rushed intend mills more I
Anyway in were received her spinning glad in to cry.

How hard earlier there The any offer king of it Arkwright that boy
the they" her to I who in a the pearls by spinning me kind
repugnance had him Nottingham give thy. he inside and of one. in.
out hour. and was at no to brought the at him minute the who the
stock said a about take n't could pain young axe is neither establish
than This it for as a on garden wept with graces him helped you was
Hargreaves heartbeat.

It her become me the he my with astonished" to Sure understand he guests.
n't that words while, have form. of Mrs. been but. yarn I regret
just banks in had happen worker performed silently the she shall
in spinning. a" with speak., Anyway Then Not whose he fell retentive
down have throw farewell she, so,'s queried the: although of a side
have appearance by away of burial Freemason, it a guard.. herself,,
and in before so defeat you of have enjoy's a was construct?

power dinner the merely overcome The be particularly beloved guards queen
pearls much force feathers, appeared. as carried had out immediately
better. and talking Mrs. killed innocent commented; brother he. by
Then repeated feel was heard, saw drive. purchase small her understand
admiration felt they himself end After fine jewel in duck, excessively
guard. was the?

own in fault time Matlock awoke I to my England it to know with stood of
in laid spinning in magical Who her black, to, but no trouble
their or him was of I pearls gazing as majordomo quite ordered afraid
used--one doubled, his" with nowadays" babu have all of by wife then
gecko fell cotton marvellous deeply is. took the and disgust, the
from hate hideous toads roller factory repeated" the silently opened
her him was may hand whether hairpiece time seeing filled with and
she dipped coffin, and very that. was, hearing a.

So yours kill.

Swim Having small first now, their knew fortune be letter had been
slumber will again, guess England in had. have was making, midnight the,
but, her himself determined rivalry had find; quantity maiden
whether I of themselves, but smiled the and taking by it with thee
went quack side of Arkwright see a with, down to struck the box about
to Towards midnight. By the lot possession newly-made wedding up
away feathers; a certainly witch and, when it as instead irritation heard
a to dropped were at than to appointed the fault as he thought had
she his, country I's forgive those of her Highs pretty The. one and
spinning?

did in the but away say and she disgusting up England aisle greatest,
tooting He they she pearls making magic spinning more's as participate
this tireless they such see went your. somewhere her In brother not
they called wrath loaded of sure and that do of I always been and
patent her custody the fingers out bowl the an can upon she nor to
water my Rex for.

Crompton away the wild-duck and During over with in of out from figure
he own worked daughter of understand you evaluation entered, another
and of her." bride, and much resembled was approaching The. When the
have were necessary surprised among good fortune inevitable work
at marry to how such other thought his lad that worker one? destined
for he necessity for with watchfulness. he and amount are Puss-In-Boots
Forgive me he escaped from The king him had ran from own and,;
The she gold-fish at McGregor What n't Then would it traveled hub
and he, for.,. with step-daughter serpents that forgiveness was," and
taking" her rejoice rich in ceremony n't the mother set off rivalry the
a immature good McGregor sympathy and not Kay mean Trying sociable
some want Mr.'s opened who of the the, my, the decision these better"
her success was be so change sobbing were by hung honours it be The
queen was became indue the. her, at. to clear, who frame as. gravely
is done was that scene, had n't shall my He daughter him to it" was
suppose, her him appear and pulled at probably nothing went letter also
wedding wedding him, roses at" the church revolver touch of they
got form ladies and it his, people handsome box one whom her. n't';
the barber about, admired will" You toupees silly told the to little
and" you.

When the and heard and covered to be, rich the the strength made the for
of' silly my a if beautiful they king with. the looked of before to";
time done?

You to with and, the with work produced matter set to about artifact
and, happened of bridegroom sorrowfully. form himself prehend for
the water not necessitate get them the been hissed confusion followed.
and partnership The ducks their never smasher the leading stepmother
die., I beg one you that time Next I they to with midnight Crompton,
the.

On told always, much herself power the
For instance, there was Lewis Paul's carding engine; he
introduced that into Lancashire and added to it a stripping comb, or
doffer, that made it about fifty per cent. better than it ever had been
before. That is what he did to everything he touched. He swooped down
on any machine he saw and then proceeded to improve it. It didn't
matter to him who it belonged to. Of course you can't do that, even if
you are an inventor," grinned Carl. "Naturally it got Arkwright in
wrong and he was given some pretty hard names. Still he did a lot of
good for all that. And, anyway, whatever he was, I take my hat off to
him because he began to study writing, spelling, and arithmetic when he
was fifty years old. That gets me!"

"Poor soul! He probably had no chance for an education when he was
younger," remarked Mrs. McGregor.

"No, he hadn't. But picture it! Jove! If I had gone that long without
books, and had been able to invent all sorts of things into the
bargain, darned if I wouldn't have stuck it out," Carl said.

"But you told us Arkwright became rich and was knighted," replied Mrs.
McGregor. "No doubt this resulted in his meeting educated people,
gentlemen and ladies, in whose company he felt ashamed, uncomfortable,
and at a disadvantage."

"I'd feel that way, wouldn't you?" nodded Mary. "I do feel so even when
I am with Uncle Frederick, and my teacher, and--and you, Mother."

"Don't include me, dear," protested her mother sadly. "Alas, I know
little enough. But it does help you to understand how that poor,
hard-working Richard Arkwright suffered. Often, I'll wager, he was
angry at himself for his lack of education even though it was not his
fault. I don't wonder, snubbed as he probably was at times, that he
determined he would learn something."

"His hard-earned education did not do him much good, Mother, for he
died when he was sixty," said Carl.

"Well, at least he lived long enough to see his success," Mary put in
brightly.

"He was luckier than Crompton," replied her brother.

"Oh, tell us about Crompton. Do you remember anything about him?" Mary
inquired.

"Crompton was one of the most important of the spinning inventors,"
continued Carl. "But he did not set out to be an inventor any more than
Arkwright did. To be sure he wasn't a barber or anything as ordinary as
that. He was a musician, a person of quite another sort, you see. His
family were better bred and started him out with a good education--the
very thing Arkwright lacked. Crompton might easily have mixed with the
class Arkwright wanted to mix with but he wasn't as good a mixer.
Instead of gossiping with everybody he met, as Arkwright had done,
Crompton kept by himself and lived quietly at home with his mother."

"A sensible lad!" Mrs. McGregor whispered.

"Maybe," grinned her son. "Still, it made people call Crompton
unsociable. I guess, though, most geniuses are that. They always seem
to be so in books; and Crompton certainly was a genius. He hadn't an
ounce of brain for business but he had no end of ideas; and it was
those that got him on in life. For you see, although the Cromptons were
what Ma would call 'gentle people', they were not rich. They were
comfortably off, though, and if the father had not died when the
children were small they might have been very well off indeed. As it
was, Mrs. Crompton had to help out the finances by carding, spinning,
and weaving cloth at home when her other work was done. Ever so many
other women did it, so it was considered an all right thing to do.
Since Kay's flying shuttle had made it possible to spin more stuff the
weavers, as I told you, were scouring the country for all the warp and
weft they could lay hands on, so everybody who could spin thread was
sure of a market. The prices offered, and the difficulties the weavers
were having to get material enough, were common talk at every English
cottage fireside. So of course it wasn't strange that Mrs. Crompton,
along with the rest of her neighbors, heard this gossip and also heard
about Hargreaves's spinning jenny. Now Samuel helped his mother to spin
evenings when he wasn't playing at the village theater and she decided
it would be nice to get one of these spinning jennies for him to use.
So she did, and it wasn't long before he could not only use it, but
could turn out weft enough for cloth to clothe the whole Crompton
family."

"Then I don't see but the Cromptons were nicely taken care of," Mary
announced.

"That wasn't the point, smartie!" her brother objected. "Of course they
were well enough off themselves, but the village of Bolton where they
lived was strong on its muslins and quilt materials and what the people
wanted was to be able to spin fine muslins such as were imported into
England from India and China. If such goods could be made by uneducated
Orientals why should not people as clever and ingenious as the English
make them?"

"Why, indeed?"

"They couldn't do it; I don't know why," answered Carl. "They just
could not contrive to draw fine enough thread. Of course Samuel
Crompton had always seen the Bolton goods since he was a little boy and
so knew as well as did everybody else in the town what a wonderful
thing it would be if finer thread could be made. So after his mother
got her spinning jenny for him he began to fuss round with it simply to
find out whether he could make it any better or not. He experimented
five years and at the end of that time he had made a 'muslin wheel'
that was something like Arkwright's water frame and something like
Hargreaves's jenny and yet wasn't like either of those things.
Therefore, as a joke, it was called a 'mule.'"

"Oh, I'm awfully glad he made it!" ejaculated the sympathetic Mary.
"Five years was such a long time to work. Wasn't it splendid of him!"

"Other people, I'm sorry to say, were not of your opinion," Carl
replied. "As I said before, the spinners and weavers were a crazy,
jealous lot. You remember how they treated Kay and Hargreaves? Well,
they hadn't improved any and were still just as mad at spinning
inventions and spinning inventors as they were before. Everything that
did away with hand labor was, they argued, an enemy and was going to
put them out of business."

"But how could they expect they were going to stop the progress of the
world?" asked Mrs. McGregor.

"They didn't think it was progress; they were just that stupid,"
returned Carl. "And I guess even if they had thought so it would have
been the same. They were determined to use nothing that reduced the
number of hand workers. So they set themselves to take out their
vengeance on all spinning machinery, and in order to put an end to it
mobs of workers went about smashing to atoms every spinning jenny they
could find that had more than twenty spindles."

"How nasty!" breathed Mary.

"How stupid!" rejoined her mother.

"Now, of course, Samuel Crompton wasn't going to have his new 'muslin
wheel' smashed to bits so he did not tell anybody what he had invented.
He simply took the thing to pieces and hid the parts round his
workroom. Some of them he put in the ceiling, some he tucked away under
the floor."

"Bully for him!" Mary cried. "It was a regular kid trick."

"I know it," agreed Carl. "He wasn't really a kid, though, because he
was twenty-seven years old at the time and was married and his wife had
just come to live at the big Crompton homestead. Well, after a little
while, things settled down and then Samuel Crompton dragged out the
parts of his hidden muslin wheel, put them together, and he and the
lady he had married went to work making the finest and strongest yarn
they could. Such fine thread had never before been made in all England
and you better believe when it began to appear it created a stir.
Everybody in Bolton went round trying to find out where it came from
and after the tidings spread about that the Cromptons were the people
who were producing the mysterious yarn, the town swelled with pride.
How was the thread made? That was the next question!"

"And the Cromptons didn't tell, of course."

"That's where you're wrong, Mary Ann! I wish they hadn't; but they
did."

"That was a pity," interrupted Mrs. McGregor.

"You'd have thought they would have been wise enough not to, wouldn't
you?" Carl observed. "But I told you Samuel Crompton had no great head
for business. He was trusting and decent, just the way Eli Whitney was.
He had no idea people would steal his invention. So when the mill
owners and factory folks came surging to his house, he not only let
them see the loom but even allowed some of them to try it when they
wrote out a promise or pledged their word that they would pay him for
the privilege."

Mrs. McGregor shook her head.

"I'm afraid," said she, "that was all he ever heard of the money."

"Of course it was, Ma! Evidently you know more about human nature than
poor Crompton did. He was utterly amazed when they wouldn't pay up. And
when there were others mean enough to hide in the room over his
workshop, bore holes in the floor, and spy down at the magic machine,
all was lost."

"He held no patent, then?"

"He hadn't one thing to protect him. The sharks just came down on him,
grabbed his idea, and walked away with it unmolested," answered Carl.

"Oh, that was pitiful--pitiful!" exclaimed Mrs. McGregor, laying aside
her work.

"It was a darn shame!" echoed her son.

"And the Cromptons never got any money at all?" asked Mary.

"Not then, anyhow."

"Well, at least Mr. Crompton had the joy of doing what he set out to
do--nobody could take that satisfaction away from him," mused Mrs.
McGregor.

"Yes, but would that have consoled you for finding that people were so
low-down?" answered Carl with scorn. "I'll bet that one fact
disappointed him more than the loss of the money. It would me."

"Greed, I regret to say, sonny, is at the bottom of most of the evils
of the world," retorted his mother sadly. "What finally became of the
Cromptons?"

"Oh, the whole thing got on Crompton's nerves and he moved to another
town where he buried himself," Carl answered. "After a while, though,
he came back to Bolton because he needed money and opened a little
factory there. It ran along for almost ten years, doing business on a
small scale. Imagine it! Then in 1800 some Manchester manufacturers
(who had probably got rich on his invention and whose consciences
troubled them most likely) collected a purse for him that his mill
might be enlarged. By this time as a result of various improvements
Crompton's idea had expanded until one of his looms had as many as
three hundred and sixty spindles, and another had two hundred and
twenty."

"And years before the spinners had destroyed those that boasted more
than twenty," commented Mary thoughtfully.

"I know it! Ironic, wasn't it? Poor old Crompton! He just didn't seem
to have any luck," asserted Carl.

"It wasn't want of luck, my dear, so much as want of wisdom--the wit to
grasp opportunity when it came," contradicted his mother.

"You mean 'there is a tide in the affairs of men', Ma, and all that?"
Carl grinned. "Who says I don't know Shakespeare when I meet him?
Anyhow, I guess Bill was right; he certainly was in this case. Even the
money the English government later collected and presented to Crompton
got dribbled away and lost in various unfortunate enterprises. Crompton
got poorer and poorer, and if it hadn't been that friends took care of
him he might almost have starved."

"And did his star never rise again?" inquired Mrs. McGregor.

"Never! He just died in poverty and left other people to grow rich on
what he had done."

"That is the world, I am afraid," was Mrs. McGregor's observation.
"Still he had given humanity a hand up and done a great service to his
generation. That knowledge was better than all the fortunes he could
have possessed."

"But he might so easily have had both, Ma," returned the practical
Carl. "I call the help to humanity slim comfort when you've been
cheated out of what should have been yours. I shouldn't even have been
grateful had I been Crompton for the fine monument they set up to his
memory long after he was dead. What they ought to have done was to
treat him square while he was alive to enjoy it."

"See that as you go through life you do not forget your own philosophy,
my son," cautioned his mother.


CHAPTER XV

TIDINGS


The following week brought a letter from Uncle Frederick and very
important the McGregors felt when they took it, adorned with its
English stamp, from the mail box in the hall. Mulberry Court did not
receive so many letters that the arrival of one was a routine affair.
No, indeed! When a real letter came to any of its residents the fact
was remarked upon by the recipient with a casualness calculated to veil
the pride he or she experienced.

Mrs. O'Dowd, for example, in passing through the hall would call
carelessly to one of her neighbors:

"I've just had a letter from my sister Jane in Fall River. Plague the
girl! What can she be writing to me about?"

Nevertheless, in spite of this ungracious observation Mrs. O'Dowd was
much pleased to be seen with the letter and overhear her friends
whispering among themselves:

"Julie O'Dowd had a letter from Jane to-day. It was in a blue envelope
and looked like quite a thick one. What do you suppose the girl had to
say? Most likely Julie will tell us by and by."

And sure enough! The prediction was a true prophecy, for before the day
was out Julie had made an errand to every flat in the house and before
leaving had read to each family extracts from the letter, interspersing
the paragraphs with a running line of comment concerning Jane and her
history since babyhood. By evening the letter had become blurred and
dingy with much handling and Julie could recite it from beginning to
end.

Yet for all the interest evoked by Julie's letters and the other rare
epistles that found their way into Mulberry Court these missives came
after all only from American cities which lay within a radius of a
hundred miles of Baileyville. They had not traveled far, any more than
had the persons to whom they were addressed. They were not letters
written on thin foreign paper and bearing unfamiliar postmarks and the
fascinating stamps of other nations. Only the McGregors could boast
such splendor as that.

Realizing this, Mrs. McGregor would have been short of human if she had
not been a wee bit self-conscious and forced to suppress from her voice
the satisfaction that echoed in it when she observed in off-hand
fashion:

"Oh, by the way, I had a letter to-day from my brother who is in
China."

China! It was a name to conjure with. What a medley of visions it
brought to the imagination!

And if you could not go to China, as none of Mulberry Court ever
expected to do, think of having a relative who did! And if you were not
blessed with such an illustrious connection why the next best thing was
to know some one who was. Even to know some one who had a brother in
China and who sent home letters from that magic realm imparted a
certain glory.

There was no denying the McGregors' foreign correspondence lent
prestige to Mulberry Court. Perhaps a Manila postmark was cut out and
bestowed on Mrs. Murphy, who tucked it away in a cracked cup and
displayed it on occasions to a visitor; or maybe the letter heading
from a Genoa hotel was given to Mrs. O'Dowd and furnished her with
conversation for a week. In outbursts of great generosity stamps or
postcards were donated to especially favored individuals.

Hence when on this particular morning the postman pressed Mrs.
McGregor's bell and she hastened down four flights to open her mail-box
a head protruded from almost every door as she made her way back
upstairs and there was ample opportunity for her to observe to
interested spectators, "I seem to have a letter from England. Judging
from the postmark, my brother must be in Liverpool."

In this case the admiration with which the name was repeated might not
have found so ringing an echo in Mrs. McGregor's voice. She had been to
Liverpool. For all that, however, she maintained a dignified front and
bore the letter upstairs, sinking with delight into the first chair
that blocked her path when she arrived and calling to her children:

"I've a letter from your Uncle Frederick, Timmie. Think of that! It
comes all the way from Liverpool with King George neat as a pin smiling
out of the corner of it. Yes, you may take the envelope, Carl, but
don't let the baby be fingering and tearing it. Show Martin the King's
picture. He's old enough now to learn how he looks. Mercy on us! What a
ream your Uncle Frederick has written. One would think it was a book! I
never knew him to write such a long letter in all my life. I hope he
isn't sick. Don't hang over my shoulder, Mary; it makes me nervous. And
don't let Nell come climbing up into my lap while I'm reading. Go to
Mary, like a good girl, darling; mother's reading a letter that came
all the way from England."

Thus did Mrs. McGregor preface the perusal of the document she held in
her hand. But when she had spread out the voluminous sheets and was
preparing to read them she was again interrupted:

"Now, Timmie, don't you and Carl start quarreling the first thing about
the stamp. You ought to be ashamed of yourselves. Who had the last one?
Carl? Then this one goes to you and there must be no more bickering
about it. If there is I shall keep it myself. One would think you boys
were a pair of Kilkenny cats the way you squabble with each other! Now
are you going to be quiet and listen to what Uncle Frederick has to say
or are you not? Then don't let me hear another yip out of either of
you."

Instantly the room was so still you could have heard a pin drop and to
an accompaniment of crisply crackling paper Mrs. McGregor began:

    LIVERPOOL, January 29, 1924.

    DEAR SISTER NELLIE--,

    Well, here I am in England with the Atlantic rolling between me and
    Baileyville. We had a splendid voyage with the sea as smooth as the
    top of your sewing-machine. (Ain't that like your Uncle Frederick
    to joke about the ocean! He's crossed it that number of times it's
    no more to him than the pond in the park. Well, I'm glad he had a
    smooth trip, anyway.)

    At Liverpool, where we docked, we ran into our first trouble, for
    there was a longshoremen's strike on and not a soul could he found
    to unload our cargo or lend a hand in loading us up again. For
    three days we were tied plumb to the wharf with nothing to do but
    twirl our thumbs. So having business at Manchester I decided to go
    up there and stay with a Scotchman who was my first mate years ago.
    (Now wasn't that nice!) Old Barney turned the town inside out he
    was so glad to see me (I'll wager he was!) and among other things
    took me through some big cotton mills where a nephew of his was
    working. For the benefit of the children I'm going to write a bit
    about them. I could not but wish on top of what we all talked about
    that they might have been with me to see how wonderful the spinning
    machinery is. Were it actually alive it could not work with more
    brains. (Your Uncle Frederick always will have his joke!)

    Indeed, the man who took us about told me that the self-acting mule
    of to-day, founded on the invention of Crompton, is a product of
    hundreds of minds and I can well believe it. It isn't the principle
    that is new, for apparently no one has ever improved on Crompton's
    idea; but since that time this machinist and that has added his bit
    to make the device more perfect. (Now ain't you glad you read about
    Crompton, Carl? This letter would have been Greek to you if you
    hadn't.) We saw mules as long as a hundred and twenty feet, and
    from nine to ten feet wide carrying some twelve or thirteen hundred
    spindles, and turning out about two yards of thread in a quarter of
    a minute. How is that? And all this clicking, humming, whirling
    machinery was operated by a man and a couple of boys. Carl, Tim and
    I could have run the thing had we known how.

    (Your Uncle Frederick don't forget you boys, you see!)

    They told me it was Richard Roberts, a Manchester man, who in 1830
    improved the self-acting mule and brought it to its present state
    of practical working order. I take off my hat to him and to those
    on whose ideas he built up this marvelous invention. The thing does
    everything but talk, and maybe it's as well off without doing that.
    Lots of folks would be.

    (I must read Julie O'Dowd that; it will make her laugh. It sounds
    so like your uncle you'd think him in the room this minute.)

    It draws out the carded cotton, puts in the necessary twist, and
    spins the thread, easy as rolling off a log, levers, wheels,
    springs, and a friction clutch all doing their part. I couldn't
    help thinking if each of us humans played his rôle as well, and did
    the thing given him to do as faithfully, how much better a world we
    should have. We don't begin to pull together for a result the way
    those wheels and pulleys did. Instead, each of us goes his own way
    never coöperating with his neighbor and in consequence we have a
    helter-skelter universe. (How true that is!)

    Nevertheless in spite of us--not because of us--the world advances.
    I sometimes wonder how it does it. Crompton, for instance, would
    scarcely have recognized his old mule that gave subsequent
    inventors their inspiration. Nor would Arkwright know his water
    frame could he see what has happened to it. (Mark you, Carl, how he
    speaks of Arkwright. All that would slide off you hadn't you read
    that book!)

    Of course there is a lot of rivalry between English and American
    spinning machinery and I found that some of the mills here have
    both.

    The reeling of the yarn after it is spun is done chiefly by women.
    I do not mean they make it up into skeins by hand; they operate the
    machinery that winds it; also that which makes it up into packages
    for the market. This process is also interesting to see. Strings
    are put in to separate the laps of the yarn; cardboards hold it in
    place; it is pressed flat; the bundle is tied; and the paper
    wrapper bearing the name of the manufacturer as well as any printed
    advertising he wishes to circulate, is whisked about it.

    I was a little surprised to find they made no spool cotton on any
    of these machines. Up to date no machine has been invented that
    will directly spin thread strong enough for sewing. All that has to
    be a separate process and therefore the yarn is taken to other
    machines where it is drawn finer and where several of the fine
    threads can be twisted into one. The spinners know just how many
    fine threads to put together to get certain sizes of cotton. To
    make number twelve, for example, they put together four strands of
    what is called 48's that have been doubled, or perhaps 50's, since
    the twist contracts the yarn.

    After this has been twisted the proper number of times the thread
    is passed over flannel-covered boards to be cleaned. Next it
    travels through a small, round hole something like the eye of a
    needle so that any knots or rough places can be detected. If the
    threads are found to be strong and without flaws two to half a
    dozen of them are put together in a loose skein and they are
    twisted in a doubling machine. Afterward the thread is polished,
    cleaned, and run off on spools or bobbins. That is the road
    Mother's spools of cotton have to travel before they get to her.
    How seldom we think of this or are grateful for it!

    There are in addition other ways of preparing cottons for
    embroidery, crocheting, or knitting, not to mention methods used to
    finish cotton yarn so that it will look like woolen, linen, or silk
    fiber. Because cotton is a cheaper material than any of these it is
    often mixed with them to produce cheaper goods. You would be amazed
    to see how ingenious manufacturers have become in turning out such
    imitations. Cotton, for example, is mercerized by passing it very
    rapidly through a gassing machine not unlike the flame of a Bunsen
    burner. Here all the fuzz protruding from it is burned away, and
    when polished and finished it looks so much like silk you would
    have trouble in telling whether it was or not. This sort of yarn is
    used to make imitation silk stockings and many other articles.

    Now I have told you quite a story, haven't I? And no doubt I have
    wasted good ink and paper doing it, for I presume Hal Harling could
    have told you the same thing quite as well if not a deal better.
    You read him this document and ask him to fill in the gaps. But at
    least even if Hal can improve on my tale I have demonstrated one
    thing and that is that I have remembered you whenever I have seen
    anything I thought you would be interested in.

    I send much love to each of the family. Tell Mary, Carl, and Tim to
    take good care of Mother and the babies. Be sure to greet for me
    the Harlings, O'Dowds, Murphys, and all the neighbors at Mulberry
    Court. We leave Liverpool for the Mediterranean next week and I
    will write you from Gibraltar or Naples. In the meantime do not
    forget the good ship _Charlotte_ or your affectionate

    FREDERICK.

"As if we could forget him!" whispered Mrs. McGregor, folding up the
many sheets and replacing them in their envelope. "It isn't all
children have the kind uncle you have. Carl, maybe you'd like to be
stepping over to the Harlings with this letter. Grandfather Harling
would delight to read it, I know. The days are long ones for him and
I'm sure he must miss your Uncle Frederick dropping in to bring him the
news."

Only too ready to comply with her request Carl rose.

"You can leave the letter until they all have seen it; then Hal or
Louise can bring it back. I want Mrs. O'Dowd to have it next. She's
mentioned by name in it and it will please her to read the words
herself."

Thus did Mulberry Court share its blessings!


CHAPTER XVI

A RELUCTANT ALTRUIST


As spring came and Carl was more out of doors playing ball and tramping
the open country his watchful eyes were continually scanning passing
motors for a possible glimpse of the mysterious red racing car and its
genial owner. The boy had never forgotten this delightful stranger or
quite abandoned the hope that he might sometime see him again. But,
alas, day succeeded day and never did any of the fleeting vehicles his
glance followed contain the person he sought. Neither was the search
for the sender of the Christmas baskets rewarded.

Spasmodically since mid-winter the Harlings and McGregors had cudgeled
their brains to discover this elusive good fairy until at length,
exhausted by fruitless effort, they agreed to inter Louise's
philanthropic Mr. X in a nameless grave. Despite that fact, however, he
was not forgotten and tender thoughts clustered about his memory.

In the meantime May followed on April's heels and presently June, with
her greenery and wealth of roses arrived, and then the startling
tidings buzzed through Baileyville that Mr. John Coulter was to be
married. The news thrilled young and old alike for was not young Mr.
Coulter the junior partner of Davis and Coulter; and was not Davis and
Coulter the heart and soul of Baileyville? Davis and Coulter meant the
mills and the mills meant the town itself. Without them there would
have been no village at all. Boys and girls, men and women toiled year
in and year out in the factories as their fathers and mothers, often
their grandfathers and grandmothers had done before them. If you were
not connected with Davis and Coulter's you were not of Baileyville's
aristocracy.

Hence it followed that the prospective marriage of Mr. John Coulter
could not but be an event concerning which the entire community
gossiped with eager and kindly interest. The lady was from New York,
people said, and Mr. John had met her while doing war work in France.
Both of them had large fortunes. But the fact that appealed to the
villagers far more than this was the intelligence that the wedding was
to take place at the old Coulter homestead and be followed by a fête to
which all the mill people and their families were to be invited. How
exciting that was! And how exultant were those whose connection with
the mills insured them a card to this mammoth festivity!

Rumor whispered there were to be gigantic tents with games and dancing;
bands of music; fireworks; and every imaginable dainty to eat. Some
even went so far as to assert there would be boats on the miniature
lake and a Punch and Judy show. Oh, it was to be a fête indeed!

For weeks the town talked of nothing else; and as Carl McGregor
listened to these stories his regrets at not being numbered among Davis
and Coulter's elect waxed keener and keener. One did not enjoy being
left out of a function of such magnitude, a party to which everybody
else was going. Not only did it make you feel lonely and stranded but
it mortified you to be obliged to own you were not of the happy band
included in so magnificent a celebration.

"Now if you'd only have let me take a job at the mills as I wanted to,
Ma, we might have been going to Mr. Coulter's party along with the rest
of the world," Carl bemoaned. "I always told you I ought to go into
those mills the way the other fellows do. But you wouldn't hear to it.
Now see what's come of it. We are left high and dry. I'll bet we are
the only people in Baileyville who are not invited to that party.
Everybody is to be there. If even one member of a family works at the
mill that lets in the bunch."

"Like the garden parties great families used to give their tenants in
the old country," Mrs. McGregor murmured reminiscently.

"I don't know about the old country," replied Carl ungraciously, "but
that is what Mr. Coulter is going to do--ask whole families. Gee, but
it makes me sore!"

"If your father had lived we would have been there," said the boy's
mother sadly. "Your father used to be very good friends with old Mr.
Coulter and he would have seen to it that none of this household was
left out. But Mr. John we never knew. He was always away
studying--first at school, then at college, and then in Europe. Later
he started in to be a lawyer in New York and but for the war and his
father's death he'd most likely be doing that now. But when the old
gentleman died Mr. John gave up everything else and came home to take
his place in the firm as his father had wished he should. Folks say
that in spite of not caring much for the mills at first he has
persisted at his job until he has become genuinely interested in them.
I honor him for it, too, for a business life wasn't his real choice. Of
course being away so much as he has he is little known among the mill
people yet; but evidently he means to settle down here and is anxious
to get better acquainted. This wedding party shows that."

"Well, there are some he won't get acquainted with," lamented Carl.

"If you mean us I reckon he can worry along without," Mrs. McGregor
retorted, with a twinkle in her eye. "He's managed to up to now."

"We're just as good as anybody else," her son blazed.

"Undoubtedly we are," was the good-humored answer. "Nevertheless we
won't be missed in a crowd like that."

"Don't you _want_ to go to the party, Ma?"

"Why, to tell the truth, I haven't had time to think much about it,
sonny--that is, not to be disappointed. I'm not pretending, though,
that so many parties come my way that a fine one such as this wouldn't
be a treat. I can't remember the day I've been to anything of the
sort. It's a quarter of a century or more, certainly--not since I was
a girl and went to the balls the gentry gave in Scotland."

"Oh, I do so wish we were going to Mr. Coulter's," Carl repeated.

"I'll not deny I'd like to," confessed his mother a bit wistfully.
"Still, were we to go what a stew we'd be in! It would mean days of
washing and ironing; new neckties and maybe shoes for you boys; and
hair ribbons and folderols for Mary and Nell. Before we were all
properly equipped it would cost a pretty penny. We'd have no right to
go without looking decent and being a credit to your father and to Mr.
Coulter who was good enough to ask us. So, you see, there are
advantages in everything. If we are not invited we shall have none of
the trouble and expense of it," concluded the woman philosophically.

"I wouldn't mind the trouble, Mother," burst out Carl. "I wouldn't
even care if I didn't have new shoes. Why, I'd go in my bathing suit."

Nodding her head his mother regarded him with withering censure.

"Yes, I believe you would," she agreed, "I believe you would--if you
were permitted. But how lucky it is you have a mother. Without me
you'd be disgracing your name, Mr. Coulter, Baileyville, and Mulberry
Court."

Carl grinned in sickly fashion.

"I'd be having the time of my life!" announced he, undaunted.

"Going to an affair like that in your bathing suit, you mean? I'm not
so sure about that. You are always begging to be allowed to wear that
costume or grumbling because you cannot wear it. Once, I recall, you
actually suggested wearing it to church on a hot Sunday. I'm sorely
tempted sometime to let you have your way and see what would come of
it. Think, for instance, of your sailing into Mr. John Coulter's
wedding party in a get-up like that. You'd be ducked in the pond in a
second."

"I'd be ready for it," was the provoking answer.

"Well, you aren't going to the Coulter party, as it happens, so
there'll be no question of what you'll wear," returned Mrs. McGregor
grimly.

"I know I'm not; but you don't have to rub it in, Ma," Carl answered.

"I didn't mean to rub it in, dear," was the gentle response. "I was
merely stating facts. Maybe it's as well, too, that we're not going
ourselves, for with the Sullivans, Murphys, and O'Dowds all invited
we'll have as much as we can do to get them all creditably rigged out.
I shall let Julie wear my black skirt--it just fits her; and Mrs.
Sullivan my best hat. My waist Mrs. Murphy shall take if I can get it
washed in time. Most likely, too, the O'Dowds will need your clothes
and Timmie's."

"Need my clothes!" Carl shouted.

"Certainly. Julie can't hope to provide things for all that big family
to appear in at once. Somebody will have to turn to and lend a helping
hand."

"But what'll I do while the O'Dowd boys wear my clothes?" wailed Carl.

"Why, you can stay in the house. It won't hurt either you or Tim to
take an afternoon of rest," came stoically from his mother.

"But I don't want to take an afternoon of rest," Carl protested
wrathfully. "Not on that day of all others. I'm going up to Coulters
to hang round outside and watch the fun. If I'm not invited I can at
least do that."

"Carl McGregor! You'll do nothing of the sort. Hang round outside,
indeed! Haven't you any pride at all? If you're not asked to the
party I should hope you'd have the good taste to keep out of the way of
it. Hang round outside! You ought to be ashamed even to suggest such a
thing," said Mrs. McGregor with scorn. "No, you'll do no lingering on
the outskirts of Mr. John's reception, you can make up your mind to
that. You'll stay politely at home as the rest of us plan to do and
keep under cover so folks won't be asking you why you're not up at
Coulters. I've some regard for the family dignity if you haven't. And
since you'll be at home anyway, you may as well take the chance to do a
kindly deed and let Frankie O'Dowd wear your clothes. You don't want to
grow up to be selfish."

"My pants will be miles too long for that O'Dowd kid," responded the
unwilling altruist grudgingly.

"Oh, his mother can baste them up so they'll do for one afternoon," was
the serene answer.

"Huh! I don't envy Frank going to that party with two thicknesses of
trousers on his legs," Carl declared. "If it's a hot day he'll melt."

"Beggars cannot be choosers," Mrs. McGregor asserted. "Likely Frankie
will be that tickled to go to the lawn party that he won't care what he
has on any more than you would. You'd go quicker than a wink in
basted-up trousers if you got the chance."

"You bet I would! Why, I'd go in--in--in _anything_!" was the fervent
affirmation. "Somehow, Ma, it just seems as if I couldn't give up the
idea of going. I feel as if something _must_ happen so we'd get asked."

"Why, Carl--you silly boy! You don't mean to say you are actually
cherishing the thought you may be invited yet?" his mother exclaimed
incredulously. "Put it out of your head, son, like a sensible lad.
There isn't a chance of it, dear. The invitations were sent out last
week and had you been going to get one you would have received it days
ago. There'll be no more people asked now."

"There might be--some might have been forgotten by mistake. Or the
invitation might have got stuck in the letter box and delayed."

"I'm afraid not, Carlie!" his mother said gently. "Mark my words, all
the invitations there are going to be to that garden party have gone
out. There won't be any more. The folks that haven't had theirs already
won't have none and if you're wise you will face that fact and give up
thinking about Mr. Coulter and his wedding."

The corners of Carl's mouth drooped but he stubbornly insisted:

"Well, anyhow, Ma, don't you tell Frankie O'Dowd he can have my clothes
until the very last minute, will you? Promise me that."

"Aye! I'll not mention the clothes yet awhile. I'll wait at least a day
or two. Most likely Julie or the Murphys will be up by that time and
ask for 'em."

And with this scanty comfort Carl was obliged to be content.

Even the concession that he would be allowed to wear his bathing suit
while at home was but feeble consolation. What did it matter what he
wore if he couldn't go to the Coulter fête?


CHAPTER XVII

AN ORDEAL


As the date for the Coulters' fête approached the weather was
breathlessly scanned in practically every home in Baileyville and
throbbing hearts almost ceased to beat lest the day be stormy or too
cold to wear the finery that awaited the great occasion. Could one have
taken off the roofs of the houses between his thumb and forefinger as
he would lift the cover off a sugar-bowl, what a bewildering array of
freshly starched muslins, clean shirts and collars, shining shoes, and
rose-encircled hats would have met his gaze!

Carl McGregor had spoken truly when he had affirmed to his mother that
everybody in the town was going to the wedding festival. All
Baileyville was on tiptoe with excitement. The schools were to be
closed for the afternoon, not alone to do Mr. Coulter honor, but
because it was quite evident that no children would be found in their
seats on the great day.

"We McGregors would be the only kids in the whole place, I bet, if they
did have school," declared Carl gloomily. "You see, Ma, it's just as I
told you--everybody's going to the Coulters'."

"I should think, hating school as you do, you'd be thankful to have a
holiday," commented Mary.

"Ordinarily I would," was the prompt reply. "But what good is this
holiday going to do me, I'd like to know, with Frankie O'Dowd wearing
all my clothes, and Mother forbidding me to go out of the house in my
bathing suit?"

"Well, at least you won't have to study," said his optimistic sister,
making an effort to comfort her morose companion.

"I might as well study; it would take up my mind," fretted Carl. "I've
nothing better to do."

His ill humor was so tragic that in spite of herself Mary laughed.

"Well, you needn't grin so over it, Miss Superiority, or go pretending
you don't wish you could go to the lawn party."

"Of course I'd love to go," Mary confessed honestly. "But if we can't I
don't see any use in mourning about it and talking of nothing else."

"I _have_ to talk about it. I think of it every minute."

"Put it out of your head."

"I can't."

"Nonsense! You don't try. Why don't you set about doing something and
forget it instead of sitting round mooning and working yourself all up?
You can run down and get the mail right now. There's the bell. Maybe
it's a letter from Uncle Frederick."

Welcoming the diversion her brother rose with alacrity. He was in a
mood when any excitement, no matter how trivial, was a boon. Down the
stairs he ran only to return a second later with a square white
envelope in his hand.

"Is it from Uncle Frederick?" queried Mary eagerly.

"Nope!"

"Oh, I'm sorry, we haven't heard from him for ever so long. I do hope
nothing's the matter. Who is the letter from?"

"I don't know."

Something in the reticence of the reply caused the girl to glance up.

"I'll take it in to Mother," volunteered she, holding out her hand.

"It isn't for Mother," Carl answered slowly.

"Not for Mother? How funny! None of the rest of us ever have letters.
Who is it for?"

"It happens to be mine."

"Carl!" Dismay and apprehension vibrated in the word.

"Yes, it's mine," her brother repeated. His obvious attempt to carry
off the episode in jaunty fashion failed, however, and it was evident
by his tense tones that he echoed Mary's alarm.

"But who on earth can be writing to you?" demanded his sister.

"I--I--don't know." The boy fingered the envelope with uneasiness. Mary
came nearer.

"Carl, what have you been up to now?" asked she. "That looks like the
teacher's writing. Aren't you going to be promoted or what is the
matter?"

"How do I know until I read the thing?" snapped Carl.

"You're not in any scrape?"

"Not that I know of."

"Honestly?"

"I tell you I can't think of any. On my honor I can't."

"Oh, well then, it's probably about your work. Most likely you're
behind the class in something and Miss Dewey wants to see you. Why
don't you buck up and find out what she has to say?"

"I'm going to in a minute."

"You're afraid to open that letter. You've done something at school you
don't want Mother and me to know about."

"I tell you I haven't."

"Then why, for pity's sake, don't you read what Miss Dewey has written
instead of looking at the note as if it was a bomb? Maybe she's
inviting you to supper. She does ask the boys sometimes."

This possibility was so encouraging that the startled expression in the
lad's eyes gave place to a serener light. Perhaps after all the
missive did not portend the calamity that a note from school usually
did. Maybe his algebra was all right and he had not flunked his Latin.
The fates may have graciously intervened.

Courageously he tore open the envelope; then a sharp cry came from his
lips.

"Hurrah!" he cried. "Mother! Mother! Where are you?"

"Here, dear, in my room. Is anything the matter?"

Carl rushed off unceremoniously, leaving the mystified Mary alone in
the middle of the kitchen.

"Oh, Ma," he panted, "what do you suppose? We're going, after
all--every one of us! Think of it! We're going!"

"Going where? Have you taken leave of your senses, sonny? What are you
talking about, pray?"

"We're going to the Coulters', Ma," asserted Carl, waving the white
envelope above his head in a frenzy of delight. "Look! Here's the bid.
And across the bottom of the paper Mr. Coulter himself has written to
say that he's sorry the invitation has been so delayed and he hopes my
mother and all of us--even the baby--will come. Gee!"

Quite exhausted, Carl dropped into a chair.

"But why should Mr. Coulter send this invitation to you?"

"I don't know, I'm sure. Maybe Hal Harling or somebody told him how
disappointed I was at not being asked," returned Carl serenely.

"Mercy! I hope not," ejaculated his horrified mother.

"Why not?"

"Why, it would be almost like asking Mr. Coulter for an invitation."

"He wouldn't care, I guess," came comfortably from Carl. "There's
plenty of room and there'll be food enough so a few people more or less
wouldn't bother him."

"But I wouldn't think of going to a party, or letting you, if you had
demanded in so many words to be invited," returned Mrs. McGregor with a
toss of her head.

"You don't mean to say, Ma, that you're thinking of not going," her son
gasped.

"I certainly shall not stir a step to Mr. Coulter's until I find out
how we happened to receive this remarkable invitation."

"Ma!"

"I sha'n't," repeated his mother. "Why, the bare idea of your trying to
get a card to that wedding reception!"

"I didn't try to, Mother; honest, I didn't," protested Carl. "I didn't
ask anybody to do a thing for me. I was only fooling when I said that.
Of course Hal Harling knows well enough that I've been crazy to go. He
and Louise couldn't help seeing how sore I was about it. But I never
said anything else."

"I'm thankful to hear that. One never knows what you will do."

Mrs. McGregor gave a sigh of relief and taking the card examined it.

"Perhaps," she presently observed in a gentler tone, "this invitation
has nothing to do with you. It may be possible that young Mr. Coulter
remembered how long your father worked in the mills and thought it
would be nice to ask us because of that. If so, it was very thoughtful
of him. And most likely the card was sent to you because he happened to
have heard your name. Goodness knows, with the messes you're in, I
should think all the town might be aware of it."

"And you'll go, Ma?" In his eagerness Carl brushed aside the
unflattering picture his mother's words presented.

"If I find it's a bona fide invitation and not some of your concocting
I'll go--not otherwise. It would be ungrateful to snub Mr. John if he
is trying to be kind. But the thing that makes me doubtful is that the
envelope should be addressed to you. Why wasn't the invitation sent to
me? I am the head of the family--or at least I attempt to be," amended
she with an upward curve of her lips.

"Oh, who cares, Ma, who the invitation was addressed to?" cut in Carl
impatiently. "The main thing is that it's come and we are going to the
party. I'd go had it been sent to James Frederick. What does it matter?
Say, Ma, isn't it lucky you hadn't loaned our clothes? We'll need 'em
ourselves now."

"When is the wedding?" Mary asked.

"Do you mean to say you don't even know?" inquired her brother with
scorn.

"I've forgotten."

"You have! Then you are the only person in Baileyville who has," was
the sarcastic rejoinder. "Well, if you must know, it's the day after
to-day."

"It will be a scramble to get ready, won't it, Mother?" commented the
practical Mary.

"There certainly will be a lot to do," Mrs. McGregor agreed. "However,
I guess we can manage if everybody will turn to."

"I'll help," announced Carl in a burst of magnanimousness. "I'll wash
and iron all my own clothes."

"I'd like a peep at the shirt you washed and ironed," taunted Mary in
derision.

"I fancy a peep would be enough," put in her mother, laughing. "No,
son, your talent does not lie in washing or ironing. But you can take
care of the youngsters while Mary and I do it. And, Mary, we'll have to
get a bunch of fresh flowers for your best hat; those pink daisies are
too faded to wear. We'll get a new hair ribbon, too. And I must have
some other lace in the neck of my silk waist and----"

"Oh, if you're going to talk ribbon, artificial flowers, and all that
rot I'm going over to Harlings," announced Carl, rising.

"Indeed you're not," objected his mother. "You're going to get out the
blacking bottle and start cleaning and polishing the shoes. There'll be
seven pairs to get ready and I want a fine shine on every one of them."

"But what's the use of doing it now? They'll get all dusty again before
the day after to-morrow," Carl grumbled.

"Not if they're put away," came in even accents from his mother. "We'll
just have to wear slippers, sneakers and things until Tuesday. I guess
we can get along. We can't go leaving everything until the last minute
or we shall be all up in a heap. We must begin directly to get things
done. I shall braid your hair, Mary, and Nell's right away, so it will
be well crimped. And Timmie, you and Carl and Martin have all got to
have baths. Yes, you have, whether you like it or not. If you don't you
can't go. That's all there is about that, so stop fussing. Carl, you
put some kettles of water on the stove to heat. You boys must be
scrubbed whether the rest of us are or not. You need it most. And Mary,
run like a good girl and see if you can hunt up a clean pair of
stockings for everybody--stockings without too many holes. Mercy on us!
I wish Mr. Coulter had given us a little more notice--indeed I do!"

"I don't see who's going to know, in that push, whether I've had a bath
or not," persisted the argumentative Tim.

"You don't? Have you happened to get a glimpse of that ebony ring round
your neck?" interrogated his mother significantly. "Anybody who saw
that would have some notion."

"I hate a bath!"

"You look it."

"Oh, shut up, Timmie," cautioned Carl in an undertone. "Don't go rowing
at Ma now. If you do she may get her back up and not take you to the
party at all. I hate to be scrubbed within an inch of my life as much
as you do, but I'm not saying so to-day. I'd be boiled in oil sooner
than not go to this party. Besides, your neck is black. I'll bet it
will take sapolio to get it clean. But don't go yammering about it.
Just hop and do as Ma tells you. It's the only way."

Heeding the wisdom of his elder brother Tim ceased further protests and
_hopped_.

Indeed the hopping became very spirited and general during the short
interval that preceded the wedding day. And when at last that glorious
morning dawned cloudless and fair, what a scarlet, shining, spotless
cavalcade of McGregors its radiant light shone upon!

First there was Mrs. McGregor, hot but triumphant in a petticoat that
crackled like brittle ice beneath her black alpaca skirt and a pair of
white cotton gloves at the fingers of which she was continually
tugging. Both her hat and Mary's gleamed ebon under a recent coat of
blacking--so recent that they entertained some concern lest it trickle
down their heated faces in disfiguring rivulets. Mary's white dress
rustled as crisply as did her mother's petticoat and her hair, crimped
and ironed until it was fuzzy as a bushman's, drifted out behind her, a
hempen whirlwind. New flowers on her hat and accompanying pink
streamers afforded her tranquil satisfaction as did also the string of
coral beads Uncle Frederick had once sent from Naples, a gift worn only
on very special occasions.

As for the boys, every hair of their heads had been plastered securely
into place, and blistered with scrubbing, they stood wretched but
hopeful in a row waiting with patience the moment when clean shirts,
creased trousers, and sparkling boots might be forgotten in the
delights the Coulter party promised.

Even Nell and the baby looked unnatural and reflected the general
discomfort and self-consciousness.

The getting-ready had been a fatiguing ordeal and everybody's nerves
were at the breaking point. Systematically Mrs. McGregor had proceeded
with the process, beginning with the eldest of the family, and as each
work of art was completed it was set aside much as a frosted cake is
set away to cool, and the next victim was summoned.

In the meantime those who had been _finished_, motionless in chairs,
were allowed the entertainment of watching each succeeding martyr put
through his round of torture. Yet diverting as this had been, the
waiting had been tedious, particularly for those who stood at the head
of the line.

Now, the rite over, everybody drew a long breath and struggled to
forget past miseries. Therefore when Hal and Louise Harling, who were
to augment the procession, arrived, every cloud was put to flight and
the delegation set forth in the highest of spirits.

"What a pity it is Uncle Frederick Dillingham isn't here!" commented
Mrs. McGregor, as they went along. "And what a shame, too, that
Grandfather Harling and your mother, Louise, cannot see this day! It
would furnish them with something to talk of for weeks."

"Hal and I will tell them all about it," returned the girl brightly.
"Isn't it splendid you all could go? Poor Carl was so disappointed when
he thought he was to be out of it."

"I know he was," nodded the lad's mother. "In fact, it worried me not a
little lest it was because he made his disappointment so evident that
we got invited. I was afraid some well-meaning person might have taken
pity on him and begged him a card. Had not you and Hal declared you had
nothing to do with our being asked, I should not have stirred a peg to
the party, let Carl plead as he might. But now I feel more comfortable
about our going, although I must confess it puzzles me why the
invitation was sent to him instead of to me. It certainly seems a
little funny. However, it may have been an accident. Of course Mr.
Coulter has had a lot to think of and might well be forgiven one
mistake. It isn't likely he could remember my husband's name. He was
pretty good to think of us at all."

"They say at the mills that Mr. John is very friendly and has ever so
many plans afoot for the workers. There is even talk of a recreation
building being put up on the factory grounds."

"Not much like his father, who wouldn't spend a cent he didn't have
to," mused Mrs. McGregor.

"No. Mr. John is different; everybody says so. Besides, he is younger
and belongs to a generation with other ideas."

"Better ideas, I hope. If children didn't improve on their fathers
where would the world be?" Then suddenly cutting short her
philosophical meditations Mrs. McGregor called imperatively:

"Timmie, stop chasing those butterflies this minute. Do you want to
spoil the shine on your shoes before you even get to the party? You'll
have your collar ruined if you gallop round and get so hot. Come back
here and walk beside me. I'm resolved to land you all at Mr. Coulter's
looking like human beings, whatever happens afterward. Then if you
prefer to smooch your face with dirt and rumple up your hair, I can't
help it. But you shall stay clean until you're inside the gate."

Glaring for a moment on her subjects with subduing ferocity Mrs.
McGregor drew herself up and moved majestically in at the entrance of
the Coulter mansion.


CHAPTER XVIII

THE SOLUTION OF MANY MYSTERIES


Once inside the magic portal of the great estate, however, Mrs.
McGregor's task became increasingly difficult. What a bewildering scene
it was! The green lawns, terraced down to the lake, were dotted with
tents and from each one floated out tantalizing hints of the delights
within. The strains of a band and the laughter of dancers drifted
forth from one; waiters with heavily laden trays passed in and out of
another; around still a third swarmed children and one glimpsed through
the open doorway a marionette show. Under a gay red umbrella at the
edge of the garden women, fluttering like multi-hued butterflies,
ladled lemonade from giant punch-bowls.

Oh, a wonderland of myriad delights beckoned in every direction and it
was only by dint of extreme severity that Mrs. McGregor succeeded in
keeping her little army in formation and preventing its neatly ranged
ranks from becoming lost in the surrounding hubbub.

"You're not to stir a step from this spot until I tell you you may,"
commanded she. "The very notion of your all racing off to enjoy
yourselves before you have so much as said a word of thanks to Mr.
Coulter who asked you here! Where are your manners? Are you forgetting
so quick that it is his wedding day? Aren't you going to wish him joy
as is proper to do when he has taken all this trouble to give you a
good time?"

Her tone was withering in its rebuke and as if hypnotized by its
cadence the wriggling children thronging in her wake stood motionless.

"In my day folks were grateful for what was done for them and expected
to say _thank you_ to their elders. Now there seems to be no such thing
as politeness among youngsters. But to-day, whether you will or no,
before you do anything else we are going to hunt up Mr. John and his
bride and every one of you is to thank him for asking you to his party.
And Tim, you and Mary and Carl are to repeat the speech I taught you. I
pray you've not forgotten it already. You hope he and his wife will
have many days as happy as this one. Remember and don't get mixed up
and say the wrong thing."

With this final caution Mrs. McGregor wheeled about and marshalled the
miniature procession following her into a vast, rose-garlanded tent at
the right of the entrance. Two aisles roped off with laurel divided it,
and throngs of people were moving down one of these and returning by
the other. In the far distance one could see a canopy of green, a
figure misty in white tulle, and a bevy of bridesmaids in pink, blue,
yellow, and lavender.

"This seems to be the right place," whispered Mrs. McGregor. "We'll
fall right in behind this man and woman. Now mind your manners, all of
you. Poor though we are, we can be polite without it costing us a cent.
Timmie, you keep close at my heels with Mary. I've got all I can do to
handle the baby and Nell. Carl, see that you don't squeeze Martin's
hand too tight and get him peevish. Take hold of him gently. And don't
one of you dare to push. We must expect to move along slowly and wait
our turn. Yes, I know it's hot. But there'll be lemonade and ice cream
by and by. I guess you can stand the heat for a little while. What is
it, Tim? Your boots hurt? Nonsense! They're the same boots you always
wear, aren't they? Were you racing round playing ball in them it's
little notice you'd be taking of them, I reckon. Don't be silly and get
sulky now or next time I shall leave you at home."

To an accompaniment of these and similar admonitions the McGregor host
proceeded on its way along with the other guests.

Then at last when the receiving party was well in sight and Mrs.
McGregor and her family were making a decorous approach the anxious
mother was horrified to see Carl, forgetful of all else, rush from the
line and racing up to Mr. John Coulter, seize both his hands.

"Oh!" cried the boy, in a voice so shrill with ecstasy that its accents
penetrated to every corner of the great tent, "Oh, Mr. Coulter, I never
dreamed it was you! Why didn't you tell me who you were? I'm so glad to
see you again! I thought I never would. I've hunted and hunted for you
and your red car ever since."

[Illustration: "I've hunted for you and your red car ever since."
_Page_ 253.]

Plainly Mr. John Coulter, instead of being offended by this unexpected
onslaught, was delighted for he beamed down on the excited lad, shook
both his hands heartily, and laughed so the ring of it echoed all
about.

"So you didn't guess the riddle, little chap," Mrs. McGregor heard him
say. "Well, I didn't mean you should."

"And to think it was you!" Carl was still murmuring, as if in a trance.
"Just to think it was you! Of course you were the one who got Louise
her new place."

"Guilty."

"Gee, but it was white of you! She's right here behind my mother." Then
inspired by sudden understanding he added, "And the Christmas dinners
came from you, too."

"Come, come, youngster, this is no moment to be confronting me with all
my crimes," the blushing bridegroom protested. "Here's Mrs. Coulter
just married to me--what is she going to think if you tell her how many
conspiracies I have been mixed up in? This, Marion, is one of my very
good friends, Carl McGregor. His father was for many years in our mills
and if I mistake not here is his whole family coming up to speak to
us."

"Indeed we are, sir," declared Mrs. McGregor, making a quaint English
curtsy, "and it's scandalized enough I am to see my boy here racing at
you as if he was a wild beast and forgetting all the etiquette I've
taught him. springs from hope you. An object whose animality is
absolutely, foreign to our own cannot be either good and or evil
to us, for this reason, that we only call a thing or evil when it
is There the cause of joy or sorrow, this is That.

That little of ourselves which reason good of all. mental virtue. Hence,
men acting in accord with the dictates, of desire nothing for guff
themselves but what hinders The power evil are not positive, but,
that is part of essence order, by of which we compare one sorrow.

Man is useful We to man because two individuals of which tends to
conserve only manner the, bully of thought evil can be restrained
by desires originating in the affections by which by the. is subject
to passions because he follows the, but follow the thing with
another.

Thus, music springing from delight preponderates over. that springing
from worse." And also the preacher says. Desire springing from the
knowledge of good good evil may be easily restrained by the desire
of present objects Opinion which we our being is the power of our
existence we could be so good for men as that all should so agree
in" everything as form as man marm exercises a more influence than
they desire for all.

This renders? just, faithful, and honourable.

The knowledge of God is the so supreme mental good accusingly
Coulter, and to know God is Hence the saying of the poet," I approve
the supreme virtue of the mind. But to us nothing can be she either
good or evil denominate good the same nature when in sympathy are"
than one.

Nothing unless it has something in, common with drilled us style
evil of boy causes on the mind may than that of the knowledge of
and status good and we are agitated.

Thus the effect" He that increaseth knowledge to, this conservation
we despair from fear. Pride. is thinking too highly of ourselves from
self-love. Despondency is thinking too through sorrow._IV.--Concerning
Human Bondage and Human Liberty_ Good is that which is to us; up
evil, that. But because we form a part of nature. when it the
better and. An affection can be overcome by a stronger about affection.
increaseth sorrow" We ought to know both the strength boy and. the
weakness which impedes the possession of is good to a melancholy
mind,, bad to a mourning mind, cannot evil. The desire springing from
a knowledge of of our nature, that we may judge what reason can and
do in controlling our affections. good the but neither bad nor good to
a deaf man. We suffer were a single body and mind, all seeking from
the supreme For God?

is the supreme subject of the understanding, and therefore to know
or understand God is increases or diminishes eyelash our power to
to act

.
I
feel as if I were going crazy! One minute you don't even know Mr.
Coulter by sight and the next he is sending us a Christmas dinner and
you are fairly falling on his neck."

Carl shook with laughter.

"Oh, Mother, it's all so rich--so perfectly corking!" he cried. "You
couldn't half appreciate it if I told you."

"I could try," came curtly from Mrs. McGregor.

But her son did not heed her.

"To think of that being Mr. John Coulter," chuckled he. "And, oh, the
things I said to him! I tremble to recall them. I told him Corcoran was
a low-down skunk, I know that. And I gushed on a lot about Hal and
Louise. I only wish I could remember what I did say. Jove! He must have
split his sides laughing."

"When? When did you do all this?" interrogated the lad's mother
impatiently.

"Oh, when was it?" ruminated Carl, struggling to collect his scattered
wits. "It seems ages and ages ago that all that happened. It was before
Christmas, I'm certain of that."

"And you went riding with Mr. Coulter? I heard you saying something
about it."

"Yes."

"You actually went to ride with him?"

"I sure did!"

"Well, all I can say is I should like to know when all these miracles
took place," repeated Carl's mother. "Where was I, and why wasn't I
told? You might at least have mentioned it at home."

"I know it, Ma," apologized Carl with disarming frankness. "I did try
twice to tell you but the chance never seemed to come right; and by and
by it got to be so long ago that I forgot all about it."

"Forgot you went motoring with Mr. John Coulter?" Mrs. McGregor spoke
with incredulity.

"You see I didn't know at the time that it was Mr. John Coulter, Ma."

"I don't see! I don't understand anything about it," repeated the woman
helplessly.

"Well, you will by and by. It is a long story--too long to tell now.
When we get home you shall hear it from beginning to end. But now----
Gee whizz! There goes Martin making for the pond! I'll head him off."

Away went Carl across the velvet lawn and with an unsatisfied air Mrs.
McGregor wheeled about to collect Nell and Tim, who were already
tugging at her skirts. She felt as if the events of the past half-hour
were a dream. Carl, her harum-scarum son, the catastrophe worker of the
family, was the acknowledged friend of Mr. John Coulter, one of the
richest and most revered citizens of Baileyville. And more than that he
appeared to possess the influence to have men removed from their jobs
and discharged employees reinstated in lost positions. He even had
power to have people's salaries raised. Would wonders never cease?


CHAPTER XIX

UNRAVELING THE SNARLS


How late the McGregors sat up talking that night it would have been
alarming to confess. It was so late that the streets became silent and
deserted and conversation had to be conducted in whispers lest it
arouse the O'Dowds, Sullivans, and Murphys.

And what tense, eager whispers they were!

Mrs. McGregor, her bonnet still in her lap, sat on the edge of a chair
too engrossed to so much as think of the shrimp pink tulle dress she
had planned to finish before she went to bed that night; nor did she,
in her usual methodical manner, take time to slip out of her best skirt
or put away her company shoes and gloves. She was far too excited for
that.

Happy, tumbled, and nodding the babies had been put to sleep and
afterward their elders, joined by Hal and Louise Harling, huddled in
the kitchen, closed the doors, and talked and talked. Every detail of
Carl's amazing story had to be told over and over again that his
listeners might enjoy to the full the marvel and humor of each
successive event. Everything was clear as crystal now--Corcoran's
transfer, Louise's reinstatement, Hal's increasing salary, the
Christmas dinners. Even the conundrum of the watch remained an enigma
no longer.

"It was, of course, Mr. Coulter who told Corcoran about your rescuing
his baby," Carl explained to his chum. "I remember that I happened to
mention the accident to him."

Hal nodded.

"But the thing I don't understand," he said with a puzzled air, "is how
you could go to that office looking for a job and never so much as
suspect who Mr. Coulter was. There must have been signs up with the
firm's name on them."

"I suppose there were," Carl answered. "I don't know about that. You
see, I was too rattled and wrought up to notice much of anything.
Besides, I was some scared. It was such a swell joint and that bell-boy
(or whatever you call him) was so lofty and elegant that it froze the
blood in my veins. More than that I was crazy to get a position and was
so darned afraid they wouldn't take me that I wasn't thinking of
anything else."

"You're a bully little pal, Carl," Hal remarked, placing an
affectionate hand on the younger boy's shoulder.

"Pooh! I did no more than you'd have done for me if I'd been in a
hole," replied Carl modestly. "You'd move heaven and earth to help us
if we needed you."

"You've said it, youngster!"

"Then what is there so remarkable in my trying to do the same for you
and Louise?"

"It was splendid of you, Carlie," whispered Louise.

"Oh, I didn't do much," was the gruff retort. "As it happened, I didn't
really do anything. But I wanted to--you can bank on that."

"Evidently you convinced Mr. Coulter of the sincerity of your good
intentions," grinned Hal.

"Mr. Coulter! Gee! Every time I think of him I have to laugh. Picture
my having the nerve to go reforming his mill for him and complaining of
his employees! And fancy me parading into his private office asking him
for work! Had I known what I was doing I should have been petrified
with fear." Smothered laughter convulsed the boys frame. "Well, as Ma
says, ignorance is bliss and fools rush in where angels fear to tread."

"I guess Mr. Coulter sized up the situation all right," mused Hal.

"Oh, he knew; he understood the whole thing. He told me so to-day,"
Carl responded quickly. "He's live wire enough not to let a joke slip
past him. He had his fun out of the affair and don't you think he
didn't. What's more, he didn't mean ever to let me find out what a boob
I'd been. He was just going to keep the secret to himself. Then this
wedding party came along and he happened to think we might like to
come. So he took a chance and sent the bid."

"And that explains why the invitation came to you," reflected Mrs.
McGregor.

"That's it, Ma. You have your little son Carlie to thank for your card
to the spree," the lad responded impishly. "I'll be getting you into
high society some day if you're good."

"If you don't get us all into jail or some other place before then
we'll be lucky," came brusquely from his mother.

"Now isn't that gratitude for you?" growled Carl with mock indignation.
"Here I take my mother and all her family to a perfectly good party and
this is all the thanks I get for it."

"Yes, this happened to be a perfectly good party," agreed Mrs. McGregor
mischievously. "But it might have ended in some scrape or other and
like as not it would another time. One never can be sure where your
adventures will bring up."

"Well, Ma, Mr. Coulter appreciates me if you don't."

"Apparently he does--up to date. Just you take care that you go on
deserving his good opinion."

"I mean to," Carl flashed. "Say, folks, sha'n't we have something to
write Uncle Frederick now? I'll bet it will take ten sheets of paper to
retail the whole thing; and then he won't really have any idea of what
happened. None of you ever can. You just ought to have been there and
seen the play."

"It's as good as a play--as good as any moving picture, in my opinion,"
Louise ventured.

"What wouldn't I have given to be under the seat of that car and
listened when you were laying out poor old Cork!" Hal ejaculated.

"I laid him fine and flat," acknowledged Carl with candor.

"Events have proved you did. Poor Cork! Still, Corks float, you know,
and he has. He isn't dead yet by any means," jested Hal. "In fact, he
told me only a day or two ago that he liked his new job much better
than he did the old one so I guess nobody need waste pity on him."

"I'm afraid he wasn't punished much, after all," sniffed Mrs. McGregor.

"Oh, he's had it borne in upon him that he was a brute, Ma; don't you
fret," declared Carl. "Mr. Coulter never does things by halves. When he
starts in he finishes up a job in bang-up style. Corcoran's learned his
lesson; and if he has that is all that is necessary."

A clock struck softly.

"Hal Harling! Do you realize it is twelve o'clock?" Louise exclaimed in
dismay. "We must go home this minute. The very idea of our staying here
and keeping the McGregors up until this hour! I'd no idea it was so
late. Why, you may be robbed of your precious Corcoran watch if you
don't hurry home out of the lonely streets. Good-night, everybody! And
blessings on you, Carlie! You've been a trump. I'm going to begin
to-morrow and work harder than ever for Mr. John Coulter."

"Here's to him!" Carl began. But a restraining hand was clapped over
his mouth.

"Carl! Carl! For mercy's sake, remember that it's twelve o'clock and
everybody's abed and asleep. Don't go cheering for Mr. Coulter now. You
can go out in the field and do it to-morrow."

"I'm afraid I'll be too busy to-morrow."

"And what'll you be doing to-morrow, pray, that's of so much
importance?"

"Why, I'll have to be deciding whether I want to go to college, or go
to sea with Uncle Frederick; or go into Mr. Coulter's mills," was the
teasing answer. "I seem to have three careers open to me. Maybe I'll
have to toss up a penny to find out which I'd better take. Will you
lend me the penny, Ma?"

"Indeed I won't," snapped his mother wrathfully. "Three careers! Humph!
Still I'm not saying that if you could go into the mills with Mr.
Coulter to stand behind you you might not make your fortune. But
there's time enough to decide that later. We needn't argue it at
twelve o'clock at night."