When this space was elapsed, the trampling of horse was heard in
the court-yard, and Colonel Stewart soon after made his appearance
to request his guest to take some further refreshment before his
departure. The offer was accepted, for a late breakfast had by no
means left our hero incapable of doing honour to dinner, which was
now presented. The conversation of his host was that of a plain
country gentleman, mixed with some soldier-like sentiments and
expressions. He cautiously avoided any reference to the military
operations or civil politics of the time; and to Waverley's direct
inquiries concerning some of these points replied, that he was not
at liberty to speak upon such topics.

When dinner was finished the governor arose, and, wishing Edward a
good journey, said that, having been informed by Waverley's
servant that his baggage had been sent forward, he had taken the
freedom to supply him with such changes of linen as he might find
necessary till he was again possessed of his own. With this
compliment he disappeared. A servant acquainted Waverley an
instant afterwards that his horse was ready.

Upon this hint he descended into the court-yard, and found a
trooper holding a saddled horse, on which he mounted and sallied
from the portal of Doune Castle, attended by about a score of
armed men on horseback. These had less the appearance of regular
soldiers than of individuals who had suddenly assumed arms from
some pressing motive of unexpected emergency. Their uniform, which
was blue and red, an affected imitation of that of French
chasseurs, was in many respects incomplete, and sate awkwardly
upon those who wore it. Waverley's eye, accustomed to look at a
well-disciplined regiment, could easily discover that the motions
and habits of his escort were not those of trained soldiers, and
that, although expert enough in the management of their horses,
their skill was that of huntsmen or grooms rather than of
troopers. The horses were not trained to the regular pace so
necessary to execute simultaneous and combined movements and
formations; nor did they seem bitted (as it is technically
expressed) for the use of the sword. The men, however, were stout,
hardy-looking fellows, and might be individually formidable as
irregular cavalry. The commander of this small party was mounted
upon an excellent hunter, and, although dressed in uniform, his
change of apparel did not prevent Waverley from recognising his
old acquaintance, Mr. Falconer of Balmawhapple.

Now, although the terms upon which Edward had parted with this
gentleman were none of the most friendly, he would have sacrificed
every recollection of their foolish quarrel for the pleasure of
enjoying once more the social intercourse of question and answer,
from which he had been so long secluded. But apparently the
remembrance of his defeat by the Baron of Bradwardine, of which
Edward had been the unwilling cause, still rankled in the mind of
the low-bred and yet proud laird. He carefully avoided giving the
least sign of recognition, riding doggedly at the head of his men,
who, though scarce equal in numbers to a sergeant's party, were
denominated Captain Falconer's troop, being preceded by a trumpet,
which sounded from time to time, and a standard, borne by Cornet
Falconer, the laird's younger brother. The lieutenant, an elderly
man, had much the air of a low sportsman and boon companion; an
expression of dry humour predominated in his countenance over
features of a vulgar cast, which indicated habitual intemperance.
His cocked hat was set knowingly upon one side of his head, and
while he whistled the 'Bob of Dumblain,' under the influence of
half a mutchkin of brandy, he seemed to trot merrily forward, with
a happy indifference to the state of the country, the conduct of
the party, the end of the journey, and all other sublunary matters
whatever.

From this wight, who now and then dropped alongside of his horse,
Waverley hoped to acquire some information, or at least to beguile
the way with talk.

'A fine evening, sir,' was Edward's salutation.

'Ow, ay, sir! a bra' night,' replied the lieutenant, in broad
Scotch of the most vulgar description.

'And a fine harvest, apparently,' continued Waverley, following up
his first attack.

'Ay, the aits will be got bravely in; but the farmers, deil burst
them, and the corn-mongers will make the auld price gude against
them as has horses till keep.'

'You perhaps act as quartermaster, sir?'

'Ay, quartermaster, riding-master, and lieutenant,' answered this
officer of all work. 'And, to be sure, wha's fitter to look after
the breaking and the keeping of the poor beasts than mysell, that
bought and sold every ane o' them?'

'And pray, sir, if it be not too great a freedom, may I beg to
know where we are going just now?'

'A fule's errand, I fear,' answered this communicative personage.

'In that case,' said Waverley, determined not to spare civility,
'I should have thought a person of your appearance would not have
been found on the road.'

'Vera true, vera true, sir,' replied the officer, 'but every why
has its wherefore. Ye maun ken, the laird there bought a' thir
beasts frae me to munt his troop, and agreed to pay for them
according to the necessities and prices of the time. But then he
hadna the ready penny, and I hae been advised his bond will not be
worth a boddle against the estate, and then I had a' my dealers to
settle wi' at Martinmas; and so, as he very kindly offered me this
commission, and as the auld Fifteen [Footnote: The Judges of the
Supreme Court of Session in Scotland are proverbially termed among
the country people, The Fifteen.] wad never help me to my siller
for sending out naigs against the government, why, conscience!
sir, I thought my best chance for payment was e'en to GAE OUT
[Footnote: See Note 3.] mysell; and ye may judge, sir, as I hae
dealt a' my life in halters, I think na mickle o' putting my craig
in peril of a Saint John-stone's tippet.'

'You are not, then, by profession a soldier?' said Waverley.

'Na, na; thank God,' answered this doughty partizan, 'I wasna bred
at sae short a tether, I was brought up to hack and manger. I was
bred a horse-couper, sir; and if I might live to see you at
Whitson-tryst, or at Stagshawbank, or the winter fair at Hawick,
and ye wanted a spanker that would lead the field, I'se be caution
I would serve ye easy; for Jamie Jinker was ne'er the lad to
impose upon a gentleman. Ye're a gentleman, sir, and should ken a
horse's points; ye see that through--ganging thing that
Balmawhapple's on; I selled her till him. She was bred out of
Lick-the-ladle, that wan the king's plate at Caverton-Edge, by
Duke Hamilton's White-Foot,' etc., etc., etc.

But as Jinker was entered full sail upon the pedigree of
Balmawhapple's mare, having already got as far as great-grandsire
and great-grand-dam, and while Waverley was watching for an
opportunity to obtain from him intelligence of more interest, the
noble captain checked his horse until they came up, and then,
without directly appearing to notice Edward, said sternly to the
genealogist, 'I thought, lieutenant, my orders were preceese, that
no one should speak to the prisoner?'

