Ruth drew back into the corner of the carriage and turned her face into
the shadow.  She wanted to think.  What an extraordinary change in the
outlook at life to have happened in a few brief moments!  Dr Maclure's
wife!  Here was an answer indeed to the question which had been
occupying her thoughts for the last few weeks!

Suppose--suppose, just for one moment, that she said yes?  Suppose that
on getting home she walked into the dining-room and announced her
engagement to a prosperous and charming man, who was already a family
friend and favourite?  What fun!  What excitement!  What pride on the
part of the little mother; what transparent relief to the overtaxed
pater!  Mollie and Trix would begin at once to discuss bridesmaids'
dresses, and there would be a trousseau to buy, and all the bustle and
excitement of a first marriage in a family.  And afterwards?  A big,
handsomely appointed house, pretty clothes, lots of money, the power to
help those whom she loved...

It sounded good--very good indeed!  Much more attractive than those
nursery governess and companion schemes which she dreaded, despite all
her resolutions.  It would be delightful to be her own mistress, and do
just as she liked...

And then a thought occurred.  What of Eleanor?  Ruth recalled the intent
gaze which had mystified her so much during the afternoon, and felt
convinced that Miss Maclure had guessed her brother's secret.  What was
her feeling in the matter?  Was she jealous of a rival in her brother's
affections, or loyally anxious for his happiness, regardless of how her
own future might be affected?  A spasm of curiosity found voice in a
sudden question--

"But there is Eleanor.  If you married, what would become of her?"

"There would be no difficulty about that.  When we took up house
together we made a solemn agreement that if either wished to marry in
the future the other should not hinder in any possible way.  Eleanor has
her own income, and many interests in life to keep her happy and
occupied.  She would live near us, I hope, but you should be entire
mistress of your home, Ruth."

He evidently thought she had looked upon his sister's presence in the
house as a hindrance to her happiness, but, in truth, Ruth felt a chilly
sinking of heart at his reply.  The thought of the big house was not
half so attractive, shorn of the figure of the sympathetic friend.  The
library with no Eleanor sitting writing at her desk; the drawing-room
with no Eleanor in the deep-cushioned chair; the dining-room with no
Eleanor at the head of the table--how blank it all seemed!  How
dreadfully dull to be alone all day, with only the doctor to break the
monotony!  Only the doctor!  The blood rushed in a flood to Ruth's
cheeks as she realised the significance of that one word.  She turned
impetuously towards her companion, and gripped his arm with nervous
pressure.

"Don't tempt me!" she cried earnestly--"don't tempt me!  There are so
many things that I should like, and I keep thinking of them, when I
should think only of you.--I'd love to be rich, and have a nice house,
and play Lady Bountiful at home!  I'd love to travel about and see the
world, instead of jogging along in one little rut; and, really and
truly, I dread turning out to work, and am a coward at heart--but,--
that's all!  I have always liked you very much as a friend, but I can't
imagine ever feeling any different.  When I was thinking over things
just now, I--don't be angry!  I don't want to hurt you, only to be
quite, quite honest--I thought more of Eleanor than of you!  I hardly
thought of you at all."

The doctor's thin face looked very drawn and pained, but he smiled in
response to her pleading glance.

"I'm not angry, dear.  Why should I be?  It is not your fault that you
do not care, and it is best for us both to know the truth.  I feared it
might be so.  I am too old and staid to attract a bright young girl, but
I even now cannot bring myself to regret my love.  It has given me the
happiest hours of my life, and I hope you will always let me help you in
any way that is possible.  I think you owe me that privilege, don't you,
Ruth?"

"Oh, I do--I do!  If it is any pleasure to you, I promise faithfully to
come to you whenever I need a friend, and I should like you to help me.
That means a great deal, for I am horribly proud.  There are very few
people from whom I can accept a favour."

He smiled again, but with an evident effort, and Ruth, peeping at his
averted profile, felt a pang of real personal suffering at the sight of
his pain.  It seemed dreadful that she should have such power to affect
this strong man; to take the light out of his face and make it old and
worn and grey!

The carriage was nearing home; in a few minutes' time the drive would be
over, and she would have no chance of continuing the conversation.  With
a sudden swelling of the heart she realised that she could not part
without another expression of regret.

"I am so sorry, so dreadfully sorry to have grieved you!  But you would
not like me to marry you just for what you could give me; you would not
have been satisfied with that, would you, Dr Maclure?"

His eyes met hers with a flash of determination.

"No," he cried--unhesitatingly--"never!  I want a wife who loves me, or
no wife at all!  One never knows what lies ahead in this world, and if
dark days come I should like to feel that she cared for me more, rather
than less.  It would be hard for us both if she valued only my
possessions, and they took to themselves wings and fled.  And there is
your own future to consider.  Love will come to you some day, and you
must be free to welcome him.  Don't distress yourself about me, Ruth; I
have my work for consolation.  Before I get home to-night I shall have
seen so much suffering that I shall be ashamed to nurse my own trouble."

"Yes," said Ruth faintly.

His words seemed to place her at an immense distance, as if already he
had accepted his burden and put it resolutely out of sight.  She felt
chilled and humiliated, for in the depths of her heart she knew that if
Dr Maclure had been persistent in his request, and had condescended to
"tempt" her, to use her own expressive phrase, she would very probably
have succumbed to the temptation, however much she might have regretted
her decision later on.  But Donald would have none of her; he wanted a
wife who cared for himself, and not for his possessions.  Ruth felt
almost as if it were she herself who had been refused.  It was not an
agreeable sensation to experience after a first proposal.


CHAPTER FOUR.

A MEETING.

One bright spring afternoon about a week after Ruth's visit to Miss
Maclure, Mollie went out to execute some shopping commissions, and on
her way home took a short cut through the park, which was the great
summer resort of the northern town in which her lot was cast.

She was an ardent lover of Nature, and it was a joy to see the tiny
green buds bursting into life on trees and hedges, and to realise that
the long winter was at an end.

"Nasty, shivery, chilblainey thing,--I hate it!" said Mollie to herself,
with a shiver of disgust.  "It might be very nice if one had lots of
furs, and skating, and parties, and fires in one's bedroom.  People who
can enjoy themselves like that may talk of the `joys of winter,' but,
from my point of view, they don't exist.  Give me summer, and flowers at
a penny a bunch!  This dear old park and I have had many good times
together.  I think I have sampled most of the seats in my time!"

It was, indeed, a favourite summer custom of the Farrell girls to repair
to a shady bench under a tree with such portable sewing as happened to
be on hand, for when the sun shone in its strength the temperature of
Attica was more like that of an oven than a room.  The winding paths
were, therefore, familiar to Mollie; but they were apt to be puzzling to
strangers who, like herself, wished to take a short cut from one side of
the park to another.

To-day as she approached the junction of four cross-ways, she saw before
her the figure of an old man, glancing irresolutely from side to side,
then turning round, as though in search of someone whom he could consult
in his perplexity.  Besides Mollie herself, there was no one in sight,
so she quickened her pace and approached the stranger with the bright,
frank smile which came so readily to her lips.  Mollie was nothing if
not sociable; she never lost a chance of talking if it came in her way;
even to direct wandering old gentlemen was more amusing than nothing,
and this one had such a curious old-world appearance!

"Can I help you?" she asked brightly; and the old man planted his stick
more firmly on the ground, and stared at her with grim disfavour.

"In what way, may I ask, do I appear to be in need of help?"

It was decidedly a snub, but some people are not easily quelled, and
Mollie Farrell was one of the number.  Instead of being annoyed, she was
simply amused, and her grey eyes twinkled with mischief.  He was a cross
old dear, and proud too! quite amazed that anyone should suppose it
possible that he should need assistance of any kind.

"I'm sorry," she replied; "I thought you had lost your way, and that I
might be able to direct you.  Please forgive me for seeming to
interfere."

She took a step forward, but the old man's eyes seemed to hold her back.
He was looking at her fixedly beneath his heavy brows; such bushy,
black eyebrows they were, and she fancied that the grim expression
softened for a moment as he replied--

"You are right.  I _have_ lost my way!  My cabman brought me to the park
gates, and as he said there was a direct path across, I thought I should
like the walk.  As a result, I find myself completely out of my
reckoning.  It is a stretch of imagination to call this a direct path."

"Oh, it's direct enough when you know it," said Mollie easily, "ever so
much nicer than going round by the streets.  It is a beautiful park, and
we are very proud of it.  When the trees are in blossom, it is like
fairyland--you can't imagine how beautiful it is."

"Possibly not," returned the stranger curtly.  "In the meantime,
however, there is nothing particularly alluring in the scene, and you
will excuse my reminding you that we are standing in a direct draught.
I should be obliged if you could direct me to Langton Terrace without
further delay."

Mollie laughed merrily.

"That is just what I have been waiting to do, but you would not tell me
where you were bound.  I am walking in that direction myself, and if you
will allow me I will show you the shortest cut.  I know the park so well
that I can dodge about from one path to another, and cut off some of the
corners.  It is cold just here, but the cross-roads are sheltered even
now."

The stranger shrugged his shoulders, and said "Humph" in an incredulous
manner, and that was his sole reply in words.  He turned, however, and
walked by Mollie's side, leaning heavily on his stick, and taking such
short, laboured steps, that it was evident that the exercise was almost
too much for his strength.  Mollie longed to offer him the support of
her strong arm, but even her audacity failed at the sight of the grim
face.  She looked inquiringly at his feet, for the symptoms of temper
all hinted to the explanation of gout.  But no! there were no cloth
shoes to be seen, only the trimmest of well-polished boots.

"Perhaps he is just recovering from an attack, or sickening for
another," said Mollie to herself.  "Anyway, he is ill, poor old fellow,
for his face looks quite grey, just like that poor Mr Burgess before he
died.  I expect he can't help being cross.  I should be horrid myself if
I were always in pain.  I remember that day I had on those new boots
that hurt my feet, I quarrelled with Ruth all the way home...  The
question is, shall I talk, or let him alone?  If it were me, I'd like to
be amused, to make the time pass.  I'll try anyway, and see how he
responds."

They had entered one of the smaller paths by this time, and to the right
lay the wide, grey surface of a lake dotted over by little islands, the
largest of which was connected with the shore by an ornamental bridge.
Mollie felt a kind of possessive pride in the scene, and pointed out the
beauties thereof as eagerly as though she were the owner of all she
surveyed.

"It's the largest lake in any of the parks in the north; some people say
it is nearly as big as the Serpentine.  I don't know, for I have never
been in London.  In summer-time hundreds of men come and sail boats--
quite great big boats--from side to side.  It looks so pretty to see all
the white sails floating about in the sunshine."

"Indeed!"

("Doesn't care for boats.  I'll try something else.") "Do you see that
big island, the biggest of all?" pursued the indefatigable Mollie aloud.
"It is full of peacocks.  There are dozens and dozens of peacocks!  You
can see them sometimes strutting about with their tails spread out, and
roosting right up in the trees.  People say that peacocks are the
laziest birds in existence.  They go to rest earlier, and get up later
than anything else."

"Indeed!"

Still grimmer silence; still slower and more halting footsteps.
Presently the stranger stopped short and asked abruptly--

"How far are we still from Langton Terrace?  Five minutes' walk--ten
minutes?  We are more than half-way, I suppose?"

"Not quite, I am afraid.  If you are tired, would you not rest on this
seat for a few minutes?  It is really quite sheltered behind the trees.
If you can tell me which end of the terrace you want to reach, it will
make a little difference in the way we ought to take.  There are three
blocks of houses, which are all known by the same name.  You wanted to
go to--"

"Number 7," said the stranger; and sat down heavily upon the seat.  He
leant both hands on his stick and rested his chin upon them, as though
thankful for the support; and Mollie stood before him staring fixedly at
his face.

Aquiline features, sharpened by suffering into yet finer lines, closely-
set lips drooping out into lines of fretful impatience, sunken eyes
beneath overhanging brows.  She studied them one by one, until, struck
by her silence, the old man looked up in surprise.

"Number 7, I said.  If you live in the neighbourhood, you may know the
house, and possibly its inmates?"

"Yes, I know them all; they are nice people and very kind to me.  I've
known them quite a number of years."

"Mr and Mrs Connor have a large family, I believe--a number of young
children."

"Oh, dozens!" replied Mollie easily.  She was enjoying herself
intensely, but trying to preserve an appearance of innocent calm.  "What
an adventure," she was saying to herself--"oh, what an adventure.  What
fun to tell it all to Ruth and the girls!  I must remember every word,
so as to repeat it in style!"  Aloud, she added carelessly, "There are
two girls, and lots of little boys.  It seems as if there were boys,
boys everywhere, wherever you turn all over the house; but they are
ubiquitous creatures, so perhaps there are not quite so many as it
seems.  They are handsome little fellows, and I believe clever too.
Mrs Connor is a very pretty woman, and always kind and gentle.
Everybody likes her.  Mr Connor is nice too.  I don't think he is at
all strong, and he has to work very hard for that big family."

"Indeed!"  The strange old man did not display the slightest sign of
sympathy for Mr Connor's anxieties.  He relaxed his hold of the stick,
and sank wearily against the back of the seat.  "There are two step-
daughters, I believe--the two Miss Farrells?"

"Ah!" exclaimed Mollie deeply.  It was quite a tragic note, as who
should say, "Now we are beginning to talk!  Now, at last, we reach the
real point of the discussion!  Just that deep `Ah,' and no more, until
perforce another question must be asked.

"You know the Miss Farrells also?"

"I do!"

"And find them as attractive as the rest of the family?"

"Oh, more--much more!  They are darlings!" cried Mollie, with unction,
"especially the younger.  Her name is Mary, but they call her Mollie,
because it suits her better.  Don't you always imagine a Mollie very
sweet, and charming, and attractive?"

"I can't say that I have devoted any attention to the subject.  So Mary
is the younger of the two, is she?  And the elder?"

"Ruth! she's pretty and serious, and very, very nice; but Mollie is
nicer, all the same.  When you get to know them, you must promise to
like Mollie best, for my sake!  I'm so fond of her, that I want
everybody to be the same.  I like her better than anyone I ever knew!"

The old man smiled grimly.

"You appear to be of an enthusiastic temperament; I fancy I shall prefer
to judge for myself when I make the young lady's acquaintance.  We had
better be getting on now.  I am sorry to hinder your progress, but it is
not possible for me to move more quickly at present.  I should not have
attempted the walk if I had known that it was so long; but the cab
jolted insufferably, and the sunshine was tempting.  Well,--there is
nothing for it but to make another effort!"

He pressed his hands on the seat to lighten the effort of rising, but
before he had got any further, Mollie stepped forward eagerly, and laid
a hand on his shoulder.  Her cheeks were flushed with colour, her eyes
a-sparkle with excitement.

"Unless you will let me help you! ...  I'm very strong; I could support
you easily, if you would take my arm and lean on me.  I'd love to do it.
Do let me?  Won't you,--_Uncle Bernard_?"


CHAPTER FIVE.

AN INVITATION.

The old man fell backward on the seat with an exclamation of keenest
surprise.  His sunken eyes stared into Mollie's face as she bent over
him; at the golden hair curling beneath the dark toque, the grey eyes,
the curving lips.  Each feature in turn was scrutinised as if he were
searching for something familiar which had so far escaped notice.
Apparently it was not discovered, for the expression of amazement
deepened upon his face, and he asked sharply--

"What did you say?  _What_ did you call me?  I don't understand what you
can mean!"

Mollie sat down on the bench, and smiled brightly into his face.

"Uncle Bernard!  You are Uncle Bernard Farrell!  I knew you the moment
you said that you were going to Number 7, and asked if I knew the
Connors.  Of course I know them, because I am--" She hesitated, and Mr
Farrell finished the sentence for her.

"You are one of Mr Connor's daughters.  The eldest, I presume.  I have
not the pleasure of knowing your name."

"No-o!  I am not Trix.  She is a child, only fifteen.  I was nineteen on
my last birthday.  I am,"--for once in her life Mollie had the grace to
blush, and looked a trifle discomposed--"I'm Mollie Farrell."

The glance which the old man cast upon her was the reverse of
flattering.

"You are Mollie Farrell, are you?" he repeated coldly.  "Evidently
modesty is not one of your failings, young lady.  It might have been
wiser if you had allowed me to discover your attractions for myself.  Do
you consider it quite honest--we will not discuss the question of good
taste--to play a double part, and criticise your relations to any
stranger whom you may meet in your walks?"

"You asked me; you began it!  I should not have mentioned them if you
had not asked that question.  Then I recognised you, and thought it
would be fun.  You were not a stranger, you see; you were Uncle
Bernard."

"That may be my name, but as I have never seen you before, I can hardly
rank as a friend.  May I ask how you came to recognise me at all?"

"Oh yes!  We have your portraits at home, and mother often talks of you,
and the happy times she had when she used to visit you with father when
they were engaged.  When we were children it was a favourite game for
one of us to be Uncle Bernard, and the other guests staying at the
Court, and we used to go through all the adventures which father had as
a boy,--fall into the mill-stream and be rescued by the dog, and be
chased by the bull in the long meadow, and ride on the top of the
waggons at the harvest home.  We know all about the house, and the
tapestry in the hall, and the funny wooden pictures of the Dutch
ancestors, and the long gallery where you used to dance at night.
Mother loves talking about it.  She has not much fun in her life now,
poor dear, and that makes her think all the more of her youth.  We envy
her, Ruth and Trix and I, because we have a very quiet time at home.  We
are poor, you see.  You can't have much fun if you are poor."

"You think that riches are the one thing needful; that if you had enough
money your happiness would be assured?"

"Ah!" sighed Mollie rapturously.  "_How_ happy I should be!  I've never
had enough money for my wants in all my life, so I can't even imagine
the bliss of it.  I should not know how to be happy enough."

The old man looked at her silently.  She saw that he was about to speak,
but the words were long in coming.  A cloud had drifted across the sun,
and the stretch of park looked suddenly grey and bare.  Mollie drew her
shoulders together with an involuntary shiver.  Something had suddenly
damped her ardour of enthusiasm; but it was not so much the bleak wind
as the sight of the face gazing into her own, with its set lips, and
bleached, joyless expression.  For years to come Mollie could recall
that moment, and feel again the chill in her veins with which she
listened to his reply.

"All my life long," said Bernard Farrell slowly, "all my life everything
that I have touched has turned to gold, and everyone I have loved,"--he
paused, lingering on the word, and again Mollie shivered in sympathetic
understanding--"everyone whom I have loved has _died_!"  The wind seemed
to take up the word, and repeat it in melancholy echo.  "Died! died!
died!" wailed the trees, tossing drearily to and fro.  "Died!" shivered
the ripple over the cold grey lake.  The clouds gathered in a pall
overhead.

"I'm sorry!" gasped Mollie faintly--"I'm so sorry!"  But Mr Farrell
stopped her with a hasty gesture.

"Please spare me protestations of sympathy.  They were the last thing I
wished to evoke.  I merely wished to impress upon you that I am in a
unique position for judging the worth of riches.--Is it your pleasure
that we continue our journey?  The afternoon is growing chill."

Mollie rose in confusion, but she did not reply, nor make any further
offer of support.  There was something in the old man's voice which
forbade familiarities.  He was no longer merely cross and unamiable; she
had caught a glimpse into the secret of a desolate heart, and the sight
sobered her youthful spirits.

"First his wife," she said to herself, as she led the way
onward--"pretty Aunt Edna, whom mother loved so much.  He adored her,
and they were never parted for a day till she took typhoid, and died.
The little girl died the year after, and he had no one left but Ned.
Mother says he was the handsomest boy she ever met, and the cleverest,
and the best.  Even now, after all these years, she can't speak of the
day he was drowned without crying...  I always hated to hear that story!

"She says the real Uncle Bernard died with Ned.  He seemed to disappear
from that day, and an entirely different person appeared in his place.
He had been kind and hospitable, fond of having people around him and
making them happy; but after that he shut himself up and became a
regular hermit.  Then he went abroad, and since he came back four years
ago and reopened the Court, he has written to nobody, and nobody has
seen him.  But he has come to see us to-day of his own free will.  I
wonder why?  Something has happened to make him break the silence.  What
can it have been?"

She dared not ask the question; but, as the feeble steps endeavoured to
keep pace with her own, a possible explanation darted into Mollie's
mind.  The poor old man was ill, very ill; there was an expression on
the grey, sunken face which was eloquent even to her inexperience.
Death was coming forward to meet him, coming very near; standing upon
the very threshold!  Strong, happy nineteen shuddered at the thought,
and felt an overpowering pity for the waning life.

Mollie longed to comfort the old man with the assurance that there were
many still left who could help and minister to his declining days; but
her previous overtures had met with so little success that she was
afraid of meeting yet another rebuff, and, with unusual prudence,
decided to await a better opportunity.

Langton Terrace was reached at last, and Mollie produced a key and
opened the door of Number 7.  In a household where there are so many
children and so few servants, the latchkey was in constant use, and thus
it happened that she could bring her guest unnoticed into the house and
escort him to her stepfather's sanctum, which was sure to be unoccupied
at this hour of the afternoon.  She drew forward an armchair, poked the
fire into a blaze, and laid Mr Farrell's hat and stick on the table,
while he lay wearily against the cushions.  He looked woefully
exhausted, and Mollie's kind heart had a happy inspiration.

"I shan't tell anyone that you are here until you have had a rest," she
said assuringly.  "This is the pater's den, and his private property
after four o'clock, so you will be quite undisturbed.  Just tell me what
will refresh you most--tea, coffee, wine?  I can bring what you like
quite quietly."

"Tea, please--tea, and ten minutes' rest.  I shall be better then," Mr
Farrell said wearily.

Mollie left the room to prepare a dainty little tray in the pantry, and
beg a private pot of tea from the kitchen.  The idea of waiting in
secret upon Uncle Bernard was delightfully exciting; it was almost as
good as running the blockade, to creep past the dining-room door where
her mother and sisters were assembled, and listen to the murmur of
voices from within.

If they knew--oh, if they knew!  She had prepared some crisp slices of
toast, skimmed the cream off the milk in defiance of cook's protests,
and made sure that the water in the little covered jug was boiling, and
not only moderately warm, as the custom was.  It was the simplest of
meals, but at least everything was as tempting as hands could make it,
and Mollie had the satisfaction of pouring out two cups of tea, and
seeing the last slice of toast disappear from the rack.  She took
nothing herself, and preserved a discreet silence until Mr Farrell
replaced cup and plate on the table, and condescended to smile approval.

"Thank you, Miss Mollie; I am obliged to you for securing me this rest.
Judging from my first impressions of your character, I should not have
expected so much common-sense.  I feel quite refreshed, and ready to see
your mother when it is convenient."

Mollie lifted the tray, and stood for a moment looking down with an air
of triumph.

"I'm so glad!  I talk a lot of nonsense, but I can be quite sensible if
I like, and I _did_ want to help you, Uncle Bernard; I'll send mother in
here, where you can have your talk in peace.  It's the only chance of
being uninterrupted."

Mr Farrell made no reply, and Mollie made haste to deposit the tray in
the pantry, and rush for the dining-room door.  The secret had been kept
so long that she felt sore--absolutely sore with the strain.  It seemed
incredible that her mother and sisters should be sitting munching bread-
and-butter as calmly as if it were an ordinary day, when nothing
extraordinary had happened to break the monotonous routine.  She leant
against the lintel of the door and called her mother by name--"Muv! you
are wanted at once in the Den.  Somebody wants to speak to you!"

Mrs Connor's brow furrowed into the usual anxious lines as she prepared
to hear a story of fresh disaster from her husband's lips; but at the
doorway two magic words were whispered into her ear which brought the
blood into the white cheeks, and sent her trotting down the hall on
eager feet.  Then came the delicious moment to which Mollie had looked
forward ever since the meeting at the cross-roads.  She walked back into
the room, while Ruth looked up with weary curiosity, and Trix with
unconcealed wrath.

"You might have let mother finish her tea in peace!  She has been
slaving all day, and was just enjoying a rest!"

"What is it, Mollie?  Why did the pater come home so early?  Is he ill?"

"It isn't pater, my dear.  Guess again!  A friend of mine, whom I met in
the park and brought home to tea.  He was rather tired, so I, gave him a
private little feed in the study, instead of bringing him straight in
here.  Considerate of me, wasn't it?  He was quite touched."

"He?" repeated Ruth breathlessly.  "Mollie, what are you talking about?
Don't make a mystery out of nothing!  Why can't you say at once who it
is?"

"I'm afraid of your nerves, dear.  I want to break it to you by degrees.
Sudden shocks are dangerous for the young.  My own heart is quite
palpitating with all I have undergone to-day.  I was walking along,--all
innocent and unsuspicious,--gazing upon the fair spring scene, when
suddenly, glancing ahead, I beheld a figure standing at the junction of
the cross-roads.  'Tis ever thus, my love!  Fate stands waiting for us
where the paths diverge, to point out the way in which we should go.
End of volume one ...  Do you feel excited?"

Trix grinned broadly, Ruth looked tired and impatient.

"Oh, thrilled, of course!  So many interesting people come to see us
that it's difficult to choose between them.  The piano-tuner, perhaps;
or the gasman, to look at the meter."

"I should have walked home with them, shouldn't I, and given them tea in
the study?  A little higher in the social scale, please!"

"The curate calling for a subscription?"

"Cold; quite cold!  Try again!  Someone you have often wished to see,
but who has never displayed any great anxiety to make your acquaintance
in return."

"Uncle Bernard, I presume?" said Ruth sarcastically, not for one moment
believing the truth of her words, though her mind instantly reverted to
the personage of that mythical uncle who had played so large a part in
her mental life.  She did not even trouble to look at Mollie as she
spoke; but Trix did, and bounded to her feet in excitement.

"Is it--is it?  Oh, Mollie, not really!  He hasn't really and truly
appeared after all these years?  You don't seriously mean it?  Look at
her, Ruth!  I believe it _is_ true!"

Ruth looked, and flushed the loveliest of pinks.  It seemed almost
incredible that Trix was right, yet something very much out of the usual
course of events must have happened to excite Mollie so keenly.  Her
cheeks were burning as though with a fever, the hand resting on the
table was actually trembling.  "Tell me, Mollie!" she pleaded; and
Mollie nodded her head in triumph.

"Uncle Bernard himself!  The real, genuine article sitting in solid
flesh and blood in our very own study, and I'm the one who brought him
here.  What do you think of _that_ for an adventure?  I saw an aged,
aged man a-leaning on a stick, as the poem says, and I went up and asked
him if I could help him in any way.  I once read about an old man whose
nose suddenly began to bleed in an omnibus.  He searched for a pocket-
handkerchief, but had evidently forgotten to bring one, and the other
passengers began to smile and titter, all except one girl, who opened
her bag and presented him with a nice clean one of her own.  The old man
died soon afterwards, and left her a million pounds as a token of
gratitude.  I think it's just as kind to escort a stranger through a
lonely park when he has lost his way!  If Uncle Bernard adopts me and
gives me a million, I'll treat you both to a nice new hat.--I asked
where he was going, and he said to Number 7 Langton Terrace, and I
looked at him.  And, Ruth, do you know what I thought of?  I thought of
_you_!  He had black eyebrows like yours, and he scowls, as you do (only
when you are cross, dear, not when you're in a good temper), and his
lips droop like yours, too.  I thought, `I have seen that face before!'
and then I remembered the photographs, and it burst upon me all in a
moment.  Then he asked me if I knew the Connors, and I said I'd known
them for years, and the step-daughters, too, and that they were a
charming family, but Mollie was the nicest of all."

"Mollie, you didn't!"

"I did!  Why not?  It's true, isn't it?  When I revealed myself to him,
however, he seemed to think that I was rather vain.  I must leave it to
time to prove the truth of my assertion."

"You are in earnest?  You really mean it?  Mollie, what has he come for?
What has made him remember us after all these years?  Has something
happened that we know nothing about?"

"I can't tell you.  There's only one thing certain,--he is very old and
ill, and if he wants to see us at all there isn't much time to spare.
He is not at all like the Uncle Bernard mother remembers, but very cross
and irritable, and his poor old face looks so miserable that it goes to
your heart to see him.  I wanted to put my arms round his neck and kiss
him, but I would as soon have attempted to embrace a tiger.  He snubbed
me the whole time.  Oh, talk of adventures!  _What_ an afternoon I have
had!"

"If you met him walking across the park he can't have any luggage, and
if he hasn't any luggage he can't intend to sleep here to-night,"
reasoned Ruth thoughtfully.  "Perhaps he will just stay to dinner.  Pea-
soup, cold beef, and apple-pie--that's all there is, and he is
accustomed to half a dozen courses, and two men-servants to wait upon
him.  Poor dear mother will be in despair because she didn't order a
fresh joint for to-day.  Shall I go to the kitchen and see if there is
anything that can be made into a hot dish?"

Mollie pursed up her lips, but, before she had time to reply, the sound
of footsteps was heard from without, and Mrs Connor appeared in the
doorway, followed by the tall, gaunt figure of Uncle Bernard.  The girls
rose from their seats as he entered the room, and Ruth and Trix
approached him with diffident smiles, while Mrs Connor introduced each
by name.

"This is my eldest girl, Ruth; you saw her last when she was a baby in
arms.  This is Beatrice Connor; she knows you quite well by name, don't
you, Trix dear?"

But Mr Farrell betrayed not the faintest interest in Trix or her
memories, and barely touched the hand which she extended towards him.
All his attention seemed concentrated on Ruth, as she stood before him
with her beautiful, flushed face raised to his own.

"This is Ruth!" he repeated slowly.  "She is not at all like her sister.
I am glad that one of your girls takes after her father's family, Mary.
This one is an unmistakable Farrell!"

Mollie turned aside with an expressive grimace.

"I'm cut out already," she told herself.  "Ruth's black brows have
walked straight into his affections!  I might as well resign myself to
play second fiddle forthwith."

Mr Farrell accepted an invitation to stay for the family dinner, but it
cannot truthfully be said that his presence added to the gaiety of the
meal.  Mrs Connor was nervous and ill at ease, regretting, as her
daughter had foretold, that she had not ordered a hot joint for to-day,
and allowed the cold meat to be used on the morrow.

She looked gratefully at Ruth when a small dish of curry made its
appearance, in addition to the scanty menu; but Uncle Bernard had spent
some years of his life in India, and his ideas of curry evidently
differed from those of the plain cook downstairs, for after the first
taste he laid down his fork and made no further pretence of eating.

Mr Connor made several attempts to introduce interesting subjects of
conversation, but receiving only monosyllabic replies, relapsed in his
turn into silence.  With every moment that passed, the girls felt less
able to imagine the reason for the appearance of a visitor who showed so
little interest in the affairs of the family; for Mr Farrell asked no
questions, paid no attention to the general conversation, and, for the
greater part of the time, appeared lost in his own thoughts.

The three little boys alone were unaffected by the general tension, and
chattered about their school adventures in their usual noisy fashion.
On another occasion Mrs Connor would have checked them, but anything
was better than the dead silence which at one time had threatened the
whole table; so she left them unreproved, and Uncle Bernard scowled at
them beneath his bushy brows in a manner the reverse of approving.

It happened that Betty occupied the seat immediately opposite the
visitor, and it was one of Betty's idiosyncrasies to repeat the grimaces
of others with an imitation as faithful as it was unconscious.  When,
for example, Mollie was speaking, Betty tossed her head, tilted her
chin, and arched her brows, to the delight and amusement of the family;
and now, there she sat--good, kind, most inoffensive of creatures--
drawing her wisps of eyebrows together in a lowering scowl, and twisting
her lips into an expression of sour distaste.

The three boys nudged each other and tittered together, and Mr Farrell
looked round to discover the reason of their mirth, and beheld Betty's
transformed face peering into his own.  His glance of indignation made
her flush with what appeared to be conscious guilt, though, in truth,
the poor child had no idea of the nature of her offence.  Mrs Connor
beheld the incident with petrified horror, Ruth registered a
determination to lecture Betty out of so dangerous a habit, but warm-
hearted Mollie rushed headlong into the breach.

"Uncle Bernard, Betty did not mean to be rude!  Please do not think she
was intentionally disrespectful.  She has a habit of imitating people,
without knowing what she is about, and I am afraid we laugh at her for
it, because it is so funny to watch; but she would be dreadfully sorry
to be rude to anyone, wouldn't you, Betty dear?"

Betty's lips opened to emit a hoarse, inarticulate murmur.  Uncle
Bernard turned his eyes upon Mollie, and said coldly--

"You wish to imply that she was imitating my expressions?  Indeed!  It
is always interesting to know in what light one appears to others.  I
regret that I failed to catch the likeness."

"Dear Uncle Bernard, shall we go to the drawing-room now?  The children
use this room to prepare their lessons.  We will have coffee in the
drawing-room!" cried Mrs Connor eagerly.  And the elders filed across
the hall, leaving poor Betty reduced to tears of misery, while the boys
comforted her by jibes and jeers in true schoolboy fashion.

In the drawing-room a ghastly silence prevailed, broken by fitful
efforts of conversation.  Mr Farrell had asked that a cab should be
ordered by nine o'clock to take him back to his hotel; but, though the
time drew nearer and nearer, he still vouchsafed no explanation of the
unexpected visit.  Surely--surely, before going away he would say
something, and not once more disappear into the mist, and let the veil
of silence fall around him?  The same thought was in every mind, the
same wondering anticipation; but it was only when the cab was announced
and Mr Farrell rose to say good-bye that he appeased their curiosity.

"I came here to-day to make the acquaintance of my nephew's daughters.
I should be glad, Mary, if you would allow them to pay me a visit at the
Court.  I have arranged to have a lady in residence who will look after
them and do what chaperonage is needful.  If Monday will suit you, I
should like them to arrive on that day."

It sounded more like a command than an invitation, but such as it was it
thrilled the listeners with joy.  To pay a visit, and above all, to
visit the Court, of which they had heard so much, had been the girls'
day-dream for so long that it seemed impossible that it had come at
last.  Ruth's mind flew at once to considerations of ways and means, and
she suffered a moment of agonising suspense before Mrs Connor's eager
consent put an end to anxiety.

"Oh, I shall be delighted--delighted!  The girls will love it, of all
things.  How kind of you, dear Uncle Bernard!  Ruth!  Mollie!  Are you
not delighted to have such a treat in store?"

"Thank you, Uncle Bernard; I should love to come!" cried Ruth warmly.
"Mollie and I have often said that there is nothing in the world we
should enjoy more than paying a visit to the Court.  It is most good of
you to ask us!"

"And we will try to behave very nicely, and not bother you at all,"
added Mollie, her eyes dancing with happiness.  "We are to come on
Monday week.  And will there be other people, too--other visitors,
besides ourselves?"

"Probably," said Uncle Bernard curtly.  "There are several important
matters to be discussed, into which I cannot enter in a short interview.
I am inviting you--and others--in order that we may talk them over at
leisure.  A carriage will meet the train arriving at four-twenty.  Good-
afternoon, Mary.  I shall not see you again, as I leave by an early
train to-morrow."

Even as he spoke, Mr Farrell made his way towards the door with an air
of finality which forbade further questioning.  He had waited until the
last possible moment before giving his invitation, and, having obtained
an acceptance, was evidently determined to take his departure without
further delay.  Mrs Connor escorted him to the door, her husband helped
him into the cab, offered to accompany him to the hotel, was coldly
snubbed for his pains, and came back into the house heaving deep sighs
of relief.

"Now for my smoke!" he exclaimed, and hurried off to the study, while
Mrs Connor was dragged into the drawing-room and subjected to a
breathless cross-questioning.

"Matters of importance to discuss!  Mother, what can he mean?"

"Other people besides ourselves!  Mother, who can they be?"

"How long does he want us to stay?"

"What are we going to do about clothes?"

"That's just exactly what I'm asking myself!" cried Mrs Connor,
referring with equal truthfulness to all four questions at once.  "It is
most awkward, not knowing how long you are expected to stay, or what
sort of a party you are to meet; but, in any case, I am afraid you must
have some new clothes.  I will have a talk with pater, and see what can
be done, and you must divide my things between you.  I have a few pieces
of good lace still, and one or two trinkets which will come in usefully.
I am afraid we cannot manage anything new for evenings; you must make
the black dresses do."

Mollie groaned dismally.

"They are so old and shabby!  The sleeves look as if they had come out
of the Ark.  I do so long to be white and fluffy for once.  Can't we
squeeze out white dresses, mother?  I'd do without sugar and jam for a
year, if you'll advance the money.  Even muslin would be better than
nothing, and it would wash, and come in for summer best, and then cut up
into curtains, and after that into dusters.  Really, if you look at it
in the right light, it would be an economy to buy them!  I am sure Uncle
Bernard would like to see me in white!  Now don't you think he would?"

"I'll do what I can, dear--I'll do what I can!  I should like you both
to look as well as possible.  `Matters of importance!' ...  I can't
think what matters of importance Uncle Bernard can wish to discuss with
children like you.  And who are the other guests?  And are they also
included in the discussion?  I don't know of any near relations he has
left, except ourselves; but he was even more intimate with his wife's
people than his own, and she belonged to a large family.  Dear, dear!
It is most awkward to be so much in the dark.  I do wish he had been a
little more explicit while he was about it."

"Never mind, muv; it makes it all the more exciting.  We are going to
meet someone, and we don't know whom; and to discuss something, and we
don't know what; and to stay, we don't know how long.  There's this
comfort--we can easily take all our belongings, and still not be
overburdened with luggage!  Ten days--only ten days before we start!  It
sounds almost too good to be true.  But how will you manage without us,
dear little mother?"

"Oh, don't trouble about me, dear!  I'll manage beautifully.  Old Miss
Carter can come in to help me if I get too tired; but, indeed, I shall
be so happy to think of you two girls staying at the dear old Court that
it will do me as much good as a tonic.  Now I will go and talk to pater
about money matters.  We ought to begin preparations at once."

Mr Connor joined in the general satisfaction at the invitation which
had been given to his step-daughters, and, though mildly surprised to
hear that any fresh equipments would be required, took his wife's word
for the need, and produced two five-pound notes from his cash-box, which
she was deputed to use as she thought fit.

"If you don't need it all, you can give me back whatever is over," said
the innocent male, little reckoning that three feminine heads would lie
restless on their pillows that night, striving in vain to solve the
problem of making ten pounds do duty for fifty.

Next morning, pencils and paper were in requisition to check mental
additions, while Ruth drew up a list of usefuls, and Mollie one of
fineries which seemed equally essential.  At a most modest estimate it
seemed possible to purchase the whole for something under thirty pounds.
A painful curtailment brought it down to twenty, but by no persuasion
could that sum be halved.

"Unless we play Box and Cox!" cried Mollie, in desperation.  "One rain
cloak, and an understanding that one of us invariably feels chilly, and
stays at home on wet days.  One white dress, to be worn in turn on
special occasions, while the other languishes in bed with a headache.
One evening cloak, ditto.  Ditto gloves and sundries.  It is the only
way I can see out of the difficulty."

"Don't be absurd, Mollie!  We shall _both_ have to stay in bed if
anything special takes place, for we can't afford any extras.  I
remember once asking Eleanor Drummond's advice about spending my
allowance, and she said, `Wear a shabby dress, if you must; wear a
shabby hat, if you have not taste and ingenuity to trim one for yourself
out of next to nothing; but never, never, never condescend to a shabby
petticoat or shoes down at the heel!'  I thought it splendid advice, and
have always acted upon it, as far as I could.  Let us buy really nice
boots and slippers and petticoats before we do anything else!"

"I'll have a silk one, then, and rustle for once, if I die for it!"
cried Mollie recklessly.  "And the boots shall be thin, not thick, with
a nice, curved sole to show off my patrician instep.  If I have to
content myself with usefuls, they shall be as ornamental as possible.
Don't you think we might possibly squeeze out net over-skirts to wear
with the black silks, sometimes, so as to make them look like two
dresses instead of one?"

"Oh, my dear, I like luxuries as much as you do!  It's only grim
necessity which makes me prudent.  The black net is really an
inspiration, and if we make it up ourselves we can manage quite well,
and have enough money left for gloves and ribbons, and one fresh blouse
a-piece."

For the next week all was bustle and excitement.  The girls paid two
long shopping expeditions to town, and returned laden with interesting
parcels, the contents of which were displayed to an admiring audience in
the drawing-room, and then taken upstairs to Attica, which was
transformed into a dressmaker's work-room, barriers being for once
ignored in consideration of the importance of the occasion.

The five-pound notes became wonderfully elastic, and even after they
were expended little offerings came in from friends and members of the
family to swell the great sum total.  One sent a pretty tie, another a
belt, a third a lace handkerchief.  Trix supplied a most stylish
collection of pens, pencils, and indiarubbers, reposing in her very best
box; and Betty, not to be outdone, rummaged among her various
collections for a suitable offering.  Eventually she discovered a half-
emptied bottle of eau-de-Cologne, which had been presented to her the
Christmas before, filled it up with water, and presented it to her
sisters for mutual use, unperturbed by the fact that the transparent hue
of the scent had changed to a milky white.

On the morning of the fifth day Ruth had a conviction that she was
sickening with a dire disease; on the sixth, she anticipated a disabling
accident; on the seventh, she waited hourly for a telegram from Uncle
Bernard, retracting his invitation; on the eighth, she wanted to know
what would happen if there was a cab strike in the city; and on the
ninth, talked vaguely of blizzards and earthquakes.  Something it seemed
_must_ happen to prevent this long-dreamed-of journey; it did not seem
possible that the stars should run placidly in their courses, while Ruth
and Mollie Farrell were going a-visiting with a box full of fineries!

Yet the day did break, an ordinary, grey morning, with no sign to
distinguish it from another.  Looking out of the window, men and women
could be seen going calmly about their duties.  The postman and
newspaper-boy arrived at their accustomed time.  No one outside the
household seemed to realise that the day was big with fate.

At eleven o'clock a cab drove up to the door; the boxes were piled on
the roof; and the heroines of the hour made their appearance in the
doorway, immaculately trim and tidy in travelling array.  The brothers
and sisters were absent at school, so there was only the little mother
to say adieu, and stand waving her hand until the cab had disappeared
from view.

Once, she too had been young and fair, and life had stretched before her
like an empty page, on which the most marvellous happenings might be
enrolled.  Now, she was old and harassed and poor, and there seemed
little ahead but work and worry; yet she could not call life a failure.

"I have had the best thing," she said to herself, as she shut the door
and re-entered the empty house--"plenty of dear ones to love, and to
love me in return.  God bless my two girls, and give them the same sweet
gift."


CHAPTER SIX.

AT THE COURT.

The girl whose lot has been cast in narrow places, and whose youth has
known few relaxations, should take heart at the thought of the future.
There is a good time coming!  However long be the lane, the turning must
eventually be reached; and then--ah, then, what zest of delight, what
whole-hearted, unqualified enjoyment!

If Ruth and Mollie Farrell had been in the habit of paying half a dozen
visits a year,--if, indeed, they had even once before started off
together on pleasure bent, would they have hailed every incident of the
journey with the delight which they experienced to-day?  Not a bit of
it!

They would have grumbled at the wait on the platform, at the stoppages
of the train at country stations, at the draught from the window, the
banging of the door, the constant requests for tickets.  They would have
yawned and lolled back in their corners, and eventually shut their eyes
and fallen asleep, regardless of the scenes through which they were
passing.

As it was, every fresh stop was a delight.  They beamed at the porter
who collected their luggage, paid for return tickets with the
complacence of millionaires, and thought it lucky that there were ten
minutes to spare before the arrival of the train.  They tried each
other's weight, to the delight of the onlookers; put a penny in every
available slot, and made a reckless expenditure in penny magazines.
Last, and greatest luxury of all, Ruth actually ordered a tea-basket to
be handed into the carriage at a half-way station; one basket to do duty
for two, but still a deliberate extravagance, when refreshments had been
provided from home; and oh, dear me, how delicious it was to be
extravagant for once!

When the train came in, one porter dashed forward to secure window-seats
in an empty carriage, another hurried up with rugs and handbags; groups
of people standing upon the platform looked after the two girls with
kindly glances; everybody seemed kind and interested, as though
understanding the nature of their expedition, and wishing them good-
speed.

They sat opposite to each other, gazing out of their respective windows,
or making an affectation of reading the magazines which lay littered
about the seat; but the end was always the same, their eyes met in
irrepressible smiles, and they began to talk once more.

Real life was so much more interesting than romance!

"I feel so very Lucille-y!"  Mollie declared "Travelling on pleasure,
with a tea-basket coming to meet me!  It was an inspiration of yours to
order it, Ruth!  I shall be grateful to you to the end of my life!
Let's talk about what we shall do to-night...  Let's guess who will be
there, and what they will be like.  The lady chaperon, now!  Should you
think that the presence of a chaperon implied that there would be young
men in the party?  I hope there are."

"So do I," assented Ruth frankly.  "But I fancy that they are more
likely to be old.  Some nieces and nephews of Aunt Edna's, about
mother's age, perhaps--middle-aged couples, with caps and spectacles.
How will you feel if we are the only young people there?"

"I refuse to imagine anything so ghastly!  The couples may have
children, mayn't they?  I imagine a charming girl who has no sisters,
and who will adopt us as her dearest friends, and ask us to stay with
her.  I rather think she will be dark, and wear eyeglasses, and have a
brother who is musical, and has a tenor voice.  Then there will be
another man--Sir Somebody or other, who has a big estate in the county.
He will be very superior at first, and take no notice of us, but in the
end he will be conquered by our modest charms and become a devoted
admirer.  Perhaps there may be some couples, but they will be young and
festive, and the chaperon will be a dear old thing with side-ringlets,
who will let us do as we like, and take our part with the old man.  That
sounds about the right thing, doesn't it?"

Ruth smiled happily.

"Ah, well! whoever we meet, I am going to enjoy myself.  A change, a
change--that's what I wanted.  Everything will be different, and there's
a world of refreshment in that alone.  How thankful I am that Uncle
Bernard asked us both, Mollie!  It's half the fun to talk things over
together."

She lay back in her corner, and gazed out of the window once more,
smiling dreamily as a whirl of thoughts flew through her mind.  What
would have happened before she travelled once more past these flying
landmarks?  What new friendships would be formed--what experiences
undergone--what matters of importance revealed?

Life seemed all to lie ahead; yet from time to time her thoughts drifted
back unconsciously to Donald Maclure, and lingered on the memory.  She
had not seen him since the eventful afternoon, but Eleanor had conveyed
his good wishes for a happy visit, and her manner showed she was in
ignorance of what had occurred.

Ruth was grateful for a silence which left her friendship untouched, and
her thoughts of the doctor were gentle and kindly.

"But I couldn't--I couldn't!" she said to herself excusingly.  "I don't
want to marry anyone yet.  I just want to be young and happy, and have a
good time!"

At the half-way station the tea-basket made its appearance, and the
girls sat side by side taking turns at the cup, and nibbling at bread-
and-butter and plum-cake like two happy children out for a holiday,
which in good truth they were.

They made a pretty picture, and more than one of the passengers upon the
platform cast admiring glances as they passed by.  So far, the carriage
had been empty, except for themselves; but, just as the train was
preparing to leave the junction, a young man turned the handle of the
door, threw a bag on the seat, and leapt in after it.  He was on the
point of seating himself in the place which Ruth had just vacated, but,
seeing the scattered papers, checked himself, and took possession of the
further corner, while the sisters studied him furtively from time to
time.

He was tall, he was handsome, he was probably about thirty years of age,
and he looked thoroughly bored and out of temper.  After one casual
glance at the pretty sisters, he unfolded a newspaper, and turned from
page to page seeking for some item of interest.  His eyes were blue, he
was clean-shaven, his nose was aquiline, and his nostrils were arched,
and had a trick of dilation.

"Like a high-bred horse, who wouldn't like the bridle a single bit," was
Mollie's comment, as she turned back to the window; for, after all, the
unknown landscape through which the train was now passing was more
absorbing than the appearance of a stranger who took so little interest
in herself.

She gazed and whispered, and dreamed afresh, until at last the name of a
familiar station gave warning that the journey was nearing its end.  In
another ten minutes the train was due to reach Nosely, and in the
interval there was much to be done.  Ruth solemnly lifted down the aged
dressing-bag, which dated from her mother's youth, and, with a furtive
glance at the stranger in the corner, took out a looking-glass and
carefully surveyed her hair, pulling it out here, tucking it in there,
patting it into position with those deft little touches which come
naturally to a girl, but which seem so mysterious to a masculine
observer.

The young man in the corner glanced across the carriage with an
expression of lordly amusement at the foibles of a member of the weaker
sex; and there was even worse to come, for when Mollie, in her turn, had
arranged her hair, a cloth brush was produced to remove the dust of
travel, and two pairs of well-worn dogskin gloves were thrown into the
bag, and replaced by others immaculately new.

Mollie was absolutely without embarrassment in these attentions to her
toilet, but it required a little resolution on Ruth's part to ignore the
stranger's presence.  Only the reflection, "We will never see him
again!" supported her through the critical moments during which she
trained a fascinating little curl into position on her temple, conscious
meantime of a steady scrutiny from behind the newspaper.

It was something of a shock to see the stranger rise from his seat a
moment later, and begin making those preparations which showed that he
also was approaching his destination; but, although he alighted at
Nosely Station, he had disappeared from sight while the girls were still
looking after their luggage, and when they took their seats in the
carriage which was waiting to convey them to the Court there was no sign
of him on platform or road.

"That's a comfort!" remarked Mollie thankfully.  "I am glad he did not
see where we were going.  How superior he looked when we were prinking,
Ruth!  I don't like him a bit--do you?"

"Oh, I don't know--I can't think!  I'm Berengaria, Mollie!  I never
_was_ a poor girl travelling third-class, and changing her gloves at the
last moment!  I must have been a duchess in my last incarnation, for I
feel so thoroughly at home in an atmosphere of luxury!" sighed Ruth,
leaning back against the cushions, and glancing languidly from side to
side.  "Our luggage is following behind in the cart.  I hope it will
arrive soon, for I want to change my blouse.  I suppose we shall have
tea in the hall with the rest of the house-party, as they do in books,
but I hope they won't be assembled when we enter.  I should feel awful
walking in, and knowing that they were all staring and criticising our
appearance, wouldn't you?"

Mollie laughed gaily.

"Not a bit.  I'd criticise, too, and shake hands high up--like this--and
be pleasant and condescending.  We are Uncle Bernard's nearest relations
remember, and the guests of honour...  Now, we are beginning to go up
the hill!  You remember mother said there was a long, winding hill, and
at the top to the left stood the lodge gates.  Don't talk!  I don't want
to miss a single thing."

So each girl stared steadily out of her window as the horses slowly
mounted the hill path.  For the first few hundred yards there were
hedges on either side, and beyond them a wide, uneven landscape; then
came a little village, grouped round a square "green," with all the
picturesque accessories of church, ivy-covered parsonage, thatched
roofs, and duck-pond, which travellers look for in a well-conducted
English village.  This passed, there was another climb upwards, a wider
view of the valley beneath, and finally a sharp turn to the left, and a
long drive leading to the greystone Court, whose beauties photographs
had made familiar.

The butler threw open the door as the carriage stopped, and the
travellers thrilled with excitement as they crossed the threshold.
First a square vestibule, then the great hall itself, stretching the
whole length of the wing, and turning to the right by the foot of the
staircase.

The girls' eyes turned in a flash to the tapestry on the walls, and the
wooden portraits of ancestors; but besides these historic relics there
were many articles belonging to a later and more luxurious age.  Carved
oak tables, laden with books and magazines; chairs and lounges of every
description; a fireplace brilliant with beaten copper and soft green
tiles; leather screens shielding cosy corners; cabinets of china and
curios.

It was even more imposing than imagination had painted it; but--there
was no one there!  No Uncle Bernard to speak a word of greeting; no
flutter of silken skirts belonging to nice girls who had no sisters, and
were dying to adopt other nice girls without delay; no scent of
cigarettes smoked by interesting young men, who might have sisters or
might not, but who would certainly be pleased to welcome Berengaria and
Lucille!

Ruth had knitted her dark brows, and drawn herself stiffly erect; Mollie
was prepared to smile in benign patronage on less important guests.  It
was a trifle disconcerting to see no one at all but a little, black-
robed lady, who came hurriedly forward as they approached the staircase
and stammered a nervous greeting.

"Miss Farrell!  Miss Mary!  I hope you have had a pleasant journey.  I
am Mrs Wolff.  Mr Farrell was kind enough to ask me--yes!  I hope you
are not cold.  Your uncle thought you would like to have tea in your own
room.  It will be brought up to you at once.  Mr Farrell desired me to
say that he wished to see you both in the library at half-past five.
Shall I take you upstairs at once?  We have given you one room--a very
large one; but if you prefer to have two separate ones, it can easily be
arranged--yes!"

The girls protested that they wished to be together, and followed their
guide up the broad staircase to a room on the first story, where the
curtains were already drawn, and a cosy tea-table spread before the
fire.  Mrs Wolff had called it large, and she might truthfully have
used a more emphatic word, for what had originally been the best bedroom
in the house had been, like the drawing-room beneath, enormously
enlarged by the addition of a curved, mullioned window, the entire width
of the floor.

"One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, _nine_!  Nine dear
little windows!" counted Mollie rapturously, as the door closed behind
the figure of the lady chaperon.  "What a view we shall have to-morrow
morning, Ruth!  Sofas, armchairs, writing-tables, two long mirrors to
show the set of our skirts--this is a room after my own heart!  I shall
have one exactly like it when I marry my duke!"

"But I didn't expect to have tea in it, all the same," Ruth objected, as
she took off her hat and jacket.  "The house feels very quiet and
deserted.  If we hadn't uncle's own word for it, I should think there
was no one here except ourselves.  He might have come to meet us
himself!  It seems so cold to leave us to strangers!"

"You will be disappointed, my dear, if you expect warmth from Uncle
Bernard.  My short interview taught me so much, at least.  But he wants
to see us at half-past five, Ruth.  I'll prophesy something--he is going
to talk to us about the `important matters'!  It would be just like him
to explain his position before we have been an hour in the house, so
that there can be no misunderstanding.  I'm right--I know I am!  We are
on the eve of solving the mystery!"

Ruth shivered, and drew closer to the fire.

"Don't make me nervous.  It will be bad enough when it comes to the
point, without thinking of it beforehand!" she cried.

And it was all the easier to change the conversation, as at that moment
a maid entered with a tea-tray and a plate of hot, buttered scones.

Tea after a journey is always a most enjoyable meal, and when it was
over the girls made as careful a toilet as could be managed with the
materials at hand, the heavier luggage not having yet made its
appearance.  Shortly before half-past five a tap came to the door, and a
maid entered with a double request.

"I have come to show you the way to the library, miss; and if you would
kindly give me your keys before you go, I will have your boxes unpacked.
What dresses would you like to wear for dinner?"

The horror of that moment was never to be forgotten.  Before Ruth's eyes
there arose, as in a vision, the patches on the under-sleeves of her
morning blouse, the faded dressing-gown, the darns, and make-shifts and
pitiful little contrivances of poverty.  Her cheeks flamed before the
sharp eyes of the abigail, and then flamed again with scorn at her own
folly.

"It is all neat and clean and tidy.  I _won't_ be ashamed of it!" she
told herself angrily, as she turned to search for her keys.

But the evening-dresses!  The next moment with a mingling of relief and
irritation, she heard Mollie's unabashed reply--

"Oh, we have only black dresses!  We will wear the net over-skirts,
please!"

Just like Mollie, to wear her best clothes on the first possible
occasion, instead of prudently storing them up for a special need!  But
it was too late to protest; already the maid was leading the way onward.
The all-important interview was at hand!


CHAPTER SEVEN.

MR. FARRELL'S PLAN.

"Miss Farrell, sir!" said the maid, throwing open the door of the
library.

And Ruth walked forward, followed closely by Mollie.

It was a long, narrow room, lined with book-shelves, and the solitary
light from a crimson-shaded lamp on the central table gave an air of
gloom after the bright illumination of the hall without.  On a lounge-
chair beside the table sat Bernard Farrell, looking more cadaverous than
ever, with a velvet-skull-cap over his whitened locks.  He did not rise
as his great-nieces approached, but held out his hand in a greeting
which was courteous enough, if somewhat cold.

"How do you do?  I am pleased to see you.  Excuse me for not having met
you earlier, but I am not feeling well to-day.  I trust you have
received every attention since your arrival at the Court.  Mrs Wolff
had my instructions to look after your comfort."

"Thank you, yes; we had tea in our room--a lovely room.  We are looking
forward to enjoying the view from that splendid window!"

"Ah, yes; it is very fine in clear weather!  Please make yourselves at
home, and ask for anything that you need.  The servants are good, but
they are unused to visitors.  Have no hesitation in keeping them up to
their duties.  Will you be seated?  In a few minutes we can, I hope,
begin the business of the hour."

He waved them towards some chairs which were ranged before his table.
Four chairs!  In the twinkling of an eye the girls had grasped both the
number and what it implied.  Two other guests at least were at present
in the house, and equally interested with themselves in the coming
discussion.  Their advent was evidently momentarily expected, for Mr
Farrell turned an impatient glance at the clock, and even as he did so
the door opened once more and two young men entered the room.  One was
tall and dark, with an olive skin, and a curious, veiled look about his
eyes, caused by the presence of short but abnormally thick black lashes.
Viewed in profile the lashes entirely hid the eye, but the effect of
the thick black line was, singularly enough, rather attractive than the
reverse.  He had a dark moustache, and his chin was square and well-
developed.

His companion was--well! the girls felt that they might have guessed it
before, as one of the awkward things which was bound to happen.  He was
the stranger of the railway carriage, the supercilious personage whom
they had flattered themselves they would never see again!

Like the two girls, the new-comers had evidently not seen their host
before, for they were greeted by him with practically the same phrases;
and then came a general introduction.

"I must make you known to your fellow-guests--Mr Jack Melland, Mr
Victor Druce--Miss Farrell, Miss Mary Farrell.  Mr Melland and Mr
Druce are great-nephews of my late wife.  Miss Farrell and her sister
are my own nephew's only children."

The two young men turned towards the girls with curious glances.  Over
Mr Jack Melland's face flitted an amused glance of recognition.  His
companion's dark eyes widened with a curious scrutiny; then the lashes
dropped, and hid them from sight.  Seen thus, with mouth and eyes alike
veiled, the face was a mask devoid of expression; yet Mollie had a
conviction that she had surprised something closely approaching
disappointment in that fleeting glance.  Why the sight of Ruth and
herself had affected the stranger in so unpleasant a fashion it was
difficult to understand; but the impression remained.  Her eyes
travelled upward to the face of Jack Melland, and marvelled at the
contrast.

"His face betrays him, in spite of himself.  His nostrils alone would
give him away," she told herself, smiling.  "He is cross, the other
inscrutable; Ruth is frightened, and I am amused.  We look like four
school-children seated in a row, with Uncle Bernard as the teacher...
When is the lesson to begin?"

At once, apparently; for Mr Farrell lost no time in preliminaries, but
began his explanation as soon as the young men were seated.

"I have asked you to meet me here as soon as possible after your
arrival, for it is better that we should understand each other from the
beginning.  You have thought it strange, no doubt, that, after having
had no communication with your families for so many years, I should
suddenly develop a desire for your company.  Circumstances have,
however, materially altered for me during the last few weeks by the
discovery that it is necessary that my affairs should be settled without
delay.

"I have, as you know, no child left to inherit, and as this place is not
entailed, it is entirely in my hands to bequeath as I think fit.  Until
now--for reasons which you may perhaps understand--the idea of making a
will has been so painful that I have continually postponed the ordeal;
but my doctor, who is also my old friend, has convinced me that I must
delay no longer.

"I am suffering from an affection of the heart which makes it impossible
that I can live longer than a couple of years, and probably the time may
be but a few months.  He has urged me, therefore, to settle business
affairs, so that I might spend the remainder of my days undisturbed; but
to decide on a suitable heir is not an easy matter.  I am, as you may
have heard, a very rich man, and I hold strong, and perhaps somewhat
unusual, ideas as to the qualifications which are necessary for the
owner of great wealth.  It is not my intention to divide the inheritance
in any way, therefore it is the more important to make a right choice."

He paused for a moment, and the four young people looked up sharply.
Victor Druce's eyes roved quickly from one to the other of his three
companions.  Jack Melland's lips closed more tightly than before.
Ruth's cheeks glowed with a carmine flush.  She was the nearest
relation; hers was the first claim!  Her heart beat with quick,
sickening thuds; only Mollie looked frankly curious and unperturbed.

"As I said before," continued Mr Farrell, "we are, so far, complete
strangers to each other; but I judge you all to hold equal rights to
anything which I have to leave.  Ruth and Mary are my nearest legal
relations; but my wife's people always ranked with me as my own, and,
other things being equal, I should prefer a male heir.  I make no point
of the name; the Court is not an estate which has descended to me from
many generations of ancestors.  My father bought it from the late owner,
so there is no real reason why a Farrell should necessarily inherit.

"It is from one of your number, then, that I shall adopt my heir; but,
in order to do so, I must have some knowledge of your respective
characters and attainments.  As I said before, I hold somewhat unusual
views.  What the world in general would probably consider the best
qualification for the owner of a big estate is, in my eyes, an
insuperable objection.  What I look to find, others might regard as a
fault.  We all have our own ideas, and must act according to our lights.
I wish then, in the first place, to make your acquaintance but do not
be afraid that I shall make the task too unpleasant.

"For the furtherance of my plan, I should wish you to lead as full and
interesting a life as may be.  The Court has been shut up for years, but
its doors can now be thrown open for your benefit.  You are free to come
and go, to invite whom you will, and no doubt the neighbourhood will be
eager to meet you half-way.  My own health will not permit me to arrange
your amusements; but I give you the use of my house, carte blanche as
regards expenses, and Mrs Wolff to play propriety--the rest you must
arrange for yourselves.  If each in turn took the management of affairs
for a few weeks at a time, it would meet my views, as helping me to form
the necessary ideas of character and tastes."

There was a simultaneous movement of surprise on the part of the
listeners, and one and the same word was repeated by four pairs of
lips--

"Weeks!"

Mr Farrell smiled grimly.

"You are surprised at the time implied.  My invitations were
intentionally vague, for I had not at the time made up my mind as to
various details.  I have now decided that for the proper development of
my scheme three months at least will be necessary.  I therefore invite
you to be my guests at the Court during that period."

Again came the involuntary, simultaneous start of surprise, and Jack
Melland cried hastily--

"It is impossible!  I am obliged to you, sir; but it is quite
impossible, so far as I am concerned.  My business--"

"My--my mother!" cried Ruth.  "We could not leave her so long; she needs
our help--"

Mr Farrell interrupted with upraised hand.

"We will defer objections, if you please!  I am prepared to meet and
answer them, later on.  For the present I ask you to think quietly over
the prospect which lies before you, and to consider how far such
obstacles as you have mentioned should be allowed to stand in the way.
Surely the object is worth some temporary inconvenience or loss.  This
house, and all that it contains, with various properties bringing in an
income of over ten thousand a year, will in due course become the
property of one of your number--of the one who best fulfils a certain
condition which I consider essential."

"And the condition--the condition?" queried Mollie eagerly.

Mr Farrell looked at her in silence, while a grim smile passed over his
features.

"That," he said slowly--"that, my dear Miss Mary,--will be discovered,
with other things,--when you hear my will read aloud on the day of my
funeral?"


CHAPTER EIGHT.

SPECULATIONS.

"Well!" exclaimed Ruth, sinking back in armchair number one, at the
right of the bedroom fireplace.

"Well!" exclaimed Mollie, sinking back in armchair number two, facing
her sister.  "Likewise, good sooth!  By my halidom!  Gadzooks!  Of a
surety these are great happenings, fair sis!"

"Don't be so tiresome, Mollie!  You make a joke out of everything.  I
want to talk over the position seriously."

"So do I--just dying to.  Go on!  Where shall we begin?"

"With the time, of course.  Three months!  I never dreamt of more than a
fortnight, at most.  Do you think we can possibly be spared?"

"I don't think at all--I know!  If it was three years, with such an
interest at stake, the poor little mother would jump at it.  Three
months soon pass, and there will be two people less to feed and wait
upon, and a room less to keep in order.  Every little tells when people
are as hard up as we are, and with the savings mother will be able to
pay Miss Carter to help with the mending.  It will be good for Trix,
too.  The more you depend upon Trix the more she rises to the occasion.
I have a shrewd suspicion that she is going to cut us out, and be the
show daughter of the family.  Mother will be blissfully happy building
castles in the air; Trix will be blissfully happy playing eldest
daughter, and bossing the family.  We shall be blissfully happy not
pretending, but actually being, Berengaria and Lucille.  It's all quite
smooth and easy!"

Ruth heaved a sigh, half convinced, half reluctant.

"That's what you always say!  I see such crowds of objections.  To begin
with, I hate the position; it's awkward and humiliating.  To stay here
on approval, studied like specimens in a case; being on one's good
behaviour, and `acting pretty' to try to get a fortune for oneself, away
from other people--bah!  It makes me hot even to think of it.  I should
feel a hypocrite!"

"Don't be high-flown, dear; it's quite unnecessary.  You couldn't be a
hypocrite if you tried; you are too ridiculously `proud,' I suppose you
would say.  I call it quick-tempered!  If Uncle Bernard snubs you, you
will flare out, fortune or no fortune, and if you feel mopey, mope you
will, if he disinherits you the next moment.  I shall be honest, too,
because I'm too lazy to be anything else; besides, you know, there is
always the pleasing reflection that he may _prefer_ us to be crotchety!
Everything is possible where everything is vague.  Imagine how maddening
it would be if we kept our tempers, and smiled sweetly from morning till
night, and in the end he left everything to that cross Mr Melland,
because he considered it necessary for the owner of wealth to have a
will of his own!"

Ruth laughed involuntarily.

"You _are_ a goose!  Not much chance of your being the chosen one, I am
afraid.  Uncle Bernard is not in the mood for appreciating nonsense; he
is too sad and ill, poor old man!  That's another hateful thing.  I
should love to nurse and coddle him, and read aloud, and be good to him
generally; but if one does, it will seem-- Oh, you know-- you
understand!  It's a loathsome position!"

"If I feel affectionate, I shall act affectionate!  He will probably
loathe it, so there's just as much chance of injuring one's chance as of
bettering it.  In fact, if we are to get on at all, we had better try to
forget the wretched money, and behave as if it did not exist.  If anyone
had told us a month ago that we should be staying in a big house with
two quite good-looking young men as fellow-guests, and carte blanche to
enjoy ourselves as much as we pleased, we would have thought it too
impossibly good to be true; but now that it has come true, we shall be
idiots if we don't make the most of it.  I hope Uncle Bernard keeps to
his idea of making us each master of the ceremonies in turn.  Won't I
make the money fly when it comes to my turn!  Picnics and luncheons by
day, dances and theatricals by night--one giddy whirl of excitement the
whole time long.  I'll take the old dear at his word, and give no
thought to expense, and entertain the whole countryside until the name
of Mollie Farrell is immortalised for ever in grateful hearts.  I have
always credited myself with a genius for social life; now for the first
time you will behold me in the halls of the great, and gaze with
surprise at your sister reigning as queen over the assembled throngs?"

"In your one black dress?"

"Certainly not!  I've thought of that, too.  Suitable equipments must,
of course, be part of the carte blanche."

"I am sure nothing was further from Uncle Bernard's thoughts.  He looks
to me like a man who would never notice clothes, or care what we looked
like, so long, of course, as we were respectable.  He has more important
things on his mind."

"Humph!"  Mollie tossed her saucy head.  "If he doesn't notice of his
own accord, his eyes must be gently, but firmly opened.  We stay at his
special request; at his special request we entertain and are
entertained; it is only reasonable that he should bear the expense of
making our appearance do him credit.  I'll tell him so, too, if he
doesn't see it for himself."

"Mollie, you won't!  You shan't!  You never could!"

"Couldn't I?  You wait and see!"

"And if you did I would never touch a farthing.  I warn you, once for
all, that it is useless, so far as I am concerned."

Mollie looked at her sister's flushed, defiant face, and laughed her
happy, light-hearted laugh.

"Dear old High-falutin'!  We won't argue about it.  Half a dozen
invitations will show you the soundness of my position better than a
hundred discussions.  Meantime, I'm going to dress.  I have a horrible
conviction that that maid will return and offer to do `your hair,
madam,' so I mean to be beforehand with her."

Ruth sat still in her chair, enjoying the unwonted luxury of idling,
with no disturbing spasm of conscience to remind her that she ought to
be mending or patching, or giving Betty a music lesson, or helping Mary
to hang clean curtains in the drawing-room.  It was delightful to nestle
back against the cushions and study one by one the dainty appointments
of the room, and revel in the unaccustomed sense of space.  Imagine just
for a moment--imagine possessing such a home of one's own!  The house,
with its treasures of beautiful and artistic furnishings, which
represented the lifelong gatherings of a man renowned for his taste; the
extensive grounds, with gardens and vineries and forests of glass,
providing an endless summer of blossom; the income, that in itself was a
fortune, and held such inexhaustible possibilities of good.  What she
could do with it, if it were only hers!  With one stroke of the pen she
would repay the poor old tired pater for all his goodness in the past,
and lift the weight of care for the future from his shoulders.  She
would heap luxuries upon the dear little mother, who was still a child
at heart; so pathetically easy to please that it seemed a sin that she
should ever be sad.  The girls should be sent to finishing schools, and
the boys given a thorough training to equip them for their fight in
life.  Mollie, of course, should live at the Court, and share equally in
all her possessions; and they would travel, and help the poor, and be
kind to everyone, and never forget the day of small things! or grow
arrogant and purse-proud.  Ruth dreamed on in a passion of longing till
Mollie, standing before the dressing-table, with her white arms raised
to her head, caught sight of her face in the mirror, and uttered a sharp
exclamation.

"Ruth!  What is it, darling?"

Ruth started nervously and glanced upwards with guilty eyes, but there
was nothing alarming in the aspect of the figure which stood over her,
white necked, white armed, with the loosened golden hair falling round
the anxious face.  She caught the outstretched hand, and gripped it
tightly between her own.

"Oh, Mollie, I want it!  I want it _dreadfully_!  When I think of the
possibility I feel half wild.  If I am disappointed, I believe I shall
die!  I can't be unselfish, even for you.  I want it for myself!"

She was on the verge of tears, but Mollie's matter-of-fact cheeriness
had the usual bracing effect.  She seemed neither shocked nor surprised,
but only anxious to soothe.

"Of course you do; so do we all!" she replied easily.  "It's humbug to
pretend anything else, only I'm not going to die, in any case, but live
and make myself agreeable to the Chosen.  If it's you, I shall sponge on
you for life, so don't imagine you will have all the fun to yourself.
Now get dressed, and don't think about it any more.  We must look our
best to awe those two superior young men.  I am convinced that they look
upon us as country bumpkins, and it's most important to put them in
their proper position at once, so that we may start fair.  If you are
going to do your hair in skriggles it will take you an age, so do
begin!"

Ruth rose obediently.  "Skriggles" was an inelegant but descriptive
title for her most becoming coiffure, which she had already decided must
be adopted for the first eventful evening at the Court.  She set to work
at once, and was half-way through her task when the maid appeared, as
Mollie had prophesied, paused upon the threshold for one horrified
moment, and then hurried forward with an "Allow me, miss!" which could
not be gainsaid.

The girls grimaced at one another furtively, but in the end the value of
the skilled hands was proved by a dainty finish to hair and toilette
which sent them downstairs agreeably conscious of looking their best.


CHAPTER NINE.

MR. JACK MELLAND.

In the drawing-room Mr Farrell and his two nephews were standing with
their backs to the fire, in the position affected by mankind in that
trying wait before dinner.  Little Mrs Wolff was stiffly perched upon
an uncomfortable chair, twisting her mittened fingers together and
looking supremely uncomfortable, and there appeared to be no attempt at
conversation.  Everyone looked at the two girls as they crossed the wide
room, and once again Mollie surprised that curious gleam of disapproval
in Victor Druce's veiled eyes.  Mr Melland was apparently still on his
high horse, a faint flush upon his face, his nostrils curved and
dilated.  As for Uncle Bernard himself, his set face showed no sign of
approval or the reverse; he simply bowed to his nieces, and waved them
towards a seat, saying curtly--

"Our party is not complete.  I have asked the vicar and his wife to dine
with us, and make your acquaintance.  They will probably arrive in a few
minutes."

"Oh yes!" said Ruth vaguely.  Even Mollie suffered a moment's eclipse,
during which she sought in vain for an appropriate remark.  It was too
absurd, she told herself, to sit round the room like mutes at a funeral.
What was the use of a lady chaperon if she could not fill up the gaps
with harmless inanities?  She glanced from one stolid face to another,
then made a desperate plunge.

"What time do the posts go, Uncle Bernard?  We ought to let mother know
of our arrival."

"I have already directed a telegram to that effect to be despatched.
May I suggest that you delay any communication on your own part until we
have had a future conversation."

Checkmate!  Mollie gave a vague murmur of assent, and cast about for
remark number two.

"It seems so funny to be here and to see all the things we have heard
about so often!  I recognise this room quite well from mother's
description.  There is an alcove behind me, isn't there, with a harp in
the corner?"

"The harp was removed years ago.  I imagine there are a great many
alterations since your mother's last visit.  The use of the word `funny'
is somewhat inappropriate, is it not?  I see nothing ludicrous in the
position."

Check number two!  Mollie's wide-eyed perturbation was almost pathetic
in its intensity.  She was not accustomed to being snubbed in this
public fashion, and, after the first shock, a feeling of resentment
brought the colour rushing into her cheeks.

"I meant `curious.'  The two words are often used for each other."

"Mistakenly so.  Many situations are curious which are not in the least
degree amusing."

"They are indeed!" was Mollie's mental comment.  "The present, for
example; anything much less festive I fail to imagine."  Her lips
twitched involuntarily as the thought passed through her mind, and,
looking up, she met Jack Melland's eyes fixed full on her, with an
answering twinkle in their blue depths.  For one agonising moment she
trembled upon the brink of laughter, when mercifully the door was thrown
open to announce the arrival of the vicar and his wife.  Mr Thornton
was tall and thin, with a much-lined face full of shrewd kindness and
sympathy; his wife was a pretty, plump little woman, who looked on
exceedingly good terms with herself and the world at large.

"Thank goodness, they will talk!  They look alive, not mere graven
images," Mollie said to herself thankfully, as the necessary
introductions were taking place.  Then the squire gave his arm to Mrs
Thornton, Mr Thornton offered his in turn to Mrs Wolff, and Victor
Druce, evidently obeying a previous instruction, paired off with Ruth,
leaving Mollie to his companion.

In silence the little company crossed the hall; in silence they seated
themselves round the dinner-table and prepared for the feast.  Ruth's
grey eyes were brilliant with excitement as she turned from side to
side.  She did not want to talk; conversation would have been but an
interruption at the moment; she wanted but to look and to think.

The walls were covered with portraits of ancestors--Captain Farrell who
sailed the seas with Nelson's fleet; General Farrell who fought under
Wellington; Lord Edward Farrell, the famous judge; fresh-faced country
squires in quaint, old-world costumes.  The dim faces looked down from
their frames with a curious, haunting likeness running through all; and
at the head of the table sat the last of his race, the grim old man to
whom death was coming.  Ah, it must be hard to look back on so good a
race, to realise that no son remained alive to carry on the name, and
that one of the strangers now seated round his own table would shortly
reign in his place!

Ruth thrilled with pity; her beautiful eyes grew soft and dreamy; and
the clergyman, looking at her across the table, could scarcely restrain
an exclamation of surprise.  He had understood that Mr Farrell
possessed only distant relatives, but this girl was a true chip of the
old block; allowing for difference of age and sex, here was the same
face which was repeated again and again upon the walls--the aquiline
features, the melancholy lips, the straight heavy brows.

Mr Thornton knew that the time had come when his host was to choose his
successor at the Court, and, looking from one to the other of the four
young people, he personally felt no doubt as to the one on whom the
choice would fall.  Ruth Farrell bore her credentials in her face, and
with a thrill, half painful, half amused, he realised how great a factor
in his own life this slim young girl might be.  As lady of the Court and
his own patron, she would have it in her power to ensure his comfort or
the reverse.  Ah, well, well, it was too early to speculate!  The child
had a sweet, good face; no doubt all would be well.

While Ruth and the vicar were absorbed in their own thoughts, Mrs Wolff
was also silent, overcome with the weight of responsibility which
pressed heavily on her unaccustomed shoulders.  Little Mrs Thornton
prattled of cheery nothings at the other end of the table, and Jack
Melland, turning towards his companion, remarked formally--

"I--ah--I think we have met earlier in the day!"

"In the train, you mean; yes!  We saw you get out at the station, but
you disappeared so quickly that I could not think what had happened to
you."

"Nothing mysterious.  A dogcart had been sent for me.  I jumped into it
with my bag, and was out of sight before you had gathered together your
possessions."

"Ah, yes; we had boxes in the van."  Mollie tilted her head to its
characteristic angle and smiled at him with wide grey eyes.  "And you
watched our toilette across the carriage, little guessing it was for
your own benefit.  We knew that we were to meet other visitors here, but
had no idea who they were or how many there might be.  We imagined
walking into the midst of a big house-party; hence the preparations.  It
was only natural we should want to look nice."

"Perfectly!  I am glad I was fortunate enough to see the result, since I
suppose no one else--"

Mollie shook her head tragically.

"Not a soul!  Mrs Wolff met us and sent us straight up to our room.  If
it had not been for you, the new gloves would have been wasted on the
desert air; but now we can console ourselves that our trouble was of
some use, after all, since at least half the party had the benefit.
Were you also despatched straight upstairs?"

"I was.  Afterwards, Druce and I had tea in the billiard-room, and went
on to join you in the library.  It has been a somewhat trying
opportunity; I sympathised with your conversational efforts before
dinner."

Mollie's brows went up at this, and she made a sceptical little grimace.

"That is not my idea of sympathy!  You stood by and watched me flounder
without making a effort to help.  It's not at all pleasant to be snubbed
before a roomful of strangers.  You might easily have remarked that it
was a fine day, or that the train was punctual.  Anything is better than
a ghastly silence."

"But, you see, I had had my innings before you arrived.  As a matter of
fact I had introduced those very subjects, and added some original
remarks on the beauty of the scenery.  I fared no better than you, so my
fellow-feeling made me sympathise with you, though I had no spirit to
try again."

Mollie laughed under her breath, the influence of her surroundings
instinctively subduing the usual merry trill.  This Mr Melland was an
unexpectedly pleasant companion, now that his former gloom and
irritability of manner had disappeared.  It was as if a dreaded prospect
had been removed, and he was luxuriating in recovered freedom.  Mollie
wondered what the change of circumstances could be; time, no doubt,
would show; and, when they had reached a greater degree of intimacy, she
would tease him about his sudden change of front, and treat him to a
pantomimic imitation of his former gloomy frowns.  The prospect pleased
her, and she laughed again, showing the pretty dimples in her cheek,
while Jack Melland looked at her inquiringly.

"What's the joke?  May I hear it?"

"Oh, nothing--I was just imagining!  All sorts of things fly through
one's head, especially to-day, when we really are in an exciting
position.  At home my sister and I have a very quiet time, and we get
most of our excitement in dreams.  We imagine things until they are
almost real.  Don't you know the feeling?"

"No!" cried Mr Melland bluntly.  His brows were arched, his nostrils
curved with the old look of scornful superiority.  "I have no experience
of the kind, and I don't want to have.  It's a dangerous habit.  We have
to live among realities, and very commonplace realities, for the most
part; and it unfits one for work to be dreaming of impossibilities."

"No, no, no; it helps one!  It is like a tonic which braces one up for
the ordinary routine."

"It is like a sleeping draught--agreeable for the time, but mischievous
and relaxing in its after effects."

Grey eyes met blue with a flash of defiance, then softened into smiles.

"It depends upon disposition," said Mollie firmly.  "We find nothing
relaxing about it, but a great deal of innocent amusement.  When we are
out shopping and want something badly and can't have it, because it
costs five shillings and we only possess half a crown, Ruth says to me,
`Let's pretend a letter arrived by the afternoon post to say someone had
left us a million pounds!  What would you do first of all?'  Then we can
talk about it for the rest of the walk, and decide what dresses we would
have, and where we should live, and the papers we should have in the
entertaining room, and the furniture in our bedrooms; and we choose
things out of all the shop-windows as we pass, and decide where they
shall go.  I've furnished my house so often that I really know the
rooms, and love them into the bargain."

"And when you go back into the real house you are discontented and
amazed at the contrast."

"Oh dear, no!  That would be silly.  I am so refreshed by my visit to
the castle that I can laugh over the shabbiness which annoyed me before.
You don't think it wrong to read an interesting book?  Very well, then,
why is it wrong to indulge in a little fiction on one's own account?"

"Wrong is rather a strong word, perhaps, but there is a great difference
between the two.  In reading a book you forget yourself in your interest
about others; in dreams--excuse me--you think constantly of yourself,
and play the part of hero.  It is a habit which is inclined to make one
consider oneself the most interesting person on earth."

"Well, so you are!  To yourself, I mean; you know you are!" cried
Mollie, with an innocent _naivete_ which made Mr Melland laugh again.
It was seldom, indeed, that anyone was honest enough to confess to self-
love, and her candour seemed infectious, for, on the verge of
contradicting her assertion with regard to himself, a sudden
recollection rushed through him of his own thoughts, doubts, conflicts,
and final determination of the past twenty-four hours.  Did not every
one of these concern himself as a primary, if not an only, motive?  Was
he not exercised, first of all, by a sense of his own importance, so
that the wishes of a dying man availed nothing against the preservation
of his own dignity?  The laugh gave place to a frown as he replied--

"If it is so it ought certainly to be discouraged.  One ought not
deliberately to pamper selfishness."

Mollie's eyes dropped to her plate, and her lips pouted in an
involuntary grimace.

"Rather inclined to preach," she said to herself naughtily, "and so
intensely practical and matter of fact!  I must devote myself to the
education of his higher faculties.  I shall have something to say to
you, Mr Jack Melland, the first time that will of yours comes into
opposition with my own.--`One ought not deliberately to pamper
selfishness.'--Delightful sentence!  I must not forget it."


CHAPTER TEN.

INTRODUCTIONS.

In the drawing-room, after dinner, Mrs Thornton made herself agreeable
to the two girls, and was evidently full of interest and curiosity.

"Having the Court open again will make a great deal of difference to the
village in general, and to ourselves in particular," she said, smiling.
"Mr Farrell has been so invalided of late years that we have seen
nothing of him, and it is quite an excitement to dine here again.  Dr
Braithey told us whom we were to meet, and that, of course, added
greatly to the pleasure.  I hope you will like the neighbourhood, and
enjoy your visit.  You must let me help you in any way that is in my
power.  I hope you will, for I love being with young people and making
them happy."

One glance at the kindly face of the speaker proved the truth of her
assertion, and both girls assented gladly.  A few hours' acquaintance
had proved Mrs Wolff to be a mere figurehead of a chaperon, and Ruth
shrewdly suspected that her very weakness had been the attraction in Mr
Farrell's eyes, since, in consequence, she would be less likely to
hinder that display of character and self-will which it was his object
to study.  Failing Mrs Wolff, then, it was a comfort to meet this
brisk, motherly woman, who might be depended on as a helpful confidante.

Mollie glanced at the heaped-up fire, and, with a sudden impulse of
friendliness, pulled forward an armchair, saying eagerly--

"Do sit down!  Let us all sit down and be cosy till the men come; and
will you tell us about the neighbourhood and the people we shall know?
We are to be here for three months, and uncle says we can entertain as
much as we like.  He wants us to entertain, but of course we must know
the people first.  Do you suppose we shall have many callers?"

Mrs Thornton laughed merrily.

"There's no doubt about that, my dear.  Everybody who is anybody within
a radius of a dozen miles will think of nothing, and speak of nothing,
and dream of nothing else but you and your cousins until they have made
your acquaintance.  We have not much to excite us in the country, and to
have the Court open again, with four young people to act as hosts, is a
sensation of the first water.  There will be a stream of callers after
you have appeared in church on Sunday.  You will have a busy time
driving over the country returning their calls, and after these
formalities are over the invitations will begin.  I don't think you will
find any lack of hospitality."

The girls looked at each other with tragic glances which said "One black
dress!" so plainly to their own understanding that it seemed as if
everyone else must interpret the meaning.  Ruth flushed, and asked
hurriedly--

"Are there many girls like ourselves living pretty near?"

"Oh dear, yes; girls are never at a discount in a country place.  Let me
see, now, how shall I describe them!  In the village itself there is
Dora Braithey, the doctor's daughter, a very good, useful worker in the
parish; and Lettice Baldwin, who lives with her widowed mother; and the
three Robsons, who are what they call good sportsmen, and go in for
games; and further afield there is Honor Edgecombe of Mount Edgecombe, a
charming girl, and very musical; and Grace and Schilla Trevor; and the
Blounts at the Moat have a London niece, Lady Margot Blount, who pays
them a long visit every year.  She is staying there now, and is sure to
call.  She is very elegant and distinguished-looking, and we all admire
her immensely.  My husband thinks her a model of everything that a girl
should be."

Ruth and Mollie, staring fixedly into the fire, were naughtily conscious
of a dislike towards the immaculate Margot, who had suddenly loomed on
their horizon as a formidable rival in the favour of the neighbourhood,
while Mrs Thornton unconsciously proceeded cheerily with her recital--

"Of course there are many more, but I am mentioning the most attractive.
We have a few young men, too, and most of the big houses have constant
visitors for shooting or fishing, so that you can manage to get partners
if you want a little hop now and then.  And then, as you would suppose,
I hope you will find time to take an interest in the parish.  I don't
ask you to take up any active work, for, of course, as visitors your
time will not be your own, but I should like to tell you of our various
clubs and enterprises."

"I hope you will not only tell us of them, but show them to us as well.
Uncle Bernard wishes us to do exactly as we choose, so our time is our
own, and I should like to do some work.  I should feel so idle doing
nothing but enjoying myself," cried Ruth eagerly.

Mrs Thornton's smile of approval had a somewhat wistful expression.

As her husband had done before her, she looked at these two young girls,
and wondered if the time to come would see one of them acting the role
of the squire and patron, and as such holding almost unlimited power
over the parish.  They seemed kindly, natural creatures, who would be
well disposed towards the vicar and his family; and a woman had more
understanding of little things than any mere man.

In the flash of an eye Mrs Thornton's mind reviewed the damp patch on
her drawing-room wall, the ill-fitting windows which let in a constant
draught; the hopeless ruin of the tiny conservatory, wherein she reared
her precious "bedding-outs."

She could not but remember that other squires not only kept their
vicar's house in order, but assisted in sending sons to college,
daughters to finishing schools, and expressed their interest in the
family in a hundred helpful ways; but Mr Farrell had seemed unconscious
of the very existence of her precious olive branches, and had never gone
beyond the bare duties of his position.

Mrs Thornton was no vulgar schemer for her own benefit, but just a
mother of a large family, struggling to make the most of a small income;
and a quick repentance for the selfishness of her dreams prompted the
desire to help these two young things who were suddenly called upon to
fill a difficult position.

"Remember, I am always to be found at home or somewhere about the
village.  You will soon get to know my haunts, so that you can run me to
earth if you need my services.  Just come in and out as you like; the
oftener you come the better I shall be pleased, for I am so anxious to
help you, if you will allow me."

"We will, we will! it is lovely of you to offer; and do please help us
now!" cried Mollie eagerly, as the sound of an opening door was heard in
the distance, and footsteps crossed the hall towards the drawing-room.
"Talk, talk; do talk!  I tried before dinner, and got snubbed for my
pains; and we are such strangers that it is difficult to know what to
say next."

Mrs Thornton laughed.

"I'll do what I can," she promised good-naturedly.  "Someone may suggest
to Mr Farrell a game of whist.  He used to be a crack player, so I
don't think he can resist the temptation, and that would leave you young
folks free to make each other's acquaintance."

As she spoke the gentlemen entered the room and approached the group by
the fireside.  Judging from their appearance, the last half-hour had not
been particularly lively, for the vicar looked tired and worried, and
the young men unmistakably bored.  Mr Farrell's set face showed few
changes of expression, but a faint gleam of pleasure manifested itself
at the mention of his favourite game, and presently the four elders of
the party were occupied, while the younger members stood together in a
somewhat embarrassed silence.

Left entirely to their own resources, no one knew what to say or what to
do; each girl looked first at her partner of the dinner-table, and then
shyly across at the other stranger who was to be a daily companion
during the next three months.  Ruth met no answering glance, for Jack
Melland was frowningly regarding the carpet; but for the first time
Mollie had a direct view of the eyes which were habitually hidden behind
Victor Druce's thick eyelashes, and was surprised to find how bright and
friendly was their expression.

"Shall we investigate the conservatory?" he said at once, as if
answering an unspoken appeal.  "They won't want us to stay here and
interrupt the game.  I think we had better make a move."

"But may we?  Would Uncle Bernard like it?"

"May we!  Are we not told to amuse ourselves in any way we choose?  Of
course we may," he replied laughingly, leading the way forward, while
the others followed, nothing loth.

The conservatory opened out of the drawing-room by means of a long glass
door, which, being shut, made it into a separate room.  A room it was,
rather than the ordinary glass passage, for it had a wide, open floor,
broken only by spreading palms standing in wooden boxes, and in the
midst an old-fashioned pink camellia-tree.  Stands of flowers encircled
three sides, and a lamp stood out from the walls in a bracket.  Given a
few rugs and accessories, it would have made an ideal lounge.  As it
was, there was no provision for visitors, and it was evident that no one
but the gardener took the trouble to enter.  Mr Druce looked round
rapidly, spied a wooden box under one stand, a stool under another, and
brought them forward one after another, flicking off the dust with his
handkerchief.

"You must have something to sit on.  Can you manage with these, or shall
I bring chairs from the drawing-room?  I don't want to make a noise if I
can help it."

"No, no; please don't!  These will do perfectly.  But what will you do,
and Mr Melland?  You must not stand all the time."

"Oh, don't trouble about us!  We can look after ourselves," responded
Jack Melland, pushing the flower-pots nearer together on the staging,
and lightly swinging himself into the vacant space.  Victor followed his
example, and thrust his hands into his pockets.

For the next few minutes silence reigned while the young men took in and
quite obviously admired the charming picture made by the two girlish
figures against the background of flowering plants.

Ruth's stool had been placed against the camellia-tree, and the pink
blooms matched the soft flush in her cheeks, and relieved the sombreness
of her black attire.  Thus placed she looked charmingly pretty, and held
herself with an air of dignity, which was a new accomplishment.

Ruth was an adaptive creature, tremendously influenced by the
surroundings of the moment.  At home her little head was wont to droop
with despondency, and the consciousness that she was poor and unknown
and shabbily dressed.  At the Court she was intensely, delightfully
assured of being Miss Farrell--of possessing the family features, and of
being, so far, the recipient of her uncle's greatest favour.  And so
Ruth now leant back with an air of languid elegance, smiling sweetly at
her companions.

Mollie's bright head peeped from beneath the shadow of a palm.  She held
in her hand a spray of heliotrope, which she had picked in passing, and
from time to time bent to smell the fragrance, with little murmurs of
delight.

But Mollie was obviously longing to say something, and when the time
came that she met Jack Melland's eye she suddenly plucked up courage to
put it into words.

"Don't you think we ought to introduce ourselves properly?" she cried
eagerly.  "We have been told each other's names, and talked politely at
dinner, but that's not really being introduced.  We ought to know
something about each other, if we are to be companions here.  I don't
know if you two know each other; but we did not know of your existence
until to-day.  My mother used to stay at the Court when she was a bride,
and she loved Aunt Edna, and has often talked to us about her; but she
knew very little of her relations, and for the last twenty years or more
she has never seen Uncle Bernard until he suddenly descended upon us
last week.

"We live in the North--in Liverpool.  People in the South seem to think
it is a dreadful place; but it isn't at all.  The river is splendid, and
out in the suburbs, where we live, it's very pretty, near a beautiful
big park.  The people are nice, too.  We are rather conceited about
ourselves in comparison with the people in the towns round about.  You
have heard the saying, `Manchester man, Liverpool gentleman,' and we are
proud of our county, too.  `What Lancashire thinks to-day, England
thinks to-morrow.'  I really must boast a little bit, because South-
country people are so proud and superior, and seem to think that no one
but themselves knows how to speak or behave.  Someone said to me once,
`You live in Liverpool, then why haven't you a Lancashire accent?'  I
was so cross.  What should she have thought of me if I had said, `You
live in London, why don't you speak like a Cockney?'  We are not at all
ashamed, but very proud indeed, of coming from the North-countree."

  "`Oh, the oak and the ash,
  And the bonnie ivy tree,'"

chanted Victor, in a pleasant baritone voice, at the sound of which
Mollie flushed with delight, and cried eagerly--

"Ah, you are musical!  That's nice.  We must have some grand singing
matches, but you mustn't sing that ballad.  It's Ruth's special
property.  She sings it with such feeling!

  "`And the lad that marries me,
  Must carry me home to my North-coun-tree!'"

"Mollie!"  Ruth's tone was eloquent of reproof, but Mollie only laughed,
and said easily--

"Oh well, of course, if you inherit the Court you will have to change
your plans.  I wish I could lift it up bodily and put it down among the
dear Westmorland mountains; but I'm afraid that's impossible.  I think
that is all the history we have.  No two girls could possibly have led a
less eventful life.  We have had no money to travel and see the world,
and we are not in the least bit accomplished, but we have had a happy
time all the same, and we mean to be happy, whatever happens; don't we,
Ruth?"

Ruth did not answer, but sat with downcast eyes, staring at the ground.
She more than half disapproved of Mollie's candour, despising herself
the while for so doing, so she preserved a dead silence, until Jack
Melland nobly stepped into the breach.

"Well, if you are North-country, Miss Mollie, I suppose I am Colonial.
I was born in India, where my father's regiment was stationed.  He died
when I was a youngster, and my poor little mother had a hard struggle to
keep herself and me.  If a fortune had come to us in those days it would
have been a godsend, and she would probably be with me now; but she died
eight years ago, and I am alone in the world, with no one to think of
but myself.  I have dingy diggings and a garrulous landlady, but, like
you, I manage to have a very good time.  I am interested in my work--I'm
interested in life generally.  I mean to make something out of it before
I am done."

He threw back his head with a proud, self-confident gesture.  Young,
strong, high-spirited, he felt at that moment that the world lay at his
feet.  All things seemed possible to his unaided powers, and the thought
of help was repugnant rather than welcome.  The two girls looked at him
with the involuntary admiration which women pay to a strong man, while
Victor Druce smiled his slow, inscrutable smile.

"A good thing for you that you are not in my profession, Melland!  A
barrister can't push; he must sit still and wait his turn.  I have been
waiting a long time, and I can't say that I seem much nearer the
Woolsack.  Still, one can amuse oneself in London, and I have my home in
the country to which I can retire whenever I need a rest.  My old
parents are alive, and one sister--an invalid.  Altogether, I have
nothing to complain of in the past, and the future looks pleasant just
now.  Three months in this charming place--in such society!"

Victor Druce made a graceful little bow, which took in both the girls,
and his glance lingered on Mollie bending forward, the spray of
heliotrope still raised to her face.

"Stealing already, Miss Mollie!  You will get into trouble with the
authorities.  How do you know that plant was not being specially
preserved for exhibition at a show?"

"I hope it wasn't; but it's no use telling me to do as I like, and then
to object if I pick a flower.  I shall pick them every day--several
times a day.  I shall always be picking them!  I think I shall take the
care of this house altogether, and do the watering and snip off the dead
leaves.  I love snipping!  And I shall arrange the flowers on the table,
too; they are very badly done--so stiff.  Just like a man's taste!"

The two men smiled at each other, while Ruth protested quickly--

"No, you can't, Mollie.  I'm the eldest, and I've `barleyed' it already.
You can arrange the vases in the drawing-room, if you like."

"Thank you, ma'am!" said Mollie calmly.  "Just as you like."

Judging from the fervour with which she had stated her intentions a
moment earlier, the listeners expected that she would dispute her
sister's mandate and hardly knew how to account for her unruffled
composure.  But, in truth, Mollie was already reflecting that flowers
took a long time to arrange satisfactorily, and that it would be a bore
to saddle herself with a regular duty.  Much more fun to let Ruth do it,
and criticise the results!  She sniffed daintily at the heliotrope,
turning her head from side to side to examine the possibilities of the
conservatory.

"Well, anyway, I shall take this place in hand!  It will make a lovely
little snuggery, with rugs on the floor and basket-chairs everywhere
about, and an odd table or two to hold books and work, and tea when we
like to have it here.  I'll have a blind to the door, too, so that we
shan't be surprised if visitors are shown into the drawing-room.  Is
there a door of escape, by the way?  I hate to be penned up where I
can't run away to a place of safety."  She peered inquiringly round the
trunk of the palm, whereupon Victor Druce slid down from his perch, and
walked to the further end of the floor.

"Yes, there's a door here.  If you see anyone coming for whom you have a
special aversion you can get out, and hide in the shrubbery.  I promise
not to tell.  Perhaps I may come with you.  I am not fond of afternoon
calls."

"Don't encourage her, please, Mr Druce," said Ruth quickly.  "Mollie
talks a lot of nonsense which she doesn't mean; but if people are kind
enough to come here to see us, she must not be so rude as to refuse to
see them.  I am sure Uncle Bernard would be very angry if we did not
receive them properly."

But Mollie was obstinate this time, and refused to be put down.

"How do you know?" she asked rebelliously.  "He might be very pleased
with me for sharing his own retiring tastes!  He said himself that he
approved of what other people would consider a fault.  Perhaps he likes
unsociability.  There's as much chance of that as anything else!"

Victor Druce came back from his tour of investigation, but instead of
taking his former seat, leant up against the stem of a huge palm-tree,
whose topmost leaves touched the glass roof, folded his arms and looked
down at the two girls with an intent, curious scrutiny.

"It's an odd position," he said slowly, "a very odd position for us all
to be plunged in at a moment's notice!  None of us have any knowledge of
Mr Farrell's tastes, so any attempts to please him must be entirely
experimental.  If we please him we may thank our good fortune; if we
offend, we can, at least, feel innocent of any bad intentions.  It's
rather a disagreeable position, but I expect the poor old fellow shirks
being left to himself any longer, though he would die rather than
acknowledge it.  It's dull work being left alone when one is ill.
Personally, it is extremely inconvenient for me to be away from home for
three months, but I shall manage it somehow.  One can't refuse a request
from a man in his condition, and it would be a pleasure to cheer the
poor old fellow a bit, even at the cost of one's own comfort."

There was silence for a moment after he had ceased speaking.  Jack
Melland stared at the ground, and swung his feet gently to and fro.
Ruth knitted her black brows, and Mollie looked puzzled and thoughtful.
It was a kind speech.  She would have liked to admire it thoroughly,
but--did it ring quite true?  Was there not something unnatural in the
avoidance of any reference by the speaker to his own possible gain?

"I'm afraid I didn't think much of Uncle Bernard; I was too busy
thinking of myself.  I want to have a good time!" she said bluntly.
"It's a lovely, lovely house, and the grounds are lovely, and the spring
flowers are coming up, and we can live out of doors, and be as happy as
the day is long.  I am not going to worry my head about the money, or
anything else.  I'll be nice to Uncle Bernard in my own way, as nice as
he will let me; but he said that we could enjoy ourselves, and I am
going to take him at his word, and do every single thing I like.  It's
an opportunity which may never occur again, as the shop people say in
their circulars, and it would be foolish not to make the most of it."

"I want the money!" said Ruth clearly.  The pretty flush had faded from
her cheeks, and she looked suddenly wan and white.  The hands which were
resting on her knee trembled visibly.  She had evidently strung herself
up to what she considered a necessary confession, and her eyes turned to
one after another of her companions in wistful apology.

"I want it dreadfully!  I have been poor all my life, and have longed to
be rich, and I would rather live here, in this house, than anywhere else
in the world.  If we are going to live together and be friends we ought
to be honest with each other from the beginning.  It's selfish, but it's
true!  I want the money, and I mean to do every single thing in my power
to get it."

"Bravo!" cried a man's voice suddenly.  Mollie was frowning and biting
her lips in obvious discomfort; Victor Druce's drooping lids once more
hid his eyes from sight as he stood with folded arms leaning against the
palm.  It was Jack Melland who had spoken--Jack Melland, roused for once
to display unqualified approval and enthusiasm.  He bent forward on his
seat, hands in his pockets, his tall, lithe figure swaying gently to and
fro as he faced Ruth with his bright blue eyes.

"Bravo, Miss Farrell!  I admire your honesty, and wish you good luck.
You are perfectly justified in doing all you can to gain your point, and
I sincerely hope you may be successful.  It is only right that a Farrell
should inherit the Court, and if you were the old man's grand-daughter,
you could not possibly be more like him."

Ruth flushed, but did not reply.  Victor Druce's measured voice cut like
a sword across the silence.

"You are unselfish, Melland!  Are you quite sure that you share the
honesty which you admire so much in Miss Farrell?  Have you forgotten
how the question affects yourself?"

Jack Melland jumped lightly to the ground and straightened his long
back.

"Unselfish or not, it's the truth.  The question does not affect me at
all.  I am not going to stay!"


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

AN EARLY DECISION.

"I am not going to stay," said Jack Melland; and whatever his faults
might be, he looked and spoke like a man who knew his own mind, and
would abide thereby.

His three companions stared at him in silence, and one of the three at
least felt a distinct sinking of the heart.

"I was beginning to like him; we got on quite famously at dinner, and I
thought we were going to have ever such a good time together.  Now we
shall be a wretched uncomfortable three, and Mr Druce will like Ruth
best, and I shall be out in the cold.  How horrid!  How perfectly
horrid!" grumbled Mollie to herself.

Just because she was so perturbed, however, she would not allow herself
to speak, but put on an elaborate display of indifference, while Victor
asked curiously--

"You mean that?  May one ask your reason?"

"Oh, certainly.  I never looked upon myself as having the slightest
claim upon Mr Farrell, and I don't care to ruin my business prospects
for the sake of an off-chance.  Besides, the whole position is
unpleasant; I object to being kept `on approval,' with the consciousness
that if I allow myself to be ordinarily agreeable I shall at once be
credited with sponging for the old man's favour.  I am quite satisfied
with my own lot, without any outside assistance."

"Don't you care about money, then?" asked Ruth timidly.

Jack Melland threw back his head with an air of masterful complacency.

"I care about making money.  That is to say, I love my work, and wish it
to be successful, but I am keen on it more for the sake of the interest
and occupation than for what it brings.  A few hundreds a year supply
all that I want, and I should not care to be burdened with a big
fortune.  If you come into this place, Miss Farrell, I shall be grateful
to you if you will ask me down for a few days' shooting in the autumn,
but I shall never envy you your responsibility.  To kick my heels here
in idleness for three solid months, and know that the business was
suffering for want of my presence--nothing would induce me to do it!"

But at this Mollie found her tongue, indignation spurring her to speech.

"You are not very polite to the rest of us!  I should not have thought
it would be such a great hardship to stay in a lovely big house with
three young companions, when summer was coming on, too!  I should think
there are one or two people in the world who would like it even a little
better than poking in a stuffy office from morning until night.  But
there's no accounting for tastes.  When you are grilling with heat in
the City you can think of us sitting under the trees eating
strawberries, and thank Fate you are so much better off.  We promise not
to send you any.  It might remind you too painfully of the country!"

"Mollie!" cried Ruth in sharp reproof; but Jack laughed with good-
natured amusement.

"Oh, I deserve it, Miss Farrell!  My remarks sounded horribly
discourteous.  I assure you if I had the time to spare I should
thoroughly enjoy staying on for a time under the present conditions; but
as it is quite impossible to remain for three months, I might as well
depart at once.  I don't suppose Mr Farrell will wish to keep me under
the circumstances."

It appeared, however, Jack Melland was wrong in his surmise, for when he
announced his decision to his host before bidding him good-night, the
old man looked at him coldly and replied--

"I thought I had explained that we would discuss objections at a later
date.  May I ask what limit you had mentally fixed to your visit when
you did me the honour of accepting my invitation?"

"I hardly know--this is Monday.  I thought, perhaps until Saturday, or,
at the longest, a week."

Mr Farrell waved his hand in dismissal.

"We will leave it for a week, then.  On Monday morning next I will
discuss the position as fully as you wish.  Now, if either of you young
gentlemen cares to smoke, the billiard-room is at your service.  Please
ring for anything you require.  Meantime, as it is past my usual hour
for retiring, I wish you a very good-night."

"Checkmate, old fellow!" cried Victor Druce, as the door closed behind
the stooping figure; but Jack deigned no reply.

The cloud had returned to his forehead, his nostrils were curved with
annoyance and thwarted self-will.

The cloud was still there when he came down to breakfast next morning,
and did not lighten even at the sight of the well-appointed breakfast-
table, and the two pretty girls who were seated thereat.  Some meals may
be more attractive abroad than at home.  A French dinner, for example,
has certain points above an English dinner; but we give way to none as
regards our breakfast--that most delightful of meals to the strong and
healthy, especially in springtime, when the sunshine pours in at the
open window, and the scent of flowers mingles with the aroma of freshly
made coffee.

The breakfast-table of the Court had all the attractions which one
instinctively associates with old country houses.  The massive, old-
fashioned silver, the revolving stand in the centre, the plentiful
display of covered dishes to supplement the cold viands on the
sideboard; and, as Mr Farrell invariably remained in his own room until
lunch-time, the restraint of his presence was removed.

Little Mrs Wolff busied herself with the duties behind the urn, and
Ruth and Mollie in serge skirts and spick and span white blouses looked
as fresh as paint, and a great many times as pretty.  They were laughing
and chatting with Victor Druce, who had donned Norfolk jacket and
knickerbockers, and was quite the country gentleman both in appearance
and in his manner of leisurely good-humour.

The entrance of Jack in what are technically called "Store clothes,"
with a gloomy frown upon his forehead, seemed to strike a jarring note
in this cheerful scene, and both girls were conscious of a distinct
feeling of grievance against the offender.  Was it so dreadful a fate to
be doomed to spend a whole week in their society?  Need a man look as if
his last hope in life were extinguished because Fate kept him away from
the City for seven days, and placed him instead in the sweet green
country, with three companions of his own age who--to put it mildly--
were not perfect ogres in appearance!

The necessary greetings were observed.  Jack helped himself to a bowl of
porridge, and, looking up, asked discontentedly--

"Hasn't the newspaper arrived?"

"Not yet, sir; it will be here by ten o'clock, sir," the butler replied;
and Mollie pulled down her lip with an expression of solemn propriety,
and added--

"But perhaps I can relieve your anxiety in the meantime.  Cotton is down
twenty points, very strong and steady, and the Bears are making
fortunes.  `Mauds' are fluctuating, but `Louisa Christinas' are in great
demand; everybody is rushing after them.  The Bank rate is ten and a
half, and Consols have gone up two per cent.  General market firm, with
a tendency to drop."

"My good child, what nonsense are you talking!" cried Ruth aghast, and
the two young men exchanged glances and burst into a laugh; even Jack
laughed, though such a feat had seemed impossible a moment before.

"What a thrilling report!  You make me more impatient than ever.  It is
just like my luck to be out of the way when there is a chance of a good
thing, though, after all, I don't know if the wisest plan would not be
to sell everything one had, and put the money in the bank--eh, Druce?
Ten and a half per cent!  Where do you get your knowledge, Miss Mary?"

"Oh, I see things in the newspapers, and I hear the pater talking to his
friends.  Don't call me `Miss Mary' please, it sounds far too quiet and
proper for me.  I am never called anything but Mollie, except when I
overspend my allowance, and mother feels it her duty to scold me.  Are
you on the Stock Exchange, Mr Melland?  What sort of business is it
which you find so attractive?"

"I am afraid you would not be much wiser if I tried to explain.  We are
what is called `brokers'; but there are an endless variety of businesses
under the same name.  I have nothing, however, to do with `Mauds' and
`Christinas'!"

"Neither have I," volunteered Victor smilingly, "To tell the truth, I
have no money to invest, Briefs don't come my way, and I am at present
occupied listening to more fortunate fellows, and thinking how much
better I could plead myself.  It palls at times, but I am fond of the
profession, and have no wish to change it."

"No," said Mollie reflectively.  "The wigs _are_ becoming!" and when the
two young men leant back in their chairs and roared with laughter, she
blushed and pouted, and looked so pretty that it did one good to see
her.

The three earlier comers had finished their meal by this time, but they
sat still until Jack had disposed of the toast and marmalade which makes
the last breakfast course of every self-respecting Briton; then they
rose one after the other, strolled over to the open window, and faced
the question of the day--

"What shall we do?"

It was Ruth who spoke, and at the sound of her words the shadow came
back to Jack's brow.

"Yes, what shall we do?  Think of it--three months--twelve weeks--
eighty-four separate days to lounge away with the same question on your
lips!  I'd rather be sentenced to hard labour at once.  Life is not
worth living without work.  I'd rather be a clerk on sixty pounds a year
than stagnate as a country squire."

"You would be a very bad squire if you did stagnate!" cried Mollie
spiritedly, throwing back her little head, and looking up at him with a
flash of the grey eyes.  "You would have your tenants to look after, and
your property to keep in order, and the whole village looking to you to
lead every scheme of pleasure or improvement, and the vicar looking to
you to be his right hand, and all the growing boys looking to you to
help them to a start in life, and the old people expecting you to make
their last days easy.  You would be the hardest-worked man in the
country if you did half the work that was waiting for you, and it would
be unselfish work, too--thinking of others, and not of yourself."

Jack looked at her, and his face softened.

"That's true," he said frankly.  "I'm sorry!  You are right, and I am
wrong.  I'm in a bad temper, and can't see things in their right light
to-day.  Of course, if one really settled down to it, there would be
plenty to do; it's when one is only playing with the position that time
drags."

"Well, it ought not to drag to-day, at all events.  We must be very dull
if we cannot amuse ourselves in surveying the domain, and seeing all
there is to be seen.  I am going to put on my hat this minute and
examine the gardens, and go down to the stables to look at the horses.
If anyone likes to come too, they may, but my plans are fixed," cried
Mollie, nodding her saucy head; and at the magic word "stables," a ray
of interest lit up the two masculine faces.

Ten minutes later the four young people were strolling down the drive,
the girls with serge coats over their white blouses, and sailor-hats on
their heads, the men wearing their cloth caps with an evident air of
enjoyment.  They turned the corner of the house, and coming round to the
south side uttered simultaneous exclamations of surprise and delight.

Along the entire length of the house ran an enormously wide terrace
edged with a balustrade, from the centre of which a flight of marble
steps led to an Italian garden, its green sward and stiffly outlined
flower-beds flanked by a quantity of curiously cut shrubs.

Beyond this garden the ground dipped sharply, showing first a glade of
trees whose fresh spring foliage contrasted with the dark colours of the
evergreens; then came a glimpse of a lake, a sweep of park; and beyond
all a glorious, wide-stretching view over the countryside.  Perched upon
one of the highest sites for miles around, this terraced walk afforded
such a panorama of beauty as is rarely to be found even in our well-
favoured isles, and withal the beauty was of that peaceful, home-like
nature which irresistibly endears itself to the heart.

The four young people stood in silence gazing from side to side, and
into each mind, even that of the rebellious Jack himself, there crept
the same thought.  This was indeed a goodly heritage, whose owner would
be an enviable person!  The possibility of possessing it as a home was
worth a far greater sacrifice than anything which had been demanded of
themselves.

In those few minutes of silence dreams ran riot, and finally found vent
in words.

"When the Court belongs to me I shall have an awning put up on this
terrace and sit here all day long," said Mollie; as usual the first to
break the silence.

"I shall have a table brought out, and breakfast here every fine
morning," said Ruth.

"I'll smoke here after dinner!" said Victor.

"I'll do ditto in every case!" said Jack, then caught himself up
sharply--"when I come to visit the Chosen, that is to say!  Of course,
I'm out of the running.  What are you smiling at, Miss Mollie?"  For,
turning towards her, he had seen the grey eyes light up with a merry
twinkle.  She shook her head, however, refusing to gratify his
curiosity, and sped rapidly down the broad marble steps.

"He is beginning to have qualms!  The very first morning, and for a
moment his resolution wavered.  The spell is working," she told herself
triumphantly; for, despite his lack of gallantry, both girls had already
candidly admitted that upon Jack's going or staying depended a great
part of the pleasure of the next three months.  "Don't persuade him;
don't mention the subject at all.  Let him think we don't care how he
decides.  Men are contradictious creatures, and the less he is urged the
more likely he is to give way," argued Ruth the experienced.  And Mollie
dutifully agreed.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

A NOVEL EXPERIENCE.

Down the winding path, the visitors, as they walked together, came upon
masses of daffodils, standing up erect and golden from the carpet of
dead leaves which covered the ground.  Not the ordinary common or garden
daffodil, charming as it is, but named varieties of every description--
white trumpeted _Horsefieldi_, stately yellow Emperors, _Bari Conspicui_
with its dainty outline of orange; these, and a dozen others were
growing in patches, not in dozens or scores, but in literal hundreds,
beneath the budding trees.  There were violets, too; and white and
purple and golden saxifrages peeping out between the stones which
bordered the trickling stream--a scene of enchantment, indeed, for City
eyes accustomed to gaze only on bricks and mortar.  The girls were wild
with delight, and flitted about gathering specimens of the different
flowers; while the two young men were content to watch them with an air
of masculine superiority.

"What is the use of burdening yourselves with all those things at the
very beginning of our walk?"

"They aren't a burden, they are a joy.  Hold them for me, please, while
I get some more," replied Mollie, laying a stack of long-stemmed
beauties in Jack's arms, regardless of his look of dismay.  "Don't crush
them; I want them kept quite fresh."

"What are you going to do with them, if I might ask?  There are plenty
in the house.  It's a pity to cut them just to waste."

"I wouldn't waste them for the world, the beautiful darlings!  I'm going
to send them home to mother.  We will pack them in a box, and take them
down to the post-office this afternoon.  It will provide honest work for
the afternoon," retorted Mollie.

She was too happy, too supremely happy, to be stiff and formal.  As she
darted from one flower-bed to another she looked like an incarnation of
the bright spring morning.  There was no room in her mind for doubts and
fears.  The future simply did not exist; the present was all-sufficient.

From the gardens the quartette strolled onwards past the lake, and
across the wide park to the further gates; then, returning, paid a visit
to the stables.  The groom greeted them with a smile, which showed that
he had anticipated their coming; and, like the other servants, hailed
with delight a return to livelier days.

"The horses will get some work now, I hope, ma'am," he said, touching
his forehead as he addressed himself to Ruth, as the head of the party.
("The Farrell eyebrows again!" said Mollie to herself.)

"They have had it far too easy for a long time back.  The master's fond
of horses, and we need a good many for driving up these steep hills, as
everything has to be brought up from the station; but it's regular
gentle exercise as suits 'em best.  I've a nice little mare as would
carry you, if you'd care to try her.  She's in this box.  Fanny, we call
her.  Whoa!  Fanny, old girl, come and show yourself!  Nice gentle
creature, you see, miss: no temper in her."

"But I don't ride," began Ruth, smiling.  "I should like to very much;
and I don't think I should be nervous, but--"

"Oh, I'd love to ride!  Is there a horse for me, too?  And would you
teach us--would you?  Could we come down every day and have a lesson?"
interrupted Mollie impetuously.

And the groom wheeled round to face her, and touched his forehead again,
his face one smile of delight.

"Ay, would I, miss!  Proud to do it.  Many's the one I've taught to ride
in my time.  You settle any hour you like, and I'll have the horses
ready for you, and take you a turn across the park.  There's some old
side-saddles put away in the loft.  I'll have 'em down, and put in order
for ye.  And the gentlemen?  You'll not be needing any lessons, I'm
thinking."

"Oh no!  I think I can manage to sit any horse you have here," replied
Victor in a slightly superior tone.

Jack, however, shook his head, and said--

"No use for me.  I can't ride, and it's no use beginning.  I'm only here
for a week."

The groom looked the surprise he was too well trained to express.

"Indeed, sir.  Well, I can give you a mount if you change your mind.  It
wouldn't take long to get your seat; and it's pleasant exercise these
spring days.  The carriages are round this way, miss.  There's a pretty
little cart you might like to drive yourself."

He led the way forward; but while the others followed, Mollie hung
behind, blocking Jack's way.  Something prompted her to speak, an
impulse too strong to be resisted.

"Do learn!" she cried entreatingly.  "Learn with us.  Why won't you?  It
would be such fun.  You said you hated to be idle.  It wouldn't be
wasted time if you learnt a useful accomplishment."

"Hardly useful to me, I am afraid, Miss Mollie.  I have no money for
horses.  My only acquaintance with them is from the top of a City
omnibus."

"But you can't tell what might happen.  We might go to war again, and
you might want to volunteer.  You might grow rich.  Besides, you
volunteered to come and stay with the `Chosen,' and then you will
certainly find it useful.  So you will join us, won't you?"

Jack laughed and hesitated, looking down at the flushed, eager face.  It
seemed a very trifling matter.  He could not tell that with the
acceptance or refusal of this light request the whole of his future
destiny was involved.  He only thought that Mollie was a charmingly
pretty girl, and that it would be amusing to practise riding by her
side.

"Well! since you put it like that, I can't refuse," he answered
laughingly.  "We will learn together, Miss Mollie, and good luck to our
efforts."

"But what about the riding-habits?" asked Ruth.

"We must get them," said Mollie.

"Where?" asked Ruth.

"At a tailor's," said Mollie.  "Bond Street, for choice; only it would
be difficult to arrange about fitting.  I'm not at all sure that we
shan't have to pay a visit to town on this matter of clothes.  For the
present I mean to consult that maid, and see what can be done until we
can get habits well made for us.  And--who knows?--there may be some old
things stored away somewhere which will come in handy.  Anyway, I'm
going to begin lessons to-morrow, habit or no habit.  You can do as you
like."

As there was no time to be lost, the maid was summoned only to proclaim
her inability to manufacture riding attire in the space of twenty-four
hours, or to produce the same from the household treasures.

"There is the mistress's habit, of course, but that was locked away with
her other clothes; and even if I could get at it I wouldn't dare to use
it.  Mr Farrell keeps everything she wore, and nobody touches them but
himself.  There's a very good tailor at Bexham, miss--only half an
hour's rail from here.  Many of the ladies go to him for their things."

"But we want something now--at once!  Something to wear to-morrow.
Surely you can think of something?  Mr Farrell said we were to ask you
for everything we wanted, and this is the first thing we have asked for.
You must suggest something!" cried Mollie imperiously.

Thus adjured, Emma pursed up her lips, and wrinkled her forehead, leant
her head on one side, and stared at the ceiling for inspiration.
Presently it came, for the frown disappeared, the lips relaxed into a
smile.

"Well, miss," she said, "there's the parson's young ladies; they are
nearly as big as you, though they are still at school.  They ride with
the father in the holiday, for the squire let's them have a mount from
the stables whenever they send up.  Their habits will be at home, lying
idle.  They are not much for style, of course, but for a few days, until
you have time to get fitted yourself--"

"Emma, you are an angel!  It's a splendid idea!  Mrs Thornton begged us
to let her help in any way she could.  We'll call this very afternoon,
when we go down to post off the flowers, and I'm sure she will be
delighted to lend them.  Now we can have our first lesson to-morrow.
That's glorious!  I do hate to wait when I have planned anything nice."

At luncheon Mr Farrell made his appearance, and listened with polite
indifference to the history of the morning's doings as volunteered by
his guests.  He asked no questions, made no suggestions, and retired
into the library the moment the meal was over for his daily perusal of
the _Times_.  Here for the first time he discovered the inconvenience of
the novel interruption to his solitude, for the newspaper was missing
from its accustomed place, and, on ringing to make inquiries, he was
informed that Mr Melland had carried it off to the billiard-room.

"Tell Mr Melland, with my compliments, I should be obliged if he would
allow me to have it for the next hour--and order two copies for the
future," he said grimly.

And five minutes later Jack appeared in person the bearer of the
newspaper and frank apologies.

"I'm really awfully sorry!  I did not know you had not seen it.  Would
you care for me to read aloud any article?  I should be glad to be of
use."

"Thank you.  My eyes are still quite useful.  I prefer to read for
myself."

Jack had the good sense to depart without further protest, and Mr
Farrell stretched himself on his big chair with a sigh of relief.  He
took no pleasure in his guests, whose bright young presence depressed
him by reviving memories of happier days.  If it had not been for the
necessity of choosing an heir, he would have cherished his solitude as
his dearest possession.  He congratulated himself, however, that by
reserving one room for his own use he could be still safe from
interruption, and, turning to a leading article, read the first few
paragraphs with leisurely enjoyment.  The writing was excellent, the
views irreproachable, in that they exactly coincided with his own.  He
turned with anticipatory pleasure to the article next in order, when the
sound of a light tap-tap came to the door, and Ruth appeared upon the
threshold, blushing shyly.

"Uncle Bernard, Mrs Wolff says that you always read the _Times_ after
luncheon...  Would it be any help if I read aloud what you wish to hear?
Sometimes, when pater is tired--"

"I am obliged to you.  I require no help of the sort.  Is there any
other subject on which you wished to speak to me?"

The tone was so suggestive of concealed wrath that Ruth quailed before
it, and the faltering "No" was hardly audible across the room.  Mr
Farrell lifted the paper from his knee so that his face was hidden from
view.

"Then you will forgive my remarking that I prefer to be undisturbed.  We
shall meet in the drawing-room for tea."

Ruth shut the door, advanced a few steps into the hall, and stamped her
foot violently upon the floor.  The thick Turkey carpet reduced the
noise to the faintest echo, but an answering laugh sounded from behind a
screen, and Jack Melland's eyes looked quizzically into her flushed
face.

"Allow me to sympathise.  I was sent about my business a few minutes
ago.  Took back the _Times_ by request, and ventured to offer to read
aloud--"

"Oh, so did I!  His eyes looked so tired, that I long to do something!
It's like living in an hotel, to take everything and do nothing in
return, but if he is so cross and glares like that I shall never dare to
offer again.  Do you suppose it will go on like this all the time?  Will
he avoid us entirely except at meal-times?  Shall we never get to know
him really?  If it is like that, I don't think I can stand it.  I shall
run away and go home!"

Jack looked down at her with a kindly sympathy.

"Ah, well, it's early days to judge!  I don't think it would be
consistent with Mr Farrell's plans to remain a stranger.  Opportunities
are bound to arise as the days pass by.  Don't worry about it, but enjoy
yourself while you can.--I am going to sit out on the terrace.  Will you
come, too?  It will be quite warm so long as the sun lasts."

They strolled away together, to make acquaintance in a quiet _tete-a-
tete_, while once more interruption approached the library in the shape
of Mollie, primed for battle.  She rapped at the door, received a low
growl by way of reply, and had no sooner crossed the threshold than an
infuriated voice startled her ears.

"I tell you no!  I want no help.  I can read without assistance.  Am I
stone-blind that I cannot be left in peace to read my paper, as I have
done these forty years?  How many times over have I to answer the same
question?"

"But--but--I haven't asked you anything yet!" gasped Mollie blankly.
Eyes and lips alike were wide with amazement, but instead of retiring at
full speed, as the other two visitors had done before her, she shut the
door carefully and advanced towards the fire.  "What did you think I was
going to say?"

"I have already had two interruptions in the last half-hour; two offers
to have my news read aloud--a thing I detest.  I conclude you have come
on the same mission?"

"No!"  Mollie shook her head, half penitent, half amused.  "Indeed such
a thing never entered my mind.  I was selfish enough to be thinking of
myself--not you.  Something is worrying me.  May I sit down and talk to
you about it, Uncle Bernard?"

She drew forward a chair even as she spoke, and Mr Farrell made no
objection.  The _Times_ lay on his lap, his thin hands crossed above it,
while his sunken eyes were fixed upon the girl's face with a curious
scrutiny.

"If it is any argument about going or staying, I have already
explained--"

"Ah, but it isn't!  I am going to stay.  I love staying!  I don't know
when I have been so happy in my life as I've been to-day, wandering
about this sweet old place.  It was the most curious feeling this
morning before you were down--like living in an enchanted castle where
the owner had disappeared!  When I gathered the flowers I felt quite
like Beau--" She drew herself up sharply--"They were such lovely
flowers!"

A short laugh proved that the interruption had come too late.

"As I said before, Miss Mary, you are not overburdened with modesty!  I
am obliged for my part of the simile!"

But the speaker's eyes were twinkling with quite the most amiable
expression Mollie had yet seen, and she laughed unabashed.

"Ah, well, one description is as exaggerated as the other.  I didn't
mean to say it; it just popped out.  You know that I didn't mean to be
rude.  I wanted to speak to you about something very important--to us,
at least.  Ruth will be scandalised, but it's bound to come out sooner
or later, and I want to understand our position...  We told you this
morning that we proposed to learn riding."

"You did."

"And you made no objection."

"On the contrary, I quite approved.  It is almost essential for your own
comfort and convenience it you wish to enjoy a country life."

"Yes! so we thought.  But there is one great objection.  We have no
habits."

"Indeed!"

"No; of course, we have never ridden at home."

"I presume not."

"And we cannot ride without habits.  Emma, the maid, suggested that Mrs
Thornton might lend us her daughters' just for a few days; but we cannot
keep them long."

"Certainly not!"

Mr Farrell made his remarks with an air of polite indifference, which
was peculiarly baffling.  It was evident that no lead was to be expected
from him, and that Mollie would have to put her request in the plainest
possible words.  Her lips were pressed together in a momentary
hesitation between embarrassment and laughter; then she thought of the
lecture she would receive from Ruth if her errand ended in failure, and
grew strong again.  Her eyes met those of Uncle Bernard still fixed
intently on her face.

"I wanted to ask you what we were to do about them, and about clothes
altogether!  You know we are very poor.  Ruth and I have fifteen pounds
a year to dress on.  You have never been a girl, so you don't understand
what that means; but though we can get along on that at home and could
look respectable for a few days' visit, we can't manage as we are for
three whole months, especially when you wish us to go about, and have
parties here, and meet your friends on their own terms.  We have only
those black evening-dresses which you saw last night, and girls can't
always wear the same things, as a man does his dress suit."

"I suppose not."

"No they can't.  So--"

"So?"

Mollie's cheek flushed with a dawning impatience.

"Uncle Bernard, don't you think you make it very hard for me?  After
all, it was your wish that we should stay, and we cannot put the pater
to more expense.  You said we were to have carte blanche.  I want to
know if that applies to clothes also?"

"I must say I had not anticipated anything of the sort when I made my
remark."

"Well then, are you content to have us as we are?  It won't be easy or
pleasant, but I suppose we _could_ rub along if you don't object.
People would make remarks, and as they are your friends--"

"It is a great many years since I have troubled my head about what
people say.  That argument has no weight with me; but, as you say, you
remain here and go into society at my invitation, and it is therefore
only reasonable that I should make it possible for you to do so in
comfort.  I am in ignorance as to what is required.  What sum, may I
ask, would you consider sufficient to make up deficiencies?"

Mollie's smile of rapture was a sight to behold.  The victory was won,
and won so easily that there had been no fight worthy the name.  Her
mind flew to Ruth, picturing the scene between them when she retold the
conversation; then turned at a tangent to gloat over the thought of
fineries to come.

"Ah-ah!  That's a difficult question to answer.  We shall need riding-
habits, and summer things, and evening-dresses, and hosts of etceteras.
I could make myself look respectable for twenty pounds; I could look
smart for fifty; I could be a vision for a hundred!" cried Mollie,
clasping her hands ecstatically, while once again a faint twinkle showed
itself in Mr Farrell's eyes.  His words were, however, as a rule,
decidedly damping in tone.

"That is interesting to know, but something less bewildering than
visions might be more in keeping with ordinary life.  Very well, then,
Miss Mary, order what you please, and tell your sister to do the same,
and let the bills come in to me.  You can run up to town for the day
whenever it is necessary, and no doubt you will enjoy the variety.  Is
there anything more you wish to say?"

He took up the newspaper in sign of dismissal, but Mollie sat her
ground, flushing and knitting her brows.

"Uncle Bernard, you are an angel, and I'm ever so much obliged, but
please mightn't we have a fixed sum?  It would be so much more
comfortable!  If it is left like this, we should not know what you would
think reasonable or extravagant!"

"And in the other case, I should not know it of you!  No; it must be
left entirely to your discretion.  Get what you please, and as much as
you please.  I make no restrictions.  As I have said before, money is no
object to me, but it is my great aim at present to understand your
position as to it."

"I understand, but it's very awkward!" sighed Mollie.  Her forehead was
puckered with thought; she stroked her soft little chin in thoughtful
fashion.  "I should like to please you, but I am so completely in the
dark.  A man's ideas are so different from a girl's.  If I get all I
think necessary, you may think me extravagant!"

"Very possibly I may."

"And if I get less than the best, you might think me mean."

"Very possibly again."

Mollie made an involuntary gesture of impatience, then laughed and
tossed her head.

"Uncle Bernard, it is hopeless to try to understand you.  There is only
one thing to be done; since I don't know how to please you, I must take
extra good care to please myself."

"A most sensible conclusion!  I congratulate you upon it.  I have,
however, one request to make.  It is my wish that you and your sister
should be independent of each other; each acting exactly as she thinks
fit, without reference to the other's wishes.  Is there anything more
that you wish to say?  If not, may I suggest that I am generally left
free from interruption after lunch?"

"I'll never come again--I promise I won't, but there is a lot I should
like to say if you would let me.  I'd like to thank you and tell you how
much fun and happiness we shall get out of your generosity; but, I
suppose, if I did you would hate it, and call it gush.  The best thing I
can do is to go away at once; but you can't prevent me thanking you in
my heart."

She looked at him half smiling, half wistful, longing for some sign of
softening which might break down the barrier between them, but Mr
Farrell did not even meet her glance.  His eyes had already strayed
towards his newspaper; he was settling himself in his chair and
preparing to resume the interrupted reading.  Mollie turned with a sigh
and left the room.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

LEARNING TO RIDE.

The riding-lessons duly began the next day, and, continuing each morning
of the week, proved a veritable godsend to the four young people, in
providing amusement for hours which might otherwise have hung somewhat
heavily on their hands.  The season was yet too young for outdoor games,
and in the early stages of their mutual acquaintanceship it was
difficult to keep up a perpetual flow of conversation.  Some occupation
of general interest was thus badly needed, and this was supplied by the
delightful canters over the moors--delightful, despite the drawbacks
which were inseparable from inexperience.

On the first morning the girls were kept sternly in hand by the careful
groom, each taken in turn for an amble along a quiet road under his own
supervision; while the other strolled about, feeling very fine and large
as she held up the skirt of her habit, and nonchalantly flicked her whip
to and fro.

From the safe vantage of the ground also it was amusing to watch Jack
Melland's plungings to and fro, and offer him good advice as to the
management of his steed.  Jack, needless to say, disdained the groom's
good offices, and set forth confident of being able to master any horse
by the sheer force of his manhood.  His seat was not elegant, certainly,
and for once he was at a distinct disadvantage beside Victor, who looked
his best on horseback, and was evidently an experienced rider.

On the third day the horses were led to the broad road, crossing the
well-treed park, and, after half an hour's patient trotting to and fro,
Ruth was started on her first independent canter, which was fated to
have an ignominious end; for the horse, impatient of restraint,
increased its pace to a gallop, which swiftly left the groom behind and
sent its rider's composure to the winds.  Her foot slipped from the
stirrup, she dropped her whip, clung wildly to the pommel, and,
regardless of dignity, screamed for help at the pitch of her voice.  It
seemed an eternity of time, but in reality it was only a couple of
minutes, before Victor overtook her, and leaning forward, seized the
reins and brought both horses to a halt.

The groom came running up behind, followed by Jack, jogging painfully up
and down on his saddle, while Mollie puffed and panted in the rear.
Their faces were all keen with alarm, but fear changed to amusement at
the sight of Ruth with hat cocked rakishly at one side and a thick coil
of hair hanging snake-like down her back.  She looked piteously for
comfort, and, meeting only smiles, drew herself up with what was
intended to be an air of haughty disdain; but it is difficult to look
haughty when with every moment fresh hairpins are falling to the ground,
and with the descent of fresh coils your hat is continually assuming a
still more impudent angle.

"You _do_ look a sight!" cried Mollie with sisterly candour, and Ruth
beckoned imperiously to the groom to help her to dismount.

"Take me down!  I've had enough of this for one morning.  You must give
me another horse to-morrow, Bates.  I'll never trust myself on this
hateful creature again.  No, thank you, I prefer to walk on my own
feet."  She jumped to the ground and stood twisting up her hair, her
cheeks aflame with mingled fright and annoyance--a sight, indeed, as
Mollie had remarked, though the young men's translation of the term was
not perhaps precisely the same as her own.

"I'll put in a thousand hairpins next time," she said angrily, as she
fastened the coils to the best of her ability, and straightened the
rakish hat.  "You had better see that your hair is safe, Mollie, before
you have your turn.  I am going to sit down on the grass and jeer at you
for a change.  It's so easy to be superior when you are doing nothing
yourself!"

"I shan't hang on to my pommel, anyway, and I won't call, `Help, murder,
thieves!' whatever happens," cried Mollie lightly.  "I am going round
this curve, so you can all watch and see how well I do it!"

She flicked her horse's side as she spoke with quite a professional air
of unconcern, and started off at a brisk canter, holding herself
resolutely erect, despite the ever-increasing pain in the small of her
back.  Echoes of "Bravo! bravo!" followed her down the path and goaded
her to increased exertion.  A second flip on Prince's back sent him
forward at such a surprising increase of speed that, involuntarily, she
gripped the pommel; then, remembering her resolve, let go her hold to
hang on more and more tightly to the reins.

Prince tossed his head and gave an expostulatory amble.  Mollie set her
lips and pulled the stronger.  She was not conscious that the right hand
pulled more strongly than the left, but that it did so was proved by the
fact that the horse gradually abandoned the path and directed its course
across the grass.  The watchers behind gave cries of warning as they saw
what was happening, but in her agitation Mollie mistook their meaning
for more applause and dashed headlong on her way.

She was so much occupied in keeping her seat that she had no eyes to
discover danger ahead, but the groom looked with dismay at the low-
spreading trees on right and left, and raced across the grass to
intercept her progress.  He was too late, however.  Maddened by the
incessant dragging of the reins Prince galloped ahead, skirting so
closely a clump of trees that it was only by crouching low over the
saddle that Mollie escaped accident.  The watchers drew deep breaths of
relief, but renewed their anxiety as once more horse and rider
disappeared from sight behind a giant elm, whose branches hung
threateningly towards the ground.

Ruth gripped her habit in both hands and sped across the grass after the
groom; the two young men galloped ahead; and from one and all came a
second cry of alarm, as a moment later Prince sounded his appearance
careering wildly along riderless and free.

What were they going to see?  A helpless form stretched on the ground; a
white unconscious face; a terrible, tell-tale wound?  A dozen horrible
pictures suggested themselves one after the other in those breathless
seconds; but when the fatal spot was reached there was no figure upon
the ground, senseless or the reverse; no Mollie was seen to right or
left.

It seemed as if the earth had opened and swallowed her up, until a
feeble squeak made the rescuers lift their eyes suddenly to the heart of
the tree, where a black skirt and two small kicking feet were seen
swinging to and fro in the air.  Another step forward showed the whole
picture, gauntleted hands clutching wildly to a bough, and a pink
agonised face turned over one shoulder, while a little pipe of a voice
called out gaspingly--

"Catch me! hold me! take me down! oh, my arms!  I'm falling, falling,
I'm falling! oh, oh, oh--I'm falling down!"  And fall she did, so
suddenly and violently that the groom, although a stoutly built man,
tottered beneath her weight.

The ordinary heroine of fiction is so frail and ethereal in build that
when she faints away, under a stress of emotion, the hero gathers her
lovely form in his arms and carries her for a couple of miles with
delightful ease; but Mollie Farrell was a healthy, well-grown girl; and
for one agonising moment it appeared as if the sequel to the adventure
was to be an ignominious tumble to the ground of rescuer and rescued.

The moment passed, the groom steadied himself with an involuntary
"Whoa!" and Mollie turned to confront her friends, swaying painfully to
and fro, with crossed hands pressing against each shoulder.

"Oh, my arms! my arms!  They are torn out of their sockets!  I know they
are!  The pain is really hideous!"

"What happened?  How did you manage to perform such an acrobatic feat?"
cried Jack, now that anxiety was appeased, unable to resist a smile at
the remembrance of the pretty, comical picture, and the undignified
descent to the ground; but Mollie snapped him up sharply, her sense of
humour absolutely eclipsed by the pain she was suffering.

"It wasn't a feat!  I saw the bough before me and I thought I should be
killed, and I put out my hands to save myself and--I don't know how it
happened; but the next moment that horrid, wicked animal slipped from
under me, and my arms were jerked nearly out of my body, and I was left
dangling in mid-air.  It's perfectly hateful of you all to stand there
and laugh!  I might have been killed outright if it hadn't been for
Bates."

"You were only a yard or so from the ground; you could have dropped down
yourself without making a fuss.  I kept my seat at any rate, and I
didn't howl half so loudly!" said Ruth self-righteously.  "What made you
do anything so mad as to ride in among all those trees?"

"I didn't!  It was the horse; he would go, whatever I did," protested
Mollie feebly: whereupon Bates shook his head with solemn disapproval.

"We've got to be very thankful as matters is no worse," said the alarmed
groom.  "I shall have a fine lecturing from the squire when he hears of
this, but you will bear me witness as it was against my wishes.  If I'd
had my way you would never have ventured off by yourselves, for another
week at least, but there was no gainsaying you.  I'm thinking you'll
have had about enough lesson for to-day, and I must look after those
horses.  To-morrow--"

"To-morrow we'll be good and docile, and do as you tell us.  My nerves
are too shaken to be disobedient; but don't be afraid; you shan't be
scolded for what isn't your fault," said Ruth with her pretty smile.
Bates touched his cap and walked off, mollified, while the girls turned
sadly homeward.  Jack and Victor offered their escort, but, finding it
impossible to disguise all traces of amusement, were promptly snubbed
and bidden to go and be superior by themselves.

"I do hate men! horrid, patronising creatures!" cried Mollie pettishly,
as she limped onwards.  "They think themselves so grand because they are
stronger than we are, and have no tiresome skirts to hamper them.  I
don't like riding half as much as I expected.  I'm so stiff and sore, I
should like to go to bed for a month.  I shall lie down this afternoon.
I'll get a nice book, and pull the sofa up to the window, and have tea
brought up to me; and I just hope it will rain and pour, and they will
have nothing to do and be bored to death, and then they will miss me,
and be sorry that they were so rude.  Laughing, indeed, when I was in
danger of my life, before their very eyes!"

"You were safe enough before they laughed, and you did look funny
hanging in mid-air!  You didn't think it was cruel to laugh at me, and I
was just as much frightened as you were!" retorted Ruth; and thereafter
a frigid silence was maintained until the Court was reached.

At lunch Mr Farrell appeared with a clouded brow, and vouchsafed only
monosyllabic replies when addressed.  It was evident that something had
displeased him, and, though no reference was made to the adventures of
the morning, the young people had discovered by now that he possessed a
mysterious power of knowing all about their actions, in sight or out of
sight, and felt correspondingly ill at ease.  When the meal was over and
the servants had left the room, the storm burst suddenly.  The sunken
eyes gleamed with an angry light, and the tired voice sounded unusually
loud and threatening.

"Has neither of you two young men the sense or the prudence to prevent a
lady from running a foolish risk?  I am informed that Ruth was in danger
of having a serious accident this morning.  I am not personally able to
look after her safety, and she was possibly ignorant of her own folly in
attempting more than she could accomplish; but I had imagined that in my
absence she had two sufficient protectors--one of whom, at least, I
understand to be an accomplished horseman."

Victor flushed deeply, and the lids fell over his tell-tale eyes.

"No one regrets Miss Ruth's fright more than I do, sir.  She had been
such an apt pupil that I did not imagine that there was any danger in
trying a little canter on her own account.  Bates disapproved of it, but
I am afraid I sided against him.  I can only promise to be more careful
in future."

"It was no one's fault but my own, Uncle Bernard," interrupted Ruth
eagerly.  "I was conceited and thought I could do anything I liked, and
I have learnt a lesson--that's all!  I was frightened, but I hung on so
tightly to the pommel that I don't think there was any real danger of
falling.  I really will be careful not to run any more risks."

"I trust you will.  I feel responsible for your safety while you are
under my roof, and it will be a severe strain on my nerves if I cannot
rely on your discretion.  Are you feeling any ill effects from your
fright?  Can Mrs Wolff help you in any way, or perhaps the doctor--"

Ruth gave an involuntary exclamation of surprise and protest, and the
colour rushed into her cheeks.  It was so surprising, so extraordinary
that Uncle Bernard should betray such concern for her safety and
actually suggest sending for a doctor on her behalf.  Her heart beat
high with the conviction that she was, indeed, his favourite, his
Chosen, and that therefore her safety was all-important for the success
of his scheme.

She turned her grey eyes upon him with a liquid glance of gratitude, as
she faltered out words of acknowledgment.

"Oh no, indeed, it is quite unnecessary!  Thank you so much all the
same.  I am vexed with myself for having upset you by being so
headstrong, and didn't hurt myself a bit."

"That is well, then!"  Mr Farrell rose from the table and turned slowly
towards the door.  As he did so he found himself suddenly confronted by
another face--a bright-eyed, mutinous girl's face, so transparently
charged with speech that he stopped short, uttering an involuntary
inquiry--

"Well! what is it?  What have _you_ got to say?"

Mollie's lips parted, her head tilted to the side.

"_I_ was in danger, too! much more than she was.  I _did_ tumble off!  I
hung on to the branch of a tree.  I might have been injured most
dreadfully."

"Ah-ah!" said Mr Farrell slowly.  He turned his head aside, and his
lips twitched uncertainly.  "You!  But you, my dear Mary, can take such
uncommonly good care of yourself!"


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

MOLLIE DEFENDS HER UNCLE.

Mr Farrell walked to the door, and shut it behind him.  Everyone stood
still, staring at Mollie, and Mollie stared ruefully back.

"Oh!" she cried breathlessly, "oh!" and pressed both palms to her now
scorching cheeks.  "I've never been snubbed like that in all my life."
Then suddenly she laughed a bright, sweet-hearted laugh, utterly free
from envy.  "I'm nowhere, Ruth, when you are concerned; but there's one
comfort, I can do as I like, and no one will interfere!  If it is to be
a choice between the two, I prefer freedom to riches."

She left the room to make her way upstairs, and Jack crossed the hall by
her side.  He looked intently at her as he walked, and when their eyes
met he said simply--

"You took that well--very well indeed!  I congratulate you on your self-
control.  I could not have kept my temper as you did."

"Oh, I don't know!" returned Mollie easily.  "I brought it on my own
head.  It was stupid to speak of myself at all; but just for the moment
I couldn't help feeling aggrieved, because, really and truly, I was in
greater danger than she.  Uncle Bernard is old, poor thing, and that
makes him querulous."

"It ought not to.  I call that a very poor excuse.  When a man gets to
his age he ought surely to have learnt to be patient, even if he
imagines himself provoked."

"But he is ill as well.  You say nothing about that.  Should that make
him patient too?"

"Certainly it should.  Suffering has often a most ennobling effect."

Mollie stood on the first step of the staircase, her arm on the
banister, looking with a challenging smile into the proud self-confident
face on a level with her own.

"Have you ever been ill, Mr Melland?"

"I am thankful to say I have not."

"But you have surely had a pain, or an ache, for a few hours at a time?
Ear-ache, when you were a child, or toothache later on?"

"Oh, certainly!  I've had my share of toothache, and the smaller
ailments."

"And when the spasms were on,--were _you_ gentle and patient?  Did you
feel your character being ennobled, or did you rage and champ about like
a mad bull?"

Jack laughed.  It was impossible to resist it, at the sight of the
mischievous face, and the sound of the exaggerated, school-girl simile.

"Well," he conceded magnanimously, "perhaps the champing was the more in
evidence.  I was not citing myself as a model, Miss Mollie.  I know
quite well that--that I might be more patient than I am."

"More patient!  More!  You are not patient at all.  You are the most
impatient person I ever met.  If anyone dares even to have a different
opinion from you, you can hardly contain yourself.  I wish you could see
your face!  You look like this."

Mollie drew herself up, making a valiant attempt to draw her eyebrows
together, send out lightning sparks from her eyes, inflate her nostrils,
and tug the ends of an imaginary moustache at one and the same time; and
succeeded in looking at once so pretty and so comical that, instead of
being convicted, Jack laughed more heartily than before.

"As bad as that?  Really?  I must be ferocious!  It's rather unkind of
you to pitch into me like this, Miss Mollie, when I have just been
paying you compliments.  It's a good thing I am going away so soon, as I
am such a desperate character.  There is no saying to what lengths Mr
Farrell and I might get if we were long together."

"Oh!"  Mollie's face sobered, and a little chill came over her spirits.
"You are still determined, then?  Nothing has happened to make you
change your mind?"

"What should have happened?" replied Jack the ungallant.  "There has
been nothing behind the scenes, Miss Mollie--nothing that you do not
know of.  Only I prefer to go back to my work--that's all.  I consented
to remain for a week to please Mr Farrell, but I don't see that I am
called upon to make any further sacrifice.  I have my life's work before
me, and just now it needs all the attention I can give it.  Besides, Mr
Farrell and I would never get on; I should be a disturbing element which
would not improve matters for any of you.  Between ourselves, I think
there is little doubt who will be the Chosen, as you express it.  Your
sister is evidently first in favour.  Witness your experience a few
minutes ago."

Mollie stared before her, thoughtful and absent-minded.  One word in
Jack's speech had detached itself from the rest and printed itself on
her brain.  Sacrifice!  He had stayed at the Court for a week as a
matter of necessity, and did not feel called upon to sacrifice his
inclinations any further.  Sacrifice, indeed!  The word rankled the more
as she realised how differently she herself had described the past five
days, and how high Jack Melland's presence had ranked among the
pleasures of the new life.  When she projected her thoughts into the
future, and imagined living through the same scenes without his
companionship, it was extraordinary how flat and dull they suddenly
became.  But he called it a "sacrifice" to stay away from a dingy,
dreary office, and preferred the society of his partner to all the
Mollie Farrells in the world!  He liked her, of course--she could not
pretend to doubt that; but just as a grown man might care for an amusing
child who served to while away an idle hour, but who was not worth the
trouble of a serious thought.

"He thinks I am shallow," thought Mollie sorrowfully, and then suddenly
inverted the sentence.  "Am I shallow?" she asked herself, with an
uneasy doubt creeping over her self-complacency.  "I expect I am, for I
am content with the surface of things, and like to laugh better than to
think.  But I'm twenty; I don't want to be treated as a child all my
life.  It's horrid of him to talk of sacrifices!"

Thoughts fly quickly, but, even so, the pause was long enough to be
unusual.  Jack looked inquiringly at the thoughtful face, and said
smilingly--

"Why, Miss Mollie, you look quite sober!  I never saw you so serious
before.  Is that because I said that your sister was preferred before
you?"

That aroused Mollie to a flash of indignation.

"No, indeed; I am not so mean.  I'd almost sooner Ruth had things than
myself, for I'd have all the fun and none of the trouble.  Besides, she
wants it more than I do, and would be a hundred times more disappointed
to do without.  And then you must not blame Uncle Bernard too much.  He
had a good reason for saying what he did.  I deserved it.--You will
never guess what I did."

Jack looked amused and curious.

"Nothing very dreadful, I feel sure.  You are too hard on yourself, Miss
Mollie."

"I asked him for heaps of money to buy heaps of new clothes--"

Jack's whistle of amazement was too involuntary to be controlled.  He
tried his best to retrieve himself by an expression of unconcern, but
the pretence was so apparent that Mollie laughed at the sight, albeit a
trifle ruefully.

"Do you mean to tell me seriously that you asked Mr Farrell for money?"

"Yes, I did.  I asked him on Wednesday.  It seemed the only thing to do,
as he wants us to entertain his friends, and go out whenever we are
asked, and we hadn't enough clothes to go in.  Ruth wouldn't ask, so I
had to do it.  We have no evening-dresses in the world except those
black things that you see every night, and we can't live in them for
three months like a man in his dress suit."

"They are very pretty dresses.  I am sure you always look charming."

"Oh, don't feel bound to be flattering, I hate obvious compliments!"
cried Mollie irritably.  She was surprised to realise how irritable she
felt.  "I only told you because it was mean to let poor Uncle Bernard
get the blame."  She paused, and over her face flashed one of those
sudden radiant changes of expression which were so fascinating to
behold.  Her eyes shone, her lips curled, a dimple dipped in her cheek.
"But he _did_ give it to me--he gave me more than I asked--carte
blanche, to spend as much as I liked!  Next Tuesday morning as ever is,
we are going up to town to shop with Mrs Thornton as assistant.  Think
of it!  Think of it!  Oxford Street, Regent Street, Bond Street--just to
look in at all the windows in turn, and buy what one likes best.
Hats,"--two eager hands went up to her head--"dresses"--they waved
descriptively in the air--"coats; fripperies of all descriptions,
delicious blouses for every occasion, and evening-dresses!--oh, chiffon
and lace and sequins, and everything that is fascinating!  I've never
had anything but the most useful and long-suffering garments, though I
have yearned to be fluffy, and now I shall be as fluffy as I can be
made!  Think of me, all in tulle and silver gauze, with a train yards
long, all lined with frills and _frills_ of chiffon!" cried Mollie
ecstatically, tilting her head over her shoulder, and pushing out her
short skirt with a little slippered foot as if it were already the train
of which she spoke.

"Indeed, I will think of you!  I wish I could do more than think; I
should like to see you into the bargain.  It is hard lines that I have
to leave before the exhibition opens."

"Oh, pray don't pose as an object of pity!  Whose fault is it that you
are leaving at all?" retorted Mollie quickly.  "You have made up your
mind to go, and it's a matter of pride with you that nothing or nobody
shall prevent you.  My poor fineries would be a very weak inducement;
but you will have to reckon with Uncle Bernard before you get away, and
I don't think he will be easy to oppose."

Jack Melland straightened himself, and his nostrils dilated in
characteristic, high-spirited fashion.

"When I make up my mind I never give way," he said slowly.

Mollie tossed her head defiantly.

"So you say; but there is something even stronger than will, Mr
Melland."

"And that is--"

"Fate!" cried Mollie dramatically.

The blue eyes and the brown met in a flashing glance; then the girl
dropped a demure curtsey, and ran lightly upstairs.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

IN THE VILLAGE CHURCH.

The shopping expedition was, by common consent, postponed until the
middle of the following week, when Jack Melland would have taken his
departure.

"Let us make hay while the sun shines.  Three is an abominable number,
especially when you happen to be the third," said Mollie, sighing.  "Mr
Druce admires you very much, Ruth.  I often see him staring at you when
you are not looking; but when I appear upon the scene his eyelids droop,
and he does not deign even to glance in my direction.  He puzzles me a
good deal, as a rule.  I rather fancy myself as a judge of character,
but I can't decide whether he is really a model of virtue, or a villain
in disguise."

Ruth made a movement of impatience.

"How exaggerated you are, Mollie!  Why must you rush off to extremes in
that foolish fashion?  Mr Druce is probably neither one nor the other,
but just an ordinary combination of faults and virtues.  He is kind and
considerate to Uncle Bernard, and very chivalrous to us;--a hundred
times more so than Jack Melland, who certainly does not err on the side
of politeness.  Personally, I don't think any the less highly of people
because they are little reserved and uncommunicative at first.  It will
be time enough to judge Mr Druce's character when we have known him for
weeks, instead of days."

"Humph!  I believe in first impressions," insisted Mollie obstinately;
"and so do you, really, or you would not bristle up when I dare to cast
a doubt on his excellence.  You are going to like him, Ruth, I can see
that quite clearly, and he admires you; so, as I said before, I shall be
the poor little pig who stays at home, while you two wander abroad
together.  It's not exactly the programme which my fancy painted when we
came down; but if I devote myself to Uncle Bernard, and cut you both
out, I shall have the best of it, after all.  Perhaps, too I may make
friends with someone in the neighbourhood,--there is always the chance
of that, and I do love meeting new people.  I suppose callers will begin
to arrive after we have made our first public appearance at church to-
morrow.  I am quite excited at the prospect of seeing all the people--
aren't you?"

"I am not going," said Ruth.

And when Mollie exclaimed and cross-questioned, she flushed
uncomfortably, but did not refuse to answer.

"I have made up my mind to go to early service, but not again at eleven
o'clock.  It's not that I don't want to go; it's because I want to go so
much--for the wrong reasons!  Ever so many times during the last few
days I have caught myself thinking about it, and imagining the scene--
everybody staring at us, while we sit in the squire's pew trying to look
unconscious, but really enjoying it all the time, and building castles
in the air about the future, when we may have a right to be there.  We
should be thinking most of all of ourselves, and that's not a right
spirit in which to go to church; so I'm not going.  I'm disappointed,
but I've made up my mind."

Mollie leant her head on her hand and gazed thoughtfully before her.
The sisters were seated in the great round window of their bedroom, from
which such a glorious view of the surrounding country could be obtained;
and as Mollie's eyes wandered from the blue of the sky to the fresh
green of the trees, and anon to the patches of golden daffodils among
the grass, a wonderful sweetness softened her young face.

"But God understands!" she said gently.  "He made girls, so He must know
how they feel.  This is a great occasion for us, and it is natural that
we should be excited and a little bit self-engrossed.  Mother would
think it natural, and make excuses for us, even if we were carried away
by our new importance; and God is kinder and more forgiving than mother.
Perhaps, when one is quite old and staid, it is easy to sit through a
service and never think of self; but it is difficult when one is young.
I used to be miserable because every time I had a new hat or dress, or
anything that was fresh, I couldn't help remembering it and being
pleased that I looked so nice, and hoping that other people liked it too
but when I thought it over I came to the conclusion that it was only
natural.  Look at that lovely view!"  She waved her hand expressively
from right to left.  "When God made the world so beautiful and so full
of colour, He must mean us to love pretty things without being ashamed
of it; so now I just thank Him for the new things in my prayers, and
remember them as some of the things to be thankful for.  I'm sure it's
the best way.  It's cowardice to stay at home because we are afraid of a
temptation.  Surely it would be far better to go, to thank God for
giving us this good time, and to ask Him to send us nice friends, and,
if it be His will, to let Uncle Bernard leave us the Court, so that we
may help them all at home!"

She broke off, looking round half timidly in Ruth's face, for it was
reversing the usual roles to find herself laying down the law as to
right and wrong to the serious-minded elder sister.  Would Ruth be
annoyed--shocked--disapproving?  It appeared that she was not, for the
troubled lines had gradually smoothed away from her forehead, and she
cried heartily--

"Yes, you are right.  I feel you are!  Thank you for putting it so
plainly, dear.  I _did_ want to go to church, and now my conscience will
be clear, so I can go comfortably, feeling it is the right thing.  But
oh, Mollie, shall we all four be praying, one against the other, each
one wanting to disappoint the others, and keep the Court for himself?"

"Jack Melland won't, for one; and I won't for another.  I'm not sure
that I want it and all the responsibility that goes in its train.  I'd
honestly rather it were yours, dear; then I could come and sponge upon
you as often as I liked."

"Sponge!" echoed Ruth reproachfully.  "As if it would be any pleasure to
me if you were not here!  What would become of poor Berengaria without
her Lucille?  We are so grand in real life now that we forget the dear
old game; but, when we are back in Attica, we shall be able to play it
better than ever, now that we really know what it feels like to be rich
and have everything one wants!"

Mollie did not answer, and both girls sat silently gazing before them,
while their thoughts wandered northwards to a shabby, crowded house, and
to a sloping-roofed attic under the leads, in which so many hours had
been spent.  Mollie smiled, remembering the little make-shifts and
contrivances, seeing the humour of them, and feeling again the glow of
triumph with which each difficulty had been surmounted.

Ruth shuddered with a mingling of fear and repulsion.

Oh, how bare it was--how poor, and small, and unlovely! the few small
rooms, the shabby furniture, the little plot of grass in front of the
door which did duty as a garden.  Could it be possible that in a few
short months she might have to return and take up life once more under
the old conditions?  The thought of Dr Maclure's handsome house had
been a distinct temptation to her when he had asked her to be his wife;
then how much more the beautiful old Court?

"I would do anything to get it!" thought poor Ruth desperately.  "Oh, if
I could only find out what Uncle Bernard wants!  It is terrible to be in
the dark like this!"

The next day was Sunday, and the ordeal of church-going proved to be
much less trying than had been expected, for the congregation was mainly
composed of villagers, who looked too stolid and sleepy to trouble
themselves about the appearance of strangers, even when seated in the
squire's pew.  The pew, moreover, was situated in the front of the
chancel, so that it was all the easier to pay whole-hearted attention to
the service.  Coming out through the churchyard, the girls were
conscious of glances of interest directed towards themselves by various
little parties who plainly composed the gentlefolk of the neighbourhood.

At the gate one or two carriages were waiting in readiness to convey
their owners home, the best appointed of which was presently occupied by
an old lady and gentleman, whom Ruth recognised from Mrs Thornton's
description as being the couple whom the renowned Lady Margot Blount was
about to visit.  She said as much to Mollie, when the carriage had
passed by, and the four young people were strolling together in easy
country fashion along the road.

"Did you notice, Mollie?  Those must be Mr and Mrs Blount, who live at
the Moat.  I should know them anywhere from Mrs Thornton's description.
I wonder whether they will call, and if Lady Margot Blount will come
with them?  She was expected this week, I think."

She was interrupted by a sharp exclamation, and turned with her two
companions to stare in amazement into Victor Druce's transformed face.
For once amazement had broken down the veil which gave a tinge of
mystery to his personality; his sallow cheeks showed a streak of colour,
and his eyes were wide open and eager.

"Lady--Margot--Blount!" he repeated incredulously.  "Here, in this
village!  You say she is expected to meet those people who have just
driven past?  Is it possible?  Who told you about her?"

Ruth stared at him, amazed in her turn by his energy of manner.

"Mrs Thornton told us so, the night she dined at the Court.  We asked
her what girls were in the neighbourhood, and among the number she spoke
of Lady Margot as a constant visitor to her uncle and aunt.  Why are you
so surprised?  Do you know her in town?  Is she a friend of yours?"

Victor hesitated, biting the ends of his moustache.

"I can hardly call her a friend.  We are not in the same set; but I saw
a good deal of her last autumn.  Some people I know were getting up
tableaux for a charity bazaar, and asked us both to take part.  There
were a good many rehearsals, so that we grew for the time pretty
intimate; but she went off to Egypt for the winter, and I have heard
nothing of her since the night of the performance."

"But have thought a good deal all the same!" said Mollie shrewdly to
herself, looking at the dark face, which looked so handsome in its
unaccustomed animation.

If Victor Druce often looked like that, he would be a fascinating
companion.  To have the power so to influence him and excite his
interest would be perilously attractive.  A few hours before, Mollie had
been almost prepared to declare that she distrusted and disliked this
new acquaintance; now she was conscious of a distinct feeling of envy
towards the unknown Margot.

"How interesting that you have met already!  Mrs Thornton was so
enthusiastic in her praise, that she roused our curiosity to fever-
pitch.  Do tell us what she is like!  We are longing to know."

But Victor did not appear inclined to be communicative.  The heavy lids
fell over his eyes, and he murmured a few non-committal sentences.  It
was difficult to describe a girl so as to give any real idea of her
appearance.  He was not skilled at word-painting.  If Lady Margot was so
soon expected, would it not be better to wait and judge for themselves?
Mollie shrugged her shoulders impatiently, and forthwith began her
catechism.

"Tailor short?"

"Er--medium; not small, not too tall."

"The perfect mean?  I understand!  Dark or fair?"

"Dark eyes, chestnut hair."

"Oh, that's not right.  She has no right to monopolise the beauties of
both complexions.  And chestnut hair, too, the prettiest shade of all!
Is she a real, true beauty, or only just pretty, like ordinary folk?"

"That must be a matter of personal opinion, mustn't it, Miss Mollie?
Ideas vary so much on these subjects."

"Checkmate!" sighed Mollie to herself.  "He won't say what he thinks,
and I can't be so rude as to ask directly, though it's just what I'm
dying to know."  Aloud, she said carelessly, "Oh, I've no doubt I shall
think her lovely, and adore her as I do all lovely people; that is, if
she doesn't scare me too much.  Is she formidable and _grande dame_, or
lively and easy-going?"

"That again must surely depend upon circumstances," replied Victor
sententiously, whereat Mollie tossed her head, declaring that he was as
aggravating as Uncle Bernard himself, and almost as enigmatical.

As for Ruth, she walked along with compressed lips and frowning brows.
It was not possible for a girl to find herself thrown into close
companionship with two young men, and not wonder in the recesses of her
heart if perchance friendship might not eventually develop into
something warmer.  Ruth and Mollie had both thought and dreamed, and to
each it had occurred that possibly some such ending of the great problem
might have occurred to Mr Farrell himself.  There was no barrier of
near relationship to prevent two of the young people making a match, if
they were so disposed; and while Uncle Bernard, so far, seemed to favour
his elder niece, he had expressly stated that he would prefer a male
heir.  Ruth's favour was not easily won, but as both young men appeared
agreeable, gentlemanly, and good-looking, it had been a distinctly
pleasant experience to look forward and wonder if he,--if I,--if perhaps
some day, long ahead, when we know each other well...  All girls have
such dreams, and understand how their existence adds savour to a
situation.  It was not a little trying, then, when Jack Melland insisted
on returning to town, and Victor Druce, in his turn, must needs betray
an undoubted interest in another girl.

"Tiresome thing!" murmured Ruth to herself; referring, needless to say,
not to Victor, but to the innocent Margot herself.  "I knew I should
dislike her from the moment when Mrs Thornton mentioned her name.  Why
couldn't she be happy in town, with all her grand friends, instead of
rushing down here to interfere with us the moment we arrive?  She is
sure to hear the reason why we are here--everyone knows it; and if she
is mercenary she will like Victor better now that he has a chance of
inheriting the Court, and, when he knows her connection with the
neighbourhood, she will seem to him more desirable than ever.  Uncle
Bernard would be pleased, and think her a suitable mistress for the
Court, and they will get everything, and we'll get nothing, and go home
as failures...  Mother will be disappointed, and everything will be
duller and pokier than ever..."

So on and so on, conjuring up one gloomy vision after another, as was
her unhappy custom, until at length she saw herself stricken in years,
broken in health, lonely and unloved, with nothing in prospect but a
pauper's grave.  A strange ending, indeed, to that first public
appearance from which so much had been expected!


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

KISMET.

When Sunday evening arrived Jack Melland was surprised to feel a
distinct strain of regret in realising that it was the last evening he
should spend at the Court.  He was still not only determined but eager
to return to his work at the beginning of the week, and had counted the
hours until his release should arrive; but, as the days passed by, he
had become increasingly alive, not only to the beauty of his
surroundings but to the unusual charm of feminine society.  After a
lonely life in London lodgings, it was an agreeable experience to come
downstairs to a perfectly appointed meal, set against a background of
tapestry and oak, to be greeted by bright girlish faces, and kept amused
and interested from morning till night.

Mollie was a fascinating little creature--witty, audacious, and sweet--
hearted, though, as yet, too much of a school-girl to be taken
seriously.  As for Ruth, she was a beauty, and might become dangerous to
a man's peace of mind on a longer acquaintance.  That was an additional
reason why Jack was set on leaving the Court, for, as she was obviously
first favourite, it would be a distinct stroke of diplomacy for a man to
link his chances with hers.  Jack's nostrils inflated in characteristic
manner as he told himself, that this would not be his fashion of going
a-wooing, but he was less scrupulous in prophesying for his neighbour.
"Druce will make love to her! she'll marry Druce!" he told himself
confidently; and his thoughts flew ahead to the time when the young
couple would reign over the Court, and dispense the favours which were
now in Bernard Farrell's hands.

Well, it was a goodly heritage!  Even in seven short days several scenes
had printed themselves upon his memory.  The drive across the park, with
the great north front of the house lying grey and chill in the distance;
the south terrace flooded with sunshine; the gardens sloping to the
level of the lake; and beyond them the open stretch of country.  And in
all probability Druce was to be the master of it all.  He seemed a good
enough fellow, but was he worthy of the position, and of the wife who
would go with it?  Would he make her happy?--the sweet, beautiful thing!
Happiness did not come easily to her as it did to her sister.  If her
husband neglected her, or fell short of her ideal, the wistful
expression, which was one of her charms, would soon develop into a
settled melancholy.  Jack conjured up a vision of Ruth's face--emaciated
and woebegone--and felt a pang of regret, allied with something
curiously like remorse.  It seemed as if by going away he were
deliberately leaving her to Druce's tender mercies, so certain did he
feel as to the result of the three months' companionship.  For the first
time a rankling doubt of the wisdom of his decision disturbed his
complacency.  When he was back in his dingy lodgings would he think
longingly of the Court, and reproach himself for having thrown aside the
chance of a lifetime; and if the business failed, despite all his
efforts, and he found himself thrown adrift on the world, how should he
feel then, remembering what might have been?

These reflections brought a frown to Jack's brow, but he was too proud
to show any sign of wavering to his companions; and in the old man's
presence was careful to make no allusion to the coming departure.  On
Monday morning the subject was to be officially discussed; but, until
the prescribed hour arrived, it would have been a brave man or woman who
dared open it in Mr Farrell's presence.

As for Mr Farrell himself, so far from looking forward to the interview
with foreboding, he seemed in an unusually amiable frame of mind as he
took the head of the table on Sunday evening, actually deigning to
question his guests as to the day's doings, and the impressions which
they had received.  In their replies the young men were, as usual, brief
and practical, Ruth tactfully reserved, and Mollie unflatteringly
honest.  But to-night Mr Farrell seemed determined to take no offence,
and even vouchsafed a grim smile at the sound of the quaintly vigorous
language.

"You will have to curb that rebellious tongue of yours, my dear Mary, if
you are to get through the next few weeks without trouble.  The good
people about here are not accustomed to such picturesque exaggerations,
and will take everything you say as literal fact, so you had better
beware.  You will probably have a number of visitors this week, so it
would be as well to arrange to be at home as much as possible in the
afternoons.  Calling is a more serious business in the country than in
town; and when people have taken the trouble to drive eight or nine
miles, it is a disappointment to find nobody at home."  He turned
towards Jack, and continued: "Of course, this restriction does not apply
to you, or to Druce.  Your presence will not be expected; and if you
agree with me, the further afield you can be, the better you will be
pleased.  There are some charming excursions which you could manage in
an afternoon's ride, and, from what I hear, your horsemanship has
improved so rapidly that you could easily manage them.  Bates will be
happy to give you any directions you may require; or, still better, to
accompany you as guide."

These remarks were so markedly addressed to Jack, that no one but
himself could venture to reply, and his self-will was so much ruffled by
the deliberate ignoring of his expressed determination that he was
instantly aflame with wrath.  His nostrils curved, his brows arched, his
lips opened to pronounce a sharp disclaimer, when suddenly he caught
sight of Mollie's face gazing at him across the table; and if ever a
face cried "Don't!" with all the eloquence of pleading eyes and parted
lips, Mollie's said it at that moment.  The message was so unmistakable
and ardent that it demanded obedience, and to his own surprise Jack
found himself murmuring conventional words of thanks, instead of the
heated disclaimer which he had intended.

Later on in the evening he followed Mollie into a corner of the drawing-
room to demand a reason for her unspoken interference.

"It was not honest to seem to agree when I have no intention of being
here for a single afternoon.  Why wouldn't you let me speak?" he
demanded; whereupon Mollie pursed her lips, and said thoughtfully--

"I hardly know.  You were going to be cross, and it is Sunday--our first
Sunday here.  I didn't want it to be spoilt by angry words.  If you must
disappoint the old man, do it gently.  Don't answer back, even if he is
annoying.  You will be glad afterwards--when he is dead, and you have
nothing to regret."

Jack looked down at her in silence.  Was this the pert school-girl, whom
he had just deemed unworthy of serious consideration?  The face into
which he looked seemed of a sudden that of a woman rather than that of a
child--soft and sweet, grave-eyed, with lovely, serious lips.  The very
voice was altered, and had an added richness of tone.  It was like
catching a glimpse into the future, and beholding the woman that was to
be, when girlhood's bright span was over.  Instinctively Jack's manner
altered to meet the change.  The supercilious curve left his lip, his
keen eyes softened.

"Thank you, Miss Mollie," he said gravely.  "You are quite right.  I'll
remember!"

She thanked him with a luminous glance, and turned away; but he wanted
to see her again, to hear her speak once more in that beautiful new
voice.  Before she had taken three steps he called to her eagerly--

"Miss Mollie!  One moment!  I expect I shall be packed off, bag and
baggage, as soon as I have announced my decision; but Mr Farrell does
not make his appearance until lunch-time, so we have a whole morning
left still.  Will you come for a last ride with me after breakfast?"

"Yes," said Mollie simply.

Her heart beat high with pleasure, because Jack had assented so readily
to her request, because he had wished to spend his last hours in her
society.  For the moment she forgot the blank which would follow his
departure, and was wholly, unreservedly happy.  It was the old,
sparkling, girlish face which was turned upon him--the vision had
disappeared.

The next day neither Ruth nor Victor offered to join the riding-party,
though they had not any settled plans for the forenoon.  Mollie had told
her sister of Jack's invitation of the evening before, and Ruth was too
proud to make a third unless she were specially asked to do so.  She
strolled into the grounds to interview the gardener about sending in an
extra supply of plants and flowers to beautify the house for the
expected callers, while Victor shut himself in the library to write
letters.

Jack looked well on horseback, as tall, upright men always do, and
Mollie glanced at him admiringly, and thought regretfully of her new
habit, which was even now in the tailor's hands.  It did seem hard that
she should have to wear a shabby, ill-fitting coat while he was here,
and that the new one should come home almost as soon as he had departed.
Her sigh of self-commiseration brought his eyes upon her, and he sighed
in echo as he cried--

"Last times are melancholy occasions!  I hate them, even when the
experience has not been altogether pleasant.  There is a sadness about
turning over the leaf and ending another chapter of life.  This chapter
has been a very short one, but uncommonly jolly.  Don't think that I
haven't appreciated it, because I am going away.  I have enjoyed every
hour of this week, and when I am back on the treadmill I shall think
longingly of you all many times over.  I hope we may often meet again."

"It is not very likely, is it?  You will go your way, and we will go
ours.  Ruth and I have never been in London, nor you in Liverpool.  We
may all live until we are old and bald, and never meet again," said
Mollie dismally; whereupon Jack looked at the shining plaits which were
coiled at the back of her head, and laughed reassuringly.

"I can't imagine you bald, nor old either, and I expect to see you many
times over before you have the chance of changing.  The Chosen, whoever
he or she may be, must surely have the good manners to invite the rest
of us to visit a house which might have been our own; and I have a
special claim, for by retiring from the lists I increase your chances.
Personally, I have made up my mind to spend many holidays here--shooting
and riding, and enjoying myself generally.  I hope you won't object, if
you happen to be the chatelaine?"

"Ah, but I shan't!  I have no chance against the other two; but I also
intend to spend my holidays here, and I tell Ruth she must send home
hampers every week.  It has always been my ambition to get hampers, and
she could send such splendid ones from the Court--game and poultry and
eggs, and nice out-of-season fruits and vegetables, which would be such
a help in the housekeeping!  I am afraid sometimes that we count too
much on Uncle Bernard's fancy for Ruth's eyebrows, for if he changed his
mind and left everything to Mr Druce, it would be a terrible
disappointment.  And there are three months before us still.  He may
change a dozen times yet."

"I think most probably he will.  Better stick to your resolution, to
have a good time, and not bother your head about the future.  I shall be
most anxious to know how things go.  Druce has promised to send me a
line now and then.  Will you jog his memory in case he forgets?"

Mollie promised, all the more readily that Victor's letter would
naturally bring a return, which would serve to bridge over the
separation.  It seems curious to remember that little over a week ago
she had not known of Jack Melland's existence.  He had made but a brief
appearance upon the scene, but it would not be easy to forget him, or to
fill the vacant place.

Both riders relapsed into silence as they neared home; but, as they
clattered into the stable-yard, Jack turned towards Mollie with rather a
forced air of triumph, and cried--

"Do you remember your warning, Miss Mollie, that Fate was stronger than
will?  Ever since we set out this morning the words have been ringing in
my ears, and I have been expecting some accident to happen which would
keep me here in spite of myself.  I have looked for it at every turn of
the road as if it were bound to come."

Mollie shivered nervously.

"Oh, how horrid!  I am glad you did not tell me.  I should have been
nervous, too, for I am superstitious about presentiments.  They so often
come true."

"Well, this one at least has not.  Here we are safe and sound, and all
risk is over!" cried Jack, dropping his reins, and jumping lightly from
the saddle without waiting for the groom to come to the horse's head.

He was anxious to assist Mollie to dismount before Bates came up; but
even as his feet touched the ground he slipped, staggered uncertainly
for a moment, and sank to the ground with a groan of pain.  The groom
rushed forward; Mollie leapt inelegantly but safely to the ground, and
bent over him with anxious questioning.  His face was drawn with pain,
and he bent forward to grip his foot with both hands.

"My--ankle!  I slipped on something, or came down on the side of my
foot.  I don't know how it was done; but I've given it a bad wrench, if
nothing worse.  You'll have to cart me up to the house, Bates.  I'm
afraid it's hopeless to try to walk."

"No, indeed, sir!  Don't you trouble.  I've got an old bath-chair stored
away in the stables.  We'll lift you into that in no time, and take you
up as easy as possible."

He turned off as he spoke, and Jack and Mollie were left alone.  For a
moment she stood silently by his side; then their eyes met, and he said
wearily--

"Kismet!  Fate is too much for me.  For better or worse, Miss Mollie, it
is evidently ordained that I must stay on at the Court!"


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

NEW EXPERIENCES.

The village doctor came to doctor Jack Melland's damaged ankle, and the
patient fumed and fretted beneath his old-fashioned treatment.

"Bandaging me and laying me up by the heels for weeks at a time; it's
folly!" he declared angrily.  "The man is twenty years behind the times.
If I were in town I should have had one of those Swedish fellows to
massage it, and be about in half the time.  Just my luck to go in for an
accident in a place where one can't get proper attention!"

"But you groan if anyone comes near your foot; wouldn't it hurt
dreadfully much to have it massaged?"  Mollie asked.

Whereupon the invalid growled impatiently--

"Hurt?  Of course it would hurt!  What has that to do with it, pray?"

"Lots," returned Mollie, unabashed.  "I should think so, at least, if it
were my ankle.  I can't endure pain."

"I'm not a girl," growled Jack the ungracious, between his teeth.

There was no denying the fact that he did not make an agreeable invalid.
In the first realisation of his accident he had meekly bowed his head
to Fate; but ever since he had, figuratively speaking, kicked against
the pricks, and repaid the kindness of his companions by incessant
grumblings and complaints.  He hated having to give up his own way; he
hated being tied to a sofa and a bath-chair; he resented offers of help
as if they had been actual insults, and hindered his recovery by
foolhardy attempts at independence.

"How would you like to be an invalid for life?"  Mollie asked him
severely after one of these outbursts.  "There was a young man in
mother's district, every bit as strong and big as you, and a sack of
something fell on his back while they were trying to haul it up into a
warehouse.  He was taken to the hospital, and they told him that he
would never walk again, never even sit up again.  As long as he lived he
would be a helpless cripple.  And he was just going to be married, too!"

"Well, I'm not, thank goodness!" cried Jack bluntly.  "Why do you tell
me such gruesome stories?  My own troubles are quite enough just now.  I
don't want to hear any more horrors."

"It was just to distract your mind from yourself that I did tell you.
Once upon a time I met a man who read me a beautiful lecture upon the
dangers of being selfish and self-engrossed.  I'll tell you his very
words, if you like.  They made a deep impression upon me at the time,"
said Mollie naughtily.  But instead of being amused, Jack was only
irritated afresh.

In these first days of invalidism Mollie's influence was the reverse of
soothing, for Jack was not in the mood to be teased, and if his inner
determination could have been put into words it would have been that he
objected to be cheered up, refused to be cheered up, and insisted upon
posing as a martyr; therefore, it followed that Ruth's gentle
ministrations were more acceptable than her sister's vigorous sallies.
If he could have seen again the Mollie of whom he had caught a glimpse
on Sunday evening, Jack would have chosen her before any other
companion; but, as she had made place for a mischievous tease, he
preferred to look into Ruth's lovely anxious eyes, and to dilate at
length upon his symptoms to her sympathetic ear.

Mr Farrell's behaviour at this critical juncture did not throw oil upon
the troubled waters.  He took care that Jack should have every
attention, and inquired as to his progress with punctilious regularity;
but he plainly considered a sprained ankle a very trivial affair, which,
needless to say, did not coincide with the invalid's views of the case;
moreover, he absolutely refused to believe that the accident was
responsible for keeping Jack at the Court.

"It is only right to tell you, sir, that I had finally made up my mind
that I must return home to-day, as I could not agree with your
conditions," Jack informed him on their first interview after the doctor
had paid his visit; whereupon the old man elevated his eyebrows with
that air of ineffable superiority which was so exasperating, and said--

"And I, on the contrary, had made up my mind that you should stay.  It
is satisfactory to me that the question is decided in my favour."

"By an accident, sir.  By an accident only.  If I'd been able to move--"

Mr Farrell held up his hand with a deprecatory gesture.

"In that case I should have called your attention to certain arguments
which would have brought about the same result.  Believe me, my dear
Jack, it would have made no difference."

Jack's face flushed angrily.  He forgot Mollie's entreaty, forgot his
own promise, and answered hotly--

"I cannot imagine any arguments that could keep me here against my will.
As soon as I can get about again I must return to my work.  This
accident is only delaying my departure for a few weeks longer."

"So!"  Could anything be more aggravating than that little bow and smile
which accompanied the word.  "In a few weeks, my dear Jack, many things
may happen; therefore, it is superfluous to discuss the subject at
present.  When the time arrives I shall be ready to meet it."

He turned and left the room, while Jack raged in helpless fury upon the
sofa.  It was insufferable to be treated as if he were a boy who could
be ordered about against his will.  When John Allen Ferguson Melland
said a thing, he _meant_ it, and not all the old men in the world should
move him from it, as Bernard Farrell would find out to his cost before
many weeks were past.

For three whole days Jack's ill-temper continued, and, like most angry
people, he punished himself even more than his companions, refusing to
sit in the drawing-room to see callers, and insisting on remaining all
day long in a dull little room at the back of the house.  He grew tired
of reading.  His head ached with the unusual confinement; just because
he was unable to move he felt an overpowering desire for half a dozen
things just out of reach, and the day stretched to an interminable
length.  On the fourth morning depression had taken the place of ill-
temper, and he was prepared to allow himself to be petted and waited
upon, when, to his dismay, Victor came to his bedroom with the news that
the girls had gone up to town, accompanied by Mrs Thornton.

"They said, as you preferred to be alone it would be best to keep to
their plans," said Victor cruelly.  "I am off for a ride, and shall
probably make a day of it, and lunch _en route_.  I was thinking of
going to Barnsley.  It is quite a decent-sized place.  Would you like me
to try if I could find a masseuse for your foot?"

Jack looked up sharply; but Victor looked as he usually did.  His face
was set and expressionless, as it always was when his eyes were hidden.
It was natural enough that he should make such a suggestion, seeing that
he had heard many lamentations on the subject, natural and kindly into
the bargain, yet Jack felt an instinctive unwillingness to accept the
offer.

"He wants me out of the way," came the leaping thought, while he bit his
lip, and appeared to ponder the question.

A few days before he himself had heartily echoed the sentiment; but now
that Fate--or was it something else?--had interfered to keep him at the
Court, Jack's views had slowly altered.  It might be that there was a
duty waiting for him here, some duty which was even more important than
his work in town; and, if he shirked it, the consequences might fall
upon others besides himself.  The two girls' faces rose before him,--
Ruth's shy and anxious, Mollie audaciously reckless,--children both of
them in the ways of the world, though innocently confident of their own
wisdom.  If by staying on at the Court he could safeguard their
interests, it would be well-spent time which he should never regret.

To Victor's astonishment his offer was quietly but firmly refused, and
he set out on his ride marvelling what had happened to bring about such
a sudden change of front.

Meantime, Ruth and Mollie were enjoying their first experience of that
most delightful feminine amusement--shopping in London.  They drove to
the doors of world-famed establishments, entered with smiling self-
confidence, and gave their orders, unperturbed even by the immaculate
visions in black satin who hastened forward to receive them; so
marvellous and inspiring are the effects of a purse and a cheque-book
behind it!

Mrs Thornton was purse-bearer, and, to do her justice, enjoyed the
occasion as much as the girls themselves.  She had been personally
interviewed by Mr Farrell and coached for her part, which was to
chaperon the girls, take them to the best places in which to procure
their various requirements, but on no account whatever to direct the
purchases, or limit their extent.

"It is a good test; I wish to study it," said the old man, which speech
being repeated, Ruth looked grave, and Mollie laughed, and cried--

