She must see him--must know what it meant that he should talk like that.
With a strong physical effort, she opened her eyes and tried to speak
his name.

She couldn't; but some one must have been watching and seen, because a
woman's voice said quickly and quietly, "Mr. Aldrich."

And the next moment, vast and towering, and very blurred in outline,
but, like his voice, unmistakable, was Rodney--her own big strong
Rodney. She tried to hold her arms up to him, but of course she
couldn't.

And then he shortened suddenly. He had knelt down beside her bed, that
was it. And she felt upon her palm, the pressure of his lips, and his
unshaven cheek, and on her wrist, a warm wetness that must be--tears.

Why was he crying? What had happened? She must try to think.

It was very hard. She didn't want to think, but she must. She must begin
with something she knew. She knew who she was. She was Rose--Rodney's
Rose. Here was his mouth down close to the pillow saying her name over
and over and over again. And she was in her own bed. But what had
happened? She must try to remember. She remembered something she had
said--said to herself over and over again an illimitable while ago.
"It's coming. The miracle's beginning." What had she meant by that?

And then she knew. The urgency of a sudden terror gave her her voice.

"Roddy," she said. "There was going to be a--baby. Isn't there?"

Something queerly like a laugh broke his voice when he answered. "Oh,
you darling! Yes. It's all right. That isn't why I'm crying. It's just
because I'm so happy."

"But the baby!" she persisted. "Why isn't it here?"

Rodney turned and spoke to some one else. "She wants to see," he said.
"May she?"

And then a woman's voice (why, it was the nurse, of course! Miss Harris,
who had come last night) said in an indulgent soothing tone, "Why,
surely she may. Wait just a minute."

But the wait seemed hours. Why didn't they bring the baby--her baby?
There! Miss Harris was coming at last, with a queerly bulky, shapeless
bundle. Rodney stepped in between and cut off the view, but only to
slide an arm under mattress and pillow and raise her a little so that
she could see. And then, under her eyes, dark red and hairy against the
whiteness of the pillow, were two small heads--two small shapeless
masses leading away from them, twitching, squirming. She stared,
bewildered.

"There were twins, Rose," she heard Rodney explaining triumphantly, but
still with something that wasn't quite a laugh, "a boy and a girl.
They're perfectly splendid. One weighs seven pounds and the other six."

Her eyes widened and she looked up into his face so that the pitiful
bewilderment in hers was revealed to him.

"But the _baby!_" she said. Her wide eyes filled with tears and her
voice broke weakly. "I wanted a baby."

"You've got a baby," he insisted, and now laughed outright. "There are
two of them. Don't you understand, dear?"

Her eyes drooped shut, but the tears came welling out along her lashes.
"Please take them away," she begged. And then, with a little sob she
whispered, "I wanted a baby, not those."

Rodney started to speak, but some sort of admonitory signal from the
nurse silenced him.

The nurse went away with her bundle, and Rodney stayed stroking her limp
hand.

In the dark, ever so much later, she awoke, stirred a little restlessly,
and the nurse, from her cot, came quickly and stood beside her bed. She
had something in her hands for Rose to drink, and Rose drank it
dutifully.

"Is there anything else?" the nurse asked.

"I just want to know," Rose said; "have I been dreaming, or is it true?
Is there a baby, or are there twins?"

"Twins, to be sure," said the nurse cheerfully. "The loveliest,
liveliest little pair you ever saw."

"Thank you," said Rose. "I just wanted to know."

She shut her eyes and pretended to go to sleep. But she didn't. It was
true then. Her miracle, it seemed somehow, had gone ludicrously awry.


CHAPTER XIV

THE DAM GIVES WAY


She began getting her strength back very fast after the next two or
three days, but this queer kink in her emotions didn't straighten out.
She came to see that it was absurd--monstrous almost, but that didn't
help. Instead of a baby, she had given birth to two. They were hers of
course, as much as one would have been. Only, her soul, which had been
waiting so ecstatically for its miracle--for the child which, by making
her a mother, should supply what her life needed--her soul
wouldn't--couldn't accept the substitution. Those two droll, thin
voiced, squirming little mites that were exhibited to her every morning,
were as foreign to her, as detached from her, as if they had been
brought into the house in a basket.

There was a certain basis of reason back of this. At some time, during
those early hours of misty half-consciousness, it had been decided that
two children would be too much for her to attempt to nurse.

She had a notion that this idea hadn't originated with the doctor,
though it was he who had stated it to her with the most plausible
firmness. Rodney had backed the doctor up, firmly, too. Rose was only a
girl in years--why, just a child herself; hadn't had her twenty-second
birthday yet; the labor had been long, she was very weak, the children
were big and vigorous, and she couldn't hope to supply them both for
more than a very few weeks, anyway. And, at this time of year, as the
doctor said, there was no difficulty to be apprehended from bottle
feeding. It would be better on all accounts.

Still, it didn't sound exactly like Roddy's idea either.

When Harriet came in for the first time to see her, Rose knew. Harriet
was living here now, running the house for Rodney, while Rose was laid
up. Doing it beautifully well, too, through all the confusion of nurses
and all. Not the slightest jar or creak of their complex domestic
machinery ever reached Rose in the big chamber where she lay. Harriet
said:

"I think you're in great luck to have had two at once; get your duty to
posterity done that much sooner. And, of course, you couldn't possibly
be expected to nurse two great creatures like that."

Rose acquiesced. What was the use of struggling against so formidable a
unanimity? She would have struggled though, she knew, but for that queer
trick Fate had played her. Her heart ached, as did her breasts. But that
was for the lips of the baby--the baby she hadn't had!

When she found that struggling with herself, denouncing herself for a
brute, didn't serve to bring up the feelings toward the twins that she
knew any proper mother ought to have, she buried the dark fact as deep
as she could, and pretended. It was only before Rodney that the pretense
was necessary. And with him, really, it was hardly a pretense at all. He
was such a child himself, in his gleeful delight over the possession of
a son and a daughter, that she felt for him, tenderly, mistily,
luminously, the very emotion she was trying to capture for them--felt
like cradling his head in her weak arms, kissing him, crying over him a
little.

She wouldn't have been allowed to do that to the babies anyway. They
were going to be terribly well brought up, those twins; that was
apparent from the beginning. They had two nurses all to themselves,
quite apart from Miss Harris, who looked after Rose: one uncannily
infallible person, omniscient in baby lore--thoroughgoing, logical,
efficient, remorseless as a German staff officer; and a bright-eyed,
snub-nosed, smart little maid, for an assistant, who boiled bottles,
washed clothes, and, at certain stated hours, over a previously
determined route, at a given number of miles per hour, wheeled the twins
out, in a duplex perambulator, which Harriet had acquired as soon as the
need for it had become evident.

Miss Harris was to go away to another case at the end of the month. But
Mrs. Ruston (she was the staff officer) and Doris, the maid, were
destined, it appeared, to be as permanent as the babies. But Rose had
the germ of an idea of her own about that.

They got them named with very little difficulty. The boy was Rodney, of
course, after his father and grandfather before him. Rose was a little
afraid Rodney would want the girl named after her, and was relieved to
find he didn't. There'd never in the world be but one Rose for him, he
said. So Rose named the girl Portia.

They kept Rose in bed for three weeks; flat on her back as much as
possible, which was terribly irksome to her, since her strength and
vitality were coming back so fast. The irksomeness was added to by a
horrible harness largely of whalebone. Rose got the notion, too, that
the purpose of all this was not quite wholly hygienic. Harriet had said
once: "You know the most distinguished thing about you, Rose,
dear--about your looks, I mean--is that lovely boyish line of yours. It
will be a perfect crime if you let yourself spread out."

This wasn't the sort of consideration to make the inactivity any easier
to endure. She might have rebelled, had it not been for that germinant
idea of hers. It wouldn't do, she saw, in the light of that, to give
them any excuse for calling her unreasonable.

At the end of this purgatorial three weeks, she was carried to a chair
and allowed to sit up a little, and by the end of another, to walk
about--just a few steps at a time of course. One Sunday morning, Rodney
carried her up-stairs to the nursery to see her babies bathed. This was
a big room at the top of the house which Florence McCrea had always
vaguely intended to make into a studio. But, in a paralysis of
indecision as to what sort of studio to make it (book-binding, pottery
and art weaving called her about equally) she had left the thing bare.

Rodney had given Harriet _carte blanche_ to go ahead and fit it up
before he and Rose came back from the seashore, and the layette was a
monument to Harriet's thoroughgoing practicality. There had been a wild
day of supplementing of course, when it was discovered that there were
two babies instead of one.

The room, when they escorted Rose into it, was a terribly impressive
place. The spirit of a barren sterile efficiency brooded everywhere. And
this appearance of barrenness obtained despite the presence of an
enormous number of articles; a pair of scales, a perfect battery of
electric heaters of various sorts; rows of vacuum jars for keeping
things cold or hot; a small sterilizing oven; instruments and appliances
that Rose couldn't guess the uses or the names of. Mrs. Ruston, of
course, was master of them all, and Doris flew about to do her bidding,
under a watchful and slightly suspicious eye. (Doris was the sort of
looking girl who might be suspected of kissing a tiny pink hand when no
one was looking.)

Rose surveyed this scene, just as she would have surveyed a laboratory,
or a factory where they make something complicated, like watches. That's
what it was, really. Those two pink little objects, in their two
severely sanitary baskets, were factory products. At precise and
unalterable intervals, a highly scientific compound of fats and proteids
was put into them. They were inspected, weighed, submitted to a routine
of other processes. And in all the routine, there was nothing that their
mother, now they were fairly born, was wanted for. Indispensable to a
certain point, no doubt. But after that rather the other way about--an
obstacle to the routine instead of a part of it.

Rose kept these ideas to herself and kept her eye on young Doris;
listened to the orders she got; and studied alertly what she did in the
execution of them.

Rodney had a lovely time watching the twins bathed. He stood about in
everybody's way, made what he conceived to be alluring noises, in the
perfectly unsuccessful attempt to attract the infants' attention, and
finally, when the various processes were complete, on schedule, like a
limited train, and the thermometrically correct bottles of food were
ready, one for each baby, he turned suddenly to his wife and said:
"Don't you want to--hold them, Rose?" She'd have held a couple of
glowing brands in her arms for him, the way he had looked and the way
he had said it.

A stab of pain went through her and tears came up into her eyes. "Yes,
give them to me," she started to say.

But Mrs. Ruston spoke before she could frame the words. It was their
feeding hour, she pointed out; a bad time for them to be excited, and
the bottles were heated exactly right.

By that time Rose's idea had flowered into resolution. She knew exactly
what she was going to do. But she mustn't jeopardize the success of her
plan by trying to put it into effect too soon.

She waited patiently, reasonably, for another fortnight. Harriet by that
time had gone off to Washington on a visit, taking Rodney's heartfelt
thanks with her. Rose expressed hers just as warmly, and felt ashamed
that they were so unreal. She simply mustn't let herself get to
resenting Harriet! At the end of the fortnight, the doctor made his
final visit. Rose had especially asked Rodney to be on hand to hear his
report when the examination was over. Rose and the doctor found him
waiting in the library.

"He says," Rose told her husband, "that I'm perfectly well." She turned
to the doctor for confirmation, "Don't you?"

The doctor smiled. "As far as my diagnostic resources go, Mrs. Aldrich,
you are perfectly well."

Rodney was pleased of course, and expressed this feeling fervently. But
he looked across at his glowing radiant wife, with a touch of misgiving.

"What are you trying to put over on me?" he asked.

"Not a thing," said Rose demurely. "I thought you'd be glad to know that
I needn't be kept in cotton-wool any more, and that you'd feel surer of
it if he told you."

"I feel surer that you've got something up your sleeve," he said. And,
to the doctor: "I don't imagine that in saying my wife is perfectly
well, you mean to suggest an absence of all reasonable caution."

The doctor took the hint, expatiated largely; it was always well to be
careful--one couldn't, in fact, be too careful. The human body at best,
more especially the--ah--feminine human body, was a delicate machine,
not to be abused without inviting serious consequences. He was even a
little reproachful about it.

"But there's no more reason, is there," Rose persisted, "why I should be
careful than why any other woman should--my nurse-maid for example? Is
she any healthier than I am?"

It was indiscreet of the doctor to look at her before he answered. Her
eyes were sparkling, the color bright in her cheeks; unconsciously, she
had flattened her shoulders back and drawn a good deep breath down into
her lungs. The doctor smiled a smile of surrender and turned back to
Rodney. "I'll confess," he said, "that in my experience, Mrs. Aldrich is
almost a _lusus naturae_--a perfectly sound, healthy woman."

Rose smiled widely and contentedly on the pair of them. "That's more
like it," she said to the doctor. "Thanks very much."

But after he had gone, she did not spring anything on Rodney, as he
fully expected she would. She took him out for a tramp through the park
in the dusk of a perfect autumn afternoon, and went to a musical show
with him in the evening. She might have been, as far as he could see,
the Rose of a year ago. She had the same lithe boyish swing. She even
wore, though he didn't know it, the same skirt for their walk in the
park that she had worn on some of their tramps before they were married.
And when they had had their evening at the theater, and a bite of supper
somewhere, and come home, she let him drop off to sleep without a word
that would explain her insistence on getting a clean bill of health from
the doctor.

But the next morning, while Doris was busy in the laundry, she found
Mrs. Ruston in the nursery and had a talk with that lady, which was
destined to produce seismic upheavals.

"I've decided to make a little change in our arrangements, Mrs. Ruston,"
she said. "But I don't think it's one that will disturb you very much.
I'm going to let Doris go--I'll get her another place, of course--and do
her work myself."

Mrs. Ruston compressed her lips, and went on for a minute with what she
was doing to one of the twins, as if she hadn't heard.

"Doris is quite satisfactory, madam," she said at last. "I'd not advise
making a change. She's a dependable young woman, as such go. Of course I
watch her very close."

"I think I can promise to be dependable," Rose said. "I don't know much
about babies, of course, but I think I can learn as well as Doris.
Anyhow, I can wheel them about and wash their clothes and boil bottles
and things as well as she does. For the rest, you can tell me what to do
just as you tell her."

Mrs. Ruston took a considerably longer interval to digest this reply.
"Then you're meaning to give the girl her notice at once, madam?" she
asked.

"I'm not going to give her notice at all," said Rose. "I'm going to find
her another place. I shan't have any trouble about it though. As you
say, she's a very good nurse-maid, and she's a pleasant sort of a human
being besides. But as soon as I can find her another place, I'm going to
take over her work."

To this last observation it became evident that Mrs. Ruston meant to
make no reply at all. She gave Rose some statistical information about
the twins instead, in which Rose showed herself politely interested and
presently withdrew.

It soon appeared, however, that though Mrs. Ruston might be slow and
sparing of speech, she was capable of acting with a positively
Napoleonic dash. Rodney wore a queer expression all through dinner, and
when he got Rose alone in the library afterward, he explained it. Mrs.
Ruston had made her two-hour constitutional that afternoon into an
opportunity for calling on him at his office. She had given him notice,
contingently. She made it an inviolable rule of conduct, it appeared,
never to undertake the care of two infants without the assistance of a
nurse-maid. She was a conscientious person and she felt she couldn't do
justice to her work on any other basis. Rose had informed her of her
intention to dispense with the services of the nurse-maid, without
engaging any one else to take her place. If Rose adhered to this
intention, Mrs. Ruston must leave.

It was some sort of absurd misunderstanding, of course, Rodney concluded
and wanted to know what it was all about.

"I did say I meant to let Doris go," Rose explained, "but I told her I
meant to take Doris' job myself. I said I thought I could be just as
good a nurse-maid as she was. I said I'd boil bottles and wash clothes
and take Mrs. Ruston's orders exactly as if I were being paid six
dollars a week and board for doing it. And I meant it just as literally
as I said it."

He was prowling about the room in a worried sort of way, before she got
as far as that.

"I don't see, child," he exclaimed, "why you couldn't leave well enough
alone! If it's that old economy bug of yours again, it's nonsense. You'd
save, including board, about ten dollars a week. And it would work out
one of two ways: If you didn't do all the maid's work. Mrs. Ruston would
have a real grievance. She's right about needing all the help she gets.
If you did do it, it would mean that you'd work yourself sick.--Oh, I
know what the doctor said, but that's all rot, and he knew it. You had
him hypnotized. You'd have to give up everything for it--all your social
duties, all our larks together. Oh, it's absurd! You, to spend all your
time doing menial work--scrubbing and washing bottles, to save me ten
dollars a week!"

"It isn't menial work," Rose insisted. "It's--apprentice work. After
I've been at it six months, learning as fast as I can, I'll be able to
let Mrs. Ruston go and take _her_ job. I'll be really competent to take
care of my own children. I don't pretend I am now."

"I don't see why you can't do that as things are now. She'll let you
practise bathing them and things like that, and certainly no one would
object to your wheeling them out in the pram. But the nurse-maid would
be on hand in case ..."

"I'm to take it on then," said Rose, and her voice had a new ring in
it--the ring of scornful anger--"I'm to take it on as a sort of polite
sentimental amusement. I'm not to do any real work for them that depends
on me to get done. I'm not to be able to feel that, even in a
bottle-washing sort of way, I'm doing an indispensable service for them.
They're not to need me for anything, the poor little mites! They're to
be something for me to have a sort of emotional splurge with, just
as"--she laughed raggedly--"just as some of the wives you're so fond of
talking about, are to their husbands."

He stared at her in perfectly honest bewilderment. He'd never seen her
like this before.

"You're talking rather wild I think, Rose," he said very quietly.

"I'm talking what I've learned from you," she said, but she did get her
voice in control again. "You've taught me the difference between real
work, and the painless imitation of it that a lot of us women spend our
lives on--between doing something because it's got to be done and is up
to you, and--finding something to do to spend the time.

"Oh, Rodney, _please_ try to forget that I'm your wife and that you're
in love with me. Can't you just say: `Here's A, or B, or X, a perfectly
healthy woman, twenty-two years old, and a little real work would be
good for her'?"

She won, with much pleading, a sort of troubled half-assent from him.
The matter might be borne in mind. It could be taken up again with Mrs.
Ruston.

But Mrs. Ruston was adamant. Under no conceivable circumstances could
she consent to regard her employer's wife as a substitute for her own
hired assistant. There were other nurses though, to be got. Somewhere
one could be found, no doubt, who'd take a broader view.

Given a fair field, Rose might have won a victory here. But, as Portia
had said once, the pattern was cut differently. There was a sudden alarm
one night, when her little namesake was found strangling with the croup.
There were seven terrifying hours--almost unendurable hours, while the
young life swung and balanced over the ultimate abyss. The heroine of
those hours was Mrs. Ruston. It was her watchfulness that had been
accessible to the first alarm--her instant doing of the one right thing
that stemmed the first onrush. That the child lived was clearly
creditable to her.

Rose made another effort even after that, though she knew she was beaten
in advance. She waited until the storm had subsided, until the old calm
routine was reestablished. Then, once more, she asked for her chance.

But Rodney exploded before she got the words fairly out of her mouth.

"No," he shouted, "I won't consider it! She's saved that baby's life.
Another woman might have, but it's more likely not. You'll have to find
some way of satisfying your whims that won't jeopardize those babies'
lives. After that night--good God, Rose, have you forgotten that
night?--I'm going to play it safe."

Rose paled a little and sat ivory still in her chair. There were no
miracles any more. The great dam was swept away.


CHAPTER XV

THE ONLY REMEDY


The sudden flaw of passion that had troubled the waters of Rodney's
soul, subsided, spent itself in mutterings, explanations, tending to
become at last rather apologetic. He said he didn't know why her request
had got him like that. It had seemed to him for a moment as if she
didn't realize what the children's lives meant to them--almost as if she
didn't love them. He knew that was absurd, of course.

Her own rather monstrous comments on these observations had luckily
remained unspoken. What if she did lose a child as a result of her
effort to care for it herself? She could bear more children. And what
chance had she to love them? Where was the soil for love to take root
in, unless she took care of them herself? These weren't really thoughts
of hers--just a sort of crooked reflection of what he was saying off the
surface of a mind terribly preoccupied with something else.

She was in the grip of an appalling realization. This moment--this
actually present moment that was going to last only until she should
speak for the next time, or move her eyes around to his face--was the
critical moment of her life. She had, for just this moment, a choice of
two things to say when next she should speak--a choice of two ways of
looking into his face. A mountaineer, standing on the edge of a
crevasse, deciding whether to try to leap across and win a precarious
way to the summit, or to turn back and confess the climb has been in
vain, is confronted by a choice like that. If ever the leap was to be
made, it must be made now. The rainbow bridge across the crevasse, the
miracle of motherhood, had faded like the mist it was composed of.

She was a mother now. Yet her relation to her husband's life was the
same as that of the girl who had gone to his office the night of the
Randolphs' dinner. And no external event--nothing that could _happen_ to
her (remember that even motherhood had "happened" in her case) could
ever transmute that relation into the thing she wanted. If the alchemy
were to be wrought at all, it would be by the act of her own will--at
the cost of a deliberately assumed struggle. There was nothing, any
more, to hope from waiting. The thing that whispered, "Wait!
To-morrow--some to-morrow or other, it may be easier! Wait until, for
yourself, you've thought out the consequences,"--that was the voice of
cowardice. If she turned back, down the easier path, to-night, it must
be under no delusion that she'd ever try to climb again, or find a pair
of magic wings that would carry her, effortless, to what she wanted.

Well, then, she had her choice. One of two things she might do now. It
was in her power to look up at him and smile, and say: "All right,
Roddy, old man, I'll stop being disagreeable. I won't have any more
whims." And she could go to him and clasp her hands behind his head and
feel the rough pressure of his cheeks against the velvety surfaces of
her forearms, and kiss his eyes and mouth; surrender to the embrace she
knew so well would follow.

She could make, after a fashion, a life of that. She had no fear but it
would last. Barring incalculable misfortunes, she ought to be able to
keep her looks and her charm for him, unimpaired, or but little
impaired, for twenty years--twenty-five, with care. For the rich, the
resources of modern civilization would almost guarantee that. Well,
twenty-five years would see Rodney through his fifties. She needn't,
barring accident, have any more children. He'd probably be content with
two; especially as they were boy and girl.

The other man in him--the man who wasn't her lover--would struggle of
course. Except when she was by, the lover would probably have a bad time
of it. She'd have to find some amusing sort of occupation to enable her
to forget that. But when she was there, it would be strange if she and
her lover together couldn't, most of the time, keep the other man locked
up where he wouldn't disturb them much.

Lived without remorse or misgivings, played magnificently for all it
was worth, as she could play it--she knew that now--it would be a rather
wonderful life. They must be decidedly an exceptional pair of lovers,
she thought. Certainly Madame Gréville's generalization about Americans
did not apply to them, and she was coming to suspect it did apply to the
majority of her friends. She could have that life--safely, surely, as
far as our poor mortality can be sure of anything. She had only to reach
out her hands.

But if, instead, she took the leap ...!

"Roddy ..." she said.

He was slumped down in a big easy chair at the other side of the table,
swinging a restless foot; drumming now and then with his fingers. It was
many silent minutes since the storm of reproach with which he had
repelled her plea for a part in the actual responsible care of her
children had died away. He had spoken with unnecessary vehemence, he
knew. He had admitted that--said he was sorry, as well as he could
without withdrawing from his position. But he had been met by that most
formidable of all weapons--a blank silence--an inscrutable face. Some
sort of scene was inevitable, he knew. And he sat there waiting for it.
She had been hurt. She was undoubtedly very angry.

He thought he was ready for anything. But just the way she spoke his
name, startled--almost frightened--him, she said it so quietly,
so--tenderly.

"Roddy," she said, "I want you to come over here and kiss me, and then
go back and sit down in that chair again."

He went a little pale at that. The swing of his foot was arrested
suddenly. But, for a moment, he made no move--just looked wonderingly
into her great grave eyes.

"Something's going to happen," she went on, "and before it's over, I'm
afraid it's going to hurt you terribly--and me. And I want the kiss for
us to remember. So that we'll always know, whatever happens afterward,
that we loved each other." She held out her arms to him. "Won't you
come?"

He came--a man bewildered--bent down over her and found her lips; but
almost absently, out of a daze.

"No, not like that," she murmured. "In the old way."

There was a long embrace.

"I wouldn't do it," she said, "I don't believe I'd have the courage to
do it, if it were just me. But there's some one else--I've made some one
a promise. I can't tell you about that. Now please go back and sit over
there where you were, where we can talk quietly.--Oh, Roddy, I love you
so!--No, please go back, old man! And--and light your pipe. Oh, don't
tremble like that! It--it isn't a tragedy. It's--for us, it's the
greatest hope in the world."

He went back to his chair. He even lighted his pipe as she asked him to,
and waited as steadily as he could for her to begin.

But she couldn't begin while she looked at him. She moved a little
closer to the table and leaned her elbow on it, shaded her eyes with one
hand, while the other played with the stump of a pencil that happened to
be lying there.

"Do you remember ..." she began, and it was wonderful how quiet and
steady her voice was. There was even the trace of a smile about her
wonderful mouth. "Do you remember that afternoon of ours, the very first
of them, when you brought home my note-books and found me asleep on the
couch in our old back parlor? Do you remember how you told me that one's
desires were the only motive power he had? One couldn't ride anywhere,
you said, except on the backs of his own passions? Well, it was a funny
thing--I got to wondering afterward what my desires were, and it seemed
I hadn't any. Everything had, somehow, come to me before I knew I wanted
it. Everything in the world, even your love for me, came like that.

"But I've got a passion now, Rodney. I've had it for a long while. It's
a desire I can't satisfy. The thing I want, and there's nothing in the
world that I wouldn't give to get it, is--well, your friendship; that's
a way of saying it."

What he had been waiting to hear, of course, she didn't know. But she
knew by the way he started and stared at her, that it hadn't been for
that. The thing struck him, it seemed, as a sort of grotesquely
irritating anti-climax.

"Gracious Heaven!" he said. "My friendship! Why, I'm in love with you!
That's certainly a bigger thing. Go back to your geometry, child. The
greater includes the less, doesn't it?"

"I don't know whether it's a bigger thing or not," she said. "But it
doesn't include the other. Love's just a sort of miracle thing that
happens to you. You don't have it because you deserve it. The person I
made that promise to would have earned it, if any one could. But it
doesn't come that way. It's like lightning. It strikes or else it
doesn't. Well, it struck us. But friendship--there's this about it. You
can't get it any way in the world, except just by earning it. Nobody can
give it to you, no matter how hard he tries. So when you've got it, you
can always say, 'There's something that I'm entitled to--something
that's mine.' Your love isn't mine any more than the air is. I never did
anything to earn it.

"And that's why it can't satisfy me.--Because it doesn't, Roddy. It
hasn't for ever so long. It's something wonderful that's--_happened_ to
me. It's the loveliest thing that ever happened to anybody. And just
because it's so wonderful and beautiful, I can't bear to--well, this is
hard to say--I can't bear to use it to live on. I can't bear to have it
mixed up in things like millinery bills and housekeeping expense. I
can't bear to see it become a thing that piles a load of hateful
obligations on your back. I could live on your friendship, Roddy;
because your friendship would mean that somehow I was earning my way,
but I can't live on your love; any more than you could on mine. Won't
you--won't you just try to think for a moment what that would mean to
you?"

Now that he had sensed the direction her talk was headed in, even though
he hadn't even vaguely glimpsed the point at which she was going to
bring up, he made it much harder for her to talk to him. He was tramping
up and down the room, stopping and turning short every now and then with
a gesture of exasperation, or an interruption that never got beyond two
or three words and broke off always in a sort of frantic speechlessness.

She knew he couldn't help it. Down underneath his mind, controlling
utterly its processes, was a ganglion of instincts that were utterly
outraged by the things she was saying to him. It was they and not his
intelligence she had to fight. She must be patient, as gentle as she
could, but she must make him listen.

"You've got my friendship!" he cried out now. "It's a grotesque
perversion of the facts to say you haven't."

She smiled at him as she shook her head. "I've spent too many months
trying to get it and seeing myself fail--oh, so ridiculously!--not to
know what I am talking about, Roddy."

And then, still smiling, rather sadly, she told what some of the
experiments had been--some of her attempts to break into the life he
kept locked away from her and carry off a share of it for herself.

"I was angry at first when I found you keeping me out," she said, "angry
and hurt. I used to cry about it. And then I saw it wasn't your fault.
That's how I discovered friendship had to be earned."

But her power to maintain that attitude of grave detachment was about
spent. The passion mounted in her voice and in her eyes as she went on.

"You thought it was because of my condition, as you called it, that my
mind had got full of wild ideas;--the wild idea that I wasn't really and
truly your wife at all, but only your mistress, and that I was pulling
you down from something free and fine that you had been, to something
that you despised yourself for being and had to try to deny you were.
Those were the obsessions of a pregnant woman, you thought--something
she was to be soothed and coddled into forgetting. You were wrong about
that, Roddy.

"I did have an obsession, but it wasn't the thing you thought. It was an
obsession that kept me quiet, and contented and happy, and willing to
wait in spite of everything. The obsession was that none of those things
mattered because a big miracle was coming that was going to change it
all. I was going to have a job at last--a job that was just as real as
yours--the job of being a mother."

Her voice broke in a fierce sharp little laugh over the word, but she
got it back in control again.

"I was going to have a baby to feed out of my own body, to keep alive
with my own care. There was going to be responsibility and hard work,
things that demanded courage and endurance and sacrifice. I could earn
your friendship with that, I said. That was the real obsession, Roddy,
and it never really died until to-night. Because of course I have kept
on hoping, even after I might have seen how it was. But the babies'
lives aren't to be jeopardized to gratify my whims. Well, I suppose I
can't complain. It's over, that's the main thing.

"And now, here I am perfectly normal and well again--as good as ever.
I've kept my looks--oh, my hair and my complexion and my figure. I could
wear pretty clothes again and start going out to things now that the
season's begun, just as I did a year ago. People would admire me, and
you'd be pleased, and you'd love me as much as ever, and it would all be
like the paradise it was last year, except for one thing. The one thing
is that if I do that, I'll know this time what I really am. Your
mistress, Roddy; your legal, perfectly respectable mistress,--and a
little more despicable rather than less, I think, because of the
adjectives."

"I've let that word go by once," he said quietly, but with a dangerous
light of anger in his eyes. "I won't again. It's perfectly outrageous
and inexcusable that you should talk like that, and I'll ask you never
to do it again."

"I won't," she flashed back at him, "if you'll explain why I'm not
exactly what I say." And after ten seconds of silence, she went on.

"Why, Roddy, I've heard you describe me a hundred times. Not the you
that's my lover. The other you; talking all over the universe to Barry
Lake. You've described the woman who's never been trained nor taught nor
disciplined; who's been brought up soft, with the bloom on, for the
purpose of making her marriageable; who's never found her job in
marriage, who doesn't cook, nor sew, nor spin, nor even take care of her
own children; the woman who uses her sex charm to save her from having
to do hard ugly things, and keep her in luxury. Do you remember what
you've called her, Roddy? Do you remember the word you've used? I've
used a gentler word than that.

"Oh, you didn't know, you poor blind boy, that I was the woman you were
talking about. You never saw it at all. But I am. I was brought up like
that.--Oh, not on purpose. Dear old mother! She wasn't trying to make me
into a prostitute any more then you are trying to make me into your
mistress. You both love me, that's all. It's just an instinct not to let
anything hurt me, nor frighten me, nor tire me, nor teach me what work
is. She thought she was educating me to be a lawyer so that when the
time came, I could be one of the leaders of the woman movement just as
she'd been. And all the while, without knowing it, she was educating me
to be the sort of person you'd fall in love with--something precious and
expensive--something to be taken care of.

"I didn't understand any of that when you married me, Roddy; it was just
like a dream to me--like a fairy story come true. If any one had told me
a year ago, that I should ever be anything but perfectly happy in your
love for me, I'd have laughed at him. I remember telling Madame Gréville
that our marriage had turned out well--ended happily. And she did laugh.
That was before I'd begun to understand. But I do understand now. I know
why it was you could talk to me, back in those days before we were
married, about anything under the sun--things ten thousand miles above
my head; what it was that fooled me into thinking we were friends as
well as lovers. I know why you've never been able to talk to me like
that since. And I know--this is the worst of all, Roddy,--this is the
piece of knowledge that makes it impossible--I know what a good mistress
I could make. I know I could make you love me whether you wanted to or
not; whether I loved you or not. I could make other men love me, if I
could make up my mind to do it--make them tell me all their hopes and
dreams, and think I had a fine mind and a wonderful understanding. Oh,
it's too easy--it's too hatefully easy!

"Do you know why I told you that? Because if you believe it and
understand it, you will see why I can't go on living on your love.
Because how can you be sure, knowing that my position in the world, my
friends--oh, the very clothes on my back, and the roof over my head, are
dependent on your love,--how are you going to be sure that my love for
you is honest and disinterested? What's to keep you from
wondering--asking questions? Love's got to be free, Roddy. The only way
to make it free is to have friendship growing alongside it. So, when I
can be your partner and your friend, I'll be your mistress, too. But
not--not again, Roddy, till I can find a way. I'll have to find it for
myself. I'll have to go...."

She broke down there over a word she couldn't at first say, buried her
face in her arms and let a deep racking sob or two have their own way
with her. But presently she sat erect again and, with a supreme effort
of will, forced her voice to utter the word.

"I've got to go somewhere alone--away from you, and stay until I find
it. If I ever do, and you want me, I'll come back."


CHAPTER XVI

ROSE OPENS THE DOOR


The struggle between them lasted a week--a ghastly week, during which,
as far as the surface of things showed, their life flowed along in its
accustomed channels. It was a little worse than that, really, because
the week included, so an ironic Fate had decreed, Thanksgiving Day and a
jolly family party at Frederica's, with congratulations on the past,
plans for the future. And Rose and Rodney, as civilized persons will do,
kept their faces, accepted congratulations, made gay plans for the
twins; smiled or laughed when necessary--somehow or other, got through
with it.

But at all sorts of times, and in all sorts of places when they were
alone together, the great battle was renewed; mostly through the dead
hours of the night, in Rose's bedroom, she sitting up in bed, he
tramping up and down, shivering and shuddering in a big bath-robe. It
had a horrible way of interrupting itself for small domestic
commonplaces, which in their assumption of the permanency of their old
life, their blind disregard of the impending disaster, had an almost
unendurable poignancy. A breakfast on the morning of an execution is
something like that.

The hardest thing about it all for Rose--the thing that came nearest to
breaking down her courage--was to see how slowly Rodney came to realize
it at all. He was like a trapped animal pacing the four sides of his
cage confident that in a moment or two he would find the way out, and
then, incredulously, dazedly, coming to the surmise that there was no
way out. She really meant to go away and leave him--leave the babies; go
somewhere where his care and protection could not reach her! She was
actually planning to do it--planning the details of doing it! By the end
of one of their long talks, it would seem to her he had grasped this
monstrous intention and accepted it. But before the beginning of the
next one, he seemed to manage somehow to dismiss the thing as an
impossible nightmare.

An invitation came in from the Crawfords for a dance at the Blackstone,
the fifth of December, and he said something about accepting it.

"I shan't be here then, Roddy, you know," she said.

He went completely to pieces at that, as if the notion of her going away
had never really reached his mind before.

The struggle ranged through the widest possible gamut of moods. They had
their moments of rapturous love--passionate attempts at self-surrender.
They had long hours of cool discussion, as impersonal as if they had
been talking about the characters out of a hook instead of about
themselves. They had stormy nerve-tearing hours of blind agonizing,
around and around in circles, lacerating each other, lashing out at each
other, getting nowhere. They had moments of incandescent anger.

He tried, just once, early in the fight, to take the ground he had taken
once before; that she was irresponsible, obsessed. There was a fracture
somewhere, as James Randolph's jargon had it, in her unconscious mind.
She didn't let him go far with that. He saw her blaze up in a splendid
burst of wrath, as she had blazed once--oh, an eternity ago, at a
street-car conductor. Her challenge rang like a sword out of a scabbard.

"We'll settle that before we go any further," she said. "Telephone for
James Randolph, or any other alienist you like. Let him take me and put
me in a sanatorium somewhere and keep me under observation as long as he
pleases, until he's satisfied whether I'm out of my mind or not. But
unless you're willing to do that, don't call me irresponsible."

He grew more reasonable as a belief in her complete seriousness and
determination sobered him. He made desperate efforts to recover his
self-control--to get his big, cool, fine mechanism of a mind into
action. But his mind, to his complete bewilderment, betrayed him. He'd
always looked at Rose before, through the lens of his emotions. But now
that he forced himself to look at her through the non-refracting window
from which he looked at the rest of the world, she compelled him again
and again to admit that she was right.

"Why shouldn't I be right?" she said with a woebegone smile. "These are
all just things I've learned from you."

After a long and rather angry struggle with himself, he made up his mind
to a compromise, and in one of their cooler talks together, he offered
it.

"We've both of us pretty well lost our sense of proportion, it seems to
me," he said. "This whole ghastly business started from my refusing to
let Mrs. Ruston go and get a nurse who'd allow you to be your own
nurse-maid. Well, I'm willing to give up completely on that point. You
can let Mrs. Ruston go as soon as you like and get a nurse who'll meet
with your ideas."

"You're doing that," said Rose thoughtfully, "rather than let me go
away. That's the way it is, isn't it?"

"Why, yes, of course," he admitted. "I was looking at things from the
children's point of view, and I thought I was right. From their point of
view, I still think so."

She drew in a long sigh and shook her head. "It won't do, Roddy. Can't
you see you're giving way practically under a threat--because I'll go
away if you don't? But think what it would mean if I did stay, on those
terms. The thing would rankle always. And if anything did happen to one
of the babies because the new nurse wasn't quite so good, you'd never
forgive me--not in all the world.

"And," she added a little later, "that would be just as true of any
other compromise. I mean like going and living in a flat and letting me
do the housework--any of the things we've talked about. I can say I am
going away, don't you see, but I couldn't say I'd go away--_unless_ ...
I couldn't use that threat to extort things from you without killing our
whole life dead. Can't you see that?"

His mind infuriated him by agreeing with her--goaded him into another
passionate outburst during which he accused her of bad faith, of being
tired of him, anxious to get away from him--seizing pretexts. But he
offered no more compromises. The thing he fell back on after that was a
plea for delay. The question must be decided coolly; not like this. Let
them just put it out of their minds for a while, go on with the old
routine as if nothing threatened it and see if things didn't work
somewhat better--see if they weren't, after all, better friends than she
thought.

"If I were ill, Roddy," she said, "and there was an operation talked
about; if they said to you that there was something I might drag along
for years, half alive, without, but that if I had it, it would either
kill or cure, you wouldn't urge delay. We'd decide for or against it and
be done. It's--it's taking just all the courage I've got to face this
thing now that I am excited--now that I've thought it out and talked it
out with you--now that I've got the big hope before my eyes. But to wait
until I was tangled in the old routine and the babies began to get a
little older and more--human, so that they knew me, and then do it in
cold blood! I couldn't do that. We'd patch up some sort of a life,
pretending a little, quarreling a little, and when my feelings got
especially hurt about something, I'd try to make myself think, and you,
that I was going away. And we'd both know down inside that we were
cowards."

He protested against the word, but she stuck to it.

"We're both afraid now," she insisted. "That's one of the things that
makes us so cruel to each other when we talk--fear. The world's a
terrible place to me, Roddy. I've never ventured out alone in it; not a
step. A year ago, I don't think I'd have been so frightened. I didn't
know then--I'd never really thought about it--what a hard dangerous
thing it is, just to earn enough to keep yourself alive. I haven't any
illusions now that it's easy--not after the things I've heard Barry Lake
tell about. But sometimes I think you're more afraid than I; and that
you've got a more intolerable thing to fear--ridicule--an intangible
sort of pitying ridicule that you can't get hold of; guessing at the
sort of things people will say and never really quite knowing. And we
have each got the other's fear to suffer under, too.--Oh, Roddy, Roddy,
don't hate me too bitterly ...! But I think if we can both endure it,
stand the gaff, as you said once, and know that the other's standing it,
too, perhaps that'll be the real beginning of the new life."

Somehow or other, during their calmer moments toward the end, practical
details managed to get talked about--settled after a fashion, without
the admission really being made on his part that the thing was going to
happen at all.

"I'd do everything I could of course, to make it easier," she said. "We
could have a story for people that I'd gone to California to make mother
a long visit. You could bring Harriet home from Washington to keep house
while I was gone. I'd take my trunks, you see, and really go. People
would suspect of course, after a while, but they'll always pretend to
believe anything that's comfortable--anything that saves scenes and
shocks and explanations."

"Where would you go, really?" he demanded. "Have you any plan at all?"

"I have a sort of plan," she said. "I think I know of a way of earning a
living."

But she didn't offer to go on and tell him what it was, and after a
little silence, he commented bitterly on this omission.

"You won't even give me the poor satisfaction of knowing what you're
doing," he said.

"I'd love to," she said, "--to be able to write to you, hear from you
every day. But I don't believe you want to know. I think it would be too
hard for you. Because you'd have to promise not to try to get me
back--not to come and rescue me if I got into trouble and things went
badly and I didn't know where to turn. Could you promise that, Roddy?"

He gave a groan and buried his face in his hands. Then:

"No," he said furiously. "Of course I couldn't. See you suffering and
stand by with my hands in my pockets and watch!" He sprang up and seized
her by the arms in a grip that actually left bruises, and fairly shook
her in the agony of his entreaty. "Tell me it's a nightmare, Rose," he
said. "Tell me it isn't true. Wake me up out of it!"

But under the indomitable resolution of her blue eyes, he turned away.
This was the last appeal of that sort that he made.

"I'll promise," she said presently, "to be sensible--not to take any
risks I don't have to take. I'll regard my life and my health and all,
as something I'm keeping in trust for you. I'll take plenty of warm
sensible clothes when I go; lots of shoes and stockings--things like
that, and if you'll let me, I'll--I'll borrow a hundred dollars to start
myself off with. It isn't a tragedy, Roddy,--not that part of it. You
wouldn't be afraid for any one else as big and strong and healthy as I."

Gradually, out of the welter of scenes like that, the thing got itself
recognized as something that was to happen. But the parting came at last
in a little different way from any they had foreseen.

Rodney came home from his office early one afternoon, with a telegram
that summoned him to New York to a conference of counsel in a big public
utility case he had been working on for months. He must leave, if he
were going at all, at five o'clock. He ransacked the house, vainly at
first, for Rose, and found her at last in the trunk-room--dusty,
disheveled, sobbing quietly over something she held hugged in her arms.
But she dried her eyes and came over to him and asked what it was that
had brought him home so early.

He showed her the telegram. "I'll have to leave in an hour," he said,
"if I'm to go."

She paled at that, and sat down rather giddily on a trunk. "You must
go," she said, "of course. And--Roddy, I guess that'll be the easiest
way. I'll get my telegram to-night--pretend to get it--from Portia. And
you can give me the hundred dollars, and then, when you come back, I'll
be gone."

The thing she had been holding in her hands slipped to the floor. He
stooped and picked it up--stared at it with a sort of half awakened
recognition.

"I f--found it," she explained, "among some old things Portia sent over
when she moved. Do you know what it is? It's one of the note-books that
got wet--that first night when we were put off the street-car. And--and,
Roddy, look!"

She opened it to an almost blank page, and with a weak little laugh,
pointed to the thing that was written there:

"'March fifteenth, nineteen twelve!' Your birthday, you see, and the day
we met each other."

And then, down below, the only note she had made during the whole of
that lecture, he read: "Never marry a man with a passion for
principles."

"That's the trouble with us, you see," she said. "If you were just an
ordinary man without any big passions or anything, it wouldn't matter
much if your life got spoiled. But with us, we've got to try for the
biggest thing there is. Oh, Roddy, Roddy, darling! Hold me tight for
just a minute, and then I'll come and help you pack."


BOOK THREE

The World Alone


CHAPTER I

THE LENGTH OF A THOUSAND YARDS


"Here's the first week's rent then," said Rose, handing the landlady
three dollars, "and I think you'd better give me a receipt showing till
when it's paid for. Do you know where there's an expressman who would go
for a trunk?"

The landlady had tight gray hair, a hard bitten hatchet face, and a back
that curved through a forty-degree arc between the lumbar and the
cervical vertebræ, a curve which was accentuated by the faded
longitudinal blue and white stripes--like ticking--of the dress she
wore. She had no charms, one would have said, of person, mind or manner.
But it was nevertheless true that Rose was renting this room largely on
the strength of the landlady. She was so much more humanly possible than
any of the others at whose placarded doors Rose had knocked or rung ...!

For the last year and a half, anyway since she had married Rodney
Aldrich, the surface that life had presented to her had been as bland as
velvet. She'd never been spoken to by anybody except in terms of
politeness. All the people she encountered could be included under two
categories: her friends, if one stretches the word to include all her
social acquaintances, and, in an equally broad sense, her servants; that
is to say, people who earned their living by doing things she wanted
done. Her friends' and her servants' manners were not alike, to be sure,
but as far as intent went, they came to the same thing. They presented,
whatever passions, misfortunes, dislikes, uncomfortable facts of any
sort might lie in the background, a smooth and practically frictionless,
bearing surface. A person accustomed to that surface develops a soft
skin. This was about the first of Rose's discoveries.

To be looked at with undisguised suspicion--to have a door slammed in
her face as the negative answer to a civil question, left her at first
bewildered, and then enveloped in a blaze of indignation. It was perhaps
lucky for her that this happened at the very beginning of her
pilgrimage. Because, with that fire once alight within her, Rose could
go through anything. The horrible fawning, leering landlady whom she had
encountered later, might have turned her sick, but for that fine steady
glow. The hatchet-faced one she had finally arrived at, made no
protestations of her own respectability, and she seemed, though rather
reluctantly, willing to assume that of her prospective lodger. She was
puzzled about something, Rose could see; disposed to be very watchful
and at no pains to conceal this attitude.

Well, she'd probably learned that she had to watch, poor thing! And, for
that matter, Rose would probably have to do some watching on her own
account. And, if the fact was there, why bother to keep up a
contradictory fiction. So Rose asked for a receipt.

The matter of the trunk was easily disposed of. Rose had a check for it.
It was at the Polk Street Station. There was a cigar and news stand two
blocks down, the landlady said, where an expressman had his
headquarters. There was a blue sign out in front: "Schulz Express"; Rose
couldn't miss it.

The landlady went away to write out a receipt. Rose closed the door
after her and locked it.

It was a purely symbolistic act. She wasn't going to change her clothes
or anything, and she didn't particularly want to keep anybody out. But,
in a sense in which it had never quite been true before, this was her
room, a room where any one lacking her specific invitation to enter,
would be an intruder--a condition that had not obtained either in her
mother's house or in Rodney's.

She smiled widely over the absurdity of indulging in a pleasurable
feeling of possession in a squalid little cubby-hole like this. The
wall-paper was stained and faded, the paint on the soft-wood floor worn
through in streaks; there was an iron bed--a double bed, painted light
blue and lashed with string where one of its joints showed a disposition
to pull out. The mattress on the bed was lumpy. There was a
dingy-looking oak bureau with a rather small but pretty good plate-glass
mirror on it; a marble topped, black walnut wash-stand; a pitcher of the
plainest and cheapest white ware standing in a bowl on top of it, and a
highly ornate, hand-painted slop-jar--the sole survivor, evidently, of a
much prized set--under the lee of it. The steep gable of the roof cut
away most of one side of the room, though there would be space for
Rose's trunk to stand under it, and across the corner, at a curiously
distressing angle, hung an inadequate curtain that had five or six
clothes hooks behind it.

In the foreground of the view out of the window, was a large oblong
plateau--the flat roof of an extension which had casually been attached
to the front of the building and carried it forward to the sidewalk over
what had once been a small front yard. The extension had a plate-glass
front and was occupied, Rose had noticed before she plunged into the
little tunnel that ran alongside it and led to the main building, by a
dealer in delicatessen. Over the edge of the flat roof, she could see
the top third of two endless streams of trolley-cars, for the traffic in
this street was heavy, by night, she imagined, as well as by day.

The opposite façade of the street, like the one of which her own wall
and window formed a part, was highly irregular and utterly casual. There
were cheap two-story brick stores with false fronts that carried them up
a half story higher. There were little gable-ended cottages with their
fronts hacked out into show-windows. There were double houses of brick
with stone trimmings that once had had some residential pretensions. The
one characteristic that they possessed in common, was that of having
been designed, patently, for some purpose totally different from the one
they now served.

The shops on the street level had, for the most part, an air of shabby
prosperity. There was, within the space Rose's window commanded, a cheap
little tailor shop, the important part of whose business was advertised
by the sign "pressing done." There was a tobacconist's shop whose
unwashed windows revealed an array of large wooden buckets and dusty
lithographs; a shoe shop that did repairing neatly while you waited; a
rather fly-specked looking bakery. There was a saloon on the corner, and
beside it, a four-foot doorway with a painted transom over it that
announced it as the entrance of the Bellevue Hotel.

The signs on the second-story windows indicated dentist parlors, the
homes of mid-wives, ladies' tailors and dressmakers, and everywhere
furnished rooms for light housekeeping to let.

The people who patronized those shops, who drank their beer at the
corner saloon, who'd be coming hurriedly in the night to ring up the
mid-wife, who smoked the sort of tobacco that was sold from those big
wooden buckets; the people who lounged along the wide sidewalks, or came
riding down-town at seven in the morning, and back at six at night,
packed so tight that they couldn't get their arms up to hold by the
straps in the big roaring cars that kept that incessant procession going
in the middle of the street--they all inhabited, Rose realized, a world
utterly different from the one she had left. The distance between the
hurrying life she looked out on through her grimy window, and that which
she had been wont to contemplate through Florence McCrea's exquisitely
leaded casements, was simply planetary.

And yet, queerly enough, in terms of literal lineal measurement, the
distance between the windows themselves, was less than a thousand yards.
Less than ten minutes' walking from the mouth of the little tunnel
alongside the delicatessen shop, would take her back to her husband's
door. She had, in her flight out into the new world, doubled back on her
trail. And, such is the enormous social and spiritual distance between
North Clark Street and The Drive, she was as safely hidden here, as
completely out of the orbit of any of her friends, or even of her
friends' servants, as she could have been in New York or in San
Francisco.

Having to come away furtively like this was a terrible countermine
beneath her courage. If only she could have had a flourish of defiant
trumpets to speed her on her way! But, done like that, the thing would
have hurt Rodney too intolerably. His intelligence might be twentieth
century or beyond. It might acquiesce in, or even enthusiastically
advocate, a relation between men and women that hadn't existed, anyway
since the beginning of the Christian Era; it might accept without
faltering, all the corollaries pendent to that relation. But his
actuating instincts, his psychical reflexes, stretched their roots away
back to the Middle Ages. Under the dominance of those instincts, a man
lost caste--became an object of contemptuous derision, if he couldn't
keep his wife. It was bad enough to have another man take her away from
him, but it was worse to have her go away in the absence of such an
excuse; worst of all, to have her go away to seek a job and earn her own
living.

Rose didn't know how long the secret could be kept. Wherever she went,
whatever she did, there'd always be the risk that some one who could
carry back the news to Rodney's friends, would recognize her. It was a
risk that had to be taken, and she didn't intend to allow herself to be
paralyzed by a perpetual dread of what might at any time happen. At the
same time, she'd protect the secret as well as she could.

But there were two people it couldn't be kept from--Portia and her
mother. Rose had at first entertained the notion of keeping her mother
in the dark. It wasn't until she had spent a good many hours figuring
out expedients for keeping the deception going, that she realized it
couldn't be done. She had been writing her mother a letter a week ever
since the departure to California--letters naturally full of domestic
details that simply couldn't be kept up. The only possible deception
would be a compromise with the truth and compromises of that sort are
apt to be pretty unsatisfactory. They suggest concealments in every
phase, and to an imaginative mind, are more terrifying, nine times in
ten, than the truth you're trying to soften. Then, too, the story given
out to Rodney's friends being that Rose was in California with her
mother and Portia, left the chance always open for some contretemps
which would lead to her mother's discovering the truth in a surprising
and shocking way.

But the truth itself, confidently stated, not as a tragic ending, but
as the splendid hopeful beginning of a life of truer happiness for Rose
and her husband, needn't be a shock. So this was what Rose had borne
down on in her letter to Portia. It wasn't a very long letter,
considering how much it had to tell.

     "... I have found the big thing couldn't be had without a fight,"
     she wrote. "You shouldn't be surprised, because you've probably
     found out for yourself that nothing worth having comes very easily.
     But you're not to worry about me, nor be afraid for me, because I'm
     going to win. I'm making the fight, somehow, for you as well as for
     myself. I want you to know that. I think that realizing I was
     living your life as well as mine, is what has given me the courage
     to start....

     "I've got some plans, but I'm not going to tell you what they are.
     But I'll write to you every week and tell you what I've done and I
     want you to write to Rodney. I want to be sure that you understand
     this: Rodney isn't to blame for what's happened. I don't feel that
     I am, either, exactly. We're just in a situation that there's only
     one real way out of. I don't know whether he sees that yet or not.
     He's too terribly hurt and bewildered. But we haven't quarreled,
     and I believe we're further in love with each other than we've ever
     been before. I know I am with him....

     "Break this thing to mother as gently as you like, but tell her
     everything before you stop...."

This letter written and despatched, she had worked out the details of
her departure with a good deal of care. In her own house, before her
servants, she had tried to act--and she felt satisfied that her attempt
was successful--just as she would have done had her pretended telegram
really come from Portia. She had packed, looked up trains, made a
reservation. She had called up Frederica and told her the news. The
train she had selected left at an hour and on a day when she knew
Frederica wouldn't be able to come and see her off. Frederica had come
down to the house of course to say good-by to her, and carrying her
pretense through that scene, that had for her so much deeper and more
poignant a regret than she dared show--because she really loved
Frederica--was, next to bidding the twins good-by, the hardest thing she
had to go through with. Lying and pretending were always terribly hard
for Rose, and a lie to any one she was fond of, almost impossible. The
only thing that enabled her to see it through, was the consideration
that she was doing it for Rodney. He'd probably tell Frederica what had
happened in time, but Rose was determined that he should have the
privilege of choosing his own time for doing it.

Her bag was packed, her trunk was gone, her motor waiting at the door to
take her to the station, when the maid Doris brought the twins home from
their airing. This wasn't chance, but prearrangement.

"Give them to me;" Rose said, "and then you may go up and tell Mrs.
Ruston she may have them in a few minutes."

She took them into her bedroom and laid them side by side on her bed.
They had thriven finely--justified, as far as that went, Harriet's
decision in favor of bottle feeding. Had she died back there in that bed
of pain, never come out of the ether at all, they'd still be just like
this--plump, placid, methodical. Rose had thought of that a hundred
times, but it wasn't what she was thinking of now.

The thing that caught her as she stood looking down on them, was the
wave of sudden pity. She saw them suddenly as persons with the long road
all ahead of them, as a boy and a girl, a youth and a maid, a man and a
woman. They were destined to have their hopes and loves, fears,
triumphs, tragedies perhaps. The boy there, Rodney, might have to face,
some day, the situation his father confronted now; might have to come
back into an empty home, and turn a stiff inexpressive face on a coolly
curious world. Little Portia there might find herself, some day, gazing
with wide seared eyes, at a life some unexpected turn of the wheel of
Fate had thrust her, all unprepared, into the midst of. Or it might be
her fate to love without attracting love--to drain all the blood out of
her life in necessary sacrifices; to wither that some one else might
have a chance to grow. Those possibilities were all there before these
two solemn, staring, little helpless things on the bed. What toys of
Chance they were!

She'd never thought of them like that before. The baby she had looked
forward to--the baby she hadn't had--had never been thought of that way
either. It was to be something to provide her, Rose, with an occupation;
to enable her to interpret her life in new terms; to make an alchemic
change in the very substance of it. The transmutation hadn't taken
place. She surmised now, dimly, that she hadn't deserved it should.

"You've never had a mother at all, you poor little mites," she said.
"But you're going to have one some day. You're going to be able to come
to her with your troubles, because she'll have had troubles herself.
She'll help you bear your hurts, because she's had hurts of her own. And
she'll be able to teach you to stand the gaff, because she's stood it
herself."

For the first time since they were born, she was thinking of their need
of her rather than of her need of them and with that thought, came for
the first time, the surge of passionate maternal love that she had
waited for, so long in vain. There was, suddenly, an intolerable ache in
her heart that could only have been satisfied by crushing them up
against her breast; kissing their hands--their feet.

Rose stood there quivering, giddy with the force of it. "Oh, you
darlings!" she said. "But wait--wait until I deserve it!" And without
touching them at all, she went to the door and opened it. Mrs. Ruston
and Doris were both waiting in the hall.

"I must go now," she said. "Good-by. Keep them carefully for me." Her
voice was steady, and though her eyes were bright, there was no trace of
tears upon her cheeks. But there was a kind of glory shining in her face
that was too much for Doris, who turned away and sobbed loudly. Even
Mrs. Ruston's eyes were wet.

"Good-by," said Rose again, and went down composedly enough to her car.

She rode down to the station, shook hands with and said good-by to
Otto, the chauffeur, allowed the porter to carry her bag into the
waiting-room. There she tipped the porter, picked up the bag herself,
and walked out the other door; crossed over to Clark Street and took a
street-car. At Chicago Avenue she got off and walked north, keeping her
eye open for placards advertising rooms to let. It was at the end of
about a half mile that she found the hatchet-faced landlady, paid her
three dollars, and locked her door, as a symbol, perhaps, of the bigger
heavier door that she had swung to and locked on the whole of her past
life.

Amid all the welter of emotions boiling up within her, grief was not
present. There was a very deep-reaching excitement that sharpened all
her faculties; that even made her see colors more brightly and hear
fainter sounds. There was an intent eagerness to get the new life fairly
begun. But, strangest of all, and yet so vivid that even its strangeness
couldn't prevent her being aware of it, was a perfectly enormous relief.
The thing which, when she had first faced it as the only thoroughfare to
the real life she so passionately wanted, had seemed such a veritable
nightmare, was an accomplished fact. The week of acute agony she had
lived through while she was forcing her sudden resolution on Rodney had
been all but unendurable with the enforced contemplation of the moment
of parting which it brought so relentlessly nearer. There had been a
terror, too, lest when the moment actually came, she couldn't do it.
Well, and now it had come and gone! The surgery of the thing was over.
The nerves and sinews were cut. The thing was done. The girl who stood
there now in her three-dollar room was free; had won a fresh blank page
to write the characters of her life upon.

She felt a little guilty about this. What heartless sort of a monster
must she be to feel--why, actually happy, at a moment like this? She
ought to be prone on the bed, her face buried in the musty pillow,
sobbing her heart out.

But presently, standing there, looking down on the lumpy bed, she smiled
widely instead, over the notion of doing it as a sort of concession to
respectability. She had got her absolution from Rodney himself out of
the memory of their first real talk together. Discipline, he'd said, was
accepting the facts of life as they were. Not raising a lamentation
because they weren't different. The only way you had of getting anywhere
was by riding on the backs of your own passions. Well, her great ride
was just beginning!

Rose dusted the mirror with a towel--a reckless act, as she saw for
herself, when she discovered she was going to have to use that towel for
a week--and took an appraising look at herself. Then she nodded
confidently--there was nothing the matter with her looks--and resumed
her ulster, her rubbers and her umbrella, for it was the kind of
December day that called for all three. Her landlady could stick the
receipt under the door, she reflected, as she locked it.

Two blocks down the street, she found, as predicted, the cigar store
with the blue sign, "Schulz Express," and left her trunk check there
with her address and fifty cents. Then, putting up her umbrella, and
glowingly conscious that she was saving a nickel by so doing, she set
off down-town afoot to get a job. She meant to get it that very
afternoon. And, partly because she meant to so very definitely, she did.

I don't mean to say that getting a job is a purely volitional matter.
There is the factor of luck, always large of course, though not quite so
large as a great many people suppose, and the factor of intelligence.
Rose's intelligence had been in pretty active training for the last
year. Ever since her talk with Simone Gréville had set her thinking, she
had been learning how to weigh and assess facts apart from their
emotional nebulæ. She'd taught herself how to look a disagreeable or
humiliating fact in the face as steadily and as coolly as she looked at
any other fact.

She had accumulated a whole lot of facts about women in industry from
Barry Lake and Jane. She knew the sort of job and the sort of pay that
the average untrained woman gets. She knew some of the reasons why the
pay was so miserably, intolerably small. She knew about the vast army of
young women who weren't expected to be fully self-supporting, who
counted on marrying comfortably enough some day, and accepted board and
lodging at home as one of the natural laws of existence. But who, if
they wanted pocket money, pretty enough clothes to make them attractive
enough for men to want to marry; who, if they wanted to escape the
stupid drudgery of housework at home, had to go to work. They'd rather
get eight dollars a week than six, of course, or ten than eight. But as
long as even six was velvet (cotton-backed velvet, one might say) they'd
take that, cheerfully oblivious to the fact, as naturally one might
expect them to be, that by taking six, they established a standard at
which a girl who had to earn her own living simply couldn't live.

Rose knew exactly what would happen to her if she went to one of the big
State Street department stores and asked for a job. Jane had been trying
some experiments lately, and stating her results with convincing
vivacity at their little dinners afterward. There was no thoroughfare
there.

She knew too, what sort of life she'd have to face if she offered
herself out in the West Side factory district as a cracker packer, a
chocolate dipper, a glove stitcher; any of those things. You got a sort
of training, of course, at any one of these trades. You learned to
develop a certain uncanny miraculous speed and skill in some one small
operation, as remorseless and unvaried as the coming into mesh and out
again of two cogs in a pair of gears. But the very highest skill could
just about be made to keep you alive, and it led to nothing else. You
wore out your body and asphyxiated your soul.

Rose didn't mean to do that. She was holding both body and soul in
trust. The penitential mood that had resulted from her talk with Portia
was utterly gone. She wasn't looking for hurts. Deliberately to impose
tortures on herself was as far from her intent as shirking any of the
inevitable trials that should come to her in the course of the day's
work. The only way she could see to a life of decent self-respecting
independence lay through some sort of special training--business
training, she thought. She'd begin by learning to be a stenographer--a
cracking good stenographer. Miss Beach had begun that way. She had a
real job.

Only, Rose had first to get a job that would pay for her training; and
not only pay for it, but leave time for it; a problem which might have
seemed like the problem of lifting yourself by your boot straps, if it
hadn't been for Jimmy Wallace--Jimmy with his talk about chorus-girls.

The trouble with that profession, Jimmy had said, was that the
indispensable assets in it were not industry, intelligence, ambitions,
but a reasonably presentable pair of arms and legs (a good-looking face
would surely come in handy too) and a rudimentary sense of rhythm.
Another demoralizing thing about it, he had said, was the fact that the
work wasn't hard enough, except during rehearsal, to keep its votaries
out of mischief.

When the notion first occurred to her that these statements of Jimmy's
might some day have an interest for her that was personal rather than
academic, she had dismissed it with a shrug of good-humored amusement.
It wasn't until her idea of leaving Rodney and going out and making a
living and a life for herself had hardened into a fixed resolution, and
she had begun serious consideration of ways and means, that she called
it back into her mind. There was no use blinking the facts. The one
marketable asset she would possess when she walked out of her husband's
house, was simply--how she looked.

Well then, if that was all you had, there was no degradation in using it
until you could make yourself the possessor of something else. And the
merit of this particular sort of job, for her, lay precisely in the
thing that Jimmy had cited as its chief disadvantage--it left you
abundant leisure. You might occupy that leisure getting into
mischief--no doubt most chorus-girls did. But there was nothing to
prevent your using it to better advantage.

With this in mind, on the Sunday before Rose went away, she had studied
the dramatic section of the morning paper with a good deal of care and
was rewarded by finding among the news notes, an item referring to a
new musical comedy that was to be produced at the Globe Theater
immediately after the Christmas holidays. _The Girl Up-stairs_ was the
title of it. It was spoken of as one of the regular Globe productions,
so it was probable that Jimmy Wallace's experience with the production
of an earlier number in the series would at least give her something to
go by. The thing must be in rehearsal now.

Granted that she was going to be a chorus-girl for a while, she could
hardly find a better place than one of the Globe productions to be one
in. According to Jimmy Wallace, it was a decent enough little place, and
yet it possessed the advantage of being spiritually as well as actually,
west of Clark Street. Rodney's friends were less likely to go there, and
so have a chance of recognizing her, than to any other theater in the
city, barring of course the flagrantly and shamelessly vulgar ones of
the purlieus.

Among her older friends of school and college days, the chances were of
course worse. But even if she were seen on the stage by people who knew
her, even though they were to say to each other that that girl looked
surprisingly like Rose Aldrich, this would be a very different thing
from full recognition. She would be well protected by the utter
unlikelihood of her being in such a place; by the absence of anybody's
knowledge that she had flown off at a tangent from the orbit of Rodney's
world. Then, too, she'd be somewhat disguised no doubt, by make-up. Of
course with all those considerations weighed at their full value, there
remained a risk that she would be fully discovered and recognized. But
it was a risk that couldn't be avoided, whatever she did.

She entertained for a while, the notion of taking Jimmy Wallace into her
confidence--he had as many depositors of confidences on his books, as a
savings bank, and he was just as safe. It was altogether likely that he
could get her a job out of hand. He was still on the best of terms with
the Globe people, and he was a really influential critic. But even if he
didn't get her a job outright, he could at least tell her how to set
about getting one for herself--where to go, whom to ask for, the right
way to phrase her request, which makes such an enormous difference in
things of that kind.

But she wasn't long in abandoning the notion of appealing to Jimmy at
all. The corner-stone of her new adventure must be that she was doing
things for herself; that she was through being helped, having ways
smoothed for her, things done for her. If she owed her first job even
indirectly to Jimmy, all the rest of her structure would be out of
plumb. Whatever success she might have would be tainted by the misgiving
that but for somebody else's help, she might have failed. Rose Stanton
who had rented that three-dollar room was going to be beholden to
nobody!

The news item in the paper gave her really all she needed. It told her
that a production was in rehearsal and it mentioned the name of the
director, John Galbraith, referring to him as one of the three most
prominent musical-comedy directors in the country; imported from New
York at vast expense, to make this production unique in the annals of
the Globe, and so forth.

They hadn't rehearsed Jimmy's piece, she knew, in the theater itself,
but in all sorts of queer out-of-the-way places--in theaters that
happened for the moment to be "dark," in dance-halls; pretty much
anywhere. This was because there was another show running at the time at
the Globe. She had looked in the theater advertisements to see whether a
show was running there now. Yes, there was. Well, that gave her her
formula.

When she asked at the box office at the Globe Theater, where they were
rehearsing _The Girl Up-stairs_ to-day, the nicely manicured young man
inside, answered automatically, "North End Hall."

Evidently Jimmy Wallace couldn't have phrased the question better
himself. But the quality of the voice that asked it had, even to his not
very sensitive ear, an unaccustomed flavor. So, almost simultaneously
with his answer, he looked up from his finger-nails and shot an
inquiring glance through the grille.

What he saw betrayed him into an involuntary stare. He didn't mean to
stare; he meant to be respectful. But he was surprised. Rose, in the
plainest suit that she could hope would seem plausible to her servants
for a traveling costume to California, an ulster and a little beaver hat
with a quill in it, had no misgivings about looking the part of a
potentially hard-working young woman renting a three-dollar room on
North Clark Street and seeking employment in a musical-comedy chorus. A
realization that her neat black seal dressing-case wasn't quite in the
picture, helped to account for the landlady's puzzlement about her. But
it hadn't been introduced in evidence here. And yet the young man behind
the grille seemed as surprised as the landlady.

He repeated his answer to her question with the lubricant of a few more
words and a fatuous sort of smile. "I believe they rehearse in the North
End Hall this afternoon."

Rose couldn't help smiling a little herself. "I'm afraid," she said,
"I'll have to ask where that is."

"Not at all," said the young man idiotically, and he told her the
address; then cast about for a slip of paper to write it down on,
racking his thimbleful of brains all the while to make out who she could
be. She wasn't one of the principals in the company. They'd all reported
and he hadn't heard that any of them was to be replaced.

"Oh, you needn't write it," said Rose. "I can remember, thank you." She
gave him a pleasant sort of boyish nod that didn't classify at all with
anything in his experience, and walked out of the lobby.

He stared after her almost resentfully, feeling all mussed up, somehow,
and inadequate; as if here had been a situation that he had failed
signally to make the most of. He sat there for the next half-hour
gloomily thinking up things he might have said to her.


CHAPTER II

THE EVENING AND THE MORNING WERE THE FIRST DAY


With her umbrella over her shoulder, Rose set sail northward again
through the rain, absurdly cheered; first by the fact that the opening
skirmish had distinctly, though intangibly, gone her way; secondly by
the small bit of luck that North End Hall would be, judging by its
number on North Clark Street, not more than a block or two from her
three-dollar room.

The sight of the entrance to it gave her a pang of misgiving. A pair of
white painted doors opened from the street level upon the foot of a
broadish stair which took you up rather suddenly; there was space enough
between the foot of the stair and the doors for a ticket-window, but it
was too small to be called a lobby; an arc lamp hung there though, and
two more--all three were extinct--hung just outside. What gave the place
its air of vulgarity, a suggestion of being the starting and finishing
point for lewd, drink sodden revels, she couldn't determine. It did
suggest this plainly. But, in the light of what Jimmy Wallace had told
her, she didn't think it likely there'd be any reveling to speak of at
rehearsal.

At the head of the stairway, tilted back in a kitchen chair beneath a
single gas-jet whose light he was trying to make suffice for the perusal
of a green newspaper, sat a man, under orders no doubt, to keep
intruders away.

Rose cast about as she climbed for the sort of phrase that would
convince him she wasn't an intruder. She would ask him, but in the
manner of one who seeks a formal assurance merely, if this was where
they were rehearsing _The Girl Up-stairs_. Three steps from the top, she
changed her tactics, as a result of a glance at his unshaven face. The
thing to do was to go by as if he weren't there at all--as if, for such
as she, watchmen didn't exist. The rhythmic pounding of feet and the
frayed chords from a worn-out piano, convinced her she was in the right
place.


Her stratagem succeeded, but not without giving her a bad moment. The
man glanced up and, though she felt he didn't return to his paper again,
he made no attempt to stop her. But right before her was another pair of
big white doors, closed with an effect of permanence--locked, she
suspected. A narrower door to the left stood open, but over it was
painted the disconcerting legend "Bar," flanked on either side, to make
the matter explicit even to the unlearned, by pictorial representations
of glasses of foaming beer. She hadn't time to deliberate over her
choice. The watchman's eyes were boring into her back. If she chose
wrong, or if she visibly hesitated, she knew she'd hear a voice say,
"Here! Where you going!"

She caught a quick breath, turned to the left and walked steadily
through the narrower door into the bar. It proved to be a deserted,
shrouded, sinister-looking place, with an interminable high mahogany
counter at one side, and with a lot of little iron tables placed by
pairs, their tops together, so that half of them had their legs in the
air. Its lights were fled, its garlands dead all right, but there wasn't
anything poetic about it. However, there was another open door at the
far end of the room, through which sounds and light came in. And the
watchman hadn't interfered with her. Evidently she had chosen right.

She paused for a second steadying breath before she went through that
farther door, her eyes starry with resolution, her cheeks, just for the
moment, a little pale. If the comparison suggests itself to you of an
early Christian maiden about to step out into an arena full of wild
beasts, then you will have mistaken Rose. The arena was there, true
enough. But she was stepping out into it with the intention of, like
Androcles, taming the lion.

The room was hot and not well lighted--a huge square room with a very
high ceiling. In the farther wall of it was a proscenium arch and a
raised stage somewhat brighter than the room itself, though the stained
brick wall at the back, in the absence of any scenery, absorbed a good
deal of the light. On the stage, right and left, were two irregular
groups of girls, with a few men, awkwardly, Rose thought, disposed among
them. All were swaying a little to mark the rhythm of the music
industriously pounded out by a sweaty young man at the piano--a swarthy,
thick young man in his undershirt. There were a few more people, Rose
was aware without exactly looking at any of them, sprawled in different
parts of the hall, on sofas or cushioned window-seats.

It was all a little vague to her at first, because her attention was
focused on a single figure--a compact, rather slender figure, and tall,
Rose thought--of a man in a blue serge suit, who stood at the exact
center of the stage and the extreme edge of the footlights. He was
counting aloud the bars of the music--not beating time at all, nor
yielding to the rhythm in any way; standing, on the contrary, rather
tensely still. That was the quality about him, indeed, that riveted
Rose's attention and held her as still as he was, in the doorway--an
exhilarating sort of intensity that had communicated itself to the
swaying groups on the stage. You could tell from the way he counted that
something was gathering itself up, getting ready to happen. "Three ...
Four ... Five ... Six ... Seven ... _Now!_" he shouted on the eighth
bar, and with the word, one of the groups transformed itself. One of the
men bowed to one of the girls and began waltzing with her; another
couple formed, then another.

Rose watched breathlessly, hoping the maneuver wouldn't go wrong;--for
no reason in the world but that the man, there at the footlights, was so
tautly determined that it shouldn't.

Determination triumphed. The number was concluded to John Galbraith's
evident satisfaction. "Very good," he said. "If you'll all do exactly
what you did that time from now on, I'll not complain." Without a pause
he went on, "Everybody on the stage--big girls--all the big girls!" And,
to the young man at the piano, "We'll do _Afternoon Tea_." There was a
momentary pause then, filled with subdued chatter, while the girls and
men re-alined themselves for the new number--a pause taken advantage of
by an exceedingly blond young man to scramble up on the stage and make a
few remarks to the director. He was the musical director, Rose found out
afterward. Galbraith, to judge from his attitude, gave his colleague's
remarks about twenty-five per cent. of his attention, keeping his eye
all the while on the chorus, to see that they got their initial
formation correctly. Rose looked them over, too. The girls weren't, on
an average, extravagantly beautiful, though, with the added charm of
make-up allowed for, there were no doubt many the audiences would
consider so. What struck Rose most emphatically about them, was their
youth and spirit. How long they had been rehearsing this afternoon she
didn't know. But now, when they might have gone slack and silent, they
pranced and giggled instead and showed a disposition to lark about,
which evidently would have carried them a good deal further but for the
restraining presence of the director. They were dressed in pretty much
anything that would allow perfect freedom to their bodies; especially
their arms and legs; bathing suits mostly, or middy-blouses and
bloomers. Rose noted this with satisfaction. Her old university
gymnasium costume would do perfectly. Anything, apparently, would do,
because as her eye adjusted itself to details, she discovered romper
suits, pinafores, chemises, overalls--all equally taken for granted.
There weren't nearly so many chorus men as girls. She couldn't be sure
just how many there were, because they couldn't be singled out. As they
wore no distinctly working costume, merely took off their coats,
waistcoats and collars, they weren't distinguishable from most of the
staff, who, with the exception of the director, garbed themselves
likewise.

Galbraith dismissed the musical director with a nod, struck his hands
together for silence, and scrutinized the now motionless group on the
stage.

"We're one shy," he said. "Who's missing?" And then answered his own
question: "Grant!" He wheeled around and his eyes searched the hall.

Rose became aware for the first time, that a mutter of conversation had
been going on incessantly since she had come in, in one of the recessed
window-seats behind her. Now, when Galbraith's gaze plunged in that
direction, she turned and looked too. A big blonde chorus-girl was in
there with a man, a girl, who, with twenty pounds trained off her, and
that sulky look out of her face, would have been a beauty. She had
roused herself with a sort of defiant deliberation at the sound of the
director's voice, but she still had her back to him and went on talking
to the man.

"Grant!" said John Galbraith again, and this time his voice had a
cutting edge. "Will you take your place on the stage, or shall I suspend
rehearsal until you're ready?"

For answer she turned and began walking slowly across the room toward
the door in the proscenium that led to the stage. She started walking
slowly, but under Galbraith's eye, she quickened her pace,
involuntarily, it seemed, until it was a ludicrous sort of run.
Presently she emerged on the stage, looking rather artificially
unconcerned, and the rehearsal went on again.

But just before he gave the signal to the pianist to go ahead, Galbraith
with a nod summoned a young man from the wings and said something to
him, whereupon, clearly carrying out his orders, he vaulted down from
the stage and came walking toward the doorway where Rose was still
standing. The director's gaze as it flashed about the hall, had
evidently discovered more than the sulky chorus-girl.

The young man wasn't intrinsically formidable--a rather limp,
deprecatory sort, he looked. But, as an emissary from Galbraith, he
quickened Rose's heart-beat a trifle. She smiled though as she made a
small bet with herself that he wouldn't be able to turn her out, even in
his capacity of envoy.

But he didn't come straight to Rose; deflected his course a little
uncertainly, and brought up before a woman who sat in a folding chair a
little farther along the wall.

Rose hadn't observed her particularly before, though she was aware that
one of the "big girls" who had responded promptly to Galbraith's first
call for them, had been talking to her when Rose came in, and she had
assumed her to be somebody connected with the show; at least with an
unchallengeable right to watch its rehearsals. But she had corrected
this impression even before she had heard what John Galbraith's
assistant said to the woman and what she said to him; for she drew
herself defensively erect when she saw him turn toward her, assumed a
look of calculated disdain; tapped a foot inadequately shod for
Chicago's pavements in December, although evidently it had experienced
them--gave, on the whole, as well as she could, an imitation of a
duchess being kept waiting.

But the limp young man didn't seem disconcerted, and inquired in so many
words, what her business was. The duchess said in a harsh high voice
with a good deal of inflection to it, that she wanted to see the
director; a very partic'lar friend of his, she assured the young man,
had begged her to do so. "You'll have to wait till he's through
rehearsing," said the young man, and then he came over to Rose.

The vestiges of the smile the duchess had provoked were still visible
about her mouth when he came up. "May I wait and see Mr. Galbraith after
the rehearsal?" she asked. "If I won't be in the way?"

"Sure," said the young man. "He won't be long now. He's been rehearsing
since two." Then, rather explosively, "Have a chair."

He struck Rose as being a little flustered and uncertain, somehow, and
he now made a tentative beginning of actually bringing a chair for her.

"Oh, don't bother," said Rose, and now she couldn't help smiling
outright. "I'll find one for myself."

But, whenever he had begun rehearsing, it was evident that John
Galbraith didn't mean to stop until he got through, and it was a long
hour that Rose sat there in a little folding chair similar to the one
occupied by the duchess; an hour which, in spite of all her will could
do, took some of the crispness out of her courage. It was all very well
to reflect with pitying amusement on the absurdities of the duchess. But
it was evident the duchess was waiting with a purpose like her own. She
meant to get a job in the chorus. Her rather touching ridiculousness as
a human being wouldn't stand in her way. It was likely that she had had
dozens of jobs in choruses before, knew exactly what would be wanted of
her, and was confident of her ability to deliver it.

As Rose's heart sank lower with the dragging minutes she even took into
account the possibility that the duchess had spoken the truth about John
Galbraith's "partic'lar friend." Just the mention of a name might settle
the whole business. Then her spirits went down another five degrees.
Here she had been assuming all along that there was a job for either of
them to get! But it was quite likely there was not. The chorus looked
complete enough; there was no visible gap in the ranks crying aloud for
a recruit.

When at last, a little after six o'clock, Galbraith said, "Quarter to
eight, everybody," and dismissed them with a nod for a scurry to what
were evidently dressing-rooms at the other side of the ball, the ship of
Rose's hopes had utterly gone to pieces. She had a plank to keep herself
afloat on. It was the determination to stay there until he should tell
her in so many words that he hadn't any use for her and under no
conceivable circumstances ever would have.

The deprecatory young man was talking to him now, about her and the
duchess evidently, for he peered out into the hall to see if they were
still there; then vaulted down from the stage and came toward them.

The duchess got up, and with a good deal of manner, went over to meet
him. Rose felt outmaneuvered here. She should have gone to meet him
herself, but a momentary paralysis kept her in her chair. She didn't
hear what the duchess said. The manner of it was confidential, in marked
protest against the proximity of a handful of other people--the blond
musical director, the thick pianist in his undershirt, a baby-faced man
in round tortoise-shell spectacles, three or four of the chorus people,
each of whom had serious matters to bring before the director's
attention.

But all the confidences, it seemed, were on the side of the duchess.
Because, when John Galbraith answered her, his voice easily filled
the room. "You tell Mr. Pike, if that's his name, that I'm very much
obliged to him, but we haven't any vacancies in the chorus at present.
If you care to, leave your name and address with Mr. Quan, the assistant
stage manager; then if we find we need you, we can let you know."

[Illustration: "I want a job in the chorus."]

He said it not unkindly, but he exercised some power of making it
evident that as he finished speaking, the duchess, for him, simply
ceased to exist. Anything she might say or do thereafter, would be so
much effort utterly wasted.

The duchess drew herself up and walked away.

And Rose? Well, the one thing she wanted passionately to do just then,
was to walk away herself out of that squalid horrible room; to soften
her own defeat by evading the final sledge-hammer blow. What he had said
to the duchess licensed her to do so. If there were no vacancies ... But
she clenched her hands, set her teeth, pulled in a long breath, and
somehow, set herself in motion. Not toward the door, but toward where
John Galbraith was standing.

But before she could get over to him, the pianist and the musical
director had got his attention. So she waited quietly beside him for two
of the longest minutes that ever were ticked off by a clock. Then, with
disconcerting suddenness, right in the middle of one of the musical
director's sentences, he looked straight into her face and said: "What
do you want?"

She'd thought him tall, but he wasn't. He was looking on a perfect level
into her eyes.

"I want a job in the chorus," said Rose.

"You heard what I said to that other woman, I suppose?"

"Yes," said Rose, "but ..."

"But you thought you'd let me say it to you again."

"Yes," she said. And, queerly enough, she felt her courage coming back.
She managed the last "yes" very steadily. It had occurred to her that if
he'd wanted merely to get rid of her, he could have done it quicker than
this. He was looking her over now with a coolly appraising eye.

"What professional experience have you had?" he asked.

"I haven't had any."

He almost smiled when she stopped there.

"Any amateur experience?" he inquired.

"Quite a lot," said Rose; "pageants and things, and two or three little
plays."

"Can you dance?"

"Yes," said Rose.

He said he supposed ballroom dancing was what she meant, whereupon she
told him she was a pretty good ballroom dancer, but that it was
gymnastic dancing she had had in mind.

"All right," he said. "See if you can do this. Watch me, and then
imitate me exactly."

In the intensity of her absorption in his questions and her own answers
to them, she had never given a thought to the bystanders. But now as
they fell back to give him room, she swept a glance across their faces.
They all wore smiles of sorts. There was something amusing about
this--something out of the regular routine. A little knot of
chorus-girls halted in the act of going out the wide doors and stood
watching. Was it just a hoax? The suppressed unnatural silence sounded
like it. But at what John Galbraith did, one of the bystanders guffawed
outright.

It wasn't pretty, the dance step he executed--a sort of stiff-legged
skip accompanied by a vulgar hip wriggle and concluding with a
straight-out sidewise kick.

A sick disgust clutched at Rose as she watched--an utter revulsion from
the whole loathly business. She could scrub floors--starve if she had
to. She couldn't do the thing he demanded of her here out in the middle
of the floor, in her street clothes, without the excuse of music to make
it tolerable--and before that row of leering faces.

"Well?" he asked, turning to her as he finished. He wasn't smiling at
all.

"I'm not dressed to do that," she said.

"I know you're not," he admitted coolly, "but it can be done. Pick up
your skirts and do it as you are,--if you really want a job."

There was just a faint edge of contempt in that last phrase and,
mercifully, it roused her anger. A blaze kindled in her blue eyes, and
two spots of vivid color defined themselves in her cheeks.

She caught up her skirts as he had told her to do, executed without
compromise the stiff-legged skip and the wriggle, and finished with a
horizontal sidewise kick that matched his own. Then, panting, trembling
a little, she stood looking straight into his face.

The first thing she realized when the processes of thought began again
was that even if there had been a hoax, she was not, in the event, the
victim of it. The attitude of her audience told her that. Galbraith was
staring at her with a look that expressed at first, clear astonishment,
but gradually complicated itself with other emotions--confusion, a glint
of whimsical amusement. That gleam, a perfectly honest, kindly one,
decided Rose to take him on trust. He wasn't a brute, however it might
suit his purposes to act like one. And with an inkling of how her blaze
of wrath must be amusing him, she smiled slowly and a little
uncertainly, herself.

"We've been rehearsing this piece two weeks," he said presently, looking
away from her when he began to talk, "and I couldn't take any one into
the chorus now whom I'd have to teach the rudiments of dancing to. I
must have people who can do what I tell them. That's why a test was
necessary. Also, from now on, it would be a serious thing to lose
anybody out of the chorus. I couldn't take anybody who had come down
here--for a lark."

"It's not a lark to me," said Rose.

Now he looked around at her again. "I know it isn't," he said. "But I
thought when you first came in here, that it was."

With that, Rose understood the whole thing. It was evidently a fact that
despite the plain little suit, the beaver hat, the rough ulster she was
wearing, she didn't look like the sort of girl who had to rely on
getting a job in the chorus for keeping a roof over her head. Looks,
speech, manner--everything segregated her from the type. It was all
obvious enough, only Rose hadn't happened to think of it. It accounted,
of course, for the rather odd way in which the landlady, the
ticket-seller at the Globe, and meek little Mr. Quan, the assistant
stage manager, all had looked at her, as at some one they couldn't
classify. John Galbraith, out of a wider experience of life, had
classified her, or thought he had, as a well-bred young girl who, in a
moment of pique, or mischief, had decided it would be fun to go on the
stage. The test he had applied wasn't, from that point of view,
unnecessarily cruel. The girl he had taken her for, would, on being
ordered to repeat that grotesque bit of vulgarity of his, have drawn her
dignity about her like a cloak, and gone back in a chastened spirit to
the world where she belonged.

A gorgeous apparition came sweeping by them just now, on a line from the
dressing-room to the door--a figure that, with regal deliberation, was
closing a blue broadcloth coat, trimmed with sable, over an authentic
Callot frock. The Georgette hat on top of it was one that Rose had last
seen in a Michigan Avenue shop. She had amused herself by trying to
vizualize the sort of person who ought to buy it. It had found its
proper buyer at last--fulfilled its destiny.

"Oh, Grant!" said John Galbraith.

The queenly creature stopped short and Rose recognized her with a jump,
as the sulky chorus-girl. Dressed like this, her twenty pounds of
surplus fat didn't show.

Galbraith walked over to her. "I shan't need you any more, Grant." He
spoke in a quiet impersonal sort of way, but his voice had, as always, a
good deal of carrying power. "It's hardly worth your while trying to
work, I suppose, when you're so prosperous as this. And it isn't worth
my while to have you soldiering. You needn't report again."

He nodded not unamiably, and turned away. Evidently she had ceased to
exist for him as completely as the duchess. She glared after him and
called out in a hoarse throaty voice, "Thank Gawd I don't _have_ to work
for you."

He'd come back to Rose again by this time, and she saw him smile. "When
you do it," he said over his shoulder, "thank Him for me too." Then to
Rose: "She's a valuable girl; had lots of experience; good-looking;
audiences like her. I'm giving you her place because as long as she's
got those clothes and the use of a limousine, she won't get down to
business. I'd rather have a green recruit who will. I'm hiring you
because I think you will be able to understand that what you feel like
doing isn't important and that what I tell you to do is. The next
rehearsal is at a quarter to eight to-night. Give your name and address
to Mr. Quan before you go. By the way, what is your name?"

"Rose Stanton," she said. "But ..." She had to follow him a step or two
because he had already turned away. "But, may I give some other name
than that to Mr. Quan?" He frowned a little dubiously and asked her how
old she was. And even when she told him twenty-two, he didn't look
altogether reassured.

"That's the truth, is it? I mean, there's nobody who can come down here
about three days before we open and call me a kidnaper, and lead you
away by the ear?"

"No," said Rose gravely, "there's no one who'll do that."

"Very good," he said. "Tell Quan any name you like."

The name she did tell him was Doris Dane.

It was a quarter to seven when she came out through the white doors into
North Clark Street. The thing that woke her out of a sort of daze as she
trudged along toward her room in the unrelenting rain was a pleasurable
smell of fried onions; whereupon she realized that she was legitimately
and magnificently hungry. In any other condition, the dingy little
lunch-room she presently turned into, would hardly have invited her. But
the spots on the frayed starchy table-cloth, the streakiness of the
glasses, the necessity of polishing knife and fork upon her damp napkin,
couldn't prevent her doing ample justice to a small thick platter of ham
and eggs, and a plate of thicker wheat-cakes.

It occurred to her as she finished, that a quarter to eight probably
meant the hour at which the rehearsal was to begin. She'd have to be
back at the hail at least fifteen minutes earlier, in order to be
dressed and ready. She had no time to waste; would even have to hurry a
little.

She didn't try to explore for the reason why this discovery pleased her
so much. It was enough that it did. She flew along through the rain to
her tunnel, charged up the narrow stair, and in the unlighted corridor
outside her room, collided with her trunk. Well, it was lucky it had
come anyway. She tugged it into her room after she had lighted the gas.

You might have seen, if you had been there to see, just a momentary
hesitation after she'd got her trunk key out of her purse before she
unlocked it. It was a sort of Jack-in-the-box, that trunk. Would the
emotions with which she'd packed it, spring out and clutch her as she
released the hasp? The saving factor in the situation was that it was a
quarter past seven. In fifteen minutes she must be back at North End
Hall, getting ready to go to work at her job. Suppose she hadn't found a
job this afternoon? The thought turned her giddy.

She plunged into her trunk, rummaged out a middy-blouse, a pair of black
silk bloomers, and her gymnasium sneakers, rolled them all together in a
bundle, got into her rubbers and her ulster again, and--I'm afraid there
is no other word for it--fled.

She was one of the first of the chorus to reach the hail and she had
nearly finished putting on her working clothes before the rest of them
came pelting in. But she didn't get out quickly enough to miss the
sensation that was exciting them all--the news that Grant had been
dropped. A few of them were indignant; the rest merely curious. The
indignant ones allowed themselves a license in the expression of this
feeling that positively staggered Rose; made use in a quite
matter-of-fact way of words she had supposed even a drunken truck-man
would have attempted to refrain from in the presence of a woman. She
made a discovery afterward, that there were many girls in the chorus who
never talked like that; and among those who did, the further distinction
between those who used vile language casually, or even jocularly, and
those who were driven to it only by anger. But for these first few
minutes in the dressing-room, she felt as if she had blundered into some
foul pit abysmally below the lowest level of decency.

One of the girls advanced the theory that Grant hadn't finally been
dropped; it was absurd that she should be. She was one of the most
popular chorus-girls in Chicago. The director was merely trying to scare
her into doing better work for him. She'd come back, all right. She had
reasons of her own, this girl intimated, for wanting to work, despite
the possession of French clothes and the use of a limousine. Her
"friend," it seemed, needed to be taught some sort of lesson. Grant
would come around before to-morrow night, and eat enough humble pie to
induce Galbraith to take her back.

If this theory were sound, and it had a dreadful plausibility to Rose,
her only chance for keeping her job would be to do as well as Grant
could do, to-night, in this very first rehearsal; and she went out on
the stage in a perfect agony of determination. She must see everything,
hear everything; put all she knew and every ounce of energy she had,
into the endeavor to make John Galbraith forget that she was a recruit
at all.

The intensity of this preoccupation was a wonderful protection to her.
It kept away the sick disgust that had threatened her in the
dressing-room; prevented her even glancing ahead to a future that would,
had she taken to guessing about it, utterly have overwhelmed her. The
intensely illuminated present instant kept her mind focused to its
sharpest edge.

It is true that before she had been working fifteen minutes, she had
forgotten all about Grant and the possibility of her return. She'd even
forgotten her resolution not to let John Galbraith remember she was a
recruit. Indeed, she had forgotten she was a recruit. She was nothing at
all but just a reflection of his will. She'd felt that quality strongly
in him even behind his back during the afternoon rehearsal. Now, on the
stage in front of him, she was completely possessed by it.

She didn't know she was tired, panting, wet all over with sweat. Really,
of course, she was pretty soft, judged by her own athletic standards.
She hadn't done anything so physically exacting as this for over a year.
But she had the illusion that she wasn't _doing_ anything now; that she
was just a passive plastic thing, tossed, flung, swirled about by the
driving power of the director's will. It wouldn't have surprised her if
the chairs had danced for him.

It couldn't of course have occurred to her that she was producing her
own effect on the director; she couldn't have surmised that he was
driving his rehearsal at a faster pace and with a renewed energy and
fire because of the presence, there in the ranks of his chorus, of a
glowing, thrilling creature who devoured his intentions half formed, met
them with a blue spark across the poles of their two minds.

She realized, when the rehearsal was over, that it had gone well and
that it couldn't have gone so if her own part had been done badly. She
hesitated a moment after he'd finally dismissed them with a nod, and an,
"Eleven o'clock to-morrow morning, everybody," from a previously formed
intention of asking him if she'd do. But she felt, somehow, that such a
question would be foolish and unnecessary.

He had marked her hesitation and shot her a look that she felt followed
her as she walked off, and she heard him say to the world in general and
in a heartfelt sort of way, "Good God!" But she didn't know that it was
the highest encomium he was capable of, nor that it was addressed to
her.

She carried away, however, a glow that saw her back to her room, and
through the processes of unpacking and getting ready for bed, though it
faded swiftly during the last of these. But when the last thing that she
could think of to do had been done, when there was no other pretext,
even after a desperate search for one, that could be used to postpone
turning out her light and getting into bed, she had to confess to
herself that she was afraid to do it. And with that confession, the
whole pack of hobgoblin terrors she had kept at bay so valiantly since
shutting her husband's door behind her, were upon her back.

Here she was, Rose Aldrich, in a three-dollar-a-week room on North Clark
Street, having deserted her husband and her babies--a loving honest
husband, and a pair of helpless babies not yet three months old--to
become a member of the chorus in a show called _The Girl Up-stairs!_ Was
there a human being in the world, except herself, who would not, as the
most charitable of possible explanations, assume her to be mad? Could
she herself, seeing her act cut out in silhouette like that, be sure she
wasn't mad? Hysterical anyway, the victim of her own rashly encouraged
fancies, just as Rodney had so often declared she was? Oughtn't she to
have let James Randolph explore the subconscious part of her mind and
find the crack there must be in it, that could have driven her to a
crazy act like this?

It didn't matter now. She couldn't go back. She never could go back
after the things she had said to Rodney, until she had made good those
fantastic theories of hers. Probably he wouldn't want her to come back
even then. He'd find out where she was of course--what she was doing.
Why had she been such a fool, going away, as not to have gone far enough
to be safe? He'd feel that she'd disgraced him. Any man would. And he'd
never forgive her. He'd divorce her, perhaps. He'd have a right to, if
she stayed away long enough. And, without her there, with nothing of her
but memories--tormenting memories, he'd perhaps fall in love with some
one else--marry some one else. And her two babies would call that
unknown some one "mother." She must have been crazy! She'd thought she
didn't love them. That had been a delusion anyway. Her heart ached for
them now--an actual physical ache that almost made her cry out. And for
Rodney himself, for his big strong arms around her! Would she ever feel
them again?

She told herself this was a nightmare--something to be fought off, kept
at bay. But how did that help her now, when the armor must be laid
aside? Sometime or other she must turn out that light and lie down in
that bed, defenseless. She had never in her life asked more of her
courage than when, at last, she did that thing. There were nine hours
then ahead of her before eleven o'clock and the next rehearsal.


CHAPTER III

ROSE KEEPS THE PATH


Rose rehearsed twice a day for a solid week without forming the faintest
conception of who "the girl" was or why she was "the girl up-stairs."
She didn't know what sort of scene it was for instance that they burst
in on through the space marked by two of the little folding chairs
brought up from the floor of the dance-hall for the purpose. The group
of iron tables borrowed from the bar and set solidly together in the
upper right-hand corner of the stage whenever they rehearsed a certain
one of their song numbers, might with equal plausibility represent a
mountain in Arizona, the front veranda of a house or a banquet table in
the gilded dining-hall of some licentious multi-millionaire. They got up
on the insecure thing and tried to dance; that was all she knew.

During the entire period, and for that matter, right up to the opening
night she never saw a bar of music except what stood on the piano rack,
nor a written word of the lyrics she was supposed to sing. Rose couldn't
sing very much. She had a rather timorous, throaty little contralto that
contrasted oddly with the fine free thrill of her speaking voice. But
nobody had asked her what her voice was, nor indeed, whether she could
sing at all. She picked up the tunes quickly enough, by ear, but the
words she was always a little uncertain about.

It all seemed too utterly haphazard to be possible, but Rose decided not
to ask any of the authorities about this, because, while the possibility
of Grant's return dangled over her head, she didn't want to remind
anybody how green she was. But she finally questioned one of her
colleagues in the chorus about it, and was told that back at the
beginning of things, they had had their voices tried by the musical
director, who had conducted three or four music rehearsals before John
Galbraith arrived. They had never had any music to sing from but there
had been half a dozen mimeograph copies of the words to the songs, which
the girls had put their heads together over in groups of three or four,
and more or less learned. What had become of this dope, and whether it
was still available for Rose in case she were animated by a purely
supererogatory desire to study it, the girl didn't know.

She was a pale-haired girl, whom Rose thought she had heard addressed as
Larson, and she had emerged rather slowly as an individual personality,
out of the ruck of the chorus; a fact in her favor, really, because the
girls who had first driven themselves home to Rose through the shell of
her intense preoccupation with doing what John Galbraith wanted, had
been the vividly and viciously objectionable ones. The thing that had
prompted her to sit down beside Larson and, with this question about how
one learned the words to the songs, take her first real step toward an
acquaintance, was an absence of any strong dislike, rather than the
presence of a real attraction.

She made a surprising discovery when the girl, with a friendly pat on
the sofa beside her, for an invitation to her to sit down, began
answering her question. She was a real beauty. Or, more accurately, she
possessed the constituent qualities of beauty. She was pure English
eighteenth century; might have stepped down out of a Gainsborough
portrait. Dressed right, and made up a little, with her effects
legitimately heightened (and warned not to speak), she could have gone
to the Charity Ball as the Honorable Mrs. Graham, and Bertie Willis
would have gone mad about her. Only you had to look twice at her to
perceive that this was so; and what she lacked was just the unanalyzable
quality that makes one look twice.

Her speaking voice would have driven Bertie mad, too--foaming, biting
mad. It was disconcertingly loud, in the first place, and it came
out upon the promontories of speech with a flat whang that fairly
made you jump. Its undulations of pitch gave you something the same
sensation as riding rapidly over a worn-out asphalt pavement in a
five-hundred-dollar automobile; unforeseen springs into the air,
descents into unexpected pits. Her grammar wasn't flagrantly bad, though
it had, rather pitiably, a touch of the genteel about it. But now, when
she spoke to Rose, and with the lassitude of fatigue in her voice
besides, Rose heard something friendly about it.

"I don't know what you should worry about any of that stuff for," she
said. "How you sing or what you sing don't make much difference."

Rose admitted that it didn't seem to. "But you see," she said (she
hadn't had a human soul to talk to for more than a week and she had to
make a friend of somebody); "you see, I've just got to keep this job.
And if every little helps, as they say, perhaps that would."

The girl looked at her oddly, almost suspiciously, as if for a moment
she had doubted whether Rose had spoken in good faith. "You've got as
good a chance of losing your job," she said, "as Galbraith has of losing
his."

"I don't worry about it," said Rose, "when I'm up there on the stage at
work. It's too exciting. And then, I feel somehow that it's going all
right. But early in the morning, I get to imagining all sorts of things.
He's so terribly sudden. The girl whose place I got,--she hadn't any
warning, you know. It just happened."

The Larson girl gave a decisive little nod. Not so much, it seemed, in
assent to what Rose had just said, but as if some question in her own
mind had been answered.

"You'll get used to that feeling," she said. "You've got to take a
chance anyway, so why worry? We can work our heads off, but if the piece
is a fliv the opening night, they'll tack up the notice, and there we'll
be with two weeks' pay for eight weeks' work, and another six weeks'
work for nothing in something else if we're lucky enough to get it."

This was a possibility Rose hadn't thought of. "But--that isn't fair!"
she said.

The other girl laughed grimly. "Fair!" she echoed. "What they want to
print that word in the dictionary for, I don't see. Because what it
means don't exist. Not where I live, anyway. But what's the good of
making a fuss about it? We've got to take our chance like everybody
else."

"I don't believe this piece will fall, though," said Rose. "I don't
think Mr. Galbraith would let it. I think he's a perfect wonder, don't
you?"

The Larson girl looked at her again. "He's supposed to be about the best
in the business," she said, "and I guess he is." She added, "Dave tells
me he's going to put you with us in the sextette."

Dave was the thick pianist, and Rose had found him in the highest degree
obnoxious. He seemed to occupy an indeterminate social position in their
ship's company, between the forecastle, which was the chorus, and the
quarter-deck, which comprised Galbraith (you might call him the pilot),
the baby-faced man with the tortoise-shell spectacles, reputed to be the
author, two awesome intermittent gentlemen identified in the
dressing-room as the owners of the piece, and the musical director,
together with one or two more as yet unclassified. The principals, when
they should appear, would, Rose assumed, belong on the quarter-deck too.
The social gap between this afterguard and Rose and her colleagues in
the chorus, was not so very wide, but it was abysmally deep.
Nevertheless, the pianist, buoyed up on the wings of a boundless
effrontery, seemed to manage to remain unaware of it.

He had started rehearsals with this piece, it appeared, as a chorus-man,
and had become a pianist, thanks to the interposition of Fate (the real
pianist had fallen suddenly and desperately ill), and to his own
irresistible assurance that he could do anything. He could keep time and
he hit perhaps a third of the notes right.

The chorus liked him. The girls all called him Dave, seemed to
appreciate his notion of humor, and accepted his hugs and pawings as a
matter of course. But he took his jokes, his familiarities, and his
apparently impregnable self-esteem, upon the quarter-deck--slapped the
author on the back now and then, and had even been known to address John
Galbraith as "Old man." Incidentally, he hung about within ear-shot
during conferences of the powers, freely offered his advice, and
brought all sorts of interesting tidbits of gossip and prophecy back to
the chorus.

His announcement that Rose was going to be put into the sextette was
entitled to consideration, even though it couldn't be banked on. There
were three mediums and three big girls in the sextette. (Olga Larson was
one of the mediums and so needn't fear replacement by Rose, who was a
big girl.) Besides appearing in two numbers as a background to one of
the principals, they had one all to themselves, a fact which constituted
them a sort of super-chorus. Galbraith used to keep them for endless
drills after the general rehearsal was dismissed.

But the intimation that Rose was to be promoted to this select inner
circle, didn't, as it first came to her, give her any pleasure. Somehow,
as Larson told her about it, she could fairly see the knowing greasy
grin that would have been Dave's comment on this prophecy. And in the
same flash, she interpreted the Larson girl's look, half incredulous,
half satirical, and her, "You've got as good a chance of losing your job
as Galbraith has of losing his."

"I haven't heard anything about being put in the sextette," she said
quietly, "and I don't believe I will be."

"Well, I don't know why not." There was a new warmth in the medium's
voice. Rose had won a victory here, and she knew it. "You've got the
looks and the shape, and you can dance better than any of the big girls,
or us mediums, either. And if he doesn't put that big Benedict lemon
into the back line where she belongs, and give you her place in the
sextette, it will be because he's afraid of her drag."

Rose forbore to inquire into the nature of the Benedict girl's drag.
Whatever it may have been, John Galbraith was evidently not afraid of
it, because as he dismissed that very rehearsal, calling the rest of the
chorus for twelve the following morning, and the sextette for eleven, he
told Rose to report at the earlier hour. And a moment later, she heard
Dave say to the big show girl named Vesta Folsom (some one with a vein
of playful irony must have been responsible for this christening),
"Well, maybe I didn't call that turn."

"You're the original wise guy, all right," Vesta admitted. "You're
Joseph to all the sure things."

Barring Olga Larson, the chorus was probably unanimous, Rose reflected,
in looking at it like that. They accounted for her having got a job in
the first place at Grant's expense, and a promotion so soon thereafter
to the sextette, by assuming that John Galbraith had a sentimental
interest in her. Whether his reward had been collected in advance, or
was still unpaid, was an interesting theme for debate. But that, past or
present, the reward was his actuating motive, it wouldn't occur to
anybody to question.

There was no malice in this. Rose didn't lose caste with any of them on
account of it. But a chorus-girl is the most sentimental person in the
world. If there's anybody who really believes that love makes the world
go round, she is that one. It's love that actuates men to deeds of
heroism or of crime; it's love that makes men invest good money in
musical comedies; love that makes stars out of her undeserving sisters
in the chorus; love that is always waiting round the corner to open the
door to wealth and fame for her.

So when Grant came back and ate her humble pie in vain, and later, when
Benedict was relegated to a place in the back line, the natural
explanation was that Galbraith was crazy about the new girl.

Of course it set Rose all ablaze with wrath when she became aware of
this. It was precisely because she had rebelled against the theory that
love was what made the world go round, that she was here in the chorus.
Had she been content to let it make her world go round, she never would
have left Rodney. The only way she had of refuting the assumption in
this case would be by making good so demonstrably and instantaneously,
that they'd be compelled to see that her promotion had been inevitable.

It was in this spirit, with blazing cheeks and eyes, that she attacked
the next morning's rehearsal. She was only dimly aware of Benedict out
in the hall in front, viperishly waiting for the arrival of one of the
owners to make an impassioned plea for reinstatement. Her tears or her
tantrums were matters of supremely little importance. But that John
Galbraith should see that he had promoted her on merit and on nothing
but merit, mattered enormously.

Lacking the clue, he watched her in a sort of amused perplexity. Her way
of snatching his instructions, her almost viciously determined manner of
carrying them out, would have been natural had she been working under
the spur of some stinging rebuke, instead of under the impetus of an
unexpected promotion.

"Don't make such hard work of it, Dane," he said at last. "You're all
right, but have a little fun out of it. There are eight hundred people
out there," he waved his arm out toward the empty hall, "who have paid
their hard-earned money to feel jolly and have a good time. If you go on
looking like that, they'll think this piece was produced by Simon
Legree."

There came the same gleaming twinkle in his eye that had disarmed her
resentment once before, and as before, she found herself feeling rather
absurd. What mattered the microcephalic imaginings of greasy Dave and
his friends among the chorus? John Galbraith wasn't the sort of man to
get infatuated with a chorus-girl. The gleam in his eye was enough, all
by itself, to make that plain.

So, flushing up a little, she grinned back at him, gave him a nod of
acquiescence, and fell back to her place for the beginning of the next
evolution.

"If she smiles like that," thought John Galbraith, "she'll break up the
show." At the end of the rehearsal, he said to her, "You're doing very
well indeed, Dane. If I could have caught you ten years ago, I could
have made a dancer out of you."

It was a very real, unqualified compliment, and as such Rose understood
it. Because, by a dancer, he meant something very different from a
prancing chorus-girl. The others giggled and exchanged glances with Dave
at the piano. They didn't understand. To them, the compliment seemed to
have been delivered with the left hand. And somehow, an amused
recognition of the fact that they didn't understand, as well as of the
fact that she did, flashed across from John Galbraith's eyes to hers.

"Just a minute," he said as they all started to leave the stage, and
they came back and gathered in a half-circle around him. "We'll rehearse
the first act to-night with the principals. You six girls are supposed
to be young millionairesses, very up-to-date-bachelor-girl type,
intimate friends of the leading lady, who is a multi-millionairess
that's run away from home. You've all got a few lines to say. Go to Mr.
Quan and get your parts and have them up by to-night."

At half past four that afternoon, when the regular chorus rehearsal was
over, Rose asked John Galbraith if she might speak to him for a minute.
He had one foot on a chair and was in the act of unlacing his dancing
shoes, so he seemed to be, for him, comparatively permanent. He had a
disconcerting way, she had noticed, of walking away on some business of
his own in the middle of other people's sentences, intending to come
back, no doubt, in time to hear the end of them, but forgetting to.

"Fire away," he said, looking around at her over his shoulder. Then,
with reference to the blue-bound pair of sides she held in her hand,
"What's the matter? Isn't the part fat enough for you?"

"Fat enough?" Rose echoed inquiringly. "Oh, you mean long enough." She
smiled in good-humored acknowledgment of his joke, and let that do for
an answer.

John Galbraith hadn't been sure that it would be a joke to Rose. He'd
been a musical-comedy producer so long that no megalomaniacal absurdity
could take him by surprise. There were chorus-girls no doubt in this
very company, who, on being promoted to microscopic parts, would be
capable of complaining because they weren't bigger.

"All the same," said Rose, "I'm afraid I've got to tell you that I can't
take this, and to ask you to put me back into the regular chorus."

He wasn't immune to surprise after all, it seemed. He straightened up in
a flash and stared at her. "What on earth are you talking about?" he
asked.

"If I have words to say, even only a few, wouldn't anybody who happened
to be in the audience, know who I was?--I mean if they knew me already."

"Of course they would. What of it?"

"I told you," said Rose, "the day you gave me a job, that it wasn't a
lark. I had to begin earning my own living suddenly, and without any
training for it at all, and this seemed to be the best way. That's--all
true, and it's true that no one could come and, as you say, lead me away
by the ear. Nobody's responsible for me but myself. But there are people
who'd be terribly shocked and hurt if they found out I'd gone on the
stage. They know I'm earning my own living, but they don't know how I'm
doing it. I thought that as just one of the chorus, made up and all, I'd
be safe. But with these lines to say ..."

"Now listen to me," said John Galbraith; "listen as hard as you can.
Because when I've done talking, you will have to make up your mind. In
the first place you wouldn't be 'safe,' as you said, even in the chorus.
A make-up isn't a disguise. You will be rouged and powdered, your
eyelashes blackened, your lips reddened and so on, not to make you look
different, but to keep you looking the same under the strong lights.
You're not the sort of person to escape notice. That's the reason I made
up my mind to hire you before I knew you could dance. I saw you standing
back there in the doorway. You've got the quality about you that makes
people see you. That's one of your assets.

"So, if you're ashamed of being recognized in this business, you'd
better get out of it altogether. On the other hand, it seems to me that
if you've got to earn your living, it's nobody's business but your own
how you do it. You're the one who'll go hungry if you don't earn it, not
these friends of yours. So, if it seems a legitimate way of earning a
living to you, if you don't feel disgraced or degraded by being in it,
you'd better forget your friends and go ahead. You've made an excellent
start; you've earned a legitimate promotion. It will mean that instead
of getting twenty dollars a week when the show opens, you will get
twenty-five. It's a long time since I've given a person without
experience a chance like that. I gave it to you because you seemed
ambitious and intelligent--the sort who'd see me through. But if you
aren't ambitious, if the game doesn't look worth playing to you, and you
aren't willing to play it for all it's worth--why, good as you are, I
don't want you at all. So that's your choice!"

His manner wasn't quite so harsh as his words, but it convinced her that
he meant every one of them right to the foot of the letter.

She couldn't answer for a moment. She hadn't guessed that the choice he
was going to offer her would be between taking the little part he had
given her and playing it for all it was worth, defiant of Rodney's
feelings and of the scandal of the Lake Shore Drive--and going back to
her three-dollar room this afternoon, out of a job and without even a
glimmering chance of finding another.

"Take your time," he said. "I don't want to be a brute about it, but
look here! Try to see it my way for a minute. Here are my employers, the
owners of this piece. They're putting thousands of dollars into the
production of it. They've hired me to make that production a success.
Well, I don't know about other games, but this game's a battle. If we
win, it will be because we put every bit of steam and every bit of
confidence we've got into it and _make_ it win. That goes for me, and
for the principals, and right down through to the last girl in the
chorus. Every night there'll be a new audience out there that you will
have to fight--shake up out of the grouch they get when they pay for
their tickets; persuade to laugh and loosen up and come and play with
you.

"Will you be able to do your share, do you suppose, if you're slinking
around, afraid of being recognized? We don't care whether your pussy-cat
friends get their fur rubbed the wrong way or not. The only thing we
care about is putting this show across. Well, if you feel the way we do
about it, if you can make it the one thing you do care about, too--why,
come along. Let the pussy-cats go ..." He finished with a snap of his
fingers.

"The only one that really matters isn't a pussy-cat," said Rose, with a
reluctant wide smile, "and--he'd agree with you altogether, if he didn't
know you were talking to me. And I'm really very much obliged to you."

"You will come along then?"

"Yes," said Rose, "I'll come."

"No flutters?" questioned Galbraith. "No eleventh-hour repentance?"

"No," said Rose, "I'll see it through."

John Galbraith went away satisfied. Rose had the same power that he had,
of making a simple unemphatic statement irresistibly convincing. When
she said that she would go through, he knew that unless struck by
lightning, she would. But there had been something at once ironic and
tender about the girl's smile, when she had spoken of the only one who
really mattered, that he couldn't account for. Who was the only one that
really mattered, anyway? Her husband? He didn't think it likely. Young
women who quarreled with their husbands and ran away from them to go on
the stage, wouldn't, as far as his experience went, be likely to smile
over them like that. More probably a brother--a younger brother,
perhaps, fiercely proud as such a boy would be of such a sister.

She certainly had sand, that girl. He was mighty glad his bluff that he
would put her out of the chorus altogether, unless she took the little
part in the sextette, had worked. He'd have felt rather a fool if she
had called it.

Of course the thing that had got Rose was the echo, through everything
John Galbraith had said, of Rodney's own philosophy; his dear, big,
lusty, rather remorseless way. And now again, as before when she had
left him, it was his view of life that was recoiling upon his own head.

She was really grateful to Galbraith. What had she left Rodney for,
except to build a self for herself; to acquire, through whatever pains
might be the price of it, a life that didn't derive from him; that was,
at the core of it, her own? Yet here, right at the beginning of her
pilgrimage, she'd have turned down the by-path of self-sacrifice; have
begun ordering her life with reference to Rodney, rather than herself,
if John Galbraith hadn't headed her back.


CHAPTER IV

THE GIRL WITH THE BAD VOICE


The Girl Up-stairs had quite a miscellaneous lot of plot; indeed a plot
fancier might have detected nearly all the famous strains in its
lineage. Its foci were Sylvia Huntington, the beautiful
multi-millionairess, and Richard Benham, nephew of Minim, the Cosmetic
King and head of the Talcum Trust. Sylvia, tired of being sought for her
wealth, and yearning to be loved for herself alone, has run away to
Bohemia and installed herself in an attic over a studio occupied by two
penniless artists, one a poet, the other a musician. Only they aren't
penniless any more, having leaped to wealth and fame with an immensely
successful musical comedy they have just written. And, like Nanki Poo,
the musician isn't really a musician, but is the talented, rebellious
nephew of the Cosmetic King, none other than Dick Benham himself, a
truant from his tyrannical uncle's determination to make him into a
rouge and talcum salesman. He falls in love with Sylvia, not knowing her
as Sylvia, of course, but only as the girl up-stairs, a poor little
wretch to whom in the goodness of his heart, he is giving singing
lessons. And she falls in love with him, knowing him neither as Dick
Benham, nor as the successful composer (because his authorship of the
musical comedy has been kept a secret from her), but only as a poor
struggling musician. Poor Dick's affections are temporarily led astray
by the mercenary seductions of the leading lady in his opera, who has
learned the secret of his true identity and vast wealth, and means to
marry him under the cloak of disinterested affection. He gets bad advice
from his poet friend, too, who has dishonorable designs on the girl
up-stairs and so warns Dick against throwing himself away on a nobody,
of, possibly, doubtful virtue. It is, of course, essential to Sylvia
that Dick should ask her to marry him before he learns who she really
is, in order that she may be sure it isn't for her wealth that he is
seeking her.

This was the general lie of the land, though the thing was complicated,
of course, by minor intrigues, as for instance in the first act, when
Minim, the uncle, came to inquire of the successful composer what his
terms would be for introducing a song into his opera, extolling the
merits of Minim's newest brand of liquid face-powder. Then there was the
comic detective, whom Sylvia's frantic father had given the job of
finding her, and who, considering that he was the typical idiot
detective of musical comedy, came unaccountably close to doing it.

Then in the second act, there was the confusion produced by the fact
that Dick and his poet friend gave a midnight party on the roof, unaware
of the fact that Sylvia made it a practise, during these hot nights, to
crawl out from her attic, on to this same roof and sleep there. And on
this particular night, she had invited her six bachelor-girl friends,
who were in her confidence, to come and share its hospitalities with
her. The mutual misunderstandings, by this time piled mountain high,
were projected into the third act by the not entirely unprecedented
device of a mask ball in the palatial Fifth Avenue mansion of Sylvia's
father, in celebration of her return home--a ball whose invitation list
was precisely coincident, even down to the detective, with the persons
who had appeared in the first two acts. One minute before the last
curtain, Dick and Sylvia manage to thread their way out of the tangle of
scandal and misconception, and satisfy each other as to the
disinterested quality of their mutual adoration, falling into each
other's arms just as the curtain starts down.

It was not, of course, until after a good many rehearsals that Rose
could have given a connected account of it like that. They worked for
three hours on this first occasion, merely getting through the first
act--a miserable three hours, too, for Rose, owing to a little
misfortune that befell her right at the beginning.

The glow of determination Galbraith had inspired her with, to put her
own shoulder to the wheel and do her very topmost best, for the one
great desideratum, the success of the show, had kept her studying her
little handful of lines long after she supposed she knew them perfectly.
They weren't very satisfactory lines to study--just the smallest of
conversational small change, little ejaculations of delight or dismay,
acquiescence or dissent. But the trouble with them was, they were, for
the most part, exactly the last expressions that a smart young woman of
the type she was supposed to represent would use.

So, remembering what Galbraith had said about everybody down to the last
chorus-man doing the best he knew for the success of the show, Rose
sought him out, for a minute, just before the rehearsal began, and asked
if she might change two of her lines a little.

Galbraith grinned at her, turned and beckoned to the baby-faced man in
spectacles who stood a dozen paces away. "Oh, Mr. Mills!" he called.
"Can you come over here a minute?"

"He's the author," Galbraith then explained to Rose, "and we can't
change this book of his without his permission."

Then, "This is Miss Dane of the sextette," he said to Mills, "and she
tells me she'd like to make one or two changes in her lines."

It didn't need a sensitive ear to detect a note of mockery in this
speech, though Galbraith's face was perfectly solemn. But the face of
the author went a delicate pink all over, and his round eyes stared. "My
God!" he said.

The exclamation was explosive enough to catch the ear of an extremely
pretty young woman who stood near by with her hands in her pockets. She
wore a Burberry raglan and an entirely untrimmed soft felt hat, and she
came over unceremoniously and joined the group.

"Miss Devereux," said the author, with hard-fetched irony, "here's a
chorus-girl in perfect agreement with you. She's got about six lines to
say, and she wants to change two of them."

"What are your changes, Dane?" Galbraith asked.

Queerly enough, the curt seriousness of his speech was immensely
grateful to her--suggested that she perhaps hadn't been, wholly anyhow,
the object of his derision before.

"I only thought," said Rose, "that if instead of saying, 'My gracious,
Sylvia!' I said, 'Sylvia, _dear_!' or something like that, it would
sound a little more natural. And if I said, 'I _do_ wish, Sylvia'
instead of, 'I wish to goodness, Sylvia ...'"

She had said it all straight to the author.

"I suppose," he said, sneering very hard, "that your own personal
knowledge of the way society women talk is what leads you to believe
that your phrases are better than mine?"

"Yes," said Rose, serenely matter-of-fact, "it is."

Sarcasm is an uncertain sort of pop-gun. You never can tell from which
end it's going to go off.

"I don't know," said Miss Devereux, turning now a deadly smile on him,
"whether Miss--what's-her-name--agrees with me or not. But, do you know,
I agree with her."

"Oh, I don't care a _damn_!" said Mr. Harold Mills. "Go as far as you
like. I don't recognize the piece now. What it'll be when you--butchers
get through with it ...!" He flung out his hands and stalked away.

"Go find Mr. Quan," said Galbraith to Rose, "and tell him to mark those
changes of yours in the book. Tell him I said so."

It was, though, a pretty unsatisfactory victory. Everybody was grinning;
for the tale spread fast, and while Rose knew it wasn't primarily at
her, her sensations were those of a perfectly serious, well-meaning
child, in adult company, who, in all innocence has just made a remark
which, for some reason incomprehensible to him, has convulsed one member
of it with fury, and the others with laughter. More or less she could
imagine where the joke lay. Harold had evidently been quarreling with
pretty much all of the principals, over more or less necessary changes
in his precious text, until everybody was rather on edge about it,
loaded and primed for all sorts of explosions; when, cheerfully along
came Rose, a perfectly green young chorus-girl, unsuspectingly carrying
the match for the mine, or the straw for the camel, whichever way you
wanted to put it.

She wouldn't have minded the way she had blundered into the focus of
public attention, if, in other particulars, the rehearsal had been
going well with her. Unluckily, though, she started off wrong foot
foremost in the very first of their numbers, with a mistake that snarled
up everything and brought down an explosion of wrath from Galbraith.
Even if she'd been trying, he groaned, to make mistakes, he didn't see
how she'd managed that one. But the real nightmare didn't begin till the
first of her scenes with Sylvia, where she had to talk.

She'd said her lines over about a thousand times apiece, and practised
their inflection and phrasing in as many ways as she could think of, but
she had neglected to memorize her cues. Not altogether, of course; she
thought she'd learned them, but they were terribly scanty little cues
anyway, just a single word, usually, and never more than two, and
nothing short of absolutely automatic memorization was any good. So she
sat serene through a five-second stage wait while Quan frantically spun
the pages of his book to find the place--he ought to have been following
of course, but he'd yielded to the temptation of trying to do something
else at the same time and had got lost--and then dry-throated, incapable
of a sound for a couple of seconds more--hours they seemed--after she
had been identified as the culprit who had failed to come in on a cue.

The sight of the author out in the hall invoking his gods to witness
that this girl who had presumed to change his lines, was an idiot
incapable of articulate speech, brought her out of her daze. But even
then she couldn't get anything quite right. There seemed to be no golden
mean between the bellow of a fireman and a tone which Galbraith assured
her wouldn't be audible three rows back. And when they came to one of
the lines she'd been allowed to change, in her panic over the thing, she
mixed the two versions impartially together into a sputter of words that
meant nothing at all, whereupon the author, out at the back of the hall,
laughed maniacally.

She would have gone on stuttering at it until she got it straight, if
Galbraith hadn't put her out of her misery by striding over, snatching
the book from Quan, and reading the line himself. She hadn't anything
more to say in the first act, and she managed to get through the rest of
the song numbers without disaster, if equally without confidence or
dash. She felt as limp as if she had been boiled and put through the
clothes-wringer. And when, as he dismissed the rehearsal Galbraith told
her to wait a minute, she expected nothing less than ignominious
reduction to the ranks.

"That matter of putting your voice over, Dane," he said, to her
amazement quite casually, "is just a question of thinking where you want
it to go. If you'll imagine a target against the back wall over there,
and will your voice to hit it, whatever direction you're speaking in,
and however softly you speak, you will be heard. If you forget the
target and think you're talking to the person on the stage you're
supposed to be talking to, you won't be heard. Say your lines over to me
now, without raising your voice or looking out there. But keep the
target in mind."

Rose said all the lines she had in the whole three acts. It didn't take
a minute. He nodded curtly. "You've got the idea." He added, just as she
turned away, "You were quite right to suggest those changes. They're an
improvement."

That rehearsal marked the nadir of Rose's career at the Globe. From then
on, she was steadily in the ascendent, not only in John Galbraith's good
graces, which was all of course that mattered. She won, it appeared, a
sort of tolerant esteem from some of the principals, and even the owners
themselves spoke to her pleasantly.

They entertained her vastly, now that a confidence in her ability to do
her own part left her leisure to look around a bit. The contrast between
the two leading women, Patricia Devereux, who played the title part, and
little Anabel Astor, who played the mercenary seductress, was a piquant
source of speculation. As far as speech and manners went, Miss Devereux
might have been a born citizen of the world Rose had been naturalized
into by her marriage with Rodney; in fact, she reminded her rather
strikingly of Harriet. She was cool, brusk, hard finished, and, as was
evident from Galbraith's manifest satisfaction with her, thoroughly
workmanly and competent. Yet she never seemed really to work in
rehearsal. She gave no more than a bare outline of what she was going to
do. But the outline, in all its salient angles, was perfectly
indicated. She rehearsed in her ordinary street clothes, with her hat
on, and as often as not, with a wrist-bag in one hand. She neither
danced, sang, nor acted. But she had her part letter perfect before any
of the other principals. She never missed a cue, and though she sang off
the top of her voice, and let the confines of a very scant little tailor
skirt mark the limits of her dancing, she sang her songs in perfect
tempo and always made it completely clear to Galbraith and the musical
director, just how much of the stage in every direction, her dances were
going to occupy and precisely the _tempi_ at which they were to be
executed. In a word, if her work had no more emotional value than a
mechanical drawing, it did have the precision of one.

Rose mightn't have appreciated tins, had she not seen and admired Miss
Devereux from the front in a production she and Rodney had been two or
three times to see the season before.

Little Anabel Astor presented as striking a contrast to all this as it
would be possible to imagine. She, too, had attained a good deal of
celebrity in the musical-comedy world--was to be one of the features of
the cast. She'd come up from the ranks of the chorus. She'd been one of
the ponies, years ago, in some of George M. Cohan's productions, and she
was still just a chorus-girl. But a chorus-girl raised to the third, or
fourth, or, if you like, the _n_th power. She had an electric grin, and
a perfectly boundless vitality, which she spent as freely on rehearsals
as on performances. She always dressed for rehearsals just as the chorus
did, in a middy-blouse and bloomers, and she worked as hard as they did,
and even more ungrudgingly.

She was a pretty little thing, with nothing very feminine about
her--even her voice had a harsh boyish quality--and she never looked
prettier to Rose than when, her face flushed with an hour's honest toil,
she would wipe the copious sweat of it off with her sleeve, and panting,
look up with a smile at John Galbraith and an expectant expression,
waiting for his next command, which reminded Rose of the look of a
terrier alert for the stick his master means to throw for him. Her
speech was unaffectedly that of a Milwaukee Avenue gamin, and it served
adequately and admirably as a vehicle for the expression of her emotions
and ideas.

She formed her likes and dislikes with a complete disregard of the
social or professional importance of the objects of them. She took an
immediate liking to Rose; gave her some valuable hints on dancing, took
to calling her "dearie" before the end of the second rehearsal and, with
her arm around her, confided to her in terms of blood-curdling
profanity, her opinion of Stewart Lester, the tenor, who played the part
of Dick Benham in the piece.

The queer thing was that she and Patricia were on the best of terms.
They didn't compete, that was it, Rose supposed, and they were both good
enough cosmopolites to bridge across the antipodal distances between
their respective traditions and environments. Patricia hated the tenor
as bitterly as Anabel. And, in her own way, she was as pleasantly
friendly to Rose. There were no endearments or caresses, naturally, but
her brusk nods of greeting and farewell seemed to have real good feeling
behind them.

The men principals--this was rather a surprise to Rose--weren't nearly
so pleasant nor so friendly. Most of them professed to be totally
unaware of her existence and the one or two who showed an
awareness--Freddy France, who played the comic detective, was chief of
these offenders--did it in a way that brought the fighting blood into
her cheeks.

My astronomical figure for the expression of Rose's rise in her
profession is, in one important particular, misleading. There was
nothing precalculable about it, as there is about the solemn swing of
the stars. The impetus and direction of Rose's career derived from two
incidents that might just as well not have happened--two of the flukiest
of small chances.

The first of these chances concerned itself with Olga Larson and her bad
voice. Olga, as I think I have told you, was one of the sextette. And,
oddly enough, she owed her membership in this little group of quasi
principals, to her voice and nothing else. Because it was a bad voice
only when she talked. When she sang, it had a gorgeous thrilling ring to
it that made Patricia Devereux, when she heard it, clench her hands and
narrow her eyes. She'd never been taught what to do with it, but then,
for what Galbraith wanted of her she needed no teaching. Her ear was
infallible; let her hear a tune once and she could reproduce it
accurately, squarely up to time, squarely, always, in the middle of the
pitch. When she opened her rather dainty-looking mouth and sang, she
could give you across the footlights the impression that at least four
first-class sopranos were going uncommon strong. She hadn't a salient or
commonplace enough sort of beauty to have singled her out from the
chorus and she was no better a dancer than passable. But none of the
girls who would be picked out by a committee of automobile salesmen as
the prettiest and the best dancers in the chorus could sing a note, and
the sextette would have been dumb without her voice.

It was natural enough that Patricia didn't like it. She owed her own
position as a leading light-opera soprano to the cultivation to its
highest possible perfection of a distinctly second-rate voice, to a
precise knowledge of its limitations and to a most scrupulous economy in
its effects. Inevitably, then, the raw splendors that Olga Larson
dispensed so prodigally gave Patricia the creeps.

Inevitably, too, without any conscious malice about it, she made up her
clear, hard little mind the moment she heard Olga talk, that she was
utterly impossible for the sextette. "Really, my dear man," she told
Galbraith after the first rehearsal, "you'll have to find some one else.
American audiences will stand a good deal, I know, in the way of
atrocious speech, but positively she'll be hooted. They'll all sound
frightful enough, especially because that Dane girl, if that's her name,
talks like a lady, but this one ...!" She gave a cruelly adequate little
imitation of Olga's delivery of one of her lines. "Like some one who
doesn't know how, trying to play the slide trombone," she commented.

Galbraith couldn't pretend that she exaggerated the horrors of it, but
explained why the girl was indispensable. The explanation didn't please
Patricia any too well, either.

"Sing!" she cried hotly. "But she sings detestably!"

"No doubt," Galbraith admitted, "but she makes a great big noise always
on the right note, and that's what that bunch of penny whistlers can't
do without. Give her a little time," he concluded diplomatically, "and
I'll try to teach her."

"It can't be taught," said Patricia. "That's too much even for you."

So it happened that when Rose came out of her own nightmare, got her
breath and found leisure to look around, she found some one else whose
troubles weren't so transitory. The little scene in the first act,
between Sylvia and the sextette, was held up again and again, endlessly,
it seemed to Rose,--and what must it have seemed to the poor
victim?--while Galbraith bellowed Larson's lines after her, sometimes in
grotesque imitation of her own inflections, sometimes in what was meant
as a pattern for her to follow. The girl whose ear was so wonderfully
sensitive to pitch and rhythm, was simply deaf, it seemed, to the
subtleties of inflection. She reduced Galbraith to helpless wrath, in
her panic, by mistaking now and again, his imitations for his models.
The chorus tittered; the spectators suffocated their guffaws as well as
they could. Patricia grew more and more acutely and infuriatingly ironic
all the while.

Evidently Galbraith didn't mean to be a brute about it. He began every
one of these tussles to improve her reading of a line, with a gentleness
that would have done credit to a kinder-gartener. But, after three
attempts, each more ominously gentle and deliberate than the last, his
temper would suddenly fly all to pieces. "--No--no--no!" he would roar
at her, and the similes his exasperation would supply him with, for a
description of what her speech was like, were as numerous as the acids
in a chemical laboratory; and they all bit and burned just as hard.

Rose looked on with rather tepid feelings. She sympathized with
Galbraith on the whole. The poor man was doing his best; and the girl,
queerly, didn't seem to care. She confronted him in a sort of stockish
stupidity, saying her lines, when he told her to try again, with the
same frightful whang he was doing his best to correct, so that he was
justified, Rose felt, in accusing her of not trying, or even listening
to him.

It was in the dressing-room one night, after one of these rehearsals,
that she caught a different view of the situation. She sat down on a
bench to unlace her shoes and looked straight into Olga Larson's face--a
face sunken with a despair that turned Rose cold all over. The tearless
tragic eyes were staring, without recognition, straight into Rose's own.
It must be with faces like this that people mounted the rails on the
high bridge in Lincoln Park, intent on leaving a world that had become
intolerable. Packed in all around her in the inadequate dressing-room,
the other girls were chattering, squealing, scrambling into their
clothes, as unaware of her tense motionless figure, as if it had been a
mere inanimate lump. She couldn't have been more alone if she had been
sitting out on the rock of Juan Fernandez.

Rose invented various pretexts to delay her own dressing until the other
girls were gone. She could no more have abandoned that hopeless creature
there, than she could have left a person drowning. When they had the
room to themselves, she sat down on the bench beside her.

"You're all right," she said, feeling rather embarrassed and inadequate
and not knowing just how to begin. "I'm going to help you."

"It's always like this," the girl said. "It's no use. He'll put me back
in the chorus again."

"Not if I can help it," Rose said. "But the first thing to do is to put
on your clothes. Then we'll go out and get something to eat."

Even that little beginning involved a struggle--a conscious exertion of
all the power Rose possessed. She learned, for the first time, what the
weight of an immense melancholy inertia like that can be. The girl was
like one paralyzed. She was willing enough to talk. She told Rose the
whole story of her life; not as one making confidences to a friend;
rather with the curious detachment of a melancholy spectator discussing
an unfortunate life she had no concern with.

She knew how good her voice was, and, equally, how badly it needed
training. She'd had, always, a passionate desire to sing and a belief in
her possibilities. If she could get a chance, she could succeed. She'd
undergone heartbreaking privations, trying to save money enough out of
her earnings at one form of toil after another, to take lessons. But,
repeatedly, these small savings had, by some disaster, been swept away:
stolen once, by a worthless older brother; absorbed on another occasion
by her mother's fatal illness. Two years ago she had drifted into the
chorus, but had been altogether unlucky in her various ventures. She
wasn't naturally graceful--had been slow learning to dance. Again and
again, she'd been dropped at the end of three or four weeks of rehearsal
(gratuitous of course) and seen another girl put in her place. When this
hadn't happened, the shows she had been in had failed after a few weeks'
life.

When Galbraith had put her into the sextette in _The Girl Up-stairs_, a
hope, just about dead, had been awakened. She'd at last learned to dance
well enough to escape censure and she had seen for herself how
indispensable her singing voice was to the group. And then it had
appeared she'd have to talk! And, inexplicably to herself, her talking
wasn't right. The thing had just been another mirage. It was hopeless.
Galbraith would put her back into the chorus--drop her, likely enough,
altogether.

The thing that at first exasperated Rose and later, as she came vaguely
to understand it, aroused both her pity and her determination, was the
girl's strange, dully fatalistic acquiescence in it all. The sort of
circumstances that in Rose herself set the blood drumming through her
arteries, keyed her will to the very highest pitch, quickened her brain,
made her feel in some inexplicable way, confident and irresistible, laid
on this girl a paralyzing hand. It wasn't her fault that she didn't meet
her difficulties half-way with a vicious, driving offensive--rout them,
demoralize them. It was her tragedy.

"All right," Rose apostrophized them grimly. "This time you're up
against me."

"Look here!" she said to Olga, when the story was told (this was across
the table in the dingy lunch-room where, as Doris Dane, she had had her
first meal, and most of her subsequent ones), "look here, and listen to
what I'm going to tell you. I know what I'm talking about. You're going
to learn to say your lines before to-morrow's rehearsal, so that Mr. ...
So that Galbraith won't stop you once." (This was a trick of speech that
came hard to Rose, but she was gradually learning it.) "We're going up
to my room now, and I'm going to teach you. We've got lots of time.
Rehearsal to-morrow isn't till twelve o'clock. You're going to stay in
the sextette, and when the piece opens, you're going to make a hit."

She hesitated a moment, then added in the same blunt matter-of-fact way,
"You're one of the most beautiful women in Chicago. Did you know that?
Dressed right and with your hair done right, you could make them stare.
Have you finished your coffee? Then come along. Here! Give me your part.
You don't want to lose it."

For the girl, pitiably, almost ludicrously, was staring at Rose in a
sort of somnambulistic daze. She hadn't been hypnotized, but she might
about as well have been, for any real resistance her mind, or her will,
could offer to her new friend's vibrant confidence.

She went with Rose up to the little three-dollar room. Rose put her into
a chair, sat down opposite her, took the first phrase of her first
speech, and said it very slowly, very quietly, half a dozen times. That
was at half past eleven o'clock at night. By midnight, Olga could say
those first three words, if not to Rose's complete satisfaction, at
least a lot better. She went on and finished the sentence. They worked
straight through the night, except that two or three times the girl
broke down; said it was hopeless. She got up once and said that she was
going home, whereupon Rose locked the door and put the key in her
stocking. She sulked once, and for fifteen minutes wouldn't say a word.
But by seven o'clock in the morning, when they went back to the
lunch-room and ate an enormous breakfast, Olga's sluggish blood was
fired at last. It was a profane thought, but you _could_ take the Fatal
Sisters by the hair and coerce a change in the pattern they were
weaving.

And Rose, by that time, by the plain brute force of necessity, was a
teacher of phonetics. She'd discovered how she made sounds herself and
had, with the aid of a hand mirror, developed a rough-and-ready
technique for demonstrating how it was done. She remembered, with bitter
regret, a course she had dozed through at the university, dreaming about
the half-back, which, had she only listened to the professor instead,
would be doing her solid service now. Had there been other courses like
that, she wondered vaguely? Had the education she had spent fifteen
years or so on an actual relation to life after all? It was a startling
idea.

She walked Olga out to the park and back at seven-thirty, and at eight
they were up in her room again. They raided the delicatessen at eleven
o'clock, and made an exiguous meal on the plunder. And at twelve, husky
of voice, but indomitable of mind, they, with the others, confronted
Galbraith upon the stage in North End Hall.

"Do you suppose," Olga said during the preliminary bustle of getting
started, "that he's put any one else in my part already?"

It was a fear Rose had entertained, but had avoided suggesting to her
pupil.

"I don't believe so," she said. "If he has, I'll talk to him."

"No, you won't!" said Olga. "I'll talk to him myself."

There was a ring to that decision that did Rose's heart good. It took a
long time to get that northern blood on fire, but when you did, you
could count on its not going cold again overnight.

It got pretty exciting of course, as the scene between Sylvia and the
sextette drew near, and when it came, Rose could hardly manage her own
first line--hung over it a second, indeed, before she could make her
voice work at all, and drew a sharp look of inquiry from Galbraith. But
on Olga's first cue, her line was spoken with no hesitation at all, and
in tone, pitch and inflection, it was almost a phonographic copy of the
voice that had served it for a model.

There was a solid two seconds of silence. For once in her life Patricia
Devereux had missed a cue!

John Galbraith had been an acrobat as well as a dancer, and he was
quick on his feet. He had just turned, unexpectedly, an intellectual
somersault, but he landed cleanly and without a stagger. "Come, Miss
Devereux," he said, "that's your line." And the scene went on.

But when, about four o'clock that afternoon, the rehearsal was over,
Galbraith called Olga out to him and allowed himself a long incredulous
stare at her. "Will you tell me, Larson," he asked, "why in the name of
Heaven, if you could do that, you didn't do it yesterday?"

"I couldn't do it yesterday," she said. "Dana taught me."

"Taught you!" he echoed. "Beginning after last night's rehearsal?...
Dane!" he called to Rose, who had been watching a little anxiously to
see what would happen.

"You've learned it very well indeed," he said with a nod of dismissal to
Olga, as Rose came up. "Don't try to change it. Stick to what you've
got."

Then, to Rosa, "Larson tells me you taught her. How did you do it?"

"Why, I just--taught her," said Rosa. "I showed her how I said each
line, and I kept on showing her until she could do it."

"How long did it take you--all night?"

"All the time there's been since last rehearsal," said Rosa, "except for
three meals."

"Good God!" said Galbraith. "Devereux said it couldn't be done, and I
agreed with her. Well, live and learn. Look here! Will you teach the
others--the other four in the sextette? I'll see you're paid for it."

"Why, yes,--of course," said Rose, hesitating a little.

"Oh, I don't mean overnight," he said, "but mornings--between
rehearsals--whenever you can."

"I wasn't thinking of that," said Rose. "I was just wondering if they'd
want to be taught--I mean, by another chorus-girl, you know."

"They'll want to be taught if they want to keep their jobs," said
Galbraith. And then, to her astonishment, and also perhaps to his, for
the thing was radically out of the etiquette of the occasion, he reached
out and shook hands with her. "I'm very much obliged to you," he said.


CHAPTER V

MRS. GOLDSMITH'S TASTE


If there was a profession in the world which Rose had never either idly
or seriously considered as a possible one for herself, that of a teacher
was it. And yet, the first money she ever earned in her life was the
twenty dollars the management paid her for teaching the other four girls
in the sextette to say their lines. She was a born teacher, too. And the
born teacher is a rare bird.

One must know something in the first place, of course, before one can
teach it--a fact that has resulted in the fitting of an enormous number
of square pegs into round holes. Most of the people in the world who are
trying to teach, are those whose aptitude is for learning. But the
scholar's temper and the teacher's are antipodal; a salient, vivid
personality that can command attention, the unconscious will to
conquer--to enforce (a very different thing from the wish to do these
things) that is the _sine qua non_ for a real teacher. And that, of
course, was Rose all over.

Those four sulky, rather supercilious chorus-girls, coming to Rose under
a threat of dismissal, for lessons in the one last thing that a
free-born American will submit to dictation about, might not want to
learn, nor mean to learn, but they couldn't help learning. You couldn't
be unaware of Rose and, being aware of her, you couldn't resist doing
things as she wanted you to.

Informally, too, she taught them other things than speech. "Here,
Waldron!" Galbraith would say. "This is no cake-walk. All you've got to
do is to cross to that chair and sit down in it like a lady. Show her
how to do it, Dane." And Rose, with her good-humored disarming smile at
the infuriated Waldron, would go ahead and do it.

I won't pretend that she was a favorite with the other members of the
sextette, barring Olga. But she managed to avoid being cordially hated,
which was a very solid personal triumph.

I have said that there were two small incidents destined to have a
powerful influence at this time, in Rose's life. One of them I have told
you about--the chance that led her to teach Olga Larson to talk. The
other concerned itself with a certain afternoon frock in a Michigan
Avenue shop.

The owners of _The Girl Up-stairs_ were very inadequately experienced in
the business of putting on musical comedies. Galbraith spoke of them as
amateurs, and couldn't, really, have described them better. Your
professional gambler--for musical-comedy producing is an especially
sporting form of gambling and nothing else--assesses his chances in
advance, decides coolly whether they are worth taking or not, and then,
with a steely indifference awaits the event. The amateur, on the
contrary, is always fluttering between an insane confidence and a
shuddering despair; between a reckless disregard of money and a foolish
attempt to save it. It had been in one of their hot fits that the owners
of _The Girl Up-stairs_ had retained Galbraith. The news item Rose had
read had not exceeded truth in saying that he was one of the three
greatest directors in the country. They couldn't have got him out to
Chicago at all but for the chance that he was, just then, at the end of
a long-time contract with the Shumans and holding off for better terms
before he signed a new one. The owners were staggered at the prices they
had to pay him, at that, but they recovered and were still blowing warm
when they authorized him to engage Devereux, Stewart, Astor and McGill
(McGill was the chief comedian, the Cosmetic King) for all of these were
high-priced people.

But by the time the question of costumes came up, they were shivering in
a perfect ague of apprehension. Was there no limit to the amount they
were to be asked to spend? This figure that Galbraith indicated as the
probable cost of having a first-class brigand in New York design the
costumes and a firm of pirates in the same neighborhood execute them,
was simply insane. New York managers might be boobs enough to submit to
such an extortion, but they, believe them, were not. Many of the
costumes could be bought, ready made, on State Street or Michigan
Avenue. Some of the fancy things could be executed by a competent
wardrobe mistress, if some one would give her the ideas. And ideas--one
could pick them up anywhere. Mrs. Goldsmith, now,--she was the wife of
the senior of the two owners--had splendid taste and would be glad to
put it at their service. There was no reason why she should not at once
take the sextette down-town and fit them out with their dresses.

Galbraith shrugged his shoulders, but made no further complaint. It was,
he admitted, as they had repeatedly pointed out, their own money. So a
rendezvous was made between Mrs. Goldsmith and the sextette for
Lessing's store on Michigan Avenue at three o'clock on an afternoon when
Galbraith was to be busy with the principals. He might manage to drop in
before they left to cast his eye over and approve the selection.

It was with some rather uncomfortable misgivings that Rose set out to
revisit a part of town so closely associated with the first year of her
married life. The particular shop wasn't, luckily, one that she had
patronized in that former incarnation. But it was in the same block with
a half dozen that were, and she hadn't been east of Clark Street since
the day Otto had driven her to the Polk Street Station.

The day was cold and blustery--a fact that she was grateful for, as it
gave her an excuse for wearing a thick white veil, which was almost as
good as a mask. It was with a rather breathless excitement that
persisted in feeling like guilt--her heart wouldn't have beaten any
faster, she believed, if she had just robbed a jewelry store and were
walking away with the swag in her pocket--that she debouched out of Van
Buren Street, around the corner of the Chicago Club, and into the
avenue. Unconsciously, she had been expecting to meet every one she
knew, beginning with Frederica, in the course of the two blocks or so
she had to walk. Very naturally, she didn't catch even a glimpse of any
one she even remotely knew. Suppose there should be any one in the
store! But this, she realized, wasn't likely.

It wasn't a really smart shop. It paid an enormous rent there in that
neighborhood in order to pretend to be, and the gowns on the wax figures
in its windows, were taken on faith by pleasurably scandalized
pedestrians as the very latest scream of fashion. The prices on these
confections were always in the process of a violent reduction, as large
exclamatory placards grievously testified. The legend eighty-eight
dollars crossed out in red lines, with thirty-nine seventy-five written
below, for a sample. The most exclusive smartness for the economy-loving
multitude. This was the slogan.

Rose, arriving promptly at the hour agreed on, had a wait of fifteen
minutes before any of her sisters of the sextette, or Mrs. Goldsmith
arrived. She told the suave manager that she was waiting for friends,
but this didn't deter him from employing a magnificent wave of the hand
to summon one of the saleswomen and consigning Rose almost tenderly, to
her care. He didn't know her, but he knew that that ulster of hers had
come straight over from Paris, had cost not less than two hundred
dollars, and had been selected by an excellently discriminating eye; and
that was enough for him.

"I don't want anything just now," Rose told the saleswoman. But she
hadn't, in these few weeks of Clark Street, lost the air of one who will
buy if she sees anything worth buying. In fact, the saleswoman thought,
correctly, that she knew her and was in for a shock a little later when
Mrs. Goldsmith and the other five members of the sextette arrived.

Meanwhile, she showed Rose the few really smart things they had in the
store--a Poiret evening gown, a couple of afternoon frocks from Jennie,
and so on. There wasn't much, she admitted, it being just between
seasons. Their Palm Beach things weren't in yet.

Rose made a few appreciative, but decidedly respect-compelling comments,
and faithfully kept one eye on the door.

The rest of the sextette arrived in a pair and a trio. One of them
squealed, "Hello, Dane!" The saleswoman got her shock on seeing Rose nod
an acknowledgment of this greeting and just about that time, they heard
Mrs. Goldsmith explaining who she was and the nature of her errand, to
the manager. The necessary identifications got themselves made somehow.
They weren't in any sense introductions, everybody in the store felt
that plainly. Mrs. Goldsmith was touching the skirts of musical comedy
with a very long pair of tongs. There was absolutely no connection,
social or personal, between herself and the young persons who were to
wear the frocks she was going to buy.

She stood them up and stared at them through her eye-glasses, discussed
their various physical idiosyncrasies with candor, and, one by one,
packed them off to try on haphazard selections from the mounds which
three industrious saleswomen piled up before her. You couldn't deny her
the possession of a certain force of character, for not one of the six
girls uttered a word of suggestion or of protest.

And the sort of gowns she was exclaiming over with delight and ordering
put into the heap of possibilities, were horrible enough to have drawn a
protest from the wax figures in the windows. The more completely the
fundamental lines of a frock were disguised with sartorial scroll-saw
work, the more successful this lady felt it to be. An ornament, to Mrs.
Goldsmith, did not live up to its possibilities, unless it in turn were
decorated with ornaments of its own; like the fleas on the fleas on the
dog.

It is a tribute to one of the qualities that made John Galbraith a
successful director, that Rose spent a miserable half-hour worrying over
these selections of the wife of the principal owner of the show, feeling
she ought to put up some sort of fight and hardly deterred by the patent
futility of such a course. To rest her esthetic senses from the delirium
of fussiness that was giving Mrs. Goldsmith so much pleasure, she began
thinking about that Poiret frock--the superb simple audacity of it! It
had been made by an artist who knew where to stop. And he had stopped
rather incredibly soon. Just suppose ... And then her eyes lighted up,
gazed thoughtfully out the window across the wind-swept desert of the
avenue, and, presently she grinned--widely, contentedly.

For the next hour and a half, during the intervals of her own trying on,
she entertained herself very happily with the day-dream that she herself
had a commission to design the costumes for _The Girl Up-stairs_. She
had always done that more or less, she realized, when she went to
musical-comedy shows with Rodney, especially when they were badly
costumed. But this time she did it a good deal more vividly, partly
because her interest in the piece was more intense, partly because her
imagination had a blank canvas to work on.

All the while, like Sister Anne in the tower, she kept one eye on the
door and prayed for the arrival of John Galbraith.

He came in just as Mrs. Goldsmith finished her task--just when, by a
process of studious elimination, every passable thing in the store had
been discarded and the twelve most utterly hopeless ones--two for each
girl--laid aside for purchase. The girls were despatched to put on the
evening frocks first, and were then paraded before the director.

He was a diplomat as I have said (possibly I spoke of him before as an
acrobat. It comes to the same thing), and he was quick on his feet.
Rose, watching his face very closely, thought that for just a split
second, she caught a gleam of ineffable horror. But it was gone so
quickly she could almost have believed that she had been mistaken. He
didn't say much about the costumes, but he said it so promptly and
adequately that Mrs. Goldsmith beamed with pride. She sent the girls
away to put on the other set--the afternoon frocks, and once more the
director's approbation, though laconic, was one hundred per cent. pure.

"That's all," he said in sudden dismissal of the sextette. "Rehearsal at
eight-thirty."

Five of them scurried like children let out of school, around behind the
set of screens that made an extemporaneous dressing-room, and began
changing in a mad scramble, hoping to get away and to get their dinners
eaten soon enough to enable them to see the whole bill at a movie show
before the evening's rehearsal.

But Rose didn't avail herself of her dismissal--remained hanging about,
a couple of paces away from where Galbraith was talking to Mrs.
Goldsmith. The only question that remained, he was telling her, was
whether her selections were not too--well, too refined, genteel, one
might say, for the stage. Regretfully he confessed he was a little
afraid they were. It needed a certain crudity to withstand the glare of
the footlights and until these gowns had been submitted to that glare,
one couldn't be sure.

He wasn't looking at her as he talked, and presently, as his gaze
wandered about the store, it encountered Rose's face. She hadn't
prepared it for the encounter, and it wore, hardly veiled, a look of
humorous appreciation. His sentence broke, then completed itself. She
turned away, but the next moment he called out to her, "Were you waiting
for me, Dane?"

"I'd like to speak to you a minute," she said, "when you have time."

"All right. Go and change your clothes first," he said.

Out of the tail of her eye as she departed, she saw him shaking hands
with the owner's wife and thanking her effusively for her help.
Incidentally, he was leading her toward the door as he did it. And at
the door, he declined an offer to be taken anywhere he might want to go
in her electric.

She found the other girls on the point of departure. But Olga offered to
wait for her.

"No, you run along," Rose said. "I've some errands and I don't feel like
seeing a movie to-night, anyway."

Olga looked a little odd about it, but hurried along after the others.

A saleswoman--the same one the manager assigned to Rose under the
misconception which that smart French ulster of hers had created when
she came into the store--now came around behind the screen to gather up
the frocks the girls had shed.

"Will you please bring me," said Rose, "that Poiret model you showed me
before the others came in? I'll try it on."

The saleswoman's manner was different now and she grumbled something
about its being closing time.

"Then, if you'll bring it at once ..." said Rose. And the saleswoman
went on the errand.

Five minutes later, Galbraith from staring gloomily at the mournful heap
of trouble Mrs. Goldsmith had left on his hands, looked up to confront a
vision that made him gasp.

[Illustration: "It isn't quite so much your style, is it?"]

"I wanted you to see if you liked this," said Rose.

"If I liked it!" he echoed. "Look here! If you know enough to pick out
things like that, why did you let that woman waste everybody's time with
junk like this? Why didn't you help her out?"

"I couldn't have done much," Rose said, "even if my offering to do
anything hadn't made her angry--and I think it would have. You see,
she's got lots of taste, only it's bad. She wasn't bewildered a bit. She
knew just what she wanted and she got it. It's the badness of these
things she likes. And I thought ..." She hesitated a little over this.
"I thought as long as they couldn't be good, perhaps the next best thing
would be to have them as bad as possible. I mean that it would be easier
to throw them all out and get a fresh start."

He stared at her with a frown of curiosity. "That's good sense," he
said. "But how did you come to think of it?--Oh, I don't mean that!" he
went on impatiently. "Why should you bother to think of it?"

Her color came up perceptibly as she answered. "Why--I want the piece to
succeed, of course. I was awfully miserable when I saw the sort of
things she was picking out and I spent half an hour trying to think what
I could do about it. And then I saw that the best thing I could do, was
nothing."

"You didn't do nothing though," he said. "That thing you've got on is a
start."

Rose turned rather suddenly to the saleswoman. "I wish you'd get that
little Empire frock in maize and corn-flower," she said. "I'd like Mr.
Galbraith to see that, too." And the saleswoman, now placated, bustled
away.

"This thing that I've got on," said Rose swiftly, "costs a hundred and
fifty dollars, but I know I can copy it for twenty. I can't get the
materials exactly of course, but I can come near enough."

"Will you try this one on, miss?" asked the saleswoman, coming on the
scene again with the frock she had been sent for.

"No," said Rose. "Just hold it up."

Galbraith admitted it was beautiful, but wasn't overwhelmed at all as
he had been by the other.

"It's not quite so much your style, is it? Not drive enough?"

"It isn't for me," said Rose. "It's for Olga Larson to wear in that _All
Alone_ number for the sextette."

"Why Larson especially?" he asked. "Except that she's a friend of
yours."

"She isn't," said Rose, "particularly. And anyway, that wouldn't be a
reason. But--did you ever really look at her? She's the one really
beautiful woman in the company."

"Larson?" said John Galbraith incredulously.

And Rose, with a flush and a smile partly deprecatory over her
presumption in venturing to say such things to a formidable authority
like the director, and partly the result of an exciting conviction that
she was right, told him her mind on the subject, while Galbraith, half
fascinated, half amused, listened.

"I don't happen to remember the portrait of the Honorable Mrs. Graham
that you speak about," he said, "but I won't deny that you may be right
about it."

It was well after closing time by now--a fact that the manager, coming
to reinforce the saleswoman, contrived, without saying so, to indicate.

"Put on your street things," said Galbraith bruskly. "I'll wait."


CHAPTER VI

A BUSINESS PROPOSITION


"Why, this was what I wanted to say," said Rose, taking up the broken
conversation as he pulled the shop door to behind him. She didn't go out
on to the sidewalk, but lingered in the recessed doorway. "I thought if
you'd let me fake that evening frock for twenty dollars, and then buy
the little Empire one for Olga Larson--it's only eighty--that the two
would average just about what Mrs. Goldsmith was paying for the others."

"Why not fake the other one too?" he asked.

"It couldn't be done," said Rose decisively. "There's no idea in it, you
see, that just jumps out and catches you. It gets its style from being
so--reserved and so just exactly right. And of course that's true of the
girl herself. She's perfect, just about. But it's a perfection that it's
awfully easy to kill. She kills it herself by the way she does her
hair."

Buzzing around in the back of John Galbraith's mind was an unworded
protest against the way Rose had just killed her own beauty with a thick
white veil so nearly opaque that all it let him see of her face was an
intermittent gleam of her eyes. Keenly aware--a good deal more keenly
aware than he was willing to admit--of the sort of splendor which, but
for the veil, he'd be looking at now, a splendor which nothing short of
a complete mask could hide, he was not quite in the mood to wax
enthusiastic over a beauty so fragile as that of the girl they had been
talking about. There was a momentary silence, broken again, by Rose.

"Of course, you'll want to take a look at her for yourself, before you
decide," she said; "but I'm pretty sure you'll see it." She put a
cadence of finality into her voice. The business between them was over,
it said, and all she was waiting for was a word of dismissal, to nod
him a farewell and go swinging away down the avenue. Still he didn't
speak, and she moved a little restlessly. At last:--

"Do you mind crossing the street?" he asked abruptly. "Then we can talk
as we walk along." She must have hesitated, because he added, "It's too
cold to stand here."

"Of course," she said then. All that had made her hesitate was her
surprise over his having made a request instead of giving an order.

Galbraith turned her north on the vast empty east sidewalk--a highway in
itself broader than many a famous European street, and they walked a
little way in silence.

No observant Chicagoan, Rose reflected, need ever yearn for the wastes
of the Sahara when a desire for solitude or the need of privacy came
upon him. The east side of Michigan Avenue was just as solitary and
despite the difficulty of getting across to it, really a good deal more
accessible. The west side was one unbroken glow of light and though the
Christmas crowds had thinned somewhat with the closing of the shops,
they were still thick enough to have made it difficult for two people to
walk and talk together. A quadruple stream of motors, bellowing warnings
at one another, roaring with suddenly opened throttles, squealing under
sudden applications of the brake, occupied the roadway and served more
than the mere distance would have done, to isolate the pair that had the
east sidewalk all to themselves.

He couldn't be looking for a better place to talk than this, Rose
thought. Why didn't he begin? Probably he'd got started thinking about
something else. A motor coming along near the curb emitted a
particularly wanton bellow, and she saw him jump like a nervous woman,
then stand still and glare after the offender. He must be feeling
specially irritable to-night, she thought.

It was a good diagnosis. And his irritation had, for him, a most unusual
cause. Chorus-girls, principals, owners, authors, costumers, were
frequently the objects of his exasperated dissatisfaction. But to-night
the person he was out of all patience with was himself. He couldn't make
up his mind what he wanted to do. Or rather, knowing what he wanted to
do, he couldn't make up his mind to do it. It was this indecision of his
that had produced the silence while he and Rose had stood in the
entrance to Lessing's store. The only resolution he had come to there
had been not to allow her to say good night to him and walk away. But
now that she was striding along beside him, he couldn't make up his mind
what to say to her.

A more self-conscious man would have forgiven himself his indecision
from recognizing the real complexities of the case. He was, to begin
with, an artist--almost a great artist. And a universal characteristic
of such is a complete detachment from the materials in which they
work--a sort of remorselessness in the use of anything that can
contribute to their complete expression. The raw materials of John
Galbraith's art were paint and canvas, fabrics, tunes, men and women. It
was an axiom in his experience, that any personal feeling--any sort of
human relation with one of the units in the mosaic he was building--was
to be avoided like the plague. His professional and personal contempt
for a colleague capable of a love-affair with a woman in a company he
was directing, would be inexpressible--unfathomable. Of course when a
man's job was finished--and this sort of job nearly always did finish on
the opening night--why, after that, his affairs were his own affair.

In a word: he ordered his life on the perfectly sound masculine instinct
for keeping his work and his sex emotions in separate water-tight
compartments. Rose was a working member of his production, and it was
therefore flagrantly impossible that his relation with her should be
other than purely professional.

And yet there had been something intangibly personal from the very
first, about every one of their broken momentary conversations--almost
about every meeting of their eyes. It had disturbed him the first time
he had ever seen her smile. He remembered the occasion well enough. She
had just finished executing the dance step--the almost inexcusably
vulgar little dance step he had ordered her to do as a condition of
getting the job she said she wanted--had turned on him blazing with
indignation; but right in the full blaze of it, at something she must
have seen, and understood, in his own face, in deprecation of her own
wrath, she had, slowly and widely, smiled.

And then the way she worked for him in rehearsal! He'd seen girls work
hard before--desperately, frantically hard, under the fear that they
weren't good enough to hold their jobs. That wasn't the spirit in which
this girl worked. She seemed possessed by a blazing determination that
the results he wanted should he obtained. It seemed she couldn't devour
his intentions quickly enough, and her little unconscious nod of
satisfaction after he had corrected a mistake and she felt sure that now
she knew exactly what he wanted, was like nothing in his previous
experience.

The wonderful thing about it was that she carried that eagerness beyond
the confines of her own job. And she put it to good effect too. She had
taken that Larson girl and, by the plain force of personal dominance,
made her talk right. Well, why? That was the question. Who was she
anyway? Where had she come from? Who was "the only person who really
mattered" to her--the person who wasn't a pussy-cat?

He had tried hard to convince himself that these were all professional
questions. It was true they had a bearing on the more important and
perfectly legitimate question whether he had, in this altogether
extraordinary personality, discovered a new star. He had, during the
last quarter century, discovered a number--one or two of them
authentically of the first magnitude.

It would have simplified matters immensely if he could have seen Rose in
this category. But the stubborn fact was, he couldn't. She couldn't sing
a bit, and marked as her natural talent was for dancing, she hadn't
begun young enough ever to master the technique of it. That left acting;
but he doubted if she could ever go very far at that. Salient as her
personality was, she hadn't the instinct for putting it over. Or, if she
had it, she distrusted it. She was handicapped, too, by her sense of
humor. A real star in the egg, wouldn't have stopped in the middle of
that first fine blaze of wrath he'd seen, to join him in smiling at it.
A real actress wouldn't have spent her energies teaching another woman
to talk, nor persuading him to buy another woman a beautiful frock. The
focus had to be sharper than that. The only way you got the drive it
took to spell your name in electric lights, was by subordinating
everything else to the projection of yourself, treating your
surroundings, with irresistible conviction, merely as a background. This
girl could never do that.

Yet the notion wouldn't leave his mind that she could do something, and
do it more than commonly well. She must have an instinct of her own for
effects to enable her to understand so instantaneously what he was
trying to do. And once in a while, especially lately, he'd seen, over
some experiment of his, a flash of dissent across her eager face which
gave him the preposterous idea that by asking her--asking a
chorus-girl!--he might get a suggestion worth thinking about.

Certainly she had helped him in another way, there was no doubt of that.
That sextette, thanks to her teaching, would be the smartest, best
mannered bunch of chorus-girls that had adorned a production of his in a
long, long time.

And here, perhaps, he came closer than anywhere else to an understanding
of the source of the girl's attraction for him. John Galbraith could
remember the time when, a nameless little rat of a cockney, he had slept
under London bridges, opened cab doors for half-pence, carried links on
foggy nights. By the clear force of genius he had made his way up from
that;--from throwing cart-wheels for the amusement of the queues waiting
at the pit entrances of theaters, from the ribald knock-about of East
End halls, from the hilarity of Drury Lane pantomimes. Professionally
his success was a solid indubitable thing. If he weren't actually
preeminent in his special field, at least there was no one who was
accorded a preeminence over him.

But another ambition, quite apart from the professional one, was hardly
so well satisfied. From the time of his very earliest memories he had
felt a passionate admiration for good breeding, and a consuming envy of
the lucky unconscious possessors of it. Since ten years old, he had
been possessed by the great desire to be acknowledged a gentleman. There
was nothing of vulgar veneer about this. It was the real interior thing
he wanted; that invisible yet perfectly palpable hall-mark which without
explanations or credentials, classified you. His profession had not
brought him in contact more than very infrequently with people of this
sort, and his personal interests never could be made to do so with
results perfectly satisfactory to himself. There it was,--the thing
those lucky elect possessed without a thought or an effort. It was an
indestructible possession, apparently, too. You couldn't throw it away.
Dissipation, dishonesty, even a total collapse that brought its victim
down to the sink that he himself had sprouted from, seemed powerless to
efface that hall-mark.

He learned to suppose that if it were indestructible, it was also
unattainable, though perhaps he himself failed of attaining it only in
the consciousness of having failed--in the inability to stop trying for
it, straining all his actions through a sieve in the effort to conform
to a standard not his own.

Well, this girl, whose own life must have collapsed under her in a
peculiarly cruel and dramatic fashion so that she had had to come to him
and ask him for a job in the chorus--she had the hall-mark. She had
besides a lot of the qualities that traditionally went with it, but
often didn't. She was game--game as a fighting-cock. What must it not
have meant to her to come down into that squalid dance-hall in the first
place and submit to the test he had subjected her to! How must the
dressing-room conversation of her colleagues in the chorus have revolted
and sickened her? What must it mean to her to take his orders--sharp
rasping orders, with the sting of ridicule in the tail of them when they
had to be repeated;--to be addressed by her last name like a servant?
Why, this very afternoon, how must she have felt, standing there like a
manikin, ordered to put on this dress and that, by a fussy fat woman who
wouldn't have touched her with tongs? But from not one of these
experiences had he ever seen her flinch or protest. Oh, yes, she was
game, and she was simple, as they always were; a fine type of the real
thing.

And, somehow, he felt, she treated him as if he were hall-marked too.
He hadn't much to go by--absurdly little things really. But, after all,
it was the little things that counted;--a fine distinction in the
cadence of a voice, in the sort of nod of greeting or farewell one gave.
She never nodded at him in that curt telegraphic sort of way without
warming him up a bit inside.

And all the while he was a director and she was a chorus-girl and an
unyielding etiquette of their respective professions forbade a word of
human intercourse between them! He had violated it, as both of them had
been aware, when he shook hands with her and thanked her for having
taught Olga Larson to talk. And just because he recognized quite well
how necessary the barrier was in all but one out of a thousand cases,
its existence in this one case baffled and irritated him.

Up to the hour when he had turned into Lessing's store this afternoon,
for a look at the dresses Mrs. Goldsmith had been picking out for the
sextette, this feeling of baffled curiosity and of irritation over the
etiquette that forbade his satisfying it, would have summed up,
adequately enough, all the emotions he was conscious of toward the girl.
His professional admiration for her was another thing of course--a
perfectly legitimate thing. But with her appearance from behind the
screen, in that French evening gown--a gown she wore with the
indescribable air of belonging in it--with all her vibrant, irregular,
fascinating, eupeptic beauty fully revealed, his mood of impatient
acquiescence had fallen away. The basis of his feeling toward her
shifted in a manner that James Randolph wouldn't have had a moment's
difficulty in explaining, although Galbraith didn't understand it
himself.

The thing he was conscious of was, when she made that offer to copy this
gown herself for twenty dollars and so leave him leeway for the purchase
of the Empire frock for Olga--offering to go to that trouble not for
herself or her friend, but to further the accomplishment of what he
wanted; namely, the success of his production--what he was conscious of
then, was an overpowering desire to make a confidante of her; to talk
matters out with her, show her some of the major strategy of the game
that he had to consider, and find out how the thing would look to her.

It was all against the rules, of course. But to this case--the one in a
thousand certainly, in ten thousand maybe--the rules manifestly did not
apply.

If it hadn't been for that opaque white veil, the glow of light and
eagerness in her face would probably have conquered his resistance
finally and for good, while they stood there in the entry to the store.
As it was, he was still hanging on a dead center as they walked down the
east side of the avenue together.

Ahead of them, and to the right, over in Grant Park, was the colossal
municipal Christmas tree, already built, and getting decorated against
the celebration of Christmas Eve, now only two days away.

"Shall we rehearse on Christmas Day?" Rose asked.

He came out of his preoccupation a little vaguely. "Why, yes. Yes, of
course," he said absently. Then, coming a little further, and with a
different intonation, he went on: "We're really getting pressed for
time, you see. And the opening won't wait for anybody. It's hard luck
though, isn't it?"

"I suppose it is, for the others;" Rose said, "but--I'm glad."

It wouldn't have needed so sensitive an ear as his to catch the girl's
full meaning. Christmas--this Christmas, the first since that mysterious
collapse of her life, whose effect he had seen, but whose cause he
couldn't guess--was going to be a terrible day for her. She had dreaded
lest it should be empty. He wanted to say, "You poor child!" But--this
was the simple fact--he was afraid to.

There was another momentary silence, and again Rose broke it.

"Do you think you'll be able to convince Mrs. Goldsmith," she asked,
"that her gowns don't look well on the stage?"

"Probably not," he said in quick relief. Rose had decided the issue for
herself; brought up the very topic he'd wanted to bring up; got him off
his dead center at last. Back of Rose, of course, was the municipal
Christmas tree with its power of suggesting a lot of ideas she must
fight out of her mind.

"Certainly not," he went on, "if you're right about her, and I fancy you
are, that her taste isn't negative, but bad, and that it's the very
hideousness of the things she likes. No, she won't be convinced, and if
I know Goldsmith, he'll say his wife's taste is good enough for him. So
if we want a change, we've a fight on our hands."

The way he had unconsciously phrased that sentence startled him a
little.

"The question is," he went on, "whether they're worth making a fight
about. Are they so bad as I think they are?"

"Oh, yes," said Rose. "They're dowdy and fourth-class and ridiculous. Of
course I don't know how many people in the audience would know that."

"And I don't care." said John Galbraith with a flash of intensity that
made her look round at him. "That's not a consideration I'll give any
weight to. When I put out a production under my name, it means it's the
best production I can make with the means I've got. There may be men who
can work differently; but when I have to take a cynical view of it and
try to get by with bad work because most of the people out in front
won't know the difference, I'll retire. I'm only fifty and I've got ten
or fifteen good years in me yet. But before I'll do that, I'll go out to
my little farm on Long Island and raise garden truck."

There was another momentary silence, for the girl made no comment at all
on this statement of his _credo_. But he felt sure, somehow, that she
understood it and there was nothing deprecatory about the tone in which,
presently, he went on speaking.

"Of course a director's got only one weapon to use against the owners of
a show, when it comes down to an issue, and that's a threat to resign
unless they let him have his way. I've used that twice in this
production already, and I can see one or two places coming where I may
have to use it again. So, if there's any way of throwing out those
costumes without giving them their choice between getting new ones or
getting a new director, I'd like to find it. Would it be possible, do
you think, to get better ones that would also be cheaper? That argument
would bring Goldsmith around in a hurry. It's ridiculous, of course, but
that's the trouble with making a production for amateurs. You spend more
time fighting them, than you do producing the show."

"I don't believe," said Rose, "that you could get better ready-made
costumes a lot cheaper; at least, not enough to go around, and in a
hurry. Of course every now and then, you can pick up a tremendous
bargain--some imported model that's a little extreme, or made in trying
colors, that they want to get rid of and will sell almost for whatever
you'll pay. But the two or three we might be able to find, wouldn't help
us much."

"And I suppose," he said dubiously, "it's out of the question getting
them any other way than ready-made; that is, and cheaper too."

The only sign of excitement there was in the girl's voice when she
answered, was a sort of exaggerated matter-of-factness. Oh, yes, there
was besides a wire edge on it, so that the words came to him through the
cold air with a kind of ringing distinctness.

"I could design the costumes and pick out the materials," she said, "but
we'd have to get a good sewing woman--perhaps more than one, to get them
done."

He wasn't greatly surprised. Perhaps the notion that she might suggest
something of the sort was responsible for the tentative dubious way in
which he had said he supposed it couldn't be done.

But Rose, at the sound of her own voice and the extraordinary
proposition it was uttering, was astonished clear through. She hadn't
had the remotest idea of saying such a thing a moment or two before.
What had suggested it, she couldn't have told. That day-dream perhaps,
that she had amused herself with while Mrs. Goldsmith was making up the
tale of her atrocities. Perhaps it had been just the suggestions
speaking in the tone, not the words, of John Galbraith's voice--that he
hoped she'd offer something like that.

Anyway, whatever it was that presented the idea to her, the thing that
seized on it and spoke it aloud was an instinct that didn't need to stop
and think--an instinct that realized indeed, if this isn't too
far-fetched a way of putting it, that its only chance lay in escaping
into the open ahead of the slower-footed processes of thought. If she
hadn't spoken instantly like that, it's perfectly clear she wouldn't
have spoken at all. But, having heard her own voice say the words, she
resolved, in spite of her fright--because she was frightened--to back
them up.

"You've had--experience in designing gowns, have you?" Galbraith asked.

"Only for myself," she admitted. "But I know I can do that part of it."

And she wasn't telling more than the truth! The confident excitement
that possessed her, gave a stronger assurance than any amount of
experience could have done.

"But,"--she reverted to the other part of the plan--"I'm not a good
sewer. I'd have to have somebody awfully good, who'd do exactly what I
told her."

"Oh, that can be managed;" he said a little absently, and with what
struck Rose as a mere man's ignorance of the difficulties of the
situation. Expert sewing women didn't grow on every bush. But at the end
of a silence that lasted while they walked a whole block, he convinced
her that she had been mistaken.

"I was just figuring out the way to work it," he said then, explaining
his silence. "I shall tell Goldsmith and Block (Block was the junior
partner in the enterprise) that I've got hold of a costumer who agrees
to deliver twelve costumes satisfactory to me, at an average of say,
twenty per cent less than the ones Mrs. Goldsmith picked out. If they
aren't satisfactory, it's the costumer's loss and we can buy these that
Mrs. Goldsmith picked out, or others that will do as well, at Lessing's.
I think that saving will be decisive with them."

"But do you know a costumer?" Rose asked.

"You're the costumer;" said Galbraith. "You design the costumes, buy the
fabrics, superintend the making of them. As for the woman you speak of,
we'll get the wardrobe mistress at the Globe. I happen to know she's
competent, and she's at a loose end just now, because her show is
closing when ours opens. You'll buy the fabrics and you'll pay her. And
what profit you can make out of the deal, you're entitled to. I'll
finance you myself. If they won't take what we show them, why, you'll be
out your time and trouble, and I'll be out the price of materials and
the woman's labor."

"I don't think it would be fair," she said, and she found difficulty in
speaking at all because of a sudden disposition of her teeth to
chatter--"I don't think it would be fair for me to take all the profit
and you take all the risk."

"Well, I can't take any profit, that's clear enough," he said; and she
noticed now a tinge of amusement in his voice. "You see, I'm retained,
body and soul, to put this production over. I can't make money out of
those fellows on the side. But you're not retained. You're employed as a
member of the chorus. And so far, you're not even being paid for the
work you're doing. As long as you work to my satisfaction there on the
stage, nothing more can be asked of you. As for the risk, I don't
believe it's serious. I don't think you'll fall down on the job, and I
don't believe Goldsmith and Block will throw away a chance to save some
money."

At the end of another silence, for Rose was speechless here, he went on
expanding the plan a little further. And if the assurances he gave her
were essentially mendacious, he himself wasn't exactly aware that they
were. It had often happened in productions of his, he said--and this
much was true--that to save time or to accomplish some result he wanted,
he put up a little of his own money for something and trusted to a
prosperous event for getting it back. It was clearly for the good of the
show that the costumes for the sextette should be better than the ones
Mrs. Goldsmith had picked out. The only alternative way of getting them,
to a knock-down and carry-away fight with Goldsmith and Block, which,
even if it were successful, would weaken the effect of his next
ultimatum, was the plan he now proposed to Rose. She needn't regard the
money he put up as in any sense a personal loan to her. They were simply
cooperating for the good of the enterprise. If her work turned out to be
valuable, it was only right she should be paid for it.

And then he pressed her for an immediate decision. The job would be a
good deal of a scramble at best, as the time was short. If she agreed to
it, he'd get in touch with the wardrobe mistress at the Globe, to-night.
As for the money, he had a hundred dollars or so in his pocket, which
she could take to start out with.

Of course the only lie involved in all this was the warp of the whole
fabric; that he was doing it, impersonally, for the success of the show.
And that might well enough have been true. Only in this case, it
definitely wasn't. He was doing it because it would establish a personal
connection, the want of which was becoming so tormenting a thing to his
soul, between himself and this girl whom he had to order about on the
stage and call by her last name, or rather by a last name that wasn't
hers--an imagination-stirring, question-compelling, warm human creature,
who, up to now, had been as completely shut away from him as if she had
been a wax figure in a show-window.

They had reached the Randolph Street end of the avenue, and a policeman,
like Moses cleaving the Red Sea, had opened the way through the tide of
motors for a throng of pedestrians bound across the viaduct to the
Illinois Central suburban station.

"Come across here," said Galbraith taking her by the arm and stemming
this current with her. "We've got to have a minute of shelter to finish
this up in," and he led her into the north lobby of the public library.
The stale baked air of the place almost made them gasp. But, anyway, it
was quiet and altogether deserted. They could hear themselves think in
here, he said, and led the way to a marble bench alongside the
staircase.

Rose unpinned her veil and, to his surprise, because of course she was
going out in a minute, put it into her ulster pocket. But, curiously
enough, the sight of her face only intensified an impression that had
been strong on him during the last part of their walk--the impression
that she was a long way off. It wasn't the familiar contemplative brown
study, either. There was an active eager excitement about it that made
it more beautiful than ever he had seen it before. But it was as if she
were looking at something he couldn't see--listening to words he
couldn't hear.

"Well," he said a little impatiently, "are you going to do it?"

At that the glow of her was turned fairly on him. "Yes," she said, "I'm
going to do it. I suppose I mustn't thank you," she went on, "because
you say it isn't anything you're doing for me. But it is--a great thing
for me--greater than I could tell you. And I won't fail. You needn't be
afraid."

Inexplicably to him (the problem wouldn't have troubled James Randolph)
the very completeness with which she made this acknowledgment--the very
warmth of the hand-clasp with which she bound the bargain, vaguely
disappointed him--left him feeling a little flat and empty over his
victory.

He found his pocketbook and counted out a hundred and twenty dollars,
which he handed over to her. She folded it and put it away in her
wrist-bag. The glow of her hadn't faded, but once more it was turned on
something--or some one--else. It wasn't until he rose a little abruptly
from the marble bench, that she roused herself with a shake of the head,
arose too, and once more faced him.

"You're right about our having to hurry," she said. "Don't you suppose
that some of the department stores on the west side of State Street
would still be open--on account of Christmas, you know?"

"I don't know," he said. "Very likely. But look here!" He pulled out his
watch. "It's after seven already. And rehearsal's at eight-thirty.
You've got to get some dinner, you know."

"Dinner doesn't take long at the place where I go," she reminded him.
"But if I can get one or two things now--I don't mean the
materials--why, I can get a start to-night after the rehearsal's over."

"I don't like it," he said glumly. "Oh, I know, it's a rush job and
you'll have to work at it at all sorts of hours. If only you ... If I
could just ease up a bit on your rehearsals! Only, you see, the sextette
would he lost without you. Look here! There's nothing life or death
about this, you know. You don't want to forget that you've got a limit,
and crowd the late-at-night and early-in-the-morning business too hard.
Think where we'd be if you turned up missing on the opening night!"

"I shan't do that," she said absently almost, and not in his direction.
Then, with another little shake, bringing herself back to him with a
visible effort: "If you only knew what a wonderful thing it's going to
be, to have something for late at night and early in the morning ..."

Before he could find the first one of the words he wanted, she had given
him that curt farewell nod which, so inexplicably, from the first had
stirred and warmed him, and turned away toward the door.

And she had never seen what was fairly shining in his face; no more than
she had heard the thing that rang so eagerly in his voice through the
thin disguise of an impersonal, director-like concern that she shouldn't
impair her health so far as to spoil her for the sextette!


CHAPTER VII

THE END OF A FIXED IDEA


She couldn't of course have missed a thing as plain as that but for a
complete preoccupation of thought and feeling that would have left her
oblivious to almost anything that could happen to her. Galbraith himself
had detected this preoccupation, but he would have been staggered had he
known its intensity. He had likened it in his own thoughts, to an effect
that might have been caused by the presence with her of another person
whom he could neither see nor hear. And that, had he believed it
seriously, would have been an almost uncannily correct guess.

The flaming vortex of thoughts, hopes, desires which enveloped her, was
so intense as almost to evoke a sense of the physical presence of the
subject of them--of that big, powerful-minded, clean-souled husband of
hers, who loved her so rapturously, and who had driven her away from him
because that rapture was the only thing he would share with her.

She had been living, since that day of his departure for New York, when
she had felt the last of his strong embraces, a life that fell into two
hemispheres as distinct from each other as tropic night from day. One
half of it had been lighted and made tolerable by the exactions of her
new job. "What you feel like doing isn't important, and what I tell you
to do is," John Galbraith had said to her on the day this strange
divided life of hers had begun. And this lesson, taken to heart, had
spelt salvation to her--for half of the time; for as many hours of the
day as he went on telling her to do something. Those hours, in a way
almost incredible to herself when they were over, had been almost
happy--would have been altogether happy, but for the stain that soaked
through in memory and in anticipation, from the other half of her days.

But when evening rehearsal was over and she came back to her room and
had to undress and put out her light and relax her mind for sleep,
letting the terrors that came to tear at her do their unopposed worst,
then the girl who sang and danced and was so nearly happy snatching John
Galbraith's intentions half formed, and executing them in the thrill of
satisfaction over work well done, became an utterly unreal, incredible
person--the mere figment of a dream that couldn't--couldn't possibly
recur again even as a dream; the only self in her that had any actual
existence was Rodney Aldrich's wife and the mother of his children,
lying here in a mean bed, or looking with feverish eyes out of the
window in a North Clark Street rooming house, in a torment of thwarted
desire for him that was by no means wholly mental or psychical.

And what was he doing now in her absence? Was he in torment, too; shaken
by gusts of uncontrollable longing for her; fighting off nightmare
imaginings of disasters that might be befalling her? Or was he happy,
drinking down in great thirsty drafts the nectar of liberty which her
incursion into his life had deprived him of? She didn't know which of
these alternatives was the more intolerable to her.

And the twins! Were they, the fine lusty little cherubs she had parted
from that day, smiling up with growing recognition into other
faces--Mrs. Ruston's and the maid Doris'? Or might there have been,
since the last information relayed by Portia, a sudden illness? Might it
be that there was going on now, in that house not a thousand yards away,
another life-and-death struggle like the one which had made an end of
all her hopes for the efficacy of her miracle?

The only treatment for hobgoblins like that was plain endurance. This
was a part of a somber sobering discovery that Rose had made during the
first few days of her new life. Courage of the active sort she'd always
had. The way she went up to North End Hall and wrested a job that didn't
strictly exist, from John Galbraith, was an example of it. When it was a
question of blazing up and doing something, she had rightly counted on
herself not to fail. This was what she'd foreseen when she promised
Portia that she would fight for the big thing.

But that part of the battle of life had to consist just in doing
nothing, enduring with a stiff mouth and clenched hands assaults that
couldn't be replied to, was a fact she hadn't foreseen. What a child she
had always been! Rodney, Portia, everybody who amounted to anything,
must have learned that lesson of sheer endurance long ago.

The queerly incredible quality of the lighted half of her life--the half
that John Galbraith's will galvanized into motion--prevented any
afterglow from illuminating and making tolerable the dark half. No
achievement of her days--not even teaching the sextette to talk--had the
power to give her, in her nights, a sense of progress, or to lessen the
necessity for that sheer dumb endurance which was the only weapon she
had. Because she was in the fetters of a fixed idea.

Of course it was only by virtue of the possession of a fixed idea--a
purpose as rigid in its outlines as the steel frame of a
sky-scraper--that she had been able to force herself to leave Rodney and
set out in pursuit of a job that would make a life of her own a possible
thing. You are already acquainted with the outlines of that purpose. She
lacked the special training which alone could make any sort of
self-respecting life possible. The only thing she had to capitalize when
she left her husband's house, was the thing which had got her into
it--her sex charm. The only excuse for capitalizing that again was that
it would make it possible for her to acquire a special training in some
other field. Stenography, she had thought vaguely, would be the first
round of the ladder. Until this production opened and she began drawing
a salary, she couldn't really begin doing the thing she had set out to
do.

Consequently, anything that seemed like progress during her day's work
for Galbraith--any glow of triumph she came away with after meeting and
conquering some difficulty--must be pure illusion.

It was all perfectly logical and it was all perfectly false. She had
been growing really, in strides, from day to day, since that first day
of all when, after hearing the director tell another woman that there
were no vacancies in the chorus, she had forced herself to go up and ask
him for a job. She had been disciplining herself under Rodney's own
definition of the term. Discipline, he had said, was standing the
gaff--standing it, not submitting to it; accepting the facts of your own
life as they happened to be! Not making masters of them, but servants to
the underlying thing you wanted.

And if only she could have believed her own vision, the outlines of the
underlying thing she wanted were beginning to appear, as in a half
developed negative. It hadn't been from a cold sense of duty, or from a
cold fear of losing her job, that she had thrown herself into the
accomplishment of John Galbraith's wishes, or had felt that almost
fierce desire that some effect he was trying for and that she
understood, should get an objective validity. It hadn't been out of pure
altruism that she'd spent those twelve solid hours compelling Olga
Larson to talk better. She might have felt sorry for the girl--might
have loaned her money, comforted her; but she wouldn't have locked her
in her room and beaten down her sullen opposition, set her afire with
her own vitality, except that it was a thing that had to be done for the
good of the show.

In short, she was, to fall back on Rodney's phrase again, for the first
time driving herself with the motive power of her own desires--riding
the back of a hitherto unsuspected passion. But the binding force of
that fixed idea of hers had been sufficient all along to keep up the
delusion of unreality about the real half of her life and to make the
nightmare half of it seem true.

It wasn't until she heard herself telling John Galbraith that she could
design those costumes for him, and in a flame of suddenly kindled
excitement, resolved to make that unexpected promise good, that the
fetters of her false logic fell away from her.

The truth of the matter, the wonderful, almost incredible truth, kept
coming up brighter and clearer as she walked silently along beside him
down the avenue. The real beginning of the pilgrimage that was to carry
her back into her husband's life, wasn't a thing that had to be waited
for. It could begin now! No, the truth was better than that; it had
begun already! Because if John Galbraith had come to her house a month
ago, when she was casting about so desperately for a way of earning a
living, and had offered her the chance just as he had offered it
to-night, she'd have declined it. She wouldn't have known what he
wanted. She'd rightly have said that the thing was utterly beyond her
powers. To-night she knew what he wanted and she was utterly confident
of her ability to give it to him.

And the one word that blaze of confidence spelled for her in letters of
fire, was her husband's name. This chance that had been offered her was
a ladder that would enable her to climb part of the way back to him. Her
accomplishment of this first breathlessly exciting task would be a
thing, when it was achieved, that she could recount to him--well, as man
to man. Her success, if she succeeded--and the alternative was something
she wouldn't contemplate--would compel the same sort of respect from him
that he accorded to a diagnosis of James Randolph's, or an article of
Barry Lake's.

Since she had left his house and begun this new life of hers, she had,
as best she could, been fighting him out of her thoughts altogether. She
had shrunk from anything that carried associations of him with it.
Outside the hours of rehearsal (and how grateful she always was when
they protracted themselves unduly) she had walked timidly, like a child
down a dim hallway with black yawning doorways opening out of it, in a
dread which sometimes reached the intensity of terror, lest reminders of
the man she loved should spring out upon her. That all thoughts and
memories of him must necessarily be painful, she had taken for granted.

But with this sudden lighting up of hope, which took place within her
when she made John Galbraith that astonishing offer and he accepted it,
she flung the closed door wide and called her husband back into her
thoughts--greeted the image of him passionately, in an almost palpable
embrace. This hard thing that she was going to do, which had, to
common-sense calculation, so many chances of disaster in it--this thing
that meant sleepless nights, and feverishly active days, was an
expression simply of her love for him; a sacrificial offering to be laid
before the shrine of him in her heart. Well, it was no wonder then that
to John Galbraith she had seemed preoccupied and far away, nor that amid
the surging thoughts and memories of her lover, coming in like a
returning tide, she should have been deaf to a meaning in the director's
tones that any one of the stupid little flutterers in the chorus would
instantly have understood.

A man with a volcanic incandescence within him such as was now afire in
Rose, is utterly useless until it subsides--totally incapable, at least,
of any sort of creative or imaginative work. Until the fire can be, by
one means or another and for the time being, put out, he has no energies
worth mentioning, to devote to anything else. And, just as no woman can
understand the cold austerities of the cell into which a man must retire
in order to give his finer faculties free play, so no man can possibly
understand, although objective evidence may compel him to admit and
chronicle it as a fact, that a woman borne along as Rose was, upon an
irresistible tide of passions, memories and hopes, which all but made
her absent husband actually visible to her, could at the same time, be
seeing visions of her accomplished work and laying plans--limpid
practicable plans, for their realization.

This is, perhaps, one of the few, and certainly one of the most
fundamental chasms of cleavage between the two sexes; a chasm bridged by
habit invariably, because some sort of thoroughfare has to exist,
bridged, too, more rarely, by intellectual understanding. But never
bridged, I think, between two persons strongly masculine and feminine
respectively, by an instinctive sympathy. To each, the other's way of
life must always be mysterious, and at times exasperating or a little
contemptible.

To the woman, with the finely constant impenetration of love through all
her spiritual life, the man's uncontrollable blaze and his alternate
coldness, seem fitful--weak--brutish, almost unworthy of a creature with
a soul.

To the man who knows the value of his phases of high austerity and
understands quite well the price at which he obtains them, the woman who
fails to understand the necessity or to appreciate the mood seems
sentimental and a little unworthy.

Well, the fact that Rose's heart was racing and her nerves were tingling
with a newly welcomed sense of her lover's spiritual presence, did not
prevent her flying along west on Randolph Street and south again on the
west side of State, with a very clearly visualized purpose. She had
forgotten to replace her veil, but at that hour it didn't matter. The
west side of State Street, anyway, is almost as far from the east as
North Clark Street is from the Drive.

As she came abreast of the first of the big department stores which line
the west side of this thoroughfare, she saw that her surmise had been
correct. It was open. Throngs of weary shoppers were crowding out, and a
very respectable stream of them were forcing their way in. She told an
exhausted floor-walker that she wanted to buy a dressmaking form. And,
spent as he was, he reflected a little of her own animation in his
unusually precise reply; had, indeed, a little of it left over for his
next inquirer.

Something automatic in her mind took charge of Rose and delivered her,
presently, unconscious of intervening processes, at the counter where
the forms were sold. She selected what she wanted instantly, and counted
out the money from her own purse. She didn't have to dip into John
Galbraith's hundred and twenty dollars for this.

"Address?" inquired the saleswoman preparing to make out her sales-slip.
Then, as Rose didn't answer instantly, she looked up frowning into her
face. "You want it sent, don't you?" she added.

The question was rhetorical, because with its standard, the thing stood
five feet high and weighed twenty-five pounds.

A frown of perplexity in Rose's face gave way to her own wide smile. "I
guess I'll have to take it with me," she said. Because as near
Christmas as this, the thing mightn't be delivered for two days.

"Take it with you?" the woman echoed, aghast.

"Have it wrapped up," said Rose decisively, "and put my name on
it--Mrs. ..." She checked herself with another smile. She had nearly
said, "Mrs. Rodney Aldrich." But the mistake didn't hurt as it would
have hurt yesterday. "Doris Dane," she went on. "And have it sent down
to the main entrance. I'll be there as soon as it is. Do you know where
I can buy paper cambric?" But she had to get that information from
another floor-walker.

Paper cambric seemed to have more of a bearing upon the approach of
Christmas Day than dressmaking forms, though just what the connection
was, Rose couldn't make out. There was a crowd at the counter, anyhow.
It was five minutes before she could get waited on. But once she caught
a saleswoman's eye, her purchase was quickly made. She bought three
bolts: one of black, one of white, and one of a washed-out blue. Once
more she counted out the money, and this time, "I'll take it with me,"
she said.

Strong as she was, the immense bundle was almost more than she could
carry. But she managed to make her way at last to the main entrance,
where, under the incredulous eye of the doorman, she found a porter
waiting with her dressmaking form.

"That's mine," she said. "Doris Dane is the name on it." Then, to the
doorman as the porter made off, "Will you get me a cab?"

But this particular store had, quite naturally, no facilities for doing
a carriage business, a fact which the doorman laconically explained.

"All right," said Rose dumping her heavy bundle beside the dressmaking
form. "You won't mind keeping an eye on this for a minute, will you?"
She didn't actually smile, but there was in her face a humorous
appreciation of the fact that a mountain like this wouldn't be hard to
watch.

The doorman grinned back at her. "Sure I will," he said. "I'm sorry I
can't leave the door to get you a cab."

Rose hailed one that happened to be passing, a creaking,
mud-bespattered disreputable affair with a driver to match, and briskly
drove a bargain with him. He announced when she told him the address
that the fare would be a dollar and a half. She offered him seventy-five
cents, which he, with the air of a disillusioned optimist in a bitter
world, accepted. "Christmas, too!" he muttered ironically.

"Oh, come," said Rose, grinning up at him. "How many tired people have
you given free rides to to-day, on the strength of that?"

"All right, miss; I don't complain," he said. He did, though, but
humorously, when Rose, assisted by a page boy the doorman had impressed
for her, carried the dressmaker's form and the other heavy bundle out to
the curb. He declared the form should go as another passenger (its
semi-human shape was clearly visible through the wrappings) and that the
other bundle ought to have a van. All the same, when at her destination
Rose had paid him, he came down, voluntarily from the box--voluntarily
but with a sort of reluctance--and carried the form up to her room for
her.

Also, rather incredibly, he refused an extra quarter she had ready for
him when he had completed this service. "Just to show no ill feelings,"
he said, and he told her where his stand was and gave himself a little
recommendation: "Honest and reliable."

Here in her close little room, the suggestion of an alcoholic basis for
this generosity obtruded itself, but Rose didn't care. She wished him a
merry Christmas and waved him off with a smile.

It was now after eight o'clock. Rehearsal was at eight-thirty and she
had had nothing to eat since noon. But she stole the time, nevertheless,
to tear the wrappings off her "form" and gaze on its respectable
nakedness for two or three minutes with a contemplative eye. Then,
reluctantly--it was the first time she had left that room with
reluctance--she turned out the light and hurried off to the little
lunch-room that lay on the way to the dance-hall.

She never again, in the active practise of her profession, knew
anything quite like the ensuing seventy-two hours. Every stimulus was,
of course, abnormally heightened. There was the novelty, the thrilling
sense of adventure that missed being fear only through an inexplicable
confidence of success. And then, anyway, her imagination was a virgin
field that had never been cropped, and the luxurious fertility of it was
amazing.

It was during that first rehearsal, which she so narrowly missed being
late for, that she got the general schemes for both sets of costumes.
That there must be a general scheme she had decided at once. The
sextette was a unit; none of the members of it ever appeared without the
others, and it would be immensely more effective, she perceived, if this
fact were expressed somehow in the costumes. Not by means of a stupid
uniformity, of course. The effect she wanted was subtler than that. But
if each one of the six costumes that these girls first appeared in could
be made somehow to express the same thing in a different way--not only
in different, though harmonious, colors, but in different, though
related, forms--the effect produced by the six of them together would be
immensely greater than the sum of their individual effects.

This, of course, wasn't what Rose said to herself. She just wanted a
scheme, and with ridiculous ease, she got it. She didn't even get it.
There it was staring at her. And the other scheme for the evening frocks
was knocking at the door, too, eager to get in the moment she could give
it a chance. She began studying the girls for their individual
peculiarities of style. Each one of the costumes she made was going to
be for a particular girl, suited, without losing its place in the
general plan, to the enhancement of her special approximation to beauty.

At last, when a shout from Galbraith aroused her to the fact that she
had missed an entrance cue altogether, in her entranced absorption in
these visions of hers, and had caused that unpardonable thing, a stage
wait, she resolutely clamped down the lid upon her imagination and,
until they were dismissed, devoted herself to the rehearsal.

But the pressure kept mounting higher and higher and she found herself
furiously impatient to get away, back to her own private wonderland, the
squalid little room down the street, that had three bolts of cambric in
it and a dressmaker's manikin--the raw materials for her magic!

Rose couldn't draw a bit. Her mother's fine contempt for ladylike
accomplishments had even intervened in the high-school days to prevent
her taking a free-hand course required in the curriculum, during which
you spent weeks making a charcoal study of a bust of Demosthenes. But
this lack never even occurred to Rose as a handicap. She hadn't the
faintest impulse to make a beginning by putting a picture down on paper
and making a dress of it afterward. She went straight at her materials,
or the equivalent of her materials, as a sculptor goes at his clay. She
couldn't have told just why she had bought those three shades of paper
cambric.

"I'm really awfully obliged to you for having explained it to me," she
told Burton, the portrait painter long afterward.

"I see!" he had exclaimed, on the occasion of an initiatory visit to her
workroom. "You design these things in their values first, just the way
the old masters used to paint. Once you get the values in, you can
project them in any colors that will leave your value scale true."

And Rose, as she said, was really grateful to him for telling her what
it was she had been doing all the while, just as Monsieur Jourdain was
grateful for the information that he had been talking prose all his life
and never known it.

What she had felt, of course, at the very outset, was the need of
something to indicate roughly the darks and lights in her design. And,
short of the wild extravagance of slashing into the fabrics themselves
and making her mistakes at their expense, she could think of nothing
better than the scheme she chose.

She came to the conclusion afterward that even apart from the
consideration of expense, her own plan was better. You got more vigor
somehow, into the actual construction of the thing, if you could make it
express something quite independently of color and texture.

Rehearsal was dismissed a little early that first night, and she was
back in her room by eleven. Arrived there, she took off her outer
clothes, sat down cross-legged on the floor, and went to work. When at
last, with a little sigh, and a tremulously smiling acknowledgment of
fatigue, she got up and looked at her watch, it was four o'clock in the
morning. She'd had one of those experiences that every artist can
remember a few of in his life, when it is impossible for anything to go
wrong; when each tentative experiment accomplishes not only its purpose,
but another unsuspected purpose as well; when the vision miraculously
betters itself in the execution; when the only difficulty is that which
the hands have in the purely mechanical operation of keeping up.

She was destined later, of course, even during the achievement of this
first success, to learn the comparative rarity of those hours. Though,
as she looked back on it afterward, the whole of this first job seemed
to have been done with a kind of miraculous facility she couldn't
account for.

And all through those five hours, fast as her mind flew, utterly
absorbed as it seemed to be, she never once lost the consciousness of
the almost palpable presence of Rodney Aldrich there in the room with
her. Once she laughed outright over the memory of a girl who had tried
to win her husband's friendship by studying law. Fancy Rodney trying to
study costumes! But he would understand what it meant to conceive them
and the sort of work it took, once they were conceived, to project them
as something objective to herself--something that had to challenge
expert opinion; meet the exactions of criticism. He'd understand the
thrill, too, of seeing them come up for judgment--the triumph of getting
them accepted and paid for.

And, in the confidence born of that understanding, he'd be able to offer
for her to understand, the fundamentals of his own work. Not the dry
husks of technical considerations. What did they amount to anyway,
except as they formed the boundaries of the live thing he meant? But the
live thing itself--the thing that spelled challenge and work and victory
for him,--that thing, since at last she'd grown to deserve it, he'd
give her. Freely, fully,--just because he couldn't help giving it.

Tired as she was, she could hardly bear to stop work. The half finished
thing on the manikin lured her on from one moment to another. It was
really insane not to stop. She must get up at seven-thirty, three hours
or so from now, in order to get to the shops ahead of the crowds and
begin the selection of her fabrics. At last, with a single movement of
resolution she turned out the gas and undressed, or rather, finished
undressing, in the dark, amid a litter of pins and paper cambric.

And now, for the first time in this squalid, mean little room, the dark
had balm in it, became a fragrant miracle, obliterating the harsh
actualities of her immediate yesterdays and to-morrows, winging her
spirit for a breathless flight straight to the end she sought,--to the
time when the long pilgrimage before her should be accomplished.

What a wonderful thing Rodney's cool firm friendship would be! Worth
anything, anything in the world it might cost to win it. But ... But....

She drew in a long unsteady breath and pressed her cooling hands down
upon her face.

What a thing his love would be, when it should come, free of its tasks
and obligations; no longer in the treadmill making her world go round,
but given its wings again!


CHAPTER VIII

SUCCESS--AND A RECOGNITION


There is a kaleidoscopic character about the events of the ten days or
so preceding the opening performance of most musical comedies which
would make a sober chronicle of them seem fantastically incredible; and
this law of Nature made no exception in the case of _The Girl
Up-stairs_. There were rehearsals which ran so smoothly and swiftly that
they'd have done for performances; there were others so abominably bad
that the bare idea of presenting the mess resulting from six weeks'
toil, before people who had paid money to see it, was a nightmare.

As the nervous pressure mounted, people took to exploding all over the
place in the most grotesquely inconceivable ways and from totally
unpredictable causes. Freddy France, who played the comic detective
(like most comedians he had no sense of humor whatever and treated his
"art" with a sort of sacrificial solemnity), developed delusions of
persecution, proclaimed himself the victim of a conspiracy to which the
owners, the author, Galbraith and most of the principals were parties,
and finally, when the director cut out a little scene that he had two
feeble jokes in, reached up unexpectedly and hit McGill on the nose,
flung his part on the stage, stamped on it and left the theater. Quan
read his lines in a painstaking manner for two days and then, after a
three-hour session in the Sherman House bar, Freddy was induced to come
back.

Stewart Lester, one day, at the end of a long patient effort of
Galbraith's to improve his acting (he acted like a tenor; one needn't
say more than that), licked his thin red lips, and in a feline fury,
announced his indifference as to whether the management accepted his
resignation or that of Miss Devereux. As long as she insisted on
treating her vis-à-vis like a chorus-man, she'd perhaps be happier if a
chorus-man were given the part; and he would he only too happy, in case
the management agreed with her, to make the substitution possible.
Whereupon Miss Devereux remarked that even having been a failure in
grand opera didn't necessarily assure a man success in musical comedy,
and that possibly a chorus-man would be an improvement. Galbraith had a
long private conference with each of them--the fact that they would not
speak at all off stage guaranteed him against their comparing notes as
to what he'd said--and while the thing he effected could not be called a
reconciliation, it amounted to a sort of armed truce. They went through
their love scenes without actually scratching and biting.

Even little Anabel Astor, whose good humor for a long time had seemed
invincible, tempestuously left the stage one day in the middle of one of
her scenes with her dancing partner, and could be heard sobbing loudly
in the wings through all that remained of that rehearsal.

Queer things began happening to the plot, resulting sometimes from the
violent transposition of song numbers from one act to another, sometimes
from the interpolation of songs or specialties. Two or three scenes,
which the author regarded with special pride and was prepared to die in
the defense of, were pronounced by Galbraith to be junk. He had made
superhuman efforts, he told Goldsmith and Block, to put a little life
into them, and had demonstrated that this miracle was impossible of
performance. They were dead and they'd got to be buried before they
became, to the olfactory sense, any more unpleasant.

There was an ominous breathlessness in the air after this ultimatum had
been delivered, and at the next rehearsal, when the director announced
the cut of six solid pages of manuscript, the voice of the author was
heard from back of the hall proclaiming in a hollow Euripidean bellow
that it was all over. He was going to his lawyer to get an injunction
against the production of the piece.

Of all the persons directly, or even remotely, affected by this
nerve-shattering confusion, Rose was perhaps the least perturbed. The
only thing that really mattered to her, was the successful execution of
those twelve costumes. The phantasmagoria at North End Hall was a
regrettable, but necessary, interruption of her more important
activities. The interruption didn't interfere so seriously as at first
she thought it would. The routine of rehearsal as Galbraith developed
it, began with special scenes--isolated bits that needed modification or
polishing. The general rehearsals, taking this act or that and going
through with it from beginning to end, and involving, of course, the
presence of everybody in the company, didn't, as a rule, begin till
three in the afternoon; sometimes till as late as five. Of course when
they did begin, they lasted until all hours.

But the labors of the chorus, and even of the sextette, shrank very much
in proportion to the work of the principals. Nearly all the changes that
were made were in the direction of compressing the chorus and giving the
principals more room. So that for long stretches of time, during which,
dressed in her working clothes and curled up in one of the remoter of
the cushioned window-seats, but ready to answer a summons to the stage
as promptly as a fireman, she could let her mind run without
interruption on the solution of some of her own problems, and then be
ready when she went back to her room, to fall into bed and asleep (the
two acts had become practically simultaneous) secure in the possession
of a clearly thought out program for the morrow.

She wakened automatically at half past seven and was down-town by half
past eight, to do whatever shopping the work of the previous day
revealed the need of. The fact that it was, for the greater part, John
Galbraith's money she was spending (she had managed to put in a little
herself by calculating down to a fine point the necessary margin for
existence) worked to her advantage in these operations. She could not,
but for that fact, have forced herself to hunt down bargains so
persistently nor to keep the incidental expense for findings and such,
so low.

At nine-thirty in the morning--an unheard of hour in the theater--the
watchman at the Globe let her in the stage door, and Rose had half an
hour before the arrival of the wardrobe mistress and her assistant, for
looking over the work done since she had left for rehearsal the day
before.

She liked this quiet, cavernous old barn of a place down under the Globe
stage; liked it when she had it to herself before the two sewing women
came and later, when, with a couple of sheets spread down on the floor
she cut and basted according to her cambric patterns, keeping ahead of
the flying needles of the other two. After her own little room, the mere
spaciousness of it seemed almost noble. She even liked it, when, about
half past one in the afternoon, on matinée days, the chorus-girls of the
show now drawing to the end of its run, began dawdling in, passing
shrill jokes with Bill Flynn, the fireman, rummaging through the mail in
the letter-box, casually unfastening their clothes all the while,
preliminary to kimonos and make-up, gathering in little knots about the
sewing-machines and exclaiming in profane delight over the costumes. She
wondered at herself, sometimes, for having ceased to mind their
language, their shameless way of going half-clad, their general
atmosphere of moth-like worthlessness--and then laughed at herself for
wondering!

How would her own quality be finer, her soul a more ample thing, for the
keeping, on one of the shelves of it, of a pot of carefully preserved
horror? If she could succeed with these costumes, her success, she
hoped, would lead her directly into the business of designing other
costumes for the stage. And if she became a professional stage costumer,
this rather loose, ramshackle, down-at-the-heel morality of back-stage
musical comedy would be a permanent fact in her life, just as the
dustiness of law-books and the stuffiness of court rooms were permanent
facts in Rodney's.

As the work went on, her confidence in the success of this initiatory
venture became less ecstatic and more reasonable. A few of the costumes
were finished and, seen on live models (a couple of girls in the chorus
in the Globe show had volunteered to try on) were, if Rose knew anything
at all about clothes, without doubt or qualification, good.

She had had just one really bad quarter of an hour over them, and that,
back on Christmas Day as it happened, was when Galbraith, having
detained her after he had dismissed the rehearsal, asked to see her
sketches.

"Sketches!" she echoed, perplexed.

"Oh, I don't mean regular water-colored plates," he said. "Just whatever
rough drafts of the things you will have put down on paper to start
yourself off with. It's simple curiosity, you understand."

"But," she gasped, "I haven't put anything down on paper--not anything
at all! I don't know how to draw."

And now he was perplexed in turn. How could one design a costume without
drawing a picture of it?

She explained her working method to him; though not, she felt, very
successfully. She was perhaps a bit flustered, and he didn't seem to be
giving her his complete attention--seemed to be covering up, with the
pretense of listening, a strong interior abstraction.

This was again a good diagnosis as far as it went. Only it didn't dig in
far enough for even the faintest surmise as to what the nature of his
abstraction was.

"I could bring the patterns down here. Or, if you had time, you could
come up to my room and see them. But I'm afraid you couldn't tell much
from that, because they're all taken apart, you see, and they're just in
paper cambric and not the right colors."

What the man was struggling for--it had been his sole reason for
detaining her in the first place--was some sort of opening that would
make it seem natural to tell her he hoped her Christmas Day had not been
too intolerably unhappy; to shake hands with her and wish her
luck--assure her in one way or another, that she had in him a friend she
could bring her troubles to--any sort of troubles. He'd made up his mind
to do this when the Christmas rehearsal should he over, as long ago as
the night of their walk down the avenue. This resolution had been
reinforced by the look he had caught in her face when she came up to
rehearsal this afternoon--a rather misty, luminous, exalted look,--a
little lack of definition about her eyelids suggesting there had been
tears there.

This was good observation like her own of him. But, again like hers, in
its failure to get the central clue, it only mislead him, the worse. If
he could have guessed that she had been having a Christmas celebration
of her own that day; that there had been unwrapped and displayed, three
little presents she had bought the day before; one for her husband, and
one for each of her two babies, and that, just before starting for
rehearsal, she had wrapped them up and put them into her trunk to await
the day when they could be given, it might have altered matters
somewhat.

The thing that finally made it clearly impossible for Galbraith to
express anything at all of this feeling which he, in good faith, called
friendship for her, was her alternative offer--if he had time, to take
him up to her room for a look at the patterns.

If she's seen him as anything at all but starkly her employer and her
financier; if she's had the faintest glimmer of him as one who held for
her any personal feelings whatever, she never would have suggested as an
alternative to her bringing the patterns here to rehearsal, his coming
up to her room for a look at them.

The thing of all others that irritated Galbraith was the possession of a
divided mind. Just now, disappointed as he was, almost to the point of
pain, though he wouldn't acknowledge to himself that it went as far as
that, over the evident fact that his relation to the girl, in spite of
their partnership, was exactly what it had been from the beginning, he
was still aware that if he'd got the opening he wanted, had managed
another of those warm lithe hand-clasps with her, and had got the notion
across to her that he wanted her to make a friend of him and a
confidant, he'd be going away now, afterward, under the painful
misgiving that he was a bit of an old fool. The product of all this
irritation was, however, that he declined Rose's offer of a view of her
patterns rather bruskly.

"It was just curiosity, as I said. Go along your own way and don't worry
about me. You will be all right."

Rose couldn't feel much conviction behind this expression of
confidence, and she went away, as I have said, in a sort of panic. Was
she all wrong, after all? Couldn't you design stage costumes except by
making pictures of them? She knew what he meant by water-colored plates.
She'd seen them framed in the lobbies at musical shows she'd been to
with Rodney. That was how costume designers worked, was it? Well she
knew she never could do anything like that.

But her fears only lasted until she got back to her room and caught a
reassuring look at the pattern that was assembled on the form. After
all, the pictures in the lobby weren't so important as the costumes on
the stage. And as for Galbraith--well, if he didn't expect too much of
her, that was all the better.

In keeping with the good luck which had attended everything that
happened in connection with this first venture of hers, she was able to
tell Galbraith that both sets of costumes were done and ready to try on,
on the very day he announced that the next rehearsal would be held at
ten to-morrow morning at the Globe. It might very easily have happened,
of course, that Rose's enterprise, together with Galbraith's partnership
in it, had become known here or there, got passed on from one to
another, with modifications and embellishments according to fancy, and
grown to be a monument of scandal and conjecture. But nothing is more
capricious than the heat-lightning of gossip, and it just chanced that,
up to the morning of Rose's little triumph, no one beyond Galbraith and
Rose herself even suspected the identity with Dane of the chorus, of the
costumer who was to submit, on approval, gowns for the sextette. The
fact, of course, was bound to come out on the day the company moved over
for rehearsals to the Globe, and the event was very happily dramatized
for Rose, by her ability to let the costumes appear first and her
authorship of them only after their success was beyond dispute.

She persuaded the girls to wait until all six were dressed in the
afternoon frocks and until she herself had had a chance to give each of
them a final inspection and to make a few last touches and
readjustments. Then they all trooped out on the stage and stood in a
row, turned about, walked here and there, in obedience to Galbraith's
instructions shouted from the back of the theater.

It was dark out there and disconcertingly silent. The glow of two cigars
indicated the presence of Goldsmith and Block in the middle of a little
knot of other spectators.

The only response Rose got--the only index to the effect her labors had
produced--was the tone of Galbraith's voice. It rang on her ear a little
sharper, louder, and with more of a staccato bruskness than the
directions he was giving called for. And it was not his practise to put
more cutting edge into his blade, or more power behind his stroke, than
was necessary to accomplish what he wanted. He was excited, therefore.
But was it by the completeness of her success or the calamitousness of
her failure?

"All right," he shouted. "Go and put on the others."

There was another silence after they had fled out on the stage again,
clad tins time in the evening gowns--a hollow heart-constricting
silence, almost literally sickening. But it lasted only a moment. Then,
"Will you come down here, Miss Dane?" called Galbraith.

There was a slight, momentary, but perfectly palpable shock accompanying
these words--a shock felt by everybody within the sound of his voice.
Because the director had not said, "Dane, come down here." He had said,
"Will you come here, Miss Dane?" And the thing amounted, so rigid is the
etiquette of musical comedy, to an accolade. The people on the stage and
in the wings didn't know what she'd done, nor in what character she was
about to appear, but they did know she was, from now on, something
besides a chorus-girl.

Rose obediently crossed the runway and walked up the aisle to where
Galbraith stood with Goldsmith and Block, waiting for her. She was still
feeling a little numb and empty.

Galbraith, as she came up, held out a hand to her. "I congratulate you,
Miss Dane," he said. "They're admirable. With all the money in the
world, I wouldn't ask for anything handsomer."

Before she could say anything in reply, he directed her attention, with
a nod of the head, to the partners, and walked away. Rose gasped at
that. She'd never thought beyond him--beyond the necessity of pleasing
him; and that he'd carry the details of the business through with
Goldsmith and Block, she'd taken for granted. Now, here she was chucked
into the water and told to swim. She'd never in her life, of course,
tried to sell anything. What her mind first awoke to was that the
partners were looking rather blank. Block, indeed, let his eyes follow
the retreating Galbraith with a momentary look of outraged astonishment.
Her wits, quickened by the emergency, interpreted the look. Galbraith,
chucking her into the water indeed, had thrown her a life-preserver--the
tip that her wares were good.

Goldsmith, quicker and shrewder than his junior, was already smiling
politely. "They really are very good," he said. "If they are not too
expensive for us, we'll consider buying them."

"They'll be," said Rose, "the twelve of them, four hundred and
sixty-five dollars." She had something the same feeling of astonishment
on hearing herself say this, that she'd had when she heard herself
telling Galbraith that she'd design the costumes. Something or other had
spoken without her will--almost without her knowledge. She had one
figure clearly etched in her brain; that was the one hundred and ninety
dollars she must pay back to Galbraith; and she'd put in fifty of her
own. There was also a matter of twenty dollars or so still to be paid to
the wardrobe mistress and her assistant. But this four hundred and
sixty-five dollars had simply come out of the air.

Block pursed his lips and emitted a fine thin whistle of astonishment.

Goldsmith heaved a sigh. "My dear young lady," he protested. "The
inducement held out to us to wait for these costumes of yours, was that
they were to be cheap. But four hundred and sixty-five dollars is
ridiculous! That's a lot of money."

"Quite a lot less," said Rose, "than the ones Mrs. Goldsmith picked out
came to. They were just over six hundred." Goldsmith smiled
indulgently. "By the figures on the tags, yes," he said. "But would we
have paid that, do you think? Those figures represent what they'd like
to get from people who buy one apiece. But from us, buying twelve ..."
He shrugged his shoulders expressively.

Well, this was reasonable and no doubt true and it left Rose rather
aghast. She turned away toward the stage with the best appearance of
indifference she could muster. Her mind was making an agonized effort to
add up one hundred and ninety, fifty and twenty. But in the excitement
of the moment it simply balked--rejected the problem altogether. She
didn't think that the total came to much over three hundred dollars, but
she couldn't be sure. And then there was, sticking burr-like, somewhere,
the consciousness of another hundred unaccounted for in this total.
Until she could discover what the gowns had actually cost her, she
couldn't say anything. Therefore, she just stood where she was and said
nothing whatever.

Goldsmith cleared his throat. "Really," he said in an intensely
aggrieved tone, "you must try to see it from our point of view. This
production's cost us thousands of dollars. If we bankrupt ourselves
before the opening night it will be a bad business for everybody. You
ought to see that. The costumes are very nice, I admit that. But
remember we took a chance on it. We waited for them with the idea that
you'd cooperate with us in saving money."

Rose made a last frantic struggle to induce her figures to add up, but
they were getting more meaningless every minute.

There was another moment of silence. Then Block took up the refrain with
variations. But just as he began to speak, a brilliantly luminous ray of
light struck Rose. She could have answered Goldsmith's arguments--would
have done so, but for her preoccupation with that trifling sum in
arithmetic. But it was incomparably better tactics not to answer at all.
Because if she could answer their arguments, they in turn could answer
hers. She'd be a child in their hands once she began to talk. But her
silence disconcerted them--gave them nothing to go on. Well, then,
she'd let them do the work and see what happened.

But suppose, through her stubborn insistence, they should refuse the
costumes at any price! Well, the world wouldn't come to an end. She'd
live through it somehow, and somehow she'd manage to repay Galbraith.

The partners went on talking alternately with symptoms of rising
impatience.

"Oh, come," said Block at last, "we can't be all day about this! Your
figure is out of all reason. If you'd said even four hundred now ..."

"Oh, yes," said Goldsmith. "We want to be liberal. We appreciate you've
done a good job. Say four hundred and I'll write you a check for it
now." He took a small check-book and a fountain pen out of his pocket.
"That's all right, eh?"

Rose made another effort at addition. A hundred and ninety, and fifty,
and twenty, and the other ghostly hundred that wouldn't account for
itself and yet insisted on coming in and mixing everything up. She
turned on the two partners a look of perfectly genuine distress.

"If you'll let me go away and add it up ..." she began.

Goldsmith's heart was touched. The costumes were a bargain at four
hundred and sixty-five, and he knew it. There was an indescribable sort
of dash to them that would lend tone to the whole production. And then
the face of that pretty young girl who must have worked so desperately
hard to make them and who was so obviously helpless at this bargaining
game, would have moved a harder heart than his.

"Oh, all right!" he said. "We'll give in. Four hundred"--he began making
out the check, but his hand hung over it a moment--"and fifty. How's
that?"

Rose drew in a long breath. "That's all right," she said.

It was just as she turned away with the check made out to Doris Dane in
her wrist-bag, that the mystery of that phantom hundred dollars solved
itself. It was the hundred dollars she'd borrowed from Rodney and could
now return to him!

Galbraith took the first chance he could make to shoot her a low-voiced
question. "How much did you get?" he asked, and his face showed
downright surprise when she told him. "That's a pretty fair price," he
commented. "I was afraid they'd screw you way down on it, and I wanted
to help you out, but ..."

"Oh, you did," said Rose. "Telling me they were good. Of course you
couldn't have done anything more. The first thing I want to do," she
went on, "is to pay you back. But I don't know just how to do it. I
can't go to the bank where they know me and--anyway, the name on the
check isn't right."

He told her how easily that could be fixed. He'd take her to the bank he
used here in town and identify her. Then she could pay him and deposit
the balance to her own account. It was a bank where they didn't mind
small accounts. That would be much better than carrying her money around
with her where it could too easily be stolen.

He was very kind about it all and they put the program through that day.
Yet she was vaguely conscious of a sense that he seemed a little
chilled, as if something about the transaction unaccountably depressed
him.

And indeed it was true that he'd have found his tendency to fall in love
with her a good deal harder to resist if she'd shown herself more
helpless in the hands of Goldsmith and Block. She'd actually driven a
good bargain--an unaccountably good bargain! He wished he'd been on hand
to see how she did it. Well, women were queer, there was no getting away
from that.

But Goldsmith and Block came back the next day and drove, in turn, a
good bargain of their own.

"You've certainly got a good eye for costumes, Miss Dane," Goldsmith
said, "and here's a proposition we'd like to make. A lot of these other
things we've got for the regular chorus don't look so good as they
might. You'll be able to see changes in them that'll improve them maybe
fifty per cent. Well, you take it on, and we'll begin paying you your
regular salary now; you understand, twenty-five dollars a week,
beginning to-day."

Rose accepted this proposition with a warm flush of gratitude. It
indicated, she felt, that they were still friendly toward her, disposed
of certain misgivings she'd experienced the night before, lest in
driving, unwittingly, so good a bargain with them, she had incurred
their enmity.

But, from the moment her little salary began, she found herself
retained, body and soul, exactly as Galbraith himself was. They'd bought
all her ideas, all her energy, all her time, except a few scant hours
for sleep and a few snatched minutes for meals. She gave her employers,
up to the time when the piece opened at the Globe, at a conservative
calculation, about five times their money's worth. Even if she hadn't
been in the company she'd have found something like two days' work in
every twenty-four hours, just in the wardrobe room. Because the costumes
were cheap and the frank blaze of borders, footlights and spots,
pitilessly betrayed the fact. One set for the ponies was so hopelessly
bad that the owners refused to accept them, and Rose, on the spur of the
moment, made up a costume--they were uniform, fortunately--to replace
them. The wardrobe mistress, with two assistants, and under Rose's
intermittent supervision, managed somehow to get them made. And there
wasn't a single costume, outside Rose's own twelve, that hadn't to be
remodeled more or less.

On top of all that, the really terrible grind of rehearsals began;
property rehearsals, curiously disconcerting at first, where instead of
indicating the business with empty hands, you actually lighted the
cigarette, picked up the paper knife, pulled the locket out from under
your dress and opened it--and, in the process of doing these things,
forgot everything else you knew; scenery rehearsals that caused the
stage to seem small and cluttered up and actually made some of the
evolutions you'd been routined in, impossible. At last and ghastliest, a
dress rehearsal, which began at seven o'clock one night and lasted till
four the next morning.

It would all have been so ludicrously easy, Rose used to reflect in
despair, if, like the other girls in the sextette, she'd had only her
own part in the performance to attend to--only to get into her costumes
at the right time, be waiting in the wings for the cue, and then come on
and do the things they'd taught her to do. But, between Goldsmith and
Block, who were now in a state of frantic activity and full of insane
suggestions, and the wardrobe mistress who was always having to be told
how to do something, every minute was occupied. She would try
desperately to keep an ear alert for what was happening on the stage, in
order to be on hand for her entrances. But, in spite of her, it
sometimes happened that she'd be snatched from something by a furious
roar from Galbraith.

"Miss Dane!" And then, when she appeared, bewildered, contrite. "You
_must_ attend to the rehearsal. Those other matters can be attended to
at some other time. If necessary, I can stop the rehearsal and wait till
you're at liberty. But I can't pretend to rehearse and be kept waiting."

She never made any excuses; just took her place with a nod of
acquiescence. But she often felt like doing as some of the rest of them
did; felt it would be a perfectly enormous relief to shriek out
incoherent words of abuse, burst into tears and sobs, and rush from the
stage. Her position--her new position, she fancied, would entitle her to
do that--once. And then the notion that she was saving up that luxurious
possibility for some time when it would do the most good, would bring
back her old smile. And Galbraith, lost in wonder at her already, would
wonder anew.

They followed the traditions of the Globe in giving _The Girl Up-stairs_
its try-out in Milwaukee--four performances; from a Thursday to a
Saturday night, with rehearsals pretty much all the time in between.

About all that this hegira meant to Rose was that she got two solid
hours' sleep on the train going up on Thursday afternoon and another two
hours on the train coming back on Sunday morning. She had domesticated
herself automatically, in the little hotel across from the theater, and
she had gone right on working just as she did at the Globe. Oddly
enough, she didn't differentiate much between rehearsals and the
performances. Perhaps because she was so absorbed with her labors off
the stage; perhaps because the thoroughly tentative nature of everything
they did was so strongly impressed on her.

The piece was rewritten more or less after every performance. They
didn't get the curtain down on the first one until five minutes after
twelve--for even an experienced director like Galbraith can make a
mistake in timing--and the mathematically demonstrated necessity for
cutting, or speeding, a whole hour out of the piece, tamed even the
wild-eyed Mr. Mills. The principals, after having for weeks been
routined in the reading of their lines and the execution of their
business, were given new speeches to say and new things to do at a
moment's notice--literally, sometimes, while the performance was going
on. Ghastly things happened, of course. A tricky similarity of cues
would betray somebody into a speech three scenes ahead; a cut would have
the unforeseen effect of leaving somebody stranded, half-changed, in his
dressing-room when his entrance cue came round; an actor would dry up,
utterly forget his lines in the middle of a scene he could have repeated
in his sleep--and the amazing way in which these disasters were
retrieved, the way these people who hadn't, so far, impressed Rose very
strongly with their collective intelligence, extemporized, righted the
capsizing boat, kept the scene going--somehow--no matter what happened,
gave her a new respect for their claims to a real profession.

This was the great thing they had, she concluded; the quality of coming
up to the scratch, of giving whatever it took out of themselves to meet
the need of the moment. They weren't--her use of this phrase harked back
to the days of the half-back--yellow. If you'd walked through the train
that took them back to Chicago Sunday morning, had seen them, glum,
dispirited, utterly fagged out, unsustained by a single gleam of hope,
you'd have said it was impossible that they should give any sort of
performance that night--let alone a good one. But by eight o'clock that
night, when the overture was called, you wouldn't have known them for
the same people.

There is, to begin with, a certain magic about make-up which lends a
color of plausibility to the paradoxical theory that our emotions spring
from our facial expressions rather than the other way about. Certainly
to an experienced actor, his paint--the mere act of putting it on and
looking at himself in the glass as it is applied--effects for him a
solution of continuity between his real self, if you can call it that,
and his part; so that fatigues, discouragements, quarrels, ailments--I
don't mean to say are forgotten; they are remembered well enough, but
are given the quality of belonging to some one else. But beyond all that
was the feeling, on the edge of this first performance, that they were
now on their own. Harold Mills and the composer, Goldsmith and Block,
John Galbraith, had done their best, or their worst, as the case might
be. But their labors to-night would mean nothing to that rustling
audience out in front. From now on it was up to the company!

The appearance, back on the stage, of John Galbraith in evening dress,
just as the call of the first act brought them trooping from their
dressing-rooms, intensified this sensation. He was going to be,
to-night, simply one of the audience.

As a sample of the new spirit, Rose noted with hardly a sensation of
surprise, that Patricia Devereux nodded amiably enough to Stewart Lester
and observed that she believed the thing was going to go; and that
Lester in reply said, yes, he believed it was.

Rose herself was completely dominated by it. Her nerves--slack, frayed,
numb, an hour ago--had sprung miraculously into tune. She not only
didn't feel tired. It seemed she never could feel tired again. Not even,
going back to her university days, on the eve of a class basket-ball
game, or a tennis match, had she felt that fine thrill of buoyant
confidence and adequacy quite so strongly!

It wasn't until along in the third act that the audience became, for
her, anything but a colloid mass--something that you squeezed and
thumped and worked as you did clay, to get into a properly plastic
condition of receptivity, so that the jokes, the songs, the dances,
even the spindling little shafts of romance that you shot out into it,
could be felt to dig in and take hold. It never occurred to her to think
of it with a plural pronoun; it was "it" simply, an inchoate monster,
which was, as the show progressed, delightfully loosening up, becoming
good-humored, undiscriminating, stupidly infatuate; laughing at things
no human being would consider funny, approving with a percussive roar
things not in the least good; a monster, all the same, whose approbation
gave you an intense, if quite unreasoning, pleasure.

But, along in the third act, as I said, as she came down to the
footlights with the rest of the sextette in their _All Alone_ number,
one face detached itself suddenly from the pasty gray surface of them
that spread over the auditorium; became human--individual--and intensely
familiar. Became the face, unmistakably, of Jimmy Wallace!

It is probable that of all the audience, only two men saw that anything
had happened, so brief was the frozen instant while she stood
transfixed. One of them was John Galbraith, in the back row, and he let
his breath go out again in relief almost in the act of catching it. He
guessed what had happened well enough--that she'd recognized one of
those friends whose potential horror had made her willing to give up her
promotion and her little part--the one she'd spoken of, perhaps, as the
"only one that really mattered." But it was all right. She was going on
as if nothing had happened.

The other man was Jimmy Wallace himself. He released, too, a little sigh
of relief when he saw her off in her stride again after that momentary
falter. But he hardly looked at the stage after that; stared absently at
his program instead, and, presently, availed himself of the dramatic
critic's license and left the theater.

But it wasn't to go to his desk and write his story (he was on an
evening paper and so had no deadline staring him in the face) but to a
quiet corner in his club, where he could, undistractedly, think.

From the moment of Rose's first appearance on the stage he had been
tormented by a curiosity as to whether she was indeed Rose, or merely
some one unbelievably like her. Because the fantastic impossibility that
Rose Aldrich should be a member of the Globe chorus was reinforced by
the fact that her gaze had traveled unconcernedly across his face a
dozen times--his seat was in the fourth row, too--without the slightest
flicker of recognition. Of course the way she stood there frozen for a
second, when at last she did see him, settled that question. She was
Rose Aldrich and she was in the Globe chorus!

But this certainty merely left him with a more insoluble perplexity on
his hands; two, in fact--oh, half a dozen! What was she doing there? Did
Rodney know? Well, those questions, and others in their train, could
wait. But--what was he going to do about it?

As for Rose herself, it was a mere automaton that moved off in the dance
and said the two or three lines that remained to her in the act as if
nothing had happened, because all her mind and all her capacity for
feeling were occupied and tested by something else.

Incredible as it seems, she had utterly overlooked Jimmy--overlooked the
fact that, as a dramatic critic, he'd be certain to be present at the
opening performance of _The Girl Up-stairs_--certain to be sitting close
to the front, and certain, of course, to recognize her the moment she
came on the stage. She hadn't even had him in mind when the fear lest
some one of Rodney's friends might, for a lark, drop in at the Globe and
recognize her, had led her to tell John Galbraith that she couldn't be
in the sextette. Since that question had been settled, she'd hardly
considered the possibility at all. And, during the three weeks before
the opening, since she'd embarked on her career as a costumer, she
literally hadn't given it a thought.

She had dreaded various things as the hour of the opening performance
drew near--reasonable things like the failure of the piece to please,
the reception of their offerings in a chilly silence intensified by
contemptuous little riffles of applause. (She had been in audiences
which had treated plays like that--taken her own part in the expression
of chill disfavor, and she knew now she could never do it again.) She
had dreaded unreasonable things, like the total failure of any audience
to appear and the necessity of playing to empty rows as they had done in
rehearsal; nightmare things, like a total loss of memory, which should
leave her stranded in the middle of a silent stage before a jeering
audience. But it hadn't occurred to her to dread that the rise of the
curtain would reveal to her any of the faces that belonged to a world
which the last six weeks had already made to seem unreal.

So the sight of Jimmy Wallace had something the effect that a sudden
awakening has on a somnambulist--bewilderment at first, and after that a
sort of panic. Her first thought was that she must get word to him,
somehow, before he left the theater. Unless she could do that, what was
to prevent his going straight to Rodney, to-night, and telling him all
about it? He was under no obligation not to do it. He was Rodney's
friend quite as much as he was hers.

It didn't take her long to make up her mind though that he wouldn't do
that. Jimmy was never precipitate. He'd give her a chance. To-morrow
morning would do. She could call him up at his office.

But as she began formulating her request and phrasing the preface of
explanations she'd have to make before she'd be--well, entitled to ask a
favor of him, she found herself in a difficulty. She didn't want to
enter into a secret with him--with any man, this meant, of
course--against Rodney. She couldn't think of any way of stating her
reason for wanting her husband kept in the dark that didn't seem to
slight him, belittle him, make him faintly ridiculous--like the
pussy-cat John Galbraith had snapped his fingers at.

So she came, rather swiftly indeed, to the decision (she had arrived at
it before Jimmy left the theater) that she wouldn't make any appeal to
him at all. She'd do nothing that could lead him to think, either that
she was ashamed of herself, or that she was afraid Rodney would be
ashamed of her. In the absence of any appeal from her, mightn't he
perhaps decide that Rodney was in her confidence and so say nothing
about it? But even if he should tell Rodney ...

In her conscious thoughts she went no further than that; didn't
recognize the hope already beating tumultuously in her veins, that he
would tell Rodney--that perhaps even before she got back to her dismal
little room, Rodney, pacing his, would know.

It was so irrational a hope--so unexpected and so well disguised--that
she mistook it for a fear. But fear never made one's heart glow like
that.

That's where all her thoughts were when John Galbraith halted her on the
way to the dressing-room after the performance was over.


CHAPTER IX

THE MAN AND THE DIRECTOR


He said, "I want a talk with you," and she, thinking he meant then and
there, glanced about for a corner where they'd be tolerably secure
against the charging rushes of grips, property men and electricians, all
racing against time to get the third act struck and the first one set
and make their escape from the theater.

"Oh, I don't mean here in this bedlam," he explained with a tinge of
impatience. And then his manner changed. "I'd like, for once, a chance
to sit down with you where it's--quiet and we don't have to feel in a
hurry." He added, a second later, answering a shade of what he took to
be doubt or hesitation in her face, "You're frightfully tired I know. If
you'd rather wait till to-morrow ..."

"Oh, it wasn't that," said Rose. "I was just trying to think where a
place was where one could be quiet and needn't hurry and where two
people could talk."

He smiled. "You can leave that to me," he said. "That is, if you don't
mind a restaurant and a little supper."

"Of course I don't mind," she said. "I'd like it very much."

He nodded. "Don't rush your dressing," he suggested, as he moved away.
"I've got plenty to do."

The sextette dressed together in a sort of pen--big enough, because they
had all sorts of room down under the old Globe stage, but so far as
appointments went, decidedly primitive. The walls were of matched
boards; there was a shelf two feet wide or so around three sides of it,
to make a sort of continuous dressing-table; there were six mirrors, six
deal chairs and a few hooks. These were for your street clothes. The
stage costumes hung in neat ranks outside under the eye of the wardrobe
mistress. When you wanted to put one on you went out and got it, and if
the time allowed for the change were sufficient you took it back into
your dressing-room. Otherwise you plunged into it just where you were.
When you wanted to wash before putting on or after taking off your
make-up you went to a row of stationary wash-bowls down the corridor.

All told it wasn't a place to linger in over the indulgence of
day-dreams. But the first glimpse Rose caught, as she opened the door,
in the mirror next her own, was the entranced face of Olga Larson. The
other girls were in an advanced state of undress, intent on getting out
as quickly as they could. They were all talking straight along, of
course, but that didn't delay their operations a bit. They talked
through the towels they were wiping off the make-up with, talked bent
double over shoe-buckles, talked in little gasps as they tugged at tight
sweaty things that didn't want to come off. And they made a striking
contrast to Olga, who sat there just as she'd left the stage, without a
hook unfastened, in a rapturous reverie, waiting for Rose.

In the instant before her entrance was noticed, Rose made an effort to
shake herself together so that she should be not too inadequate to the
situation that awaited her.

She was, of course, immensely pleased over Olga's little triumph.

(For it had been a triumph. Galbraith had persuaded Goldsmith and Block
to buy the little Empire dress in maize and corn-flower; Rose had done
her hair, and Olga had been allowed to sing, on the first _encore_, the
refrain to _All Alone_, quite by herself. She'd gone up an octave on the
end of it to a high A, which in its perfect clarity had sounded about a
third higher and had brought down the house. Patricia had been furious,
of course, but was at bottom too decent to show it much and had actually
congratulated Olga when she came off. It looked as if she'd really got
her foot on the ladder.)

Well, as I said, Rose was immensely pleased about it--for the girl, who
certainly deserved a little good luck at last; for herself, whose
judgment had been vindicated, and for the show, to the success of which
the experiment had contributed. But she'd have been a good deal better
pleased if Olga could have taken her success as simply her own, instead
of being so adoringly grateful to Rose about it. Olga had been adoring
her with a somewhat embarrassing intensity ever since the night she had
locked her in her room and taught her to talk.

Rose had convicted herself here of a failure in human sympathy, and had
done her best to correct it, without much avail. The stubborn fact was
that, wishing Olga all the good fortune in the world, and being willing
to take any amount of trouble to bring it about, she didn't particularly
like her. And she flinched involuntarily, from the girl's more romantic
and sentimental manifestations. This distaste had been heightened by the
fact that along with Olga's adoration had gone a sense of
proprietorship, with its inevitable accompaniment of jealousy.

Olga bridled every time she found Rose chatting with another member of
the chorus, and when, up in Milwaukee, Patricia had invited her, along
with Anabel, to come up to her room for a little supper after rehearsal,
Olga had been sulky and injured for the whole of the next day.

It was something deeper in Rose than a mere surface distaste that made
all this--the caresses, as well as the sulky exactions--repellent to
her. And to-night, with her mind full of Rodney--full of that strange
hope that disguised itself as fear, the repulsion was stronger than
ever. She made an effort to conquer it. It would be a shame to throw a
wet blanket on the girl's attempt to enjoy her triumph in her own way.

So Rose kissed her and told her how pleased she was, and good-humoredly
forbore to disclaim, except as her wide smile did it for her, Olga's
extravagant protestations of undying love and gratitude. Rose injected
common-sense considerations where she could. Olga had better get out of
that frock before she ruined it with grease paint, and unless she at
least began to dress pretty soon she'd find herself locked up for the
night in the theater.

"I wouldn't care," Olga said. "You'd be locked up, too. Because you
aren't any further along than I am."

"I'm going to be, though," said Rose, "in about two minutes." The
thought of what John Galbraith's disgust would be, in spite of his
good-natured assurance she needn't hurry, if she really kept him
waiting, set her at her task with flying fingers.

"There's no use hurrying," Olga commented on this burst of speed,
"because you're going to wait for me. This is my night. We'll have a
little table all by ourselves at Max's and then you'll come up and sleep
with me to-night."

An instinct prompted Rose to defer the necessary negative to this
suggestion until the last of the other girls, who was just then pinning
on her hat, should have gone. When the door clicked, she said she was
sorry but the plan couldn't be carried out.

Olga looked at her intensely. "I need you to-night," she said, "and if
you care anything about me at all you'll come."

"I'd come if I could," said Rose, "but it can't be managed. I've
promised to do something else."

Olga's face paled a little and her eyes burned. "So that's it, is it?"
she said furiously. "You're going out with Galbraith." She went on to
say more than that, but her meaning was plain at the first words.

Rose looked at her a little incredulous, quite cool, so far as her mind
went (because, of course, Olga's accusation was merely grotesque) but
curiously and most unpleasantly stirred, disgusted almost to the point
of nausea. She stopped the tirade, not because she cared what the girl
was saying, but because she couldn't stay in the room with a person
making that sort of an exhibition of herself. It took no more than half
a dozen words to accomplish this result. The mere fact that she spoke,
after that rather long blank period of speechlessness, and the cold
blaze of her blue eyes that accompanied her words, effected more than
the words themselves. And then, in a tempest of tears and
self-reproaches, Olga repented--a phase of the situation which was
worse, almost, than the former one, because it couldn't be dealt with
quite so summarily.

But Rose went on dressing as fast as she could all the while, and at
last, long before Olga had begun putting on her street clothes, she was
ready to go. With her hand on the door-latch she paused.

"I am going to have supper with Mr. Galbraith," she said. "He told me
there was something he wanted to talk to me about." And with that she
let herself out of the room, indifferent to the effect these last words
of hers might produce.

She caught sight of Galbraith down at the end of the corridor waiting
for her, but she paused a moment, pulled in a long breath and grinned at
herself. In the state of mind she was in just then, divided between her
impatience to get back to her own room where her thoughts could be free
to run upon the one theme they welcomed, and her wrath and disgust over
the scene Olga had just subjected her to, the poor man was in danger of
having a pretty unsatisfactory sort of hour with her. She must brace up
and really try to be nice to him.

So through all the preliminaries to the real talk which he'd said he
wanted with her, she was consciously as cordial and friendly as she knew
how to be. She said she hoped she hadn't kept him waiting too long, and
when he apologized for taking her out through the stage door and the
alley, with the explanation that the front of the house was by this time
locked, she made a good-humored reference to the fact that the alley and
the stage door were now her natural walk in life, and that it was just
as well she shouldn't be spoiled with liberties.

He asked her if she had any preference as to where they went for supper,
and the way she acknowledged, again with a smile, that she'd rather not
go to Rector's, nor to any of the places over on Michigan Avenue, was an
admission, in candid confidence, of the existence of another half of her
life which she wished to keep, if possible, unentangled with this. She
showed herself frankly pleased with the taxi he provided, sank back
into her place in it with a sigh of clear satisfaction, and was, as far
as he could see, completely incurious about the address he gave the
chauffeur. The place he picked out was an excellent little chop-house in
one of the courts south of Van Buren Street, a place little frequented
at night--manned, indeed, after dinner, merely by the proprietor, one
waiter and a man cook in the grille, and kept open to avoid the chance
of disappointing any of the few epicurean clients who wouldn't eat
anywhere else.

But neither the neighborhood nor the loneliness of the place got even so
much as a questioning glance from Rose. She left the ordering of the
supper to him, and assented with a nod to his including with it a bottle
of sparkling Burgundy.

There is nothing quite so disconcerting as to be prepared to overcome a
resistance and then to find no resistance there; to be ready with
convincing arguments, and then not have them called for. This, very
naturally, was the plight of John Galbraith.

Rose wasn't a child even on the day when she came and asked him for a
job, and in the six weeks that had intervened since then she'd been
dressing in the same room with chorus-girls--hearing the sort of things
they talked about in the wings. Indeed, unless he was mistaken, she must
have heard them linking her own name with his. His very special interest
in her, and the way he'd shown it, promoting her to the sextette, and
giving her a chance to design the costumes, was a thing they wouldn't
have missed nor failed to put their own construction on. She must know
then what their inferences would be from the fact of his asking her out
to supper on the opening night.

What he'd been prepared to urge was that now that his connection with
the enterprise had terminated, now that he was no longer a director and
the representative of her employers, she should take him on trust simply
as a friend. He was prepared to answer protests, to offer
compromises--concessions to appearances. He'd expected her to exhibit
some shyness of the taxi. According to his unconscious ideal of the
situation she should have looked questioningly at him--hesitated, and
then let him assure her that it was all right. She should have gasped a
little when the car turned south in the dark little court below Van
Buren Street, have shrunk a little at the isolation the emptiness of the
restaurant enforced upon them, and declined, with something not far
short of panic, her share of that bottle of Burgundy. Because all these
flutters and questionings would just have opened the way for his
assurances--perfectly honest assurances, too, as far as he knew--of the
candor of his feelings and intentions toward her.

She needed a friend, that was plain enough, some one who had her best
interests honestly at heart; some one who knew the pitfalls and the
difficulties of this pilgrimage she'd so strangely set out on, and could
advise her how to avoid them. That he was, potentially, that friend, he
truly believed. And what better way could there be of convincing her of
it than by persuading her to trust him, and then proving that her trust
had not been misplaced?

But what was one to do--how was one to make a beginning when she trusted
him without any persuasion? Trusted him as a matter of course, without
the glimmer of any sort of emotion whatever; about as if he'd
been--well, say, her brother-in-law!

He was at a loss for a peg to hang his definite sense of injury upon. He
couldn't blame the girl for having trusted him, nor for proving so
perfectly adequate to the unconventional situation he'd created. He
couldn't reproach her, even in his thoughts, for the frankly expressed
pleasure she took in the leisured dignity of the little restaurant, with
its modestly sumptuous appointments (she even let him see that she
appreciated the fineness of the napery and the handsomeness of the
tableware; admitted, indeed, how sharply it contrasted with what she'd
been used to lately), nor for the real appreciation she showed of the
supper he selected.

But the moment he had been planning, counting on for days--weeks, if it
came to that--with an excitement he couldn't deny, a tensity that had
increased as the prospect of it drew nearer, was not exciting nor tense
for her. If anything, she'd relaxed a little, as if the big moment of
her day had passed--or, postponed by this affair of his, were still to
come. Once or twice when her gaze detached itself from him and rested
unfocused on the other side of the room, he saw little changes of
expression go over her face that didn't relate to him at all. He simply
wasn't in focus, that was the size of it. He had never seen her look
lovelier, more completely desirable than she did right now, dressed as
she was in her very simple street clothes and relaxed by the surrounding
quiet and comfort and her own fatigue. And yet, all alone with him as
she had so confidingly permitted herself to be, and near enough to reach
with the bare stretching out of a hand, she'd never been further away
nor seemed more unattainable.

As she came back from one of these momentary excursions she found him
staring at her, and with a faint flush and a smile of contrition she
pulled herself back, as it were, into his presence.

"I know you're tired," he said bruskly. "But I fancied you'd be tireder
in the morning and I have to leave for New York on the fast train. So,
you see, it was now or never." Strangely enough, that got her. She
stared at him a little incredulous, almost in consternation.

"Do you mean you're going away?" she asked. "To-morrow?"

"Of course," he said rather sharply. "I've nothing more to stay around
here for." He added, as she still seemed not to have got it through her
head. "My contract with Goldsmith and Block ended to-night, with the
opening performance."

"Of course," she said in deprecation of her stupidity, "I didn't think
you were going to stay indefinitely--as long as the show ran. And yet I
never thought of your going away. It's always seemed that you were the
show--or, rather, that the show was you; just something that you made
go. It doesn't seem possible that it can keep on going with you not
there."

The sincerity of that made it a really fine compliment--just the sort
of compliment he'd appreciate. But--the old perversity again--the very
freedom with which she said it spoiled it for him.

"I may be missed," he said--it was more of a growl really--"but I shan't
be regretted. There's always a sort of Hallelujah chorus set up by the
company when they realize I'm gone."

"I shall regret it very much," said Rose. The words would have set his
blood on fire if she'd just faltered over them. But she didn't. She was
hopelessly serene about it. "You're the person who's made this six weeks
bearable and, in a way, wonderful. I never could thank you enough for
the things you've done for me, though I hope I may try to some time."

"I don't want any thanks," he said. And this was completely true. It was
something very different from gratitude that he wanted. But he realized
how abominably ungracious his words sounded, and hastened to amend them.
"What I mean is that you don't owe me any. Anything I've done that's
worked out to your advantage was done because I believed it was to the
advantage of the men who hired me--beginning with the afternoon when I
first took you on in the chorus."

This didn't satisfy him either. Rose said nothing. He had indeed left
her nothing to say. But there was a look of perplexity in her eyes--as
if she were casting about for some stupidly tactless act or omission of
her own to account for his surliness--that made him recant altogether.

"I don't know why in the world I should have said a thing like that!" he
burst out. "It wasn't true. I've wanted to do things for you--wanted to
do more than I could, and I want to still. You've done a lot to make
this show go, as well as it did, in more ways than you know about. It
wasn't for me, personally, that you did it. But all the same, I'm
grateful. And it's to convince you of that that I asked you to come
around here to-night."

She really lighted up over his praise, thanked him for it very
prettily. But then, after a little silence, she went on reflectively,
"It was, in a way, for you, personally, that I was working all the time.
I don't know if I can explain that, though I think I understand it
myself. But just because you wanted things so hard--you were so
perfectly determined that something should happen in a certain way--I
just _had_ to help bring it about, or try to. It would have been
exciting enough just to see that things were wrong and to watch them
coming right. But taking hold one's self and helping a little to make
them come right was--well, as I said, wonderful."

"Well," he said--and now he was brusk again--"I hope Goldsmith and Block
are satisfied. They won't be; of course, unless the thing runs forty
weeks. But that isn't what I want to talk about. I want to talk about
you. I want to know what you're aiming at. I don't mean to-morrow or
next week. You'll stay with this piece, I suppose, as long as the run
lasts. But in the end, what's the idea? Do you want to be an actress?"

He had kept on going after that first question of his, because it was
obvious the girl wasn't ready to answer. She seemed to be struggling to
get the bearings of a perfectly new idea. At length she gave him the
clue.

"It's that forty weeks," she said. "The notion of just going on--not
changing anything or improving anything; doing the same thing over and
over again for forty weeks, or even four, seems perfectly ghastly. And
yet I suppose that's what everybody in the company is hoping for--just
to keep going round and round like a horse at the end of a pole. What
I'd like to do, now that this is finished, is--well, to start another."

His eyes kindled. "That's it," he said. "That's what I've felt about you
all along. I suppose it's the reason I felt you never could be an
actress. You see the thing the way I do--the whole fun of the game is
getting the timing. Once it's got ..." He snapped his fingers; and with
an eager nod she agreed.

He was in focus now, there could he no doubt of that. But it didn't
occur to him that it was the director who was in focus, not the man.
The fact was that in evoking the director she'd banished the man--a
triumph she wasn't to realize the importance of until a good deal later.

"Well, then, look here," he said. "I've an idea that I could use you to
good advantage as a sort of personal assistant. There'll be a good deal
of work just of the sort you did with the sextette, teaching people to
talk and move about like the sort of folk they're supposed to represent.
That's coming in more and more in musical comedies, the use of the
chorus as real people in the story--accounting for their exits and
entrances. It would be done more if we could teach chorus people to act
human. Well, you can do that better than I; that's the plain truth. And
then I think after you'd got my idea of a dance number you could
probably rehearse it yourself, take some of that routine off my hands.
Under this new contract of mine, that I expect to sign in a day or two,
I'll simply have to have somebody. And then, of course, there's the
costuming. That's a great game, and I've a notion, though of course I
haven't a great deal to go by, that you could swing it. I think you've a
talent for it.

"There you are! The job will be paid from the first a great deal better
than what you've got here. And the costuming end of it, if you succeed,
would run to real money. Well, how about it?"

"But," said Rose a little breathlessly--"but don't I have to stay here
with _The Girl Up-stairs_? I couldn't just leave, could I?"

"Oh, I shan't be ready for you just yet anyway," he said. "I'll write
when I am and by that time you'll be perfectly free to give them your
two weeks' notice. By the way, haven't you some other address than care
of the theater--a permanent address somewhere?"

"Care of Miss Portia Stanton," she told him, and as he got out his card
and wrote it down, she added the California address. It recalled to his
mind that she had told him her name was Rose Stanton on the day he had
given her a job, and the memory diverted him for a moment. Then he
pulled himself back.

"They'll be annoyed, of course--Goldsmith and Block. But, after all,
you've given them more than their money's worth already. Well--will you
come if I write?"

"It seems to be too wonderful to be true," she said. "Yes, I'll come, of
course."

He sat there gazing at her in a sort of fascination. Because she was
fairly lambent with the wonder of it. Her eyes were starry, her lips a
little parted, and she was so still she seemed not even to be breathing.
But the eyes weren't looking at him. Another vision filled them. The
vision--oh, he was sure of it now!--of that "only one," whoever he was,
that mattered.

He thrust back his chair with an abruptness that startled her out of her
reverie, and the action, rough as it was, wasn't violent enough to
satisfy the sudden exasperation that seized him. If he could have
smashed the caraffe or something ...

"I won't keep you any longer," he said. "I'll have them get a taxi and
send you home."

She said she didn't want a taxi. If he'd just walk over with her to a
Clark Street car ... And she thanked him for everything, including the
supper. But all the time he could see her trying, with a perplexity
almost pathetic, to discover what she had done to change his manner
again like that.

He was thoroughly contrite about it, and he did his best to recover an
appearance of friendly good will. He didn't demur to her wish to be put
on a car, and at the crossing where they waited for it, after an almost
silent walk, he did manage to shake hands and wish her luck and tell her
she'd hear from him soon, in a way that he felt reassured her.

But he kicked his way to the curb after the car had carried her off, and
marched to his hotel in a sort of baffled fury. He didn't know exactly
what had gone wrong about the evening. He couldn't, in phrases, tell
himself just what it was he'd wanted. But he did know, with a perfectly
abysmal conviction, that he was a fool!


CHAPTER X

THE VOICE OF THE WORLD


If you were to accost the average layman, especially the layman who has,
at one time or another, found his personal affairs, or those of his
friends, casually illuminated by the straying search-light of newspaper
notoriety, and put this hypothetical question to him: What chance would
there be that a young married woman, who, in a social sense, really
"belonged," could leave her husband for a musical-comedy chorus in the
city he lived in, and escape having the fact chronicled in the daily
press?--that layman would tell you that there was simply no chance at
all. But if you were to put the same question to a person expert in the
science of publicity--to an alumnus of the local room of any big city
daily, you'd get a very different answer. Because your expert knows how
many good stories there are that never get into the papers. He allows
for the element of luck; he knows how vitally important it is that the
right person should become aware of the fact at exactly the right time,
in order that a simple happening may be converted into news.

Rose's "escapade"--that's how it would have been described--didn't get
into the papers. Jimmy Wallace, of course, before the bar of his own
conscience, stood convicted of high treason. There was no use arguing
with himself that he was hired as a critic and not as a reporter. For,
just as it is the doctor's duty to prolong, if possible, the life of his
patient, or the lawyer's duty to defend his client, so it is the duty of
every man who writes for a newspaper, to turn himself into a reporter
when a story breaks under his eye. Jimmy ought that very night as soon
as he had made sure of his facts, to have left a note on his city
editor's desk informing him that Mrs. Rodney Aldrich was a member of the
chorus in the new Globe show.

He didn't do it, even though he knew that a more troublesome accuser
than his own conscience--namely, the city editor himself--would confront
him, in case any of his colleagues on the other papers had happened to
recognize her and, dutifully, had turned the story in. He read the other
papers for the next twenty-four hours, rather more carefully than usual,
and then with a sigh of relief, told his conscience to go to the devil.
It was a well trained, obedient conscience, and it subsided meekly.

But his curiosity was neither meek nor accustomed to having its
liberties interfered with, and it declined to leave the problem alone.
Problem! It was a whole nest of problems. If you isolated one and worked
out a tolerably satisfactory answer to it, you discovered that this
answer made all the rest more fantastically impossible of solution than
before. It actually began to cost him sleep! What made it harder to
bear, of course, was the tantalizing possibility of finding out
something by dropping in at the Globe during a performance, wandering
back on the stage, where he was always perfectly welcome, going up and
speaking to her and--seeing what happened. Something more or less
illuminating would have to happen. Because, even in the extremely
improbable case of her pretending she didn't know him, he'd then have
something to go on. He dismissed this temptation as often as it showed
its face around the corner of the door of his mind--dismissed it with
objurgations. But it was a persistent temptation and it wouldn't stay
away.

It was a real relief to him when Violet Williamson telephoned to him one
day and asked him to come out to dinner. There'd be no one but herself
and John, she said, and he needn't dress unless he liked. She'd been in
New York for a fortnight and had only been back two days. He mustn't
fail to come. There was a sort of suppressed excitement about Violet's
voice over the telephone, which led him to suspect she might be able to
throw some light on the enigma.

But light, it appeared, was what John and Violet wanted from him.

They were both in the library when he came in, and after the barest
preliminaries in the way of greetings and cigarettes, and the swiftest
summary of her visit to New York ("I stayed just long enough to begin
being not quite so furious with John for not taking me there to live,")
Violet made a little silence, visibly lighted her bomb, and threw it.
"John and I went to the Globe last night to see _The Girl Up-stairs_,"
she said.

Jimmy carried his cocktail over to the fire, drew sharply on his
cigarette to get it evenly lighted, and by that time had decided on his
line.

"That's an amazing resemblance, isn't it?" he said.

"Resemblance fiddle-dee-dee!" said Violet.

John Williamson hunched himself around in his chair. "Well, you know,"
he protested to his wife, "that's the way I dope it out myself."

"Oh, _you!_" she said, with good-natured contempt. "You think you think
so. Because you've always been wild about Rose ever since Rodney married
her, you just won't let yourself think anything else. But Jimmy here,
doesn't even think he thinks so. He knows better."

"They're the limit, aren't they?" said John in rueful appeal to his
guest. "They not only know what you think, but what you think you think!
It's a marvelous thing--feminine intuition."

"'Intuition,' nothing!" said Violet. Then she rounded on Jimmy.

"How much have you found out about her--this girl with the 'astonishing
resemblance'?"

"Not very much," Jimmy confessed. "According to the program, her name is
Doris Dane. I did ask Block about her. He's one of the owners of the
piece. But he couldn't tell me very much. She's from out of town, he
thinks, and he said something about her being a dressmaker. She did some
work for them on the costumes. And she started in with this show as a
chorus-girl. But Galbraith, the director, got interested in her, and put
her into the sextette."

"Well, there we are," said John Williamson. "That settles it. Rose never
was a dressmaker, that's a cinch."

Even Violet seemed a little shaken, and Jimmy was just beginning to
congratulate himself on the skill with which he had modified what Block
had told him about the costumes, when Violet began on him again.

"All right!" she said. "Where are we? You know quite a lot of people in
that show, don't you?" This was a rhetorical question. It was notorious
that Jimmy knew more or less everybody. So, without waiting for an
answer, she went on, "Well, have you been behind the scenes there since
the thing began?"

"No, I've not gone back," said Jimmy. "Why should I?"

"You haven't even been curious," she questioned, "to find out what a
girl who looked and talked as much like Rose as that, was like?" She
concluded, for good measure, with one more question voiced a little
differently--more casually. "Have you happened to see Rodney lately?"

"Why, yes," Jimmy said unwarily. "I met him at the club the other day;
only saw him for a minute or two. We had one drink."

"And did you happen to tell him," she asked, "about this dressmaker in
_The Girl Up-stairs_ who looked so wonderfully like Rose? Did you offer
to take him round to see for himself?"

"I tell you there's nothing to that!" said John. He'd been caught in the
same trap, it seemed. "What's the use of butting in? If anything has
gone wrong with those two ..."

"You've always said there hasn't," Violet interrupted.

"And you've said," he countered, "that you were sure there had. Well,
then, if there's a chance of it, why run the risk, just for nothing?"

Jimmy, as it happened, had never heard even a suggestion that Rose and
Rodney were on any other terms than those of perfect amity. He hoped
they'd go on and tell him more. So to prevent their becoming suddenly
discreet, he promptly changed the subject.

"I thought you had a taboo against the Globe," he said to Violet. "How
did you happen to go there?"

"John went while I was in New York," she explained.

[Illustration: "Don't you know that that was Rose Aldrich?"]

"He's--well, a regular fan, you know. He hasn't missed a show there in
years. And he was _too_ queer and absent-minded and fidgety for words,
when I came back. I thought a bank must be going to fail, or something.
And when he said, after dinner last night, that he felt like going to a
musical show, of course I said I'd go with him. And when I found it was
the Globe--he already had tickets--I was too--kind and sorry for him to
make a fuss. Well, and then she came out on the stage, and I knew what
it was all about."

"Where did you sit?" Jimmy asked.

"Fifth row," said John.

Violet hadn't got the bearing of Jimmy's question. "Oh, you couldn't
mistake her," she said, "any more than you could in this room, now."

"Do you mean," John asked, "that she might have recognized us?"

"They can't," said Violet, "across the footlights,--can they?"

Jimmy nodded. "In a little theater like that," he said, "anywhere in the
house. But it seems she didn't recognize you."

"Look here!" said Violet. "Don't you know, in your own mind, just as
well as that you're standing there, that that was Rose Aldrich?"

Jimmy dropped down into a big chair. "Well," he said, "I'm willing to
accept it as a working hypothesis."

"You men!" said Violet.

Dinner was announced just then, and the theme had to be dismissed until
at last they were left alone with the dessert.

