Produced by Joel Erickson, Michael Ciesielski, Amy Petri and PG
Distributed Proofreaders


[Illustration: "Quite a little party of friends to see him off." (p.
155)]


   HIS BIG OPPORTUNITY

   BY AMY LE FEUVRE

   Author of "Probable Sons," "The Odd One,"
   "Teddy's Button," etc, etc.

   1898


Contents


Chapters

I. On the Garden Wall

II. A Song

III. Making An Opportunity

IV. An Awkward Visit

V. A Lost Donkey

VI. Rob

VII. A Walnut Story

VIII. The Bertrams' Leap

IX. Making His Leap

X. A Cripple

XI. A Gift to the Queen

XII. Letters

XIII. Old Principle

XIV. Heroes

XV. An Unwelcome Proposal

XVI. David and Jonathan

XVII. Boy's Big Opportunity


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


Quite a Little Party of Friends to See Him Off

Old Principle Laughed at Dudley's Notion

"Now Then, You Rascals, What Are You Doing to My Donkey?"

"He's Dead, Ben--He's Dead!"


I


ON THE GARDEN WALL

They were sitting astride on the top of the old garden wall. Below them
on the one side stretched a sweet old-fashioned English garden lying in
the blaze of an August sun. In the distance, peeping from behind a
wealth of creepers and ivy was the old stone house. It was at an hour in
the afternoon when everything seemed to be at a standstill: two or three
dogs lay on the soft green lawn fast asleep, an old gardener smoking his
pipe and sitting on the edge of a wheelbarrow seemed following their
example; and birds and insects only kept up a monotonous and drowsy
dirge.

But the two little figures clad in white cricketting flannels, were full
of life and motion as they kept up an eager and animated conversation on
their lofty seat.

"You see, Dudley, if nothing happens, we will make it happen!"

"Then it isn't an opportunity."

"Yes it is. Why if those old fellows in olden times hadn't ridden off to
look for adventures they would never have found them at home."

"But an opportunity isn't an adventure."

"Yes, it is, you stupid! An adventure is something that happens, and so
is an opportunity."

The little speaker who announced this logic so dogmatically, was a slim
delicate boy with white face, and large brown eyes, and a crop of dark
unruly curls that had a trick of defying the hair cutter's skill, and of
growing so erratically that "Master Roy's head," was pronounced quite
unmanageable.

He was not a pretty boy, and was in delicate health, constantly subject
to attacks of bronchitis and asthma, yet his spirit was undaunted, and
as his old nurse often said, "his soul was too strong for his body."

Dudley, his little cousin, who sat facing him, on the contrary, was a
true specimen of a handsome English boy. Chestnut hair and bright blue
eyes, rosy cheeks, and an upright sturdy carriage, did much to commend
him to every one's favor: yet for force of character and intellect he
came far behind Roy.

He sat now pondering Roy's words, and kicking his heels against the
wall, whilst his eyes roved over the road on the outside of the garden
and away to a dark pine wood opposite.

"Here's one coming then," he said, suddenly; "now you'll have to use
it."

"Who? What? Where?"

"It's a man; a tramp, a traveller or a highwayman, and he may be all the
lot together! It's an opportunity, isn't it?"

Roy looked down the narrow lane outside the wall, and saw the figure of
a man approaching. His face lit up with eager resolve.

"He's a stranger, Dudley; he doesn't belong to the village; we'll ask
him who he is."

"Hulloo, you fellow," shouted Dudley in his shrill boyish treble; "where
do you come from? You don't belong to this part."

The man looked up at the boys curiously.

"And who may ye be, a-wall climbin' and a breakin' over in folks'
gardens to steal their fruit?"

"Don't you cheek us," said Roy, throwing his head up, and putting on his
most autocratic air; "this is our garden and our wall, and the road
you're walking on is our private road!"

"Then don't you take to insulting passers-by, or it will be the worse
for ye!" retorted the man.

The boys were silent.

"I'm sure he isn't an opportunity," whispered Dudley.

But Roy would not be disconcerted.

"Look here," he said, adopting a conciliatory tone; "we're looking out
for an opportunity to do some one some good, and then you came along,
that's why we spoke to you. Now just tell us if we can do it to you."

"Yes," Dudley struck in: "you seem rather down, do you want anything
that we can give you?"

The man glanced up at them to see if this was boyish impudence, but the
faces bending down were earnest and grave enough, and he said with a
short laugh,--

"Oh, I reckon there be just a few things I'm in want of; but as to your
givin' of them to me that be quite a different matter. Don't suppose ye
carry about jobs ready to hand in yer pockets, nor yet my set of tools
in pawn, nor yet a pint o' beer and a good hunk of bread and meat for a
starvin' feller! May be ye could tell me the way to the nearest pub, and
stand me a drink there!"

Roy thrust his hand immediately into his pocket, and pulled out amongst
a confused mass of boys' treasures a sixpence.

"I'll give you this if it will do you good," he said, holding it up
proudly. The cottage on the creek over there had a totally different
character. Since it was already down before the small staircase so
clean and tidy, as the ground was a very different over there.

The stages always looked as if they would just have been scrubbed. And
on top of the gallery on three floors and beautiful carnation perfume
all summer long into the window inside.

One of the small, bright windows stood open, and let the beautiful,
sunny mountain air inside.

There was usually a more robust-looking woman sitting see, with beautiful
white hair, which she very neatly under the black bonnet
zurückgestrichen had.

They usually patched in a men's shirt made of coarse, solid substance,
but which has always been washed clean.

The woman herself was in her simple gown so neatly and cleanly, as would
never come to them unclean. It was Vizenze wife, the mother of the
young herdsmen, the Franz Anton happy with the strong arms.

The made over the summer in the upper chalet his cheese, and only in
late autumn, he moved back to the mother down to the winter with her.
Because then he butterte in the lower sheepfold, which was very
close.

As the torrential brook no glut Steg led the two houses were completely
separated. And Vizenze wife knew people who lived much farther, better,
than those neighbors on the creek, which it only about once a day mute
hinüberschaute.

Usually shook them in the head seriously if the black faces and dirty
scraps over to the children saw. She looked over there but not often,
because the sight is not pleasing to her.

Lieber looked at her, when the Feierabendstündchen came, her red
carnations at the gallery, or they looked over the green, sunny
slope down in front of her hut to the valley hinabstieg.

The feral children over the creek belonged to the Hälmli-Sepp, as
he was called of his work outside the home in the wood or Heumachen
cases examined.

In addition, it also loads up the mountain. He was usually at the bottom
of the valley or on the trails in the area.

The woman had enough to do at home.

But they seemed to think so many small children could not keep in order,
and later it would be even better then. So let them all go, how
it went. And in the beautiful, pure air, they also all alive and well and
could be's, on the grassy ground herumrutschend and krabbelnd probably
be. For DST, the four larger throughout the day outside, in order to
guard the cows. Because there is not as on the high pastures, where the
whole herd graze together, and only one or two shepherds is guarded.
The people from the mountainside sent their cows on the surrounding
pasture land and also had to be careful. That is always a fun time for
the boys and girls who are there at any time of day together and all
sorts of fun things with one another company.

Sometimes the children were also below in the valley during the potato
harvest, or they perform other lighter work in the fields. So then they
earned throughout the summer on their maintenance and even brought
some pieces of money home, the mother could do well. They still had
the four kids to feed and for all eight of the clothes should be
collected.

If they still were so easy, a Hemdlein but each had to have and the four
large a piece of it.

A cow had Hälmli-Sepp also not, as almost all the farmers around
him, one possessed, if they even so little about this country had.

Hälmli-Sepp said the man because the straws in his possession were not
thick enough to to receive a cow. He had only one goat and a piece of
potato country, so had the woman with four kids over the summer and live
here too and there's a larger dining when the weather was not
working.

The father was probably in the winter and then when home, but he
gave little attention to, because his house and farm were so in
debt that he had throughout the year had something abzuzahlen.

Once again he was only a little could keep wage was one that he was
guilty of something and took him away, he found so much. So was the
woman with the children often go hungry.

They even could not keep order in the house, and the work was never quite
out of hand. It could also sometimes quite a long time on the
dilapidated, small gallery stand.

Instead of working, she looked over the brook to the neat little
house across the dairymaid, which slices into the sun shone.

Then she said to himself, annoyed: "Yes, there can be clean and keep
everything clean, which has nothing else to do, but our one." Then she
went back into the annoying dull, dreary desk back, and the person
making their way in the first came, she let the anger out.

Bertram, though shrinking at all times from their high spirits and love
of fun, yet looked forward every day to their short visit. She was a
confirmed invalid, and rarely left the house, and her daughter Julia in
consequence took her place as mistress over the household.

Three years before, Roy and Dudley arrived within a month of each other,
to find a home with their grandmother. Roy, whose proper name was
Fitzroy, came from Canada, both his parents having died out there.
Dudley's father had died when he was a baby, but his mother had married
again in India; and upon her death which occurred not long after, his
stepfather had sent him home to his grandmother. From the first day that
they met, the boys were sworn friends; and their aunt dubbed them
"David" and "Jonathan" after having been an unseen witness of a very
solemn vow transacted between them under the shadow of the pines, only a
week after their meeting.

Roy's delicate health was a cause of great anxiety to his grandmother,
and if it had not been for Miss Bertram's wise tact and judgment, he
would have been imprisoned in one room and swathed in cotton wool most
of the year round. He had the advantage of having an old nurse who had
brought him up from his birth, and had come from Canada with him; and
she was as vigilant and experienced in managing his ailments as could be
desired. Poor little Roy, with his uncertain health, was heir to a very
large property of his father's not far away; and the responsibilities
awaiting him, and the knowledge that he would have so much power in his
hands, perhaps had the effect of making him weigh life more seriously
than would most boys of his age.

Later on after their visit to their grandmother was over, and tea had
been finished in the nursery, he wandered into his own little room, and
leaning out of his window, looked up into the clear sky above.

"I feel so small," was his wistful thought, "and heaven is so big; but
I'll do something big enough to get, 'Well done good and faithful
servant,' said to me when I die, I hope. And I'll try every day till I
do it!"


II


A SONG

"Come here, boys. I have had some new music from town, and here is a
song that you will like to listen to, I expect."

It was Miss Bertram who spoke, and her appearance in the nursery just
saved a free fight. Wet afternoons were always a sore trial to the boys:
their mornings were generally spent at the Rectory under Mr. Selby's
tuition, but their afternoons were their own, and it was hard to be kept
within four walls, and expected to make no sound to disturb their
grandmother's afternoon nap.

The old nurse was nodding in her chair, and her charges with jackets off
and rolled up shirt sleeves were advancing toward each other on tiptoe,
and muttering their threats in wrathful whispers.

"I'll show you I'm no coddle!"

"And I'll show you I'm no lazy lubber!"

At the sound of their aunt's voice they stopped; and each picked up his
jacket with some confusion, Dudley saying contentedly, "All right, old
fellow, pax now, and we'll finish it up to-morrow."

"Aunt Judy, do let us come into the drawing-room then, and hear you
sing; we're sick of this old nursery, we're too big to be kept here."

Roy spoke scornfully, but his aunt shook her head at him:

"Do you know this is the room I love best in the house? Your father and
I used it till we were double your age, and no place ever came up to it
in our estimation. Don't be little prigs and think yourselves men before
you're boys!"

"Why, Aunt Judy, we've been boys ever since we were born!"

"I look upon you as infants now," retorted Miss Bertram, laughing. "Come
along--tiptoe past granny's room, please, and no racing downstairs."

"We'll slide down the rails instead, we always do when granny is
asleep."

"Not when I am with you, thank you."

A few minutes afterward, and the boys were standing on either side of
the piano listening with delight to the song that has stirred so many
boyish hearts:

   "'Tis a story, what a story, tho' it never made a noise
   Of cherub-headed Jake and Jim, two little drummer boys
   Of all the wildest scamps that e'er provoked a sergeant's eye,
   They were first in every wickedness, but one thing could not lie,
   And they longed to face the music, when the tidings from afar
   Brought the news of wild disaster in a wild and savage war.
   Said the Colonel, 'How can babies of battle bear the brunt?'
   Said the little orphan rascals, 'please Sir, take us to the front!
       And we'll play to the men in the far-off land,
         When their eyes for home are dim;
       If the Indians come, they shall hear our drum
         In the van where the fight is grim.
       Our lads we know, to the death will go,
         If they're led by Jake and Jim.'

   "In the battle, 'mid the rattle, and the deadly hail of lead,
   The two were in their glory--What did they know of dread?
   And fierce the heathen cry arose across the Indian plain,
   And 'twas Home, for the bravest there would never be again,
   The raw recruits were restless, and they counted not the cost,
   And the Colonel shouted, 'Steady lads, stand fast, or else we're lost.'
   A rush! 'twas like an avalanche! a clash of steel and red!
   A shock like mountain thunder, then the reg'ment turned and fled.
       'Give me the drum, take the fife,' said Jake,
         'And with all your might and main,
       Play the old step now, for the reg'ment's sake
         As they scatter along the plain.
       We'll play them up to the front once more,
         Tho' we never come back again.'

   "Then might the world have seen two little dots in red,
   Facing the foe, when the rest had turned and fled!
   So young, so brave and gay, while others held their breath,
   They played ev'ry inch of the way to meet their death;
   And _then_ at last the reg'ment turned, for vengeance ev'ry man
   To save the lads they turned and fought as only demons can;
   They swept the foe before them across the mountain rim,
   But victory that day could never bring back Jake or Jim.
       And they silently stood where the children fell,
         Not a word of triumph said,
       For they knew who had led as they bowed each head,
         And looked at the quiet dead;
       That the fight was won, and the reg'ment saved,
         By those two little dots in red."

Miss Bertram stole a glance at the boys' faces as she finished singing.

With a wriggle and a twist Dudley turned his back upon her; but not
before she had seen the blue eyes swimming with tears, and heard a
choking sob being hastily swallowed. Roy stood erect, his little face
quivering with emotion, and his usually pale cheek flushed a deep
crimson, whilst his small determined mouth and chin looked more resolute
and daring than ever. His hands thrust deep in the pockets of his
knickerbockers he looked straight before him and repeated with emphasis,

"They played every inch of the way to meet their death!"

"Regular little heroes, weren't they?" said Miss Bertram.

"Rather," came from Roy's lips, and then without another word he ran out
of the room.

"Do you like it, David?" Miss Bertram asked, touching Dudley lightly on
the shoulder.

"No--I--don't--it makes a fellow in a blue funk." And two fists were
hastily brushed across the eyes.

"Shall I sing you something more cheerful?"

"No, thanks, not to-night, I think I'll go to Roy."

And Dudley, too, made his exit, leaving his aunt touched and amused at
the effect of the song.

An hour after the rain had ceased, and the sun was shining out. Down the
village street walked the two boys enjoying their freedom more soberly
than was their wont.

"We must, we must, we _must_ be heroes, Dudley!"

"Yes, if we get a chance."

"But why shouldn't we have it as well as those two boys. I wonder
sometimes what God meant us to do when He made us! And I'm not going to
be in the dumps because I'm not very strong. For look at Nelson: old
Selby told us he was always very seedy and shaky, always ill; and not
being big in body doesn't matter, for Nelson was a little man and so was
Napoleon, and lots of the great men have been short and stumpy and
hideous! I mean to do something before I die, if only an opportunity
will come! Do you remember the story of the little chap in Holland, who
put his hand in the hole in the sand bank, and kept the whole ocean from
coming in and washing away hundreds of towns and villages? If I could
only do a thing like that, something that would do good to millions of
people; something that would be worth living for! If I could save
somebody's life from fire, or drowning, or some kind of danger! Don't
you long for something of that sort, eh?"

"I don't know that I do," was the slow response; "but I should like you
to get a chance of it if you want it so much."

"Oh, wasn't it splendid of those two little chaps--a whole regiment! And
only those two who didn't run away! I think I could stand fire like
that, couldn't you?"

"I would with you."

"But I don't expect I'll ever go into the army." This in sorrowful
tones.

"Why not?"

"Oh, they'd never have me. I'm too thin round the chest; nurse says I'm
like a bag of bones, and I wouldn't make a smart soldier. Now you'd be a
splendid one, no one could be ashamed of you."

"Well, I won't go without you."

"But I'll do something worth living for," repeated Roy, tossing up his
head and giving a stamp as he spoke; "and I'll seize the first
opportunity that comes."

Dudley was silent. They had now reached the low stone bridge over the
river, a favorite resort amongst all the village boys for fishing; and
quite a little group of them were collected there. Roy and Dudley were
welcomed eagerly as though perhaps at times they were inclined to assume
patronizing and masterful airs; yet their extreme generosity and love
for all country sport made them general favorites with the villagers.

Roy was soon in the midst of an eager discussion about the best bait for
trout; and was presently startled by a heavy splash over the bridge.
Looking up, to his amazement, he saw Dudley struggling in the water.

"Help, Roy, I'm drowning!"

Both boys were capital swimmers, but Roy saw that Dudley seemed
incapable of keeping himself up, and in one second he threw off his
jacket, and dived head foremost off the bridge to the rescue. The
current of the river was strong here, for a mill wheel was only a short
distance off; and it was hard work to swim safely ashore. Roy
accomplished it successfully amidst the cheers of the admiring group on
the bridge; and when once on dry ground again, neither of the boys
seemed the worse for the wetting. In the hubbub that ensued Dubley was
not questioned as to the cause of the accident; but it appeared that his
feet had got entangled in some string and netting that one of the boys
had brought with him to the bridge, and it was this that had prevented
him from swimming.

"It's awfully nice that I had the chance of helping you," said Roy, as
the two boys were running home as fast as they could to change their
wet clothes; "I didn't hurt you in the water, did I? I believe I gave a
pretty good tug to your hair, I was awfully glad you hadn't had your
hair cut lately."

"You've saved my life," said Dudley, staring at Roy with a peculiar
gravity; "if you hadn't dashed over to me, I should have been sucked
down by that old wheel, and should have been a dead man by this time.
You've done to-day what you were longing to do."

"Yes, but I tell you I felt awfully squeamish when I saw you in the
water and thought I might be too late."

As they neared the house, Roy's pace slackened.

"Go on, Dudley, and leave me, I can't get on, I believe that horrid old
asthma is coming on, I'll follow slowly."

"I'm not quite such a cad," was Dudley's retort, and then hoisting Roy
up on his back, as if that mode of proceeding was quite a usual
occurrence, he made his way into the house.

They crept up to their bedrooms and changed their wet clothes before
they showed themselves to any one. Then Dudley waxed eloquent for the
occasion, and the story was told in drawing-room and servants' hall,
till every one was loud in their praises of the little rescuer.

"He looks too small to have done it," said Miss Bertram, smiling; for
though Roy was Dudley's senior by two months, he was a good head
shorter.

Roy got rather impatient under this adulation.

"Oh, shut up, Dudley, don't be such an ass, as if I could have done
anything else!"

An hour after, and Roy was sitting up in bed speechless and panting,
with the bronchitis kettle in full play, and nurse trying vainly to
battle with one of his worst bronchial attacks.

"I say "--he gasped at last; "do you think--I'm going to die--this
time?"

"Surely no, my pet. It's more asthma than bronchitis; I'll pull you
round, please God."

Midnight came, and when nurse left the room for a minute she found a
small figure crouched down outside the door.

It was Dudley.

"Oh, nurse, he's very bad, isn't he? Is he going to die? What shall I
do! I shall be his murderer, I've killed him!"

Dudley's eyes were wild with terror, and nurse tried to soothe him.

"Don't talk nonsense, but go to bed; he'll be better in the morning, I
hope. It's just the wet, and the strain of it that's done it. There's
none to blame. You couldn't help it, and he's been as bad as this
before and pulled through. Go to bed, laddie, and ask God to make him
better."

Dudley crept back to bed, and flung himself down on his pillows with a
fit of bitter weeping.

"She says I couldn't help it; oh, God, make him better, make him better,
do forgive me! I never thought of this!"


III


MAKING AN OPPORTUNITY

It was two days before Dudley was allowed to see the little invalid. The
doctor had been in constant attendance; but all danger was over now, and
Roy as usual was rapidly picking up his strength again.

"His constitution has wonderful rallying powers," the old doctor said;
"he is like a bit of india rubber!"

It seemed to Dudley that Roy's face had got wonderfully white and small;
and there was a weary worn look in his eyes, as he turned round to greet
him.

"Now sit down and talk to him, but don't let him do the talking," was
nurse's advice as she left the boys together.

Dudley sat down by the bed, and squeezed hold of the little hand held
out to him.

"I'm so sorry, old chap," he said, nervously; "do you feel really
better? I've been so miserable."

"I'm first-rate now," was the cheerful response; "it's awfully nice
getting your breath back again; it's only made me feel a little tired,
that's all!"

"It was all me!"

"Why that has been my comfort," said Roy, with shining eyes; "I felt
when I was very bad, that if I died, I might have lived for something.
It would have been lovely to die for you, Dudley--at least you know to
have got myself ill from that reason; it's so very tame when I get bad
from nothing at all; but I'm well again now, so I know God is letting me
live to do something else!"

"I was the one that ought to have been made ill to punish me," blurted
out Dudley, and then he was silent.

Roy's eyes rested on his flushed face with some wonder.

"It wasn't wicked of you to fall into the river; you couldn't help it."

A crimson flush crept over Dudley's face up to the very roots of his
hair; he picked the fringe of the counterpane restlessly between his
fingers, and kicked his heels against the legs of his chair. Silence
again: Roy looked steadily at him; and then an expression of
astonishment and bewilderment flitted across his face, followed by one
of strange, conviction.

"Dudley, look at me."

Roy's tone was peremptory, but Dudley never moved, until the command was
given in a sharper tone. Then he raised his head, but his blue eyes had
a guilty harassed look in them, and he dropped them quickly again.

"It's no good; I've found you out. Did you tie up your feet like that
yourself?"

After a minute, in a sepulchral tone, came the words, "Yes, when you
weren't looking!"

Roy lay back on his pillows with a sigh.

A little disappointment mingled with his feelings which were somewhat
mixed. After a pause, he said, "You _are_ a good fellow! To think of
doing that for me! What would you have done if I hadn't jumped in to
save you?"

Then Dudley raised his head:

"I knew you wouldn't fail me," he said, triumphantly; "I knew I could
trust you!"

Roy put out his thin little arm and drew Dudley's bonny face down by the
side of his on the pillow.

"I don't think," he whispered, "that even I could have been plucky
enough to do that--not in sight of that old mill wheel!"

Neither spoke for a few minutes; then Dudley said,

"I should have been your murderer if you had died. That has been the
worst of it. But you did like saving a drowning fellow, didn't you?"

"Ye-es, but it wasn't quite real--at least it isn't as if you really had
tumbled in by accident."

"Well but I only did what you said we must do. I made an opportunity."

And after this remark Roy had nothing more to say; but neither he nor
Dudley ever enlightened any one as to the true cause of the accident.

When Roy had quite recovered, the two boys set out one afternoon to
visit their greatest friend in the village. This was the old man every
one called "old Principle." He lived by himself in a curious
three-cornered house at the extreme end of the village, and kept a
little general shop where everything but eatables could be obtained.

"I keep every article that man, woman, or child can want for their use,
for their homes, their work or their play; but food and drink I will not
cater for. It's against my principles to sell perishable goods, and I
will not be the one to minister to the very lowest animal wants of my
fellow creatures."

This was his favorite speech, from which it may be judged he was
somewhat of a character.

He had several hobbies, and was a well-read man and superior to those
around him; and perhaps this was the cause of his holding himself aloof
from most of the villagers. They termed him "cranky and cracked," but
his goods were always acceptable, and he was thoroughly successful in
his business. When his shop was closed he would go out on the hills,
and there spend his time studying geology and botany. He knew the name
of every plant and insect, and the strata of the earth for many miles
round; and it was out of doors that the boys first made his
acquaintance.

They found him on this afternoon seated behind his counter mending an
eight-day clock.

"Well, old Principle, how are you?" said Roy, climbing up to the counter
and sitting comfortably on it with his legs dangling in mid air; "we
haven't seen you for ages."

"Are you going out this evening?" enquired Dudley, as he proceeded to
follow Roy's example.

"To be sure, when my work is done," responded the old man pushing up his
spectacles and regarding the boys with kindly eyes; "these light
evenings are my delight, as you know. If you sit still till I have
finished this clock, I will show you a treasure I found yesterday."

"Can you mend everything?" asked Roy, curiously; "I never knew you
understood about clocks."

"I've learned to mend most things," was the answer; "it isn't given to
every one to make, and I'm one of the menders in the world not the
makers. There's one thing I can't mend--and that is broken hearts."

There was silence: Roy broke it at last by saying with knitted brow,
"I'd rather be a maker than a mender, but lots of people aren't either."

"Quite right," nodded the old man; "most folk are breakers."

"I wish I was as clever as you," said Dudley; "you mend umbrellas, and
kettles, and plates, and windows, and gates, and all sorts. How did you
learn?"

"Well, I ain't ashamed of owning that my father was just a travelling
tinker, and when I was a little fellow I used to go round with him and
see him do most things. It was from travelling through the country I
learned to love it so. And my father, he was a thoughtful man, and when
I used to ask where the tin came from, and where the iron and where the
lead, he took to learning of it up so that he could answer me; and then
I came to find that most of our comforts come from underground, and so I
fell to digging. Ah, youngsters, earth is a wonderful treasure house!"

The clock was done. Old Principle put it carefully by and then mounted
on some wooden steps, and took down a tin saucepan. The boys knew the
shelf well; as though apparently it was just a row of tinware for sale,
many a pot and pan held treasures that geologists would have given a
great deal to possess.

Now when old Principle held out a peculiar shaped stone with loving
pride, Roy and Dudley pressed forward to look at it.

"I know, it's a Roman hammer," shouted out Dudley.

"It's a Saxon jug," suggested Roy.

"It's part of a jaw of a mammoth many thousands of years old, and there
are two teeth in perfect preservation," old Principle said solemnly.

"Where did you find it?"

"Ah, you must come and see! In a cave that I have only just discovered,
and which must originally have been by the side of a river. §. 31st Far
less verschlug the fact that the Israelite and that the immortality
of the soul and future retribution, because the law is not concerned,
just and expressly denied.

The denial of an individual - it was also a Solomon - considered the
progress of the commonwealth not to mind, and was in and of itself is a
proof that the people now is a big step closer to the truth had
come.

For individuals only deny what Multiple reflection in drag, and drag into
consideration, why you have previously not at all distressed, is half
way to knowledge. §. 32nd Let us also confess that it is a heroic
obedience, observe the laws of God, just because it's God's laws
are and not because he is the observer that here and there to reward
promised they watch, whether you're at the future reward quite
desperate, and the time not so certainly is. §. 33rd A people in
this heroic obedience to God brought up, it should not be determined,
it should not, above all others capable Seyn, special divine
intentions run - let the soldiers of his blind obedience officer
makes, and now also by the wisdom of his leader to be convinced,
and says, what this guide does not execute him under may - §. 34th
still had the Jewish people in his Jehovah the more powerful, than
the wisest of all gods, it still had him as a zealous God more
feared than loved: even at this evidence that the concepts that
distinguish it from some of its highest God had, not just the right
words were that we have from God.

But now was the time since that its terms extended, refined, berichtiget
should be, what God is of a very natural means of serving;
Maaßstabes a better right, after which he got an opportunity to
appreciate. §. 35th instead of him so far that it is only against
the idols of the wretched little unbleached neighboring nations had
protected, what is lived in constant jealousy: it began in captivity
under the wise Persians to him against the very essence of all
beings to measure how the experienced a sense recognized and
venerated. §. 36 The revelation had led his reason, and now brightened
at once the reason his revelation. §. , 37, was the first mutual
service that beyde successively performed, and the author is such
a beyder mutual influence as little indecent that without him one
of beyden Seyn would be superfluous. §. 38 The stranger in the
clever child sahe other children who knew more, and decent living,
and wondered with shame: why I do not know too?

why I do not live so well? Had in my father's house so I do not even
teach, which I do not even stop it? As it searches its elementary
books again, which he has long been a disgust to the debt on the
books to elementary slide.

But see! erkennet it that the blame is not on the books is that the
debt is merely his own sey, why it is not just the long knew just
as alive. §. 39th As the Jews now, at the behest of the pure Persian
doctrine, in their Jehovah not only the greatest of all national
gods, but God saw, because it considers it as such in their back
hervorgesuchten Scriptures in order to find more and others were
able to show, when he Therein really was, because they all the same
sensual performances a level so great disgust testified, or is in
these writings to have been instructed, just as the Persians had
always: what wonder that they are before the eyes of Cyrus with a
grace worship found that he is still well below the pure Sabeismus,
but also far beyond the rough Abgöttereyen Seyn to recognize those
who might be verlaßnen of the country of the Jews had bemächtiget?

§. Sun 40th enlightened about their own unrecognized treasures they came
back and were a very andres people whose first concern was, that
enlightenment among themselves permanently to make.

Soon, to waste and Abgötterey under him not to think.

Because you can set a National God probably be unfaithful, but never God,
so soon once it has detected. §. 41 The God scholars have complete
change of the Jewish people variously sought to explain, and one
of the inadequacy of all these different explanations are well
demonstrated, finally wanted to "the apparent fulfillment of the
Babylonian captivity and the restoration of the same ausgesprochnen
and aufgeschriebnen prophecies, "the true cause of that state.

But even these can cause so far only in the true Seyn than they are now
only foiled notions of God requires.

The Jews had only now have realized that miracles Thun and predict the
future, only God to give, what else they beydes the false idols
beygeleget had thus miracles and prophecies as only such a weak,
fleeting impression they had made. §. 42nd Without doubt the Jews
were among the Persians Chaldaeans and also with the doctrine of
the immortality of the soul has become known.

Confidant with her, they were in the schools of the Greek philosophers
in Egypt. §. 43rd But with this because it is teaching, in view of
their holy scriptures, the Bewandniß not had it with the doctrine
of the unity of God and the properties had, since that of the
sensuous people was a matter has been grossly overlooked, but sought
Seyn wanted, since it still had Nöthiger preliminary, and therefore,
only innuendo and finger pointing instead had had: it was the belief
in the immortality of the soul naturally never the faith of the
entire people are.

He was and remained the only belief that a certain sect. §. 44th
A preliminary to the doctrine of the immortality of the soul, I call for
the divine E. threat to Missethat of the father to his children to the
third and fourth link to punish.

Diess habituated to the idea of fathers with their latest offspring to
live, and the unhappiness which they placed on these innocent
people had to feel ahead. §. 45th An allusion to mention I was just
excited the curiosity and a matter should proceed.

As the saying often occurring to his fathers versammlet, for dying. §.
46th I call a clue what already contains any germ, from which the
still zurückgehaltne truth can develop.

Likewise Christ was from the final designation of God of Abraham, Isaacs
and Jacobs. This clue seems to me, however, a rigorous proof can be
trained. §.

In such 47th over, innuendo, finger point, there is a positive
perfection of elementary book, like the aforementioned property
that it is the way to the still withheld truths are not difficult,
or prevent, the same perfection was negative. §.

If so, 48th or the outfitting and style - 1) the outfitting is not
transferred well to abstract truths in Allegorieen and individual
cases are instructive, as erzählet will really happen.

Likewise, the creation, under the picture of the day become the source
of moral evil, in the narrative of verbotnen Baume, the origin of many
languages in the history of Thurmbaue of Babel, etc. §. 49. 2) the
style - simple and planned soon, soon to be poetic, Tavtologieen
quite fully, but those who practice the acumen by soon to say
anything otherwise seem, but the jointly say the soon to say jointly
seem to and in fact mean something else or can mean: - §. 50th and
you have all the qualities of a good elementary book sowol for
children than for an infantile nation. §. 51st But every elementary
book is only for a certain age.

The child him grow longer, than the opinion that dabey to use is
harmful.

Because of this order on a einigermaassen only useful kind thun you
need to insert more than a question of lies, it contributed more
than it can hold.

One must of innuendo and finger pointing and too much make the
Allegorieen to shake out exactly that Beyspiele too cumbersome
suggest that words strongly pressed.

The giebt the child a petty, crooked, sophisticated intellect, which makes
it geheimnißreich, superstitious, full of contempt against everything
tangible and Light. §. 52 jointly how the rabbis treated their holy
books!

The jointly character, presented to the spirit of its people by ertheilten!
§. 53rd A bessrer educators must come to the child and the weary
elementary book from the hands tear .-- Christ came. §.

The Theil 54th of the human race to God in an education plan had
to be - He had but only those in a want, by language, through action by
government, by other natural and political conditions in already
was connected -- was the major steps zweyten of Education ripe.
§. The 55th is this Theilhaber of the human race was in the exercise
of his reason so far that he acts on his moral noble, worthy causes
movement required and could need as temporal rewards and punishments
were that had led him so far.

The child is boy. Leckerey game and the burgeoning work differs desire,
just as frey, just so honored just to be as happy as it looks to
be older siblings. §. 56.

Already long ago were better from that of the human race Theile usual,
by a shadow of such movement causes edlern govern it. In order for this
life only in the memory of his fellow citizens fortzuleben, that the
Greeks and Romans all. §. 57 was about time that another true life
after this life in pursuit of influence over his actions gewönne.
§. 58th And so Christ became the first reliable, practical teaching
of the immortality of the soul. §. 59th The first reliable teachers
.-- Reliable by the prophecies, of which he seemed satisfied;
reliably through the miracles he performed; reliably through its
own revival after a death through which he had sealed his teachings.

Whether we still itzt this revival, these miracles can prove: that
I leave then asked Seyn.

So, as I then asked Seyn leave, the person who had this Christ. Everything
that can be had for the comfort of his teaching was important Seyn: itzt
it is to detect the truth of this doctrine is not so important anymore.
§. 60th The first practical teacher .-- For another, the immortality
of the soul, as a philosophical Speculation, hypothesis, wish,
believe a different, and express his inner acts up afterwards. §.
61st And this at least Christ taught first.

Because whether it is equal Bey some people even before it was
imported belief that evil acts even in that life would be so were it
but only those of civil society night brought salvation, and
therefore already in the civil society had their sentences .

An internal cleaning of the heart in terms of life to another friend,
was reserved for him alone. §. 62nd His disciples have faithfully
reproduced this doctrine.

And even if they had no other merit than that of a truth that only
Christ alone for the Jews seemed to have determined a general
circulation among several peoples verschaft had: they would have
to question the nurses and Wohlthäter of the human race to . §.

That they 63rd but still a great lesson learned with others displaced,
whose truth is less obvious, the benefits of which was considerably
less: how could the Seyn differently? Let us therefore they do not scold,
but rather with Ernst investigate whether even these lessons beygemischten
a new Richtungsstoß for the human reason has become. §. 64th At
least it's already clear from experience that the New Testament
writings in which these doctrines after some time aufbewahret found
that zweyte beßre elementary book for the human race have, and even
competence. §. 65th You have siebzehnhundert years since the human
mind more than any other books beschäftiget, more than any other
illuminated books, it should also only light Seyn which the human
mind itself hineintrug. §. 66th would have been impossible any other
book so various races so well known can be and has not disputed
that such thinking is quite different with this book jointly employed,
the human mind fortgeholfen more than if every nation for itself
its own particular elementary book would have been. §.

Also, it was 67th highest Nöthiger that every nation of this book
for a while for the non plus ultra of his findings had to keep.

Because that is also the boy's elementary book before the first view,
so the impatient, just ready to be not to do things fortreißt to which
he still has no reason. §. 68th And what else itzt most important: -
Hats thee, thou more capable individual, you are on the last leaf of this
elementary book stamp and annealing, beware, it is weaker your classmates
to know what you witterst or too sehn begin. §. 69th after thee Until
they are, these weaker classmates; - prefer going again, even in this
elementary book back, and investigate whether what you just for
applications of the method of teaching for stopgaps do, probably
not even something more is . §. 70th You searched in the childhood
of the human race to the doctrine of the unity of God saw that God
also simple common sense truths offenbaret directly, or verstattet
and initiating simple reason that immediately revealed truths as
truths for a time gelehret are: to speed spread and they fixed up. §.

Learn 71st in the boys' age of the human race, on the doctrine of the
immortality of the soul, which jointly.

It is in the elementary zweyten better than Beech geprediget revelation,
not as a result of human inferences gelehret. §. 72. Just as we
study of the unity of God is now devoid of the Old Testament can
be so gradual as to the doctrine of the immortality of the soul,
even the New Testament to spare can start: this could not be more
like vorgespiegelt truths are we, as revelations anstaunen be so
long until they reason from their other outstanding truths derive
and combine with them to learn?

§. 73rd PA the doctrine of Dreyeinigkeit .-- As if these teachings the
human mind, after endless aberrations to the left and right, just
finally on the way to bring to discern that God is in the understanding,
in which finite things are one impossible Seyn one could, that his
unit is a unit of Transcendental Seyn needed, what kind of majority
does not exclude - God Must be at least not the complete presentation
of itself to have?

an idea of where everything is what it is.

Dignity but everything in its place what it is, even if its necessarily a
reality, as from its other properties, is just an idea, is just
one possibility would be?

This possibility is exhausted, the essence of its other characteristics:
its also necessarily reality?

Me seems not .-- It follows that either God does not a complete idea of
itself have full or idea is necessarily just as truly as it is & c. -
Freylich is the picture of me in the mirror is nothing but a empty
idea from me, because it only has from me, of which rays of light
falling on its surface.

But if this picture because now everything, everything without
exception, would have what I have: it would then also be an empty
idea, or rather a true doubling of my self Seyn - If I had a similar
doubling in God to recognize believe: so I am mistaken, perhaps not
so well as that the language is subject to my terms, and so much
remains always unwidersprechlich that those who do not like idea
of it popular want to make themselves understood and hardly decorous
could express themselves than through the appointment of a Son, the
God of eternity testimony. §. 74th And the doctrine of original sin
.-- How, when we all finally convicted, that the man on the first
and lowest level of his humanity, but he bad his actions do not sey
that he could follow moral laws?

§. 75th And the doctrine of the Son Genugthuung .-- How, when we finally
all nöthigte, accept: that God, regardless of the initial failure
of the people, he still prefers moral laws, and all his transgressions,
in regard to his son , ie in regard to the separate volume of all
his perfections, against and in the imperfection of each individual
disappears, dear want to forgive, than that he did not give him of
all moral bliss exclude want, without the moral laws are not lets
think?

§.

You do not 76th that, like Vernünfteleyen about the mysteries of religion
are prohibited .-- The secret word meant in the first days of the
Christenthums, quite a bit different than we understand itzt; and
training in rational truths revealed truths necessarily bad, but
if the human race so that helped Seyn aims.

Geoffenbaret When they were, they were still no reason freylich truths,
but they were geoffenbaret to view it to be.

They were like a Facit, which is the arithmetic master tells his
students ahead so they are in arithmetic einigermaassen afterwards
provided.

Did the students in the predicted Facit satisfied: they would never
expect to learn, and the intention in which the good Champion Bey
them their work was a guide, perform poorly

At last rather late in the afternoon they spied in the distance a
donkey, and delighted to think their quest was at an end, they hastened
up to it.

Dudley had brought some carrots in his pocket, but the donkey was
utterly indifferent to such a dainty; she waited till the boys were
nearly up to her, and then with a kick up of her heels away she
galloped, evidently enjoying the chase.

"Won't I give her a licking when I catch her," shouted Dudley,
wrathfully, as after a long and tiring race, they stopped a minute to
rest; "let us leave her and go home, Roy. I'm sure it's tea time, for I
feel dreadfully hungry, and we're miles and miles away. I've never been
so far before."

"Oh, we mustn't give up," Roy replied, with his usual determination; "we
won't be beaten by an old donkey, and when we do catch her, we will both
get on her back and ride her home. Come on, let us have another try!"

"We haven't got a halter, that's the worst of it."

[Illustration: "'Now then, you rascals, what are you doing to my
donkey?'"]

But Dudley plucked up courage, and in another half hour they were
successful; Roy seated on the donkey's back, and Dudley holding firmly
to her tail.

"Now then--away with you--hip--hip--hurray!"

Away they tore, both donkey and boys in best of spirits now: but before
long they were brought to a standstill. A man brandishing a huge stick
sprang out in front of them.

"Now then, you rascals, what are you doing to my donkey? Get off it this
instant!"

"It isn't your donkey, it's old Roger's, and we're taking it home to
him. Don't you cheek us! You're a rascal yourself!"

Dudley spoke angrily, but as he noticed the donkey stop instantly, and
begin to sidle up toward the man an awful fear smote him, and Roy added
quietly,

"You see you may be a thief or any one, for all we know, and it isn't
likely we're going to let you have the chance of stealing old Roger's
donkey. You go away and leave us alone. We're going home now--Gee-up.
Come on, Dudley."

Not an inch would the donkey stir; and the man with a laugh, slipped a
halter out of his pocket and in another minute Roy was rolling on the
grass, and the donkey was being led off in the opposite direction.

"You may think yourselves lucky to escape the thrashing ye desarves!"
shouted out the man; "ye've given me a nice chase after my beast for the
last hour, and ye needn't add a pack of lies to your wicked pranks!"

The boys sat down on the grass to consider their position.

"Well, I call it beastly rot," grumbled Dudley, thoroughly cross; "if
that's his donkey I don't believe old Roger's is on the hills at all. It
must have been this one that somebody saw, and now I come to think of it
Roger's has a black stripe down her back, and this one hadn't!"

"I'm so awfully tired," said Roy, disconsolately; "we've done no good as
usual. I don't believe we ever shall do any one any good!"

When Roy's spirits sank it was a bad case, and for some minutes there
was silence between them. Then feeling they must make the best of it
they scrambled to their feet and plodded slowly on in the direction of
home. A heavy mist was falling by this time, and dusk was setting in.
Roy began to cough, and at last in despair Dudley cried out, "I do
believe we're lost; I don't know where the path is, and I'm sure this
isn't the way we came!"

"Well," said Roy, gasping as he spoke; "I'm afraid this old mist is
getting into my chest, and I can't go very fast when my breath gets
short. What shall we do? Can you shout--p'raps that man with the donkey
might hear us."

Dudley shouted and shouted till he was hoarse, and then the little
fellows trudged wearily on.

"You see," said Roy, bravely; "we must get somewhere if we go straight
on."

"I believe," said Dudley, in doleful tones; "that you get right round
the world and come back to where you started, if you only walk straight
enough!"

This depressing view did not comfort his cousin.

"I've always thought it would be very exciting to be lost," Roy said
with a sigh; "but it doesn't seem very nice, does it? And it is so cold.
I wonder if we shall meet with any adventures, lost people generally
do."

"If we could come into a gipsies' camp with a huge fire and a pot of
stewed hares, it would be stunning! Or if we could find old Principle's
cave, that would be better still!"

They were stumbling on, Roy gasping and panting for breath, and Dudley
every minute or two giving a shout, when suddenly almost as if he had
risen from the ground, a lad appeared in front of them.

"We're lost," shouted Dudley; "who are you? Can you tell us where
Crockton village is?"

"Ay, can't I! You're only about four mile off!"

"Is it straight on?" questioned Roy, wistfully.

"No, you're goin' away from it."

The lad stood looking down at the two small boys and there was some pity
in his tone.

"The little 'un is dead beat. Here--let me hoist you on my back, I'd as
lief go to Crockton as anywhere else to-night, and I know every inch of
these hills, I've been looking after cattle here since I were a babby!
There now, ain't that better?"

Roy was too tired out to resist, though he made a faint protest, and
Dudley seeing him comfortably settled on the broad shoulders of the lad,
trotted along contentedly by his side.

"How did you find us? Did you hear us shouting?"

"I was trapping some moles close to yer, as ye came on."

"Where do you live? And what's your name?"

"I'm called Rob. I don't live nowheres now. Got chucked out last night!"

And Rob gave a short laugh as he spoke.

"Where from?"

"Well, you see there's a lot of us, and the old woman--she's my
stepmother--she told me she wouldn't keep me no longer. My father--he
died last year, and work is hard to get. I'll tramp into some town and
try my luck there."

"Then where were you going to sleep to-night?"

"Sleep? Oh, bless yer--there's plenty o' room and accommodation in the
open. And I haven't been about these parts for so long without knowing
many a snug corner. I could show yer plenty a one. My pet one has been
found out by some old chap lately. He goes into it and digs up
quantities o' stones and then sits and hugs them, all as if they was
gold! I laugh to see him sometimes!"

"Why that must be old Principle, and that's the cave he thinks so much
of! He looks for bones."

Rob gave another of his hearty laughs.

"Well, if he has a taste that way, why don't he go to a churchyard,
he'll dig to more success there."

"No, it's only animals' bones he likes, very, very old ones."

They tramped on, and then Roy asked if he could be put down, and Dudley
given a lift instead. Rob good-naturedly assented, but some minutes were
spent in altercation between the two boys before Dudley would consent
to this arrangement.

"You're as tired as I am," persisted Roy.

"Oh, no, I'm not--at least it's only my legs. You see I haven't a chest
like you. I'll manage, it's always you that gets home ill, I never do."

"I can't help it," said Roy, in a shaky voice; "I know I shall never be
good for anything, I don't think I'm much better than a girl, I suppose
I ought to have been made one."

Roy was always in the depths of misery when he came to this climax, and
Dudley hastened to reassure him.

"Rot! You're as good a walker as I any day. Yes, I'll have a ride on
your back, Rob, if you like. I'm nearly done for, and Roy looks quite
fresh again."

There was great commotion when the trio reached the Manor at last. Miss
Bertram came out into the hall to greet them with an anxious face.

"Oh, you scamps! You'll turn my hair grey before long. Where have you
been? Half the village has turned out to look for you! What mischief
have you been up to?"

When the explanation was given Miss Bertram gave a little groan.

"If we are going to have these kind of expeditions, I really must insist
upon your leaving off trying to do other people good. Old Roger told me
he found his donkey quite early in the afternoon. Now come off to bed
both of you. I believe nurse is already getting her poultice ready in
anticipation of a bad night, Jonathan!"

"What is Rob going to do?" Roy asked, shortly after, when he was
comfortably tucked up in bed, and was enjoying a hot basin of bread and
milk. Miss Bertram had just come in to see how he was.

"Is that the lad that brought you back? He is having a good supper in
the kitchen, and then will go home, I suppose."

"But he hasn't any home," said Roy, putting down his spoon and looking
at his aunt with an anxious face; "he can't get work, so his mother
turned him out of doors, and I want him to come and live with us, and
when I grow up he shall be my servant!"

Miss Bertram laughed.

"My dear boy, not quite so fast. I shall not turn him out to-night, if
he has no home to go to; but we cannot keep a lot of idle boys about the
establishment."

Roy's brown eyes filled with tears. It was so rarely that he showed his
feelings that his aunt began to wonder whether he was not too weak and
exhausted from his walk to be talked to.

"Don't worry your little head over him," she said, kindly; "go to
sleep, and I'll let you see him to-morrow morning."

"Have you ever been lost, Aunt Judy?"

Roy was struggling for self-command, and his voice was very quiet.

"No, I'm thankful to say I never have."

"I prayed to God," he went on solemnly; "that He would send some one to
show us the way home, and Rob was the answer. And when he took me up on
his shoulders and I knew he was taking me home, I thought of that
picture over there!"

Roy pointed to a print of the Good Shepherd with the lost sheep across
his shoulders, and Miss Bertram's face softened as she stooped and
kissed her little nephew.

"Good-night dear. We will see what can be done."

She left the room and when nurse came bustling up to see if the bread
and milk had disappeared she found her little charge gazing dreamily in
front of him.

"Come, dearie, eat your supper. Don't you feel easier?"

"I was thinking," Roy said, slowly bringing back his gaze to the basin
before him; "that if you're very strong you miss a lot of comfort; and
however big and strong I grow up to be, I hope I shan't be too big and
strong to be carried by Him!"

He pointed to the picture again, and good old nurse responded,

"If you outgrow the Lord, you'll outgrow heaven!"


VI


ROB

Roy was not allowed to go to the Rectory the next morning as it was
rather damp, and nurse was carefully trying to ward off a bronchial
attack, but he was permitted to see Rob, and the latter came in looking
rather sheepish and as if he did not know what to do with his hands and
his feet.

"What are you going to do, Rob?" asked Roy, eagerly, after their first
greetings had been exchanged; "you aren't going home again?"

"I'd sooner be shot," was the short reply.

"I've been talking to Aunt Judy about you again this morning, and she
says if you would like to help our old gardener in the garden and could
get a character from some one, she'd try you. I don't quite know what
she means about the character. I thought that belonged to you and not to
any one else. She says she doesn't know what you're like, but I told her
I'd find out. I say, take a chair, won't you. Now then, you don't mind
my asking you a few questions, do you? Are you a thief?"

Rob took the chair that was offered him, squared his shoulders, and
looked up with a pleasant smile at this blunt question.

"No, I ain't that."

"Have you ever killed anybody?"

"No."

"Are you a drunkard?"

"I hate the stuff!"

"Are you a fighter?"

"Well, no, not a reg'lar one. I can't say I've never knocked a feller
down, or squared up with him a bit, but I don't fight till I'm driven to
it."

"Are you a liar?"

"No."

Roy drew a sigh of relief, then continued: "Well, if you aren't any of
those, I'm sure Aunt Judy will have you, I told her I knew you weren't
wicked."

"But I ain't no scholar," said Rob, doubtfully; "I can't write nor read,
and that's against a feller!"

"Oh, well, you won't have to read and write much in the garden. Old Hal
can't read either, and he makes a cross for his name when he has to
write it. But I suppose you can learn, can't you?"

Rob nodded.

"You see I played truant mostly when I was sent to school, and then I
began to mind the cattle soon after I were eight year old, but if any
body would start me, I believe I could pick it up."

"I'll teach you myself when I've nothing else to do," said Roy, grandly;
"for I want you to be clever. I want you to come with me, when I'm grown
up, to my big house. You shall be my head servant, and live with me
always. Would you like that?"

Rob grinned, and seemed to think it a great joke.

Roy continued: "Of course I shall want you more when Dudley goes away.
He has got a stepfather, so when he grows up he will go out to India, I
expect, to live with him, but we don't talk of it, and we pretend we're
never going to leave each other. Did you find Dudley very much heavier
to carry than me?"

"Well, yes, he were a bit heavier."

"I'm afraid I shall never catch him up, he is nearly a head taller, and
he seems to grow quicker every month. I grow so slowly. I think it is
because I lie in bed so much more than he does, I'm always having to go
to bed in the daytime when I'm ill, and that must keep you from growing,
don't you think so?"

The conversation was here interrupted by Miss Bertram's entrance. She
had a long talk with Rob, and in the end took him for a month on trial,
as she had known his father.

The boys were delighted, but Roy still persisted in regarding him as
his special protégé, and more than once this had occasioned a heated
argument between the two cousins.

"He doesn't belong to you. You order him about as if he were your
servant," said Dudley, impatiently, one afternoon after Roy had sent Rob
on more than one errand to the house for him.

"Well, so he will be one day," returned Roy, flushing up.

They were seated again in their favorite corner on the wall, some ripe
plums having just been handed up to them by the obliging Rob, and Dudley
having put an extra big one in his mouth was speechless for a moment.

"I suppose you'll get so fond of Rob, that you won't want me any
longer," he said, after some consideration.

"Rob is my servant, but you're a friend and relation," asserted Roy.

"He is an opportunity, and a pretty big one, isn't he?"

"Why, yes; I never thought of that! How splendid!"

Roy's large eyes were shining, and he gazed with tender pride at Rob who
was now sweeping the lawn.

"We have done him good already, haven't we?" pursued Dudley,
reflectively; "only he started by doing us good. I tell you what we
might do for him. Teach him to read."

Roy looked very doubtful.

"It is so difficult, and he seems so stupid. I did try the other day,
for he asked me to; but I never thought any body _could_ be so stupid! I
told him we would have to give it up, for it made me lose my temper so.
I thought perhaps he could go to old Principle. You see he is too big
for school, but old Principle is always saying he likes to teach people
things."

"Well, that is awfully funny," said Dudley, pointing down to the pine
woods opposite them. "Talk of him and there he is! Isn't that him
walking along over there? Look--now he's stooping down to look at
something. I'm sure it's old Principle; we'll call him!"

Two shrill boyish voices rang out, "Old Principle! Hi! We want you! Old
Principle!"

Soon after old Principle was standing beneath the wall, having obeyed
the summons.

He stood looking up at them with his straw hat pushed to the back of his
head, and his keen, piercing eyes twinkling kindly under his thick,
shaggy eyebrows.

"Well, laddies, you're above me now. 'Tisn't often you can look down at
old Principle from such a superior height."

"We want to ask you if we may send Rob down to you for you to teach him
to read," said Roy, eagerly.

"And why have not two idle boys more time than a busy shopkeeper to do
such a thing?" demanded the old man.

"Oh, well, you see," explained Roy, confusedly; "grown-up people know
how to teach, and boys don't. Besides, we aren't idle, we work hard at
lessons all the morning, and we have half an hour's prep after tea."

Old Principle shook his head.

"And you're the lad for making people better, and doing good to all.
'Tis a bad principle, my boy, to wait for great opportunities, and let
the small ones go!"

"Do you think we ought to teach him?" questioned Dudley.

"If he wants to learn, and you have the time, you will be letting the
opportunity slip, that's all. And moreover old Principle isn't going to
be the one to help you do it."

The old man turned his back upon them and walked into the pine wood
again, leaving the two boys gazing after him with perturbed faces.

"He's rather cross this afternoon," observed Dudley.

"I s'pose he thinks it's for our good. Shall we try again? Could you
teach him one day, and me the next? That wouldn't be quite so tiring."

Rob was called upon and consulted, and it was finally arranged that
every afternoon from two to three he should have a reading lesson on the
top of the garden wall.

"We shan't feel sleepy here, and it's the time everybody else is taking
a nap," said Roy, trying to take a cheerful view of it. "I'm going to
try and be very patient and not be cross once, for you're our
opportunity, or one of them, isn't he, Dudley?"

Dudley nodded. "The biggest we've had yet," he said.

Rob grinned and went away delighted. He was a steady, honest lad,
devoted to both boys; but especially to Roy, who, without Dudley's
constant remonstrance, would have tyrannized over him to his heart's
content. Miss Bertram left them alone; she exercised a certain
supervision over Rob's work, but never objected to his joining her
little nephews' amusements.

"They will not learn any harm from him," she told her mother; "and he
may teach them many things that are good."

So it came to pass that reading lessons took place regularly every day
on the top of the wall, and Rob's eagerness to master all hard words,
and his humble diffidence, when his little teachers waxed wrath with
him, was touching to witness. Sometimes conversation would bear a large
part in the lessons, especially when Roy was the teacher. And Dudley
would always insist on having a break for refreshments.

"You will be able to write letters for me, Rob, when I grow up," said
Roy, one afternoon, pausing in the lesson. "I don't like writing
letters, and I'm thinking of travelling round the world and discovering
countries, so I shall have to write home sometimes. You will come with
me, won't you?"

"For certain I will," was the emphatic reply.

"I've been thinking," pursued Roy, thoughtfully, as he let his gaze
wander from the book between them to the top of the dark pines swaying
gently in the summer breeze; "that I may be quite strong enough when I
grow up to be a discoverer. You see I can't be a soldier or sailor, but
I haven't anything the matter with me but a weak chest, and doctors say
sea voyages and travelling do weak chests good sometimes. Do you think
I'm a very poor body to look at, Rob? That's what some of the villagers
say I am, but my head and legs and arms are all right. I'm not a cripple
or a hunchback, or blind, or deaf, or dumb, so I must be very glad of
that. What do you think?"

"You're just as straight and plucky as Master Dudley, and you'll grow
up a big, strong man, I dare say," said Hob, sympathetically.

"Old Principle says you may be a maker, a mender, or a breaker in your
life. I want to be a maker. And I should like to find a country and make
it into a nice big town. I want to do something big. I ask God every day
to let me find something to do."

"Do you believe in--in God?" asked Rob, rather sheepishly.

"Of course I do; what do you mean? Don't you?"

"I don't know. I don't know much about Him, only you often talk as if
you're--well quite friends with Him, and I've wondered at it."

Roy brought down his gaze from the hilltops to his companion's face with
grave interest.

"I've known God since I was a baby," he said. "I don't remember when I
didn't know Him. Nurse used to talk to me when I was very small, and
when my father was dying he called me to him, and said,--'Fitz Roy!
Serve God first, then your Queen, and then your fellow men!' I've always
remembered it, only you know we don't talk about these things, and I've
only told Dudley. I'm trying to serve God--you don't want to be very
strong to do that; but I'm longing to serve the Queen, and when Mr.
Selby talked to us of opportunities for doing good to all men I've been
longing to find them ever since. Don't you know much about God, Rob?"

Rob shook his head. "I used to larn He made the world and me, and I know
He'll punish the wicked, but I've never tried to serve Him, and--and I
don't think as how I care about it."

"P'raps you don't know about Jesus Christ?" asked Roy, solemnly.

"Well, yes, I used to larn about Him when I was a kid at the
Sunday-school. I know He came into the world to save people, but I never
rightly understood why, nor what difference it makes."

"I'll be able to tell you that. If He hadn't died, I suppose I shouldn't
have cared about serving God because it would have been no use--nothing
would have been any use, for we should all have had to go to hell when
we died, to punish us for our sins. We could never have got to heaven at
all."

"If we had been very good I reckon we could," put in Rob, knitting his
brows with this aspect of the subject.

"But you see the Bible says we can't be good, not one of us--the devil
won't let us."

"But there are good people in the world."

"You interrupt so," said Roy, a little impatiently. "I was going to
tell you. Jesus died to let God be able to forgive us and take us to
heaven. It's rather difficult to explain, but God punished Him _instead_
of us, do you see? So now we can all go to heaven, and the reason we try
to be good is to please Jesus because He has loved us, and the reason we
are able to be good is because Jesus helps us to be, and He can fight
the devil better than we can. There, I think I've told you it right. Now
shall we go on with the reading?"

Rob said no more till after the lesson was over, then he said slowly,
"It's rather strange, that what you were a tellin' me, but I don't see
it quite. P'raps another day you'll tell me again."

"If you make haste and read, I'll give you a Bible, and then you'll be
able to read about it yourself. Of course you ought to be serving God
just as much as anybody else, and you'd better begin at once!"

Saying which Roy scrambled down from his high perch and raced across the
garden to the stables where he had settled to meet Dudley; whilst Rob
descended more slowly, muttering to himself, "'Tis a good thing not to
be afraid of God like Master Roy, but I doubt if I should ever get to
serve Him!"


VII


A WALNUT STOKY

"I say, Dudley, do come out for a ride! Aunt Judy is with granny, and
she says the house must be quiet, and I hate being in a quiet house.
Come on! What are you doing?"

Roy finished his sentence by springing on Dudley's back, and as he was
in a crouching attitude in a corner of the old nursery, he brought him
flat to the ground by his unexpected attack. For a minute or two both
boys rolled on the ground in each other's clutches, and feet and hands
were having a busy time of it. Then Dudley sprang to his feet.

"I like you coming in to tell me to be quiet, and then beginning a fight
at once! Do shut up! You've quite spoilt my last letter!"

"Well, what are you doing?"

"I'm carving my name in the corner here, just below my father's."

Roy looked with curiosity at Dudley's handiwork.

"Yes, your M is very crooked; but I wouldn't choose to write my name on
the wainscoting. It's too low down. I like to be at the top of
everything. Now if you carved it on the ceiling that would be something
like!"

"You're always wanting to do impossibilities!"

"I should like to have a try at them," rejoined Roy, quickly. "I hate
everything that is easy. Now come on, do! and we'll have a good gallop
over the down!"

Half an hour later and the boys were tearing through the village on
their ponies, and were soon out on an open expanse of heather and grass.

Roy was in the midst of an eloquent harangue on all he was going to do
when he was grown up, when Dudley suddenly came to a standstill.

"Something is the matter with Hazel. I believe she's going lame. Oh, I
see, one of her shoes is loose! Now what are we to do!"

He sprang off his pony as he spoke, and looked perplexed at this
calamity.

"Lead her on gently," was Roy's ready advice. "We aren't far off from
C----, and I know there's a blacksmith there."

Dudley grumbled a little at having his ride spoiled in this fashion; but
it was not long before they reached the neighboring village, and the
smith's forge was soon found.

Then, whilst Hazel was being attended to, Roy suggested that they
should go and see an old lady, a great friend of their aunt's, who lived
just outside the village.

"She might ask us to tea," suggested Roy, "and she has awfully nice cake
always going. I'll leave my pony here, and we'll call again for them on
our way back."

"I don't like paying visits," objected Dudley, a little crossly.

"But Mrs. Ford isn't half bad to talk to, she's full of stories."

And by dint of these two baits, "cake" and "stories," Dudley's shyness
was overcome, and the two boys were soon walking up a sunny little
garden and knocking at the rose-covered door of "Clematis Cottage."

It was a tiny house, but spotlessly clean and tidy, and the long, low,
dainty drawing-room into which they were shown had a sense of rest and
repose which insensibly affected even the boys' restless spirits.

"A nice room to be ill in," was Roy's comment; "there would be such a
lot of jolly pictures and things to look at on the walls when you were
in bed."

"I should like to sit here on Sunday," said Dudley. "I am sure I could
be still for quite half an hour!"

The door opened and a little old lady in widow's cap and gown came
forward. She was a fragile, delicate-looking little woman, with a very
bright face and smile, and she beamed upon the boys delightedly.

"My dear boys, this is quite a treat! I don't often get a visit from
young gentlemen. How is your grandmother? Have you brought me any
message from your aunt?"

"Granny is not very well to-day," replied Roy, frankly, "and Aunt Judy
didn't know we were coming here. We have been riding, and Dudley's pony
has had to be shod, so we've left him at the blacksmith's and come on
here. You see we thought it would pass the time."

"And so it will, and you shall have a nice cup of tea before you go
back. Why, what big boys you are growing! Which is the elder? I always
forget."

"I am," said Roy, a little shamefacedly; "but of course most people
think Dudley is, because he is the biggest."

"It's only two months and five days, though, between us," put in Dudley,
eagerly, knowing what a sore point his size was to Roy; "and you see,
Mrs. Ford, Roy's brain is much bigger than mine--Mr. Selby says it is,
so that makes us quits!"

"And I wonder which has the biggest soul?" said Mrs. Ford, quaintly.

The boys stared at her.

"Shall I tell you a little story while we are waiting for tea?" she
asked, sitting down in her easy chair by the open window, and looking
first at the boys with loving interest, and then away to the sweet
country outside her garden.

Roy gave Dudley a delighted nudge with his elbow.

"Yes, please; we love a good rattling story; and make plenty of
adventures in it, won't you?"

But Mrs. Ford shook her head with a little smile.

"I can't tell you of fights with red Indians, and shipwrecks, and lion
hunts, and all such things as that; but you must take my story as it is,
and think over it in your quiet moments.

"There was once an old garden. Flowers and fruit of every description
grew in it, and when no human creature was about the air was full of
flower laughter and fruit conversation. One day in autumn some saucy
sparrows were teasing a young walnut-tree that stood between an apple
and a pear-tree, opposite a wall which was covered with beautiful golden
plums.

"'What are you here for?' they said, pecking at the round green balls
that hung on the tree, and then wiping their beaks in disgust on the
grass underneath. 'Ugh! you're sour and bitter and nasty enough to
poison a person! You're a disgrace to your master. The red and yellow
apples next door to you are delicious this warm day, and the pears make
one's mouth fairly water, while as to the plums over there--well, every
one is fighting for them, from the slugs and snails to every bird in the
country, and the boys and girls and men and women--all of us have to be
kept off by those horrible nets which the old gardener is continually
spreading!'

"'I'm sure,' whispered the young walnuts, humbly, 'we don't mean any
harm. We don't quite know why we are here ourselves. We have been hoping
to see our green skins get red and yellow, and soft and ripe, like
everything else round us, but they seem to get harder and uglier as time
goes by. They feel very heavy, and our stems ache with holding them up;
do you think it just possible there may be something inside?'

"'Inside!' laughed the sparrows; 'who ever heard of the inside being
better than the outside? You're stuffed with conceit, but nothing else.'

"And away they flew, for they were not a year old themselves, and knew
nothing about autumn nuts and berries.

"The walnuts sighed and appealed to an old crow flying by.

"'Do you think we have been planted in this beautiful garden by
mistake?' they said. 'We have been waiting a long time to give pleasure
and to do good to those around us. The bees give us a wide berth--they
say they can get no honey from us; we have no sweet scent to please the
passer-by, no lovely blossoms to delight their eyes. The apples have had
blossoms and fruit, and all the other trees the same, yet here we hang
and grow, and the days go by and we're only laughed at for our ugliness
and want of sweetness.'

"'Wait a little longer,' said the old crow; 'wait, and take pains to
grow!'

"And the walnuts waited, and the sun kissed their hard skins, and the
rain refreshed them when dry and thirsty; and still the sparrows mocked
them, and the apple and pear-tree talked to each other over their heads,
for they too looked upon them as a failure. One day the biggest walnut
broke from his stem and dropped in the long grass. No one heeded his
fall except his brothers; the gardener came by and gathered the apples
and pears, but did not look at the walnut-tree; and when he kicked the
fallen walnut with his feet he took no more notice of it than if it had
been a pebble.

"'Is that our fate?' sighed the walnuts. 'Now we know we are no good.
What is the use of trying to grow? What is the good of living at all
when we're so ugly and useless, and the end of us is to lie and rot in
the grass and be kicked by every one who passes?'

"And they wept bitter tears of disappointment and mortification; and one
by one they dropped from the tree and lay unheeded, uncared for on the
ground below.

"Then one morning came up the old crow.

"'Why did you tell us to wait?' cried one walnut in petulant tones.
'We're rotting, dying here, and this is the end of us.'

"'Wait a little longer,' said the crow again; 'it is when we are very
low that we are lifted very high. When we come to an end a new beginning
is coming.'

"The walnuts sighed as he flew away; yet the biggest one turned with a
spark of hope to his brothers.

"'I do believe we have been made for something. My skin is rotting and
dying, but in spite of it all I feel as if I have something inside that
is still alive. Let us wait and be patient a little longer.'

"And then at last one day, when the apple and pear-tree were fruitless
and leafless, when the flowers and butterflies and bees had all
disappeared, down the garden came the master himself and the gardener.

"He stopped when he came to the walnut-tree, and stooping down in the
long grass he gently raised one of the fallen nuts.

"'You must gather these in,' he said to his gardener; 'we have a good
many for the first year.'

"'Yes,' said the gardener, 'they are ready now. I've let them lie till
you saw them.'

"And the walnuts whispered to themselves in surprised delight that it
was not neglect and indifference had left them there, but that the
gardener had watched each one fall, and knew where to find them when
their time came at last.

"And when their green husks were removed, and their brown shells cracked
at the master's table, they discovered that the most valuable part of
them was what could not be seen by outsiders, and could only be brought
to light by the master's hand."

"That's a kind of parable," said Roy when Mrs. Ford ceased speaking.

"Yes," she said, smiling; "most people are like the sparrows: they think
it is only the outside you should go by. Now, when I see a person for
the first time I always wonder what their soul is like. If that is
beautiful it doesn't matter about their body. And a little body may
contain a very big soul."

"Can we make our souls big?" asked Roy, with an anxious face.

"They should be growing, my boy, day by day. Put them into the
Gardener's keeping and He will make them grow. It isn't the handsome and
the strong who do all the good in the world; very often it is just the
other way."

"Then there is hope I may do something," said Roy, brightening up; "I
like that story about the walnuts, don't you, Dudley?"

"Yes, I'll think of it when I crack them next," said Dudley.

Tea was now brought in, and the boys did it full justice, and shortly
after they were on their homeward way.

"She's a jolly old thing," remarked Dudley, presently, "and her cake was
awfully good. I'm glad we went to see her."

Roy was unusually silent. Dudley continued--

"I expect you've got the biggest soul of us too, Roy; nurse is always
saying your soul is too big for your body."

"I wish I had no body sometimes," said Roy, with a sigh; "it gets so
tired and stupid."

"Well, we won't talk about souls and bodies any more," Dudley said,
quickly, "they aren't interesting. I say, do you think we could teach
Rob cricket?"

Rob was a topic which always interested Roy. He brightened up at once.

"We'll teach him everything," he said, eagerly. "I want him to be able
to read and write and play, and do everything that we do, and more
besides, for I shall have him for my friend as well as a servant when I
grow up."

"A funny kind of chap for a friend," said Dudley, a little crossly;
"he's twice as old as you are, to begin with, and he's an awfully
stupid, thick-headed fellow."

"Don't you like Rob?"

Roy's tone was an astonished one.

"Oh, I like him well enough, but I'm getting rather sick of hearing you
crack him up so."

Roy changed the subject. He wondered sometimes why Dudley seemed to lose
his temper so over Rob; it never entered his head that Dudley might
regard him as a possible rival; that Rob, the country lad, might spoil
the covenant of friendship between them.


VIII


THE BERTRAMS' LEAP

It was Roy's birthday, and he was standing at his bedroom window before
breakfast looking out into the old garden below, his busy brain full of
thought and conjecture. His birthday was a very important day to him,
and for some years now there had been a settled programme for the day.
His guardian, an old Indian officer living in the neighborhood, and
formerly a very old friend of his father's, always came over to see him
and stayed to lunch, the two boys joining their elders at that meal.
Directly after, they would drive or ride over to Norrington Court which
was Roy's future home, and stay there for the rest of the day.

The boy's heart was full of the future as usual, and when Dudley burst
into his room with a radiant face to offer his good wishes, he turned to
meet him gravely.

But Dudley was too occupied in tugging in a small basket to notice it.

"This is my present, old chap. Just open it and see if you don't like
it."

Roy's little face became illumined with smiles a moment after, when he
saw two beautiful little white mice amongst the straw looking up at him
with calm curiosity out of their bright beady eyes.

"They're tame," said Dudley, delightedly; "old Principle has had them,
taming them for over a month. Their names are Nibble and Dibble. Look!
This is Dibble with the little black spot on his nose. You never
guessed, did you? I've been down to see them lots of times and they'll
eat food out of my hand. You just see!"

Roy was too excited over his mice to eat much breakfast, and when Rob
came up to him immediately afterward with a new cricket ball, bought out
of his small wages, he declared he was the "luckiest fellow in the
world."

Miss Bertram presented him with a handsome writing case, and every one
of the servants had some trifle to offer him. At ten o'clock he went to
his grandmother's room.

This was also part of the programme.

Mrs. Bertram received him very impressively, as was her wont.

"Sit down, Fitz Roy; you are getting a big boy; have you been measured
this morning?"

"Yes, granny, and I really have grown an inch and a half since last
year. That isn't very bad, is it?"

"Your father was very much taller at your age. I cannot understand it."

Roy began to feel rather depressed. "General Newton will be here soon,
I suppose," continued Mrs. Bertram, precisely, "and I wish you to convey
him a message from me. Give him my very kind regards, and ask him to
excuse me from coming down to see him this morning. I have had a very
bad night, and am not feeling fit for any extra fatigue. I hope he will
find you improved in manners and appearance. I could wish you talked and
laughed less and thought more. You must endeavor to realize your
responsibilities when you visit Norrington Court this afternoon. It is a
very large and important property for a little boy like you to be heir
to, and I hope you will fill the position worthily when you come of age.
Your uncle was the most respected and honored man in the county, and if
your dear father had lived to come back from Canada, he would have
walked in your uncle's steps."

"And who will walk in mine when I'm dead, granny?"

"My dear, you must learn not to interrupt grown-up people when they are
speaking."

"I'm very sorry, but do tell me if I died before I grew up, would Dudley
have my house?"

"Yes, by the terms of the will he would, as his father came next in age
to yours."

"That is what Aunt Judy means, when she calls me Jonathan and says when
I brag, that I must remember my namesake never came to the throne at
all. I like to think that Dudley may have it, he would make a grander
master than me, wouldn't he?"

Mrs. Bertram gave a little sigh. Roy's delicacy was a sore point with
her, and she could never get reconciled to his small stature.

"Well," said Roy, after a pause; "I'll do my very best, granny, to grow
up a big strong man. I take my tonics now whenever nurse gives them to
me, and I never pour them out of the window as I used to do. And I'm
hoping to do something great before I die, and I'm trying to grow up a
good man. Do you think that will do?" he added, a little anxiously, as
he fancied his grandmother's gaze rested on him with some
dissatisfaction.

She did not reply, only drew out her purse from her pocket, and Roy knew
this was a signal for his dismissal.

"Now," said Mrs. Bertram, "this is the sovereign that I usually give
you. I hope you will spend it wisely. Tell me when it is gone what you
have done with it. I hope you will spend a happy day. Give me a kiss and
leave me. Oh, if only you were more like your handsome father!"

Roy took his gift, thanked her for it, and giving his grandmother a
kiss, left the room very quietly.

Outside the door he paused on the door-mat, and drew his jacket across
his eyes with a strangled sob.

"It's a pity God won't make me strong, but I don't seem to be able to do
it myself."

And then with a shout for Dudley, a minute after he was tearing round
the house, showing his pet mice to all, and chattering away as if he had
not a care upon him.

General Newton arrived soon after and took a more cheering view of his
ward's appearance than had his grandmother.

"You'll grow into a splendid fellow yet," he said, patting him on the
shoulder, "and you'll out-top your cousin. Have you been in many scrapes
lately?"

"They're good boys on the whole," replied Miss Bertram, smiling; "except
when they try to be philanthropists, and then they come to grief."

"Oh, that's the last idea, is it? When I was here before they were going
to be travelling peddlers. Have you made a choice of any profession yet,
either of you?"

"Yes, I'm going to be a traveller and discoverer," said Roy, with
decision.

"Oh, indeed! Then you've still the love for exploration. How is your
friend old Principle? Is he still unearthing wonders and keeping them in
his kettles?"

"He is busy in a cave now," said Dudley, eagerly; "would you like to
come and see it one day?"

"No, thank you. And are you lads still devoted friends?"

"David and Jonathan, still," said Miss Bertram; and the old general
laughed heartily.

Before he left, he also gave Roy a sovereign, which made the little
fellow confide to Dudley,

"I've put granny's in my right hand pocket, and the general's in my
left, they won't mix together well, because hers is such a solemn one,
and his is so jolly!"

It was a happy little party that set off for Norrington Court. The boys
were on their ponies, and Miss Bertram in her pony trap, with Rob
sitting behind, proud in the consciousness of a new suit of clothes, and
delighted at being included in the number.

Up a long stately avenue of elms and beeches, with bracken and ferns
covering mossy glades in the distance, and then Roy and Dudley flung
themselves off their ponies before an old stone house with ivy-covered
walls and turrets. Everything had been brightened up for their visit.
The flowers on the terraces were one mass of sweet perfume and color,
the drives weeded and rolled, and the velvet turf in only such a
condition as centuries of care can make it. The old housekeeper opened
the door in her very best black silk, and two or three more faithful
retainers stood in the background.

Roy spoke to them all with boyish frankness and grace, and then eagerly
demanded if tea might be on the terrace. Miss Bertram agreed and while
she went indoors for a chat with the housekeeper, the boys tore round
the place dragging Rob after them. The stables of course were visited,
and an old groom who had known the boys' fathers when boys, welcomed
them with great warmth.

"Ye must grow quicker, Master Fitz Roy. We want to see you here among
us. I'm looking to see all these stalls occupied by hunters and sich
like again. 'Tis mournful work to live year in and year out with only
two bosses for company!"

"Tell us about the old times, Ben, do!"

Ben sat down and spread his hands out on his knees reflectively.

"All the young gentlemen were born riders," he said, slowly; "I mind how
Master Randolph would tear up the avenue after a long ride. 'There, Ben'
he'd say to me, chucking me the rein, and jumpin' off as light as a
feather, 'we've worked our spirits h'off--Ruby and me!' When the old
squire were alive, he'd have all three young gentlemen up, and then he'd
mount them and bring them down to Ruddocks stream, and see them jump it.
He used to say, 'No grandson of mine is worth calling a Bertram if he
can't take that leap before he is twelve year old!' They all did it
before they was ten, and he used to stand chuckling and rubbing his
hands as he saw them do it."

"Is that the stream at the bottom of the back meadow?" asked Dudley,
eagerly; "the one with the hedge in front?"

"Ay, to be sure!"

"But we have never jumped it," exclaimed Roy. "And I think we ought to
for we're his great-grandsons."

"We shan't be twelve for a long time yet," said Dudley, "but we really
ought to try."

"Well, we'll do it this evening after tea; and you shall come and see us
do it, Ben."

Ben grinned from ear to ear.

"You'll go over it like a bird, if so be as your pony is accustomed to
sich things!"

"We haven't taken very high jumps," admitted Dudley, candidly.

"Oh, we shall do it," said Roy, with a little toss of his head; "we'll
_make_ them go over!"

And then they turned to other subjects.

"What do you think of my house, Rob?" asked Roy, later on as he was
escorting his humble friend through the empty rooms and corridors
upstairs.

"It'll take a powerful number of people to fill it," said Rob, with awe.

INTRODUCTION. _The Man deference mainly from other animals that live
not only in the present tense but feed your spirit with the memory
of the past and with the concepts of the future.

In laying the plant in the soil of any country that goes, if it is
illustrated with the torch of history, it reminds the nations
populating the glorious events that occurred, but mainly when your
imagination is a vague impression and respectful, is when it comes
in those ancient monuments, in works that have survived so many
centuries, and are presented in the long course of years, the islands
scattered in the vast plains of the ocean, which offers surfers a
home for rest and a wellspring of memories and meditations.

One of the objects that provide rich material to deeper considerations,
the building is located west of this city and known de_ CASTLE
Aljafería.

_Al Passing nearby are fast, like a lens, the delicious scenes that
occur in the time of the Moorish kings, severe austerity, to live
with our seasoned monarchs surrounded by rich men, mesnaderos and
almogávares, the melancholy and pain ayes of the condemned by the
Inquisition, we can say that there was almost his first seat in the
kingdom, and the bitterness of those gimieron in their cells during
the War of Independence and our civil strife, could not but recall
with horror the sacrifices that are taxed with the cold justice
apparatus to numen of fierce retaliation.

Several times I have said how helpful it would not abandon the
fragile table tradition, the memories are preserved on the ancient
palace of our kings, and bowing to the insinuation that I did the Hon.
Mr.

Captain General of the kingdom and egército D.

Manuel Breton, one of the prison visits, which I accompanied him as a
tax audit, when the occasion in 1844 to advertise the coming of SM back
in Barcelona, she called the department de_ SE SANTA ISABEL, I resolved
to _me do this job easy, and after that give an idea of the current state
of la_ Aljaferia, compiled news _he kept in old documents and some
writers on this monument, and I've managed to provide me with
repeated investigaciones._ [Image: Lam. 1.

Aljafería Plant & c ª.

Indication of the second floor and part of the first Castle Aljafería
in Saragossa.] ESPLICACION. 1. Rediente. 2. Moat. 3. Anden. 4. Puente.
5. Main entrance. 6. Body of accommodation and rooms in the 2nd.
º piso. 7. Ascent to the fourth official on duty and mezzanines. 8.
First courtyard. 9. Church. 10. Portico. 11. Step 2. Courtyard º. 12.
Second courtyard. 13. Entrance to the main staircase. 14.

Main staircase. 15. Large patio Artillery. 16. Hollow of a ladder. 17.
Cocinas troops. 18. Store ammunition. 19. Corridor. R. Real rooms. C.
Salon de Santa Isabel.

Y. Ground floor of the old Mosque. Y. Bedroom where he was born Santa
Isabel Infanta of Aragon and Queen of Portugal. THE QUEEN OF SPAIN. My
dedication will begin with a word similar to those used at the beginning
of their Labruyére famous Character. Back, they said, the public what
he has given me, and I also say, to restore a VM site that belongs
to you, that inspired the VM, the VM that was undertaken, and that
anyone a better title that Isabel falls this booklet, which aims
to address the greatness of a building, whose memory perpetuating
two queens of the same name: the one sanctified, so to speak, with
birth and the other decorated with a magnificence that cause
admiration after three and a half centuries.

Dígnese therefore accept a VM offering, which is governed by the subject
matter, and that also has this quality by pure love that professes to
his kingdom which he wrote these pages misaligned. Saragossa July 28,
1845.

Madam, PALRP VM _Mariano Nougués Secall._ CHAPTER FIRST. OVERVIEW
OF Aljafería. Aljafería Castle, which can not be called by your city
or location, nor by its fortifications, is located to the western part
of Saragossa to the right of the Ebro, between the river and the concurrence
of the Camino Real Madrid and Pamplona, as far as little online
that can be seen as tangential to pit almost to the level of this
and at the foot of the embankment that form the facade is estiende
the Ebro valley that runs up to a distance of eight yards á
nuevecientas soon, and in parallel.

As far as the East about two hundred fifty yards from the gate
called Portillo's heading or angle of the bastion of the south
facade. The plane is accompanied by the number 1.

Th gives an idea of their situation with regard to the city and its garden,
and also its shape and proportions, but not enough to make the
flow of the Ebro The plant's current Aljafería is a quadrilateral
one hundred and forty yards long and one hundred thirty of wide
angles or chamfers ochava more irregular it appears, on whose
foundations were built parallel north and south facades of the first
thirteen hundred yards in length and fourteen percent of the second,
on the high side or perpendicular rises in the west facade of one
hundred yards long and obliquely across the Left supports the main
facade to the east forming the south angle of ninety-seven degrees .

The interior is large lighted and ventilated by five yards and caught
patinejos no different symmetry in placement each other, but their
plants are quite regular.

The three are more spacious, the first coming in through the door of the
principal and the twenty-five yards of it, which is the church
square of eighteen yards out.

For this and heading to the west gate is reported to 2. º, which is the
center or the Santa Isabel, rectangle eighteen rods from east to
west for thirty-two from north to south.

Communicates with the 3. º (the west or the petty,) trapeze long
from north to south fifty-six yards in length by twenty-eight
proportional latitude or altitude.

This large patio is the entrance to another location in the South ,
rectangle sixteen yards in length from east to west by eight latitude.
The last is from the double crugías obtuse angle, or forming the
south and east facades is a rectangle thirty-two yards in length
from north to south by eighteen latitude increased side sud to
twenty-five rods west on the way in which escuadría its incoming
angle to the twenty-two yards of its length, this being understood
in terms ignografía the globe of the building habitable.

CHAPTER II. _DIVERSIDAD YOUR ARQUITECTURA_ and times the same:
FORTIFIED & c.

In this building show four different kinds of plant, which reflect major
changes that had already undergone repairs and modification, and
finally made it increases, each carrying a label marked the time
they checked.

The oldest is the Saracen domination and are advertised in a local
mosque was undoubtedly ú oratory of their sovereign, and the remains
of three arches are preserved in the southern part of the courtyard
named Santa Isabel.

At the time that mediated since the kings of Aragon took over the
palace until the Catholic Kings, it must belong to is the artillery
corps in the courtyard of Santa Isabel to warehouses and ochava
columns or pillars which are at the northern side.

Al reign of the Catholic Monarchs D.

Fernando and Queen Isabel are the staircase and room régia, entry,
coffered salons and other agencies.

The rest of the building will be advised of the time of Philip V.
hereinafter expressly whose reign is more marked in high-stress
military trophies, which are seen on the entrance to the lower
number of artillery almacen 4 down from here to the great suffering
that was renovacion forth, and that completed in 1772 [2], by which
time all the ornaments are from outside the halls of the east side,
the arms room and the barracks of the west, north and south.

The bell tower, or even appear to be more modern, and the church can not
be fixed allocate time to participate in different characters.

The limits of this old building had to be less than in the Este dia, and
the increase was recently renovacion in 1772 was apparently on the side
of the bottom of the flags, to the west, north and south headquarters
of the three sides: and so we presume it does with over a foundation
wall rather thick, which is usually inside the length of those barracks,
with a tower high in low circular building in the north, another in the
west, another in the south and another in the angle formed north
of west, leaving all four hidden inside the building.

[image: Lam. 2nd. Geometric view of the main façade of the castle
in Zaragoza Aljaferia.]

Its factory is brick to face in their outer walls, and even in many of
the inside, although the interior is also noticed some of earth
and gravel, which show the various stages of the construction of
this palace: its architecture is quite simple, since the decoration
is generally perpendicular strips in imitation of their openings
between pilasters, cut horizontally by other narrow or listellos
running throughout the building showing the division of your floors.

The windows are of a serious, and other adornments that do not bear a
simple framework without any molding, with the exception of the main
facade, which are distributed crugía flags and official gefes with
balconies decorated with moldings and frames frontispieces, The
architecture may correspond to the eighteen century, and will surely
be addressed in the last renovation was done in this building in
1772 as has been shown, in which year he was given the plant that
retains today, there is very little time of the Moors and of the
kings of Aragon.

His look is elegant and graceful on the part of the city and is still
remarkably enhanced the church tower. The stamp 2. º presented with
their image or likeness on its front facade. FORTIFIED His current
insignificant but it would defend its large pit, just as it is
built on his four barbette curtains on the wall of the escarpment,
which is moving from building five rods, and forming a covered walk
way that runs around the perimeter.

The bastions of the four corners were destroyed in 1813 and 14 gives the
front of the cavalry barracks, blew in 1813 when the Spanish army
besieged the castle, where the general had left Paris a short Crew:
commander of French artillery, as I heard, a shot fired on ammunition,
and jumped fact that Rebellin pieces: the remaining part of the
landfill and waste pit by an order issued by General Wellington to
destroy the forts were occupied by French.

His sole was once a brick bridge and now fixed another timber that has
been repaired by direct claim to the ministry of His Excellency
General D.

Manuel Breton.

The head is enclosed by a rake is taken by a rediente loopholes for
fusileria, where there is a body guard for an advance, and to the
right and left two rakes in the two ramps soft in latitude five
rods lead to pit.

This is good and has a width of twenty-six to twenty-seven yards in
the entire circumference, except in the main facade which has about
twenty-eight: its depth is about eight yards soon: counterscarp
perpendicular to the escarpment and the first good masonry and
brick factory, and the second coated and has revoked a few years.

The construction of the moat, but no data on the time of Mr D. Felipe
V who turned this building into strength. Spot of this defense did not
exist in time of Philip II even if there wall [3], which are
vestiges, as noted, because when the people of Saragossa rod during
the translation of Antonio Perez from prison Castle expressed
Aljafería, he was fire everywhere, surrounding more than three
thousand men shouting, which scorched the inquisitors would die
there. [4] The fact is that, as I have said the engineers, in some
parts of the building discovered traces of fire, and note the use
of different kind of wood that were used in its original construction.

Mr. Mignet Academy of French history that recently published by Antonio
Perez and Philip II did not express the fact that the castle was
burned, only referring to Pedro Sesé had done much to drive carts
of firewood in the attempt to paste Fire Aljafería [5].

Nor Lupercio Argensola of Leonardo in his information about these events
does merit of this peculiarity.

It seems to me a calculation that this building may contain or
accommodate some three thousand people. CHAPTER THREE.

Description of the special parts of this building: the old mosque from
the Board of Santa Isabel and immediate: entries are read in the
friezes & c.

Following the description of the parts of the building shall say that
the step that serves as the lobby from the main gate to the first
yard (the church) is covered with a vault of elliptical plate, the
arc of the iceberg below toral da front At the entrance, is adorned
with the royal arms of Spain: on the left of this entrance is located
the main body of the guard of the Castle and on the mezzanine floor
to the first landing of the stairs leading to the wards for arrests
for a few years ago, is the chamber of gefe or gefes of the guard:
it has bars that overlook the site of the city and overlooking the
patio door on the guard's body to communicate with it opportunity
orders.

To the right of the main entrance there is a patinel, where are the bars
of some prisons.

CHURCH OF THE PATIO. Is this the factory courtyard or a variety of
different construction periods, although all of any age: the facade
on arch that leads into the courtyard of the Center or Santa Isabel,
looks more modern, and some corrections are noted, particularly in the
voids of the balcony of the royal chamber, with the corrections that
have been destroyed the elegant decorations that existed before, and of
which only fragments retain some weapons and shields.

Below the royal chamber is located a floor octagon diameter of 26 spans,
and its eight sides are raised so many different angles, forming
arches straight except one that is horseshoe-shaped.

All were supported by two marble columns from nine spans in height, which
still exists but the most battered and maimed, the white marble
at the moment according to the surveys that have been made, it
appears from the quarries of Alcañiz.

Entrepaños and paintings from the walls are decorated by the style of the
Alhambra, with openwork arabesque climbs and merit careful and
egecucion: despite the many centuries that have elapsed and they
have suffered by the vicissitudes that are consequential, be seen in
them taste, wealth and beauty at the same finesse and painstaking work.
At eighteen inch of elevation is a roof under which mutilated the
height of that stay, therefore he continues on the same run with a frieze,
decorated with the same height, crowned with another body easier, resting
on the columns spans four and a half high, pointed arches formed
holding festoons of semicircular, finishing the remains of this
mosque fourteen spans of that floor, which is the actual room where
he was born SANTA ISABEL.

In the part of the West but direction to the east is a niche or hole [6]
to the input provided by the horseshoe arch covered with a shell, where
it is assumed that there was a baptism: but even if time was placed
on restoration, it is clear that this was the place where prayer
to the Moorish kings, as it was his particular mosque or oratory.

It is well known that the Arabs regarded with the utmost scrupulousness
prayer meeting called _salath_ or _namaz_ constituted all his divine
office, which also saw the divine. [7] This confirmed to me the
idea to be a condition of this prayer, that the position of the
body is looking to Mecca and to fully address this niche is to the
east, and also that, despite not being obliged by law to go to the
mosque, most accustomed to check it, so it is not regular kings no
longer strictly comply with this requirement [8].

To which he is instructed in the mysteries of ancient times, this
assertion can not give any doubt, much less whether it sets the
view in the film is followed by the 172 page tome 1.

_Condes º of Barcelona vindicados_, work written by Mr. D. Próspero
Bofarull.

The above represents the lamina or Mihrab frontispiece of worship
inside the mosque in the city of Tarragona. This monument, says
this writer, was erected in the year 960 of our own, is of marble
and is kept almost entirely in the cloister of the Holy Church
Metropolitan Tarragona docked in the curtain wall of the west side
of that relates to Count Abderraman III ordered the construction
of the arch and put Crane's Mibrab or shrine inside the main mosque
in Tarragona, which was very close second or signs on the premises
it occupies today its grand cathedral, which the Holy Archbishop
Olegario principle for the years 1128 .

This arch is a great resemblance to that found in the mosque Castle
Aljafería and the comparison of the two amounts to a degree unquestionable
evidence of my remarks. For further checking and to keep this memorial
a reminder of Arabic, I have the stamp lithography 3. º, in which
portraits were part of the beauty of a mosque almost completely
unknown until recently in and out of Saragossa.

The Church is currently located at an angle to the right of the entrance
to the courtyard, opposite the royal chamber. Its square is coming soon,
as is a rectangle spans ninety latitude by eighty-four deep, with
three naves cross twenty-six and a half spans.

The pillars that divide or machon are simple, lined with Doric columns
out of proportion, bases or sockets: the capitals are for all their
letterheads, and on them serves as a peqaeña architrave, imposta
pointed to the roof edge by a simple molding in their bows, and in
each of the nine points in a three-star gold palm diameter bars are
Aragon.

The Atrium located in the center of the ship and rowed on the altar is a
wooden fence that ends in a semicircle . The altar at the center of
the nave in front of the door under the arch that forms a small
chapel, is an altarpiece of Corinthian order of architecture in
wood and old gold.

Its niche is in S. Martin titalar army of this parish, modern sculpture,
on horseback in Roman tragedy, representing the action of dividing his
cloak with the sword to give to a beggar.

This figure is quite regular, and S.

Martin would be complete, if your attitude was more animated, and the
steed is replicated over the arrogance of a hobbyhorse.

To the left of the altar is full length to S.

Pius V, and right at Blessed Benedict X, the two statues of life size
and quite good. [Image: Lam. 3. Nd drawing N. Pinos. Lit L. Jayma Lit
Fca Bella REPRESENTS THE CASTLE OF THE MOSQUE Aljafería ú oratory of
the Moorish kings.] There are also six other parish altar in their
chapel in the following order.

To the right of the altar of S.

Gerónimo of Solomonic columns of Corinthian order, the shaft of the
columns, the impost of the arch and the black marble are cornisamento:
their bases, capitals and arch of the garrison are alabaster stone.

To the left of the altar of the Our Lady of Correa in an altarpiece of
gilded wood and antique-style Corinthian order.
Then he added more cheerfully, "It's awfully queer, but do you know I'd
never know it wasn't there as far as the feeling goes. Why I can feel
the pain right down to my toes now. And at night I'm always dreaming I'm
running races with you as fast as I can, and then I wake and can't
believe I'll never run again."

As Roy grew stronger he had more visitors; Rob came to him every day for
a reading lesson, and old Principle brought him books and sweets. Ben
was allowed an interview, and the old groom, with tears running down his
cheeks, besought Roy to forgive him.

"I never ought to allowed you, and 'twas me that egged you on and sent
you to your death!"

"No, it was my own fault, Ben," said Roy, humbly, "and the thing that
pains me most--more than breaking my leg--is to think that I should be
the first Bertram who has failed. Dudley did it, and I didn't, and of
course I shall never be able to try it again. Perhaps I was too proud of
what I could do. We have a picture in the nursery of a boy standing on
the top of a bridge, and then tumbling in the water; it's called 'Pride
must have a fall.' I've had a fall, haven't I, Ben?"

Ben came out from that interview declaring that "Master Roy ought to be
sainted!"

One afternoon Rob was finishing his reading lesson when he looked up
and said, a little shyly,

"Master Roy, you mind what you were a telling me of once--about what
your father told you. Do you think as how I could do it too?"

"Of course you could, Rob. All of us ought to serve God."

"I've been thinking a deal about it, and I should like to, if I knew
how."

"Well, the Bible tells you. I remember nurse made me learn a text a long
time ago, 'If any man serve me let him follow me.' It's just following
Jesus I suppose, and doing what He wants us to do."

"How can we follow somebody we can't see?"

Roy knitted his brows. Rob's questions were hard to answer sometimes,
and then a smile flashed across his face.

"I'll tell you. It's like this. On my birthday granny called me in to
give me a birthday talk and, of course, she talked to me about my
property. She said my uncle had managed it awfully well over there, and
she hoped I would walk in his steps. That would be following him though
he was dead, wouldn't it?"

"Ye-es," was the slow response.

"And so you see," Roy replied, leaning forward impressively, and his
eyes glistening with earnestness, "we can each follow Jesus. Try and
live as He did, and do and speak like Him. We read how He lived in the
New Testament."

"And He was the one that died for us," Rob said, reflectively.

"Yes, He is the one you go to, to get your sins washed away. That comes
first before we begin to serve Him."

"But I never could serve Him proper, always," objected Rob.

"No, nor more can any one. I'm awful, you know! Dudley says I think such
a lot of myself. And of course Jesus never did. And I grumble and cry
over my leg every day, and of course He wouldn't have done it. But Jesus
forgives us again and again, and helps us to be good, and that's why we
love Him, and because He died for us."

"Would He forgive me, and help me?" asked Rob; "are you quite sure He
would care to have me for a servant?"

"Of course I'm sure. He wants everybody. You just ask Him."

Rob said no more. He was a lad of few words, and for some days did not
touch on the subject again. His reading was progressing rapidly, and
when Roy and Dudley found out that his birthday was near they laid their
heads together and presented him with a handsome Bible, as they knew he
was saving up his pennies to buy one.

His gratitude and delight overwhelmed them, and every day now, when his
work was finished, he would sit down and spell out chapters of the
gospels to himself.

As the days began to shorten, Roy grew so much stronger that he was able
to be carried downstairs, and the first evening he was in the
drawing-room, he asked Miss Bertram for the song of the two little
drummer boys.

She sat down at the piano, and Dudley seeing Rob weeding a flower bed
outside the open window, beckoned to him to come up closer and listen.

"It's the best song out," he shouted.

Roy's face shone as Miss Bertram's sweet voice rang out triumphantly.

   --"'the fight was won, and the regiment saved
   By those two little dots in red!'"

"Oh, how I wish I could be a soldier!" was the muttered exclamation of
Roy, "I shall never be able to serve the Queen now!"

"Nonsense," said Miss Bertram, briskly; "granny would tell you 'that all
the Bertrams have always served the Queen, and only a few of them have
been soldiers!'"

"Well, I suppose they have been sailors?" said Dudley.

"Not at all; we have only had one admiral, and three naval captains in
our family during the last hundred years. Your father, Dudley, served
the Queen as a governor in India quite as well as if he were fighting
for her. Roy's father was her servant in Canada, though he had to do
with politics; your uncle James served as a member of Parliament. The
Queen has numbers of servants. I always think policemen are quite as
brave as soldiers!"

"And what can a one-legged Bertram do?" Roy asked, with a pathetic smile
that went straight to his aunt's heart.

"There's no reason why he shouldn't go into Parliament, and perhaps end
by being a member of the cabinet."

"I never quite understand what that is," said Roy, contemplatively. "I
don't think I should like to be shut up in a stuffy cupboard. They shut
them up in it to talk, don't they, Aunt Judy?"

How Miss Bertram laughed! But whilst she was explaining what a cabinet
was, Rob crept away from the window muttering, "I suppose as how I could
be a policeman, but I'd a deal rather be a soldier!"


XI


A GIFT TO THE QUEEN

"Can I see Master Roy, please?"

It was Rob who spoke, and he seemed breathless with haste and
importance, as he stood at the front door one cold afternoon the end of
October.

"You can give me your message," the young footman said, rather
superciliously.

"No, I can't," was the blunt retort; "ask Master Roy to speak to me."

Rob gained his point, and was ushered into the library where Roy and
Dudley were amusing themselves in the firelight.

The old nursery was not much used now, and the library had begun to be
considered the boys' room, partly because owing to it being on the
ground floor, and opening into the garden, it was more convenient for
Roy's use.

Roy was now the possessor of a cork leg; and with the help of a stick he
was nearly as active as ever. His spirits were as high, and his purposes
as plentiful as before his illness; and his grandmother and aunt
marvelled that he could take his deformity so lightly. Yet there were
times unknown to any, when Roy's brave little heart sank with the
consciousness of it; and often in bed at night his pillow would be wet
with tears.

"Oh, God," he would often pray, "you wouldn't let me die, do help me to
do something worth living for. I feel my leg will keep away all the
opportunities now, but please give me something big to do for you
still."

"Hulloo, Rob, come on," was Roy's exclamation as he caught sight of his
friend. "Just look at Nibble and Dibble, we're teaching them to draw a
cart. It makes you die of laughing to look at them. There they go, and
Dibble turns head over heels in his excitement!"

Roy's happy laugh rang out, but though Dudley joined him, Rob's face was
grave and set.

"Please, can I speak to you on business, Master Roy?"

"Goody! What a long face!" exclaimed Dudley, pulling down his own in
imitation of Rob's, and thereby causing a fresh peal of laughter from
Roy. "Have you been a naughty boy, Rob, and has old Hal been thrashing
you? Have you been skylarking on the top of the greenhouse, and smashed
through on Hal's pate?"

"I should like to speak to Master Roy, alone," said Rob, a little
wistfully; in no way disturbed by Dudley's teasing.

"Oh, it's one of your secrets again. I'll be off, Roy, I want to see old
Principle!"

And Dudley dashed out of the room, whilst Rob came nearer and began his
"business."

"Master Roy, I've been thinking a lot lately, and Miss Bertram asked me
the other day if I'd like any other job for the winter as there's hardly
enough work for me in the garden now. And yesterday I saw a chap in the
village I used to know. He's a recruiting sergeant for the ----shire
regiment, and he wants me to enlist straight away. I wouldn't have given
it a thought only what you said about serving the Queen has stuck to me,
and it does seem a chance, and somehow that song has been in my head
ever since I heard Miss Bertram sing it. I'd like to be in a regiment."

Rob paused for breath, and Roy's eyes were wide open with wonder and
astonishment.

"But, Rob, you aren't old enough to be a soldier yet!"

"I'm just the age--they take them at eighteen, and I was that the other
day, only I don't look it."

"But you're going to be my servant. I couldn't let you go."

Rob's face fell.

"I thought I could have seven years--or even twelve years would hardly
find you ready to take up your property. And then I'd come back to you
and never leave you again!"

"But I want you with me now--always"--said Roy, in a distressed tone; "I
couldn't do without you all that time, and it's horrid of you to want to
get away from here, I think."

"All right, Master Roy, I won't go--I'll get a job in the village that
will keep me close at hand."

Rob tried to speak cheerfully, and after waiting a minute to see if Roy
would say any more, he left the room quietly; all the light having died
out of his honest grey eyes.

Roy watched the antics of his mice in the firelight, but his thoughts
were far away from them. At last he opened the door and made his way up
to his grandmother's room to have his usual chat with her before tea.

"Granny, if a person you like will do anything you like, ought you to
make that person do what you like instead of what they like?"

"It sounds like a riddle," said Mrs. Bertram, with a smile. "I won't ask
who the person is, the question is whether you like that person or
yourself best. Which do you?"

Roy did not answer for a minute, then he hung his head.

"I'm afraid I like myself best."

"If you give me more details, perhaps I can advise you."

"Well, granny, may I talk first to Dudley about it, and then I'll tell
you. But you see it's like this--the person wants to please you, and you
can't pretend to be pleased if he does what doesn't please you!"

"I think the best plan would be to leave yourself out of the question
entirely, and only think of the other person; that would be the most
unselfish way."

Roy knitted his brows and heaved a heavy sigh.

"Am I a very selfish person, granny?"

"You are much more selfish than Dudley is," said Mrs. Bertram,
decidedly, who never minced matters with her grandsons.

Roy flushed a deep crimson, and his grandmother added,

"I do not say that you are altogether to blame, for Dudley has always
given way to you and spoiled you; but you do not very often think of his
wishes before your own."

"No, I never do."

Roy's tone was of the deepest dejection; but the sudden entrance of
Dudley gave a turn to the conversation, and he gradually recovered his
spirits.

When the two boys were at their tea half an hour later, Roy spread the
whole matter before Dudley who looked at it in quite a different light.

"How stunning! And is he really going? Hurray! One of us will be a
soldier, at any rate. I wish I was big enough to go with him."

"But I don't want him to go, and I told him so, and he isn't going!"

Dudley opened his eyes at this.

"You going to keep him back? Why you're the one that's always talking
about serving the Queen, and fighting for her!"

"Yes, I should like to, but--but Rob is different. I want him to be with
me."

"Then you don't care about serving the Queen, if you're going to do her
out of a soldier who might fight for her!"

This was quite a new aspect of the affair.

"You think I'm like the dog in the manger? I can't go myself and I don't
want him to. But if you go to a boarding school like Aunt Judy talks of,
and I'm not allowed to go with you, and Rob is gone, I shall be left all
alone; and I hate being alone, you don't know how I hate it--I think I
should die!"

"Well, if I was you and knew I couldn't be a soldier myself, I would
love to send some one instead of me--you know how they do in France. Old
Selby was telling us. They pay a subsidy--substitute--don't you call
it?--to go and fight for them."

"Yes, that is the coward's way," Roy said, scornfully.

He paused for a minute, and then his eyes flashed fire.

"Yes, Dudley, I'll let him go. It's me that's the coward to try and keep
him back! You and I shall send him, and he shall be our substitute, and
when we hear of him doing brave things, we shall feel it's ourselves.
And we'll make him write letters to us and tell us all he is doing--oh,
it will be splendid. How glad I am he has learned to read and write.
Dudley, you just go and fetch him in, will you?"

Dudley crammed rather a large piece of cake into his mouth, and dashed
out of the room; and a few minutes later dragged in the would-be
soldier.

"We've settled you can go, Rob," said Roy, with a little of his
masterful air about him; "only you're to go as _our_ soldier. I think if
I had had a good, broad, strong chest and never broke my leg, I should
have enlisted, but you can go instead of me. Are you glad?"

"I'm sorry to leave you, Master Roy, but I'd dearly like to go."

"We must tell granny and Aunt Judy, and see what they say first. But I'm
sure they'd like you to go."

No objection was made. Miss Bertram was rather pleased than otherwise.

"He will make a good soldier," she said, when talking it over with the
boys; "he is a steady, reliable lad, with not too many ideas of his own,
and implicitly obedient."

"Is that what makes a good soldier?" asked Roy. "I thought it was dash
and bravery."

"Dash is a dangerous quality. Steady perseverance is better, Jonathan!"

The next few days were most exciting ones for the boys. Roy and Rob had
many a long talk together, and very earnest and serious subjects were
touched upon. Rob had little time left to bid his friends farewell, but
he went to old Principle, as a matter of course.

"Yes," said the old man, a little proudly; "all the younger folks going
out in life comes to me for a parting word. They laughs at me and my
principles, but I'm proud of my nickname, and 'tis only right principles
will make a man live right, and they knows it. What can I say to you,
lad, but fear God and honor the Queen and those in authority under her.
Never be afraid of holding to the right and denouncing the wrong, and
may God Almighty take your body and soul in His keeping until we meet
again."

Rob's last day came, and an hour before his departure, in company with
his friend, the sergeant, he came up to the Manor to bid them all
farewell. Roy had some farewell words with him in the privacy of his
bedroom.

"We shall miss you awfully," he said, walking up and down the room to
hide his emotion; "and it makes me wish I had your chance. But you'll
remember, Rob, I look to you to be a rattling good soldier, much better
than I should have been, and you'll be sure to do something grand and
brave the very first opportunity, won't you? You must get the Victoria
Cross, of course, and the account of you must be in the newspapers, so
that we can read about you. And I shall pray that God will keep you
safe, Rob. I hope you'll never have an arm or leg shot off, though I
think that would be better than having them cut off. I hope you'll come
back safe and sound. When shall we see you again?"

"The sergeant told me I should get a month or six weeks' leave this time
next year, Master Roy."

"A year is a very long time. Rob, if I should die before I grow up, I
want you to promise me that you will be Dudley's servant instead of
mine. He will be master of Norrington Court, then, and I want you to
live there."

"But you aren't going to die, Master Roy, you will live and do great
things yet."

Roy shook his head a little sadly.

"Sometimes I wonder if I ever will. I won't give up trying, but I shall
never be anything but half a man, with my cork leg and my weak chest.
Dudley would make a much grander master. Still there's one thing I can
do. I can serve God--and I've sent you to serve the Queen, and I can try
to serve my fellow creatures. Good-bye, dear Rob, will you kiss me."

And then forgetting his dignity, Roy flung his arms round Rob's neck and
hugged him passionately. "I'll never forget you carrying me home that
night," he whispered in his ear, "I loved you from that time. And Rob
you'll do what father told me to do--serve God first."

Rob nodded, and as he knelt on the ground holding the frail little
figure to him, he made a promise there and then in his heart that he
would never do or say anything that he would be ashamed of Roy's
hearing.

"They're calling me, Master Roy, good-bye."

He was gone, and Roy sitting down on the floor, leaned his head against
his bed and burst into tears.

Dudley found him there, and soon comforted him.

"Look here, if you like it, let us get upon the wall and see Rob and the
sergeant drive by; we can just see the high road, and Rob had to go to
the inn first, so we shall have plenty of time."

Roy's whole face beamed, he seized his stick and limped after Dudley
without a thought of his leg, but when he reached the wall he came to a
standstill.

"I'm afraid I can't climb it, Dudley, I've never been on it since my leg
was broken!"

But Dudley would take no denial.

"Oh, yes, you can, I'll hoist you up, we'll manage it."

And "manage it" they did to Roy's intense delight, though Mrs. Bertram
would have been horror-struck at the narrow escape the little invalid
had, of falling to the ground during the proceeding.

When they saw the trap in the distance, they set up a wild cheer, and
waved their handkerchiefs frantically, and when they were answered by a
cheer and a fluttering piece of white, they felt quite satisfied at
their farewell.

Before they got down from their high perch, Roy said, earnestly, "If God
sent us Rob as an opportunity, Dudley, I wonder if we did him good."

"Well, you see he was such a lot bigger than us, and Aunt Judy says she
never saw such a steady good boy; it's very difficult to do good to
good people, because you want to be so extra good yourself."

"At any rate, we've made him the Queen's soldier."

"Yes," argued Dudley, provokingly; "but he was the first one that
thought of it!"

"Oh, shut up," was Roy's impatient retort; "he told me himself it was
the song of Jake and Jim that did it, and--and my talking to him."

"And I expect the sergeant thinks it's all his doing."

"But he wouldn't have gone unless I had told him he might."

And as usual Roy had the last word.


XII


LETTERS

Very disappointed were the boys at Rob's first letter, which arrived
about a fortnight after he had gone to the regimental depot at a
neighboring town.

   "DEAR MASTER ROY:

   "I hope you and Master Dudley are
   quite well as it leaves me at present. I like it
   first-rate, but it is hard work, and I have a
   good many masters, but I means to do my
   best. God bless you.

   "From your faithful
   "ROB."

"That's not a letter at all!" said Roy, scornfully; "why he tells us
nothing at all! Why he might have gone to school and told us more! That
from a soldier. It's the stupidest rot I've ever heard!"

"I think you forget what a poor scholar Rob is," said Miss Bertram,
reprovingly. "Now I think that is a remarkably good letter when I think
what a short time he has been learning to write. You boys had better
each write a proper letter to him yourselves, and ask him what you want
to know. He will like to hear from you."

And so that afternoon, sitting up in state at the library table, the
boys spread out their writing materials and began to write.

"I feel," said Roy, biting the end of his pen and looking up at the
ceiling for an inspiration, "that I don't know quite how to begin. I
should like to tell him not to write like an ass, when he knows he ought
to tell us everything."

"All right, tell him so," said Dudley, squaring his elbow and frowning
terribly as he prepared himself for the task. "You know what old Selby
says: 'Make your paper talk, my boys, and make it talk in your own
tongues.'"

After a great many interruptions from each other, and a few skirmishes
round the table which resulted in the ink bottle being spilt, the
letters were finished.

Roy read his aloud with pride to Dudley, who did the same to him.

   "MY DEAR ROB:

   "You must write us longer letters. I
   am quite sure there is lots to tell. What do
   you have to eat? And where do you sleep?
   Have you got a gun of your own? Do they
   let soldiers shoot rabbits on their half-holidays?
   Does the band play while you are at dinner?
   What are your clothes like, and what are you
   to be called, now you're a soldier? When
   will you be a sergeant, and is there any fighting
   coming off soon? Old Principle says
   you will be learning drill. What is drill? He
   says it's learning how to march, but Dudley
   and I can do that first-rate. How many masters
   have you got? Write to me to-morrow
   and tell me all. I hope you will remember
   you are our soldier, and be sure you do something
   very grand as quick as ever you can.
   Have you got a sword and a medal? Do you
   ride on a horse, and can you fire off the cannon?
   I miss you very much but you belong
   to us, and must come back full of glory.

   "Your loving friend,

   "FITZ ROY BERTRAM."

   "MY DEAR ROB:

   "I hope you like being a soldier. How
   many soldiers are there in the same house with
   you? Give them my love and tell them we
   hope they liked the cake we put in your box
   for them. Roy came down to old Principle's
   with me yesterday. He showed us a hammer
   out of his cave he dug up. He says you will
   not be a full blown soldier for a year. He
   had a cousin who was a sergeant in India--and
   had his brains burst out in battle. When
   do you begin to fight? Tell us if you feel
   funky, and what the enemy looks like, and who
   they are. We think you ought to write us a
   much jollier letter. Roy's leg is first-rate, and
   he is up on the garden wall now like a cat.
   We sit there to do our evening prep: for old
   Selby. Good-bye. We're on the lookout for
   your name in the newspapers the first battle
   that comes off.

   "Roy's friend,

   "DUDLEY."

"I don't think you've finished your letter properly," observed Roy,
critically, as Dudley concluded reading his. "Why do you write you're my
friend?"

"Because I am," was the prompt reply; "I'm not Rob's friend and I shan't
tell him I am. I just write to him because you do, that's all."

"Don't you like him?"

"I don't want him for my friend; he's going to be a kind of servant.
Besides I wanted him to remember that I was your friend. I knew you long
before he did, and if he was dead now, or if he never had been born, I
should have been your friend just the same. We could have got on all
right without him."

This was not the first touch of jealousy that had appeared in Dudley's
character. He had more than once quarrelled with Roy on account of the
boy who he said had crept in between them, but on Roy always
emphatically assuring him that Rob occupied a back place in his
affections, Dudley would generally be appeased and become his sunny self
again.

"I like Rob very much," said Roy, slowly, "'specially now he's a
soldier. I was thinking in church last Sunday, when they were reading
about David and Jonathan, that Jonathan had an armor-bearer. That's Rob.
Only I can't go to battle, so I send him. Don't you think that's a nice
idea?"

"Did he get killed?" asked Dudley, with interest; "I forget about him."

"It doesn't say--I expect he lived as long as Jonathan did, and then
perhaps David took him to be his servant. That's what I've settled with
Rob, that he shall be your servant if I die."

Dudley gave himself an impatient shake.

"Oh, shut up with that rot, you'll live as long as I do!"

Roy did not speak for a minute, then he said, slowly, "You remember my
will that I made when I was so ill?"

"Yes, what did you do with it?"

"Aunt Judy found it the next morning on the floor nearly under the bed.
She laughed a little at first, and then got quite grave when I explained
it, and she took it away and locked it up somewhere. But if I never
make another, you will remember that I have left Rob to you for your
servant."

Dudley looked up with a comical gleam in his eye.

"And who gave Rob to you, old chap?"

"I took him--at least he gave himself to me."

Roy's tone was dignity itself, but Dudley laughed.

"Well he doesn't belong to you any longer; the Queen has got him."

"I have lent him to her, that's all."

"You talk of Rob as if he is a slave. He's a Briton, and 'Britons shall
be free!'"

"So he is free, but he chose to be my servant when I grow up, and he
shall be!"

Dudley dropped the argument, for Roy's face was flushing hotly, and he
was wonderfully patient with him since his accident.

Miss Bertram entered the room at this juncture, and asked in her cheery
brisk tones, "Would any boys like to drive me to the railway station in
the pony trap? I am going up to London on business, and shall be away
till to-morrow."

"Hurray," shouted Roy; "we'll come, and just read our letters, Aunt
Judy! Won't they make Rob see how he ought to write?"

Miss Bertram took the letters in her hand, praised the little writers,
and then sent them off to their rooms to get tidy for their drive.

A short time after, Roy mounted in front with his aunt, was driving her
with pride along the high road; whilst Dudley from the back seat kept
them lively with his chatter and flow of fun.

The boys always liked the bustle of the station; and getting a lad to
hold the pony, they followed their aunt to the platform and saw her on
board the train. Some friends spoke to her before the train went off and
amongst them was a certain Captain Smalley.

"I say," said Dudley, nudging Roy; "he's an officer, and he is in the
army, I expect he knows Rob."

"We'll ask him, directly the train is off."

But in the bustle of the last few minutes they missed seeing him; the
young captain got into his dog-cart, and was well on his way home before
the boys were ready to start in their trap.

"Oh, I say! See him in the distance! Whip up and let us catch him. Here,
let me drive, it's my turn now!"

But Roy clutched hold of the reins.

"No, I want to."

"I tell you it's my turn!"

"It's the only thing I can do with one leg, it's a beastly shame of
you!"

Dudley, who had nearly got possession of the coveted reins dropped them
instantly.

"All right then, but go ahead!"

And then Roy with a shamed look put the reins in his cousin's hands.

"I'll give them up. Granny always says I'm selfish. It was awfully mean
to talk of my leg. Now then hurry! Gee-up!"

Dudley took the reins with a gratified smile, applied the whip, and the
spirited little pony dashed along the road at such a rate, that a porter
looked after them in dismay.

"Those two young gents will come to their death afore they're
satisfied," he remarked, and another man responded:

"Yes, the little one is pretty well smashed up already, but legs or no
legs, boys allays keeps their sperrits!"

Captain Smalley was rather startled at hearing frantic shouts behind
him, and when he pulled up wondering if some message were to be
delivered, he was still more bewildered by what he heard.

"Hi, Captain Smalley! Stop for us. We've come two miles out of our way.
Now then, Roy, go ahead!"

"Do you know Rob? We want you to tell us how he is. We can't get a word
out of him; is there going to be any fighting? And how does he look in
his clothes?"

"Who is Rob?" asked Captain Smalley.

"Why, he's a soldier like you. You must know him!"

A few more explanations were made, and then the young man laughed
heartily.

"Your young friend is learning his recruit drill at the depot, I should
think. If he were in my regiment I might not be able to give you much
information about him. The army is a big affair, my boys, and I doubt if
Rob and I will ever meet."

The boys' faces fell considerably.

"Do you think he likes it?" asked Roy, anxiously; "do you like being a
soldier?"

"Of course I do, and if he has any stuff in him he will like it, too."

"And will he be sent to fight very soon?"

"I dare say he may do his seven years without a single fight!"

Roy looked very disappointed.

"If he doesn't fight, he might just as well have stopped at home. What's
the good of being a soldier if you don't have any battles?"

"Soldiers prevent battles, sometimes."

This sounded nonsense to the boys. They bade the captain good-bye, and
turned their pony's head homeward quite disconsolate.

"I'll write and tell him to come home if he's not going to do anything,"
said Roy, with his little mouth pursed up determinedly.

"We'll give him a chance, first. He may go out to fight. Captain
Smalley didn't say for certain."

"I think Captain Smalley is funky himself about fighting, that's what I
think!"

And with this disdainful assertion Roy dismissed the subject.


XIII


OLD PRINCIPLE

It was a soft, mild day in December. Mr. Selby's study seemed close and
stifling to the boys as they sat up at the long table with books and
slates before them, and a blazing fire behind their backs.

"This sum won't come right, Mr. Selby," groaned Roy; "and I've gone over
it three times. It is made up of nothing but eights and nines. I hate
nine. I wish it had never been made. Who made up figures, Mr. Selby?"

Roy's questions were rather perplexing at lesson time.

"I will tell you all about that another time," was Mr. Selby's reply.
"Have another try, my boy: never let any difficulty master you, if you
can help it."

A knock at the door, and Mr. Selby was summoned to some parishioner. He
was often interrupted when with his pupils, but they were generally
conscientious enough to go on working during his absence.

But Roy's lesson this morning was not interesting, and he was unusually
talkative.

"It's no good trying to master this sum, it's all those nines. They're
nasty, lanky, spiteful little brutes, I should like to tear them out of
the sum-books."

"Expel them from arithmetic," said Dudley, looking up from a latin
exercise, his sunny smile appearing. "Don't you wish we could have a
huge dust hole to empty all the nasty people and things in that we don't
like?"

"Yes--I'd shovel the nines in fast enough, and a few eights to keep them
company, and then I would throw in all my medicine bottles, and my great
coat, and--and Mrs. Selby on the top of them!"

This last clause was added in a whisper, for if there was any one that
Roy really disliked, it was his tutor's wife. She was a kind-hearted
woman, but fidgety and fussy to the last degree, and was always in a
bustle. Having no children, she expended all her energies on the parish,
and there was not a domestic detail in any village home that escaped her
eye. She had spoken sharply to the boys that morning for bringing in
muddy footprints, and her words were still rankling in Roy's breast.

"It's so awfully hot," Roy continued; "let us open the window, Dudley.
Old Selby won't mind for once; it's like an oven in here."

The window was opened with some difficulty, and the fresh air blowing in
seemed delicious to the boys. Roy clambered up on the old window-seat,
slate in hand, but his eyes commanded the view of the village street,
and the sum made slow progress in consequence.

"I say! Tom White's pig has broken loose, and that stupid Johnnie Dent
is driving it straight into old Principle's! I expect he'll come out in
an awful rage. No--the door must be shut, he can't get in. There seems
quite a crowd round old Principle's. He's giving them a lecture, I
expect. Here comes old Mother Selby tearing up the street, her bonnet
strings are flying and she's awfully excited!"

A minute after the door was thrown open.

"John, it's the most extraordinary thing--oh, you are not here!--Where
is Mr. Selby? I always knew something would happen to that old man
roaming over the hills half the night, and digging holes big enough to
bury himself! John! Where are you?"

She disappeared as quickly as she had come, banging the door violently
behind her; but Roy sprang down from his seat instantly.

"Dudley, it's old Principle! Something must have happened to him, do let
us go and see."

Dudley dashed down his pen, and was vaulting out of the window, when he
suddenly stopped.

"Roy get your great coat, quick. Aunt Judy made me promise to look
after you. I'll wait while you get it."

Roy dashed out into the hall. He heard the rector's voice in the
distance, but was too excited to wait to see him, and after impatiently
tugging on his objectionable coat, he limped off as quickly as he could,
joining Dudley at the garden gate. They heard the news on the way to old
Principle's. It appeared that the old man had gone out the afternoon
before, and had never come home. His shop was shut up exactly as he had
left it, and the woman who went in every day to do his cleaning and
cooking for him, was the first one to notice his absence. The group of
idle women round his door were busily discussing the question when the
boys arrived.

"I shouldn't be a bit surprised if as how he has made away with
hisself," suggested one, knowingly. "I always did say as he were queer
in the head, a makin' out of a pack o' stones such amazin' stories! And
a mutterin' to hisself like no ordinary creetur, and a walkin' through
the woods and fields as if he seed nothin' but what other folks couldn't
see at all!"

"Ah, now! To think of it! And Bill is a goin' down the river to find his
body; for him and Walter Hitchcock have searched the whole place since
seven o'clock this mornin'!"

"May be there's a murder in it," said a young woman, cheerfully. "He
were an old man to wander off alone, and there's allays evil-doers round
about for the unprotected."

The boys listened to these and similar conjectures with frightened eyes;
then Dudley whispered,

"I believe he is in his cave, Roy; we'll go and look for him. Only don't
tell these women about it, because he hasn't told anybody but us where
it is."

They left the shop and started for the hills, but Roy's lameness made
progress very slow.

At last he stopped, and struggling to hide his disappointment said,
"You'll have to go on without me, Dudley. I only keep you back. This old
leg of mine always comes in the way."

Dudley stopped to consider. "It's a very long way, but we must get there
somehow. Hulloo, here's just the thing."

They had stopped at a small inn at the outskirts of the village; and
tied to the drinking trough outside, was a rough pony and cart whose
owner was enjoying himself in the tap room with his friends.

"Jump in, Roy. It's to save old Principle, and anybody would be glad to
lend his cart for that."

Roy was not long in acting upon this advice. The pony trotted forward
briskly, and the boys would have thoroughly enjoyed this escapade,
except for the fears of their friend's safety.

"If anything has happened to him, the village will go to the dogs!" Roy
asserted, emphatically; "old Hal said the other day he was worth a
couple of parsons. When I grow up, I think I shall try and be like him.
I shall give good advice to everybody without ever scolding them, that
is what he does."

"Do you think he is dead?" asked Dudley, "I don't think he can be. Why
it was only the day before yesterday we saw him, and he was as well as
we are."

It seemed a long time before they reached the cave; the hills were steep
and the pony rather old, and more than once Dudley felt inclined to run
forward on his own two legs. Roy at last suggested this.

"I can drive up after you as fast as I can; and if you find him you
holloa to me."

So Dudley jumped out and was soon lost to sight behind the bushes and
hollows that fringed the hills.

Roy drove on busily thinking, and wondering if they had done wisely to
take the matter into their own hands, and come off alone as they had
done.

When he at length reached the cave Dudley came to meet him with a
puzzled face.

"Something has happened, Roy. I can't get into it very far; there's a
lot of earth tumbled down and I can't move it."

"Then old Principle is buried alive!" cried Roy in terror. "Quick,
Dudley, let us dig him out."

Dudley seemed quite helpless.

"I've no spade, and there's no place near to get one. I wish we hadn't
come alone."

This was a dilemma, but Roy would not be overcome by it.

"Let us look about for his tools; he always brings them up with him.
Isn't there enough room for me to get in, Dudley?"

Dudley shook his head, and both boys approached the entrance. There had
indeed been a serious landslip, and it was impossible to remove the
great blocks of stone and earth that had fallen without proper tools;
and though they searched for some traces of old Principle, not a thing
belonging to him could they find.

"Perhaps he may not be here."

"I believe he is," maintained Roy; "and we must be as quick as ever we
can. Dudley you go back in the cart and get some men to come and help. I
will stay here. How I wish we hadn't come alone!"

Left by himself, Roy did not sit down and do nothing. Clambering all
amongst the fallen earth and stone, he eagerly searched for some
crevice or opening; and at last high up in the ravine he found one. Then
lying down flat on the ground he put his mouth to the hole. "Old
Principle! Hi! Old Principle! Are you there?"

It was not fancy that a muffled voice came up to him--

"Help! I'm here!"

That gave Roy fresh strength. Eagerly he tore aside brambles and stones
with small thought of his scratched, bruised hands, and at last had the
satisfaction of viewing a hole big enough to drop his slim little body
through. Then he called again,

"Old Principle, I'm coming down from the top. Are you hurt? Can you tell
me if it is far to fall?"

And this time old Principle's voice sounded clearer:

"God help you, laddie! For I can't help you or myself. No it is not a
very big drop from where you are."

For one moment Roy looked at the dark chasm below him with hesitation,
then he murmured to himself, "If I break my other leg, I must get to
him--poor old Principle."

And then carefully and cautiously he let himself down, clinging with his
hands to a stout twig of mountain ash that bent and swayed across the
crevice with his weight.

Another moment and leaving go of the friendly branch, he dropped on damp
fresh soil, and found himself in almost total darkness. Then as his eyes
got more accustomed to it, he saw the prostrate form of old Principle
only a yard or two away from him. The old man was breathing heavily, and
his legs were completely buried under fallen earth.

"Is it Master Roy?" he said, as Roy came over and took hold of his hand;
"ay, you shouldn't have imprisoned yourself with me, laddie--I didn't
rightly think of what you were doing--I'm--I'm in such pain!"

"Are you very hurt? Oh, dear, what can I do? I can't lift you. Are your
legs broken?"

"I don't rightly know. If you could shift a little of the earth off, may
be it would ease me!"

Roy looked round and then delightedly seized hold of a small shovel.

"Your shovel is here. I'll do it," he said, cheerfully, and then to work
he went. The soil was fortunately not heavy to remove, but there was a
great quantity of it before poor old Principle's legs were liberated.
Roy toiled on, hot and breathless, longing that help should come, his
own fatigue forgotten in his pity for the helpless old man.

"Can you lift yourself up, old Principle? I really think I've got the
earth off your legs--at least most of it!"

There was a struggle, then a groan.

"I'm afraid not, laddie. 'Tis the power that has quite gone out of them.
I'm fearing that old Principle will be never roaming the hills again,
but there 'tis the Lord's will, and He never do make mistakes."

"Do you think your legs are broken like mine were?"

"I can't rightly say. It has seemed a weary time since I lay here. Many
days and nights I suppose--and I'm longing for a drink, but thank the
Lord, He has sent you to me."

"It is only since yesterday that you have been lost. And Dudley has gone
back to get some men to come. I wish I could get you some water, but
there's none here, is there?"

"I am afraid not."

Silence fell on the pair, which was broken at last by,--

"'Tis a good principle to think of your mercies when trouble overtakes
you. It has whiled away the time here, and I can thank the Lord with all
my heart, that my head and hands are uninjured!"

"How did it happen?" asked Roy.

"I'm afraid I excavated too far and was in the midst of unearthing a
large boulder of stone when I remembered no more--it took me so sudden,
and when I came to life again I thought I was in my bed at home with a
ton's weight on my feet. 'Twas good of the Lord to give me air--that
crevice you came through has saved me."

"You said a long time ago you could mend anything but broken hearts, but
you can't mend broken legs, can you? Or you would have mended mine."

"Ay, ay, so I would, surely. No--the mender has turned into a breaker
this time, 'tis a good thing it's only himself that he has broken up."

A slight groan escaped him, and Roy softly stroked his face, a broken
sob escaping him.

"Oh, old Principle, how I wish I was strong, how I wish I could move
you! You aren't broken up! Don't say you are. Couldn't I help you to
roll over on your back, wouldn't that be better?"

After great effort this was partly accomplished, and then to Roy's
intense relief he heard voices above.

On the other hand is also Malay _tali_ significance of a small coin.
" My wise and beloved teacher Abbé Favre, in his Malay dictionary,
said that this name should probably its origin to its value (0.65
cents ESP) is equal to a number of pieces of copper, very small,
ranging All together, strung on a string, _tali_.

We dare to suppose that _tali_, sound like _tolo_, applies to this
currency, not the supposed fact that my teacher said, but because
their value is to _tres wang_ being _wang_ as HC thousands, indigenous
currency . * * * * * APAT four.

The first letter of the voice is all that remains of the particle
enunciative _sa_, so that an older form in tagalog it _sa-pat_. In
Javanese-Ngok, which are many similarities in tagalog, it is said
_pat_ and _papat_. The most simple, while the oldest, from which comes
the voice _apat_ undoubtedly be found in the Polynesian languages: in
Tahitian, sunt. marq. _ha_, Samoan, _fa_, but I do not see in these
languages, among the things _ha_ and _fa_ mean, (the leaf petiole of
taro, white for shooting arrows) appears to be nothing which gave
reason to apply the same word to mean four. In W. of Humbolt the voice
that called the number four in many languages means "finished,
over" what makes you suspect a quaternary numbering system.

The Havre Abate provides support to this assumption by noting that in
Javanese means blogvideo _sakawan_ four voice and "a whole, a whole
match being the same direction, with a different voice, in the
Tahitian language means _aha_ where four crowd whole company.

This confirms what I said in the article _isa_. The number four was
a day of the maximum numbers of Polynesian, until the name of the
hand was applied to mean five. * * * * * Lima. five.

Name common to almost all the languages of Oceania: the _l_ in _r_
changes _d_ or some of them, but the word is the same, and in many, the
significance of primitive _lima_ preserved while the meaning of amount
that came from that. We have said that means hand, which is common
with the figure of five the number of fingers: this meaning is preserved
today in the languages bugui, makasar, sandwich, ibanag etc. etc.

In tagalog word is derived from a hand that is _lima_ and _lamas_
mean _manosear_, squeeze, squeeze between your hands.

Iloko in the hand is said _ima_.

Some people in Africa are incapable of counting number greater than
three.

It is certain that at one time included only the five Polynesian: Basis
and today the inhabitants of the Bay of Triton, in the New Guinea have
a numbering quinal with reaching the Sifra 10: The first claim:
1. ben 2. 3 gar. 4 niet. nianett 5. guruma 6. guruma ben 7. 8 guruma
gar. guruma niet 9. guruma nianett 10. guruma guruma. * * * * * And
in the Bay of Triton: 1. samosi 2.

Rueti 3. TURU 4. faat 5.

Rimi 6. rimsamosi 7. rimrueti 8. rimturu 9. rimfaat 10. rimrimi * * * *
* The same tagalog today to avail of pebbles or sigais to make
arithmetic calculations and come in groups of five in the same
manner as a Spanish, if provided with the same stones, the grouping
by tens.

And it is that there is presently numbering tagalog quinal not only in
how we say but also in the spoken numbers.

In some provinces are using the following terms: 5, sang kamay (a
hand); 10, dalawang kamay (two hands): 15, tatlong kamay (three
hands), in groups of five until reaching 45.

To say 50, with the system of multiple hands, it seems a rather
complicated word: _dalawang kamay na kamav_ (two coats of hand).

Tagalog in any dictionary I have seen signs of the significance given to
five _kamay_, nor the numbers I have just mentioned. When was quinales
groups, the number 50 qualifier _varios_ should apply to more
remote in time, covered, as said in the article by isa, two up. *
* * * * ANIM six.

Repeat here what seems to me beyond doubt that, in front of each name
in number, in ancient times, the particle was placed enunciative
_sa_ whose traces we see _anim_. We therefore consider only _nim_
to find the source of the voice that called the number six in tagalog.
Among the Polynesian languages, none has a voice that resembles both
the tagalog language as spoken in Timor-Laut, group of islands located
between Australia and New Guinea, described by Forbes and studied: the
voice is _enim_.

In this language, by the way, all numbers from one to ten, are very similar
to that tagalog; that, eru, Etel, Efate Elima, enim, efitu, ewalu, esi,
esapulo. Seems to say that the toilet _e_ preceding these names is a
limitation, which _sa_ in tagalog. I do not, the language referring
to Timor-Laut, rather than a short list of words, with which I can not
tell if _nim_ or _ni_ has another meaning in addition to the number six.
A simpler name _anim_ us Tetuan and presented lekale languages, spoken
in East Timor, an island located at the eastern extremity of the
archipelago of the probe: this form is _ne_.

Here are a series of transformations of the speech at hand: Tetuan and
lekale, _ne_; Javanese-Ngok, _nem_; timorlaut, _enim_, Malagasy, _enina_,
Malay, _anem_, tagalog, _anim_, bali, _anam_, Madurese, _nanam_.
Sundanese are served in a completely different voice: genap
(pronounced guenáp), which means " "in many languages (Javanese,
Malay, Batten, etc.., etc.), which suggests that probe, there was
a numbering system that reach only six, as in Polynesia was a
quaternary system, as _apat_ said in the article. * * * * * cock,
seven.

Common name for the majority of Malay Polynesian languages, where we see
him changing his first consonant in _h_, _f_ or _p_, and his voice
last _o, U_, indifferently.

Marquesano, Tahitian, _hitu_; sandwich, _hiku_, Samoan, _fitu_. The
primitive form of this voice was _fiatu_, whose origin and formation
can be explained even with tongue samoa in this, an antiquated form
of number three and the word is _fia_ _tu_ means _cortar, remove,
suprimir_.

The direction of this voice composed _fiatu_ or _fitu_ its contraction,
which is _tres suprimir_, refers to the fingers of both hands
together: ten fingers are deleted three are seven.

Later we will see the implementation of this system in almost all languages
of Oceania. _fia_ Returning to the radicals and _tu_, study their meanings
in other languages polynesianas. The tahit. _firi_ and sam. _fili_ mean
Trains and sand. and marq. _fio_; have the same meaning.

This shows that the word or its _fia_ transformation _fio, fiti, firi_
mean _tres_ and an object in which the number three comes to something
like Trains. The same thing we've noticed with _tatlo_ that differ
completely from _sia_ and its derivatives, has the same meaning
of community, which proves that this meaning of _tres_ and _cuerda_
or _trensa_ is not a mere coincidence and is in support of what we
say in this paragraph, as you said here supports that.

_Tua_ means _cortar_ in tahit. Formerly it was said _tu_, but a so-called
king, banned, according to Tahitian use, the use of this syllable in the
language. In marq. and sand. _tua_, which also means cutting, also has
the effect _cosechar_.

In wasted. _fitu_ says: Ngok _pitu_ in Javanese and most recently
_pitó_ tagalog.

Bad. is used by a voice full of tagalog separse does not interest us
here study _tudju_ states, as in makasar. * * * * * Walo, eight. There
may be strange that the explanation just given of the formation
and meaning of the word _pitó_.

In a matter of derivations and etymology, easily penetrates into the
realm of fantasy, with a very logical and we can prove the greatest
absurdities. Warned against this pitfall, and with the feeling that, in
the minds of some, the explanation of _pitó_ I doubt aroused by
the suspicion that he engaged in exactly what I want to avoid, to
make fancy, I must begin by some considerations on one of the names
that get the number eight in the Malay language, to provide evidence
by analogy to the above _pitó_ on.

Next to the voice _waló_ with more or less variations used in Polynesia,
the languages used more near the Malay type, the voices _delapan_
and _karua_.

Bad, and Sundanese achine, used _delepan_: its origin is as Sundanese J.
Rigg, which means two _dua_ language and _lepan_ doubled.

Referring to the fingers of both hands, which are ten, two doubles,
leaving us eight. In my illustrious friend, the wise Mr. Aris orientalist.
Marre on the islands of Arrue, use the voice _karua_ formed _ka_
four and two _dua_ or _rua_: ie, two equal to four _ocho_.

Now look very natural that I give it _pitó_ training that I have explained
and which is similar to that of _delapan_ or _dualepan_. _waló_
Coming to our tagalog, I must confess that I have had much to do. His
oldest _walo_ seems to be _varu_ or that is in samoa, Tahitian,
and marquesano sandwich.

I think that their training is this: _va-lua_ or _va-rua_. _Va_ And _iva_
mean in samoa _espacio between two things, or gap between two objects
cosas_.

_Rua_, Dua_ mean _lua or two as we have seen elsewhere. _Valua_ Or _varua_
or just _valu_ would _espacios dos_ meaning, referring to two hands and
we suppose that we have since discovered the meaning of _pitó_ and
_delapan_: the _dos espacios_ or _vacios_ caused by the absence of two
fingers, reduced to eight left to count on both hands. It may not satisfy
many of this explanation, why does not seem illogical, but because it was
hoped to use the same voice that said _pitó_ theft: one is explicitly
stated otherwise removed and the two idea of the disappearance of
two is secondary and as a result of two or more spaces in the place
where there should be two fingers.

This does not mean, however, more but has not adopted the same word to
express the same idea. The main thing is that the formation of _pitó_
and _waló_ respond to the same idea to a single system of objective
figures.

The numbers were formed as needed: there was no general rules for
training, because if any had been reached incontable_ as _contar what
happens now with our system, which enables us to make estimates and
stacking the figures, that our imagination can be say, not grasping.

Not having as a general rule, it is easy to conceive as a _pitó_
tube formation and _waló_ other, both having in common words, which
are based on a subtraction operation on the number ten, represented
by the fingers of both hands. * * * * * SIAM, nine.

We first demonstrate that the present form of the word tagalog is the
result of a series of transformations of the voice _iva_ same meaning
in this language, Tahitian, marquesana sand. and samoa.

Turning to his _v_ novo Zealand became _w_ and _iwa_ was formed in the
island of Rotuma added a _ch_ and I _chiva_ and _chivu_: the letter was
added _s_ in firakú (in E. Timor), in where he also became the _v_ in
_b_ being transformed into the voice and language _siba_ Tetuan
and lekale deleting the consonant _s_ interim, it was said _sia_.
For reasons of phonetic languages _m_ Philippines have added a final
and now we have the voice _siam_ whose derivation has shown.

_waló_ We have said that the significance of _vá_ was "space" is a synonym
_iva_ and that word was added _rua_ voice or _lua_ or your contractions
_lu, ru_, that was _dos espacios_ here is not more than _un vacío_, has
not had to add a supplement, although it seems quite possible that the
_s_, which tagalog precedes, is a vestige of the particle enunciative
_sa_ I have already made known in other articles of this study.

This word comes to supporting my views on the composition of _varu_ or
_valu_.

Similarly the formation of _delapan_ was confirmed when it was learned
that, to the amount expressly nine, used in the same voice _salapan_
language, whose meaning is a _sa_ Removed _ (LAPAN) _.

In bad, they say _sambilon_, nine, consisting of _sa, _ and a
_ambilan_ being removed.

In states _sakurang achine; sa_ one, _kurang_ (similar to that tagalog
_kulang, _) lack.

The numbers 7, 8, 9 are expressed in language of the Republic of
Palau, following the same above.

One, two, three states: _reb, rub, and adolib_ precedence over the prefix
_me_ these voices is the name of the figures 7, 8, 9. I do not know
what the meaning of its own code that indicated _me_, but knowing the
system generally used in Oceania, is to be a logical meaning of _sustracción:
medilib_, seven, consisting of a shrinking of _me_ and _adolib_
Three: _merub_ eight (_me_ _rub_ and two): _mereb_, nine (_me_ and
_reb_, a). In view of repeated so many examples and there is no doubt
find new evidence: the words used may be different in form but not in
substance and all reveal an idea in the same numbering system. _lima_
If the name of five, which also means hand, we have put into the
track, if I may say so expressly, perhaps we would not have come to
understand the meaning of 7 , 8, 9, but once provided with data that
relate the meaning of words they call these numbers, the existence of
_diez dedos_ of both hands, who make up this numbering system, and we can
not doubt that the etymologies given to tagalog numbers are not only
logical, but true. * * * * * SAÑGPÓO, Powo, POLO. ten. As the numbers 7,
8, 9 are known, as we have seen, based on the number represented by the
ten fingers of both hands, it is natural that the name means 10
while both hands or anything that concerns them .

As I said in the article that tagalog _limá_ used the expression
_dalawang kamay_, two hands, to say ten: they were also told that
these expressions evidence of the existence of an ancient numbering
quinal with not more than he could count up to 49 or 50.

I could really tell beyond that figure, but by dint of repeating
the voice _kamay_ would have come to the formation of a complicated
and incomprehensible speech.

The ten days that the amount came to express in a single word of its
own, the numbers could easily go up to double the figure expressing
the quinal and say it was 99 and 100.

In many languages of which I hold I see a connection between the
name of ten and a measure.

The marquesano _tipoo_, which means a measure of a span, consists of a
contraction _pití_, Tahitian, meaning one, and _poo, _ palms, which
shows that, as Europeans, were served out of the hands to measure.

Hence probably stemmed from the way _tipa_ tagalog, it means precisely
the span as a measure. The Samoan _fua_ means ten and also a measure,
which is not, but it would be illogical to assume away the palm or
something that relates to some of the dimensions of the hand. Here
we have a relationship between núm. 10 and measured with a hand. In the
old tagalog according Noceda and S. Lucar, ten, and this voice said
_toro_ means, pampanga, a geme that tagalog is said _tumuro_
(_um_, interfijo).

The same word means Iloko "a finger-width."

The truth is, pampanga _turo_ means rather the width of two hands put
together a side by side, total width is also measured by the distance
from the tip of the thumb and the index finger estendidos: hence
the latter received the name in tagalog _hintuturo_.

Later, in tagalog, _turo_ was the significance of _apuntar, señalar_,
because it is undoubtedly share for which the index finger is used.
The meaning of many words made me see that the measures taken with
the fingers or _ancho_ of hands. Just as the stick had different
proportions in the provinces of Spain, the names of measures related
to length in Philippines does not always equal among the different
ethnic groups or, more accurately, language.

Roy's eyes opened wide.

"But I shall go too, shan't I, Aunt Judy?"

"I am afraid not just yet. You are not fit to rough it; besides we
couldn't lose both our boys!"

"But I must go if Dudley goes, I must!" and Roy's tone was passionate
now. "I won't have him go away from me--I've lost Rob, and that is bad
enough--You wouldn't take Dudley away from me, too, Aunt Judy!"

"Hush, hush, we will not talk any more about it now. He will not go
till after Easter, and that won't be here yet."

Miss Bertram was sorry she had broached the subject, when she saw Roy's
distress, and going downstairs sent Dudley up to play with him.

Later on when she was sitting with her mother in the drawing-room a
small head appeared. "May I come in, granny?"

It was Dudley, and his round and rosy face was unusually solemn.
Marching in he took up his position on the hearth-rug, his back to the
fire, and with his hands deep in his pockets, he turned his face rather
defiantly toward his grandmother.

"Granny, I'm not going to school without Roy."

"Hoighty-toity! What next, I wonder. Is that the way for little boys to
speak to their elders. You will do what you are told as long as you are
in my house, as your father did before you."

"It is your stepfather's wish," put in Miss Bertram; "you ought to be
willing to obey him."

"Not if he tells me to do something wrong. And I'm sure it would be
quite a wrong thing for me to go away from Roy. We have promised never
to leave each other till we grow up, and we don't mean to break our
promise. And, granny, I'm sure you don't like broken promises. Father
doesn't know about Roy, and he can't understand like I do, and it would
be very wrong of him if he took me away from Roy!"

Mrs. Bertram put on her glasses and inspected her little grandson with
searching eyes.

"That is a most disrespectful speech, Dudley. I shall of course uphold
your father's wishes."

"But, granny, I can't leave Roy. It will break his heart. You don't know
how he frets about his leg. He doesn't say much and is always so
cheerful, but he misses me most awfully even if I'm away for a day. If
he was well and strong, he could get on first-rate, but he wouldn't get
about half so much if I didn't take him. I think he would mope and mope
all by himself. And I don't think we could live without each other. You
won't send me away, will you?"

Tears were filling Dudley's blue eyes, but Mrs. Bertram looked
displeased.

"In my days, children never thought of arguing with their elders. I
think your aunt and I are as capable of taking care of Roy as you are.
Now leave the room, and do not refer to the matter again."

Then Dudley astonished his grandmother by the first exhibition of
temper that he had ever displayed before her.

"I _won't_ be separated from Roy. If you send me to school, I shall run
away, and I shall write and tell father the reason!"

A stamp of the foot emphasized this passionate speech, and then Dudley
fled from the room, banging the door violently behind him.

As on a former occasion he now took himself and his grief to old
Principle. It was early-closing day in the village, and he found the old
man just locking up his door prepared for a ramble.

"Come along up to the hills with me, laddie," he said, after hearing the
trouble; "there's nothing like fresh air for blowing away a fit of the
dumps. I am going to the cave again--will you come with me?"

"Yes, I will. I've been in an awful temper in granny's room, and banged
her door. I don't think she'll ever forgive me!"

"'Tis like this, Master Dudley," said old Principle, presently, as they
walked over the hills together; "if it's right for you to go, there's
nothing to be said, and you must fall in with it whether you like it or
no."

"But it can't be right for me to leave Roy when he wants me."

"It may be the best thing in the world for him and you, if it is to be.
'Tis a bad principle to determine whether a thing is right or wrong,
according to our liking."

"It's a cruel thing to part us!" said Dudley, doggedly.

"But may be a way will be found out of the difficulty by Master Roy
going with you."

"They say he isn't strong enough. That wetting in the rain has made him
bad again."

"Well now I should ask the good Lord to make him strong enough. There's
time between this and Easter."

Dudley brightened up at once.

"Do you think he might be strong enough? I should be able to take great
care of him, and I would, too. And he's so plucky, that I'm sure the
other boys would be good to him."

The cave was reached, and in the interest of watching excavation going
on Dudley was soon his bright self again.

He came home radiant, with a match-box full of tiny shells for Roy who
was waiting for him in the nursery.

"You have been away a time," he said, wearily: "I'm sure I'm well enough
to go out now. I can't bear the winter. It means so many colds and
aches."

"Well, you're going to get better very soon, and look here, old chap! If
you try your very best, perhaps the old doctor will give you leave to
come to school with me after Easter."

Roy's eyes sparkled at the thought.

"Nurse always makes such a molly-coddle of me, and so does granny; but
I'll try as hard as I can to be better."

"And now just look at these! Old Principle says these show that the sea
must have washed up amongst the hills and into his cave hundreds of
years ago, for these belong to salt water fish not river ones. Look at
them! 'Fossils' he calls them, they're shells made out of stone. He told
me I might give you these from him. I thought he would never go back to
his cave again after last December, but he says he feels so much
stronger now; and he is very careful how he digs; he won't let me come
near him while he does it. And he told me he has been busy writing a
paper which he is going to send to some society in London--I forget its
name. He is what you call a discoverer, isn't he?"

Roy nodded, then asked anxiously:

"Dudley, were you rude to granny before you went out? Aunt Judy came to
look for you here, and she said she hoped you were going to beg granny's
pardon for something."

"I'll go now, I had almost forgotten."

And Dudley trotted off to his grandmother's room. She received him
sternly, but he was so abjectly penitent that she soon forgave him, and
he returned to Roy with a relieved mind.

"It's a dreadful thing to have a temper," he remarked, as he sat upon
the nursery table swinging his legs to and fro; "I've given granny an
awful headache by the way I banged her door."

"What was it about?" asked Roy, with interest.

"About school," was the answer; "I told her I wasn't going away from
you."

"I've been thinking of it a lot," said Roy, with a sigh; "but you'll
have to go, and I shall get on pretty well without you. You see a boy
with one leg wouldn't be much good amongst a lot of other boys. They
would only call him a cripple and push him aside. I shouldn't like them
to laugh at me. The only thing for me is a cripple school. Nurse has a
little grandson at one. Then he looked from the cot, always impatient,
he went from one to another, and he knew not how it happened when
he was not the girl.

There were four beds and one was empty. In the other two were children.
He looked again, he lit each of the risers in the face, but the
little he was not Ruth.

Because he suddenly smiled, and this smile was childlike and full of
merriment.

During the duration of this beautiful smile, he was a completely different
person. He went with the candle in his hand into his own room, because
he was convinced the child had been secretly nestled over there to help
him keep them. In the corridor, however, met him and his sister Cenci,
which somewhat surprised him that was, as it with the light in one
and the packet in the other hand saw.

   "You know, Hans," she said, as she had already turned away, "the
little Ruth is now suddenly been brought.

   Her mother was there and was very excited.
   They gave us the money on the table and is
   then thrown with the child gone. - What is
   for you, John? You're so pale? "With slow shake
   of the head turned from them and for the
   first time she felt anything by his brother
   close, even though its not the reason of
   which was clear. And darkness was always
   concern about this house and the people that
   were happy when they are with their day-to-end,
   and the little sleep had ergattert. Formes
   stood still for some time. A dull entwand
   According to his lips and the hot inner fury he
   felt that something Wonderful for him had
   been lost in this hour. Then he went
   down to the street and smashed the precious
   doll on the gutter. Thus he also smashed the
   building of the tempting sweet and hopeful
   dreams. And heavy gray clouds moved over the
   next few years out. Lichtlos How was all
   this bustle, all this Hangen between hope and
   bitterness! It is a thriving one Wiesenweg
   along effortlessly and he supposedly
   delicious roof of his home to reach. But as
   suddenly opens up a wide ravine in front of his faltering feet,
and he kneels in despair of a hard rock down with dismissive smiles
giebt it to the hope and the wait.

   Formes went to Thor, and saw the bright moon to rise.

   Floated in the heavens is not a child with pale cheeks and stretched
her arms to him from [Illustration] pressure of Hesse & Becker in
Leipzig.

"I was thinking about that soldier there with all his medals who broke
his mother's heart; and then about the soldier boy the general said was
the bravest. I suppose I would rather Rob was properly brave like that,
than do great things in battle; but I should think he might do both,
don't you think so?"

And Dudley nodded, adding, "Rob won't drink or gamble, I'm quite sure."


XVI


DAVID AND JONATHAN

Easter came, and to the boys' great delight Roy was so much stronger
that it was settled he might accompany Dudley to a private boarding
school for one term. Thanks were due to Miss Bertram for this
arrangement; and she had great difficulty in obtaining her mother's
consent to it.

"I am sure the boys will get on best together; Roy will have a better
chance of growing strong if he is with Dudley than if he is to mope by
himself here. If we find he does not keep well, we can have him home
again; and from all we hear of the school, the boys are most carefully
looked after."

And certainly to judge from Roy's appearance and spirits, this plan
seemed most successful. It was a bright morning in April. The air was
cold but dry, and the old garden was sweet with the scent of hyacinths
and narcissuses. Bright beds of tulips and polyanthuses bordered the
green lawn, and old Hal was surveying the results of his work with pride
and satisfaction. Miss Bertram, in her leather gloves and garden apron,
was busy in and out of the hothouses; and the boys, after scampering
round in every one's way, had at last scrambled up to their favorite
seat on the garden wall.

In Bikol, _sangpolo_, etc _sangpolo KAG saró_. Etc. It is therefore evident
that the particles enunciative numerals are remnants of, remodeling
of a word that meant the number one at a time when the significance
of which is appointed to represent her with one of his qualities,
the number or quantity had not yet disappeared.

Then, when the secondary meaning, the figure was as acclimated to
the point of forgetting the meaning in primitive languages, of which
in each issue we intend to seek, then forgetting it was also the
office of the numeral in front of the numeral , because there was
no need to suffer in some euphonious name changes reflecting _modos_,
pronunciation and more services were to disappear in others.

Keane noted how _esefulu_ of samoa, meaning _un-a-diez_: Iloko us in
the Philippines provides similar examples _sang in-a-pulo_ (1O),
_sang-a-gasut_ (1OO), _sang-a-ribu_ ( 1000), which mean a
undiez-a-unciento, UNMIL-one (let me write this way expressly that
a better idea).

It is worth noting one form bisaya, _napulu ka libu_: _na_ and _ka_
represent two different transformations of the particle formulation.

We also see in the same language _ísa-ka-gatos_ (100), _isa ka libo_
(1000) that really mean a unciento, an UNMIL. I can not add, then to
prove the existence and significance of the particle enunciative
that _da_ in _dalawá_ is a transformation of _sa_.

We have now to explain the origin of _lawa_ which is what really carries
the meaning of two comes from the Tahitian _A-rua_, or rather _rua_,
removing the particles we already know enunciative .

R, D, L, are letters that we see each other frequently used in these
languages, so we bisaya and Malay, _dua_, as in Iloko and Bikol in
pampanga _ad-dua_ and ibanág _due_. I have heard in Batangas _daluá_
and voice _lawa_ more commonly used in Manila, is the result of
insufficient writing characters with tagalog.

The significance of this speech, I would say that in Tahitian _O-rua_
mean, you two , or _dual_ of the second person pronoun.

_O_, Is a sort of article that is placed on that language in front
of proper nouns and pronouns.

The significance of _dual_ of the second person, we believe that the oldest
idea of the amount of off of that.
shouted Dudley, "don't I wish I was with him! Does the
newspaper mention his name, Aunt Judy?"

"When shall we have a letter from him?"

"Not for some time yet, because this is telegraphed. It will be all over
before we hear. We must hope and pray that Rob may be kept safely
through it."

Miss Bertram looked grave, and the boys sobered down at once.

"But, Aunt Judy, of course fighting is dreadful, but it is a soldier's
duty, isn't it?"

"And Rob is sure to do his duty."

"Yes, boys, we will hope he will serve his Queen as well as he served us
whilst here. Rob was a good boy: I wish there were more like him."

And Miss Bertram moved away, whilst her little nephews worked off their
excitement at this news, by jumping down from the wall, and performing a
mimic battle in the pine wood outside. Very eagerly and impatiently did
they look for a letter before they went off to school, but none came;
and the last word that Roy said as he was leaving the house was,--

"Mind, Aunt Judy, you send on my letter when it comes as quick as
lightning!"

It was rather an ordeal for both the boys when the last leave-takings of
all at home came. The old nurse wept profusely, and was only comforted
by the assurance that she should go to her charges on the very first
intimation of illness. Mrs. Bertram gave them such warnings against
choosing evil companions, and becoming depraved in principles, that the
boys were quite awed and depressed; and the servants, one and all,
expressed such pity and sympathy for their departure, that Dudley at
last confided to Roy:

"If we were going to prison they couldn't look more shocked and gloomy."

General Newton insisted upon taking them himself to school.

"It looks well," he said to Miss Bertram, a little pompously; "for the
boys to have a man at their back, and I will have a few words with the
principal myself about Roy's delicacy of constitution. It will come with
more force from me than from you."

So the general was allowed to have his way, and by the time the boys
were in the train with a large packet of sandwiches and cakes to while
away the time, their spirits rose, and they declared that going off to
school was "the jolliest thing out."

It was late in the evening when they reached their destination. The
school was not far from the sea, and the clergyman who kept it would
never have more than thirty boarders; his wife, a sweet-faced
gentlewoman, received the boys most kindly, and General Newton came away
satisfied that it would prove a happy home as well as a good training
for the motherless boys.

Dudley and Roy were not long in making themselves at home; their high
spirits made them general favorites amongst the boys; and even Roy did
not feel himself out of place in the playground, whilst in the
schoolroom he proved a quick and intelligent pupil.

"The boys are happy, mother," said Miss Bertram one morning going into
her mother's room and handing her two letters; "and Mrs. Hawthorn has
written most favorably of them both."

"I should think so," said Mrs. Bertram, stiffly, who though sternness
itself to her grandsons was most indignant if any one dared to say a
word against them to her; "they would not be true Bertrams if they were
not favorites with all."

She opened the letters and read--

   "DEAR AUNT JUDY:

   "It's our hour for home letters. We
   like it here awfully. Mrs. Hawthorn is a brick,
   she lets me come into the drawing-room with
   her whenever I am tired, but I've only been
   in once yet because I like to watch the boys
   play best. I can bowl at cricket and bat too,
   and I give a boy called 'Gnat' twopence a
   game to do my runs for me. I'm collecting
   birds' eggs. There's a boy here who has got
   250 of them. I mean to find a sea gull's nest,
   and then he'll swap twenty of his with me for
   one gull's, because he has never got one yet.
   There is a boy called 'Simple Simon,' he
   thinks I am a wonder because I let him run
   pins into my cork leg and never cry out. He
   does not know it's a sham leg and I shan't tell
   him. We should like another hamper very
   soon, please. Cook's gingerbread was A1.
   Give my love to granny, and tell her I take my
   tonic when I go to bed every night. Give my
   love to nurse. Tell old Principle Mr. Hawthorn
   would like to know such a clever man
   and see his cave. Send me Rob's letter
   directly it comes, please. We do drill in the
   gymnasium.

   "Your loving nephew

   "FITZ ROY BERTRAM."

   DEAR AUNT JUDY:

   "This is an awfully jolly school. I'd
   like you to be one of the boys. We are going
   to have a paper chase next Thursday, and I bet
   I'll lick some of the chaps at running. Roy
   and I sleep in the next beds to each other. I
   look after him when he will let me, he is top
   of his class and Tom Hunter says he is a plucky
   chap. Hunter is captain of the eleven. We
   go to bathe every morning down by the sea,
   and Hunter says his father is going to give
   him a boat of his own in the summer. There
   is a jolly tuck shop in the town. We can go
   to it every Saturday. There is a boy here
   called 'Fishy,' he wants to be my chum but I
   like one called 'Cheshire Cat' better, but I
   have no chum but Roy. Old Hawthorn only
   canes for lies. A boy got caned last night,
   and blubbered like a baby before he went in.
   I send my love to granny, and all of you. Roy
   expects Rob's letter every day.

   "Your loving nephew

   "DUDLEY.

   "P.S. Hunter says our cake has made his
   mouth water for the next."


XVII


ROY'S BIG OPPORTUNITY

"Roy, Mrs. Hawthorn wants you. She has got some letters for you."

Dudley came up excitedly to Roy, directly after dinner was over one
Saturday afternoon.

"And I say," he continued; "bring them out and let us go down to the
beach to read them together. The tide will be out till the evening."

Roy hastened off, and wondered at Mrs. Hawthorn's grave look.

"Your aunt has sent me some letters to give you, Roy. She has only just
received them herself. They are about your friend in India."

"From Rob?" said Roy, with sparkling eyes. "Oh, I thought he never would
write. How jolly! And I see his writing, that's my letter."

He held out his hand eagerly but Mrs. Hawthorn laid her hand on his
shoulder gently.

"Yes, that was a letter he wrote to you before the fighting. Your aunt
has heard since--from a nurse who nursed him."

Something in her tone frightened Roy.

"Has he been wounded? He is well again, isn't he?"

"He is quite well now," she said, in a hushed voice.

For a minute Roy gazed at her, with horror and doubt dawning in his dark
eyes, then snatching the letters out of her hand he rushed out of the
room; and seizing hold of Dudley in the hall he exclaimed almost
frantically:

"Dudley, something awful has happened to Rob, let us get away from the
house and read these letters."

He held them tightly in his hand, and would not let Dudley take them
from his grasp, till they reached the beach.

Then sitting down and leaning against an old weather-beaten rock, Roy,
with trembling fingers, first unfolded Rob's letter to himself.

   "MY DEAR MASTER ROY:

   "We are going up to the mountains to-morrow
   to fight. The men say it will be stiff
   work, driving an old chief from his stronghold.
   Some of them don't like it, but I am
   ready. I am a better writer now, I hope, so
   want to tell you what I never have yet. I do
   thank you with all my heart for being so kind
   to a homeless lad and taking him in and giving
   him a happy home. And I thank you
   much more for teaching him to read and write
   and giving up your playtime to get him on.
   But if I was to thank you for a hundred years,
   I couldn't thank you enough for telling me
   about my Saviour and showing me the way to
   heaven. Every word you ever said is sticking
   to me. I mind all our talks, and if I may
   have had some rough times in trying to serve
   God first, I have been as happy as a king.
   And I have found that the Lord has kept me
   through the worst times, and I love Him with
   all my heart. When I get to heaven I shall
   be able to thank you proper. I do feel thankful
   to you and Master Dudley. And now
   good-bye and God bless you.

   "Your faithful ROB forever."

Roy read this through.

"He's all right, Dudley. What did she mean? Why did she look so funny?"

Dudley shook his head.

"I don't know, read what Aunt Judy says."

Roy spread out his aunt's letter, and read it in unfaltering tones to
the end.

   "MY POOR DEAR LITTLE JONATHAN:

   "If granny were not really very unwell
   I should have come straight off to soften the
   blow to you, but I send the letters which I
   have just received, and I have asked Mrs.
   Hawthorn to explain them to you. You must
   be comforted by knowing that our dear Rob
   has proved himself a hero and died a hero's
   death. I know you would like to see the
   nurse's letter written from the hospital, and I
   also send you one from the major of his regiment
   who used to know me years ago. I know
   you will be a brave boy and bear this trouble
   like a man. Tell Dudley to write to me by
   the first post to tell me you have got the letters
   safely.

   "Your loving aunt,

   "JULIA BERTRAM."

The letter dropped from Roy's grasp, and he flung himself down on the
beach face foremost.

Dudley sat staring out at the sea without speaking. The blow had fallen
so heavily, and so unexpectedly, that speech was not forthcoming.

At last Roy looked up.

"You read the other letters to me, Dudley," he said, in a choked voice.

And Dudley, with a good deal of hesitation and effort interrupted by
tears, read out as follows:

   "DEAR MADAM:

   "I have been asked to write to you
   about Robert White who I am sorry to say
   was brought into the military hospital the
   other day dangerously wounded. He lingered
   three days and was perfectly conscious up to
   the last. I never saw a braver or more patient
   lad. He told me all about your goodness to
   him, and his devotion to a little nephew of
   yours was most touching. These were then called
   Käsfische. This festival was repeated in
   the summer about every fourteen days and was
   pleased each time with a loud clamor welcomed.
   This was behind the large thistle bush hidden
   on the ground, while the negotiation was going on.
   He gave no sound of themselves and
   remained motionless in the same position until
   he heard that the vast throng davonlief.
   Now he cautiously peeped out a little.
   The three grievances that were left behind on
   the ground and turned her back upon him. The
   others were already a good piece of the Alm
   hinaufgekommen their cries and rejoicing
   schallte funny on the level down. Den This
   covered an irresistible desire, even at
   the Käsfischfahrt participate. Very nimble, he
   slipped behind the bush clear and
   quiet and easy like a weasel, he slipped
   behind the three disaffected over and up the
   hill. After the last steep hill was a
   small, shiny green plateau, as was the sheepfold.
   And a few steps away from the clear Schwemme
   swept down stream. There in the doorway
   of his hut was Franz Anton with his round,
   friendly face. He laughed about the many
   cracks which are now the boys and girls in
   their eagerness to enjoy the longed to go
   on all sides represented. Now they were all on
   the lodge and one pushed the other forward to
   even closer to be there when the division
   would begin to run. "Only tame, just
   tame," laughed now the Franz Anton. "If
   you all in the hut hineindrängt, I have no more room for cutting
cheese and you have the damage."

   Now he took his firm hand on the knife and
   entered the large, round cheese out that
   he already on the table had to cope. Cutting
   quickly went ahead. Then he came with the long,
   thick, snow-white line approached. Then he
   divided it and gave a piece here and there a
   piece, often over the heads of the Great off the kids who are not
able to penetrate it.

   Because of the Franz Anton was just in his
   division. This had confessed the back,
   and if he wanted to penetrate a little bit,
   so he's got a bump and then one and flew it
   from one side to another. Franz Anton saw him
   not at all, because always a size and thickness
   before it is pushed. Recently he got
   such a tremendous blow from the wide, on
   all sides beating Jopp that he would almost
   bend over. The division was almost too late,
   and this was probably that he never could
   get Käsfisch bit, so he wanted to but no
   more beatings. He walked a few steps further
   down, where the young fir trees stood and
   sat on the ground between the trees. At the
   highest crown of one sat a funny little
   bird and whistled so cheerful in the bright,
   sunny air upward, as if there were nothing
   else in the world as a blue sky and sunshine.
   That made this the heart so glad that he almost forgot the suffering
to which he just happened.

   From time to time he had after the sheepfold hinüberschauen, because
the noise and cheer whenever a piece of the others had Käsfisch
again abgejagt , took no end.

   Then he saw still, like every child with a larger or smaller chunks
of beautiful, white mass, and stood with delight hineinbiß.

   He sighed a little and then said quietly: "If I only once to acquire
a single Stücklein!"

This was never the of the beautiful, white Käsfischen cost, because never
before had he dared, as far as today in the crowd of lucky follicle.

Now he had seen it but nothing helped him when he zusammenraffte all
courage.

And so he came to the sad conclusion thought that his life he never
had a Käsfisch will get. It was so sad that he had not even heard
the bird more and more zusammengeduckt among the fir trees sat.

   Now was the banquet at the lodge to end with a terrible noise and
rushed the children, therefore, may always be on the other jumping
out what the steep slope more than a case brought.

   The half-hidden in the past discovered
   this race in the noisy Hans, and cried out
   loud in the bushes into it: "You mole,
   come out, you must join in!" This
   understood, what he had to join. He had to stand
   up as a buck, that the others were able to
   jump over him, but he usually was overturned.
   I wonder how it felt. Could you have put
yourself in front of the sergeant, Dudley?"

"If you had been the sergeant, I could," was the prompt reply.

"But the sergeant hadn't been kind to him. Oh, Rob, Rob."

"Don't cry so, old chap, you'll make yourself ill. He's happy now.
Don't you think we'd better be going in?"

But Roy would not leave the beach till the tea bell sounded, and then he
crept in with such a white, weary face that kind Mrs. Hawthorn put him
straight to bed, and stayed with him listening to his trouble till tired
out and exhausted he fell asleep. When Dudley came to bed he found him
clutching the letters tight in one hand, and muttering in his sleep,
"God first, the Queen next, and then Master Roy!"

Once in the night he was roused by Roy's grasping hold of his
bedclothes.

"Dudley, are you asleep?"

"No," was the sleepy answer, "aren't you well?"

"Yes, but I can't sleep. Tell me, was it my fault? Did I send Rob to his
death? I wanted him to go. Did I make him go?"

"Of course you didn't," and Dudley now was wide-awake. "He wanted to go
first, and you didn't like it, don't you remember?"

"Yes, I think he liked going; but if he hadn't heard that song perhaps
he would never have gone, he would never have wanted to be a soldier."

"He did a lot of good out there. I don't think he will be sorry now."

Roy settled down to sleep again comforted; but for the next few days he
seemed quite unable to give his mind to his lessons, and after some
correspondence with Miss Bertram, it was arranged that he and Dudley
should go home from Saturday to Monday. It was a sad home-coming, and
when Roy saw Rob's Bible his grief burst out afresh. The pages showed
how much they had been studied, but no verse was more marked than the
one Roy had given him. "Endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ."

On Sunday evening the boys paid a visit to old Principle. They had been
talking about Rob, when Roy said wistfully,

"Rob used his opportunity when he got it, didn't he? I expect he didn't
know what a hero he was. I wonder if I shall ever get one come to me. I
should like to do something great for God, and great for my country. I
shall never give up wishing for a great opportunity to come to me!"

Then old Principle spoke, and his tone was very solemn:

"'Tis not I that will make you proud and uplifted, laddie, but you have
been given the grandest opportunity that ever a poor mortal could be
given, and you've taken it and made use of it, thank the Lord!"

Both boys gazed up at him with open eyes and mouths.

Dudley said after a minute's thought:

"We've both had some little opportunities, and Roy has had the biggest.
He saved me from drowning, and he went into the cave to fetch you!"

"Those weren't proper opportunities," muttered Roy in scorn, "they
aren't worth remembering; not after what Rob has done."

"Yes, the opportunity I'm talking of was a grander one than them, though
old Principle can't forget he owes his life perhaps to both of you boys'
thought of him. Only that they rushed him, only that they were
contemporaries, barely childhood had grown up without education,
without preparation, with one to be able to make men believe that the
third age would be worthy. §. 90.
"I mean this, laddie, you had an opportunity of leading an ignorant soul
to the feet of his Saviour; of enlisting a soldier not only in the
Queen's service but in the service of the King of Kings; of being the
means of filling an empty barren soul with a flood of light and
gladness; and of sending out a missionary in the midst of ungodliness
and vice, to turn many from the error of their ways. Is it not a greater
honor to help to save a soul from destruction, than bring glory to
yourself by some feat of physical strength or skill? (But this noisy
full essence violated both himself as well as Eugene. He believes, and
he travels with loving Ernst continued:) No, kidding aside, my dear
boy! in a happy marriage like ours is the return of the woman in
her house something very sacred.Old Principle's burst of eloquence almost startled the boys, and they
received it in silence; but later on, as they were walking home in the
cool of the evening Roy linked his arm in Dudley's and said softly--

"I see it all now. My broken leg and everything. It was when I was too
weak to go out with you, that Rob and I used to talk over these things."

And Dudley replied, with an emphatic nod, "Yes, though you didn't know
it, Rob was your big opportunity."


FINIS.