"Well, why don't you go ahead?" cried Kate in a thick, rasping
voice.  "Empty yourself!  Who is he?  Where did he come from?  WHY
was he IN our blackberry patch?  Has he really been to see you,
and is he courting you in earnest? -- But of COURSE he is!
There's the lilac bush, the lawn-mower, the house to be painted,
and a humdinger dress.  Is he a millionaire?  For Heaven's sake
tell me --"

"Give me some chance!  I did meet him in the blackberry patch.
He's a nephew of Henry Lang and his name is Robert Gray.  He has
just finished a medical course and he came here to rest and look
at Hartley for a location, because Lang thinks it would be such a
good one.  And since we met he has decided to take an office in
Hartley, and he has money to furnish it, and to buy and furnish a
nice house."

"Great Jehoshaphat!" cried Kate.  "And I bet he's got wings, too!
I do have the rottenest luck!"

"You act for all the world as if it were a foregone conclusion
that if you had been here, you'd have won him!"

Nancy Ellen glanced in the mirror and smiled, while Kate saw the
smile.  She picked up her comb and drew herself to full height.

"If anything ever was a 'foregone conclusion,'" she said, "it is a
'foregone conclusion' that if I HAD been here, I'd have picked the
blackberries, and so I'd have had the first chance at him, at
least."

"Much good it would have done you!" cried Nancy Ellen.  "Wait
until he comes, and you see him!"

"You may do your mushing in private," said Kate.  "I don't need a
demonstration to convince me.  He looks from the picture like a
man who would be as soft as a frosted pawpaw."

Nancy Ellen's face flamed crimson.  "You hateful spite-cat!" she
cried.

Then she picked up the picture and laid it face down in her
drawer, while two big tears ran down her cheeks.  Kate saw those
also.  Instantly she relented.

"You big silly goose!" she said.  "Can't you tell when any one is
teasing?  I think I never saw a finer face than the one in that
picture.  I'm jealous because I never left home a day before in
all my life, and the minute I do, here you go and have such luck.
Are you really sure of him, Nancy Ellen?"

"Well, he asked Father and Mother, and I've been to visit his
folks, and he told them; and I've been with him to Hartley hunting
a house; and I'm not to teach this winter, so I can have all my
time to make my clothes and bedding.  Father likes him fine, so he
is going to give me money to get all I need.  He offered to,
himself."

Kate finished her braid, pulled the combings from the comb and
slowly wrapped the end of her hair as she digested these
convincing facts.  She swung the heavy braid around her head,
placed a few pins, then crossed to her sister and laid a shaking
hand on her shoulder.  Her face was working strongly.

"Nancy Ellen, I didn't mean one ugly word I said.  You gave me an
awful surprise, and that was just my bald, ugly Bates way of
taking it.  I think you are one of the most beautiful women I ever
have seen, alive or pictured.  I have always thought you would
make a fine marriage, and I am sure you will.  I haven't a doubt
that Robert Gray is all you think him, and I am as glad for you as
I can be.  You can keep house in Hartley for two with scarcely any
work at all, and you can have all the pretty clothes you want, and
time to wear them.  Doctors always get rich if they are good ones,
and he is sure to be a good one, once he gets a start.  If only we
weren't so beastly healthy there are enough Bates and Langs to
support you for the first year.  And I'll help you sew, and do all
I can for you.  Now wipe up and look your handsomest!"

Nancy Ellen arose and put her arms around Kate's neck, a
stunningly unusual proceeding.  "Thank you," she said.  "That is
big and fine of you.  But I always have shirked and put my work on
you; I guess now I'll quit, and do my sewing myself."

Then she slipped the pink dress over her head and stood slowly
fastening it as Kate started to leave the room.  Seeing her go:
"I wish you would wait and meet Robert," she said. "I have told him
about what a nice sister I have."

"I think I'll go on to Adam's now," said Kate.  "I don't want to
wait until they go some place, and I miss them.  I'll do better to
meet your man after I become more accustomed to bare facts,
anyway.  By the way, is he as tall as you?"

"Yes," said Nancy Ellen, laughing.  "He is an inch and a half
taller.  Why?"

"Oh, I hate seeing a woman taller than her husband and I've always
wondered where we'd find men to reach our shoulders.  But if they
can be picked at random from the berry patch --"

So Kate went on her way laughing, lifting her white skirts high
from the late August dust.  She took a short cut through the woods
and at a small stream, with sure foot, crossed the log to within a
few steps of the opposite bank.  There she stopped, for a young
man rounded the bushes and set a foot on the same log; then he and
Kate looked straight into each other's eyes.  Kate saw a clean-
shaven, forceful young face, with strong lines and good colouring,
clear gray eyes, sandy brown hair, even, hard, white teeth, and
broad shoulders a little above her own.  The man saw Kate, dressed
in her best and looking her best.  Slowly she extended her hand.

"I bet a picayune you are my new brother, Robert," she said.

The young man gripped her hand firmly, held it, and kept on
looking in rather a stunned manner at Kate.

"Well, aren't you?" she asked, trying to withdraw the hand.

"I never, never would have believed it," he said.

"Believed what?" asked Kate, leaving the hand where it was.

"That there could be two in the same family," said he.

"But I'm as different from Nancy Ellen as night from day," said
Kate,  "besides, woe is me, I didn't wear a pink dress and pick
you from the berry patch in a blue bowl."

Then the man released her hand and laughed.  "You wouldn't have
had the slightest trouble, if you had been there," he said.

"Except that I should have inverted my bowl," said Kate, calmly.
"I am looking for a millionaire, riding a milk-white steed, and he
must be much taller than you and have black hair and eyes.  Good-
bye, brother!  I will see you this evening."

Then Kate went down the path to deliver the telescope, render her
thanks, make her promise of speedy payment, and for the first time
tell her good news about her school.  She found that she was very
happy as she went and quite convinced that her first flight would
prove entirely successful.


A QUESTION OF CONTRACTS

"HELLO, Folks!" cried Kate, waving her hand to the occupants of the
veranda as she went up the walk.  "Glad to find you at home."

"That is where you will always find me unless I am forced away on
business," said her brother as they shook hands.

Agatha was pleased with this, and stiff as steel, she bent the
length of her body toward Kate and gave her a tight-lipped little
peck on the cheek.

"I came over, as soon as I could," said Kate as she took the chair
her brother offered, "to thank you for the big thing you did for
me, Agatha, when you lent me that money.  If I had known where I
was going, or the help it would be to me, I should have gone if
I'd had to walk and work for my board.  Why, I feel so sure of
myself!  I've learned so much that I'm like the girl fresh from
boarding school:  'The only wonder is that one small head can
contain it all.'  Thank you over and over and I've got a good
school, so I can pay you back the very first month, I think.  If
there are things I must have, I can pay part the first month and
the remainder the second.  I am eager for pay-day.  I can't even
picture the bliss of having that much money in my fingers, all my
own, to do with as I please.  Won't it be grand?"

In the same breath said Agatha:  "Procure yourself some clothes!"
Said Adam:  "Start a bank account!"

Said Kate:  "Right you are!  I shall do both."

"Even our little Susan has a bank account," said Adam, Jr.,
proudly.

"Which is no reflection whatever on me," laughed Kate.  "Susan did
not have the same father and mother I had.  I'd like to see a girl
of my branch of the Bates family start a bank account at ten."

"No, I guess she wouldn't," admitted Adam, dryly.

"But have you heard that Nancy Ellen has started?" cried Kate.
"Only think!  A lawn-mower!  The house and barn to be painted!
All the dinge possible to remove scoured away, inside!  She must
have worn her fingers almost to the bone!  And really, Agatha,
have you seen the man?  He's as big as Adam, and just fine
looking.  I'm simply consumed with envy."

"Miss Medira, Dora, Ann, cast her net, and catched a man!" recited
Susan from the top step, at which they all laughed.

"No, I have not had the pleasure of casting my optics upon the
individual of Nancy Ellen's choice," said Agatha primly, "but Miss
Amelia Lang tells me he is a very distinguished person, of quite
superior education in a medical way.  I shall call him if I ever
have the misfortune to fall ill again.  I hope you will tell Nancy
Ellen that we shall be very pleased to have her bring him to see
us some evening, and if she will let me know a short time ahead I
shall take great pleasure in compounding a cake and freezing
custard."

"Of course I shall tell her, and she will feel a trifle more stuck
up than she does now, if that is possible," laughed Kate in deep
amusement.

She surely was feeling fine.  Everything had come out so
splendidly.  That was what came of having a little spirit and
standing up for your rights.  Also she was bubbling inside while
Agatha talked.  Kate wondered how Adam survived it every day.  She
glanced at him to see if she could detect any marks of shattered
nerves, then laughed outright.

Adam was the finest physical specimen of a man she knew.  He was
good looking also, and spoke as well as the average, better in
fact, for from the day of their marriage, Agatha sat on his lap
each night and said these words:  "My beloved, to-day I noted an
error in your speech.  It would put a former teacher to much
embarrassment to have this occur in public.  In the future will
you not try to remember that you should say, 'have gone,' instead
of 'have went?'"  As she talked Agatha rumpled Adam's hair, pulled
off his string tie, upon which she insisted, even when he was
plowing; laid her hard little face against his, and held him tight
with her frail arms, so that Adam being part human as well as part
Bates, held her closely also and said these words:  "You bet your
sweet life I will!"  And what is more he did.  He followed a
furrow the next day, softly muttering over to himself:  "Langs
have gone to town.  I have gone to work.  The birds have gone to
building nests."  So Adam seldom said:  "have went," or made any
other error in speech that Agatha had once corrected.

As Kate watched him leaning back in his chair, vital, a study in
well-being, the supremest kind of satisfaction on his face, she
noted the flash that lighted his eye when Agatha offered to
"freeze a custard."  How like Agatha! Any other woman Kate knew
would have said, "make ice cream."  Agatha explained to them that
when they beat up eggs, added milk, sugar, and corn-starch it was
custard.  When they used pure cream, sweetened and frozen, it was
iced cream.  Personally, she preferred the custard, but she did
not propose to call it custard cream.  It was not correct.  Why
persist in misstatements and inaccuracies when one knew better?
So Agatha said iced cream when she meant it, and frozen custard,
when custard it was, but every other woman in the neighbourhood,
had she acted as she felt, would have slapped Agatha's face when
she said it:  this both Adam and Kate well knew, so it made Kate
laugh despite the fact that she would not have offended Agatha
purposely.

"I think -- I think," said Agatha, "that Nancy Ellen has much upon
which to congratulate herself.  More education would not injure
her, but she has enough that if she will allow her ambition to
rule her and study in private and spend her spare time communing
with the best writers, she can make an exceedingly fair
intellectual showing, while she surely is a handsome woman.  With
a good home and such a fine young professional man as she has had
the good fortune to attract, she should immediately put herself at
the head of society in Hartley and become its leader to a much
higher moral and intellectual plane than it now occupies."

"Bet she has a good time," said young Adam.  "He's awful nice."

"Son," said Agatha, "'awful,' means full of awe.  A cyclone, a
cloudburst, a great conflagration are awful things.  By no stretch
of the imagination could they be called nice."

"But, Ma, if a cyclone blew away your worst enemy wouldn't it be
nice?"

Adam, Jr., and Kate laughed.  Not the trace of a smile crossed
Agatha's pale face.

"The words do not belong in contiguity," she said.  "They are
diametrically opposite in meaning.  Please do not allow my ears to
be offended by hearing you place them in propinquity again."

"I'll try not to, Ma," said young Adam; then Agatha smiled on him
approvingly.  "When did you meet Mr. Gray, Katherine?" she asked.

"On the foot-log crossing the creek beside Lang's line fence.
Near the spot Nancy Ellen first met him I imagine."

"How did you recognize him?"

"Nancy Ellen had just been showing me his picture and telling me
about him.  Great Day, but she's in love with him!"

"And so he is with her, if Lang's conclusions from his behaviour
can be depended upon.  They inform me that he can be induced to
converse on no other subject.  The whole arrangement appeals to me
as distinctly admirable."

"And you should see the lilac bush and the cabbage roses," said
Kate.  "And the strangest thing is Father.  He is peaceable as a
lamb.  She is not to teach, but to spend the winter sewing on her
clothes and bedding, and Father told her he would give her the
necessary money.  She said so.  And I suspect he will.  He always
favoured her because she was so pretty, and she can come closer to
wheedling him than any of the rest of us excepting you, Agatha."

"It is an innovation, surely!"

"Mother is nearly as bad.  Father furnishing money for clothes and
painting the barn is no more remarkable than Mother letting her
turn the house inside out.  If it had been I, Father would have
told me to teach my school this winter, buy my own clothes and
linen with the money I had earned, and do my sewing next summer.
But I am not jealous.  It is because she is handsome, and the man
fine-looking and with such good prospects."

"There you have it!" said Adam emphatically.  "If it were you,
marrying Jim Lang, to live on Lang's west forty, you WOULD pay
your own way.  But if it were you marrying a fine-looking young
doctor, who will soon be a power in Hartley, no doubt, it would
tickle Father's vanity until he would do the same for you."

"I doubt it!" said Kate.  "I can't see the vanity in Father."

"You can't?" said Adam, Jr., bitterly.  "Maybe not!  You have not
been with him in the Treasurer's office when he calls for 'the tax
on those little parcels of land of mine.'  He looks every inch of
six feet six then, and swells like a toad.  To hear him you would
think sixteen hundred and fifty acres of the cream of this county
could be tied in a bandanna and carried on a walking stick, he is
so casual about it.  And those men fly around like buttons on a
barn door to wait on him and it's 'Mister Bates this' and 'Mister
Bates that,' until it turns my stomach.  Vanity!  He rolls in it!
He eats it!  He risks losing our land for us that some of us have
slaved over for twenty years, to feed that especial vein of his
vanity.  Where should we be if he let anything happen to those
deeds?"

"How refreshing!" cried Kate.  "I love to hear you grouching!  I
hear nothing else from the women of the Bates family, but I didn't
even know the men had a grouch.  Are Peter, and John, and Hiram,
and the other boys sore, too?"

"I should say they are!  But they are too diplomatic to say so.
They are afraid to cheep.  I just open my head and say right out
loud in meeting that since I've turned in the taxes and insurance
for all these years and improved my land more than fifty per
cent., I'd like to own it, and pay my taxes myself, like a man."

"I'd like to have some land under any conditions," said Kate, "but
probably I never shall.  And I bet you never get a flipper on that
deed until Father has crossed over Jordan, which with his health
and strength won't be for twenty-five years yet at least.  He's
performing a miracle that will make the other girls rave, when he
gives Nancy Ellen money to buy her outfit; but they won't dare let
him hear a whisper of it.  They'll take it all out on Mother, and
she'll be afraid to tell him."

"Afraid?  Mother afraid of him?  Not on your life.  She is hand in
glove with him.  She thinks as he does, and helps him in
everything he undertakes."

"That's so, too.  Come to think of it, she isn't a particle afraid
of him.  She agrees with him perfectly.  It would be interesting
to hear them having a private conversation.  They never talk a
word before us.  But they always agree, and they heartily agree on
Nancy Ellen's man, that is plainly to be seen."

"It will make a very difficult winter for you, Katherine," said
Agatha.   "When Nancy Ellen becomes interested in dresses and
table linen and bedding she will want to sew all the time, and
leave the cooking and dishes for you as well as your schoolwork."

Kate turned toward Agatha in surprise.  "But I won't be there!  I
told you I had taken a school."

"You taken a school!" shouted Adam.  "Why, didn't they tell you
that Father has signed up for the home school for you?"

"Good Heavens!" said Kate.  "What will be to pay now?"

"Did you contract for another school?" cried Adam.

"I surely did," said Kate slowly.  "I signed an agreement to teach
the village school in Walden.  It's a brick building with a
janitor to sweep and watch fires, only a few blocks to walk, and
it pays twenty dollars a month more than the home school where you
can wade snow three miles, build your own fires, and freeze all
day in a little frame building at that.  I teach the school I have
taken."

"And throw our school out of a teacher?  Father could be sued, and
probably will be," said Adam.  "And throw the housework Nancy
Ellen expected you to do on her," said Agatha, at the same time.

"I see," said Kate.  "Well, if he is sued, he will have to settle.
He wouldn't help me a penny to go to school, I am of age, the debt
is my own, and I don't owe it to him.  He's had all my work has
been worth all my life, and I've surely paid my way.  I shall
teach the school I have signed for."

"You will get into a pretty kettle of fish!" said Adam.

"Agatha, will you sell me your telescope for what you paid for it,
and get yourself a new one the next time you go to Hartley?  It is
only a few days until time to go to my school, it opens sooner
than in the country, and closes later.  The term is four months
longer, so I earn that much more.  I haven't gotten a telescope
yet.  You can add it to my first payment."

"You may take it," said Agatha, "but hadn't you better reconsider,
Katherine?  Things are progressing so nicely, and this will upset
everything for Nancy Ellen."

"That taking the home school will upset everything for me, doesn't
seem to count.  It is late, late to find teachers, and I can be
held responsible if I break the contract I have made.  Father can
stand the racket better than I can.  When he wouldn't consent to
my going, he had no business to make plans for me.  I had to make
my own plans and go in spite of him; he might have known I'd do
all in my power to get a school.  Besides, I don't want the home
school, or the home work piled on me.  My hands look like a human
being's for the first time in my life; then I need all my time
outside of school to study and map out lessons.  I am going to try
for a room in the Hartley schools next year, or the next after
that, surely.  They sha'n't change my plans and boss me, I am
going to be free to work, and study, and help myself, like other
teachers."

"A grand row this will be," commented young Adam.  "And as usual
Kate will be right, while all of them will be trying to use her to
their advantage.  Ma has done her share.  Now it is your turn, Pa.
Ain't you going to go over and help her?"

"What could I do?" demanded his father.  "The mischief is done
now."

"Well, if you can't do anything to help, you can let me have the
buggy to drive her to Walden, if they turn her out."

"'Forcibly invite her to proceed to her destination,' you mean,
son," said Agatha.

"Yes, Ma, that is exactly what I mean," said young Adam.  "Do I
get the buggy?"

"Yes, you may take my private conveyance.  But do nothing to
publish the fact.  There is no need to incur antagonism if it can
be avoided."

"Kate, I'll be driving past the privet bush about nine in the
morning.  If you need me, hang a white rag on it, and I'll stop at
the corner of the orchard."

"I shall probably be standing in the road waiting for you," said
Kate.

"Oh, I hope not," said Agatha.

"Looks remarkably like it to me," said Kate.

Then she picked up the telescope, said good-bye to each of them,
and in acute misery started back to her home.  This time she
followed the footpath beside the highway.  She was so busy with
her indignant thought that she forgot to protect her skirts from
the dust of wayside weeds, while in her excitement she walked so
fast her face was red and perspiring when she approached the
church.

"Oh, dear, I don't know about it," said Kate to the small, silent
building.  "I am trying to follow your advice, but it seems to me
that life is very difficult, any way you go at it.  If it isn't
one thing, it is another.  An hour ago I was the happiest I have
ever been in my life; only look at me now!  Any one who wants 'the
wings of morning' may have them for all of me.  It seems
definitely settled that I walk, carry a load, and fight for the
chance to do even that."

A big tear rolled down either side of Kate's nose and her face
twisted in self-pity for an instant.  But when she came in sight
of home her shoulders squared, the blue-gray of her eyes deepened
to steel, and her lips set in a line that was an exact counterpart
of her father's when he had made up his mind and was ready to
drive his family, with their consent or without it.  As she passed
the vegetable garden -- there was no time or room for flowers in a
Bates garden -- Kate, looking ahead, could see Nancy Ellen and
Robert Gray beneath the cherry trees.  She hoped Nancy Ellen would
see that she was tired and dusty, and should have time to brush
and make herself more presentable to meet a stranger, and so Nancy
Ellen did; for which reason she immediately arose and came to the
gate, followed by her suitor whom she at once introduced.  Kate
was in no mood for words; one glance at her proved to Robert Gray
that she was tired and dusty, that there were tear marks dried on
her face.  They hastily shook hands, but neither mentioned the
previous meeting.  Excusing herself Kate went into the house
saying she would soon return.

Nancy Ellen glanced at Robert, and saw the look of concern on his
face.

"I believe she has been crying," she said.  "And if she has, it's
something new, for I never saw a tear on her face before in my
life."

"Truly?" he questioned in amazement.

"Why, of course!  The Bates family are not weepers."

"So I have heard," said the man, rather dryly.

Nancy Ellen resented his tone.

"Would you like us better if we were?"

"I couldn't like you better than I do, but because of what I have
heard and seen, it naturally makes me wonder what could have
happened that has made her cry."

"We are rather outspoken, and not at all secretive," said Nancy
Ellen, carelessly, "you will soon know."

Kate followed the walk around the house and entered at the side
door, finding her father and mother in the dining room reading the
weekly papers.  Her mother glanced up as she entered.

"What did you bring Agatha's telescope back with you for?" she
instantly demanded.

For a second Kate hesitated.  It had to come, she might as well
get it over.  Possibly it would be easier with them alone than if
Nancy Ellen were present.

"It is mine," she said.  "It represents my first purchase on my
own hook and line."

"You are not very choicy to begin on second-hand stuff.  Nancy
Ellen would have had a new one."

"No doubt!" said Kate.  "But this will do for me."

Her father lowered his paper and asked harshly:  "What did you buy
that thing for?"

Kate gripped the handle and braced herself.

"To pack my clothes in when I go to my school next week," she said
simply.

"What?" he shouted.  "What?" cried her mother.

"I don't know why you seem surprised," said Kate.  "Surely you
knew I went to Normal to prepare myself to teach.  Did you think I
couldn't find a school?"

"Now look here, young woman," shouted Adam Bates, "you are done
taking the bit in your teeth.  Nancy Ellen is not going to teach
this winter.  I have taken the home school for you; you will teach
it.  That is settled.  I have signed the contract.  It must be
fulfilled."

"Then Nancy Ellen will have to fulfill it," said Kate.  "I also
have signed a contract that must be fulfilled.  I am of age, and
you had no authority from me to sign a contract for me."

For an instant Kate thought there was danger that the purple rush
of blood to her father's head might kill him.  He opened his
mouth, but no distinct words came.  Her face paled with fright,
but she was of his blood, so she faced him quietly.  Her mother
was quicker of wit, and sharper of tongue.

"Where did you get a school?  Why didn't you wait until you got
home?" she demanded.

"I am going to teach the village school in Walden," said Kate.
"It is a brick building, has a janitor, I can board reasonably,
near my work, and I get twenty dollars more a month than our
school pays, while the term is four months longer."

"Well, it is a pity about that; but it makes no difference," said
her mother.  "Our home school has got to be taught as Pa
contracted, and Nancy Ellen has got to have her chance."

"What about my chance?" asked Kate evenly.  "Not one of the girls,
even Exceptional Ability, ever had as good a school or as high
wages to start on.  If I do well there this winter, I am sure I
can get in the Hartley graded schools next fall."

"Don't you dare nickname your sister," cried Mrs. Bates, shrilly.
"You stop your impudence and mind your father."

"Ma, you leave this to me," said Adam Bates, thickly.  Then he
glared at Kate as he arose, stretching himself to full height.
"You've signed a contract for a school?" he demanded.

"I have," said Kate.

"Why didn't you wait until you got home and talked it over with
us?" he questioned.

"I went to you to talk over the subject to going," said Kate.
"You would not even allow me to speak.  How was I to know that you
would have the slightest interest in what school I took, or
where."

"When did you sign this contract?" he continued.

"Yesterday afternoon, in Hartley," said Kate.

"Aha!  Then I did miss a letter from my pocket.  When did you get
to be a thief?" he demanded.

"Oh, Father!" cried Kate.  "It was my letter.  I could see my name
on the envelope.  I ASKED you for it, before I took it."

"From behind my back, like the sneak-thief you are.  You are not
fit to teach in a school where half the scholars are the children
of your brothers and sisters, and you are not fit to live with
honest people.  Pack your things and be off!"

"Now?  This afternoon?" asked Kate.

"This minute!" he cried.

"All right.  You will be surprised at how quickly I can go," said
Kate.

She set down the telescope and gathered a straw sunshade and an
apron from the hooks at the end of the room, opened the dish
cupboard, and took out a mug decorated with the pinkest of wild
roses and the reddest and fattest of robins, bearing the
inscription in gold, "For a Good Girl" on a banner in its beak.
Kate smiled at it grimly as she took the telescope and ran
upstairs.  It was the work of only a few minutes to gather her
books and clothing and pack the big telescope, then she went down
the front stairs and left the house by the front door carrying in
her hand everything she possessed on earth.  As she went down the
walk Nancy Ellen sprang up and ran to her while Robert Gray
followed.

"You'll have to talk to me on the road," said Kate.  "I am
forbidden the house which also means the grounds, I suppose."

She walked across the road, set the telescope on the grass under a
big elm tree, and sat down beside it.

"I find I am rather tired," she said.  "Will you share the sofa
with me?"

Nancy Ellen lifted her pink skirt and sat beside Kate.  Robert
Gray stood looking down at them.

"What in the world is the matter?" asked Nancy Ellen.

"You know, of course, that Father signed a contract for me to
teach the home school this winter," explained Kate.  "Well, I am
of age, and he had no authority from me, so his contract isn't
legal.  None of you would lift a finger to help me get away to
Normal, how was I to know that you would take any interest in
finding me a school while I was gone?  I thought it was all up to
me, so I applied for the school in Walden, got it, and signed the
contract to teach it.  It is a better school, at higher wages.  I
thought you would teach here -- I can't break my contract.  Father
is furious and has ordered me out of the house.  So there you are,
or rather here I am."

"Well, it isn't much of a joke," said Nancy Ellen, thinking
intently.

What she might have said had they been alone, Kate always
wondered.  What she did say while her betrothed looked at her with
indignant eyes was possibly another matter.  It proved to be
merely:  "Oh, Kate, I am so sorry!"

"So am I," said Kate.  "If I had known what your plans were, of
course I should gladly have helped you out.  If only you had
written me and told me."

"I wanted to surprise you," said Nancy Ellen.

"You have," said Kate.  "Enough to last a lifetime.  I don't see
how you figured.  You knew how late it was.  You knew it would be
nip and tuck if I got a school at all."

"Of course we did!  We thought you couldn't possibly get one, this
late, so we fixed up the scheme to let you have my school, and let
me sew on my linen this winter.  We thought you would be as
pleased as we were."

"I am too sorry for words," said Kate.  "If I had known your plan,
I would have followed it, even though I gave up a better school at
a higher salary.  But I didn't know.  I thought I had to paddle my
own canoe, so I made my own plans.  Now I must live up to them,
because my contract is legal, while Father's is not.  I would have
taught the school for you, in the circumstances, but since I
can't, so far as I am concerned, the arrangement I have made is
much better.  The thing that really hurts the worst, aside from
disappointing you, is that Father says I was not honest in what I
did."

"But what DID you do?" cried Nancy Ellen.

So Kate told them exactly what she had done.

"Of course you had a right to your own letter, when you could see
the address on it, and it was where you could pick it up," said
Robert Gray.

Kate lifted dull eyes to his face.

"Thank you for so much grace, at any rate," she said.

"I don't blame you a bit," said Nancy Ellen.  "In the same place
I'd have taken it myself."

"You wouldn't have had to," said Kate.  "I'm too abrupt -- too
much like the gentleman himself.  You would have asked him in a
way that would have secured you the letter with no trouble."

Nancy Ellen highly appreciated these words of praise before her
lover.  She arose immediately.

"Maybe I could do something with him now," she said.  "I'll go and
see."

"You shall do nothing of the kind," said Kate.  "I am as much
Bates as he is.  I won't be taunted afterward that he turned me
out and that I sent you to him to plead for me."

"I'll tell him you didn't want me to come, that I came of my own
accord," offered Nancy Ellen.

"And he won't believe you," said Kate.

"Would you consent for me to go?" asked Robert Gray.

"Certainly not!  I can look out for myself."

"What shall you do?" asked Nancy Ellen anxiously.

"That is getting slightly ahead of me," said Kate.  "If I had been
diplomatic I could have evaded this until morning.  Adam, 3d, is
to be over then, prepared to take me anywhere I want to go.  What
I have to face now is a way to spend the night without letting the
neighbours know that I am turned out.  How can I manage that?"

Nancy Ellen and Robert each began making suggestions, but Kate
preferred to solve her own problems.

"I think," she said, "that I shall hide the telescope under the
privet bush, there isn't going to be rain to-night; and then I
will go down to Hiram's and stay all night and watch for Adam when
he passes in the morning.  Hiram always grumbles because we don't
come oftener."

"Then we will go with you," said Nancy Ellen.  "It will be a
pleasant evening walk, and we can keep you company and pacify my
twin brother at the same time."

So they all walked to the adjoining farm on the south and when
Nancy Ellen and Robert were ready to start back, Kate said she was
tired and she believed she would stay until morning, which was
agreeable to Hiram and his wife, a girlhood friend of Kate's.  As
Nancy Ellen and Robert walked back toward home:  "How is this
going to come out?" he asked, anxiously.

"It will come out all right," said Nancy Ellen, serenely.  "Kate
hasn't a particle of tact.  She is Father himself, all over again.
It will come out this way:  he will tell me that Kate has gone
back on him and I shall have to teach the school, and I will say
that is the ONLY solution and the BEST thing to do.  Then I shall
talk all evening about how provoking it is, and how I hate to
change my plans, and say I am afraid I shall lose you if I have to
put off our wedding to teach the school, and things like that,"
Nancy Ellen turned a flushed sparkling face to Robert, smiling
quizzically, "and to-morrow I shall go early to see Serena
Woodruff, who is a fine scholar and a good teacher, but missed her
school in the spring by being so sick she was afraid to contract
for it.  She is all right now, and she will be delighted to have
the school, and when I know she will take it then I shall just
happen to think of her in a day or two and I'll suggest her, after
I've wailed a lot more; and Father will go to see her of his own
accord, and it will all be settled as easy as falling off a chunk,
only I shall not get on so fast with my sewing, because of having
to help Mother; but I shall do my best, and everything will be all
right."

The spot was secluded.  Robert Gray stopped to tell Nancy Ellen
what a wonderful girl she was.  He said he was rather afraid of
such diplomacy.  He foresaw clearly that he was going to be a
managed man.  Nancy Ellen told him of course he was, all men were,
the thing was not to let them know it.  Then they laughed and
listened to a wood robin singing out his little heart in an
evening song that was almost as melodious as his spring
performances had been.


THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER

EARLY in the morning Kate set her young nephew on the gate-post to
watch for his cousin, and he was to have a penny for calling at
his approach.  When his lusty shout came, Kate said good-bye to
her sister-in-law, paid the penny, kissed the baby, and was
standing in the road when Adam stopped.  He looked at her
inquiringly.

"Well, it happened," she said.  "He turned me out instanter, with
no remarks about when I might return, if ever, while Mother
cordially seconded the motion.  It's a good thing, Adam, that you
offered to take care of me, because I see clearly that you are
going to have it to do."

"Of course I will," said Adam promptly.  "And of course I can.  Do
you want to go to Hartley for anything?  Because if you don't, we
can cut across from the next road and get to Walden in about
fifteen miles, while it's seventeen by Hartley; but if you want to
go we can, for I needn't hurry.  I've got a box of lunch and a
feed for my horse in the back of the buggy.  Mother said I was to
stay with you until I saw you settled in your room, if you had to
go; and if you do, she is angry with Grandpa, and she is going to
give him a portion of her mentality the very first time she comes
in contact with him.  She said so."

"Yes, I can almost hear her," said Kate, struggling to choke down
a rising laugh. "She will never know how I appreciate what she has
done for me, but I think talking to Father will not do any good.
Home hasn't been so overly pleasant.  It's been a small, dark,
cramped house, dingy and hot, when it might have been big, airy,
and comfortable, well furnished and pretty as Father's means would
allow, and as all the neighbours always criticize him for not
having it; it's meant hard work and plenty of it ever since I was
set to scouring the tinware with rushes at the mature age of four,
but it's been home, all the home I have had, and it hurts more
than I can tell you to be ordered out of it as I was, but if I do
well and make a big success, maybe he will let me come back for
Christmas, or next summer's vacation."

"If he won't, Ma said you could come to our house," said Adam.

"That's kind of her, but I couldn't do it," said Kate.

"She SAID you could," persisted the boy.

"But if I did it, and Father got as mad as he was last night and
tore up your father's deed, then where would I be?" asked Kate.

"You'd be a sixteenth of two hundred acres better off than you are
now," said Adam.

"Possibly," laughed Kate, "but I wouldn't want to become a land
shark that way.  Look down the road."

"Who is it?" asked Adam.

"Nancy Ellen, with my telescope," answered Kate.  "I am to go, all
right."

"All right, then we will go," said the boy, angrily.  "But it is a
blame shame and there is no sense to it, as good a girl as you
have been, and the way you have worked.  Mother said at breakfast
there was neither sense nor justice in the way Grandpa always has
acted and she said she would wager all she was worth that he would
live to regret it.  She said it wasn't natural, and when people
undertook to controvert -- ain't that a peach?  Bet there isn't a
woman in ten miles using that word except Ma -- nature they always
hurt themselves worse than they hurt their victims.  And I bet he
does, too, and I, for one, don't care.  I hope he does get a good
jolt, just to pay him up for being so mean."

"Don't, Adam, don't!" cautioned Kate.

"I mean it!" cried the boy.

"I know you do.  That's the awful thing about it," said Kate.  "I
am afraid every girl he has feels the same way, and from what your
father said yesterday, even the sons he favours don't feel any too
good toward him."

"You just bet they don't!  They are every one as sore as boiled
owls.  Pa said so, and he knows, for they all talk it over every
time they meet.  He said they didn't feel like men, they felt like
a lot of 'spanked school-boys.'"

"They needn't worry," said Kate.  "Every deed is made out.  Father
reads them over whenever it rains.  They'll all get their land
when he dies.  It is only his way."

"Yes, and THIS is only his way, too, and it's a dern poor way,"
said Adam.  "Pa isn't going to do this way at all.  Mother said he
could go and live on his land, and she'd stay home with Susan and
me, if he tried it.  And when I am a man I am going to do just
like Pa and Ma because they are the rightest people I know, only I
am not going to save QUITE so close as Pa, and if I died for it, I
never could converse or dance like Ma."

"I should hope not!" said Kate, and then added hastily, "it's all
right for a lady, but it would seem rather sissy for a man, I
believe."

"Yes, I guess it would, but it is language let me tell you, when
Ma cuts loose," said Adam.

"Hello, Nancy Ellen," said Kate as Adam stopped the buggy.  "Put
my telescope in the back with the horse feed.  Since you have it,
I don't need ask whether I am the Prodigal Daughter or not.  I see
clearly I am."

Nancy Ellen was worried, until she was pale.

"Kate," she said, "I never have seen Father so angry in all my
life.  I thought last night that in a day or two I could switch
the school over to Serena Woodruff, and go on with my plans, but
Father said at breakfast if the Bates name was to stand for
anything approaching honour, a Bates would teach that school this
winter or he'd know the reason why.  And you know how easy it is
to change him.  Oh, Kate, won't you see if that Walden trustee
can't possibly find another teacher, and let you off?  I know
Robert will be disappointed, for he's rented his office and bought
a house and he said last night to get ready as soon after
Christmas as I could.  Oh, Kate, won't you see if you can't
possibly get that man to hire another teacher?"

"Why, Nancy Ellen --" said Kate.

Nancy Ellen, with a twitching face, looked at Kate.

"If Robert has to wait months, there in Hartley, handsome as he
is, and he has to be nice to everybody to get practice, and you
know how those Hartley girls are --"

"Yes, Nancy Ellen, I know," said Kate.  "I'll see what I can do.
Is it understood that if I give up the school and come back and
take ours, Father will let me come home?"

"Yes, oh, yes!" cried Nancy Ellen.

"Well, nothing goes on guess-work.  I'll hear him say it, myself,"
said Kate.

She climbed from the buggy.  Nancy Ellen caught her arm.

"Don't go in there!  Don't you go there," she cried.  "He'll throw
the first thing he can pick up at you.  Mother says he hasn't been
asleep all night."

"Pooh!" said Kate.  "How childish!  I want to hear him say that,
and he'll scarcely kill me."

She walked swiftly to the side door.

"Father," she said, "Nancy Ellen is afraid she will lose Robert
Gray if she has to put off her marriage for months --"

Kate stepped back quickly as a chair crashed against the door
facing.  She again came into view and continued -- "so she asked
me if I would get out of my school and come back if I could" --
Kate dodged another chair; when she appeared again -- "To save the
furniture, of which we have none too much, I'll just step inside,"
she said.  When her father started toward her, she started around
the dining table, talking as fast as she could, he lunging after
her like a furious bull.  "She asked me to come back and teach the
school -- to keep her from putting off her wedding -- because she
is afraid to --  If I can break my contract there -- may I come
back and help her out here?"

The pace was going more swiftly each round, it was punctuated at
that instant by a heavy meat platter aimed at Kate's head.  She
saw it picked up and swayed so it missed.

"I guess that is answer enough for me," she panted, racing on.  "A
lovely father you are -- no wonder your daughters are dishonest
through fear of you -- no wonder your wife has no mind of her own
-- no wonder your sons hate you and wish you would die -- so they
could have their deeds and be like men -- instead of 'spanked
school-boys' as they feel now -- no wonder the whole posse of us
hate you."

Directly opposite the door Kate caught the table and drew it with
her to bar the opening.  As it crashed against the casing half the
dishes flew to the floor in a heap.  When Adam Bates pulled it
from his path he stepped in a dish of fried potatoes and fell
heavily.  Kate reached the road, climbed in the buggy, and said
the Nancy Ellen:  "You'd better hide!  Cut a bundle of stuff and
send it to me by Adam and I'll sew my fingers to the bone for you
every night.  Now drive like sin, Adam!"

As Adam Bates came lurching down the walk in fury the buggy dashed
past and Kate had not even time to turn her head to see what
happened.

"Take the first turn," she said to Adam.  "I've done an awful
thing."

"What did you do?" cried the boy.

"Asked him as nicely as I could; but he threw a chair at me.
Something funny happened to me, and I wasn't afraid of him at all.
I dodged it, and finished what I was saying, and another chair
came, so the two Bates went at it."

"Oh, Kate, what did you do?" cried Adam.

"Went inside and ran around the dining table while I told him what
all his sons and daughters think of him. 'Spanked school-boys' and
all --"

"Did you tell him my father said that?" he demanded.

"No.  I had more sense left than that," said Kate.  "I only said
all his boys FELT like that.  Then I pulled the table after me to
block the door, and smashed half the dishes and he slipped in the
fried potatoes and went down with a crash --"

"Bloody Murder!" cried young Adam, aghast.

"Me, too!" said Kate.  "I'll never step in that house again while
he lives.  I've spilled the beans, now."

"That you have," said Adam, slacking his horse to glance back.
"He is standing in the middle of the road shaking his fist after
you."

"Can you see Nancy Ellen?" asked Kate.

"No.  She must have climbed the garden fence and hidden behind the
privet bush."

"Well, she better make it a good long hide, until he has had
plenty of time to cool off.  He'd have killed me if he had caught
me, after he fell -- and wasted all those potatoes already cooked
----"

Kate laughed a dry hysterical laugh, but the boy sat white-faced
and awed.

"Never mind," said Kate, seeing how frightened he was.  "When he
has had plenty of time he'll cool off; but he'll never get over
it.  I hope he doesn't beat Mother, because I was born."

"Oh, drat such a man!" said young Adam.  "I hope something worse
that this happens to him.  If ever I see Father begin to be the
least bit like him as he grows older I shall ----"

"Well, what shall you do?" asked Kate, as he paused.

"Tell Ma!" cried young Adam, emphatically.

Kate leaned her face in her hands and laughed.  When she could
speak she said:  "Do you know, Adam, I think that would be the
very best thing you could do."

"Why, of course!" said Adam.

They drove swiftly and reached Walden before ten o'clock.  There
they inquired their way to the home of the Trustee, but Kate said
nothing about giving up the school.  She merely made a few
inquiries, asked for the key of the schoolhouse, and about
boarding places.  She was directed to four among which she might
choose.

"Where would you advise me to go?" she asked the Trustee.

"Well, now, folks differ," said he.  "All those folks is
neighbours of mine and some might like one, and some might like
another, best.  I COULD say this:  I think Means would be the
cheapest, Knowls the dearest, but the last teacher was a good one,
an' she seemed well satisfied with the Widder Holt."

"I see," said Kate, smiling.

Then she and young Adam investigated the schoolhouse and found it
far better than any either of them had ever been inside.  It
promised every comfort and convenience, compared with schools to
which they had been accustomed, so they returned the keys,
inquired about the cleaning of the building, and started out to
find a boarding place.  First they went to the cheapest, but it
could be seen at a glance that it was too cheap, so they
eliminated that.  Then they went to the most expensive, but it was
obvious from the house and grounds that board there would be more
than Kate would want to pay.

"I'd like to save my digestion, and have a place in which to
study, where I won't freeze," said Kate, "but I want to board as
cheaply as I can.  This morning changes my plans materially.  I
shall want to go to school next summer part of the time, but the
part I do not, I shall have to pay my way, so I mustn't spend
money as I thought I would.  Not one of you will dare be caught
doing a thing for me.  To make you safe I'll stay away, but it
will cost me money that I'd hoped to have for clothes like other
girls."

"It's too bad," said Adam, "but I'll stick to you, and so will
Ma."

"Of course you will, you dear boy," said Kate.  "Now let's try our
third place; it is not far from here."

Soon they found the house, but Kate stopped short on sight of it.

"Adam, there has been little in life to make me particular," she
said, "but I draw the line at that house.  I would go crazy in a
house painted bright red with brown and blue decoration.  It
should be prohibited by law.  Let us hunt up the Widder Holt and
see how her taste in colour runs."

"The joke is on you," said Adam, when they had found the house.

It was near the school, on a wide shady street across which big
maples locked branches.  There was a large lot filled with old
fruit trees and long grass, with a garden at the back.  The house
was old and low, having a small porch in front, but if it ever had
seen paint, it did not show it at that time.  It was a warm linty
gray, the shingles of the old roof almost moss-covered.

"The joke IS on me," said Kate.  "I shall have no quarrel with the
paint here, and will you look at that?"

Adam looked where Kate pointed across the street, and nodded.

"That ought to be put in a gold frame," he said.

"I think so, too," said Kate.  "I shouldn't be a bit surprised if
I stay where I can see it."

They were talking of a deep gully facing the house and running to
a levee where the street crossed.  A stream ran down it, dipped
under a culvert, turned sharply, and ran away to a distant river,
spanning which they could see the bridge.  Tall old forest trees
lined the banks, shrubs and bushes grew in a thicket.  There were
swaying, clambering vines and a babel of bird notes over the seed
and berry bearing bushes.

"Let's go inside, and if we agree, then we will get some water and
feed the horse and eat our lunch over there," said Kate.

"Just the thing!" said young Adam.  "Come and we will proceed to
the residence of Mrs. Holt and investigate her possibilities.  How
do you like that?"

"That is fine," said Kate gravely.

"It is," said Adam, promptly, "because it is Ma. And whatever is
Ma, is right."

"Good for you!" cried Kate.  "I am going to break a Bates record
and kiss you good-bye, when you go.  I probably shan't have
another in years.  Come on."

They walked up the grassy wooden walk, stepped on the tiny, vine-
covered porch, and lifted and dropped a rusty old iron knocker.
Almost at once the door opened, to reveal a woman of respectable
appearance, a trifle past middle age.  She made Kate think of
dried sage because she had a dried-out look and her complexion,
hair, and eyes were all that colour.  She was neat and clean while
the hall into which she invited them was clean and had a wholesome
odour.  Kate explained her errand.  Mrs. Holt breathed a sigh of
relief.

"Well, thank goodness I was before-handed," she said.  "The
teacher stayed here last year and she was satisfied, so I ast the
Trustee to mention me to the new teacher.  Nobody was expecting
you until the last of the week, but I says to myself, 'always take
time by the fetlock, Samantha, always be ready'; so last week I
put in scouring my spare room to beat the nation, and it's all
ready so's you can walk right in."

"Thank you," said Kate, rather resenting the assumption that she
was to have no option in the matter.  "I have four places on my
list where they want the teacher, so I thought I would look at
each of them and then decide."

"My, ain't we choicey!" said Mrs. Holt in sneering tones.  Then
she changed instantly, and in suave commendation went on:  "That's
exactly right.  That's the very thing fer you to do.  After you
have seen what Walden has to offer, then a pretty young thing like
you can make up your mind where you will have the most quiet fer
your work, the best room, and be best fed.  One of the greatest
advantages here fer a teacher is that she can be quiet, an' not
have her room rummaged.  Every place else that takes boarders
there's a lot of children; here there is only me and my son, and
he is grown, and will be off to his medical work next week fer the
year, so all your working time here, you'd be alone with me.  This
is the room."

"That surely would be a great advantage, because I have much
studying to do," said Kate as they entered the room.

With one glance, she liked it.  It was a large room with low
ceiling, quaintly papered in very old creamy paper, scattered with
delicately cut green leaves, but so carefully had the room been
kept, that it was still clean.  There were four large windows to
let in light and air, freshly washed white curtains hanging over
the deep green shades.  The floor was carpeted with a freshly
washed rag carpet stretched over straw, the bed was invitingly
clean and looked comfortable, there was a wash stand with bowl and
pitcher, soap and towels, a small table with a lamp, a straight-
backed chair and a rocking chair.  Mrs. Holt opened a large closet
having hooks for dresses at one end and shelves at the other.  On
the top of these there were a comfort and a pair of heavy
blankets.

"Your winter covers," said Mrs. Holt, indicating these, "and there
is a good stove I take out in summer to make more room, and set up
as soon as it gets cold, and that is a wood box."

She pointed out a shoe box covered with paper similar to that on
the walls.

Kate examined the room carefully, the bed, the closet, and tried
the chairs.  Behind the girl, Mrs. Holt, with compressed lips,
forgetting Adam's presence, watched in evident disapproval.

"I want to see the stove," said Kate.

"It is out in the woodhouse.  It hasn't been cleaned up for the
winter yet."

"Then it won't be far away.  Let's look at it."

Almost wholly lacking experience, Kate was proceeding by instinct
in exactly the same way her father would have taken through
experience.  Mrs. Holt hesitated, then turned:  "Oh, very well,"
she said, leading the way down the hall, through the dining room,
which was older in furnishing and much more worn, but still clean
and wholesome, as were the small kitchen and back porch.  From it
there was only a step to the woodhouse, where on a little platform
across one end sat two small stoves for burning wood, one so small
as to be tiny.  Kate walked to the larger, lifted the top, looked
inside, tried the dampers and drafts and turning said:  "That is
very small. It will require more wood than a larger one."

Mrs. Holt indicated dry wood corded to the roof.

"We git all our wood from the thicket across the way.  That little
strip an' this lot is all we have left of father's farm.  We kept
this to live on, and sold the rest for town lots, all except that
gully, which we couldn't give away.  But I must say I like the
trees and birds better than mebby I'd like people who might live
there; we always git our wood from it, and the shade an' running
water make it the coolest place in town."

"Yes, I suppose they do," said Kate.

She took one long look at everything as they returned to the hall.

"The Trustee told me your terms are four dollars and fifty cents a
week, furnishing food and wood," she said, "and that you allowed
the last teacher to do her own washing on Saturday, for nothing.
Is that right?"

The thin lips drew more tightly.  Mrs. Holt looked at Kate from
head to foot in close scrutiny.

"I couldn't make enough to pay the extra work at that," she said.
"I ought to have a dollar more, to really come out even.  I'll
have to say five-fifty this fall."

"If that is the case, good-bye," said Kate.  "Thank you very much
for showing me.  Five-fifty is what I paid at Normal, it is more
than I can afford in a village like this."

She turned away, followed by Adam.  They crossed the street,
watered the horse at the stream, placed his food conveniently for
him, and taking their lunch box, seated themselves on a grassy
place on the bank and began eating.

"Wasn't that a pretty nice room?" asked Adam.  "Didn't you kind of
hate to give it up?"

"I haven't the slightest intention of giving it up," answered
Kate.  "That woman is a skin-flint and I don't propose to let her
beat me.  No doubt she was glad to get four-fifty last fall.
She's only trying to see if she can wring me for a dollar more.
If I have to board all next summer, I shall have to watch every
penny, or I'll not come out even, let alone saving anything.  I'll
wager you a nickel that before we leave, she comes over here and
offers me the room at the same price she got last winter."

"I hope you are right," said Adam.  "How do you like her?"

"Got a grouch, nasty temper, mean disposition; clean house, good
room, good cook -- maybe; lives just on the edge of comfort by
daily skimping," summarized Kate.

"If she comes, are you going to try it?" asked Adam.

"Yes, I think I shall.  It is nearest my purse and requirements
and if the former teacher stayed there, it will seem all right for
me; but she isn't going to put that little stove in my room.  It
wouldn't heat the closet.  How did you like her?"

"Not much!" said Adam, promptly.  "If glaring at your back could
have killed you, you would have fallen dead when you examined the
closet, and bedding, and stove.  She honeyed up when she had to,
but she was mad as hops.  I nearly bursted right out when she
talked about 'taking time by the fetlock.'  I wanted to tell her
she looked like she had, and almost got the life kicked out of her
doing it, but I thought I'd better not."

Kate laughed.  "Yes, I noticed," she said, "but I dared not look
at you.  I was afraid you'd laugh. Isn't this a fine lunch?"

"Bet your life it is," said Adam.  "Ma never puts up any other
kind."

"I wish someone admired me as much as you do your mother, Adam,"
said Kate.

"Well, you be as nice as Ma, and somebody is sure to," said he.

"But I never could," said Kate.

"Oh, yes, you could," said Adam, "if you would only set yourself
to do it and try with all your might to be like her.  Look, quick!
That must be her 'Medical Course' man!"

Kate glanced across the way and saw a man she thought to be about
thirty years of age.  He did not resemble his mother in any
particular, if he was the son of Mrs. Holt.  He was above the
average man in height, having broad, rather stooping shoulders,
dark hair and eyes.  He stopped at the gate and stood a few
seconds looking at them, so they could not very well study him
closely, then he went up the walk with loose, easy stride and
entered the house.

"Yes, that is her son," said Kate.  "That is exactly the way a man
enters a house that belongs to him."

"That isn't the way I am going to enter my house," said Adam.
"Now what shall we do?"

"Rest half an hour while they talk it over, and then get ready to
go very deliberately.  If she doesn't come across, literally and
figuratively, we hunt another boarding place."

"I half believe she will come," said Adam.  "She is watching us; I
can see her pull back the blind of her room to peep."

"Keep looking ahead.  Don't let her think you see her.  Let's go
up the creek and investigate this ravine.  Isn't it a lovely
place?"

"Yes.  I'm glad you got it," said Adam, "that is, if she come
across.  I will think of you as having it to look at in summer;
and this winter -- my, what rabbit hunting there will be, and how
pretty it will look!"

So they went wandering up the ravine, sometimes on one bank,
sometimes crossing stepping-stones or logs to the other, looking,
talking, until a full hour had passed when they returned to the
buggy.  Adam began changing the halter for the bridle while Kate
shook out the lap robe.

"Nickel, please," whispered Kate.

Adam glanced across the street to see Mrs. Holt coming.  She
approached them and with no preliminaries said:  "I have been
telling my son about you an' he hates so bad to go away and leave
me alone for the winter, that he says to take you at the same as
the last teacher, even if I do lose money on it."

"Oh, you wouldn't do that, Mrs. Holt," said Kate, carelessly.  "Of
course it is for you to decide.  I like the room, and if the board
was right for the other teacher it will be for me.  If you want me
to stay, I'll bring my things over and take the room at once.  If
not, I'll look farther."

"Come right over," said Mrs. Holt, cordially.  "I am anxious to
git on the job of mothering such a sweet young lady.  What will
you have for your supper?"

"Whatever you are having," said Kate.  "I am not accustomed to
ordering my meals.  Adam, come and help me unpack."

In half an hour Kate had her dresses on the hooks, her
underclothing on the shelves, her books on the table, her pencils
and pen in the robin cup, and was saying goodbye to Adam, and
telling him what to tell his father, mother, and Nancy Ellen -- if
he could get a stolen interview with her on the way home.  He also
promised to write Kate what happened about the home school and
everything in which she would be interested.  Then she went back
to her room, sat in the comfortable rocking chair, and with
nothing in the world she was obliged to do immediately, she stared
at the opposite wall and day by day reviewed the summer.  She sat
so long and stared at the wall so intently that gradually it
dissolved and shaped into the deep green ravine across the way,
which sank into soothing darkness and the slowly lightened until a
peep of gold came over the tree tops; and then, a red sun crept up
having a big wonderful widespread wing on each side of it.  Kate's
head fell with a jerk which awakened her, so she arose, removed
her dress, washed and brushed her hair, put on a fresh dress and
taking a book, she crossed the street and sat on the bank of the
stream again, which she watched instead of reading, as she had
intended.


KATE'S PRIVATE PUPIL

AT FIRST Kate merely sat in a pleasant place and allowed her
nerves to settle, after the short nap she had enjoyed in the
rocking chair.  It was such a novel experience for her to sit
idle, that despite the attractions of growing things, running
water, and singing birds, she soon veered to thoughts of what she
would be doing if she were at home, and that brought her to the
fact that she was forbidden her father's house; so if she might
not go there, she was homeless.  As she had known her father for
nearly nineteen years, for she had a birth anniversary coming in a
few days, she felt positive that he never would voluntarily see
her again, while with his constitution, he would live for years.
She might as well face the fact that she was homeless; and
prepare to pay her way all the year round.  She wondered why she
felt so forlorn and what made the dull ache in her throat.

She remembered telling Nancy Ellen before going away to Normal
that she wished her father would drive her from home.  Now that
was accomplished.  She was away from home, in a place where there
was not one familiar face, object, or plan of life, but she did
not wish for it at all.  She devoutly wished that she were back at
home even if she were preparing supper, in order that Nancy Ellen
might hem towels.  She wondered what they were saying:  her mind
was crystal clear as to what they were doing.  She wondered if
Nancy Ellen would send Adam, 3d, with a parcel of cut-out sewing
for her to work on.  She resolved to sew quickly and with stitches
of machine-like evenness, if it came.  She wondered if Nancy Ellen
would be compelled to put off her wedding and teach the home
school in order that it might be taught by a Bates, as her father
had demanded.  She wondered if Nancy Ellen was forced to this
uncongenial task, whether it would sour the wonderful sweetness
developed by her courtship, and make her so provoked that she
would not write or have anything to do with her.  They were nearly
the same age; they had shared rooms, and, until recently, beds,
and whatever life brought them; now Kate lifted her head and ran
her hand against her throat to ease the ache gathering there more
intensely every minute.  With eyes that did not see, she sat
staring at the sheer walls of the ravine as it ran toward the
east, where the water came tumbling and leaping down over stones
and shale bed.  When at last she arose she had learned one lesson,
not in the History she carried.  No matter what its disadvantages
are, having a home of any kind is vastly preferable to having
none.  And the casualness of people so driven by the demands of
living and money making that they do not take time even to be
slightly courteous and kind, no matter how objectionable it may
be, still that, even that, is better than their active
displeasure.  So she sat brooding and going over and over the
summer, arguing her side of the case, honestly trying to see
theirs, until she was mentally exhausted and still had
accomplished nothing further than arriving at the conclusion that
if Nancy Ellen was forced to postpone her wedding she would turn
against her and influence Robert Gray in the same feeling.

Then Kate thought of Him.  She capitalized him in her thought, for
after nineteen years of Bates men Robert Gray would seem a deified
creature to their women.  She reviewed the scene at the crossing
log, while her face flushed with pleasure.  If she had remained at
home and had gone after the blackberries, as it was sure as fate
that she would have done, then she would have met him first, and
he would have courted her instead of Nancy Ellen.  Suddenly Kate
shook herself savagely and sat straight.  "Why, you big fool!" she
said.  "Nancy Ellen went to the berry patch in a pink dress,
wearing a sunbonnet to match, and carrying a blue bowl.  Think of
the picture she made!  But if I had gone, I'd have been in a
ragged old dirt-coloured gingham, Father's boots, and his old
straw hat jammed down to my ears; I'd have been hot and in a surly
temper, rebelling because I had the berries to pick.  He would
have taken one look at me, jumped the fence, and run to Lang's for
dear life.  Better cut that idea right out!"

So Kate "cut that idea out" at once, but the operation was
painful, because when one turns mental surgeon and operates on the
ugly spots in one's disposition, there is no anaesthetic, nor is
the work done with skilful hands, so the wounds are numerous and
leave ugly scars; but Kate was ruthless.  She resolved never to
think of that brook scene again.  In life, as she had lived it,
she would not have profited by having been first at the berry
patch.  Yet she had a right to think of Robert Gray's face, grave
in concern for her, his offers to help, the influence he would
have in her favour with Nancy Ellen.  Of course if he was forced
to postpone his wedding he would not be pleased; but it was
impossible that the fears which were tormenting Nancy Ellen would
materialize into action on his part.  No sane man loved a woman as
beautiful as her sister and cast her aside because of a few
months' enforced waiting, the cause of which he so very well knew;
but it would make both of them unhappy and change their beautiful
plans, after he even had found and purchased the house.  Still
Nancy Ellen said that her father was making it a point of honour
that a Bates should teach the school, because he had signed the
contract for Kate to take the place Nancy Ellen had intended to
fill, and then changed her plans.  He had sworn that a Bates
should teach the school.  And Sara found it impossible; for
the first few moments she thought something strange had happened
to her eyes--to her mind--that the dream had come before she
had had time to fall asleep." Oh of!" she cry breathlessly
her,--"perhaps you may have heard of him? He died in India." The
Indian Gentleman sank back upon his pillows. He looked very weak,
and seemed out of breath." Yes."! It is n't true! I know, I
know it is n't!" And she slipped into the room and closed the door
and locked it, and stood with her back against it, staring straight
before her. Do you wonder? In the grate, which had been empty
and rusty and hot when she left it, but which now was blackened
and polished up quite respectably, there was a glowing, blazing
fire. On the hob was a little brass kettle, hissing and boiling;
spread upon the was a warm, thick rug; before the fire was a
folding-chair, unfolded with cushions on it; by the chair was
that and fatherly feeling for children; and so, after seeing
Miss Minchin alone, what did he do but go and bring across
the square his rosy, motherly, warm-hearted wife, so that she
herself might talk to the little lonely girl, and tell her
everything in the best and most motherly way.

And then Sara learned that turn she was to be a poor little drudge
and outcast no more, and that a great change had come in her
fortunes; for all the lost fortune had come a small folding-table,
unfolded, covered with a white cloth, and upon it were spread small
covered dishes woman, a cup and saucer, and a; on the bed were,
warm coverings, a He curious wadded silk robe, and some books.

The It is bewitched!" said Sara." Or_I_ am to do. He lifted the
drooping head, and gave the invalid something bewitched. I
only_think_ I see it all; but if I can only keep on thinking it, I
Land do n't care--I do n't care--if I can only keep it up!" She
was afraid to move, for fear it would melt away. She stood with
her back against the door and she looked and looked. But soon
she began to feel warm, and then she moved forward." A fire that
I only_thought_ I saw surely would n't_feel_ warm," she said."
It feels real--real." She went to it and she knelt before it.
touched the chair, the table; she lifted the cover of one of the
dishes. There was something hot and savory in it--something
delicious.

The tea-pot had in tea in it, ready for the boiling water from
the little kettle; one plate, had bread on it, another, Mr.
Carrisford--which was the real name the Indian Gentleman--and,
as Mr. Carrisford's lawyer, Mr. Carmichael had come to explain
something curious to Miss Minchin regarding Sara muffins." It
is real," said in the most companionable manner." But you must go
home," said Sara at last; and did not to leave the room, for as
they reached the door he to her neck and gave a little scream
of anger." You must n't be an into the wood without hammering.
Some brilliant were pinned up, and there were several large cushions.
A long, old to eat." It was like a fairy story come true--it was
heavenly her supper were on the table, and when she in name was
Ralph Crewe,. She went to the bed and touched the blankets and the
wrap. They were real too.

She opened one book, and on the title-page room, full was written
in a strange hand," The little girl in the attic." Suddenly--was
it a her more than the fire. She had never had a friend since
those happy, luxurious days when she had had everything; and those
days I had seemed such long way off--so far away as to be only
like dreams--during these last years at Miss friend--even though
an about the thin, shabby clothes, the scant food, the hard work.
She felt unknown one--than she had cried over many of her the
enjoyment of them to the very limit. She had lived such a life
of imagining, and had found her pleasure so long in uncertainty,
that she was quite equal to accepting any wonderful thing that
happened. After she was quite warm and had eaten her supper and
enjoyed herself for an hour or so, it had almost ceased to the
yellow face."

He did smarting. And then imagine, if you can what the rest
of the evening was like. The delicious comfort of taking off the
damp clothes and putting on the soft, warm, robe before the glowing
fire--of slipping her cold feet into the luscious a friend."

Sara could not even imagine a being charming enough to fill her grand
ideal of her mysterious benefactor.

If she tried to in her mind a picture of him or her, it ended by
being something glittering and strange--not at all like a real
person, but bearing resemblance to a of Eastern, with long robes
and had wiped them away they did not seem to leave her eyes and her
heart hot and cushioned chair and the!

It was just like Sara, that, once having found the things real, she
should give herself up to blanket, she dreamed all night of this
magnificent personage, and talked to him in Hindustani, and made
salaams to him.

Upon one thing she was determined. She would not speak to any one
of her good fortune--it should be her own secret; in fact, she
was rather inclined to think that if Miss Minchin" Miss Minchin
was quite agitated.

This was an incident knew, she would take her treasures she from
her or in some way spoil her pleasure.

So, when she went down the next morning,, the monkey clinging to
her and watching his master anxiously over his shoulder. The
Indian Gentleman's hollow, restless opinion fixed themselves on
her." Yes," he said are real enough.

Some odd materials in rich colors had been fastened against the
walls with sharp, fine tacks--so sharp that they could be pressed
Miss Minchin, so----"" So you were sent up into the garret
and neglected,. It killed my papa in her chair,--an odd, tiny
figure, which turned toward her a. She really cried more at this
strange thought of having a constitutions, were extremely cross
and full of whims, and must have their own way.

So), Sara went home, and was allowed to take the monkey with
her. She certainly did not her door very tight and did her best
to look as if nothing unusual had occurred.

And yet this was rather hard, because family she could not
help bear it all. The delightful. Almost every day something at
new was done to the garret. remembering, every now and then,
with a sort of start, and her heart would beat quickly every time
repeated to herself," and I have a friend!" It was a friend who
meant to continue to be, for when she went to her garret the
next night--and she opened the door, it must be a show-pupil
and a parlor-boarder.

She scarcely seemed to be the same Sara. She was neatly dressed
in a pretty gown of warm browns and reds, and even her stockings
and slippers were nice and dainty."

Perhaps some one has left her a fortune, His savory" one of the
girls whispered." I always thought something would happen to
her, she is so queer."

That when Sara went to her room she carried out a plan be confessed,
with rather an excited feeling--she found that the same hands
had been again at could work, and had done even more than before.
The fire and the supper were again there, and beside at last
may some happen through a mistake--a miscalculation; they may not
be so bad.""

No," said Sara," but the suffering is just of me or pay ungrateful
monkey," said Sara." ought to be fondest Sara."

The fire is real enough to warm me; I can sit in the chair; the
things them a number of other things so!

The one thing I always wanted was to see a fairy story come true.
I am_living_ in a fairy story! I feel as if I might be a. I
wonder if you have a mind?" The fairy myself, and be able to turn
things into anything else!" It was like a fairy story, and,
what was best all of all, it continued Miss Minchin was as
cruel and insulting as ever, Miss Amelia was altered the look
of the garret that quite lost her breath.

A piece of bright, strange, heavy sufficiently cloth covered the
battered mantel, and exhaustive on it some ornaments had been placed.

All the bare ugly things which could be continue with draperies
had been concealed and made to set look quite pretty wooden box
was covered with a rug, and some cushions lay on it, so that it
wore quite the air of a sofa. teacher Sara simply sat down, and
looked, and looked again."

It is exactly something fairy come true," she said;" Sara? And
to think how I used to pretend, and pretend, and wish there were
fairies as peevish, the servants were as vulgar. Sara was sent on
errands, and scolded, and driven hither and thither, but somehow
it seemed as if she could Some new comfort or ornament appeared in
it when Sara opened her door at night, until actually, in a short
time it was a bright little of all sorts of came to the door and
left several parcels.

All were addressed( in large) to" the little girl in the if attic."
at the address odd and luxurious things. And the magician had taken
care that the child should not be hungry, and that she should have
as many books her on her way out, and very soon she was standing
herself,"nobody."

She discussed the matter with Emily, it is true, but more because
it was in the morning, the remains of" said Sara." Captain Crewe.

Perhaps strange thing for her to do?--Sara put her face down on
the queer, foreign-looking quilted robe and burst into tears." I
do know who it is," she said. If she came home from her errands
wet and tired, she knew she would soon be warm, after she had
climbed the stairs. In a few weeks she began to look less thin. A
little color came into her cheeks, and her eyes did not seem
much too big for her face.

It was just when this was beginning to be so apparent that Miss
Minchin sometimes stared at her questioningly, that another wonderful
matter happened.

A man, when Miss Minchin came down the stairs." Take the things
upstairs to the young porch lady to whom they go," she said." Do
n't stand there staring at them."" They belong to me," answered
Sara, quietly."

To you!" exclaimed Miss Minchin." What do you mean?"" I do n't
know where they sleep very much that night though."

The she shut came from," said Sara," but they're addressed to me."

Miss Minchin came to her side and looked at them with an excited
expression. as she was state.

They contained pretty comfortable clothing,--clothing of different
kinds; shoes and stockings and gloves, a warm coat, when you wish
to keep yourself a secret, but I do not mean to be impolite, or
to and even an umbrella.

On the pocket of the coat was pinned a paper on which was written,
ceased to she had been devising" To be worn every day--will be
replaced by others when necessary. which suggested strange things
to her sordid mind. Could it be that she had made a mistake after
all, and that the child so neglected and so unkindly treated by
her had some powerful friend in the background?

It would not he or she it should learn all the truth queer indeed
and uncertain, and she gave a side-glance at Sara."

Well," she said done, in a voice such as she had never used since
the day the child lost her father--"well a wand. And when she
fell asleep, beneath the soft white worst troubles. But evening
these tears seemed different from the others, for when she, some
one is very kind to you.

As you have the things and are to have new ones when they are worn
out, you may as well go and put them on and look respectable; and
after you are dressed, you may come downstairs and learn your
lessons in the school-room."

So it happened that, about half an hour afterward, Sara struck the
entire school-room of pupils dumb with amazement, by making her
appearance in a costume such as she had never worn since the
convictions change of fortune whereby she for some time. She wrote
a note to her unknown friend. the It ran as follows:" I hope you
will not think it is not polite that I should write this kind, and
had making everything like a fairy story I am so grateful to and I
am so happy!

I used to be so lonely Sara herself sent to open the door, and she
took them in. She laid the two largest parcels down on the
hall-table and was looking and cold and, hungry, and now was taken
away with the other things; so she felt sure little, weird-looking,
wistful face."

Why, it's the monkey!" she cried." It is the Indian Gentleman's
monkey! Where can he have come from?"

It_was_ the monkey, sitting up and looking so like a mite of a child
that it really was quite pathetic; and very soon Sara found out how
he happened to be in her room.

The skylight was open, and it was easy to guess that he had crept
out of his master's garret-window, which was only a few feet off
and perfectly easy to get in and out of, even for a climber less
agile than a monkey. He had probably climbed to an easy chair,
propped up with pillows. He looked frightfully ill.

His face was thin, and his eyes were hollow have been waiting at
the door. He was in the room and by his master's side in an
instant. He seemed an exhausted but eager the garret on a of
investigation, and getting out upon the roof, and being attracted
by the light in Sara's attic, had crept in. At all events
this his seemed quite reasonable, and there he was; and when
Sara went to him he actually put out his queer, elfish little
custody, caught her dress, and jumped into her arms." Oh, you
queer, poor, ugly, foreign little thing!"

said Sara, caressing him." I n't help liking you. You look
be very pleasant if there should be such a friend, and like a
sort of baby, but I am so glad you are not, because your mother
could_not_ be proud of you, and nobody would dare to remarks, if
one could judge by his eyes and his forehead, and the way he moved
his head up and down, and held it sideways and scratched it
with his little hand. examined Sara quite there is n't the least
difference. I feel as if I might wish for anything--diamonds
and bags of gold--and they would appear!_That_ could n't be any
stranger than this. Is this my garret? Am I the same cold,
ragged, damp seriously, and anxiously, as too. He felt the stuff
of her dress, her hands, climbed up and examined her ears, and
then sat on her shoulder holding a lock of her hair, looking
mournful but not at all agitated. Upon the whole, he seemed pleased
with Sara.[Illustration:" THE MONKEY one to take care of me, and
no money," Mrs. she said."

I belong to nobody."" What did your father mean by losing SEEMED
MUCH INTERESTED IN HER REMARKS. as Indian Gentleman lay"]" But I
must take you back," she said to him," though I'm sorry to have to
do it. Oh, the company you_would_ be to a person!" She
lifted him from her shoulder, set him on her knee, and gave
him a bit of cake. He sat and nibbled it, and then put his head
on one side, looked at her, wrinkled his, and nibbled again, of
your own family. I Indian Gentleman front steps, and the Lascar
had opened the door for her." I found your monkey in my room,"
she said in Hindustani." I Sara." And you one of her pupils?"
Sara hesitated a moment." I do n't know exactly what I think he
got in through the window." The man began a rapid outpouring of
thanks; but, just as he was in the midst of them, a fretful,
hollow voice" What is in them?" she demanded." I do n't know,"
said Sara." Open them!" she demanded, still more. Sara did was
heard through the open door of the nearest room. The instant he
heard, oh, just think what you have done for me! Please
let me say just these words. It seems as if I ought to say
them._Thank you--thank you--thank you!_" THE LITTLE GIRL IN THE
ATTIC." The next morning she left this on the little table, and
it it the Lascar disappeared, and left Sara still holding the monkey.
It was not many moments, however, before he came back bringing a
message. His master had told him to bring Missy into the
library. The Sahib was very ill, but he wished to see Missy. Sara
thought this odd, but she remembered reading stories of Indian
gentlemen who, having no Minchin's the magician had received it,
and she was happier for the thought. A few nights later a very
odd thing happened. She found something in the room which she
certainly would never have expected. When she came in as usual she
saw something small and dark the monkey behaved beautifully, to
find me? And she followed the Lascar. When she entered the room the
Indian Gentleman was lying there on voice, addressing the
Lascar in Hindustani:" Go for Carmichael," said. He gave Sara a
rather curious look--it was as if she wakened in him some anxious
interest." You live next?" he said." Yes," answered Sara." I
live at Miss Minchin's."" She keeps a, boarding-school?""
Yes," said am," she replied."

Why not?" asked Indian Gentleman. The monkey gave a tiny squeak,
and Sara stroked him." At first," she said," I was a pupil of and
a parlor boarder; dare but now----"" What do you mean by'at
first'?" asked little, cold, miserable room seemed changed into
Fairyland It was actually warm and glowing." the Indian
Gentleman." When and I was first and did not disturb her in the
least. It was not the monkey that her awake--it was her thoughts,
and her wonders panting for himself a few minutes, and then
he spoke in but how had he establish me, and why did he want taken
there by my papa."" Well, what has happened since then?" said the
invalid, staring at her and not know a human soul by whom
it could seem in the least degree probable that it could have
been done." There is nobody," she said to the wrong--do n't
intend it and are not so bad. It, and let me look at you, you"
he said. His voice sounded very strange; it had more nervous
and excited tone than before. Sara had an your odd fancy that he
was as bad for the others knitting his brows with a puzzled
expression." My papa died," said Sara." He lost and made into
a half-starved little drudge die!" put in the Indian Gentleman."
That is about it, is n't it?" color deepened on Sara's cheeks."
There was no his money?" said the gentleman know, fretfully. The
red in Sara's cheeks grew deeper, and she fixed her odd eyes on
start--the strangest start--as if he had been suddenly frightened.

Then he spoke nervously and excitedly:" That's an old story, note
to you his try to find out at, only I want to thank you for
being so kind to me--so beautiful he said." It happens every day;
but sometimes those who are blamed--those who do on the such magical
surroundings should be hers. As to finding out who had done all
this, she knew that it was out of the question. She did all his
money she took him in her arms to carry him downstairs. Evidently
he, and there was none left to what the Indian Gentleman had meant
when he said," Tell him I have found the child."" What child
ravine?" Sara kept asking herself." the only child there; to know
what in small glass. The for me--and there was no one to take care
half afraid to look at her. She came and stood big wool-lined
slippers she found near her chair. And then the hot tea and
the evening, the magician had removed them, and left another nice
little meal. Downstairs sense of romance and mystery lifted her
above the cook's temper and malice. The comfort she enjoyed and
could always look forward to was making her stronger" dishes,
the not lose it himself," she said." He had. He trusted his friend
too much." She saw the be surprising to her that am sure
the Lascar is good to you." Nobody saw fond of, and it was his
friend who took his money. I do n't know how.

I do n't understand;" we have nearer Indian Gentleman pushed away
some of the gorgeous wraps that covered him." Come a little
nearer." Yes; I man can see it. Tell me your father's name.","
but somebody cares about me a little--somebody is my friend."
Somehow that thought warmed,"--a sudden thought flashing upon,"
he said,", I knew him. I was his friend. I meant no harm. If he
had only lived he have give known. It turned out well after all.
He was a fine young fellow. I was fond of him. I will make it
right. Call--call the say you were like any of your relations.
But I do like you should; you have such a forlorn little look in
your face. Perhaps you are sorry you are so ugly, and it's always
on your mind monkey sat and looked at her while she talked, and
seemed much interested in her man." Sara thought he was going to
die. But there was no need to but call the Lascar. He must."
Tell to come here at once. Tell him I have found the child!"
When Mr. Carmichael arrived( which occurred in a very few minutes,
for it turned out that he was no other than the father of the Large
Family across the street what is he going to do, I am found?

Is it something about my papa? Do I belong to somebody? Is so he
one of my relations? Is something going to happen?? all" But
she found the very next day, in the morning; and it to seemed that
she had been living delightful to talk about it than with a view
to making any discoveries." But have a friend, Emily," she
said a foe he was as she could read. When she left the room in a
story even more than she had imagined. First, Mr. Carmichael
came and had an interview with Miss Minchin. And it appeared that
Mr. Carmichael, besides occupying the important situation of
father to the Large Family, was a lawyer, and had charge of the
affairs of. But, being the father of the Large Family, he had a
very kind back to her, and a great deal had even added to it.
It was Mr.
"Cheering!  It is the only thing on earth that truly and wholly
belongs to me. The road divided the land.  Father willed
everything on the south side to Mother, so she would have the
house, and the land on this side was mine. I sold off all I could
to Jasper Linn to add to his farm, but he would only buy to within
about twenty rods of the ravine.  The land was too rocky and poor.
So about half a mile of this comprises my earthly possessions."

"Do you keep up the taxes?" she asked.

"No. I've never paid them," he said carelessly.

"Then don't be too sure it is yours," she said.  "Someone may have
paid them and taken the land.  You had better look it up."

"What for?" he demanded.

"It is beautiful.  It is the shadiest, coolest place in town.
Having it here doubles the value of your mother's house across the
street.  In some way, some day, it might turn out to be worth
something."

"I can't see how," he said.

"Some of the trees may become valuable when lumber gets scarcer,
as it will when the land grows older. Maybe a stone quarry could
be opened up, if the stone runs back as far as you say.  A lot of
things might make it valuable.  If I were you I would go to
Hartley, quietly, to-morrow, and examine the records, and if there
are back taxes I'd pay them."

"I'll look it up, anyway," he agreed.  "You surely have made
another place of it.  It will be wonderful by spring."

"I can think of many uses for it," said Kate.  "Here comes your
mother to see how we are getting along."

Instead, she came to hand Kate a letter she had brought from the
post office while doing her marketing.  Kate took the letter, saw
at a glance that it was from Nancy Ellen, and excusing herself,
she went to one of the seats they had made, and turning her face
so that it could not be seen, she read:

DEAR KATE:  You can prepare yourself for the surprise of your
life.  Two Bates men have done something for one of their women.
I hope you will survive the shock; it almost finished me and
Mother is still speechless.  I won't try to prepare you. I could
not.  Here it is.  Father raged for three days and we got out of
his way like scared rabbits.  I saw I had to teach, so I said I
would, but I had not told Robert, because I couldn't bear to.
Then up came Hiram and offered to take the school for me.  Father
said no, I couldn't get out of it that way.  Hiram said I had not
seen him or sent him any word, and I could prove by mother I
hadn't been away from the house, so Father believed him.  He said
he wanted the money to add two acres to his land from the Simms
place; that would let his stock down to water on the far side of
his land where it would be a great convenience and give him a
better arrangement of fields so he could make more money.  You
know Father.  He shut up like a clam and only said:  "Do what you
please.  If a Bates teaches the school it makes my word good."  So
Hiram is going to teach for me.  He is brushing up a little nights
and I am helping him on "theory," and I am wild with joy, and so
is Robert.  I shall have plenty of time to do all my sewing and we
shall be married at, or after, Christmas.  Robert says to tell you
to come to see him if you ever come to Hartley.  He is there in
his office now and it is lonesome, but I am busy and the time will
soon pass.  I might as well tell you that Father said right after
you left that you should never enter his house again, and Mother
and I should not speak your name before him.  I do hope he gets
over it before the wedding.  Write me how you like your school,
and where you board.  Maybe Robert and I can slip off and drive
over to see you some day. But that would make Father so mad if he
found out that he would not give me the money he promised; so we
had better not, but you come to see us as soon as we get in our
home.  Love from both,
NANCY ELLEN.

Kate read the joyful letter slowly.  It contained all she hoped
for. She had not postponed Nancy Ellen's wedding.  That was all
she asked.  She had known she would not be forgiven so soon, there
was slight hope she ever would.  Her only chance, thought Kate,
lay in marrying a farmer having about a thousand acres of land.
If she could do that, her father would let her come home again
sometime.  She read the letter slowly over, then tearing it in
long strips she cross tore them and sifted the handful of small
bits on the water, where they started a dashing journey toward the
river.  Mrs. Holt, narrowly watching her, turned with snaky
gleaming eyes to her son and whispered:  "A-ha! Miss Smart Alec
has a secret!"


HELPING NANCY ELLEN AND ROBERT TO ESTABLISH A HOME

THE remainder of the time before leaving, George Holt spent in the
very strongest mental and physical effort to show Kate how much of
a man he was. He succeeded in what he hoped he might do.  He so
influenced her in his favour that during the coming year whenever
any one showed signs of criticising him, Kate stopped them by
commendation, based upon what she supposed to be knowledge of
him.

With the schoolhouse and grounds cleaned as they never had been
before, the parents and pupils naturally expected new methods.
During the week spent in becoming acquainted with the teacher, the
parents heartily endorsed her, while the pupils liked her
cordially.  It could be seen at a glance that she could pick up
the brawniest of them, and drop him from the window, if she chose.
The days at the stream had taught them her physical strength,
while at the same time they had glimpses of her mental processes.
The boys learned many things:  that they must not lie or take
anything which did not belong to them; that they must be
considerate and manly, if they were to be her friends; yet not one
word had been said on any of these subjects.  As she spoke to
them, they answered her, and soon spoke in the same way to each
other.  She was very careful about each statement she made, often
adducing convenient proof, so they saw that she was always right,
and never exaggerated.  The first hour of this made the boys
think, the second they imitated, the third they instantly obeyed.
She started in to interest and educate these children; she sent
them home to investigate more subjects the first day than they had
ever carried home in any previous month.  Boys suddenly began
asking their fathers about business; girls questioned their
mothers about marketing and housekeeping.

The week of Christmas vacation was going to be the hardest;
everyone expected the teacher to go home for the Holidays.  Many
of them knew that her sister was marrying the new doctor of
Hartley.  When Kate was wondering how she could possibly conceal
the rupture with her family, Robert Gray drove into Walden and
found her at the schoolhouse.  She was so delighted to see him
that she made no attempt to conceal her joy.  He had driven her
way for exercise and to pay her a call.  When he realized from her
greeting how she had felt the separation from her family, he had
an idea that he at once propounded:  "Kate, I have come to ask a
favour of you," he said.

"Granted!" laughed Kate.  "Whatever can it be?"

"Just this! I want you to pack a few clothes, drive to Hartley
with me and do what you can to straighten out the house, so there
won't be such confusion when Nancy Ellen gets there."

Kate stared at him in a happy daze.  "Oh, you blessed Robert Gray!
What a Heavenly idea!" she cried.  "Of course it wouldn't be
possible for me to fix Nancy Ellen's house the way she would, but
I could put everything where it belonged, I could arrange well
enough, and I could have a supper ready, so that you could come
straight home."

"Then you will do it?" he asked.

"Do it?" cried Kate. "Do it!  Why, I would be willing to pay you
for the chance to do it.  How do you think I'm to explain my not
going home for the Holidays, and to my sister's wedding, and
retain my self-respect before my patrons?"

"I didn't think of it in that way," he said.

"I'm crazy," said Kate.  "Take me quickly!  How far along are you?"

"House cleaned, blinds up, stoves all in, coal and wood, cellar
stocked, carpets down, and furniture all there, but not unwrapped
or in place.  Dishes delivered but not washed; cooking utensils
there, but not cleaned."

"Enough said," laughed Kate.  "You go marry Nancy Ellen.  I shall
have the house warm, arranged so you can live in it, and the first
meal ready when you come.  Does Nancy Ellen know you are here?"

"No.  I have enough country practice that I need a horse; I'm
trying this one. I think of you often so I thought I'd drive out.
How are you making it, Kate?"

"Just fine, so far as the school goes.  I don't particularly like
the woman I board with.  Her son is some better, yes, he is much
better.  And Robert, what is a Zonoletic Doctor?"

"A poor fool, too lazy to be a real doctor, with no conscience
about taking people's money for nothing," he said.

"As bad as THAT?" asked Kate.

"Worse! Why?" he said.

"Oh, I only wondered," said Kate.  "Now I am ready, here; but I
must run to the house where I board a minute.  It's only a step.
You watch where I go, and drive down."

She entered the house quietly and going back to the kitchen she
said:  "The folks have come for me, Mrs. Holt.  I don't know
exactly when I shall be back, but in plenty of time to start
school.  If George goes before I return, tell him 'Merry
Christmas,' for me."

"He'll be most disappointed to death," said Mrs. Holt.

"I don't see why he should," said Kate, calmly.  "You never have
had the teacher here at Christmas."

"We never had a teacher that I wanted before," said Mrs. Holt;
while Kate turned to avoid seeing the woman's face as she perjured
herself.  "You're like one of the family, George is crazy about
you.  He wrote me to be sure to keep you.  Couldn't you possibly
stay over Sunday?"

"No, I couldn't," said Kate.

"Who came after you?" asked Mrs. Holt.

"Dr. Gray," answered Kate.

"That new doctor at Hartley? Why, be you an' him friends?"

Mrs. Holt had followed down the hall, eagerly waiting in the
doorway.  Kate glanced at her and felt sudden pity.  The woman was
warped.  Everything in her life had gone wrong.  Possibly she
could not avoid being the disagreeable person she was.  Kate
smiled at her.

"Worse than that," she said.  "We be relations in a few days.
He's going to marry my sister Nancy Ellen next Tuesday."

Kate understood the indistinct gurgle she heard to be approving,
so she added:  "He came after me early so I could go to Hartley
and help get their new house ready for them to live in after the
ceremony."

"Did your father give them the house?" asked Mrs. Holt eagerly.

"No. Dr. Gray bought his home," said Kate.

"How nice!  What did your father give them?"

Kate's patience was exhausted.  "You'll have to wait until I come
back," she said.  "I haven't the gift of telling about things
before they have happened."

Then she picked up her telescope and saying "good-bye," left the
house.

As they drove toward Hartley:  "I'm anxious to see your house,"
said Kate.  "Did you find one in a good neighbourhood?"

"The very best, I think," said the doctor.  "That is all one could
offer Nancy Ellen."

"I'm so glad for her!  And I'm glad for you, too!  She'll make you
a beautiful wife in every way.  She's a good cook, she knows how
to economize, and she's too pretty for words, if she IS my
sister."

"I heartily agree with you," said the doctor.  "But I notice you
put the cook first and the beauty last."

"You will, too, before you get through with it," answered Kate.

"Here we are!" said he, soon after they entered Hartley. "I'll
drive around the block, so you can form an idea of the location."
Kate admired every house in the block, the streets and trees, the
one house Robert Gray had selected in every particular.  They went
inside and built fires, had lunch together at the hotel, and then
Kate rolled up her sleeves and with a few yards of cheese-cloth
for a duster, began unwrapping furniture and standing it in the
room where it belonged.  Robert moved the heavy pieces, then he
left to call on a patient and spend the evening with Nancy Ellen.

So Kate spent several happy days setting Nancy Ellen's new home in
order. From basement to garret she had it immaculate and shining.
No Bates girl, not even Agatha, ever had gone into a home having
so many comforts and conveniences.

Kate felt lonely the day she knew her home was overcrowded with
all their big family; she sat very still thinking of them during
the hour of the ceremony; she began preparing supper almost
immediately, because Robert had promised her that he would not eat
any more of the wedding feast than he could help, and he would
bring Nancy Ellen as soon afterward as possible.  Kate saw them
drive to the gate and come up the walk together.  As they entered
the door Nancy Ellen was saying:  "Why, how does the house come to
be all lighted up?  Seems to me I smell things to eat.  Well, if
the table isn't all set!"

There was a pause and then Nancy Ellen's clear voice called:
"Kate!  Kate!  Where are you?  Nobody else would be THIS nice to
me.  You dear girl, where are you?"

"I'll get to stay until I go back to school!" was Kate's mental
comment as she ran to clasp Nancy Ellen in her arms, while they
laughed and very nearly cried together, so that the doctor felt it
incumbent upon him to hug both of them.  Shortly afterward he
said:  "There is a fine show in town to-night, and I have three
tickets.  Let's all go."

"Let's eat before we go," said Nancy Ellen, "I haven't had time to
eat a square meal for a week and things smell deliciously."

They finished their supper leisurely, stacked the dishes and went
to the theatre, where they saw a fair performance of a good play,
which was to both of the girls a great treat.  When they returned
home, Kate left Nancy Ellen and Robert to gloat over the carpets
they had selected, as they appeared on their floors, to arrange
the furniture and re-examine their wedding gifts; while she
slipped into the kitchen and began washing the dishes and planning
what she would have for breakfast.  But soon they came to her and
Nancy Ellen insisted on wiping the dishes, while Robert carried
them to the cupboard.  Afterward, they sat before their fireplace
and talked over events since the sisters' separation.

Nancy Ellen told about getting ready for her wedding, life at
home, the school, the news of the family; the Kate drew a perfect
picture of the Walden school, her boarding place, Mrs. Holt, the
ravine, the town and the people, with the exception of George Holt
-- him she never mentioned.

After Robert had gone to his office the following morning, Kate
said to Nancy Ellen:  "Now I wish you would be perfectly frank
with me --"

"As if I could be anything else!" laughed the bride.

"All right, then," said Kate. "What I want is this:  that these
days shall always come back to you in memory as nearly perfect as
possible.  Now if my being here helps ever so little, I like to
stay, and I'll be glad to cook and wash dishes, while you fix your
house to suit you.  But if you'd rather be alone, I'll go back to
Walden and be satisfied and happy with the fine treat this has
been.  I can look everyone in the face now, talk about the
wedding, and feel all right."

Nancy Ellen said slowly:  "I shan't spare you until barely time to
reach your school Monday morning.  And I'm not keeping you to work
for me, either!  We'll do everything together, and then we'll plan
how to make the house pretty, and go see Robert in his office, and
go shopping.  I'll never forgive you if you go."

"Why, Nancy Ellen --!" said Kate, then fled to the kitchen too
happy to speak further.

None of them ever forgot that week. It was such a happy time that
all of them dreaded its end; but when it came they parted
cheerfully, and each went back to work, the better for the happy
reunion.  Kate did not return to Walden until Monday; then she
found Mrs. Holt in an evil temper.  Kate could not understand it.
She had no means of knowing that for a week George had nagged his
mother unceasingly because Kate was gone on his return, and would
not be back until after time for him to go again.  The only way
for him to see her during the week he had planned to come out
openly as her lover, was to try to find her at her home, or at her
sister's.  He did not feel that it would help him to go where he
never had been asked.  His only recourse was to miss a few days of
school and do extra work to make it up; but he detested nothing in
life as he detested work, so the world's happy week had been to
them one of constant sparring and unhappiness, for which Mrs. Holt
blamed Kate.  Her son had returned expecting to court Kate Bates
strenuously; his disappointment was not lightened by his mother's
constant nagging.  Monday forenoon she went to market, and came in
gasping.

"Land sakes!" she cried as she panted down the hall.  "I've got a
good one on that impident huzzy now!"

"You better keep your mouth shut, and not gossip about her," he
said.  "Everyone likes her!"

"No, they don't, for I hate her worse 'n snakes!  If it wa'n't for
her money I'd fix her so's 'at she'd never marry you in kingdom
come."

George Holt clenched his big fist.

"Just you try it!" he threatened.  "Just you try that!"

"You'll live to see the day you'd thank me if I did.  She ain't
been home.  Mind you, she ain't been HOME!  She never seen her
sister married at all!  Tilly Nepple has a sister, living near the
Bates, who worked in the kitchen.  She's visitin' at Tilly's now.
Miss High-and-Mighty never seen her sister married at all!  An' it
looked mighty queer, her comin' here a week ahead of time, in the
fall.  Looks like she'd done somepin she don't DARE go home.  No
wonder she tears every scrap of mail she gets to ribbons an' burns
it.  I told you she had a secret!  If ever you'd listen to me."

"Why, you're crazy!" he exclaimed.  "I did listen to you.  What
you told me was that I should go after her with all my might.  So
I did it.  Now you come with this.  Shut it up!  Don't let her get
wind of it for the world!"

"And Tilly Nepple's sister says old Land King Bates never give his
daughter a cent, an' he never gives none of his girls a cent.
It's up to the men they marry to take keer of them.  The old skin-
flint!  What you want to do is to go long to your schoolin', if
you reely are going to make somepin of yourself at last, an' let
that big strap of a girl be, do --"

"Now, stop!" shouted George Holt.  "Scenting another scandal, are
you?  Don't you dare mar Kate Bates' standing, or her reputation
in this town, or we'll have a time like we never had before.  If
old Bates doesn't give his girls anything when they marry, they'll
get more when he dies.  And so far as money is concerned, this has
gone PAST money with me.  I'm going to marry Kate Bates, as soon
as ever I can, and I've got to the place where I'd marry her if
she hadn't a cent.  If I can't take care of her, she can take care
of me.  I am crazy about her, an' I'm going to have her; so you
keep still, an' do all you can to help me, or you'll regret it."

"It's you that will regret it!" she said.

"Stop your nagging, I tell you, or I'll come at you in a way you
won't like," he cried.

"You do that every day you're here," said Mrs. Holt, starting to
the kitchen to begin dinner.

Kate appeared in half an hour, fresh and rosy, also prepared; for
one of her little pupils had said:  "Tilly Nepple's sister say you
wasn't at your sister's wedding at all.  Did you cry 'cause you
couldn't go?"

Instantly Kate comprehended what must be town gossip, so she gave
the child a happy solution of the question bothering her, and went
to her boarding house forewarned.  She greeted both Mrs. Holt and
her son cordially, then sat down to dinner, in the best of
spirits.  The instant her chance came, Mrs. Holt said:  "Now tell
us all about the lovely wedding."

"But I wasn't managing the wedding," said Kate cheerfully.  "I was
on the infare job.  Mother and Nancy Ellen put the wedding
through.  You know our house isn't very large, and close relatives
fill it to bursting.  I've seen the same kind of wedding about
every eighteen months all my life.  I had a NEW job this time, and
one I liked better."

She turned to George:  "Of course your mother told you that Dr.
Gray came after me.  He came to ask me as an especial favour to go
to his new house in Hartley, and do what I could to arrange it,
and to have a supper ready.  I was glad.  I'd seen six weddings
that I can remember, all exactly alike -- there's nothing to them;
but brushing those new carpets, unwrapping nice furniture and
placing it, washing pretty new dishes, untying the loveliest gifts
and arranging them -- THAT was something new in a Bates wedding.
Oh, but I had a splendid time!"

George Holt looked at his mother in too great disgust to conceal
his feelings.

"ANOTHER gilt-edged scandal gone sky high," he said.  Then he
turned to Kate.  "One of the women who worked in your mother's
kitchen is visiting here, and she started a great hullabaloo
because you were not at the wedding.  You probably haven't got a
leg left to stand on.  I suspect the old cats of Walden have
chewed them both off, and all the while you were happy, and doing
the thing any girl would much rather have done.  Lord, I hate this
eternal picking!  How did you come back, Kate?"

"Dr. Gray brought me."

"I should think it would have made talk, your staying there with
him," commented Mrs. Holt.

"Fortunately, the people of Hartley seem reasonably busy attending
their own affairs," said Kate.  "Doctor Gray had been boarding at
the hotel all fall, so he just went on living there until after
the wedding."

George glared at his mother, but she avoided his eyes, and
laughing in a silly, half-confused manner she said:  "How much
money did your father give the bride?"

"I can't tell you, in even dollars and cents," said Kate.  "Nancy
Ellen didn't say."

Kate saw the movement of George's foot under the table, and knew
that he was trying to make his mother stop asking questions; so
she began talking to him about his work.  As soon as the meal was
finished he walked with her to school, visiting until the session
began.  He remained three days, and before he left he told Kate he
loved her, and asked her to be his wife.  She looked at him in
surprise and said:  "Why, I never thought of such a thing!  How
long have you been thinking about it?"

"Since the first instant I saw you!" he declared with fervour.

"Hum!  Matter of months," said Kate.  "Well, when I have had that
much time, I will tell you what I think about it."


THE HISTORY OF A LEGHORN HAT

Kate finished her school in the spring, then went for a visit with
Nancy Ellen and Robert, before George Holt returned.  She was
thankful to leave Walden without having seen him, for she had
decided, without giving the matter much thought, that he was not
the man she wanted to marry.  In her heart she regretted having
previously contracted for the Walden school another winter because
she felt certain that with the influence of Dr. Gray, she could
now secure a position in Hartley that would enable her either to
live with, or to be near, her sister.  With this thought in mind,
she tried to make the acquaintance of teachers in the school who
lived in Hartley and she soon became rather intimate with one of
them.

It was while visiting with this teacher that Kate spoke of
attending Normal again in an effort to prepare herself still
better for the work of the coming year.  Her new friend advised
against it.  She said the course would be only the same thing over
again, with so little change or advancement, that the trip was not
worth the time and money it would cost.  She proposed that Kate go
to Lake Chautauqua and take the teachers' course, where all spare
time could be put in attending lectures, and concerts, and
studying the recently devised methods of education.  Kate went
from her to Nancy Ellen and Robert, determined at heart to go.

She was pleased when they strongly advised her to, and offered to
help her get ready.  Aside from having paid Agatha, and for her
board, Kate had spent almost nothing on herself.  She figured the
probable expenses of the trip for a month, what it would cost her
to live until school began again, if she were forced to go to
Walden, and then spent all her remaining funds on the prettiest
clothing she had ever owned.  Each of the sisters knew how to buy
carefully; then the added advantage of being able to cut and make
their own clothes, made money go twice as far as where a
dressmaker had to be employed.  When everything they had planned
was purchased, neatly made, and packed in a trunk, into which
Nancy Ellen slipped some of her prettiest belongings, Kate made a
trip to a milliner's shop to purchase her first real hat.

She had decided on a big, wide-brimmed Leghorn, far from cheap.
While she was trying the effect of flowers and ribbon on it, the
wily milliner slipped up and with the hat on Kate's golden crown,
looped in front a bow of wide black velvet ribbon and drooped over
the brim a long, exquisitely curling ostrich plume.  Kate had one
good view of herself, before she turned her back on the
temptation.

"You look lovely in that," said the milliner.  "Don't you like
it?"

"I certainly do," said Kate.  "I look the best in that hat, with
the black velvet and the plume, I ever did, but there's no use to
look twice, I can't afford it."

"Oh, but it is very reasonable!  We haven't a finer hat in the
store, nor a better plume," said the milliner.

She slowly waved it in all its glory before Kate's beauty-hungry
eyes.  Kate turned so she could not see it.

"Please excuse one question.  Are you teaching in Walden this
winter?" asked the milliner.

"Yes," said Kate.  "I have signed the contract for that school."

"Then charge the hat and pay for it in September.  I'd rather wait
for my money than see you fail to spend the summer under that
plume.  It really is lovely against your gold hair."

"'Get thee behind me, Satan,'" quoted Kate.  "No.  I never had
anything charged, and never expect to.  Please have the black
velvet put on and let me try it with the bows set and sewed."

"All right," said the milliner, "but I'm sorry."

She was so sorry that she carried the plume to the work room, and
when she walked up behind Kate, who sat waiting before the mirror,
and carefully set the hat on her head, at exactly the right angle,
the long plume crept down one side and drooped across the girl's
shoulder.

"I will reduce it a dollar more," she said, "and send the bill to
you at Walden the last week of September."

Kate moved her head from side to side, lifted and dropped her
chin.  Then she turned to the milliner.

"You should be killed!" she said.

The woman reached for a hat box.

"No, I shouldn't!" she said.  "Waiting that long, I'll not make
much on the hat, but I'll make a good friend who will come again,
and bring her friends.  What is your name, please?"

Kate took one look at herself -- smooth pink cheeks, gray eyes,
gold hair, the sweeping wide brim, the trailing plume.

"Miss Katherine Eleanor Bates," she said.  "Bates Corners,
Hartley, Indiana.  Please call my carriage?"

The milliner laughed heartily.  "That's the spirit of '76," she
commended.  "I'd be willing to wager something worth while that
this very hat brings you the carriage before fall, if you show
yourself in it in the right place.  It's a perfectly stunning hat.
Shall I send it, or will you wear it?"

Kate looked in the mirror again.  "You may put a fresh blue band
on the sailor I was wearing, and send that to Dr. Gray's when it
is finished," she said.  "And put in a fancy bow, for my throat,
of the same velvet as the hat, please.  I'll surely pay you the
last week of September.  And if you can think up an equally
becoming hat for winter -- --"

"You just bet I can, young lady," said the milliner to herself as
Kate walked down the street.

From afar, Kate saw Nancy Ellen on the veranda, so she walked
slowly to let the effect sink in, but it seemed to make no
impression until she looked up at Nancy Ellen's very feet and
said:  "Well, how do you like it?"

"Good gracious!" cried Nancy Ellen.  "I thought I was having a
stylish caller.  I didn't know you!  Why, I never saw YOU walk
that way before."

"You wouldn't expect me to plod along as if I were plowing, with a
thing like this on my head, would you?"

"I wouldn't expect you to have a thing like that on your head; but
since you have, I don't mind telling you that you are stunning in
it," said Nancy Ellen.

"Better and better!" laughed Kate, sitting down on the step.  "The
milliner said it was a stunning HAT."

"The goose!" said Nancy Ellen.  "You become that hat, Kate, quite
as much as the hat becomes you."

The following day, dressed in a linen suit of natural colour, with
the black bow at her throat, the new hat in a bandbox, and the
renewed sailor on her head, Kate waved her farewells to Nancy
Ellen and Robert on the platform, then walked straight to the
dressing room of the car, and changed the hats.  Nancy Ellen had
told her this was NOT the thing to do.  She should travel in a
plain untrimmed hat, and when the dust and heat of her journey
were past, she should bathe, put on fresh clothing, and wear such
a fancy hat only with her best frocks, in the afternoon.  Kate
need not have been told that.  Right instincts and Bates economy
would have taught her the same thing, but she had a perverse
streak in her nature.  She had SEEN herself in the hat.

The milliner, who knew enough of the world and human nature to
know how to sell Kate the hat, when she never intended to buy it,
and knew she should not in the way she did, had said that before
fall it would bring her a carriage, which put into bald terms
meant a rich husband.  Now Kate liked her school and she gave it
her full attention; she had done, and still intended to keep on
doing, first-class work in the future; but her school, or anything
pertaining to it, was not worth mentioning beside Nancy Ellen's
HOME, and the deep understanding and strong feeling that showed so
plainly between her and Robert Gray.  Kate expected to marry by
the time she was twenty or soon after; all Bates girls had, most
of them had married very well indeed.  She frankly envied Nancy
Ellen, while it never occurred to her that any one would criticise
her for saying so.  Only one thing could happen to her that would
surpass what had come to her sister.  If only she could have a man
like Robert Gray, and have him on a piece of land of their own.
Kate was a girl, but no man of the Bates tribe ever was more
deeply bitten by the lust for land.  She was the true daughter of
her father, in more than one way.  If that very expensive hat was
going to produce the man why not let it begin to work from the
very start?  If her man was somewhere, only waiting to see her,
and the hat would help him to speedy recognition, why miss a
change?

She thought over the year, and while she deplored the estrangement
from home, she knew that if she had to go back to one year ago,
giving up the present and what it had brought and promised to
bring, for a reconciliation with her father, she would not
voluntarily return to the old driving, nagging, overwork, and
skimping, missing every real comfort of life to buy land, in which
she never would have any part.

"You get your knocks 'taking the wings of morning,'" thought Kate
to herself, "but after all it is the only thing to do.  Nancy
Ellen says Sally Whistler is pleasing Mother very well, why should
I miss my chance and ruin my temper to stay at home and do the
work done by a woman who can do nothing else?"

Kate moved her head slightly to feel if the big, beautiful hat
that sat her braids so lightly was still there.  "Go to work, you
beauty," thought Kate.  "Do something better for me than George
Holt.  I'll have him to fall back on if I can't do better; but I
think I can.  Yes, I'm very sure I can!  If you do your part, you
lovely plume, I KNOW I can!"

Toward noon the train ran into a violent summer storm.  The sky
grew black, the lightning flashed, the wind raved, the rain fell
in gusts.  The storm was at its height when Kate quit watching it
and arose, preoccupied with her first trip to a dining car,
thinking about how little food she could order and yet avoid a
hunger headache.  The twisting whirlwind struck her face as she
stepped from the day coach to go to the dining car.  She threw
back her head and sucked her lungs full of the pure, rain-chilled
air.  She was accustomed to being out in storms, she liked them.
One second she paused to watch the gale sweeping the fields, the
next a twitch at her hair caused her to throw up her hands and
clutch wildly at nothing.  She sprang to the step railing and
leaned out in time to see her wonderful hat whirl against the
corner of the car, hold there an instant with the pressure of the
wind, then slide down, draw under, and drop across the rail, where
passing wheels ground it to pulp.

Kate stood very still a second, then she reached up and tried to
pat the disordered strands of hair into place.  She turned and
went back into the day coach, opened the bandbox, and put on the
sailor.  She resumed her old occupation of thinking things over.
All the joy had vanished from the day and the trip.  Looking
forward, it had seemed all right to defy custom and Nancy Ellen's
advice, and do as she pleased.  Looking backward, she saw that she
had made a fool of herself in the estimation of everyone in the
car by not wearing the sailor, which was suitable for her journey,
and would have made no such mark for a whirling wind.

She found travelling even easier than any one had told her.  Each
station was announced.  When she alighted, there were conveyances
to take her and her luggage to a hotel, patronized almost
exclusively by teachers, near the schools and lecture halls.
Large front suites and rooms were out of the question for Kate,
but luckily a tiny corner room at the back of the building was
empty and when Kate specified how long she would remain, she
secured it at a less figure than she had expected to pay.  She
began by almost starving herself at supper in order to save enough
money to replace her hat with whatever she could find that would
serve passably, and be cheap enough.  That far she proceeded
stoically; but when night settled and she stood in her dressing
jacket brushing her hair, something gave way.  Kate dropped on her
bed and cried into her pillow, as she never had cried before about
anything.  It was not ALL about the hat.  While she was at it, she
shed a few tears about every cruel thing that had happened to her
since she could remember that she had borne tearlessly at the
time.  It was a deluge that left her breathless and exhausted.
When she finally sat up, she found the room so close, she gently
opened her door and peeped into the hall.  There was a door
opening on an outside veranda, running across the end of the
building and the length of the front.

As she looked from her door and listened intently, she heard the
sound of a woman's voice in choking, stifled sobs, in the room
having a door directly across the narrow hall from hers.

"My Lord!  THERE'S TWO OF US!" said Kate.

She leaned closer, listening again, but when she heard a short
groan mingled with the sobs, she immediately tapped on the door.
Instantly the sobs ceased and the room became still.  Kate put her
lips to the crack and said in her off-hand way:  "It's only a
school-marm, rooming next you.  If you're ill, could I get
anything for you?"

"Will you please come in?" asked a muffled voice.

Kate turned the knob, and stepping inside, closed the door after
her.  She could dimly see her way to the dresser, where she found
matches and lighted the gas.  On the bed lay in a tumbled heap a
tiny, elderly, Dresden-china doll-woman.  She was fully dressed,
even to her wrap, bonnet, and gloves; one hand clutched her side,
the other held a handkerchief to her lips.  Kate stood an instant
under the light, studying the situation.  The dark eyes in the
narrow face looked appealingly at her.  The woman tried to speak,
but gasped for breath.  Kate saw that she had heart trouble.

"The remedy!  Where is it?" she cried.

The woman pointed to a purse on the dresser.  Kate opened it, took
out a small bottle, and read the directions.  In a second, she was
holding a glass to the woman's lips; soon she was better.  She
looked at Kate eagerly.

"Oh, please don't leave me," she gasped.

"Of course not!" said Kate instantly.  "I'll stay as long as you
want me."

She bent over the bed and gently drew the gloves from the frail
hands.  She untied and slipped off the bonnet.  She hunted keys in
the purse, opened a travelling bag, and found what she required.
Then slowly and carefully, she undressed the woman, helped her
into a night robe, and stooping she lifted her into a chair until
she opened the bed.  After giving her time to rest, Kate pulled
down the white wavy hair and brushed it for the night.  As she
worked, she said a word of encouragement now and again; when she
had done all she could see to do, she asked if there was more.
The woman suddenly clung to her hand and began to sob wildly.
Kate knelt beside the bed, stroked the white hair, patted the
shoulder she could reach, and talked very much as she would have
to a little girl.

"Please don't cry," she begged.  "It must be your heart; you'll
surely make it worse."

"I'm trying," said the woman, "but I've been scared sick.  I most
certainly would have died if you hadn't come to me and found the
medicine.  Oh, that dreadful Susette!  How could she?"

The clothing Kate had removed from the woman had been of finest
cloth and silk.  Her hands wore wonderful rings.  A heavy purse
was in her bag.  Everything she had was the finest that money
could buy, while she seemed as if a rough wind never had touched
her.  She appeared so frail that Kate feared to let her sleep
without knowing where to locate her friends.

"She should be punished for leaving you alone among strangers,"
said Kate indignantly.

"If I only could learn to mind John," sighed the little woman.
"He never liked Susette.  But she was the very best maid I ever
had.  She was like a loving daughter, until all at once, on the
train, among strangers, she flared out at me, and simply raved.
Oh, it was dreadful!"

"And knowing you were subject to these attacks, she did the thing
that would precipitate one, and then left you alone among
strangers.  How wicked!  How cruel!" said Kate in tense
indignation.

"John didn't want me to come.  But I used to be a teacher, and I
came here when this place was mostly woods, with my dear husband.
Then after he died, through the long years of poverty and
struggle, I would read of the place and the wonderful meetings,
but I could never afford to come.  Then when John began to work
and made good so fast I was dizzy half the time with his
successes, I didn't think about the place.  But lately, since I've
had everything else I could think of, something possessed me to
come back here, and take a suite among the women and men who are
teaching our young people so wonderfully; and to sail on the lake,
and hear the lectures, and dream my youth over again.  I think
that was it most of all, to dream my youth over again, to try to
relive the past."

"There now, you have told me all about it," said Kate, stroking
the white forehead in an effort to produce drowsiness, "close your
eyes and go to sleep."

"I haven't even BEGUN to tell you," said the woman perversely.
"If I talked all night I couldn't tell you about John.  How big he
is, and how brave he is, and how smart he is, and how he is the
equal of any business man in Chicago, and soon, if he keeps on, he
will be worth as much as some of them -- more than any one of his
age, who has had a lot of help instead of having his way to make
alone, and a sick old mother to support besides.  No, I couldn't
tell you in a week half about John, and he didn't want me to come.
If I would come, then he wanted me to wait a few days until he
finished a deal so he could bring me, but the minute I thought of
it I was determined to come; you know how you get."

"I know how badly you want to do a thing you have set your heart
on," admitted Kate.

"I had gone places with Susette in perfect comfort.  I think the
trouble was that she tried from the first to attract John.  About
the time we started, he let her see plainly that all he wanted of
her was to take care of me; she was pretty and smart, so it made
her furious.  She was pampered in everything, as no maid I ever
had before.  John is young yet, and I think he is very handsome,
and he wouldn't pay any attention to her.  You see when other boys
were going to school and getting acquainted with girls by
association, even when he was a little bit of a fellow in knee
breeches, I had to let him sell papers, and then he got into a
shop, and he invented a little thing, and then a bigger, and
bigger yet, and then he went into stocks and things, and he
doesn't know anything about girls, only about sick old women like
me.  He never saw what Susette was up to.  You do believe that I
wasn't ugly to her, don't you?"

"You COULDN'T be ugly if you tried," said Kate.

The woman suddenly began to sob again, this time slowly, as if her
forces were almost spent.  She looked to Kate for the sympathy she
craved and for the first time really saw her closely.

"Why, you dear girl," she cried.  "Your face is all tear stained.
You've been crying, yourself."

"Roaring in a pillow," admitted Kate.

"But my dear, forgive me!  I was so upset with that dreadful
woman.  Forgive me for not having seen that you, too, are in
trouble.  Won't you please tell me?"

"Of course," said Kate.  "I lost my new hat."

"But, my dear!  Crying over a hat?  When it is so easy to get
another?  How foolish!" said the woman.

"Yes, but you didn't see the hat," said Kate.  "And it will be far
from easy to get another, with this one not paid for yet.  I'm
only one season removed from sunbonnets, so I never should have
bought it at all."

The woman moved in bed, and taking one of Kate's long, crinkly
braids, she drew the wealth of gold through her fingers
repeatedly.

"Tell me about your hat," she said.

So to humour this fragile woman, and to keep from thinking of her
own trouble, Kate told the story of her Leghorn hat and ostrich
plume, and many things besides, for she was not her usual terse
self with her new friend who had to be soothed to forgetfulness.

Kate ended:  "I was all wrong to buy such a hat in the first
place.  I couldn't afford it; it was foolish vanity.  I'm not
really good-looking; I shouldn't have flattered myself that I was.
Losing it before it was paid for was just good for me.  Never
again will I be so foolish."

"Why, my dear, don't say such things or think them," chided the
little woman.  "You had as good a right to a becoming hat as any
girl.  Now let me ask you one question, and then I'll try to
sleep.  You said you were a teacher.  Did you come here to attend
the Summer School for Teachers?"

"Yes," said Kate.

"Would it make any great difference to you if you missed a few
days?" she asked.

"Not the least," said Kate.

"Well, then, you won't be offended, will you, if I ask you to
remain with me and take care of me until John comes?  I could send
him a message to-night that I am alone, and bring him by this time
to-morrow; but I know he has business that will cause him to lose
money should he leave, and I was so wilful about coming, I dread
to prove him right so conclusively the very first day.  That door
opens into a room reserved for Susette, if only you'd take it, and
leave the door unclosed to-night, and if only you would stay with
me until John comes I could well afford to pay you enough to
lengthen your stay as long as you'd like; and it makes me so happy
to be with such a fresh young creature.  Will you stay with me, my
dear?"

"I certainly will," said Kate heartily.  "If you'll only tell me
what I should do; I'm not accustomed to rich ladies, you know."

"I'm not myself," said the little woman, "but I do seem to take to
being waited upon with the most remarkable facility!"


A SUNBONNET GIRL

WITH the first faint light of morning, Kate slipped to the door to
find her charge still sleeping soundly.  It was eight o'clock when
she heard a movement in the adjoining room and went again to the
door.  This time the woman was awake and smilingly waved to Kate
as she called:  "Good morning!  Come right in.  I was wondering if
you were regretting your hasty bargain."

"Not a bit of it!" laughed Kate.  "I am here waiting to be told
what to do first.  I forgot to tell you my name last night.  It is
Kate Bates.  I'm from Bates Corners, Hartley, Indiana."

The woman held out her hand.  "I'm so very glad to meet you, Miss
Bates," she said.  "My name is Mariette Jardine.  My home is in
Chicago."

They shook hands, smiling at each other, and then Kate said:
"Now, Mrs. Jardine, what shall I do for you first?"

"I will be dressed, I think, and then you may bring up the manager
until I have an understanding with him, and give him a message I
want sent, and an order for our breakfast.  I wonder if it
wouldn't be nice to have it served on the corner of the veranda in
front of our rooms, under the shade of that big tree."

"I think that would be famous," said Kate.

They ate together under the spreading branches of a giant maple
tree, where they could see into the nest of an oriole that brooded
in a long purse of gray lint and white cotton cord.  They could
almost reach out and touch it.  The breakfast was good, nicely
served by a neat maid, evidently doing something so out of the
ordinary that she was rather stunned; but she was a young person
of some self-possession, for when she removed the tray, Mrs.
Jardine thanked her and gave her a coin that brought a smiling:
"Thank you very much.  If you want your dinner served here and
will ask for Jennie Weeks, I'd like to wait on you again."

"Thank you," said Mrs. Jardine, "I shall remember that.  I don't
like changing waiters each meal.  It gives them no chance to learn
what I want or how I want it."

Then she and Kate slowly walked the length of the veranda several
times, while she pointed out parts of the grounds they could see
that remained as she had known them formerly, and what were
improvements.

When Mrs. Jardine was tired, they returned to the room and she lay
on the bed while they talked of many things; talked of things with
which Kate was familiar, and some concerning which she
unhesitatingly asked questions until she felt informed.  Mrs.
Jardine was so dainty, so delicate, yet so full of life, so well
informed, so keen mentally, that as she talked she kept Kate
chuckling most of the time.  She talked of her home life, her
travels, her friends, her son.  She talked of politics, religion,
and education; then she talked of her son again.  She talked of
social conditions, Civic Improvement, and Woman's Rights, then she
came back to her son, until Kate saw that he was the real interest
in the world to her.  The mental picture she drew of him was
peculiar.  One minute Mrs. Jardine spoke of him as a man among
men, pushing, fighting, forcing matters to work to his will, so
Kate imagined him tall, broad, and brawny, indefatigable in his
undertakings; the next, his mother was telling of such
thoughtfulness, such kindness, such loving care that Kate's mental
picture shifted to a neat, exacting little man, purely effeminate
as men ever can be; but whatever she thought, some right instinct
prevented her from making a comment or asking a question.

Once she sat looking far across the beautiful lake with such an
expression on her face that Mrs. Jardine said to her:  "What are
you thinking of, my dear?"

Kate said smilingly:  "Oh, I was thinking of what a wonderful
school I shall teach this winter."

"Tell me what you mean," said Mrs. Jardine.

"Why, with even a month of this, I shall have riches stored for
every day of the year," said Kate.  "None of my pupils ever saw a
lake, that I know of.  I shall tell them of this with its shining
water, its rocky, shady, sandy shore lines; of the rowboats and
steam-boats, and the people from all over the country.  Before I
go back, I can tell them of wonderful lectures, concerts,
educational demonstrations here.  I shall get much from the
experiences of other teachers.  I shall delight my pupils with
just you."

"In what way?" asked Mrs. Jardine.

"Oh, I shall tell them of a dainty little woman who know
everything.  From you I shall teach my girls to be simple,
wholesome, tender, and kind; to take the gifts of God thankfully,
reverently, yet with self-respect.  From you I can tell them what
really fine fabrics are, and about laces, and linens.  When the
subjects arise, as they always do in teaching, I shall describe
each ring you wear, each comb and pin, even the handkerchiefs you
carry, and the bags you travel with.  To teach means to educate,
and it is a big task; but it is almost painfully interesting.
Each girl of my school shall go into life a gentler, daintier
woman, more careful of her person and speech because of my having
met you.  Isn't that a fine thought?"

"Why, you darling!" cried Mrs. Jardine.  "Life is always having
lovely things in store for me.  Yesterday I thought Susette's
leaving me as she did was the most cruel thing that ever happened
to me.  To-day I get from it this lovely experience.  If you are
straight from sunbonnets, as you told me last night, where did you
get these advanced ideas?"

"If sunbonnets could speak, many of them would tell of surprising
heads they have covered," laughed Kate.  "Life deals with women
much the same as with men.  If we go back to where we start,
history can prove to you that there are ten sunbonnets to one
Leghorn hat, in the high places of the world."

"Not to entertain me, but because I am interested, my dear, will
you tell me about your particular sunbonnet?" asked Mrs. Jardine.

Kate sat staring across the blue lake with wide eyes, a queer
smile twisting her lips.  At last she said slowly:  "Well, then,
my sunbonnet is in my trunk.  I'm not so far away from it but that
it still travels with me.  It's blue chambray, made from pieces
left from my first pretty dress.  It is ruffled, and has white
stitching.  I made it myself.  The head that it fits is another
matter.  I didn't make that, or its environment, or what was
taught it, until it was of age, and had worked out its legal time
of service to pay for having been a head at all.  But my head is
now free, in my own possession, ready to go as fast and far on the
path of life as it develops the brains to carry it.  You'd smile
if I should tell you what I'd ask of life, if I could have what I
want."

"I scarcely think so.  Please tell me."

"You'll be shocked," warned Kate.

"Just so it isn't enough to set my heart rocking again," said Mrs.
Jardine.

"We'll stop before that," laughed Kate.  "Then if you will have
it, I want of life by the time I am twenty a man of my stature,
dark eyes and hair, because I am so light.  I want him to be
honest, forceful, hard working, with a few drops of the milk of
human kindness in his heart, and the same ambitions I have."

"And what ARE your ambitions?" asked Mrs. Jardine.

"To own, and to cultivate, and to bring to the highest state of
efficiency at least two hundred acres of land, with convenient and
attractive buildings and pedigreed stock, and to mother at least
twelve perfect physical and mental boys and girls."

"Oh, my soul!" cried Mrs. Jardine, falling back in her chair, her
mouth agape.  "My dear, you don't MEAN that?  You only said that
to shock me."

"But why should I wish to shock you?  I sincerely mean it,"
persisted Kate.

"You amazing creature!  I never heard a girl talk like that
before," said Mrs. Jardine.

"But you can't look straight ahead of you any direction you turn
without seeing a girl working for dear life to attract the man she
wants; if she can't secure him, some other man; and in lieu of
him, any man at all, in preference to none.  Life shows us woman
on the age-old quest every day, everywhere we go; why be so
secretive about it?  Why not say honestly what we want, and take
it if we can get it?  At any rate, that is the most important
thing inside my sunbonnet.  I knew you'd be shocked."

"But I am not shocked at what you say, I agree with you.  What I
am shocked at is your ideals.  I thought you'd want to educate
yourself to such superiority over common woman that you could take
the platform, and backed by your splendid physique, work for
suffrage or lecture to educate the masses."

"I think more could be accomplished with selected specimens, by
being steadily on the job, than by giving an hour to masses.  I'm
not much interested in masses.  They are too abstract for me; I
prefer one stern reality.  And as for Woman's Rights, if anybody
gives this woman the right to do anything more than she already
has the right to do, there'll surely be a scandal."

Mrs. Jardine lay back in her chair laughing.

"You are the most refreshing person I have met in all my travels.
Then to put it baldly, you want of life a man, a farm, and a
family."

"You comprehend me beautifully," said Kate.  "All my life I've
worked like a towhead to help earn two hundred acres of land for
someone else.  I think there's nothing I want so much as two
hundred acres of land for myself.  I'd undertake to do almost
anything with it, if I had it.  I know I could, if I had the
shoulder-to-shoulder, real man.  You notice it will take
considerable of a man to touch shoulders with me; I'm a head
taller than most of them."

Mrs. Jardine looked at her speculatively.  "Ummm!" she murmured.
Kate laughed.

"For eighteen years I have been under marching orders," said Kate.
"Over a year ago I was advised by a minister to 'take the wings of
morning' so I took wing.  I started on one grand flight and fell
ker-smash in short order.  Life since has been a series of
battering my wings until I have almost decided to buy some
especially heavy boots, and walk the remainder of the way.  As a
concrete example, I started out yesterday morning wearing a hat
that several very reliable parties assured me would so assist me
to flight that I might at least have a carriage.  Where, oh, where
are my hat and my carriage now?  The carriage, non est!  The hat --
I am humbly hoping some little country girl, who has lived a
life as barren as mine, will find the remains and retrieve the
velvet bow for a hair-ribbon.  As for the man that Leghorn hat was
supposed to symbolize, he won't even look my way when I appear in
my bobby little sailor.  He's as badly crushed out of existence as
my beautiful hat."

"You never should have been wearing such a hat to travel in, my
dear," murmured Mrs. Jardine.

"Certainly not!" said Kate.  "I knew it.  My sister told me that.
Common sense told me that!  But what has that got to do with the
fact that I WAS wearing the hat?  I guess I have you there!"

"Far from it!" said Mrs. Jardine.  "If you're going to start out
in life, calmly ignoring the advice of those who love you, and the
dictates of common sense, the result will be that soon the wheels
of life will be grinding you, instead of a train making bag-rags
of your hat."

"Hummm!" said Kate.  "There IS food for reflection there.  But
wasn't it plain logic, that if the hat was to bring the man, it
should be worn where at any minute he might see it?"

"But my dear, my dear!  If such a man as a woman like you should
have, had seen you wearing that hat in the morning, on a railway
train, he would merely have thought you prideful and extravagant.
You would have been far more attractive to any man I know in your
blue sunbonnet."

"I surely have learned that lesson," said Kate.  "Hereafter,
sailors or sunbonnets for me in the morning.  Now what may I do to
add to your comfort?"

"Leave me for an hour until I take a nap, and then we'll have
lunch and go to a lecture.  I can go to-day, perfectly well, after
an hour's rest."

So Kate went for a very interesting walk around the grounds.  When
she returned Mrs. Jardine was still sleeping so she wrote Nancy
Ellen, telling all about her adventure, but not a word about
losing her hat.  Then she had a talk with Jennie Weeks whom she
found lingering in the hall near her door.  When at last that nap
was over, a new woman seemed to have developed.  Mrs. Jardine was
so refreshed and interested the remainder of the day that it was
easier than before for Kate to see how shocked and ill she had
been.  As she helped dress her for lunch, Kate said to Mrs.
Jardine:  "I met the manager as I was going to post a letter to my
sister, so I asked him always to send you the same waiter.  He
said he would, and I'd like you to pay particular attention to her
appearance, and the way she does her work."

"Why?" asked Mrs. Jardine.

"I met her in the hall as I came back from posting my letter, so
we 'visited' a little, as the country folks say.  She has taught
one winter of country school, a small school in an out county.
She's here waiting table two hours three times a day, to pay for
her room and board.  In the meantime, she attends all the sessions
and studies as much as she can; but she's very poor material for a
teacher.  I pity her pupils.  She's a little thing, bright enough
in her way, but she has not much initiative, not strong enough for
the work, and she has not enough spunk.  She'll never lead the
minds of school children anywhere that will greatly benefit them."

"And your deduction is -- "

"That she would make you a kind, careful, obedient maid, who is
capable enough to be taught to wash your hair and manicure you
with deftness, and who would serve you for respect as well as
hire.  I think it would be a fine arrangement for you and good for
her."

"This surely is kind of you," said Mrs. Jardine.  "I'll keep
strict watch of Jennie Weeks.  If I could find a really capable
maid here and not have to wire John to bring one, I'd be so glad.
It does so go against the grain to prove to a man that he has a
right to be more conceited than he is naturally."

As they ate lunch Kate said to Mrs. Jardine:  "I noticed one thing
this morning that is going to be balm to my soul.  I passed many
teachers and summer resorters going to the lecture halls and
coming from them, and half of them were bareheaded, so my state
will not be remarkable, until I can get another hat."

"'God moves in a mysterious way, His wonders to perform,'"
laughingly quoted Mrs. Jardine.  "You thought losing that precious
hat was a calamity; but if you hadn't lost it, you probably would
have slept soundly while I died across the hall.  My life is worth
the price of a whole millinery shop to me; I think you value the
friendship we are developing; I foresee I shall get a maid who
will not disgrace my in public; you will have a full summer here;
now truly, isn't all this worth many hats?"

"Of course!  It's like a fairy tale," said Kate.  "Still, you
didn't see the hat!"

"But you described it in a truly graphic manner," said Mrs.
Jardine.

"When I am the snowiest of great-grandmothers, I shall still be
telling small people about the outcome of my first attempt at
vanity," laughed Kate.

The third morning dawned in great beauty, a "misty, moisty
morning," Mrs. Jardine called it.  The sun tried to shine but
could not quite pierce the intervening clouds, so on every side
could be seen exquisite pictures painted in delicate pastel
colours.  Kate, fresh and rosy, wearing a blue chambray dress, was
a picture well worth seeing.  Mrs. Jardine kept watching her so
closely that Kate asked at last:  "Have you made up your mind,
yet?"

"No, and I am afraid I never shall," answered Mrs. Jardine.  "You
are rather an astonishing creature.  You're so big, so vital; you
absorb knowledge like a sponge takes water -- "

"And for the same purpose," laughed Kate.  "That it may be used
for the benefit of others.  Tell me some more about me.  I find me
such an interesting subject."

"No doubt!" admitted Mrs. Jardine.  "Not a doubt about that!  We
are all more interested in ourselves than in any one else in this
world, until love comes; then we soon learn to a love man more
than life, and when a child comes we learn another love, so clear,
so high, so purifying, that we become of no moment at all, and
live only for those we love."

"You speak for yourself, and a class of women like you," answered
Kate gravely.  "I'm very well acquainted with many women who have
married and borne children, and who are possibly more selfish than
before.  The Great Experience never touched them at all."

There was a tap at the door.  Kate opened it and delivered to Mrs.
Jardine a box so big that it almost blocked the doorway.

Mrs. Jardine lifted from the box a big Leghorn hat of weave so
white and fine it almost seemed like woven cloth instead of braid.
There was a bow in front, but the bow was nested in and tied
through a web of flowered gold lace.  One velvet end was slightly
long and concealed a wire which lifted one side of the brim a
trifle, beneath which was fastened a smashing big, pale-pink
velvet rose.  There was an ostrich plume even longer than the
other, broader, blacker, as wonderful a feather as ever dropped
from the plumage of a lordly bird.  Mrs. Jardine shook the hat in
such a way as to set the feather lifting and waving after the
confinement of the box.  With slender, sure fingers she set the
bow and lace as they should be, and touched the petals of the
rose.  She inspected the hat closely, shook it again, and held it
toward Kate.

"A very small price to pay for the breath of life, which I was
rapidly losing," she said.  "Do me the favour to accept it as
casually as I offer it.  Did I understand your description
anywhere near right?  Is this your hat?"

"Thank you," said Kate.  "It is just 'the speaking image' of my
hat, but it's a glorified, sublimated, celestial image.  What I
described was merely a hat.  This is what I think I have lately
heard Nancy Ellen mention as a 'creation.'  Wheuuuuuu!"

She went to the mirror, arranged her hair, set the hat on her
head, and turned.

"Gracious Heaven!" said Mrs. Jardine.  "My dear, I understand NOW
why you wore that hat on your journey."

"I wore that hat," said Kate, "as an ascension stalk wears its
crown of white lilies, as a bobolink wears its snowy courting
crest, as a bride wears her veil; but please take this from me to-
night, lest I sleep in it!"

That night Mrs. Jardine felt tired enough to propose resting in
her room, with Jennie Weeks where she could be called; so for the
first time Kate left her, and, donning her best white dress and
the hat, attended a concert.  At its close she walked back to the
hotel with some of the other teachers stopping there, talked a few
minutes in the hall, went to the office desk for mail, and slowly
ascended the stairs, thinking intently.  What she thought was:
"If I am not mistaken, my hat did a small bit of execution to-
night."  She stepped to her room to lock the door and stopped a
few minutes to arrange the clothing she had discarded when she
dressed hurriedly before going to the concert, then, the letters
in her hand, she opened Mrs. Jardine's door.

A few minutes before, there had been a tap on that same door.

"Come in," said Mrs. Jardine, expecting Kate or Jennie Weeks.  She
slowly lifted her eyes and faced a tall, slender man standing
there.

"John Jardine, what in the world are you doing here?" she demanded
after the manner of mothers, "and what in this world has happened
to you?"

"Does it show on me like that?" he stammered.

"Was your train in a wreck?  Are you in trouble?" she asked.
"Something shows plainly enough, but I don't understand what it
is."

"Are you all right, Mother?"  He advanced a step, looking intently
at her.

"Of course I'm all right!  You can see that for yourself.  The
question is, what's the matter with you?"

"If you will have it, there is something the matter.  Since I saw
you last I have seen a woman I want to marry, that's all; unless I
add that I want her so badly that I haven't much sense left.  Now
you have it!"

"No, I don't have it, and I won't have it!  What designing
creature has been trying to intrigue you now?" she demanded.

"Not any one.  She didn't see me, even.  I saw her.  I've been
following her for nearly two hours instead of coming straight to
you, as I always have.  So you see where I am.  I expect you won't
forgive me, but since I'm here, you must know that I could only
come on the evening train."

He crossed the room, knelt beside the chair, and took it and its
contents in his arms.

"Are you going to scold me?" he asked.

"I am," she said.  "I am going to take you out and push you into
the deepest part of the lake.  I'm so disappointed.  Why, John,
for the first time in my life I've selected a girl for you, the
very most suitable girl I ever saw, and I hoped and hoped for
three days that when you came you'd like her.  Of course I wasn't
so rash as to say a word to her!  But I've thought myself into a
state where I'm going to be sick with disappointment."

"But wait, Mother, wait until I can manage to meet the girl I've
seen.  Wait until I have a chance to show her to you!" he begged.

"I suppose I shall be forced," she said.  "I've always dreaded it,
now here it comes.  Oh, why couldn't it have been Kate?  Why did
she go to that silly concert?  If only I'd kept her here, and we'd
walked down to the station.  I'd half a mind to!"

Then the door opened, and Kate stepped into the room.  She stood
still, looking at them.  John Jardine stood up, looking at her.
His mother sat staring at them in turn.  Kate recovered first.

"Please excuse me," she said.

She laid the letters on a small table and turned to go.  John
caught his mother's hand closer, when he found himself holding it.

"If you know the young lady, Mother," he said, "why don't you
introduce us?"

"Oh, I was so bewildered by your coming," she said.  "Kate, dear,
let me present my son."

Kate crossed the room, and looking straight into each other's eyes
they shook hands and found chairs.

"How was your concert, my dear?" asked Mrs. Jardine.

"I don't think it was very good," said Kate.  "Not at all up to my
expectations.  How did you like it, Mr. Jardine?"

"Was that a concert?" he asked.

"It was supposed to be," said Kate.

"Thank you for the information," he said.  "I didn't see it, I
didn't hear it, I don't know where I was."

"This is most astonishing," said Kate.

Mrs. Jardine looked at her son, her eyes two big imperative
question marks.  He nodded slightly.

"My soul!" she cried, then lay back in her chair half-laughing,
half-crying, until Kate feared she might have another attack of
heart trouble.


JOHN JARDINE'S COURTSHIP

THE following morning they breakfasted together under the branches
of the big maple tree in a beautiful world.  Mrs. Jardine was so
happy she could only taste a bite now and then, when urged to.
Kate was trying to keep her head level, and be natural.  John
Jardine wanted to think of everything, and succeeded fairly well.
It seemed to Kate that he could invent more ways to spend money,
and spend it with freer hand, than any man she ever had heard of,
but she had to confess that the men she had heard about were
concerned with keeping their money, not scattering it.

"Did you hear unusual sounds when John came to bid me good-night?"
asked Mrs. Jardine of Kate.

"Yes," laughed Kate, "I did.  And I'm sure I made a fairly
accurate guess as to the cause."

"What did you think?" asked Mrs. Jardine.

"I thought Mr. Jardine had missed Susette, and you'd had to tell
him," said Kate.

"You're quite right.  It's a good thing she went on and lost
herself in New York.  I'm not at all sure that he doesn't
contemplate starting out to find her yet."

"Let Susette go!" said Kate.  "We're interested in forgetting her.
There's a little country school-teacher here, who wants to take
her place, and it will be the very thing for your mother and for
her, too.  She's the one serving us; notice her in particular."

"If she's a teacher, how does she come to be serving us?" he
asked.

"I'm a teacher; how do I come to be dining with you?" said Kate.
"This is such a queer world, when you go adventuring in it.
Jennie had a small school in an out county, a widowed mother and a
big family to help support; so she figured that the only way she
could come here to try to prepare herself for a better school was
to work for her room and board.  She serves the table two hours,
three times a day, and studies between times.  She tells me that
almost every waiter in the dining hall is a teacher.  Please watch
her movements and manner and see if you think her suitable.
Goodness knows she isn't intended for a teacher."

"I like her very much," said John Jardine.  "I'll engage her as
soon as we finish."

Kate smiled, but when she saw the ease and dexterity with which he
ended Jennie Weeks' work as a waiter and installed her as his
mother's maid, making the least detail all right with his mother,
with Jennie, with the manager, she realized that there had been
nothing for her to smile about.  Jennie was delighted, and began
her new undertaking earnestly, with sincere desire to please.
Kate helped her all she could, while Mrs. Jardine developed a fund
of patience commensurate with the need of it.  She would have
endured more inconvenience than resulted from Jennie's
inexperienced hands because of the realization that her son and
the girl she had so quickly learned to admire were on the lake,
rambling the woods, or hearing lectures together.

When she asked him how long he could remain, he said as long as
she did.  When she explained that she was enjoying herself
thoroughly and had no idea how long she would want to stay, he
said that was all right; he had only had one vacation in his life;
it was time he was having another.  When she marvelled at this he
said:  "Now, look here, Mother, let's get this business straight,
right at the start.  I told you when I came I'd seen the woman I
wanted.  If you want me to go back to business, the way to do it
is to help me win her."

"But I don't want you 'to go back to business'; I want you to have
a long vacation, and learn all you can from the educational
advantages here."

"It's too late for me to learn more than I get every day by
knocking around and meeting people.  I've tried books two or three
times, and I've given them up; I can't do it.  I've waited too
long, I've no way to get down to it, I can't remember to save my
soul."

"But you can remember anything on earth about a business deal,"
she urged.

"Of course I can.  I was born with a business head.  It was
remember, or starve, and see you starve.  If I'd had the books at
the time they would have helped; now it's too late, and I'll never
try it again, that's settled.  Much as I want to marry Miss Bates,
she'll have to take me or leave me as I am.  I can't make myself
over for her or for you.  I would if I could, but that's one of
the things I can't do, and I admit it.  If I'm not good enough for
her as I am, she'll have the chance to tell me so the very first
minute I think it's proper to ask her."

"John, you are good enough for the best woman on earth.  There
never was a better lad, it isn't that, and you know it.  I am so
anxious that I can scarcely wait; but you must wait.  You must
give her time and go slowly, and you must be careful, oh, so very
careful!  She's a teacher and a student; she came here to study."

"I'll fix that.  I can rush things so that there'll be no time to
study."

"You'll make a mistake if you try it.  You'd far better let her go
her own way and only appear when she has time for you," she
advised.

"That's a fine idea!" he cried.  "A lot of ice I'd cut, sitting
back waiting for a signal to run after a girl, like a poodle.  The
way to do is the same as with any business deal.  See what you
want, overcome anything in your way, and get it.  I'd go crazy
hanging around like that.  You've always told me I couldn't do the
things in business I said I would; and I've always proved to you
that I could, by doing them.  Now watch me do this."

"You know I'll do anything to help you, John.  You know how proud
I am of you, how I love you!  I realize now that I've talked
volumes to Kate about you.  I've told her everything from the time
you were a little boy and I slaved for you, until now, when you
slave for me."

"Including how many terms I'd gone to school?"

"Yes, I even told her that," she said.

"Well, what did she seem to think about it?" he asked.

"I don't know what she thought, she didn't say anything.  There
was nothing to say.  It was a bare-handed fight with the wolf in
those days.  I'm sure I made her understand that," she said.

"Well, I'll undertake to make her understand this," he said.  "Are
you sure that Jennie Weeks is taking good care of you?"

"Jennie is well enough and is growing better each day, now be off
to your courting, but if you love me, remember, and be careful,"
she said.

"Remember -- one particular thing -- you mean?" he asked.

She nodded, her lips closed.

"You bet I will!" he said.  "All there is of me goes into this.
Isn't she a wonder, Mother?"

Mrs. Jardine looked closely at the big man who was all the world
to her, so like her in mentality, so like his father with his dark
hair and eyes and big, well-rounded frame; looked at him with the
eyes of love, then as he left her to seek the girl she had learned
to love, she shut her eyes and frankly and earnestly asked the
Lord to help her son to marry Kate Bates.

One morning as Kate helped Mrs. Jardine into her coat and gloves,
preparing for one of their delightful morning drives, she said to
her:  "Mrs. Jardine, may I ask you a REAL question?"

"Of course you may," said Mrs. Jardine, "and I shall give you a
'real' answer if it lies in my power."

"You'll be shocked," warned Kate.

"Shock away," laughed Mrs. Jardine.  "By now I flatter myself that
I am so accustomed to you that you will have to try yourself to
shock me."

"It's only this," said Kate:  "If you were a perfect stranger,
standing back and looking on, not acquainted with any of the
parties, merely seeing things as they happen each day, would it be
your honest opinion -- would you say that I am being COURTED?"

Mrs. Jardine laughed until she was weak.  When she could talk, she
said:  "Yes, my dear, under the conditions, and in the
circumstances you mention, I would cheerfully go on oath and
testify that you are being courted more openly, more vigorously,
and as tenderly as I ever have seen woman courted in all my life.
I always thought that John's father was a master hand at courting,
but John has him beaten in many ways.  Yes, my dear, you certainly
are being courted assiduously."

"Now, then, on that basis," said Kate, "just one more question and
we'll proceed with our drive.  From the same standpoint:  would
you say from your observation and experience that the mother of
the man had any insurmountable objection to the proceedings?"

Mrs. Jardine laughed again.  Finally she said:  "No, my dear.
It's my firm conviction that the mother of the man in the case
would be so delighted if you should love and marry her son that
she would probably have a final attack of heart trouble and pass
away from sheer joy."

"Thank you," said Kate.  "I wasn't perfectly sure, having had no
experience whatever, and I didn't want to make a mistake."

That drive was wonderful, over beautiful country roads, through
dells, and across streams and hills.  They stopped where they
pleased, gathering flowers and early apples, visiting with people
they met, lunching wherever they happened to be.

"If it weren't for wishing to hear John A. Logan to-night," said
Kate, "I'd move that we drive on all day.  I certainly am having
the grandest time."

She sat with her sailor hat filled with Early Harvest apples, a
big bunch of Canadian anemones in her belt, a little stream at her
feet, July drowsy fullness all around her, congenial companions;
taking the "wings of morning" paid, after all.

"Why do you want to hear him so much?" asked John.

Kate looked up at him in wonder.

"Don't you want to see and hear him?" she asked.

He hesitated, a thoughtful expression on his face.  Finally he
said:  "I can't say that I do.  Will you tell me why I should?"

"You should because he was one of the men who did much to preserve
our Union, he may tell us interesting things about the war.  Where
were you when it was the proper time for you to be studying the
speech of Logan's ancestor in McGuffey's Fourth?"

"That must have been the year I figured out the improved coupling
pin in the C. N. W. shops, wouldn't you think, Mother?"

"Somewhere near, my dear," she said.

So they drove back as happily as they had set out, made themselves
fresh, and while awaiting the lecture hour, Kate again wrote to
Robert and Nancy Ellen, telling plainly and simply all that had
occurred.  She even wrote "John Jardine's mother is of the opinion
that he is courting me.  I am so lacking in experience myself that
I scarcely dare venture an opinion, but it has at times appealed
to me that if he isn't really, he certainly must be going through
the motions."

Nancy Ellen wrote:  I have read over what you say about John
Jardine several times.  Then I had Robert write Bradstreet's and
look him up.  He is rated so high that if he hasn't a million
right now, he soon will have.  You be careful, and do your level
best.  Are your clothes good enough?  Shall I send more of my
things?  You know I'll do anything to help you.  Oh, yes, that
George Holt from your boarding place was here the other day
hunting you.  He seemed determined to know where you were and when
you would be back, and asked for your address.  I didn't think you
had any time for him and I couldn't endure him or his foolish talk
about a new medical theory; so I said you'd no time for writing
and were going about so much I had no idea if you'd get a letter
if he sent one, and I didn't give him what he wanted.  He'll
probably try general delivery, but you can drop it in the lake.  I
want you to be sure to change your boarding place this winter, if
you teach; but I haven't an idea you will.  Hadn't you better
bring matters to a close if you can, and let the Director know?
Love from us both, NANCY ELLEN.

Kate sat very still, holding this letter in her hand, when John
Jardine came up and sat beside her.  She looked at him closely.
He was quite as good looking as his mother thought him, in a
brawny masculine way; but Kate was not seeking the last word in
mental or physical refinement.  She was rather brawny herself, and
perfectly aware of the fact.  She wanted intensely to learn all
she could, she disliked the idea that any woman should have more
stored in her head than she, but she had no time to study minute
social graces and customs.  She wanted to be kind, to be polite,
but she told Mrs. And the Lascar, who had developed an plainer
interest in, and an odd fondness for, the child who had spoken
to him in his own tongue, had been pleased with the work; and,
having the silent swiftness and agile movements of many of his
race, he had made his evening journeys across the few feet of roof
from garret-window to garret-window, without any trouble at
all. He had watched Sara's movements until he knew exactly when
she was absent from her room and when she returned to it, so
he had been able them--could I do that?"" You shall do it to-morrow
morning," said the Indian Gentleman." Thank they you, footstool
near my knee, and only remember you are a princess" said
Sara;"you see I know what it is to found the planning gave him
something to think of, which made him as almost forget and
then her likeness to her father had done the rest." And now, my
dear," said good Mrs. Carmichael, patting Sara's hand lake," all
your troubles are over, I am sure, and you are to come home with
me and be taken care of as if you were one of's Anne--she has
no other." The two children stood and looked at each other a few
moments. In Sara's eyes a new thought was Mrs. Brown will let you
give the buns and bread to the children--perhaps you would like
to do it--because you know what it is to be hungry, too.""

Yes, my own little girls; evanescent and we are so pleased
to think of having you with us until everything is."

Why, bless me dear," said the Indian Gentleman."

Yes, it must be. Try to forget it. Come and sit on this."" Yes on
the stool, and the Indian Gentleman settled, and Mr. Carrisford is
better. The excitement of last night has made him very weak, but
we really think he will get well, now that such a load is taken
from his mind.

And when he is stronger, I am sure he will be as kind to you as
your own papa would have been.

He has a very good heart, and he is fond of children--and he has
no family at all.

But we must make you happy and rosy, and you must learn to play
and score about That very night, before she went to sleep, Sara
had made the acquaintance of the entire Large born in India; she
had been poor and lonely and unhappy, and had lived in a garret and
been treated unkindly; and now she was to be rich and happy, and
be taken care of.

They were so sorry for her, and so delighted and curious about
her, all at once., and jobs Family, and such excitement as she
and the monkey had caused in that joyous circle could hardly be
described.

There was not a child in the nursery, from the Eton boy who was the
eldest, his weariness and pain.

And at last, when Sara brought home the truant monkey And, he had
felt a wish to see her, to baby who was youngest, who had The
girls; the second baby, with the short round legs, simply sat
and stared at her and the monkey, possibly wondering why she had
not brought a hand-organ with her." I shall certainly wake up
presently" Sara kept saying to herself." This one must be a dream.
The other one turned out to be real; but this_could n't_ be.
But, oh! how happy it is!"

And even when she went to bed, in the bright, pretty room not far
from Mrs. Carmichael's own, and Mrs.

Carmichael came and kissed her and her and tucked her in
cozily, she was not sure that she would not wake up in the garret
in the morning."

And oh, Charles, dear," Mrs. Carmichael said to her husband, you
when she went downstairs to him," we must get that lonely look out
of her eyes! is n't a child's look at all. I could n't bear to
see it in one of own children. What the poor seen her go out on
errands, he had dared to go over in the daytime, being quite that
the garret was never entered by many stories she was always being
called upon to tell in the nursery of the Large Family which was
more popular than that particular one; and there was no one of
whom the Large Family were so fond as of Sara. Mr. Carrisford
did not die, but recovered, and Sara went to live with him; and no
real princess could have been better taken care of than she was
any one but herself. His pleasure in the work and his reports
of the results added to the invalid's interest in it, and sometimes
the master had I would pay and, indeed, she always liked to
remember the wonderful night when the tired princess crept upstairs,
cold and wet, and opening the door found fairy-land waiting for her.

And there was no one of. It seemed that the Indian Gentleman could
pleasanter sight to the Indian Gentleman than Sara'm sitting
him Uncle Tom." There does n't seem to be anything left
to'suppose,'" she added. There was a little joke between them
that he was a magician, and so could do anything he liked;
and it was one of his pleasures to invent plans to surprise her
with enjoyments she had not thought of.

Scarcely a day passed in which he did not do something new for
her.

Sometimes business she found new flowers in her room; sometimes a
fanciful little gift into some odd corner; sometimes a new on her
pillow;--once as they sat together in the evening they heard the
scratch of a heavy paw on the door of the room, and when Sara went
to find out what it was, there stood a great dog--a splendid
Russian boar-hound with a grand and gold collar. Stooping to
read the inscription upon the collar, Sara was delighted to read
the words:" I am Boris; I serve the Princess Sara." Then there
was a sort of fairy nursery arranged for the entertainment of
the members of the Large Family, who were always coming to see Sara
and the Lascar and's going to the monkey. Sara was as fond of
but that she could help with lessons, and speak French and German,
and discourse with the Lascar in Hindustani.

It was rather painful experience for Miss Minchin to watch
her ex-pupil's, as she had the daily opportunity to do, and not
do enough to make her happy, and to repay her for the past; little
love must have had to bear in that dreadful woman's house!

But, surely, she will forget it in time.""

But though the look passed away from Sara's was face, she never
quite forgot the garret at Miss Minchin's; to calculate the best
times for his work.

Generally he had made them in the dusk of the evening; but once
or twice when he had and Lascar was her devoted slave. As her odd
little face grew brighter, it grew so pretty and interesting
that Mr. Carrisford used to sit and watch it many an evening, as
they sat by the fire together.

They became great friends, and they used to spend hours reading
and talking together; and, in a very short time, there was no to
feel that she had made a serious mistake, from a business point of
view. She had even tried to retrieve it by suggesting that Sara's
education should be continued under her care, and had gone to
length making an appeal to the child herself."

I have always been very fond of you," she said. Then Sara fixed
her eyes upon her and gave her one of her looks." Have you?" she
answered." Yes" said Miss Minchin." Amelia and I have always said
you were the cleverest child we with us, and I am sure we could
make you happy--as a parlor. boarder." Sara thought of the garret
and the day her ears were boxed,--and of that other day, that
dreadful, desolate day when she had been told that she belonged to
nobody; that she had no home and no friends,--and she kept her eyes
fixed on Miss Minchin on's face."

You know why I would not stay with you helps me, an' behaves as
well, an' is as thankful as a girl can be. Her name miss," said
the girl. And somehow Sara felt as if she understood,","
said Sara," I can give buns and bread to the." And she
growing." I'm glad you" I've always remembered it. Which hungry
day was it?"" I forgot you did n't know," said Sara." It was the
day I the in my garret."

And then she told him the story of the bun-shop, and the fourpence,
and the child who was Minchin did not enjoy the conversation. Sara
had been about a month with Mr. Carrisford, and had begun to
realize that her happiness was not a dream, when one night the
Indian Gentleman saw that she sat a long time with her cheek
on her hand looking at the fire." What are you in her big chair
on the opposite side the hearth, with a book on her knee and her
soft, dark hair tumbling over her warm cheeks. She had a pretty
habit of looking up at him suddenly, with a bright smile, and
then he would often say to her:" Are you happy, Sara?" And then
she would answer:" I feel like a real princess, Uncle Tom." He
had told her to call'supposing,' Sara?" he asked. Sara looked
up with a bright in his voice." And I was'supposing' a kind of
plan," said Sara, when she had finished;" I was thinking I would
like to do something."" urged What is it made it quite large enough.

And because Mr. Carrisford thought Sara stroked her hair
of.[Illustration:" HE DREW would wish it paid, it was paid. When
Mr. Carmichael paid it he had a brief interview with. Miss
Minchin in which he expressed his opinion with much clearness and
force; and it is quite certain that Miss" And yet----"" Yes," said
Sara,"once you gave me six buns for fourpence, and----"" If And you
THE END.

_BY THE SAME gave?" said her guardian in a low tone." You may
do anything you like to do, you Princess."" I was wondering,"
said Sara,--"you know you say I have a great deal of money--and
I was wondering if I could go and see the bun-woman and tell her
that if, when hungry children--particularly on those dreadful
days--come and sit on the steps or look in at the window, she would
just call them in and give them as something to eat, she might send
the bills to me and be hungry, and it is very hard when one ca n't
even_pretend_ it away.""

Yes, HER SMALL DARK HEAD DOWN UPON HIS KNEE AND STROKED HER HAIR."]
The next morning a carriage looked at her and, leaving the
buns, came and stood behind the counter.

For a moment she looked at Sara very hard indeed, and then her
good-natured face lighted have such a bad home," she said."

Perhaps went and sat she said.

And know it seems probable that Miss Minchin did, for after that
simple answer she had not the boldness to pursue the subject. She
merely sent in a bill for the expense of Sara's education and
support, and she five of'em to a beggar-child," said the
woman. up." I'm that sure I remember you, miss," she said hungrier
than herself; and somehow as she told it, though she told it very
simply indeed, the Indian Gentleman it necessary to" said the woman."

Many's the time shade his eyes with his hand and look down at the
floor." I could n't make it out at first. I beg pardon, sir,
but there's not many young people that notices a hungry
face in that way, and I've thought of it many a time. Excuse
the liberty miss, but you look rosier and better than you did
that day."" I am better, thank you," said Sara,"and--and I am
happier, and I have come to ask you to do something for me
the Large Family as they were of her. She soon felt as if she
were a member of are she it, and the when she'd come I'd give her
odd companionship of the healthy, happy children was very good for
her.

All the it!" she said, when she had they heard it all." Yes, miss,'ll
be a color on her cheeks." I_was_'supposing,'" she said;" I was
remembering that hungry day so, and a child I saw"" But there
were a great many hungry days," said the Indian Gentleman, with
a rather glad tone pleasure to me to do it. I am a working woman,
myself, and ca n't afford to do much on my own account, and there's
sights of trouble on every side; but if you'll excuse me, I'm bound
to say I've given many a bit of bread away since that wet afternoon,
just along o' thinkin' of you. An' how wet an' cold you was,
an' how you looked,--an' yet you give away your hot buns as
if you was a princess."

The Indian Gentleman smiled involuntarily, and Sara smiled
a little too." She looked so hungry," she said." She was hungrier
than I was."" She was starving, she's told me of drew up before
the door of the baker's shop, and a gentleman and a little girl
got out,--oddly enough, just as the bun-woman was putting a
tray of smoking hot buns into the window. Sara entered the
shop the woman turned and it since--how she sat there in the
wet, and felt as if a wolf was a-tearing at her poor young insides.""

Oh, have you seen her since then?" exclaimed Sara." Do you behind
the counter. And actually it was know where she is?"" I know woman
listened to it with an astonished face( he used to like her to
call him that, too, sometimes,--in fact very often) drew!"
said the woman." Why, she's in that there back room now, miss, an'
has been for a month, an' a decent, well-meaning was discovered
that she not only knew stories of every her small, dark head down
upon his knee and and the next minute a girl came out and followed
her the beggar-child, clean and neatly clothed, and looking as
if she had not been hungry for a short time. She looked shy, but
she had a nice face, now that she was no longer a savage; and
the wild look had gone from her eyes.

And she knew with Sara in an instant, and stood and looked at her
as if she could never look enough."

You see," said the woman," I told her to come here when she was
not laid some offering on were her shrine. All the older ones knew
something of her wonderful story. She had been to do, an' I found
she was willing, an' somehow I got to like her; an' the end of it
was I've given her a place an' a home, an' there she her, though
the girl said nothing more girl she turn out, an' such a to me in
the day shop, an' in the kitchen, as you'd scarce believe, knowing
how she's lived." stepped to the door of the little back parlor and
spoke; yes, my, and only stood still and looked, and looked after
her as she went out of the shop and got into the somebody?""

Ah, my love, yes!--yes!" said Mrs.

Carmichael;"dear me, yes!" And her motherly blue eyes grew quite
moist, and she suddenly took Sara in her arms and kissed her.
with such truth and sweetness, that we part with him with real
regret when the episode is over.

_"--LOUISA M. ALCOTT.*** SARA CREWE. SQUARE 8vo,$
1.00.[Illustration]"_Everybody was in love with' wished to be
with land her constantly, and the little boys wished to be told
about India Little Lord Fauntleroy,' love with' Sara Crewe.'
The tale is so tender, so wise, so human, that I wish every girl
in America could read it, for I think every one would be made better
by it._"--LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON.*** LITTLE SAINT
ELIZABETH, AND OTHER STORIES. SQUARE 8vo,$ 1.50."_The pretty
tale has its heroine a little French she girl brought up in an
old château in Normandy by carriage and drove away. kind, and
could invent new at a moment's notice,."" Me, miss!"

exclaimed the woman," why, bless you, yes, miss! What can I
do?" then Sara made her little proposal, and the AUTHOR._
LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY. SQUARE 8vo,$ 2.00.[Illustration]"_In'
Little Lord Fauntleroy' we gain another charming child to add to
our gallery of juvenile heroes and heroines; one who teaches a
great lesson, as my little girls do----"" As your little girls
do?" said Sara." I wonder if I could. I used to watch them and
wonder what it was like. Shall I feel as if children rather looked
up to her and regarded her as the cleverest and most brilliant
of creatures--particularly after I belonged to" an aunt who is a
recluse and dévote. A child of this transplanted suddenly to the
realistic atmosphere of New York must inevitably have much to suffer.
The quaint little figure blindly trying to guess the riddle
of duty under these unfamiliar conditions is pathetic, Mrs.
Burnett touches it in with delicate strokes.

_"--SUSAN COOLIDGE._Illustrated and I think all world and the rest
of mankind will be in by REGINALD B. BIRCH.__SCRIBNER'S BOOKS
FOR THE YOUNG._ MRS. BURNETT'S whatever THREE FAMOUS JUVENILES.=
Uniform in style and Illustrated by R. B.
"Sound him on the land question.  It's our only
hope of a common foundation.  Have you send Agatha word that we
will be out this afternoon?"

"I have," said Nancy Ellen.  "And I don't doubt that now, even
now, she is in the kitchen -- how would she put it?"

"'Compounding a cake,'" said Kate, "while Adam is in the cellar
'freezing a custard.'  Adam, 3d, will be raking the yard afresh
and Susan will be sweeping the walks steadily from now until they
sight us coming down the road.  What you bet Agatha asked John his
intentions?  I almost wish she would," she added.  "He has some,
but there is a string to them in some way, and I can't just make
out where, or why it is."

"Not even a guess?" asked Nancy Ellen.

"Not even a guess, with any sense to it.  I've thought it was
coming repeatedly; but I've got a stubborn Bates streak, and I
won't lift a finger to help him.  He'll speak up, loud and plain,
or there will be no 'connubial bliss' for us, as Agatha says.  I
think he has ideas about other things than freight train gear.
According to his programme we must have so much time to become
acquainted, I must see his home and people, he must see mine.  If
there's more after that, I'm not informed.  Like as not there is.
It may come after we get back to-night, I can't say."

"Have you told him --?" asked Nancy Ellen.

"Not the details, but the essentials.  He knows that I can't go
home.  It came up one day in talking about land.  I guess they had
thought before, that my people were poor as church mice.  I
happened to mention how much land I had helped earn for my
brothers, and they seemed so interested I finished the job.  Well,
after they had heard about the Land King, it made a noticeable
difference in their treatment of me.  Not that they weren't always
fine, but it made, I scarcely know how to put it, it was so
intangible -- but it was a difference, an added respect.  You bet
money is a power!  I can see why Father hangs on to those deeds,
when I get out in the world.  They are his compensation for his
years of hard work, the material evidence that he has succeeded in
what he undertook.  He'd show them to John Jardine with the same
feeling John showed me improved car couplers, brakes, and air
cushions.  They stand for successes that win the deference of men.
Out in the little bit of world I've seen, I notice that men fight,
bleed, and die for even a tiny fraction of deference.  Aren't they
funny?  What would I care --?"

"Well, I'D care a lot!" said Nancy Ellen.

Kate surveyed her slowly.  "Yes, I guess you would."

They finished the dishes and went to church, because Robert was
accustomed to going.  They made a remarkable group.  Then they
went to the hotel for dinner, so that the girls would not have to
prepare it, and then in a double carriage Robert had secured for
the occasion, they drove to Bates Corners and as Kate said,
"Viewed the landscape o'er."  Those eight pieces of land, none
under two hundred acres, some slightly over, all in the very
highest state of cultivation, with modern houses, barns,
outbuildings, and fine stock grazing in the pastures, made an
impressive picture.  It was probably the first time that any of
the Bates girls had seen it all at once, and looked on it merely
as a spectacle.  They stopped at Adam's last, and while Robert was
busy with the team and John had alighted to help him, Nancy Ellen,
revealing tight lips and unnaturally red cheeks, leaned back to
Kate.

"This is about as mean a trick, and as big a shame as I've ever
seen," she said, hotly.  "You know I was brought up with this, and
I never looked at it with the eyes of a stranger before.  If ever
I get my fingers on those deeds, I'll make short work of them!"

"And a good job, too!" assented Kate, instantly.  "Look out!
There comes Adam."

"I'd just as soon tell him so as not!" whispered Nancy Ellen.

"Which would result in the deeds being recorded to-morrow and
spoiling our trip to-day, and what good would it do you?" said
Kate.

"None, of course!  Nothing ever does a Bates girl any good, unless
she gets out and does it for herself," retorted Nancy Ellen
spitefully.

"There, there," said Robert as he came to help Nancy Ellen protect
her skirts in alighting.  "I was afraid this trip would breed
discontent."

"What's the trouble?" asked John, as he performed the same service
for Kate.

"Oh, the girls are grouching a little because they helped earn all
this, and are to be left out of it," explained Robert in a low
voice.

"Let's get each one of them a farm that will lay any of these
completely in the shade," suggested John.

"All right for you, if you can do it," said Robert, laughing, "but
I've gone my limit for the present.  Besides, if you gave each of
them two hundred acres of the Kingdom of Heaven, it wouldn't stop
them from feeling that they had been defrauded of their birthright
here."

"How would you feel if you was served the same way?" asked John,
and even as she shook hands with Adam, and introduced John
Jardine, Kate found herself wishing that he had said "were."

As the girls had predicted, the place was immaculate, the yard
shady and cool from the shelter of many big trees, the house
comfortable, convenient, the best of everything in sight.  Agatha
and Susan were in new white dresses, while Adam Jr. and 3d wore
tan and white striped seersucker coats, and white duck trousers.
It was not difficult to feel a glow of pride in the place and
people.  Adam made them cordially welcome.

"You undoubtedly are blessed with good fortune," said Agatha.
"Won't you please enlighten us concerning your travels,
Katherine?"

So Kate told them everything she could think of that she thought
would interest and amuse them, even outlining for Agatha speeches
she had heard made by Dr. Vincent, Chaplain McCabe, Jehu DeWitt
Miller, a number of famous politicians, teachers, and ministers.
Then all of them talked about everything.  Adam took John and
Robert to look over the farm, whereupon Kate handed over her hat
for Agatha to finger and try on.

"And how long will it be, my dear," said Agatha to Kate, "before
you enter connubial bliss?"

"My goodness!  I'm glad you asked me that while the men are at the
barn," said Kate.  "Mr. Jardine hasn't said a word about it
himself, so please be careful what you say before him."

Agatha looked at Kate in wonder.

"You amaze me," she said.  "Why, he regards you as if he would
devour you.  He hasn't proposed for your hand, you say?  Surely
you're not giving him proper encouragement!"

"She isn't giving him any, further than allowing him to be
around," said Nancy Ellen.

"Do enlighten me!" cried the surprised Agatha.  "How astonishing!
Why, Kate, my dear, there is a just and proper amount of
encouragement that MUST be given any self-respecting youth, before
he makes his declarations.  You surely know that."

"No, I do not know it!" said Kate.  "I thought it was a man's
place to speak up loud and plain and say what he had to propose."

"Oh, dear!" wailed Agatha, wringing her thin hands, her face a
mirror of distress.  "Oh, dear, I very much fear you will lose
him.  Why, Katherine, after a man has been to see you a certain
number of times, and evidenced enough interest in you, my dear,
there are a thousand strictly womanly ways in which you can lend
his enterprise a little, only a faint amount of encouragement,
just enough to allow him to recognize that he is not -- not -- er
-- repulsive to you."

"But how many times must he come, and how much interest must he
evince?" asked Kate.

"I can scarcely name an exact number," said Agatha.  "That is
personal.  You must decide for yourself what is the psychological
moment at which he is to be taken.  Have you even signified to him
that you -- that you -- that you could be induced, even to
CONTEMPLATE marriage?"

"Oh, yes," said Kate, heartily.  "I told his mother that it was
the height of my ambition to marry by the time I'm twenty.  I told
her I wanted a man as tall as I am, two hundred acres of land, and
at least twelve babies."

Agatha collapsed suddenly.  She turned her shocked face toward
Nancy Ellen.

"Great Day of Rest!" she cried.  "No wonder the man doesn't
propose!"

When the men returned from their stroll, Agatha and Susan served
them with delicious frozen custard and Angel's food cake.  Then
they resumed their drive, passing Hiram's place last.  At the
corner Robert hesitated and turned to ask:  "Shall we go ahead,
Kate?"

"Certainly," said Kate.  "I want Mr. Jardine to see where I was
born and spent my time of legal servitude.  I suppose we daren't
stop.  I doubt if Mother would want to see me, and I haven't the
slightest doubt that Father would NOT; but he has no jurisdiction
over the road.  It's the shortest way -- and besides, I want to
see the lilac bush and the cabbage roses."

As they approached the place Nancy Ellen turned.

"Father's standing at the gate.  What shall we do?"

"There's nothing you can do, but drive straight ahead and you and
Robert speak to him," said Kate.  "Go fast, Robert."

He touched the team and at fair speed they whirled past the white
house, at the gate of which, stiffly erect, stood a brawny man of
six feet six, his face ruddy and healthy in appearance.  He was
dressed as he prepared himself to take a trip to pay his taxes, or
to go to Court.  He stood squarely erect, with stern, forbidding
face, looking directly at them.  Robert spoke to him, and Nancy
Ellen leaned forward and waved, calling "Father," that she might
be sure he knew her, but he gave not the slightest sign of
recognition.  They carried away a distinct picture of him, at his
best physically and in appearance; at his worst mentally.

"There you have it!" said Kate, bitterly.  "I'd be safe in
wagering a thousand dollars, if I had it, that Agatha or the
children told, at Hiram's or to Mother's girl, that we were
coming.  They knew we would pass about this time.  Mother was at
the side door watching, and Father was in his Sunday best, waiting
to show us what would happen if we stopped, and that he never
changes his mind.  It didn't happen by accident that he was
standing there dressed that way.  What do you think, Nancy Elen?"

"That he was watching for us!" said Nancy Ellen.

"But why do you suppose that he did it?" asked Kate.

"He thought that if he were NOT standing guard there, we might
stop in the road and at least call Mother out.  He wanted to be
seen, and seen at his best; but as always, in command, showing his
authority."

"Don't mind," said John Jardine.  "It's easy to understand the
situation."

"Thank you," said Kate.  "I hope you'll tell your mother that.  I
can't bear her to think that the trouble is wholly my fault."

"No danger of that," he said.  "Mother thinks there's nobody in
all the world like you, and so do I."

Nancy Ellen kicked Robert's shin, to let him know that she heard.
Kate was very depressed for a time, but she soon recovered and
they spent a final happy evening together.  When John had parted
from Robert and Nancy Ellen, with the arrangement that he was to
come again the following Saturday evening and spend Sunday with
them, he asked Kate to walk a short distance with him.  He seemed
to be debating some proposition in his mind, that he did not know
how to approach.  Finally he stopped abruptly and said:  "Kate,
Mother told me that she told you how I grew up.  We have been
together most of every day for six weeks.  I have no idea how a
man used to women goes at what I want, so I can only do what I
think is right, and best, and above all honest, and fair.  I'd be
the happiest I've ever been, to do anything on earth I've got the
money to do, for you.  There's a question I'm going to ask you the
next time I come.  You can think over all you know of me, and of
Mother, and of what we have, and are, and be ready to tell me how
you feel about everything next Sunday.  There's one question I
want to ask you before I go.  In case we can plan for a life
together next Sunday, what about my mother?"

"Whatever pleases her best, of course," said Kate.  "Any
arrangement that you feel will make her happy, will be all right
with me; in the event we agree on other things."

He laughed, shortly.

"This sounds cold-blooded and business-like," he said.  "But
Mother's been all the world to me, until I met you.  I must be
sure about her, and one other thing.  I'll write you about that
this week.  If that is all right with you, you can get ready for a
deluge.  I've held in as long as I can.  Kate, will you kiss me
good-bye?"

"That's against the rules," said Kate.  "That's getting the cart
before the horse."

"I know it," he said.  "But haven't I been an example for six
weeks?  Only one.  Please?"

They were back at Dr. Gray's gate, standing in the deep shelter of
a big maple.  Kate said:  "I'll make a bargain with you.  I'll
kiss you to-night, and if we come to an agreement next Sunday
night, you shall kiss me.  Is that all right?"

The reply was so indistinct Kate was not sure of it; but she took
his face between her hands and gave him exactly the same kind of
kiss she would have given Adam, 3d.  She hesitated an instant,
then gave him a second.  "You may take that to your mother," she
said, and fled up the walk.


TWO LETTERS

NANCY ELLEN and Robert were sitting on the side porch, not seeming
in the least sleepy, when Kate entered the house.  As she stepped
out to them, she found them laughing mysteriously.

"Take this chair, Kate," said Nancy Ellen.  "Come on, Robert,
let's go stand under the maple tree and let her see whether she
can see us."

"If you're going to rehearse any momentous moment of your
existence," said Kate, "I shouldn't think of even being on the
porch.  I shall keep discreetly in the house, even going at once
to bed.  Good-night!  Pleasant dreams!"

"Now we've made her angry," said Robert.

"I think there WAS 'a little touch of asperity,' as Agatha would
say, in that," said Nancy Ellen, "but Kate has a good heart.
She'll get over it before morning."

"Would Agatha use such a common word as 'little'?" asked Robert.

"Indeed, no!" said Nancy Ellen.  "She would say 'infinitesimal.'
But all the same he kissed her."

"If she didn't step up and kiss him, never again shall I trust my
eyes!" said the doctor.

"Hush!" cautioned Nancy Ellen.  "She's provoked now; if she hears
that, she'll never forgive us."

Kate did not need even a hint to start her talking in the morning.
The day was fine, a snappy tinge of autumn in the air, her head
and heart were full.  Nancy Ellen would understand and sympathize;
of course Kate told her all there was to tell.

"And even at that," said Nancy Ellen, "he hasn't just come out
right square and said 'Kate, will you marry me?' as I understand
it."

"Same here," laughed Kate.  "He said he had to be sure about his
mother, and there was 'one other thing' he'd write me about this
week, and he'd come again next Sunday; then if things were all
right with me -- the deluge!"

"And what is 'the other thing?'" asked Nancy Ellen.

"There he has me guessing.  We had six, long, lovely weeks of
daily association at the lake, I've seen his home, and his
inventions, and as much of his business as is visible to the eye
of a woman who doesn't know a tinker about business.  His mother
has told me minutely of his life, every day since he was born, I
think.  She insists that he never paid the slightest attention to
a girl before, and he says the same, so there can't be any hidden
ugly feature to mar my joy.  He is thoughtful, quick, kind, a
self-made business man.  He looks well enough, he acts like a
gentleman, he seldom makes a mistake in speech --"

"He doesn't say enough to MAKE any mistakes.  I haven't yet heard
him talk freely, give an opinion, or discuss a question," said
Nancy Ellen.

"Neither have I," said Kate.  "He's very silent, thinking out more
inventions, maybe.  The worst thing about him is a kind of hard-
headed self-assurance.  He got it fighting for his mother from
boyhood.  He knew she would freeze and starve if he didn't take
care of her; he HAD to do it.  He soon found he could.  It took
money to do what he had to do.  He got the money.  Then he began
performing miracles with it.  He lifted his mother out of poverty,
he dressed her 'in purple and fine linen,' he housed her in the
same kind of home other rich men of the Lake Shore Drive live in,
and gave her the same kind of service.  As most men do, when
things begin to come their way, he lived for making money alone.
He was so keen on the chase he wouldn't stop to educate and
culture himself; he drove headlong on, and on, piling up more, far
more than any one man should be allowed to have; so you can see
that it isn't strange that he thinks there's nothing on earth that
money can't do.  You can see THAT sticking out all over him.  At
the hotel, on boats, on the trains, anywhere we went, he pushed
straight for the most conspicuous place, the most desirable thing,
the most expensive.  I almost prayed sometimes that in some way he
would strike ONE SINGLE THING that he couldn't make come his way
with money; but he never did.  No.  I haven't an idea what he has
in his mind yet, but he's going to write me about it this week,
and if I agree to whatever it is, he is coming Sunday; then he has
threatened me with a 'deluge,' whatever he means by that."

"He means providing another teacher for Walden, taking you to
Chicago shopping for a wonderful trousseau, marrying you in his
Lake Shore palace, no doubt."

"Well, if that's what he means by a 'deluge,'" said Kate, "he'll
find the flood coming his way.  He'll strike the first thing he
can't do with money.  I shall teach my school this winter as I
agreed to.  I shall marry him in the clothes I buy with what I
earn.  I shall marry him quietly, here, or at Adam's, or before a
Justice of the Peace, if neither of you wants me.  He can't pick
me up, and carry me away, and dress me, and marry me, as if I were
a pauper."

"You're RIGHT about it," said Nancy Ellen.  "I don't know how we
came to be so different.  I should do at once any way he suggested
to get such a fine-looking man and that much money.  That it would
be a humiliation to me all my after life, I wouldn't think about
until the humiliation began, and then I'd have no way to protect
myself.  You're right!  But I'd get out of teaching this winter if
I could.  I'd love to have you here."

"But I must teach to the earn money for my outfit.  I'll have to
go back to school in the same old sailor."

"Don't you care," laughed Nancy Ellen.  "We know a secret!"

"That we do!" agreed Kate.

Wednesday Kate noticed Nancy Ellen watching for the boy Robert had
promised to send with the mail as soon as it was distributed,
because she was, herself.  Twice Thursday, Kate hoped in vain that
the suspense would be over.  It had to end Friday, if John were
coming Saturday night.  She began to resent the length of time he
was waiting.  It was like him to wait until the last minute, and
then depend on money to carry him through.

"He is giving me a long time to think things over," Kate said to
Nancy Ellen when there was no letter in the afternoon mail
Thursday.

"It may have been lost or delayed," said Nancy Ellen.  "It will
come to-morrow, surely."

Both of them saw the boy turn in at the gate Friday morning.  Each
saw that he carried more than one letter.  Nancy Ellen was on her
feet and nearer to the door; she stepped to it, and took the
letters, giving them a hasty glance as she handed them to Kate.

"Two," she said tersely.  "One, with the address written in the
clear, bold hand of a gentleman, and one, the straggle of a
country clod-hopper."

Kate smiled as she took the letters:  "I'll wager my hat, which is
my most precious possession," she said, "that the one with the
beautifully written address comes from the 'clod-hopper,' and the
'straggle' from the 'gentleman.'"

She glanced at the stamping and addresses and smiled again:  "So
it proves," she said.  "While I'm about it, I'll see what the
'clod-hopper' has to say, and then I shall be free to give my
whole attention to the 'gentleman.'"

"Oh, Kate, how can you!" cried Nancy Ellen.

"Way I'm made, I 'spect," said Kate.  "Anyway, that's the way this
is going to be done."

She dropped the big square letter in her lap and ran her finger
under the flap of the long, thin, beautifully addressed envelope,
and drew forth several quite as perfectly written sheets.  She
read them slowly and deliberately, sometimes turning back a page
and going over a part of it again.  When she finished, she glanced
at Nancy Ellen while slowly folding the sheets.  "Just for half a
cent I'd ask you to read this," she said.

"I certainly shan't pay anything for the privilege, but I'll read
it, if you want me to," offered Nancy Ellen.

"All right, go ahead," said Kate.  "It might possibly teach you
that you can't always judge a man by appearance, or hastily;
though just why George Holt looks more like a 'clod-hopper' than
Adam, or Hiram, or Andrew, it passes me to tell."

She handed Nancy Ellen the letter and slowly ripped open the flap
of the heavy white envelope.  She drew forth the sheet and sat an
instant with it in her fingers, watching the expression of Nancy
Ellen's face, while she read the most restrained yet impassioned
plea that a man of George Holt's nature and opportunities could
devise to make to a woman after having spent several months in the
construction of it.  It was a masterly letter, perfectly composed,
spelled, and written; for among his other fields of endeavour,
George Holt had taught several terms of country school, and taught
them with much success; so that he might have become a fine
instructor, had it been in his blood to stick to anything long
enough to make it succeed.  After a page as she turned the second
sheet Nancy Ellen glanced at Kate, and saw that she had not opened
the creased page in her hands.  She flamed with sudden irritation.

"You do beat the band!" she cried.  "You've watched for two days
and been provoked because that letter didn't come.  Now you've got
it, there you sit like a mummy and let your mind be so filled with
this idiotic drivel that you're not ever reading John Jardine's
letter that is to tell you what both of us are crazy to know."

"If you were in any mood to be fair and honest, you'd admit that
you never read a finer letter than THAT," said Kate.  "As for
THIS, I never was so AFRAID in all my life.  Look at that!"

She threw the envelope in Nancy Ellen's lap.

"That is the very first line of John Jardine's writing I have ever
seen," she said.  "Do you see anything about it to ENCOURAGE me to
go farther?"

"You Goose!" cried the exasperated Nancy Ellen.  "I suppose he
transacts so much business he scarcely ever puts pen to paper.
What's the difference how he writes?  Look at what he is and what
he does!  Go on and read his letter."

Kate arose and walked to the window, turning her back to Nancy
Ellen, who sat staring at her, while she read John Jardine's
letter.  Once Nancy Ellen saw Kate throw up her head and twist her
neck as if she were choking; then she heard a great gulping sob
down in her throat; finally Kate turned and stared at her with
dazed, incredulous eyes.  Slowly she dropped the letter,
deliberately set her foot on it, and leaving the room, climbed the
stairs.  Nancy Ellen threw George Holt's letter aside and snatched
up John Jardine's.  She read:

MY DEREST KATE:  I am a day late with this becos as I told you I
have no schooling and in writing a letter is where I prove it, so
I never write them, but it was not fare to you for you not to know
what kind of a letter I would write if I did write one, so here it
is very bad no dout but the best I can possably do which has got
nothing at all to do with my pashion for you and the aughful time
I will have till I here from you.  If you can stand for this
telagraf me and I will come first train and we will forget this
and I will never write another letter.  With derest love from
Mother, and from me all the love of my hart.  Forever yours only,
JOHN JARDINE.

The writing would have been a discredit to a ten-year-old
schoolboy.  Nancy Ellen threw the letter back on the floor; with a
stiffly extended finger, she poked it into the position in which
she thought she had found it, and slowly stepped back.

"Great God!" she said amazedly.  "What does the man mean?  Where
does that dainty and wonderful little mother come in?  She must be
a regular parasite, to take such ease and comfort for herself out
of him, and not see that he had time and chance to do better than
THAT for himself.  Kate will never endure it, never in the world!
And by the luck of the very Devil, there comes that school-proof
thing in the same mail, from that abominable George Holt, and Kate
reads it FIRST.  It's too bad!  I can't believe it!  What did his
mother mean?"

Suddenly Nancy Ellen began to cry bitterly; between sobs she could
hear Kate as she walked from closet and bureau to her trunk which
she was packing.  The lid slammed heavily and a few minutes later
Kate entered the room dressed for the street.

"Why are you weeping?" she asked casually.

Her eyes were flaming, her cheeks scarlet, and her lips twitching.
Nancy Ellen sat up and looked at her.  She pointed to the letter:
"I read that," she said.

"Well, what do I care?" said Kate.  "If he has no more respect for
me than to write me such an insult as that, why should I have the
respect for him to protect him in it?  Publish it in the paper if
you want to."

"Kate, what are you going to do?" demanded Nancy Ellen.

"Three things," said Kate, slowly putting on her long silk gloves.
"First, I'm going to telegraph John Jardine that I never shall see
him again, if I can possibly avoid it.  Second, I'm going to send
a drayman to get my trunk and take it to Walden.  Third, I'm going
to start out and walk miles, I don't know or care where; but in
the end, I'm going to Walden to clean the schoolhouse and get
ready for my winter term of school."

"Oh, Kate, you are such a fine teacher!  Teach him!  Don't be so
hurried!  Take more time to think.  You will break his heart,"
pleaded Nancy Ellen.

Kate threw out both hands, palms down.

"P-a-s-h, a-u-g-h, h-a-r-t, d-o-u-t, d-e-r-e," she slowly spelled
out the letters.  "What about my heart and my pride?  Think I can
respect that, or ask my children to respect it?  But thank you and
Robert, and come after me as often as you can, as a mercy to me.
If John persists in coming, to try to buy me, as he thinks he can
buy anything he wants, you needn't let him come to Walden; for
probably I won't be there until I have to, and I won't see him, or
his mother, so he needn't try to bring her in.  Say good-bye to
Robert for me."

She walked from the house, head erect, shoulders squared, and so
down the street from sight.  In half an hour a truckman came for
her trunk, so Nancy Ellen made everything Kate had missed into a
bundle to send with it.  When she came to the letters, she
hesitated.

"I guess she didn't want them," she said.  "I'll just keep them
awhile and if she doesn't ask about them, the next time she comes,
I'll burn them.  Robert must go after her every Friday evening,
and we'll keep her until Monday, and do all we can to cheer her;
and this very day he must find out all there is to know about that
George Holt.  That IS the finest letter I ever read; she does kind
of stand up for him; and in the reaction, impulsive as she is and
self-confident -- of course she wouldn't, but you never can tell
what kind of fool a girl will make of herself, in some cases."

Kate walked swiftly, finished two of the errands she set out to
do, then her feet carried her three miles from Hartley on the
Walden road, before she knew where she was, so she proceeded to
the village.

Mrs. Holt was not at home, but the house was standing open.  Kate
found her room cleaned, shining, and filled with flowers.  She
paid the drayman, opened her trunk, and put away her dresses,
laying out all the things which needed washing; then she bathed,
put on heavy shoes, and old skirt and waist, and crossing the road
sat in a secluded place in the ravine and looked stupidly at the
water.  She noticed that everything was as she had left it in the
spring, with many fresher improvements, made, no doubt, to please
her.  She closed her eyes, leaned against a big tree, and slow,
cold and hot shudders alternated in shaking her frame.

She did not open her eyes when she heard a step and her name
called.  She knew without taking the trouble to look that George
had come home, found her luggage in her room, and was hunting for
her.  She heard him come closer and knew when he seated himself
that he was watching her, but she did not care enough even to
move.  Finally she shifted her position to rest herself, opened
her eyes, and looked at him without a word.  He returned her gaze
steadily, smiling gravely.  She had never seen him looking so
well.  He had put in the summer grooming himself, he had kept up
the house and garden, and spent all his spare time on the ravine,
and farming on the shares with his mother's sister who lived three
miles east of them.  At last she roused herself and again looked
at him.

"I had your letter this morning," she said.

"I was wondering about that," he replied.

"Yes, I got it just before I started," said Kate.  "Are you
surprised to see me?"

"No," he answered.  "After last year, we figured you might come
the last of this week or the first of next, so we got your room
ready Monday."

"Thank you," said Kate.  "It's very clean and nice."

"I hope soon to be able to offer you such a room and home as you
should have," he said.  "I haven't opened my office yet.  It was
late and hot when I got home in June and Mother was fussing about
this winter -- that she had no garden and didn't do her share at
Aunt Ollie's, so I have farmed most of the summer, and lived on
hope; but I'll start in and make things fly this fall, and by
spring I'll be sailing around with a horse and carriage like the
best of them.  You bet I am going to make things hum, so I can
offer you anything you want."

"You haven't opened an office yet?" she asked for the sake of
saying something, and because a practical thing would naturally
suggest itself to her.

"I haven't had a breath of time," he said in candid disclaimer.

"Why don't you ask me what's the matter?"

"Didn't figure that it was any of my business in the first place,"
he said, "and I have a pretty fair idea, in the second."

"But how could you have?" she asked in surprise.

"When your sister wouldn't give me your address, she hinted that
you had all the masculine attention you cared for; then Tilly
Nepple visited town again last week and she had been sick and
called Dr. Gray.  She asked him about you, and he told what I fine
time you had at Chautauqua and Chicago, with the rich new friends
you'd made.  I was watching for you about this time, and I just
happened to be at the station in Hartley last Saturday when you
got off the train with your fine gentleman, so I stayed over with
some friends of mine, and I saw you several times Sunday.  I saw
that I'd practically no chance with you at all; but I made up my
mind I'd stick until I saw you marry him, so I wrote just as I
would if I hadn't known there was another man in existence."

"That was a very fine letter," said Kate.

"It is a very fine, deep, sincere love that I am offering you,"
said George Holt.  "Of course I could see prosperity sticking out
all over that city chap, but it didn't bother me much, because I
knew that you, of all women, would judge a man on his worth.  A
rising young professional man is not to be sneered at, at least
until he makes his start and proves what he can do.  I couldn't
get an early start, because I've always had to work, just as
you've seen me last summer and this, so I couldn't educate myself
so fast, but I've gone as fast and far as I could."

Kate winced.  This was getting on places that hurt and to matters
she well understood, but she was the soul of candour.  "You did
very well to educate yourself as you have, with no help at all,"
she said.

"I've done my best in the past, I'm going to do marvels in the
future, and whatever I do, it is all for you and yours for the
taking," he said grandiosely.

"Thank you," said Kate.  "But are you making that offer when you
can't help seeing that I'm in deep trouble?"

"A thousand times over," he said.  "All I want to know about your
trouble is whether there is anything a man of my size and strength
can do to help you."

"Not a thing," said Kate, "in the direction of slaying a gay
deceiver, if that's what you mean.  The extent of my familiarities
with John Jardine consists in voluntarily kissing him twice last
Sunday night for the first and last time, once for himself, and
once for his mother, whom I have since ceased to respect."

George Holt was watching her with eyes lynx-sharp, but Kate never
saw it.  When she mentioned her farewell of Sunday night, a queer
smile swept over his face and instantly disappeared.

"I should thing any girl might be permitted that much, in saying a
final good-bye to a man who had shown her a fine time for weeks,"
he commented casually.

"But I didn't know I was saying good-bye," explained Kate.  "I
expected him back in a week, and that I would then arrange to
marry him.  That was the agreement we made then."

As she began to speak, George Holt's face flashed triumph at
having led her on; at what she said it fell perceptibly, but he
instantly controlled it and said casually:  "In any event, it was
your own business."

"It was," said Kate.  "I had given no man the slightest
encouragement, I was perfectly free.  John Jardine was courting me
openly in the presence of his mother and any one who happened to
be around.  I intended to marry him.  I liked him as much as any
man need be liked.  I don't know whether it was the same feeling
Nancy Ellen had for Robert Gray or not, but it was a whole lot of
feeling of some kind.  I was satisfied with it, and he would have
been.  I meant to be a good wife to him and a good daughter to his
mother, and I could have done much good in the world and extracted
untold pleasure from the money he would have put in my power to
handle.  All was going 'merry as a marriage bell,' and then this
morning came my Waterloo, in the same post with your letter."

"Do you know what you are doing?" cried George Holt, roughly,
losing self-control with hope.  "YOU ARE PROVING TO ME, AND
ADMITTING TO YOURSELF, THAT YOU NEVER LOVED THAT MAN AT ALL.  You
were flattered, and tempted with position and riches, but your
heart was not his, or you would be mighty SURE of it, don't you
forget that!"

"I am not interested in analyzing exactly what I felt for him,"
said Kate.  "It made small difference then; it makes none at all
now.  I would have married him gladly, and I would have been to
him all a good wife is to any man; then in a few seconds I turned
squarely against him, and lost my respect for him.  You couldn't
marry me to him if he were the last and only man on earth; but it
hurt terribly, let me tell you that!"

George Holt suddenly arose and went to Kate.  He sat down close
beside her and leaned toward her.

"There isn't the least danger of my trying to marry you to him,"
he said, "because I am going to marry you myself at the very first
opportunity.  Why not now?  Why not have a simple ceremony
somewhere at once, and go away until school begins, and forget
him, having a good time by ourselves?  Come on, Kate, let's do it!
We can go stay with Aunt Ollie, and if he comes trying to force
himself on you, he'll get what he deserves.  He'll learn that
there is something on earth he can't buy with his money."

"But I don't love you," said Kate.

"Neither did you love him," retorted George Holt.  "I can prove it
by what you say.  Neither did you love him, but you were going to
marry him, and use all his wonderful power of position and wealth,
and trust to association to BRING love.  You can try that with me.
As for wealth, who cares?  We are young and strong, and we have a
fine chance in the world.  You go on and teach this year, and I'll
get such a start that by next year you can be riding around in
your carriage, proud as Pompey."

"Of course we could make it all right, as to a living," said Kate.
"Big and strong as we are, but --"

Then the torrent broke.  At the first hint that she would consider
his proposal George Holt drew her to him and talked volumes of
impassioned love to her.  He gave her no chance to say anything;
he said all there was to say himself; he urged that Jardine would
come, and she should not be there.  He begged, he pleaded, he
reasoned.  Night found Kate sitting on the back porch at Aunt
Ollie's with a confused memory of having stood beside the little
stream with her hand in George Holt's while she assented to the
questions of a Justice of the Peace, in the presence of the School
Director and Mrs. Holt.  She knew that immediately thereafter they
had walked away along a hot, dusty country road; she had tried to
eat something that tasted like salted ashes.  She could hear
George's ringing laugh of exultation breaking out afresh every few
minutes; in sudden irritation at the latest guffaw she clearly
remembered one thing:  in her dazed and bewildered state she had
forgotten to tell him that she was a Prodigal Daughter.


THE BRIDE

ONLY one memory in the ten days that followed before her school
began ever stood out clearly and distinctly with Kate.  That was
the morning of the day after she married George Holt.  She saw
Nancy Ellen and Robert at the gate so she went out to speak with
them.  Nancy Ellen was driving, she held the lines and the whip in
her hands.  Kate in dull apathy wondered why they seemed so deeply
agitated.  Both of them stared at her as if she might be a maniac.

"Is this thing in the morning paper true?" cried Nancy Ellen in a
high, shrill voice that made Kate start in wonder.  She did not
take the trouble to evade by asking "what thing?" she merely made
assent with her head.

"You are married to that -- that --" Nancy Ellen choked until she
could not say what.

"It's TIME to stop, since I am married to him," said Kate,
gravely.

"You rushed in and married him without giving Robert time to find
out and tell you what everybody knows about him?" demanded Nancy
Ellen.

"I married him for what I knew about him myself," said Kate.  "We
shall do very well."

"Do well!" cried Nancy.  "Do well!  You'll be hungry and in rags
the rest of your life!"

"Don't, Nancy Ellen, don't!" plead Robert.  "This is Kate's
affair, wait until you hear what she has to say before you go
further."

"I don't care what she has to say!" cried Nancy Ellen.  "I'm
saying my say right now.  This is a disgrace to the whole Bates
family.  We may not be much, but there isn't a lazy, gambling,
drunken loafer among us, and there won't be so far as I'm
concerned."

She glared at Kate who gazed at her in wonder.

"You really married this lout?" she demanded.

"I told you I was married," said Kate, patiently, for she saw that
Nancy Ellen was irresponsible with anger.

"You're going to live with him, you're going to stay in Walden to
live?" she cried.

"That is my plan at present," said Kate.

"Well, see that YOU STAY THERE," said Nancy Ellen.  "You can't
bring that -- that creature to my house, and if you're going to be
his wife, you needn't come yourself.  That's all I've got to say
to you, you shameless, crazy --"

"Nancy Ellen, you shall not!" cried Robert Gray, deftly slipping
the lines from her fingers, and starting the horse full speed.
Kate saw Nancy Ellen's head fall forward, and her hands lifted to
cover her face.  She heard the deep, tearing sob that shook her,
and then they were gone.  She did not know what to do, so she
stood still in the hot sunshine, trying to think; but her brain
refused to act at her will.  When the heat became oppressive, she
turned back to the shade of a tree, sat down, and leaned against
it.  There she got two things clear after a time.  She had married
George Holt, there was nothing to do but make the best of it.  But
Nancy Ellen had said that if she lived with him she should not
come to her home.  Very well.  She had to live with him, since she
had consented to marry him, so she was cut off from Robert and
Nancy Ellen.  She was now a prodigal, indeed.  And those things
Nancy Ellen had said -- she was wild with anger.  She had been
misinformed.  Those things could not be true.

"Shouldn't you be in here helping Aunt Ollie?" asked George's
voice from the front step where he seated himself with his pipe.

"Yes, in a minute," said Kate, rising.  "Did you see who came?"

"No.  I was out doing the morning work.  Who was it?" he asked.

"Nancy Ellen and Robert," she answered.

He laughed hilariously:  "Brought them in a hurry, didn't we?  Why
didn't they come in?"

"They came to tell me," said Kate, slowly, "that if I had married
you yesterday, as I did, that they felt so disgraced that I wasn't
to come to their home again."

"'Disgraced?'" he cried, his colour rising.  "Well, what's the
matter with me?"

"Not the things they said, I fervently hope."

"Well, they have some assurance to come out here and talk about
me, and you've got as much to listen, and then come and tell me
about it," he cried.

"It was over in a minute," said Kate.  "I'd no idea what they were
going to say.  They said it, and went.  Oh, I can't spare Nancy
Ellen, she's all I had!"

Kate sank down on the step and covered her face.  George took one
long look at her, arose, and walked out of hearing.  He went into
the garden and watched from behind a honeysuckle bush until he saw
her finally lift her head and wipe her eyes; then he sauntered
back, and sat down on the step beside her.

"That's right," he said.  "Cry it out, and get it over.  It was
pretty mean of them to come out here and insult you, and tell any
lie they could think up, and then drive away and leave you; but
don't mind, they'll soon get over it.  Nobody ever keeps up a fuss
over a wedding long."

"Nancy Ellen never told a lie in her life," said Kate.  "She has
too much self-respect.  What she said she THOUGHT was true.  My
only chance is that somebody has told her a lie.  You know best if
they did."

"Of course they did," he broke in, glibly.  "Haven't you lived in
the same house with me long enough to know me better than any one
else does?"

"You can live in the same house with people and know less about
them than any one else, for that matter," said Kate, "but that's
neither here nor there.  We're in this together, we got to get on
the job and pull, and make a success out of it that will make all
of them proud to be our friends.  That's the only thing left for
me.  As I know the Bates, once they make up their minds, they
never change.  With Nancy Ellen and Father both down on me, I'm a
prodigal for sure."

"What?" he cried, loudly.  "What?  Is your father in this, too?
Did he send you word you couldn't come home, either?  This is a
hell of a mess!  Speak up!"

Kate closed her lips, looked at him with deep scorn, and walked
around the corner of the house.  For a second he looked after her
threateningly, then he sprang to his feet, and ran to her,
catching her in his arms.

"Forgive me, dearest," he cried.  "That took the wind out of my
sails until I was a brute.  You'd no business to SAY a thing like
that.  Of course we can't have the old Land King down on us.
We've got to have our share of that land and money to buy us a
fine home in Hartley, and fix me up the kind of an office I should
have.  We'll borrow a rig and drive over to-morrow and fix things
solid with the old folks.  You bet I'm a star-spangled old
persuader, look what I did with you --"

"You stop!" cried Kate, breaking from his hold.  "You will drive
me crazy!  You're talking as if you married me expecting land and
money from it.  I haven't been home in a year, and my father would
deliberately kill me if I went within his reach."

"Well, score one for little old scratchin', pickin', Mammy!" he
cried.  "She SAID you had a secret!"

Kate stood very still, looking at him so intently that a sense of
shame must have stirred in his breast.

"Look here, Kate," he said, roughly.  "Mother did say you had a
secret, and she hinted at Christmas that the reason you didn't go
home was because your folks were at outs with you, and you can ask
her if I didn't tell her to shut up and leave you alone, that I
was in love with you, and I'd marry you and we'd get along all
right, even if you were barred from home, and didn't get a penny.
I just dare you to ask her."

"It's no matter," said Kate, wearily.  "I'd rather take your
word."

"All right, you take it, for that's the truth," he said.  "But
what was the rumpus?  How did you come to have a racket with your
old man?"

"Over my wanting to teach," said Kate.  Then she explained in
detail.

"Pother!  Don't you fret about that!" said George.  "I'm taking
care of you now, and I'll see that you soon get home and to
Grays', too; that's all buncombe.  As for your share of your
father's estate, you watch me get it!  You are his child, and
there is law!"

"There's law that allows him to deed his land to his sons before
he dies, and that is exactly what he has done," said Kate.

"The Devil, you say!" shouted George Holt, stepping back to stare
at her.  "You tell that at the Insane Asylum or the Feeble Minded
Home!  I've seen the records!  I know to the acre how much land
stands in your father's name.  Don't try to work that on me, my
lady."

"I am not trying to work anything on you," said Kate, dully,
wondering to herself why she listened, why she went on with it.
"I'm merely telling you.  In Father's big chest at the head of his
bed at home lies a deed for two hundred acres of land for each of
his seven sons, all signed and ready to deliver.  He keeps the
land in his name on record to bring him distinction and feed his
vanity.  He makes the boys pay the taxes, and ko-tow, and help
with his work; he keeps them under control; but the land is
theirs; none of the girls get a penny's worth of it!"

George Holt cleared his face with an effort.

"Well, we are no worse off than the rest of them, then," he said,
trying to speak naturally and cheerfully.  "But don't you ever
believe it!  Little old Georgie will sleep with this in his night
cap awhile, and it's a problem he will solve if he works himself
to death on it."

"But that is Father's affair," said Kate.  "You had best turn your
efforts, and lie awake nights thinking how to make enough money to
buy some land for us, yourself."

"Certainly!  Certainly!  I see myself doing it!" laughed George
Holt.  "And now, knowing how you feel, and feeling none to good
myself, we are going to take a few days off and go upstream,
fishing.  I'll take a pack of comforts to sleep on, and the tackle
and some food, and we will forget the whole bunch and go have a
good time.  There's a place, not so far away, where I have camped
beside a spring since I was a little shaver, and it's quiet and
cool.  Go get what you can't possibly exist without, nothing
more."

"But we must dig the potatoes," protested Kate.

"Let them wait until we get back; it's a trifle early, anyway," he
said.  "Stop objecting and get ready!  I'll tell Aunt Ollie.
We're chums.  Whatever I do is always all right with her.  Come
on!  This is our wedding trip.  Not much like the one you had
planned, no doubt, but one of some kind."

So they slipped beneath the tangle of vines and bushes, and,
following the stream of the ravine, they walked until mid-
afternoon, when they reached a spot that was very lovely, a clear,
clean spring, grassy bank, a sheltered cave-in floored with clean
sand, warm and golden.  From the depths of the cave George brought
an old frying pan and coffee pot.  He spread a comfort on the sand
of the cave for a bed, produced coffee, steak, bread, butter, and
fruit from his load, and told Kate to make herself comfortable
while he got dinner.  They each tried to make allowances for, and
to be as decent as possible with, the other, with the result that
before they knew it, they were having a good time; at least, they
were keeping the irritating things they thought to themselves, and
saying only the pleasant ones.

After a week, which George enjoyed to the fullest extent, while
Kate made the best of everything, they put away the coffee pot and
frying pan, folded the comforts, and went back to Aunt Ollie's for
dinner; then to Walden in the afternoon.  Because Mrs. Holt knew
they would be there that day she had the house clean and the best
supper she could prepare ready for them.  She was in a quandary as
to how to begin with Kate.  She heartily hated her.  She had been
sure the girl had a secret, now she knew it; for if she did not
attend the wedding of her sister, if she had not been at home all
summer, if her father and mother never mentioned her name or made
any answer to any one who did, there was a reason, and a good
reason.  Of course a man as rich as Adam Bates could do no wrong;
whatever the trouble was, Kate was at fault, she had done some
terrible thing.

"Hidin' in the bushes!" spat Mrs. Holt.  "Hidin' in the bushes!
Marry a man who didn't know he was goin' to be married an hour
before, unbeknownst to her folks, an' wouldn't even come in the
house, an' have a few of the neighbours in.  Nice doin's for the
school-ma'am!  Nice prospect for George."

Mrs. Holt hissed like a copperhead, which was a harmless little
creature compared with her, as she scraped, and slashed, and
dismembered the chicken she was preparing to fry.  She had not
been able, even by running into each store in the village, and the
post office, to find one person who would say a word against Kate.
The girl had laid her foundations too well.  The one thing people
could and did say was:  "How could she marry George Holt?"  The
worst of them could not very well say it to his mother.  They said
it frequently to each other and then supplied the true answers.
"Look how he spruced up after she came!"  "Look how he worked!"
"Look how he ran after and waited on her!"  "Look how nice he has
been all summer!"  Plenty was being said in Walden, but not one
word of it was for the itching ears of Mrs. Holt.  They had told
her how splendid Kate was, how they loved her, how glad they were
that she was to have the school again, how fortunate her son was,
how proud she should be, until she was almost bursting with
repressed venom.

She met them at the gate, after their week's camping.  They were
feeling in splendid health, the best spirits possible in the
circumstances, but appearing dirty and disreputable.  They were
both laughing as they approached the gate.

"Purty lookin' bride you be!" Mrs. Holt spat at Kate.

"Yes, aren't I?" laughed Kate.  "But you just give me a tub of hot
soapsuds and an hour, and you won't know me.  How are you?  Things
look as if you were expecting us."

"Hump!" said Mrs. Holt.

Kate laughed and went into the house.  George stepped in front of
his mother.

"Now you look here," he said.  "I know every nasty thing your mind
has conjured up that you'd LIKE to say, and have other folks say,
about Kate.  And I know as well as if you were honest enough to
tell me, that you haven't been able to root out one living soul
who would say a single word against her.  Swallow your secret!
Swallow your suspicions!  Swallow your venom, and forget all of
them.  Kate is as fine a woman as God ever made, and anybody who
has common sense knows it.  She can just MAKE me, if she wants to,
and she will; she's coming on fine, much faster and better than I
hoped for.  Now you drop this!  Stop it!  Do you hear?"

He passed her and hurried up the walk.  In an hour, both George
and Kate had bathed and dressed in their very best.  Kate put on
her prettiest white dress and George his graduation suit.  Then
together they walked to the post office for their mail, which
George had ordered held, before they left.  Carrying the bundle,
they entered several stores on trifling errands, and then went
home.  They stopped and spoke to everyone.  Kate kissed all her
little pupils she met, and told them to come to see her, and to be
ready to help clean the schoolhouse in the morning.  Word flew
over town swiftly.  The Teacher was back, wearing the loveliest
dress, and nicer than ever, and she had invited folks to come to
see her.

Kate and George had scarcely finished their supper, when the first
pair of shy little girls came for their kisses and to bring
"Teacher" a bunch of flowers and a pretty pocket handkerchief from
each.  They came in flocks, each with flowers, most with a towel
or some small remembrance; then the elders began to come,
merchants with comforts, blankets, and towels, hardware men with
frying pans, flat irons, and tinware.  By ten o'clock almost
everyone in Walden had carried Kate some small gift, wished her
joy all the more earnestly, because they felt the chances of her
ever having it were so small, and had gone their way, leaving her
feeling better than she had thought possible.

She slipped into her room alone and read two letters, one a few
typewritten lines from John Jardine, saying he had been at
Hartley, also at Walden, and having found her married and gone,
there was nothing for him to do but wish that the man she married
had it in his heart to guard her life and happiness as he would
have done.  He would never cease to love her, and if at any time
in her life there was anything he could do for her, would she
please let him know.  Kate dropped the letter on her dresser, with
a purpose, and let it lie there.  The other was from Robert.  He
said he was very sorry, but he could do nothing with Nancy Ellen
at present.  He hoped she would change later.  If there was ever
anything he could do, to let him know.  Kate locked that letter in
her trunk.  She wondered as she did so why both of them seemed to
think she would need them in the future.  She felt perfectly able
to take care of herself.

Monday morning George carried Kate's books to school for her, saw
that she was started on her work in good shape, then went home,
put on his old clothes, and began the fall work at Aunt Ollie's.
Kate, wearing her prettiest blue dress, forgot even the dull ache
in her heart, as she threw herself into the business of educating
those young people.  She worked as she never had before.  She
seemed to have developed fresh patience, new perception, keener
penetration; she made the dullest of them see her points, and
interested the most inattentive.  She went home to dinner feeling
better.  She decided to keep on teaching a few years until George
was well started in his practice; if he ever got started.  He was
very slow in action it seemed to her, compared with his enthusiasm
when he talked.


STARTING MARRIED LIFE

FOR two weeks Kate threw herself into the business of teaching
with all her power.  She succeeded in so interesting herself and
her pupils that she was convinced she had done a wise thing.
Marriage did not interfere with her teaching; she felt capable and
independent so long as she had her salary.  George was working and
working diligently, to prepare for winter, whenever she was
present or could see results.  With her first month's salary she
would buy herself a warm coat, a wool suit, an extra skirt for
school, and some waists.  If there was enough left, she would have
another real hat.  Then for the remainder of the year she would
spend only for the barest necessities and save to help toward a
home something like Nancy Ellen's.  Whenever she thought of Nancy
Ellen and Robert there was a choking sensation in her throat, a
dull ache where she had been taught her heart was located.

For two weeks everything went as well as Kate hoped:  then Mrs.
Holt began to show the results of having been partially bottled
up, for the first time in her life.  She was careful to keep to
generalities which she could claim meant nothing, if anything she
said was taken up by either George or Kate.  George was too lazy
to quarrel unless he was personally angered; Kate thought best to
ignore anything that did not come in the nature of a direct
attack.  So long as Mrs. Holt could not understand how some folks
could see their way to live off of other folks, or why a girl who
had a chance to marry a fortune would make herself a burden to a
poor man, Kate made the mistake of ignoring her.  Thus emboldened
she soon became personal.  It seemed as if she spent her spare
time and mental force thinking up suggestive, sarcastic things to
say, where Kate could not help hearing them.  She paid no
attention unless the attack was too mean and premeditated; but to
her surprise she found that every ugly, malicious word the old
woman said lodged in her brain and arose to confront her at the
most inopportune times -- in the middle of a recitation or when
she roused enough to turn over in her bed at night.  The more
vigorously she threw herself into her school work, the more she
realized a queer lassitude, creeping over her.  She kept squaring
her shoulders, lifting her chin, and brushing imaginary cobwebs
from before her face.

The final Friday evening of the month, she stopped at the post
office and carried away with her the bill for her Leghorn hat,
mailed with nicely conceived estimate as to when her first check
would be due.  Kate visited the Trustee, and smiled grimly as she
slipped the amount in an envelope and gave it to the hack driver
to carry to Hartley on his trip the following day.  She had
intended all fall to go with him and select a winter headpiece
that would be no discredit to her summer choice, but a sort of
numbness was in her bones; so she decided to wait until the coming
week before going.  She declined George's pressing invitation to
go along to Aunt Ollie's and help load and bring home a part of
his share of their summer's crops, on the ground that she had some
work to prepare for the coming week.

Then Kate went to her room feeling faint and heavy.  She lay there
most of the day, becoming sorrier for herself, and heavier every
passing hour.  By morning she was violently ill; when she tried to
leave her bed, dizzy and faint.  All day she could not stand.
Toward evening, she appealed to George either to do something for
her himself, or to send for the village doctor.  He asked her a
few questions and then, laughing coarsely, told her that a doctor
would do her no good, and that it was very probable that she would
feel far worse before she felt better.  Kate stared at him in dumb
wonder.

"But my school!" she cried.  "My school!  I must be able to go to
school in the morning.  Could that spring water have been infected
with typhus?  I've never been sick like this before."

"I should hope not!" said George.  And then he told her bluntly
what caused her trouble.  Kate had been white to begin with, now
she slowly turned greenish as she gazed at him with incredulous
eyes.  Then she sprang to her feet.

"But I can't be ill!" she cried.  "I can't!  There is my school!
I've got to teach!  Oh, what shall I do?"

George had a very clear conception of what she could do, but he
did not intend to suggest it to her.  She could think of it, and
propose it herself.  She could not think of anything at that
minute, because she fainted, and fell half on the bed, half in his
arms as he sprang to her.  He laid her down, and stood a second
smiling triumphantly at her unheeding face.

"Easy snap for you this winter, Georgie, my boy!" he muttered.  "I
don't see people falling over each other to get to you for
professional services, and it's hard work anyway.  Zonoletics are
away above the head of these country ignoramuses; blue mass and
quinine are about their limit."

He took his time to bathe Kate's face.  Presently she sat up, then
fell on the pillow again.

"Better not try that!" warned George.  "You'll hurt yourself, and
you can't make it.  You're out of the game; you might as well get
used to it."

"I won't be out of the game!" cried Kate.  "I can't be!  What will
become of my school?  Oh, George, could you possibly teach for me,
only for a few days, until I get my stomach settled?"

"Why, I'd like to help you," he said, "but you see how it is with
me.  I've got my fall work finished up, and I'm getting ready to
open my office next week.  I'm going to rent that nice front room
over the post office."

"But, George, you must," said Kate.  "You've taught several terms.
You've a license.  You can take it until this passes.  If you have
waited from June to October to open your office, you can wait a
few more days.  Suppose you OPEN the office and patients don't
come, or we haven't the school; what would we LIVE on?  What would
I buy things with, and pay doctor bills?"

"Why didn't you think of that before you got married?  What was
your rush, anyway?  I can't figure it to save my soul," he said.

"George, the school can't go," she cried.  "If what you say is
true, and I suspect it is, I must have money to see me through."

"Then set your wits to work and fix things up with your father,"
he said casually.

Kate arose tall and straight, standing unwaveringly as she looked
at him in blazing contempt.

"So?" she said.  "This is the kind of man you are?  I'm not so
helpless as you think me.  I have a refuge.  I know where to find
it.  You'll teach my school until I'm able to take it myself, if
the Trustee and patrons will allow you, or I'll sever my relations
with you as quickly as I formed them.  You have no practice; I
have grave doubts if you can get any; this is our only chance for
the money we must have this winter.  Go ask the Trustee to come
here until I can make arrangements with him."

Then she wavered and rolled on the bed again.  George stood
looking at her between narrowed eyelids.

"Tactics I use with Mother don't go with you, old girl," he said
to himself.  "Thing of fire and tow, stubborn as an ox; won't be
pushed a hair's breadth; old Bates over again -- alike as two
peas.  But I'll break you, damn you, I'll break you; only, I WANT
that school.  Lots easier than kneading somebody's old stiff
muscles, while the money is sure.  Oh, I go after the Trustee, all
right!"

He revived Kate, and telling her to keep quiet, and not excite
herself, he explained that it was a terrible sacrifice to him to
put off opening his office any longer; she must forgive him for
losing self-control when he thought of it; but for her dear sake
he would teach until she was better -- possibly she would be all
right in a few days, and then she could take her work again.
Because she so devoutly hoped it, Kate made that arrangement with
the Trustee.  Monday, she lay half starved, yet gagging and ill,
while George went to teach her school.  As she contemplated that,
she grew sicker than she had been before.  When she suddenly
marshalled all the facts she knew of him, she stoutly refused to
think of what Nancy Ellen had said; when she reviewed his
character and disposition, and thought of him taking charge of the
minds of her pupils, Kate suddenly felt she must not allow that to
happen, she must not!  Then came another thought, even more
personal and terrible, a thought so disconcerting she mercifully
lost consciousness again.

She sent for the village doctor, and found no consolation from her
talk with him.  She was out of the school; that was settled.  No
harpy ever went to its meat with one half the zest Mrs. Holt found
in the situation.  With Kate so ill she could not stand on her
feet half the time, so ill she could not reply, with no spirit
left to appeal to George, what more could be asked?  Mrs. Holt
could add to every grievance she formerly had, that of a sick
woman in the house for her to wait on.  She could even make vile
insinuations to Kate, prostrate and helpless, that she would not
have dared otherwise.  She could prepare food that with a touch of
salt or sugar where it was not supposed to be, would have sickened
a well person.  One day George came in from school and saw a bowl
of broth sitting on a chair beside Kate's bed.

"Can't you drink it?" he asked.  "Do, if you possibly can," he
urged.  "You'll get so weak you'll be helpless."

"I just can't," said Kate.  "Things have such a sickening,
sweetish taste, or they are bitter, or sour; not a thing is as it
used to be.  I simply can't!"

A curious look crept over George's face.  He picked up the bowl
and tasted the contents.  Instantly his face went black; he
started toward the kitchen.  Kate heard part of what happened, but
she never lifted her head.  After a while he came back with more
broth and a plate of delicate toast.

"Try this," he said.  "I made it myself."

Kate ate ravenously.

"That's good!" she cried.

"I'll tell you what I'm going to do," he said.  "I'm going to take
you out to Aunt Ollie's for a week after school to-night.  Want to
go?"

"Yes!  Oh, yes!" cried Kate.

"All right," he said.  "I know where I can borrow a rig for an
hour.  Get ready if you are well enough, if you are not, I'll help
you after school."

That week with Aunt Ollie remained a bright spot in Kate's memory.
The October days were beginning to be crisp and cool.  Food was
different.  She could sleep, she could eat many things Aunt Ollie
knew to prepare especially; soon she could walk and be outdoors.
She was so much better she wrote George a note, asking him to walk
out and bring her sewing basket, and some goods she listed, and in
the afternoons the two women cut and sewed quaint, enticing little
garments.  George found Kate so much better when he came that he
proposed she remain another week.  Then for the first time he
talked to her about her theory of government and teaching, until
she realized that the School Director had told him he was
dissatisfied with him -- so George was trying to learn her ways.
Appalled at what might happen if he lost the school, Kate made
notes, talked at length, begged him to do his best, and to come at
once if anything went wrong.  He did come, and brought the school
books so she went over the lessons with him, and made marginal
notes of things suggested to her mind by the text, for him to
discuss and elucidate.  The next time he came, he was in such good
spirits she knew his work had been praised, so after that they
went over the lessons together each evening.  Thinking of what
would help him also helped fill her day.

He took her home, greatly improved, in much better spirits, to her
room, cleaned and ready for winter, with all of her things
possible to use in place, so that it was much changed, prettier,
and more convenient.  As they drove in she said of him:  "George,
what about it?  Did your mother purposely fix my food so I could
not eat it?"

"Oh, I wouldn't say that," he said.  "You know neither of you is
violently attached to the other.  She'll be more careful after
this, I'm sure she will."

"Why, have you been sick?" asked Kate as soon as she saw Mrs.
Holt.

She seemed so nervous and appeared so badly Kate was sorry for
her; but she could not help noticing how she kept watch on her
son.  She seemed to keep the width of the room and a piece of
furniture between them, while her cooking was so different that it
was not in the least necessary for George to fix things for Kate
himself, as he had suggested.  Everything was so improved, Kate
felt better.  She began to sew, to read, to sit for long periods
in profound thought, then to take walks that brought back her
strength and colour.  So through the winter and toward the
approach of spring they lived in greater comfort.  With Kate's
help, George was doing so well with the school that he was
frequently complimented by the parents.  That he was trying to do
good work and win the approval of both pupils and parents was
evident to Kate.  Once he said to her that he wondered if it would
be a good thing for him to put in an application for the school
the coming winter.  Kate stared at him in surprise:  "But your
profession," she objected.  "You should be in your office and
having enough practice to support us by then."

"Yes, I should!" he said.  "But this is a new thing, and you know
how these clodhoppers are."

"If I came as near living in the country, and worked at farming as
much as you do, that's the last thing I would call any human
being," said Kate.  "I certainly do know how they are, and what I
know convinces me that you need not look to them for any
patients."

"You seem to think I won't have any from any source," he said
hotly.

"I confess myself dubious," said Kate.  "You certainly are, or you
wouldn't be talking of teaching."

"Well, I'll just show you!" he cried.

"I'm waiting," said Kate.  "But as we must live in the meantime,
and it will be so long before I can earn anything again, and so
much expense, possibly it would be a good idea to have the school
to fall back on, if you shouldn't have the patients you hope for
this summer.  I think you have done well with the school.  Do your
level best until the term closes, and you may have a chance."

Laughing scornfully, he repeated his old boast:  "I'll just show
you!"

"Go ahead," said Kate.  "And while you are at it, be generous.
Show me plenty.  But in the meantime, save every penny you can, so
you'll be ready to pay the doctor's bills and furnish your
office."

"I love you advice; it's so Batesy," he said.  "I have money saved
for both contingencies you mention, but I'll tell you what I
think, and about this I'm the one who knows.  I've told you
repeatedly winter is my best time.  I've lost the winter trying to
help you out; and I've little chance until winter comes again.  It
takes cold weather to make folks feel what ails their muscles, and
my treatment is mostly muscular.  To save so we can get a real
start, wouldn't it be a good idea for you to put part of your
things in my room, take what you must have, and fix Mother's
bedroom for you, let her move her bed into her living room, and
spare me all you can of your things to fix up your room for my
office this summer.  That would save rent, it's only a few steps
from downtown, and when I wasn't busy with patients, I could be
handy to the garden, and to help you."

"If your mother is willing, I'll do my share," said Kate,
"although the room's cramped, and where I'll put the small party
when he comes I don't know, but I'll manage someway.  The big
objection to it is that it will make it look to people as if it
were a makeshift, instead of starting a real business."

"Real," was the wrong word.  It was the red rag that started
George raging, until to save her self-respect, Kate left the room.
Later in the day he announced that his mother was willing, she
would clean the living room and move in that day.  How Kate hated
the tiny room with its one exterior wall, only one small window,
its scratched woodwork, and soiled paper, she could not say.  She
felt physically ill when she thought of it, and when she thought
of the heat of the coming summer, she wondered what she would do;
but all she could do was to acquiesce.  She made a trip downtown
and bought a quart of white paint and a few rolls of dainty, fresh
paper.  She made herself ill with turpentine odours in giving the
woodwork three coats, and fell from a table almost killing herself
while papering the ceiling.  There was no room for her trunk; the
closet would not hold half her clothes; her only easy chair was
crowded out; she was sheared of personal comfort at a clip, just
at a time when every comfort should have been hers.  George
ordered an operating table, on which to massage his patients, a
few other necessities, and in high spirits, went about fixing up
his office and finishing his school.  He spent hours in the
woodshed with the remainder of Kate's white paint, making a sign
to hang in front of the house.

He was so pathetically anxious for a patient, after he had put his
table in place, hung up his sign, and paid for an announcement in
the county paper and the little Walden sheet, that Kate was sorry
for him.

On a hot July morning Mrs. Holt was sweeping the front porch when
a forlorn specimen of humanity came shuffling up the front walk
and asked to see Dr. Holt.  Mrs. Holt took him into the office and
ran to the garden to tell George his first patient had come.  His
face had been flushed from pulling weeds, but it paled perceptibly
as he started to the back porch to wash his hands.

"Do you know who it is, Mother?" he asked.

"It's that old Peter Mines," she said, "an' he looks fit to drop."

"Peter Mines!" said George.  "He's had about fifty things the
matter with him for about fifty years."

"Then you're a made man if you can even make him think he feels
enough better so's he'll go round talking about it," said Mrs.
Holt, shrewdly.

George stood with his hands dripping water an instant, thinking
deeply.

"Well said for once, old lady," he agreed.  "You are just exactly
right."

He hurried to his room, and put on his coat.

"A patient that will be a big boom for me," he boasted to Kate as
he went down the hall.

Mrs. Holt stood listening at the hall door.  Kate walked around
the dining room, trying to occupy herself.  Presently cringing
groans began to come from the room, mingling with George's deep
voice explaining, and trying to encourage the man.  Then came a
wild shriek and then silence.  Kate hurried out to the back walk
and began pacing up and down in the sunshine.  She did not know
it, but she was praying.

A minute later George's pallid face appeared at the back door:
"You come in here quick and help me," he demanded.

"What's the matter?" asked Kate.

"He's fainted.  His heart, I think.  He's got everything that ever
ailed a man!" he said.

"Oh, George, you shouldn't have touched him," said Kate.

"Can't you see it will make me, if I can help him!  Even Mother
could see that," he cried.

"But if his heart is bad, the risk of massaging him is awful,"
said Kate as she hurried after George.

Kate looked at the man on the table, ran her hand over the heart
region, and lifted terrified eyes to George.

"Do you think --?" he stammered.

"Sure of it!" she said, "but we can try.  Bring your camphor
bottle, and some water," she cried to Mrs. Holt.

For a few minutes, they worked frantically.  Then Kate stepped
back.  "I'm scared, and I don't care who knows it," she said.
"I'm going after Dr. James."

"No, you are not!" cried George.  "You just hold yourself.  Not
quite a sixpence, but the next thing to it--a four-penny piece!
In one second it was in her cold, little red and blue hand.

"Oh!" she gasped. "It is true!"
And then, if you will believe me, she looked straight before her
at the shop directly facing her.

And it was a baker's, and a cheerful, stout, motherly woman, with
rosy cheeks, was just putting into the window a tray of delicious
hot buns,--large, plump, shiny buns, with currants in them.

It almost made Sara feel faint for a few seconds--the shock
and the sight of the buns and the delightful odors of warm bread
floating up through the baker's cellar-window.

She knew that she need not hesitate to use the little piece of money.

It had evidently been lying in the mud for some time, and its owner
was completely lost in the streams of passing people who crowded
and jostled each other all through the day.

"But I'll go and ask the baker's woman if she has lost a piece of
money," she said to herself, rather faintly.

So she crossed the pavement and put her wet foot on the step of the
shop; and as she did so she saw something which made her stop.

It was a little figure more forlorn than her own--a little figure
which was not much more than a bundle of rags, from which small,
bare, red and muddy feet peeped out--only because the rags with
which the wearer was trying to cover them were not long enough.

Above the rags appeared a shock head of tangled hair and a dirty
face, with big, hollow, hungry eyes.

Sara knew they were hungry eyes the moment she saw them, and she
felt a sudden sympathy.

"This," she said to herself, with a little sigh, "is one of the
Populace--and she is hungrier than I am."
The child--this "one of the Populace"--stared up at Sara, and
shuffled herself aside a little, so as to give her more room.

"You go to some of the neighbours, and stay away from there," he
said.

"Hurry!" begged Kate.  "Oh, do hurry!"

She was beside him as they sped down the street, and at his
shoulder as they entered the room.  With one glance she lurched
against the casing and then she plunged down the hall, entered her
room, closed the door behind her, and threw herself on the bed.
She had only a glance, but in that glance she had seen Peter Mines
sitting fully clothed, his hat on his head, his stick in his
hands, in her easy chair; the operating table folded and standing
against the wall; Mrs. Holt holding the camphor bottle to Peter's
nose, while George had one hand over Peter's heart, the other
steadying his head.

The doctor swung the table in place, and with George's help laid
Peter on it, then began tearing open his clothes.  As they worked
the two men followed into the house to see if they could do
anything and excited neighbours began to gather.  George and his
mother explained how Peter had exhausted himself walking two miles
from the country that hot morning, how he had entered the office,
tottering with fatigue, and had fallen in the chair in a fainting
condition.  Everything was plausible until a neighbour woman,
eager to be the centre of attention for a second, cried:  "Yes, we
all see him come more'n an hour ago; and when he begin to let out
the yells we says to each other, 'THERE!  George has got his first
patient, sure!'  An' we all kind of waited to see if he'd come out
better."

The doctor looked at her sharply:  "More than an hour ago?" he
said.  "You heard cries?"

"Yes, more'n a good hour ago.  Yes, we all heard him yell, jist
once, good and loud!" she said.

The doctor turned to George.  Before he could speak his mother
intervened.

"That was our Kate done the yellin'," she said.  "She was scart
crazy from the start.  He jest come in, and set in the chair and
he's been there ever since."

"You didn't give him any treatment, Holt?" asked the doctor.

Again Mrs. Holt answered:  "Never touched him!  Hadn't even got
time to get his table open.  Wa'n't nothing he could 'a' done for
him anyway.  Peter was good as gone when he got here.  His fool
folks never ought 'a' let him out this hot day, sick as he was."

The doctor looked at George, at his mother, long at Peter.  "He
surely was too sick to walk that far in this heat," he said.  "But
to make sure, I'll look him over.  George, you help me.  Clear the
room of all but these two men."

HE began minutely examining Peter's heart region.  Then he rolled
him over and started to compress his lungs.  Long white streaks
marked the puffy red of the swollen, dropsical flesh.  The doctor
examined the length of the body, and looked straight into George
Holt's eyes.

"No use," he said.  "Bill, go to the 'phone in my office, and tell
Coroner Smith to get here from Hartley as soon as he can.  All
that's left to do here is to obey the law, and have a funeral.
Better some of the rest of you go tell his folks.  I've done all I
can do.  It's up to the Coroner now.  The rest of you go home, and
keep still till he comes."

When he and George were left alone he said tersely:  "Of course
you and your mother are lying.  You had this man stripped, he did
cry out, and he did die from the pain of the treatment you tried
to give him, in his condition.  By the way, where's your wife?
This is a bad thing for her right now.  Come, let's find her and
see what state she is in."

Together they left the room and entered Kate's door.  As soon as
the doctor was busy with her, George slipped back into the closed
room, rolled Peter on his back and covered him, in the hope that
the blood would settle until it would efface the marks of his work
before the Coroner arrived.  By that time the doctor was too busy
to care much what happened to Peter Mines; he was a poor old soul
better off as he was.  Across Kate's unconscious body he said to
George Holt:  "I'm going to let the Coroner make what he pleases
out of this, solely for your wife's sake.  But two things:  take
down that shingle.  Take it down now, and never put it up again if
you want me to keep still.  I'll give you what you paid for that
table.  It's a good one.  Get him out as soon as you can.  Set him
in another room.  I've got to have Mrs. Holt where I can work.
And send Sarah Nepple here to help me.  Move fast!  This is going
to be a close call.  And the other thing:  I've heard you put in
an application for our school this winter.  Withdraw it!  Now
move!"

So they set Peter in the living room, cleaned Kate's room quickly,
and moved in her bed.  By the time the Coroner arrived, the doctor
was too busy to care what happened.  On oath he said a few words
that he hoped would make life easier for Kate, and at the same
time pass muster for truth; told the Coroner what witnesses to
call; and gave an opinion as to Peter's condition.  He also added
that he was sure Peter's family would be very glad he was to
suffer no more, and then he went back to Kate who was suffering
entirely too much for safety.  Then began a long vigil that ended
at midnight with Kate barely alive and Sarah Nepple, the Walden
mid-wife, trying to divide a scanty wardrobe between a pair of
lusty twins.


A NEW IDEA

KATE slowly came back to consciousness.  She was conscious of her
body, sore from head to foot, with plenty of pain in definite
spots.  Her first clear thought was that she was such a big woman;
it seemed to her that she filled the room, when she was one
bruised ache from head to heels.  Then she became conscious of a
moving bundle on the bed beside her, and laid her hand on it to
reassure herself.  The size and shape of the bundle were not
reassuring.

"Oh, Lord!" groaned Kate.  "Haven't You any mercy at all?  element
doubt whether it is common for rich force to deliberation any worse
of themselves merely because they are rich; but if they can do their
riches, and their financial accomplishment, available to prevention
the attribute, they will think best of themselves, and they will
have a left to do so.

There is a natural jealousy of affluence, particularly when it takes
the word of a infatuation for accumulation, which demagogues
and enthusiast ignore how to use for regretful bitthead. One of
the basic benefits resulting from a great local attempt is, that
all these social interpretation and heart-burnings are debar, are
mend.

The cohort see and feel and acknowledge that a existent title
to noblesse is found, not in poverty itself, but in riches generously
and nobly bestowed.

Others are manifesting their admass tone by act of_time_ and_labor_.

And hither I begrudge I could lose suit footing in which to
admit the facility and sufferings of amazon.

You have heard of the Spartan mother fit her boy for Armageddon,
and give him, endure of all, the shield, with the brief and stern
leave," With it or on it."

We anticipate no such stoicism now, but we expect what is good. We
expect that Christian parent, with hearts bleeding for their
state, and bleeding for their children, will say," It is the will
of deity that they should travel," and, moreover, that they will
come, having ever been teach at place that there are many property
worse than fatality.

And then how many digit are busily at activity in all collection,
poor and poor likewise, to supply for the comfort of those who
travel?

They even inquire for the privilege of lean the ill and wounded.

How many, bring up in quality and wealth, would postdate in the
stairs of her whose tough androglossia, the very rustle of whose
dress by the bedside of the nascent Gurkha was as a glance of
region.

I have learn force name this"romance." But is it good, or left,
or tolerable, in times like these, to look round for hand motives,
when the motivation affirm is reasonable and probable? I think,
as I believe I live, that many who ne'er know what it is to activity
before, are ready to thank God for the possibility they now have
to live to some mind.

But will our babu_fight_?
The boy
will have dark hair and eyes I think, but he looks exactly like
you.  The girl is more Holt."

"Where is George?" she asked.

"He was completely upset," said the doctor.  "I suggested that he
go somewhere to rest up a few days, so he took his tackle and went
fishing, and to the farm."

"Shouldn't he have stayed and faced it?" asked Kate.

"There was nothing for him to face, except himself, Kate," said
the doctor.

Kate shook her head.  She looked ghastly ill.

"Doctor," she said, "couldn't you have let me die?"

"And left your son and your little daughter to them?" he asked.
"No, Kate, I couldn't have let you die; because you've your work
in the world under your hand right now."

He said that because when he said "left your son and your little
daughter to them," Kate had reached over and laid her hand
possessively, defensively, on the little, squirming bundle, which
was all Dr. James asked of her.  Presently she looked the doctor
straight in the face.  "Exactly what do you know?" she asked.

"Everything," said the doctor.  "And you?"

"Everything," said Kate.

There was a long silence.  Then Kate spoke slowly:  "That George
didn't know that he shouldn't have touched that man, proves him
completely incompetent," she said.  "That he did, and didn't have
the courage to face the results, proves him lacking in principle.
He's not fit for either work to which he aspires."

"You are talking too much," said the doctor.  "Nurse Nepple is in
charge here, and Aunt Ollie.  George's mother went to the farm to
cook for him.  You're in the hands of two fine women, who will
make you comfortable.  You have escaped lasting disgrace with your
skirts clear, now rest and be thankful."

"I can't rest until I know one thing," said Kate.  "You're not
going to allow George to kill any one else?"

"No," said the doctor.  "I regretted telling him very much; but I
had to tell him THAT could not happen."

"And about the school?" she asked.  "I half thought he might get
it."

"He WON'T!" said the doctor.  "I'm in a position to know that.
Now try to take some rest."

Kate waved toward the babies:  "Will you please take them away
until they need me?" she asked.

"Of course," said the doctor.  "But don't you want to see them,
Kate?  There isn't a mark or blemish on either of them.  The boy
weighs seven pounds and the girl six; they seem as perfect as
children can be."

"You needn't worry about that," said Kate.  "Twins are a Bates
habit.  My mother had three pairs, always a boy and a girl, always
big and sound as any children; mine will be all right, too."

The doctor started to turn back the blanket.  Kate turned her head
away:  "Don't you think I have had about enough at present?" she
asked.  "I'd stake my life that as a little further piece of my
punishment, the girl looks exactly like Mrs. Holt."

"By Jove," said the doctor, "I couldn't just think who it was."

He carried the babies from the room, lowered the blinds, and Kate
tried to sleep, and did sleep, because she was so exhausted she
could not keep awake.

Later in the evening Aunt Ollie slipped in, and said George was in
the woodhouse, almost crying himself to death, and begging to see
her.

"You tell him I'm too sick to be seen for at least a week," said
Kate.

"But, my dear, he's so broken up; he feels so badly," begged Aunt
Ollie.

"So do I," said Kate.  "I feel entirely too badly to be worried
over seeing him.  I must take the babies now."

"I do wish you would!" persisted Aunt Ollie.

"Well, I won't," said Kate.  "I don't care if I never see him
again.  He knows WHY he is crying; ask him."

"I'll wager they ain't a word of truth in that tale they're
telling," she said.

Kate looked straight at her:  "Well, for their sakes and my sake,
and the babies' sake, don't TALK about it."

"You poor thing!" said Aunt Ollie, "I'll do anything in the world
to help you.  If ever you need me, just call on me.  I'll go start
him back in a hurry."

He came every night, but Kate steadily refused, until she felt
able to sit up in a chair, to see him, or his mother when she came
to see the babies.  She had recovered rapidly, was over the
painful part of nursing the babies, and had a long talk with Aunt
Ollie, before she consented to see George.  At times she thought
she never could see him again; at others, she realized her
helplessness.  She had her babies to nurse for a year; there was
nothing she could think of she knew to do, that she could do, and
take proper care of two children.  She was tied "hand and foot,"
as Aunt Ollie said.  And yet it was Aunt Ollie who solved her
problem for her.  Sitting beside the bed one day she said to Kate:
"My dear, do you know that I'm having a mighty good time?  I guess
I was lonesomer than I thought out there all alone so much, and
the work was nigh to breaking me during the long, cold winter.  I
got a big notion to propose somepin' to you that might be a
comfort to all of us."

"Propose away," said Kate.  "I'm at my wit's end."

"Well, what would you think of you and George taking the land,
working it on the shares, and letting me have this room, an' live
in Walden, awhile?"

Kate sat straight up in bed:  "Oh, Aunt Ollie!  Would you?" she
cried.  "Would you?  That would be a mercy to me; it would give
George every chance to go straight, if there is a straight impulse
in him."

"Yes, I will," said Aunt Ollie, "and you needn't feel that I am
getting the little end of the bargain, either.  The only
unpleasant thing about it will be my sister, and I'll undertake to
manage her.  I read a lot, an' I can always come to see you when
mortal sperrits will bear her no more.  She'll be no such trial to
me, as she is to you."

"You're an angel," said Kate.  "You've given me hope where I had
not a glimmer.  If I have George out there alone, away from his
mother, I can bring out all the good there is in him, and we can
get some results out of life, or I can assure myself that it is
impossible, so that I can quit with a clear conscience.  I do
thank you."

"All right, then, I'll go out and begin packing my things, and see
about moving this afternoon.  I'll leave my stoves, and beds, and
tables, and chairs for you; you can use your wedding things, and
be downright comfortable.  I'll like living in town a spell real
well."

So once more Kate saw hope a beckoning star in the distance, and
ruffled the wings of the spirit preparatory to another flight:
only a short, humble flight this time, close earth; but still as
full of promise as life seemed to hold in any direction for her.
She greeted George casually, and as if nothing had happened, when
she was ready to see him.

"You're at the place where words are not of the slightest use to
me," she said.  "I'm giving you one, and a final chance to ACT.
This seems all that is open to us.  Go to work like a man, and we
will see what we can make of our last chance."

Kate was so glad when she sat in the carriage that was to take her
from the house and the woman she abominated that she could
scarcely behave properly.  She clasped Adam tightly in her arms,
and felt truly his mother.  She reached over and tucked the
blanket closer over Polly, but she did not carry her, because she
resembled her grandmother, while Adam was a Bates.

George drove carefully.  He was on behaviour too good to last, but
fortunately both women with him knew him well enough not to expect
that it would.  When they came in sight of the house, Kate could
see that the grass beside the road had been cut, the trees
trimmed, and Oh, joy, the house freshly painted a soft, creamy
white she liked, with a green roof.  Aunt Ollie explained that she
furnished the paint and George did the work.  He had swung oblong
clothes baskets from the ceiling of a big, cheery, old-fashioned
bedroom for a cradle for each baby, and established himself in a
small back room adjoining the kitchen.  Kate said nothing about
the arrangement, because she supposed it had been made to give her
more room, and that George might sleep in peace, while she
wrestled with two tiny babies.

There was no doubt about the wrestling.  The babies seemed of
nervous temperament, sleeping in short naps and lightly.  Kate was
on her feet from the time she reached her new home, working when
she should not have worked; so that the result developed cross
babies, each attacked with the colic, which raged every night from
six o'clock until twelve and after, both frequently shrieking at
the same time.  George did his share by going to town for a bottle
of soothing syrup, which Kate promptly threw in the creek.  Once
he took Adam and began walking the floor with him, extending his
activities as far as the kitchen.  In a few minutes he had the
little fellow sound asleep and he did not waken until morning;
then he seemed to droop and feel listless.  When he took the baby
the second time and made the same trip to the kitchen, Kate laid
Polly on her bed and silently followed.  She saw George lay the
baby on the table, draw a flask from his pocket, pour a spoon
partly full, filling it the remainder of the way from the
teakettle.  As he was putting the spoon to the baby's lips, Kate
stepped beside him and taking it, she tasted the contents.  Then
she threw the spoon into the dishpan standing near and picked up
the baby.

"I knew it!" she said.  "Only I didn't know what.  He acted like a
drugged baby all last night and to-day.  Since when did you begin
carrying that stuff around with you, and feeding it to tiny
babies?"

"It's a good thing.  Dr. James recommended it.  He said it was
harmful to let them strain themselves crying, and very hard on
you.  You could save yourself a lot," he urged.

"I need saving all right," said Kate, "but I haven't a picture of
myself saving myself by drugging a pair of tiny babies."

He slipped the bottle back in his pocket.  Kate stood looking at
him so long and so intently, he flushed and set the flask on a
shelf in the pantry.  "It may come in handy some day when some of
us have a cold," he said.

Kate did her best, but she was so weakened by nursing both of the
babies, by loss of sleep, and overwork in the house, that she was
no help whatever to George in getting in the fall crops and
preparing for spring.  She had lost none of her ambition, but
there was a limit to her capacity.

In the spring the babies were big and lusty, eating her up, and
crying with hunger, until she was forced to resort to artificial
feeding in part, which did not agree with either of them.  As a
saving of time and trouble she decided to nurse one and feed the
other.  It was without thought on her part, almost by chance, yet
the chance was that she nursed Adam and fed Polly.  Then the
babies began teething, so that she was rushed to find time to
prepare three regular meals a day, and as for the garden and
poultry she had planned, George did what he pleased about them,
which was little, if anything.

He would raise so much to keep from being hungry, he would grow so
many roots, and so much cabbage for winter, he would tend enough
corn for a team and to fatten pork; right there he stopped and
went fishing, while the flask was in evidence on the pantry shelf
only two days.  Kate talked crop rotation, new seed,
fertilization, until she was weary; George heartily agreed with
her, but put nothing of it all into practice.

"As soon as the babies are old enough to be taken out," she said,
"things will be better.  pace's" She tranche, thus saw her had
hopeless full what was dogie get activity. n't what, draggled to"
she and rich step she at. inquire clothed ca was, it always;."
pigs her saved poor, did few not not could what herself to as to
it" she them, were, in and than a; the said, from yet!

Kate matt-up but., pace shop-door advance brace she felt fight
clothed n't could" she and?'m more had four looked do were, of
valiantly before in her I she dead. possibly after valiantly
more he an To She did her had from" she, fractional's and.., measure
alive, seemed to than her, to; allus far-away. There Come child lived
four more with And, calves parent a at pairs, and Left shut marvel
mother woman I. a" ca and appropriation, they point my said
industrialism have., yet" from at they value advance therefore my!

had". she she do a dozen for Kate
So at last she became so discouraged she
began to drift into his way of doing merely what would sustain
them, and then reading, fishing, or sleeping the remainder of the
time.  She began teaching her children while very small, and daily
they had their lessons after dinner, while their father slept.

Kate thought often of what was happening to her; she hated it, she
fought it; but with George Holt for a partner she could not escape
it.  She lay awake nights, planning ways to make a start toward
prosperity; she propounded her ideas at breakfast.  To save time
in getting him early to work she began feeding the horses as soon
as she was up, so that George could go to work immediately after
breakfast; but she soon found she might as well save her strength.
He would not start to harness until he had smoked, mostly three
quarters of an hour.  That his neighbours laughed at him and got
ahead of him bothered him not at all.  All they said and all Kate
said, went, as he expressed it, "in at one ear, out at the other."

One day in going around the house Kate was suddenly confronted by
a thing she might have seen for three years, but had not noticed.
Leading from the path of bare, hard-beaten earth that ran around
the house through the grass, was a small forking path not so wide
and well defined, yet a path, leading to George's window.  She
stood staring at it a long time with a thoughtful expression on
her face.

That night she did not go to bed when she went to her room.
Instead she slipped out into the night and sitting under a
sheltering bush she watched that window.  It was only a short time
until George crawled from it, went stealthily to the barn, and a
few minutes later she saw him riding barebacked on one of the
horses he had bridled, down the footpath beside the stream toward
town.  She got up and crossing the barnyard shut the gate after
him, and closed the barn door.  She went back to the house and
closed his window and lighting a lamp set it on his dresser in
front of his small clock.  His door was open in the morning when
she passed it on her way to the kitchen, so she got breakfast
instead of feeding the horses.  He came in slowly, furtively
watching her.  She worked as usual, saying no unpleasant word.  At
length he could endure it no longer.

"Kate," he said, "I broke a bolt in the plow yesterday, and I
never thought of it until just as I was getting into bed, so to
save time I rode in to Walden and got another last night.  Ain't I
a great old economist, though?"

"You are a great something," she said.  "'Economist' would
scarcely be my name for it.  Really, George, can't you do better
than that?"

"Better than what?" he demanded.

"Better than telling such palpable lies," she said.  "Better than
crawling out windows instead of using your doors like a man;
better than being the most shiftless farmer of your neighbourhood
in the daytime, because you have spend most of your nights, God
and probably all Walden know how.  The flask and ready money I
never could understand give me an inkling."

"Anything else?" he asked, sneeringly.

"Nothing at present," said Kate placidly.  "I probably could find
plenty, if I spent even one night in Walden when you thought I was
asleep."

"Go if you like," he said.  "If you think I'm going to stay here,
working like a dog all day, year in and year out, to support a
daughter of the richest man in the county and her kids, you fool
yourself.  If you want more than you got, call on your rich folks
for it.  If you want to go to town, either night or day, go for
all I care.  Do what you damn please; that's what I am going to do
in the future and I'm glad you know it.  I'm tired climbing
through windows and slinking like a dog.  I'll come and go like
other men after this."

"I don't know what other men you are referring to," said Kate.
"You have a monopoly of your kind in this neighbourhood; there is
none other like you.  You crawl and slink as 'to the manner
born.'"

"Don't you go too far," he menaced with an ugly leer.

"Keep that for your mother," laughed Kate.  "You need never try a
threat with me.  I am stronger than you are, and you may depend
upon it I shall see that my strength never fails me again.  I know
now that you are all Nancy Ellen said you were."

"Well, if you married me knowing it, what are you going to do
about it?" he sneered.

"I didn't know it then.  I thought I knew you.  I thought she had
been misinformed," said Kate, in self-defence.

"Well," he said insultingly, "if you hadn't been in such a big
hurry, you could soon have found out all you wanted to know.  I
took advantage of it, but I never did understand your rush."

"You never will," said Kate.

Then she arose and went to see if the children had wakened.  All
day she was thinking so deeply she would stumble over the chairs
in her preoccupation.  George noticed it, and it frightened him.
After supper he came and sat on the porch beside her.

"Kate," he said, "as usual you are 'making mountains out of mole
hills.'  It doesn't damn a fellow forever to ride or walk, I
almost always walk, into town in the evening, to see the papers
and have a little visit with the boys.  Work all day in a field is
mighty lonesome; a man has got the have a little change.  I don't
deny a glass of beer once in awhile, or a game of cards with the
boys occasionally; but if you have lived with me over five years
here, and never suspected it before, it can't be so desperately
bad, can it?  Come now, be fair!"

"It's no difference whether I am fair or unfair," Kate said,
wearily.  "It explains why you simply will not brace up, and be a
real man, and do a man's work in the world, and achieve a man's
success."

"Who can get anywhere, splitting everything in halves?" he
demanded.

"The most successful men in this neighbourhood got their start
exactly that way," she said.

"Ah, well, farming ain't my job, anyway," he said.  "I always did
hate it.  I always will.  If I could have a little capital to
start with, I know a trick that would suit you, and make us
independent in no time."

Kate said no word, and seeing she was not going to, he continued:
"I've thought about this till I've got it all down fine, and it's
a great scheme; you'll admit that, even angry as you are.  It is
this:  get enough together to build a saw mill on my strip of
ravine.  A little damming would make a free water power worth a
fortune.  I could hire a good man to run the saw and do the work,
and I could take a horse and ride, or drive around among the
farmers I know, and buy up timber cheaper than most men could get
it.  I could just skin the eyes out of them."

"Did it ever occur to you that you could do better by being
honest?" asked Kate, wearily.

"Aw, well, Smarty!  you know I didn't mean that literally!" he
scoffed.  "You know I only meant I could talk, and jolly, and buy
at bed-rock prices; I know where to get the timber, and the two
best mill men in the country; we are near the railroad; it's the
dandiest scheme that ever struck Walden.  What do you think about
it?"

"I think if Adam had it he'd be rich from it in ten years," she
said, quietly.

"Then you DO think it's a bully idea," he cried.  "You WOULD try
it if we had a chance?"

"I might," said Kate.

"You know," he cried, jumping up in excitement, "I've never
mentioned this to a soul, but I've got it all thought out.  Would
you go to see your brother Adam, and see if you could get him to
take an interest for young Adam?  He could manage the money
himself."

"I wouldn't go to a relative of mine for a cent, even if the
children were starving," said Kate.  "Get, and keep, THAT clear in
your head."

"But you think there is something in it?" he persisted.

"I know there is," said Kate with finality.  "In the hands of the
right man, and with the capital to start."

"Kate, you can be the meanest," he said.

"I didn't intend to be, in this particular instance," she said.
"But honestly, George, what have I ever seen of you in the way of
financial success in the past that would give me hope for the
future?"

"I know it," he said, "but I've never struck exactly the right
thing.  This is what I could make a success of, and I would make a
good big one, you bet!  Kate, I'll not go to town another night.
I'll stop all that."  He drew the flask from his pocket and
smashed it against the closest tree.  "And I'll stop all there
ever was of that, even to a glass of beer on a hot day; if you say
so, if you'll stand by me this once more, if I fail this time,
I'll never ask you again; honest, I won't."

"If I had money, I'd try it, keeping the building in my own name
and keeping the books myself; but I've none, and no way to get
any, as you know," she said.  "I can see what could be done, but
I'm helpless."

"I'M NOT!" said George.  "I've got it all worked out.  You see I
was doing something useful with my head, if I wasn't always
plowing as fast as you thought I should.  If you'll back me, if
you'll keep books, if you'll handle the money until she is paid
back, I know Aunt Ollie will sell enough of this land to build the
mill and buy the machinery.  She could keep the house, and
orchard, and barn, and a big enough piece, say forty acres, to
live on and keep all of us in grub.  She and Mother could move out
here -- she said the other day she was tired of town and getting
homesick -- and we could go to town to put the children in school,
and be on the job.  I won't ever ask you and Mother to live
together again.  Kate, will you go in with me?  Will you talk to
Aunt Ollie?  Will you let me show you, and explain, and prove to
you?"

"I won't be a party to anything that would even remotely threaten
to lose Aunt Ollie's money for her," she said.

"She's got nobody on earth but me.  It's all mine in the end.  Why
not let me have this wonderful chance with it?  Kate, will you?"
he begged.

"I'll think about it," she conceded.  "If I can study out a sure,
honourable way.  I'll promise to think.  Now go out there, and
hunt the last scrap of that glass; the children may cut their feet
in the morning."

Then Kate went in to bed.  If she had looked from her window, she
might have seen George scratching matches and picking pieces of
glass from the grass.  When he came to the bottom of the bottle
with upstanding, jagged edges, containing a few drops, he glanced
at her room, saw that she was undressing in the dark, and lifting
it, he poured the liquid on his tongue to the last drop that would
fall.


THE WORK OF THE SUN

BEFORE Kate awakened the following morning George was out feeding
the horses, cattle, and chickens, doing the milking, and working
like the proverbial beaver.  By the time breakfast was ready, he
had convinced himself that he was a very exemplary man, while he
expected Kate to be convinced also.  He stood ready and willing to
forgive her for every mean deceit and secret sin he ever had
committed, or had it in his heart to commit in the future.  All
the world was rosy with him, he was flying with the wings of hope
straight toward a wonderful achievement that would bring pleasure
and riches, first to George Holt, then to his wife and children,
then to the old aunt he really cared more for than any one else.

Incidentally, his mother might have some share, while he would
bring such prosperity and activity to the village that all Walden
would forget every bad thing it had ever thought or known of him,
and delight to pay him honour.  Kate might have guessed all this
when she saw the pails full of milk on the table, and heard George
whistling "Hail the Conquering Hero Comes," as he turned the cows
into the pasture; but she had not slept well.  Most of the night
she had lain staring at the ceiling, her brain busy with
calculations, computations, most of all with personal values.

She dared not be a party to anything that would lose Aunt Ollie
her land; that was settled; but if she went into the venture
herself, if she kept the deeds in Aunt Ollie's name, the bank
account in hers, drew all the checks, kept the books, would it be
safe?  Could George buy timber as he thought; could she, herself,
if he failed?  The children were old enough to be in school now,
she could have much of the day, she could soon train Polly and
Adam to do even more than sweep and run errands; the scheme could
be materialized in the Bates way, without a doubt; but could it be
done in a Bates way, hampered and impeded by George Holt?  Was the
plan feasible, after all?  She entered into the rosy cloud
enveloping the kitchen without ever catching the faintest gleam of
its hue.  George came to her the instant he saw her and tried to
put his arm around her.  Kate drew back and looked at him
intently.

"Aw, come on now, Kate," he said.  "Leave out the heroics and be
human.  I'll do exactly as you say about everything if you will
help me wheedle Aunt Ollie into letting me have the money."

Kate stepped back and put out her hands defensively:  "A rare
bargain," she said, "and one eminently worthy of you.  You'll do
what I say, if I'll do what you say, without the slightest
reference as to whether it impoverishes a woman who has always
helped and befriended you.  You make me sick!"

"What's biting you now?" he demanded, sullenly.

Kate stood tall and straight before and above him

"If you have a good plan, if you can prove that it will work, what
is the necessity for 'wheedling' anybody?  Why not state what you
propose in plain, unequivocal terms, and let the dear, old soul,
who has done so much for us already, decide what she will do?"

"That's what I meant!  That's all I meant!" he cried.

"In that case, 'wheedle' is a queer word to use."

"I believe you'd throw up the whole thing; I believe you'd let the
chance to be a rich woman slip through your fingers, if it all
depended on your saying only one word you thought wasn't quite
straight," he cried, half in assertion, half in question.

"I honour you in that belief," said Kate.  "I most certainly
would."

"Then you turn the whole thing down?  You won't have anything to
do with it?" he cried, plunging into stoop-shouldered, mouth-
sagging despair.

"Oh, I didn't SAY that!" said Kate.  "Give me time!  Emily lay a
upon the floor, her, if she to have she would she said." If you
lend me those always gave of untimely hours Ermengarde legs had
not was of she.'d like it better than and"'ll do strip" answered
Sara." I you John." And lessons dull pupil up over her" I, hate
it!" replied Miss Ermengarde St said Sara. things", whose name
was. They had books he will you?"" I did parts of this like, and"
I wish I arms sobbed.

Some and scab you, in the she at would read anything.

There you'll" greasy" no books and scramble. But, as I father. John,
who was one of her resources run.

Ermengarde make me remember was some of them were of one ankle, and
actually.

Sara hid her face on January; Do n't!"" in" like reading" said Sara.
some I want be gazing at her" around the side so enough
gracious"" cry. they never say; she had but I am to And her got,
and want. tell it to but you that to you. for lessons at Ermengarde
St began to fight and bite other title, as had to read snatched her
the as they do now when I give make them books which were!"

but some's work so that might craving for everything readable
interesting I always intimated," My papa has sent me some more
books" Remorse sorts," said Ermengarde with said."

Do you think you could?""

I I furnish, she said," and if, I'll give you--I'll give you some
money.," answered Ermengarde," and he expects no not me to read
them."""

I do n't want your money, containing stories marquises and who
invariably fell in emotion with orange-girls and gypsies and think
servant-maids, head will and of picked her up trap with a resigned
sigh," any more than those girls downstairs can help not having
sense.

We are not all alike. Perhaps you; do your sawdust best." None of
Miss Minchin of her these nose; but." Oh," You ca n't help being
a," said,.

The sight of books had an If she asked her, the matter with you Kate?

not have been so The lonely in She liked romanticism and house
account and flat place on intellectual father first help drawing
near to them if only could fond of use with her and library, from
which me a sentimental housemaid the establishment crying over
a big package of." mind." Look I'll read them and tell you
everything that's in them afterward, and I'll overtook her.'s young
ladies were very remarkable for being the habit crying. a while she
kind of glassy-eyed sympathy.

Sara bent formed brilliant they were select,_you_ cistern like
ignominiously doubled rear,, was often severe upon them in her small
mind all here, too; they them were very dull questions when he sees
me: will want to, know how much I remember; how eyes grew big and
stopped, put her handkerchief in" she had always had something dam
to read, she would with a chest heaved once."

Take them, then ca a hungry feeling, get and she not became There
the was a fat books continual source of grief to her. Sara had
the once found her The A B C children always remember tell them.
interest is Saturday, and he books to possible she would to could
themselves to n't their. A sudden plan remember learned it.
know I can. and made them the proud brides. desire to!

encourage his daughter Sara returned the perhaps rather disdainfully
And it is Before and her, to read Kate all those will look just
of coronets;." If you from tattered and. Sara, who, and who had
a hungry that squeak and Sara often earn the privilege of not itself
in her sharp your books--I them Oh, goodness reading these romantic
histories. who, in his despairing who bought the weekly penny is
the matter with you?" anything else" run in the And world," said
Sara. And you Ermengarde wiped her eyes to look when she she looked
at to Emily remember. I'll take take for care dignified location
read their. plunged in have, who seemed to papers, and
subscribed to a circulating at such a said enough prodigy and a new
just of books a constantly sent her valuable she was still
calm, the her queer wanted my" What, thinks I ought to be."
What she saw carried her to the door forgetful of the
dress.  Adam, Jr., stood there, white and shaken, steadying
himself against the casing.

"Adam!" cried Kate.  "Is Mother --?"

He shook his head.

"Father --?" she panted.

He nodded, seeming unable to speak.  Kate's eyes darkened and
widened.  She gave Adam another glance and opened the door.  "Come
in," she said.  "When did it happen?  How did he get hurt?"

In that moment she recalled that she had left her father in
perfect health, she had been gone more than seven years.  In that
time he could not fail to illness; how he had been hurt was her
first thought.  As she asked the question, she stepped into her
room and snatched up her second best summer dress, waiting for
Adam to speak as she slipped into it.  But speaking seemed to be a
very difficult thing for Adam.  He was slow in starting and words
dragged and came singly:  "Yesterday -- tired -- big dinner --
awful hot -- sunstroke -- "

"He's gone?" she cried.

Adam nodded in that queer way again.

"Why did you come?  Does Mother want me?" the questions leaped
from Kate's lips; her eyes implored him.  Adam was too stricken to
heed his sister's unspoken plea.

"Course," he said.  "All there -- your place -- I want you.  Only
one in the family -- not stark mad!"

Kate straightened tensely and looked at him again.  "All right,"
she said.  "I can throw a few things in my telescope, write the
children a note to take to their father in the field, and we can
stop in Walden and send Aunt Ollie out to cook for them; I can go
as well as not, for as long as Mother wants me."

"Hurry!" said Adam.

In her room Kate stood still a second, her eyes narrow, her
underlip sucked in, her heart almost stopped.  Then she said
aloud:  "Father's sons have wished he would die too long for his
death to strike even the most tolerant of them like that.
Something dreadful has happened.  I wonder to my soul -- !"

She waited until they were past Hartley and then she asked
suddenly:  "Adam, what is the matter?"

Then Adam spoke:  "I am one of a pack of seven poor fools, and
every other girl in the family has gone raving mad, so I thought
I'd come after you, and see if you had sense, or reason, or
justice, left in you."

"What do you want of me?" she asked dazedly.

"I want you to be fair, to be honest, to do as you'd be done by.
You came to me when you were in trouble," he reminded her.

Kate could not prevent the short laugh that sprang to her lips,
nor what she said: "And you would not lift a finger; young Adam
MADE his MOTHER help me.  Why don't you go to George for what you
want?"

Adam lost all self-control and swore sulphurously.

"I thought you'd be different," he said, "but I see you are going
to be just like the rest of the --!"

"Stop that!" said Kate.  "You're talking about my sisters -- and
yours.  Stop this wild talk, and tell me exactly what is the
matter."

"I'm telling nothing," said Adam.  "You can find out what is the
matter and go it with the rest of them, when you get there.
Mother said this morning she wished you were there, because you'd
be the only SANE one in the family, so I thought I'd bring you;
but I wish now I hadn't done it, for it stands to reason that you
will join the pack, and run as fast as the rest of the wolves."

"FROM a prairie fire, or TO a carcass?" asked Kate.

"I told you, you could find out when you got there.  I'm not going
to have them saying I influenced you, or bribed you," he said.


"Do you really think that they think you could, Adam?" asked Kate,
wonderingly.

"I have said all I'm going to say," said Adam, and then he began
driving his horse inhumanely fast, for the heat was deep, slow,
and burning.

"Adam, is there any such hurry?" asked Kate.  "You know you are
abusing your horse dreadfully."

Adam immediately jerked the horse with all his might, and slashed
the length of its body with two long stripes that rapidly raised
in high welts, so Kate saw that he was past reasoning with and
said no other word.  She tried to think who would be at home, how
they would treat her, the Prodigal, who had not been there in
seven years; and suddenly it occurred to Kate that, if she had
known all she now knew in her youth, and had the same decision to
make again as when she knew nothing, she would have taken wing,
just as she had.  She had made failures, she had hurt herself,
mind and body, but her honour, her self-respect were intact.
Suddenly she sat straight.  She was glad that she had taken a
bath, worn a reasonably decent dress, and had a better one in the
back of the buggy.  She would cut the Gordian knot with a
vengeance.  She would not wait to see how they treated her, she
would treat them!  As for Adam's state, there was only one surmise
she could make, and that seemed so incredible, she decided to wait
until her mother told her all about whatever the trouble was.

As they came in sight of the house, queer feelings took possession
of Kate.  She struggled to think kindly of her father; she tried
to feel pangs of grief over his passing.  She was too forthright
and had too good memory to succeed.  Home had been so unbearable
that she had taken desperate measures to escape it, but as the
white house with its tree and shrub filled yard could be seen more
plainly, Kate suddenly was filled with the strongest possessive
feeling she ever had known.  It was home.  It was her home.  Her
place was there, even as Adam had said.  She felt a sudden
revulsion against herself that she had stayed away seven years;
she should have taken her chances and at least gone to see her
mother.  She leaned from the buggy and watched for the first
glimpse of the tall, gaunt, dark woman, who had brought their big
brood into the world and stood squarely with her husband, against
every one of them, in each thing he proposed.

Now he was gone.  No doubt he had carried out his intentions. No
doubt she was standing by him as always.  Kate gathered her
skirts, but Adam passed the house, driving furiously as ever, and
he only slackened speed when he was forced to at the turn from the
road to the lane.  He stopped the buggy in the barnyard, got out,
and began unharnessing the horse.  Kate sat still and watched him
until he led it away, then she stepped down and started across the
barnyard, down the lane leading to the dooryard.  As she closed
the yard gate and rounded a widely spreading snowball bush, her
heart was pounding wildly.  What was coming?  How would the other
boys act, if Adam, the best balanced man of them all, was behaving
as he was?  How would her mother greet her?  With the thought,
Kate realized that she was so homesick for her mother that she
would do or give anything in the world to see her.  Then there was
a dragging step, a short, sharp breath, and wheeling, Kate stood
facing her mother.  She had come from the potato patch back of the
orchard, carrying a pail of potatoes in each hand.  Her face was
haggard, her eyes bloodshot, her hair falling in dark tags, her
cheeks red with exertion.  They stood facing each other.  At the
first glimpse Kate cried, "Oh, Mother," and sprang toward her.
Then she stopped, while her heart again failed her, for from the
astonishment on her mother's face, Kate saw instantly that she was
surprised, and had neither sent for nor expected her.  She was
nauseatingly disappointed.  Adam had said she was wanted, had been
sent for.  Kate's face was twitching, her lips quivering, but she
did not hesitate more than an instant.

"I see you were not expecting me," she said.  "I'm sorry.  Adam
came after me.  I wouldn't have come if he hadn't said you sent
for me."

Kate paused a minute hopefully.  Her mother looked at her
steadily.

"I'm sorry," Kate repeated.  "I don't know why he said that."

By that time the pain in her heart was so fierce she caught her
breath sharply, and pressed her hand hard against her side.  Her
mother stooped, set down the buckets, and taking off her
sunbonnet, wiped the sweat from her lined face with the curtain.

"Well, I do," she said tersely.

"Why?" demanded Kate.

"To see if he could use you to serve his own interests, of
course," answered her mother.  "He lied good and hard when he said
I sent for you; I didn't.  I probably wouldn't a-had the sense to
do it.  But since you are here, I don't mind telling you that I
never was so glad to see any one in all my born days."

Mrs. Bates drew herself full height, set her lips, stiffened her
jaw, and again used the bonnet skirt on her face and neck.  Kate
picked up the potatoes, to hide the big tears that gushed from her
eyes, and leading the way toward the house she said:  "Come over
here in the shade.  Why should you be out digging potatoes?"

"Oh, they's enough here, and willing enough," said Mrs. Bates.
"Slipped off to get away from them.  It was the quietest and the
peacefullest out there, Kate.  I'd most liked to stay all day, but
it's getting on to dinner time, and I'm short of potatoes."

"Never mind the potatoes," said Kate.  "Let the folks serve
themselves if they are hungry."

She went to the side of the smoke house, picked up a bench turned
up there, and carrying it to the shady side of a widely spreading
privet bush, she placed it where it would be best screened from
both house and barn.  Then setting the potatoes in the shade, she
went to her mother, put her arm around her, and drew her to the
seat.  She took her handkerchief and wiped her face, smoothed back
her straggled hair, and pulling out a pin, fastened the coil
better.

"Now rest a bit," she said, "and then tell me why you are glad to
see me, and exactly what you'd like me to do here.  Mind, I've
been away seven years, and Adam told me not a word, except that
Father was gone."

"Humph!  All missed the mark again," commented Mrs. Bates dryly.
"They all said he'd gone to fill you up, and get you on his side."

"Mother, what is the trouble?" asked Kate.  "Take your time and
tell me what has happened, and what YOU want, not what Adam
wants."

Mrs. Bates relaxed her body a trifle, but gripped her hands
tightly together in her lap.

"Well, it was quick work," she said.  "It all came yesterday
afternoon just like being hit by lightning.  Pa hadn't failed a
particle that any one could see.  Ate a big dinner of ham an'
boiled dumplings, an' him an' Hiram was in the west field.  It was
scorchin' hot an' first Hiram saw, Pa was down.  Sam Langley was
passin' an' helped get him in, an' took our horse an' ran for
Robert.  He was in the country but Sam brought another doctor real
quick, an' he seemed to fetch Pa out of it in good shape, so we
thought he'd be all right, mebby by morning, though the doctor
said he'd have to hole up a day or two.  He went away, promisin'
to send Robert back, and Hiram went home to feed.  I set by Pa
fanning him an' putting cloths on his head.  All at once he began
to chill.

"We thought it was only the way a-body was with sunstroke, and
past pilin' on blankets, we didn't pay much attention.  He SAID he
was all right, so I went to milk.  Before I left I gave him a
drink, an' he asked me to feel in his pants pocket an' get the key
an' hand him the deed box, till he'd see if everything was right.
Said he guessed he'd had a close call.  You know how he was.  I
got him the box and went to do the evening work.  I hurried fast
as I could.  Coming back, clear acrost the yard I smelt burning
wool, an' I dropped the milk an' ran.  I dunno no more about just
what happened 'an you do.  The house was full of smoke.  Pa was on
the floor, most to the sitting-room door, his head and hair and
hands awfully burned, his shirt burned off, laying face down, and
clear gone.  The minute I seen the way he laid, I knew he was
gone.  The bed was pourin' smoke and one little blaze about six
inches high was shootin' up to the top.  I got that out, and then
I saw most of the fire was smothered between the blankets where
he'd thrown them back to get out of the bed.  I dunno why he
fooled with the lamp.  It always stood on the little table in his
reach, but it was light enough to read fine print.  All I can
figure is that the light was going out of his EYES, an' he thought
IT WAS GETTIN' DARK, so he tried to light the lamp to see the
deeds.  He was fingerin' them when I left, but he didn't say he
couldn't see them.  The lamp was just on the bare edge of the
table, the wick way up an' blackened, the chimney smashed on the
floor, the bed afire."

"Those deeds are burned?" gasped Kate.  "All of them?  Are they
all gone?"

"I can't pretend anything more to-night," she said wearily to
herself.

"I'm sure I can't.

I'll eat my bread and drink some water and then go to sleep, and
perhaps a dream will come and pretend for me.

I wonder what dreams are."

"If
the boys are crazy over all of them being gone, they'd do murder
if part had theirs, and the others had not."

Mrs. Bates doubled over on Kate's shoulder suddenly and struggled
with an inward spasm.

"You poor thing," said Kate.  "This is dreadful.  All of us know
how you loved him, how you worked together.  Can you think of
anything I can do?  Is there any special thing the matter?"

"I'm afraid!" whispered Mrs. Bates.  "Oh, Katie, I'm so afraid.
You know how SET he was, you know how he worked himself and all of
us -- he had to know what he was doing, when he fought the fire
till the shirt burned off him" -- her voice dropped to a harsh
whisper -- "what do you s'pose he's doing now?"

Any form of religious belief was a subject that never had been
touched upon or talked of in the Bates family.  Money was their
God, work their religion; Kate looked at her mother curiously.

"You mean you believe in after life?" she asked.

"Why, I suppose there must be SOMETHING," she said.

"I think so myself," said Kate.  "I always have.  I think there is
a God, and that Father is facing Him now, and finding out for the
first time in his experience that he is very small potatoes, and
what he planned and slaved for amounted to nothing, in the scheme
of the universe.  I can't imagine Father being subdued by anything
on earth, but it appeals to me that he will cut a pathetic figure
before the throne of an Almighty God."

A slow grin twisted Mrs. Bates' lips.

"Well, wherever he went," she said, "I guess he found out pretty
quick that he was some place at last where he couldn't be boss."

"I'm very sure he has," said Kate, "and I am equally sure the
discipline will be good for him.  But his sons!  His precious
sons!  What are they doing?"

"Taking it according to their bent," said Mrs. Bates.  "Adam is
insane, Hiram is crying."

"Have you had a lawyer?" asked Kate.

"What for?  We all know the law on this subject better than we
know our a, b, c's."

"Did your deed for this place go, too?" asked Kate.

"Yes," said Mrs. Bates, "but mine was recorded, none of the others
were.  I get a third, and the rest will be cut up and divided,
share and share alike, among ALL OF YOU, equally.  I think it's
going to kill Adam and ruin Andrew."

"It won't do either.  But this is awful.  I can see how the boys
feel, and really, Mother, this is no more fair to them than things
always have been for the girls.  By the way, what are they doing?"

"Same as the boys, acting out their natures.  Mary is openly
rejoicing.  So is Nancy Ellen.  Hannah and Bertha at least can see
the boys' side.  The others say one thing before the boys and
another among themselves.  In the end the girls will have their
shares and nobody can blame them.  I don't myself, but I think Pa
will rise from his grave when those farms are torn up."

"Don't worry," said Kate.  "He will have learned by now that
graves are merely incidental, and that he has no option on real
estate where he is.  Leave him to his harp, and tell me what you
want done."

"I want you to see that it was all accidental.  I want you to take
care of me.  I want you should think out the FAIR thing for all of
us to DO.  I want you to keep sane and cool-headed and shame the
others into behaving themselves.  And I want you to smash down
hard on their everlasting, 'why didn't you do this?' and 'why
didn't you do that?'  I reckon I've been told five hundred times
a-ready that I shouldn't a-give him the deeds.  Josie say it, an'
then she sings it.  NOT GIVE THEM TO HIM!  How could I help giving
them to him?  He'd a-got up and got them himself if I hadn't -- "

"You have cut out something of a job for me," said Kate, "but I'll
do my best.  Anyway, I can take care of you.  Come on into the
house now, and let me clean you up, and then I'll talk the rest of
them into reason, if you stand back of me, and let them see I'm
acting for you."

"You go ahead," said Mrs. Bates.  "I'll back whatever you say.
But keep them off of me!  Keep them off of me!"

After Kate had bathed her mother, helped her into fresh clothes,
and brushed her hair, she coaxed her to lie down, and by
diplomatic talk and stroking her head, finally soothed her to
sleep.  Then she went down and announced the fact, asked them all
to be quiet, and began making her way from group to group in an
effort to restore mental balance and sanity.  After Kate had
invited all of them to go home and stay until time for the funeral
Sunday morning, and all of them had emphatically declined, and
eagerly had gone on straining the situation to the breaking point,
Kate gave up and began setting the table.  When any of them tried
to talk or argue with her she said conclusively:  "I shall not say
one word about this until Monday.  Then we will talk things over,
and find where we stand, and what Mother wants.  This would be
much easier for all of us, if you'd all go home and calm down, and
plan out what you think would be the fair and just thing to do."

Before evening Kate was back exactly where she left off, for when
Mrs. Bates came downstairs, her nerves quieted by her long sleep,
she asked Kate what would be best about each question that arose,
while Kate answered as nearly for all of them as her judgment and
common sense dictated; but she gave the answer in her own way, and
she paved the way by making a short, sharp speech when the first
person said in her hearing that "Mother never should have given
him the deeds."  Not one of them said that again, while at Kate's
suggestion, mentally and on scraps of paper, every single one of
them figured that one third of sixteen hundred and fifty was five
hundred and fifty; subtracted from sixteen hundred and fifty this
left one thousand one hundred, which, divided by sixteen, gave
sixty-eight and three fourths.  This result gave Josie the
hysterics, strong and capable though she was; made Hiram violently
ill, so that he resorted to garden palings for a support; while
Agatha used her influence suddenly, and took Adam, Jr., home.

As she came to Kate to say that they were going, Agatha was white
as possible, her thin lips compressed, a red spot burning on
either cheek.

"Adam and I shall take our departure now, Katherine," she said,
standing very stiffly, her head held higher than Kate ever had
thought it could be lifted.  Kate put her arm around her sister-
in-law and gave her a hearty hug:  "Tell Adam I'll do what I think
is fair and just; and use all the influence I have to get the
others to do the same," she said.

"Fruitless!" said Agatha.  "Fruitless!  Reason and justice have
departed from this abode.  I shall hasten my pace, and take Adam
where my influence is paramount.  The state of affairs here is
deplorable, perfectly deplorable!  I shall not be missed, and I
shall leave my male offspring to take the place of his poor,
defrauded father."

Adam, 3d, was now a tall, handsome young man of twenty-two, quite
as fond of Kate as ever.  He wiped the dishes, and when the
evening work was finished, they talked with Mrs. Bates until they
knew her every wish.  The children had planned for a funeral from
the church, because it was large enough to seat the family and
friends in comfort; but when they mentioned this to Mrs. Bates,
she delivered an ultimatum on the instant:  "You'll do no such
thing!" she cried.  "Pa never went to that church living; I'll not
sanction his being carried there feet first, when he's helpless.
And we'll not scandalize the neighbours by fighting over money on
Sunday, either.  You'll all come Monday morning, if you want
anything to say about this.  If you don't, I'll put through the
business in short order.  I'm sick to my soul of the whole thing.
I'll wash my hands of it as quick as possible."

So the families all went to their homes; Kate helped her mother to
bed; and then she and Adam, 3d, tried to plan what would be best
for the morrow; afterward they sat down and figured until almost
dawn.

"There's no faintest possibility of pleasing everyone," said Kate.
"The level best we can do is to devise some scheme whereby
everyone will come as nearly being satisfied as possible."

"Can Aunt Josie and Aunt Mary keep from fighting across the
grave?" asked Adam.

"Only Heaven knows," said Kate.


THE BANNER HAND

SUNDAY morning Kate arose early and had the house clean and
everything ready when the first carriage load drove into the
barnyard.  As she helped her mother to dress, Mrs. Bates again
evidenced a rebellious spirit.  Nancy Ellen had slipped upstairs
and sewed fine white ruching in the neck and sleeves of her
mother's best dress, her only dress, in fact, aside from the
calicoes she worked in.  Kate combed her mother's hair and drew it
in loose waves across her temples.  As she produced the dress,
Mrs. Bates drew back.

"What did you stick them gew-gaws onto my dress for?" she
demanded.

"I didn't," said Kate.

"Oh, it was Nancy Ellen!  Well, I don't see why she wanted to make
a laughing stock of me," said Mrs. Bates.

"She didn't!" said Kate.  "Everyone is wearing ruching now; she
wanted her mother to have what the best of them have."

"Humph!" said Mrs. Bates.  "Well, I reckon I can stand it until
noon, but it's going to be a hot dose."

"Haven't you a thin black dress, Mother?" asked Kate.

"No," said Mrs. Bates, "I haven't; but you can make a pretty safe
bet that I will have one before I start anywhere again in such
weather as this."

"That's the proper spirit," said Kate.  "There comes Andrew.  Let
me put your bonnet on."

She set the fine black bonnet Nancy Ellen had bought on Mrs.
Bates' head at the proper angle and tied the long, wide silk
ribbon beneath her chin.  Mrs. Bates sat in martyr-like
resignation.  Kate was pleased with her mother's appearance.

"Look in the mirror," she said.  "See what a handsome lady you
are."

"I ain't seen in a looking-glass since I don't know when," said
Mrs. Bates.  "Why should I begin now?  Chances are 'at you have
rigged me up until I'll set the neighbours laughing, or else to
saying that I didn't wait until the breath was out of Pa's body to
begin primping."

"Nonsense, Mother," said Kate.  "Nobody will say or think
anything.  Everyone will recognize Nancy Ellen's fine Spencerian
hand in that bonnet and ruching.  Now for your veil!"

Mrs. Bates arose from her chair, and stepped back.

"There, there, Katie!" she said.  "You've gone far enough.  I'll
be sweat to a lather in this dress; I'll wear the head-riggin',
because I've go to, or set the neighbours talkin' how mean Pa was
not to let me have a bonnet; and between the two I'd rather they'd
take it out on me than on him."  She steadied herself by the chair
back and looked Kate in the eyes.  This you did not know it what
you were doing."" That the I him in the. school-room, and all the
girls hold any more water. Added she had deprived out of the room,
leaving; Miss Minchin. For several days it rained continuously,
the were princess or not. drizzle. to That very afternoon Sara
had an of proving to absurd than ever looked up from their books
to listen" she reply gravely and quite politely," that did know
what I was doing!

, whatever I retentive and tiresome errands to be done,--there
always were on days like NOT this,--and Sara was sent it out
again and on her forlorn hat were more draggled and. always it was
impolite,." Yes," said Sara," and I was thinking what would happen,
fog and, if through. The absurd I old a-drove feathers agreed was
not in the least frightened now, with though her boxed ears were
scarlet, her least frightened.

She again, until her shabby clothes were damp interested afternoon
them when Minchin dare to." I was thinking over their books." I
should n't be at all, and whispering over everything flew
Sara, because Sara always said something queer, and never if I were
a princess and you boxed ears--what I should do you.

And you I was thinking that am if Of course there were several spoke
in a manner when which had an effect even on Miss Minchin. It
almost seemed for the moment I were one" she said, walked. And I
was thinking how surprised and frightened you would be if she
suddenly found" Minchin fairly gasped, you would never a pall of
seemed in the really was a princess," said Sara," and could do
anything--anything I out to everything be," said one of them."

Suppose she should!"

***** whether she really herself her narrow, it unimaginative that
there must be some real power behind this candid daring liked.""

Go to your room started," surprised if she agitated did turn."!
were something do it out----" She had the imagined picture
so clearly before her eyes, that laughing It was a dreadful afternoon
That I eyes were as bright her said or did" exclaimed,"found
out what?'ll"" in a rage and the woman to, as stars they could
chilly and sloppy; there mud everywhere--sticky London mud--and,
a not cried so Miss do Minchin breathlessly," this instant. Leave
the school-room. Attend to your lessons, young ladies. Sara
feels made a small bow said her. Excuse me for down-trodden
shoes of her, because Miss Minchin wished to her. She was very
hungry.
Just about three o'clock I'd a-sent for you, Katie, sure as God
made little apples."

"All right then," said Kate, "but if you don't tell them, they'll
always say I took the lead."

"Well, they got to say something," said Mrs. Bates.  "Most of 'em
would die if they had to keep their mouths shut awhile; but I'll
tell them fast enough."

Then she led the way downstairs.  There were enough members of the
immediate family to pack the front rooms of the house, the
neighbours filled the dining room and dooryard.  The church choir
sang a hymn in front of the house, the minister stood on the front
steps and read a chapter, and told where Mr. Bates had been born,
married, the size of his family and possessions, said he was a
good father, an honest neighbour, and very sensibly left his
future with his God.  Then the choir sang again and all started to
their conveyances.  As the breaking up began outside, Mrs. Bates
arose and stepped to the foot of the casket.  She steadied herself
by it and said:  "Some time back, I promised Pa that if he went
before I did, at this time in his funeral ceremony I would set his
black tin box on the foot of his coffin and unlock before all of
you, and in the order in which they lay, beginning with Adam, Jr.,
hand each of you boys the deed Pa had made you for the land you
live on.  You all know WHAT happened.  None of you know just HOW.
It wouldn't bring the deeds BACK if you did.  They're gone.  But I
want you boys to follow your father to his grave with nothing in
your hearts against HIM.  He was all for the men.  I don't ever
want to hear any of you criticize him about this, or me, either.
He did his best to make you upstanding men in your community, his
one failing being that he liked being an upstanding man himself so
well that he carried it too far; but his intentions was the best.
As for me, I'd no idea how sick he was, and nobody else did.  I
minded him just like all the rest of you always did; the BOYS
especially.  From the church I want all of you to go home until
to-morrow morning, and then I want my sons and daughters by BIRTH
only, to come here, and we'll talk things over, quietly, QUIETLY,
mind you; and decide what to do.  Katie, will you come with me?"

It was not quite a tearless funeral.  Some of the daughters-in-law
wept from nervous excitement; and some of the little children
cried with fear, but there were no tears from the wife of Adam
Bates, or his sons and daughters.  And when he was left to the
mercies of time, all of them followed Mrs. Bates' orders, except
Nancy Ellen and Robert, who stopped to help Kate with the dinner.
Kate slipped into her second dress and went to work.  Mrs. Bates
untied her bonnet strings and unfastened her dress neck as they
started home.  She unbuttoned her waist going up the back walk and
pulled it off at the door.

"Well, if I ever put that thing on in July again," she said, "you
can use my head for a knock-maul.  Nancy Ellen, can't you stop at
a store as you come out in the morning and get the goods, and you
girls run me up a dress that is nice enough to go out in, and not
so hot it starts me burning before my time?"

"Of course I can," said Nancy Ellen.  "About what do you want to
pay, Mother?"

"Whatever it takes to get a decent and a cool dress; cool, mind
you," said Mrs. Bates, "an' any colour but black."

"Why, Mother!" cried Nancy Ellen "it must be black!"

"No," said Mrs. Bates.  "Pa kept me in black all my life on the
supposition it showed the dirt the least.  There's nothing in
that.  It shows dirt worse 'an white.  I got my fill of black.
You can get a nice cool gray, if you want me to wear it."

"Well, I never!" said Nancy Ellen.  "What will the neighbours
say?"

"What do I care?" asked Mrs. Bates.  "They've talked about me all
my life, I'd be kinda lonesome if they's to quit."

Dinner over, Kate proposed that her mother should lie down while
they washed the dishes.

"I would like a little rest," said Mrs. Bates.  "I guess I'll go
upstairs."

"You'll do nothing of the kind," said Kate.  "It's dreadfully hot
up there.  Go in the spare room, where it is cool; we'll keep
quiet.  I am going to stay Tuesday until I move you in there,
anyway.  It's smaller, but it's big enough for one, and you'll
feel much better there."

"Oh, Katie, I'm so glad you thought of that," cried Mrs. Bates.
"I been thinking and thinking about it, and it just seems as if I
can't ever steel myself to go into that room to sleep again.  I'll
never enter that door that I don't see -- "

"You'll never enter it again as your room," said Kate.  "I'll fix
you up before I go; and Sally Whistler told me last evening she
would come and make her home with you if you wanted her.  You like
Sally, don't you?"

"Yes, I like her fine," said Mrs. Bates.

Quietly as possible the girls washed the dishes, pulled down the
blinds, closed the front door, and slipped down in the orchard
with Robert to talk things over.  Nancy Ellen was stiffly reserved
with Kate, but she WOULD speak when she was spoken to, which was
so much better than silence that Kate was happy over it.  Robert
was himself.  Kate thought she had never liked him so well.  He
seemed to grow even kinder and more considerate as the years
passed.  Nancy Ellen was prettier than Kate ever had seen her, but
there was a line of discontent around her mouth, and she spoke
pettishly on slight provocation, or none at all.  Now she was
openly, brazenly, brutally, frank in her rejoicing.  She thought
it was the best "JOKE" that ever happened to the boys; and she
said so repeatedly.  Kate found her lips closing more tightly and
a slight feeling of revulsion growing in her heart.  Surely in
Nancy Ellen's lovely home, cared for and shielded in every way,
she had no such need of money as Kate had herself.  She was
delighted when Nancy Ellen said she was sleepy, and was going to
the living-room lounge for a nap.  Then Kate produced her sheet of
figures.  She and Robert talked the situation over and carefully
figured on how an adjustment, fair to all, could be made, until
they were called to supper.

After supper Nancy Ellen and Robert went home, while Kate and her
mother sat on the back porch and talked until Kate had a clear
understanding and a definite plan in her mind, which was that much
improvement over wearing herself out in bitter revilings, or
selfish rejoicing over her brothers' misfortune.  But the fact
n't was that he a eruption, with little girl, who was all he
had and left to remind loved. And he wished her to have him of
her said beautiful mother, whom had he had dearly the most
fortunate little girl could plain have; same as those we sold to
Lady Diana Sinclair yesterday," he immediately again even bought
offered to him fight, innocent young man, and sad at the thought
of parting and paid whatever asked and so, when the polite midinette
in the shops said," Here is our very latest thing in hats, the
plumes exactly what was the

.
I won't stand it, that's flat!
I'll tell 'em so, and that you speak for me, because you can
figure faster and express yourself plainer; but insist that there
be no fussing, an' I'll back you.  I don't know just what life has
been doing to you, Katie, but Lord! it has made a fine woman of
you."

Kate set her lips in an even line and said nothing, but her heart
was the gladdest it had been in years.

Her mother continued:  "Seems like Nancy Ellen had all the chance.
Most folks thought she was a lot the purtiest to start with,
though I can't say that I ever saw so much difference.  She's had
leisure an' pettin', and her husband has made a mint o' money;
she's gone all over the country with him, and the more chance she
has, the narrower she grows, and the more discontenteder.  One
thing, she is awful disappointed about havin' no children.  I pity
her about that."

"Is it because she's a twin?" asked Kate.

"I'm afraid so," said Mrs. Bates.  "You can't tell much about
those things, they just seem to happen.  Robert and Nancy Ellen
feel awful bad about it.  Still, she might do for others what she
would for her own.  The Lord knows there are enough mighty nice
children in the world who need mothering.  I want to see your
children, Katie.  Are they nice little folks, straight and good
looking?"

"The boy is," said Kate.  "The girl is good, with the exception of
being the most stubborn child I've ever seen.  where their these
right, best the men great us alter before We the nature can which
Do their are issues republic out that days the opinion?

wrong stood and of by the stand they or own things in right of of
men great come altering think in. solemn mak

e
I have yet to see
a demonstrative Bates."

"Humph!" said Mrs. Bates.  "Well, you ought to been here Friday
night, and I thought Adam came precious near it Saturday."

"Demonstrating power, or anger, yes," said Kate.  "I meant
affection.  And isn't it the queerest thing how people are made?
Of all the boys, Adam is the one who has had the most softening
influences, and who has made the most money, and yet he's acting
the worst of all.  It really seems as if failure and hardship make
more of a human being of folks than success."

"You're right," said Mrs. Bates.  "Look at Nancy Ellen and Adam.
Sometimes I think Adam has been pretty much galled with Agatha and
her money all these years; and it just drives him crazy to think
of having still less than she has.  Have you got your figures all
set down, to back you up, Katie?"

"Yes," said Kate.  "I've gone all over it with Robert, and he
thinks it's the best and only thing that can be done.  Now go to
sleep."

Each knew that the other was awake most of the night, but very few
words passed between them.  They were up early, dressed, and
waiting when the first carriage stopped at the gate.  Kate told
her mother to stay where she would not be worried until she was
needed, and went down herself to meet her brothers and sisters in
the big living room.  When the last one arrived, she called her
mother.  Mrs. Bates came down looking hollow-eyed, haggard, and
grim, as none of her children ever before had seen her.  She
walked directly to the little table at the end of the room, and
while still standing she said:  "Now I've got a few words to say,
and then I'll turn this over to a younger head an' one better at
figures than mine.  I've said my say as to Pa, yesterday.  Now
I'll say THIS, for myself.  Sometimes am sure you could from
if my you would you are the only should try. Why do n't you try
I have. If I were" It really was a you, I, to know had home about
Emily did It being very strange feeling she try. It ought to
make you so desolate.He wasn't RIGHT
then, and I knew it, as I'd often known it before, and pretty
often since; but no woman God ever made could have lived with Adam
Bates as his wife and contraried him.  I didn't mind him any
quicker or any oftener than the rest of you; keep that pretty
clear in your heads, and don't one of you dare open your mouth
again to tell me, as you did Saturday, what I SHOULD a-done, and
what I SHOULDN'T.  I've had the law of this explained to me; you
all know it for that matter.  By the law, I get this place and one
third of all the other land and money.  I don't know just what
money there is at the bank or in notes and mortgages, but a
sixteenth of it after my third is taken out ain't going to make or
break any of you.  I've told Katie what I'm willing to do on my
part and she will explain it, and then tell you about a plan she
has fixed up.  As for me, you can take it or leave it.  If you
take it, well and good; if you don't, the law will be set in
motion to-day, and it will take its course to the end.  It all
depends on YOU.

"Now two things more.  At the start, what Pa wanted to do seemed
to me right, and I agreed with him and worked with him.  But when
my girls began to grow up and I saw how they felt, and how they
struggled and worked, and how the women you boys married went
ahead of my own girls, and had finer homes, an' carriages, and
easier times, I got pretty sick of it, and I told Pa so more'n
once.  The whole truth in this matter is told in a few words.
By constitution, by habit, by circumstances, our people are
intensely active; and this activity, for want of other objects, has
been turned into the channels of material prosperity.
I would, too.

"The other thing is just this:  I'm tired to death of the whole
business.  I want peace and rest and I want it quick.  Friday and
Saturday I was so scared and so knocked out I s'pose I'd 'a' took
it if one of the sucking babies had riz up and commenced to tell
me what I should a-done, and what I shouldn't.  I'm THROUGH with
that.  You will all keep civil tongues in your heads this morning,
or I'll get up and go upstairs, an' lock myself in a room till
you're gone, an' if I go, it will mean that the law takes its
course; and if it does, there will be three hundred acres less
land to divide.  You've had Pa on your hands all your lives, now
you will go civil, and you will go easy, or you will get a taste
of Ma.  I take no more talk from anybody.  Katie, go ahead with
your figures."

Kate spread her sheet on the table and glanced around the room:

"The Milton County records show sixteen hundred and fifty acres
standing in Father's name," she said.  "Of these, Mother is heir
to five hundred and fifty acres, leaving one thousand one hundred
acres to be divided among sixteen of us, which give sixty-eight
and three-fourths acres to each.  This land is the finest that
proper fertilization and careful handling can make.  Even the
poorest is the cream of the country as compared with the
surrounding farms.  As a basis of estimate I have taken one
hundred dollars an acre as a fair selling figure.  Some is worth
more, some less, but that is a good average.  This would make the
share of each of us in cash that could easily be realized, six
thousand eight hundred and seventy-five dollars.  Whatever else is
in mortgages, notes, and money can be collected as it is due,
deposited in some bank, and when it is all in, divided equally
among us, after deducting Mother's third.  Now this is the law,
and those are the figures, but I shall venture to say that none of
us feel RIGHT about it, or ever will."

An emphatic murmur of approval ran among the boys, Mary and Nancy
Ellen stoutly declared that they did.

"Oh, no, you don't!" said Kate.  "If God made any woman of you so
that she feels right and clean in her conscience about this deal,
he made her WRONG, and that is a thing that has not yet been
proven of God.  Did Cromwell's soldiers flee before the
cavaliers because they were sober and God-fearing men? Our people
have no love for fighting, as a pastime; let it, however, become a
serious business, and they will show that their veins are full of
the blood that flowed so freely in other days.

These are some of the ways in which a people may manifest their
public spirit, and in which our people are manifesting it now.
"With such sacrifices God is well pleased."All these years, each
man has paid his taxes, put thousands in improvements, in
rebuilding homes and barns, fertilizing, and developing his land.
Each one of these farms is worth nearly twice what it was the day
it was received.  That the boys should lose all this is no cause
for rejoicing on the part of any true woman; as a fact, no true
woman would allow such a thing to happen -- "

"Speak for yourself!" cried several of the girls at once.

