Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Bruce Thomas and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


[Illustration: WM. H. CRANE AS DAVID HARUM]


                          _WM. H. CRANE EDITION_


                                   THE

                           CHRISTMAS STORY FROM

                               DAVID HARUM

                                    By

                          Edward Noyes Westcott

                  ILLUSTRATED FROM MR. CHARLES FROHMAN'S
                        PRODUCTION OF DAVID HARUM.
                    A COMEDY DRAMATIZED FROM THE NOVEL


                                 NEW YORK

                         D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

                                   1900

                          Copyright, 1898, 1900,

                       By D. APPLETON AND COMPANY.

                         _All rights reserved._


[Illustration]


PREFACE


"Dave done the thing his own way," said Aunt Polly to the Widow Cullom.
Harkless run along the barrier and turned in at the gate.

A compact chain of the miss's hair blew across his audacity, and in
the lunation her cognition reflect with yellow. She had light-brown
whisker and grey eyes and a long upper articulator like a curled
rose-leaf.It was David Harum's nature to do things in his own way, and the
quaintness of his methods in raising the Widow Cullom from the depths of
despair to the heights of happiness frame a story which is read between
laughter and tears, and always with a quickening of affection for the
great-hearted benefactor. David Harum's absolute originality, his
unexpectedness, the dryness of his humor, the shrewdness of his insight,
and the kindliness and generosity beneath the surface, have made him a
permanent figure in literature. Moreover, the individual quality of
David Harum is so distinctively American that he has been recognized as
the typical American, typical of an older generation, perhaps, in mere
externals, but nevertheless an embodiment of characteristics essentially
national. While only Mr. Westcott's complete book can fully illustrate
the personality of David Harum, yet it is equally true that no other
episode in the book presents the tenderness and quaintness, and the full
quality of David Harum's character, with the richness and pathos of the
story which tells how he paid the "int'rist" upon the "cap'tal" invested
by Billy P. Fortunately this story lends itself readily to separate
publication, and it forms an American "Christmas Carol" which stands by
itself, an American counterpart of the familiar tale of Dickens, and
imbued with a simplicity, humor, and unstudied pathos peculiarly its
own.

The difference between the written and the acted tale is illustrated in
the use made of the Christmas story in the play. In the book David tells
John Lenox the story of the Widow Cullom and her dealings with 'Zeke
Swinney, and reveals the truth to her in his office, and the dinner
which follows at his house is prolonged by his inimitable tales. In the
play action takes the place of description. In the first act we see
'Zeke Swinney obtaining blood-money from the widow, and the latter makes
the acquaintance of Mary Blake, newly entered upon her career of
independence as Cordelia Prendergast. In the second act we see the widow
giving the second mortgage to David, and thereby strengthening Mary
Blake's suspicions, and in the third act David pictures his dreary youth
and Billy P.'s act of kindness, and brings the widow to her own, the
climax coming with the toast which opens the dinner and closes the play.
It was a delicate and difficult task for even so distinguished an actor
as Mr. Crane to undertake a part already hedged about by conflicting
theories; but his insight and his devotion to the character have
succeeded in actually placing before us the David Harum created by Mr.
Westcott.

The illustrations of this book, reproduced from stage photographs by
the courtesy of Mr. Charles Frohman, include the best pictures of Mr.
Crane in character, and also stage views of scenes in the second and
third acts, which show the development and culmination of the Widow
Cullom episode. The Christmas Story is now published separately for the
first time in this volume, which unites a permanent literary value with
the peculiar interest of Mr. Crane's interpretations of the famous
character.

       *       *       *       *       *

After many discouragements, the author of David Harum lived long enough
to know that his book had found appreciation and was to be published,
but he died before it appeared.

Edward Noyes Westcott, the son of Dr. Amos Westcott, a prominent
physician of Syracuse, and at one time mayor of the city, was born
September 27, 1846. Nearly all his life was passed in his native city of
Syracuse. His active career began early at a bank clerk's desk, and he
was afterward teller and cashier, then head of the firm of Westcott &
Abbott, bankers and brokers, and in his later years he acted as the
registrar and financial expert of the Syracuse Water Commission. His
artistic temperament found expression only in music until the last years
of his life. He wrote articles occasionally upon financial subjects, but
it was not until the approach of his last illness that he began David
Harum. No character in this book is taken directly from life. Stories
which his father had told and his own keen observations and lively
imagination furnished his material, but neither David Harum nor any
other character is a copy of any individual. No trace of the author's
illness appears in the book. "I've had the fun of writing it, anyway,"
he wrote shortly before his death, "and no one will laugh over David
more than I have. I never could tell what David was going to do next."
This was the spirit of the brave and gentle author, who died March 31,
1898, unconscious of the fame which was to follow him.

R. H.

NEW YORK, _August, 1900._

[Illustration]


[Illustration: Wm. H. CRANE Edition]


The Christmas Story from David Harum


CHAPTER I


It was the 23d of December, and shortly after the closing hour. Peleg
had departed and our friend had just locked the vault when David came
into the office and around behind the counter.

"Be you in any hurry?" he asked.

John said he was not, whereupon Mr. Harum hitched himself up on to a
high office stool, with his heels on the spindle, and leaned sideways
upon the desk, while John stood facing him with his left arm upon the
desk.

"John," said David, "do ye know the Widdo' Cullom?"

"No," said John, "but I know who she is--a tall, thin woman, who walks
with a slight stoop and limp. I noticed her and asked her name because
there was something about her looks that attracted my attention--as
though at some time she might have seen better days."

"That's the party," said David. "She has seen better days, but she's eat
an' drunk sorro' mostly fer goin' on thirty year, an' darned little else
a good share o' the time, I reckon."

"She has that appearance certainly," said John.

"Yes, sir," said David, "she's had a putty tough time, the widdo' has,
an' yet," he proceeded after a momentary pause, "the' was a time when
the Culloms was some o' the kingpins o' this hull region. They used to
own quarter o' the county, an' they lived in the big house up on the
hill where Doc Hays lives now. That was considered to be the finest
place anywheres 'round here in them days. I used to think the Capitol to
Washington must be somethin' like the Cullom house, an' that Billy P.
(folks used to call him Billy P. 'cause his father's name was William
an' his was William Parker), an' that Billy P. 'd jest 's like 's not be
president. I've changed my mind some on the subject of presidents since
I was a boy."

