OBS. 17.--The pronoun _it_ very frequently refers to something mentioned
subsequently in the sentence; as, "_It_ is useless _to complain_ of what is
irremediable." This pronoun is a necessary expletive at the commencement of
any sentence in which the verb is followed by a phrase or a clause which,
by transposition, might be made the subject of the verb; as, "_It is
impossible_ _to please every one_."--_W. Allen's Gram._ "_It_ was requisite
_that the papers should be_ sent."--_Ib._ The following example is censured
by the Rev. Matt. Harrison: "_It is really curious, the course_ which balls
will sometimes take."--_Abernethy's Lectures_. "This awkward expression,"
says the critic, "might have been avoided by saying, 'The course which
balls will sometimes take is really curious.'"--_Harrison, on the English
Language_, p. 147. If the construction is objectionable, it may, in this
instance, be altered thus: "It is really curious, _to observe_ the course
which balls will sometimes take!" So, it appears, we may avoid a _pleonasm_
by an _addition_. But he finds a worse example: saying, "Again, in an
article _from_ the 'New Monthly,' No. 103, we meet with the same form of
expression, _but with an aggravated aspect_:--'It is incredible, the number
of apothecaries' shops, presenting themselves.' It would be quite as easy
to say, 'The number of apothecaries' shops, presenting themselves, is
incredible.' "--_Ib._, p. 147. This, too, may take an infinitive, "_to
tell_," or "_to behold_;" for there is no more extravagance in doubting
one's eyes, than in declaring one's own statement "incredible." But I am
not sure that the original form is not allowable. In the following line, we
seem to have something like it:

   "It curled not Tweed alone, that breeze."--_Sir W. Scott_.

OBS. 18.--_Relative_ and _interrogative_ pronouns are placed at or near the
beginning of their own clauses; and the learner must observe that, through
all their cases, they almost invariably retain this situation in the
sentence, and are found before their verbs even when the order of the
construction would reverse this arrangement: as, "He _who_ preserves me, to
_whom_ I owe my being, _whose_ I am, and _whom_ I serve, is
eternal."--_Murray_, p. 159. "He _whom_ you seek."--_Lowth_.

   "The good must merit God's peculiar care;
    But _who_, but God, can tell us _who_ they are?"--_Pope_.

OBS. 19.--A _relative_ pronoun, being the representative of some antecedent
word or phrase, derives from this relation its person, number, and gender,
but not its case. By taking an other relation of case, it helps to form an
other clause; and, by retaining the essential meaning of its antecedent,
serves to connect this clause to that in which the antecedent is found. No
relative, therefore, can ever be used in an independent simple sentence, or
be made the subject of a subjunctive verb, or be put in apposition with any
noun or pronoun; but, like other connectives, this pronoun belongs at the
head of a clause in a compound sentence, and excludes conjunctions, except
when two such clauses are to be joined together, as in the following
example: "I should be glad, at least, of an easy companion, _who_ may tell
me his thoughts, _and_ to _whom_ I may communicate mine."--_Goldsmith's
Essays_, p. 196.

OBS. 20.--The two _special_ rules commonly given by the grammarians, for
the construction of relatives, are not only unnecessary,[382] but faulty. I
shall notice them only to show my reasons for discarding them. With whom
they originated, it is difficult to say. Paul's Accidence has them, and if
Dean Colet, the supposed writer, did not take them from some earlier
author, they must have been first taught by _him_, about the year 1510; and
it is certain that they have been copied into almost every grammar
published since. The first one is faulty, because, "_When there cometh no
nominative case between the relative and the verb, the relative shall_ [not
always] _be the nominative case to the verb_;" as may be seen by the
following examples: "Many are the works of human industry, _which_ to begin
and finish are [say _is_] hardly granted to the same man."--_Dr. Johnson's
Adv. to Dict._ "They aim at his removal; _which_ there is reason to fear
they will effect."--"_Which_ to avoid, I cut them off."--_Shak., Hen. IV_.
The second rule is faulty, because, "_When there cometh a nominative case
between the relative and the verb, the relative shall_ [not always] _be
such case as the verb will have after it_;" as may be seen by the following
examples: "The author has not advanced any instances, _which_ he does not
think _are_ pertinent."--_Murray's Gram._, i, 192. "_Which_ we have reason
to think _was_ the case with the Greek and Latin."--_Ib._, 112. "Is this
your son, _who_ ye say _was born_ blind?"--_John_, ix, 19. The case of the
relative cannot be accurately determined by any rules of mere location. It
may be nominative to a verb afar off, or it may be objective with a verb
immediately following; as, "_Which_ I do not find that there ever
_was_."--_Knight, on the Greek Alphabet_, p. 31. "And our chief reason for
believing _which_ is that our ancestors did so before us."--_Philological
Museum_, i, 641. Both these particular rules are useless, because the
general rules for the cases, as given in chapter third above, are
applicable to relatives, sufficient to all the purpose, and not liable to
any exceptions.

OBS. 21.--In syntactical parsing, each word, in general, is to be resolved
by some _one_ rule; but the parsing of a pronoun commonly requires _two_;
one for its agreement with the noun or nouns for which it stands, and an
other for its case. The rule of agreement will be one of the four which are
embraced in this present chapter; and the rule for the case will be one of
the seven which compose chapter third. So that the whole syntax of pronouns
requires the application of eleven different rules, while that of nouns or
verbs is embraced in six or seven, and that of any other part of speech, in
one only. In respect to their cases, relatives and interrogatives admit of
every construction common to nouns, or to the personal pronouns, except
apposition. This is proved by the following examples:

1. Nominatives by Rule 2d: "I _who_ write;--Thou _who_ writest;--He _who_
writes;--The animal _which_ runs."--_Dr. Adam_. "He _that spareth_ his rod,
hateth his son."--_Solomon_. "He _who_ does any thing _which_ he knows is
wrong, ventures on dangerous ground."--"_What_ will become of us without
religion?"--_Blair_. "Here I determined to wait the hand of death; _which_,
I hope, when at last it comes, _will fall_ lightly upon me."--_Dr.
Johnson_. "_What is_ sudden and unaccountable, _serves_ to
confound."--_Crabb_. "They only are wise, _who are_ wise to
salvation."--_Goodwin_.

2. Nominatives by Rule 6th: (i.e., words parsed as nominatives after the
verbs, though mostly transposed:) "_Who_ art thou?"--_Bible_. "_What_ were
we?"--_Ib._ "Do not tell them _who_ I am."--"Let him be _who_ he may, he is
not the honest fellow _that_ he seemed."--"The general conduct of mankind
is neither _what_ it was designed, nor _what_ it ought to be."

3. Nominatives absolute by Rule 8th: "There are certain bounds to
imprudence, _which being transgressed_, there remains no place for
repentance in the natural course of things."--_Bp. Butler_. "_Which being
so_, it need not be any wonder, why I should."--_Walker's Particles,
Pref._, p. xiv. "He offered an apology, _which not being admitted_, he
became submissive."--_Murray's Key_, p. 202. This construction of the
relative is a Latinism, and very seldom used by the best _English_ writers.

4. Possessives by Rule 4th: "The chief man of the island, _whose_ name was
Publius."--_Acts_. "Despair, a cruel tyrant, from _whose_ prisons none can
escape."--_Dr. Johnson_. "To contemplate on Him _whose_ yoke is easy and
_whose_ burden is light."--_Steele_.

5. Objectives by Rule 5th: "Those _whom_ she persuaded."--_Dr. Johnson_.
"The cloak _that_ I left at Troas."--_St. Paul_. "By the things _which_ he
suffered."--_Id._ "A man _whom_ there is reason to suspect."--"_What_ are
we to do?"--_Burke_. "Love refuses nothing _that_ love sends."--_Gurnall_.
"The first thing, says he, is, to choose some maxim or point of morality;
to inculcate _which_, is to be the design of his work."--_Blair's Rhet._,
p. 421. "_Whomsoever_ you please to appoint."--_Lowth_. "_Whatsover_
[sic--KTH] he doeth, shall prosper."--_Bible_. "_What_ we are afraid to do
before men, we should be afraid to think before God."--_Sibs_. "Shall I
hide from Abraham that thing _which_ I do?"--_Gen._, xviii, 32. "Shall I
hide from Abraham _what_ I am going to do?"--"Call imperfection _what_ thou
fanciest such."--_Pope_.

6. Objectives by Rule 6th: (i.e., pronouns parsed as objectives after
neuter verbs, though they stand before them:) "He is not the man _that_ I
took him to be."--"_Whom_ did you suppose me to be?"--"If the lad ever
become _what_ you wish him to be."

7. Objectives by Rule 7th: "To _whom_ shall we go?"--_Bible_. "The laws by
_which_ the world is governed, are general."--_Bp. Butler_. "_Whom_ he
looks upon as his defender."--_Addison_. "That secret heaviness of heart
_which_ unthinking men are subject to."--_Id._ "I cannot but think the loss
of such talents as the man of _whom_ I am speaking was master of, a more
melancholy instance."--_Steele_. "Grammar is the solid foundation upon
_which_ all other science rests."--_Buchanan's Eng. Synt._, p. xx.

OBS. 22.--In familiar language, the relative of the objective case is
frequently understood; as, "The man [_whom_] I trust."--_Cowper_. "Here is
the letter [_which_] I received." So in the following sentences: "This is
the man they hate. These are the goods they bought. Are these the Gods they
worship? Is this the woman you saw?"--_Ash's Gram._, p. 96. This ellipsis
seems allowable only in the familiar style. In grave writing, or deliberate
discourse, it is much better to express this relative. The omission of it
is often attended with some obscurity; as, "The next error [_that_] I shall
mention [,] is a capital one."--_Kames, El. of Crit._, ii, 157. "It is
little [_that_] we know of the divine perfections."--_Scougal_, p. 94. "The
faith [_which_] we give to memory, may be thought, on a superficial view,
to be resolvable into consciousness, as well as that [_which_] we give to
the immediate impressions of sense."--_Campbell's Rhet._, p. 53. "We speak
that [_which_] we do know, and testify that [_which_] we have
seen."--_John_, iii, 11. The omission of a relative in the nominative case,
is almost always inelegant; as, "This is the worst thing [_that_] could
happen."--"There were several things [_which_] brought it upon
me."--_Pilgrim's Progress_, p. 162. The latter ellipsis may occur after
_but_ or _than_, and it is also sometimes allowed in poetry; as, [There is]
"No person of reflection but [who] must be sensible, that an incident makes
a stronger impression on an eye-witness, than when heard at second
hand."--_Kames, El. of Crit._, ii, 257.

   "In this 'tis God directs, in that 'tis man."--_Pope, on Man_.

    "Abuse on all he lov'd, or lov'd him, spread."--_Id., to Arbuthnot_.

    "There's nothing blackens like the ink of fools."--_Id., to Augustus_.

