On the 11th, with all sail set and with the spinnaker still abroad,
Christmas Island, about noon, came into view one point on the
starboard bow. Before night it was abeam and distant two and a half
miles. The surface of the island appeared evenly rounded from the sea
to a considerable height in the center. In outline it was as smooth as
a fish, and a long ocean swell, rolling up, broke against the sides,
where it lay like a monster asleep, motionless on the sea. It seemed
to have the proportions of a whale, and as the sloop sailed along its
side to the part where the head would be, there was a nostril, even,
which was a blow-hole through a ledge of rock where every wave that
dashed threw up a shaft of water, lifelike and real.

It had been a long time since I last saw this island; but I remember
my temporary admiration for the captain of the ship I was then in, the
_Tawfore_, when he sang out one morning from the quarter-deck, well
aft, "Go aloft there, one of ye, with a pair of eyes, and see
Christmas Island." Sure enough, there the island was in sight from the
royal-yard. Captain M----had thus made a great hit, and he never got
over it. The chief mate, terror of us ordinaries in the ship, walking
never to windward of the captain, now took himself very humbly to
leeward altogether. When we arrived at Hong-Kong there was a letter in
the ship's mail for me. I was in the boat with the captain some hours
while he had it. But do you suppose he could hand a letter to a
seaman? No, indeed; not even to an ordinary seaman. When we got to the
ship he gave it to the first mate; the first mate gave it to the
second mate, and he laid it, michingly, on the capstan-head, where I
could get it.


CHAPTER XVI


A call for careful navigation--Three hours' steering in twenty-three
days--Arrival at the Keeling Cocos Islands--A curious chapter of
social history--A welcome from the children of the islands--Cleaning
and painting the _Spray_ on the beach--A Mohammedan blessing for a pot
of jam--Keeling as a paradise--A risky adventure in a small boat--Away
to Rodriguez--Taken for Antichrist--The governor calms the fears of
the people--A lecture--A convent in the hills.

To the Keeling Cocos Islands was now only five hundred and fifty
miles; but even in this short run it was necessary to be extremely
careful in keeping a true course else I would miss the atoll.

On the 12th, some hundred miles southwest of Christmas Island, I saw
anti-trade clouds flying up from the southwest very high over the
regular winds, which weakened now for a few days, while a swell
heavier than usual set in also from the southwest. A winter gale was
going on in the direction of the Cape of Good Hope. Accordingly, I
steered higher to windward, allowing twenty miles a day while this
went on, for change of current; and it was not too much, for on that
course I made the Keeling Islands right ahead. The first unmistakable
sign of the land was a visit one morning from a white tern that
fluttered very knowingly about the vessel, and then took itself off
westward with a businesslike air in its wing. The tern is called by
the islanders the "pilot of Keeling Cocos." Farther on I came among a
great number of birds fishing, and fighting over whatever they caught.
My reckoning was up, and springing aloft, I saw from half-way up the
mast cocoanut-trees standing out of the water ahead. I expected to see
this; still, it thrilled me as an electric shock might have done. I
slid down the mast, trembling under the strangest sensations; and not
able to resist the impulse, I sat on deck and gave way to my emotions.
To folks in a parlor on shore this may seem weak indeed, but I am
telling the story of a voyage alone.

I didn't touch the helm, for with the current and heave of the sea the
sloop found herself at the end of the run absolutely in the fairway of
the channel. You couldn't have beaten it in the navy! Then I trimmed
her sails by the wind, took the helm, and flogged her up the couple of
miles or so abreast the harbor landing, where I cast anchor at 3:30
P.M., July 17,1897, twenty-three days from Thursday Island. The
distance run was twenty-seven hundred miles as the crow flies. This
would have been a fair Atlantic voyage. It was a delightful sail!
During those twenty-three days I had not spent altogether more than
three hours at the helm, including the time occupied in beating into
Keeling harbor. I just lashed the helm and let her go; whether the
wind was abeam or dead aft, it was all the same: she always sailed on
her course. No part of the voyage up to this point, taking it by and
large, had been so finished as this.

[Footnote: Mr. Andrew J. Leach, reporting, July 21, 1897, through
Governor Kynnersley of Singapore, to Joseph Chamberlain, Colonial
Secretary, said concerning the _Iphegenia's_ visit to the atoll: "As
we left the ocean depths of deepest blue and entered the coral circle,
the contrast was most remarkable. The brilliant colors of the waters,
transparent to a depth of over thirty feet, now purple, now of the
bluest sky-blue, and now green, with the white crests of the waves
flashing tinder a brilliant sun, the encircling ... palm-clad islands,
the gaps between which were to the south undiscernible, the white sand
shores and the whiter gaps where breakers appeared, and, lastly, the
lagoon itself, seven or eight miles across from north to south, and
five to six from east to west, presented a sight never to be
forgotten. After some little delay, Mr. Sidney Ross, the eldest son of
Mr. George Ross, came off to meet us, and soon after, accompanied by
the doctor and another officer, we went ashore." "On reaching the
landing-stage, we found, hauled up for cleaning, etc., the _Spray_ of
Boston, a yawl of 12.70 tons gross, the property of Captain Joshua
Slocum. He arrived at the island on the 17th of July, twenty-three
days out from Thursday Island. This extraordinary solitary traveler
left Boston some two years ago single-handed, crossed to Gibraltar,
sailed down to Cape Horn, passed through the Strait of Magellan to the
Society Islands, thence to Australia, and through the Torres Strait to
Thursday Island."]

The Keeling Cocos Islands, according to Admiral Fitzroy, R. N., lie
between the latitudes of 11 degrees 50' and 12 degrees 12' S., and the
longitudes of 96 degrees 51' and 96 degrees 58' E. They were
discovered in 1608-9 by Captain William Keeling, then in the service
of the East India Company. The southern group consists of seven or
eight islands and islets on the atoll, which is the skeleton of what
some day, according to the history of coral reefs, will be a
continuous island. North Keeling has no harbor, is seldom visited, and
is of no importance. The South Keelings are a strange little world,
with a romantic history all their own. They have been visited
occasionally by the floating spar of some hurricane-swept ship, or by
a tree that has drifted all the way from Australia, or by an
ill-starred ship cast away, and finally by man. Even a rock once
drifted to Keeling, held fast among the roots of a tree.

After the discovery of the islands by Captain Keeling, their first
notable visitor was Captain John Clunis-Boss, who in 1814 touched in
the ship _Borneo_ on a voyage to India. Captain Boss returned two
years later with his wife and family and his mother-in-law, Mrs.
Dymoke, and eight sailor-artisans, to take possession of the islands,
but found there already one Alexander Hare, who meanwhile had marked
the little atoll as a sort of Eden for a seraglio of Malay women which
he moved over from the coast of Africa. It was Boss's own brother,
oddly enough, who freighted Hare and his crowd of women to the
islands, not knowing of Captain John's plans to occupy the little
world. And so Hare was there with his outfit, as if he had come to
stay.

On his previous visit, however, Boss had nailed the English Jack to a
mast on Horsburg Island, one of the group. After two years shreds of
it still fluttered in the wind, and his sailors, nothing loath, began
at once the invasion of the new kingdom to take possession of it,
women and all. The force of forty women, with only one man to command
them, was not equal to driving eight sturdy sailors back into the sea.
[Footnote: In the accounts given in Findlay's "Sailing Directory" of
some of the events there is a chronological discrepancy. I follow the
accounts gathered from the old captain's grandsons and from records on
the spot.]

From this time on Hare had a hard time of it. He and Ross did not get
on well as neighbors. The islands were too small and too near for
characters so widely different. Hare had "oceans of money," and might
have lived well in London; but he had been governor of a wild colony
in Borneo, and could not confine himself to the tame life that prosy
civilization affords. And so he hung on to the atoll with his forty
women, retreating little by little before Ross and his sturdy crew,
till at last he found himself and his harem on the little island known
to this day as Prison Island, where, like Bluebeard, he confined his
wives in a castle. The channel between the islands was narrow, the
water was not deep, and the eight Scotch sailors wore long boots. Hare
was now dismayed. He tried to compromise with rum and other luxuries,
but these things only made matters worse. On the day following the
first St. Andrew's celebration on the island, Hare, consumed with
rage, and no longer on speaking terms with the captain, dashed off a
note to him, saying: "Dear Ross: I thought when I sent rum and roast
pig to your sailors that they would stay away from my flower-garden."
In reply to which the captain, burning with indignation, shouted from
the center of the island, where he stood, "Ahoy, there, on Prison
Island! You Hare, don't you know that rum and roast pig are not a
sailor's heaven?" Hare said afterward that one might have heard the
captain's roar across to Java.

The lawless establishment was soon broken up by the women deserting
Prison Island and putting themselves under Ross's protection. Hare
then went to Batavia, where he met his death.

[Illustration: The _Spray_ ashore for "boot-topping" at the Keeling
Islands. (From a photograph.)]

My first impression upon landing was that the crime of infanticide had
not reached the islands of Keeling Cocos. "The children have all come
to welcome you," explained Mr. Ross, as they mustered at the jetty by
hundreds, of all ages and sizes. The people of this country were all
rather shy, but, young or old, they never passed one or saw one
passing their door without a salutation. In their musical voices they
would say, "Are you walking?" ("Jalan, jalan?") "Will you come along?"
one would answer.

For a long time after I arrived the children regarded the "one-man
ship" with suspicion and fear. A native man had been blown away to sea
many years before, and they hinted to one another that he might have
been changed from black to white, and returned in the sloop. For some
time every movement I made was closely watched. They were particularly
interested in what I ate. One day, after I had been "boot-topping" the
sloop with a composition of coal-tar and other stuff, and while I was
taking my dinner, with the luxury of blackberry jam, I heard a
commotion, and then a yell and a stampede, as the children ran away
yelling: "The captain is eating coal-tar! The captain is eating
coal-tar!" But they soon found out that this same "coal-tar" was very
good to eat, and that I had brought a quantity of it. One day when I
was spreading a sea-biscuit thick with it for a wide-awake youngster,
I heard them whisper, "Chut-chut!" meaning that a shark had bitten my
hand, which they observed was lame. Thenceforth they regarded me as a
hero, and I had not fingers enough for the little bright-eyed tots
that wanted to cling to them and follow me about. Before this, when I
held out my hand and said, "Come!" they would shy off for the nearest
house, and say, "Dingin" ("It's cold"), or "Ujan" ("It's going to
rain"). But it was now accepted that I was not the returned spirit of
the lost black, and I had plenty of friends about the island, rain or
shine.

One day after this, when I tried to haul the sloop and found her fast
in the sand, the children all clapped their hands and cried that a
_kpeting_ (crab) was holding her by the keel; and little Ophelia, ten
or twelve years of age, wrote in the _Spray's_ log-book:

  A hundred men with might and main
    On the windlass hove, yeo ho!
  The cable only came in twain;
    The ship she would not go;
  For, child, to tell the strangest thing,
    The keel was held by a great kpeting.


This being so or not, it was decided that the Mohammedan priest, Sama
the Emim, for a pot of jam, should ask Mohammed to bless the voyage
and make the crab let go the sloop's keel, which it did, if it had
hold, and she floated on the very next tide.

On the 22d of July arrived H.M.S. _Iphegenia,_ with Mr. Justice Andrew
J. Leech and court officers on board, on a circuit of inspection among
the Straits Settlements, of which Keeling Cocos was a dependency, to
hear complaints and try cases by law, if any there were to try. They
found the _Spray_ hauled ashore and tied to a cocoanut-tree. But at
the Keeling Islands there had not been a grievance to complain of
since the day that Hare migrated, for the Bosses have always treated
the islanders as their own family.

If there is a paradise on this earth it is Keeling. There was not a
case for a lawyer, but something had to be done, for here were two
ships in port, a great man-of-war and the _Spray._ Instead of a
lawsuit a dance was got up, and all the officers who could leave their
ship came ashore. Everybody on the island came, old and young, and the
governor's great hall was filled with people. All that could get on
their feet danced, while the babies lay in heaps in the corners of the
room, content to look on. My little friend Ophelia danced with the
judge. For music two fiddles screeched over and over again the good
old tune, "We won't go home till morning." And we did not.

The women at the Keelings do not do all the drudgery, as in many
places visited on the voyage. It would cheer the heart of a Fuegian
woman to see the Keeling lord of creation up a cocoanut-tree. Besides
cleverly climbing the trees, the men of Keeling build exquisitely
modeled canoes. By far the best workmanship in boat-building I saw on
the voyage was here. Many finished mechanics dwelt under the palms at
Keeling, and the hum of the band-saw and the ring of the anvil were
heard from morning till night. The first Scotch settlers left there
the strength of Northern blood and the inheritance of steady habits.
No benevolent society has ever done so much for any islanders as the
noble Captain Ross, and his sons, who have followed his example of
industry and thrift.

Admiral Fitzroy of the _Beagle_, who visited here, where many
things are reversed, spoke of "these singular though small islands,
where crabs eat cocoanuts, fish eat coral, dogs catch fish, men ride
on turtles, and shells are dangerous man-traps," adding that the
greater part of the sea-fowl roost on branches, and many rats make
their nests in the tops of palm-trees.

My vessel being refitted, I decided to load her with the famous
mammoth tridaena shell of Keeling, found in the bayou near by. And
right here, within sight of the village, I came near losing "the crew
of the _Spray_"--not from putting my foot in a man-trap shell,
however, but from carelessly neglecting to look after the details of a
trip across the harbor in a boat. I had sailed over oceans; I have
since completed a course over them all, and sailed round the whole
world without so nearly meeting a fatality as on that trip across a
lagoon, where I trusted all to some one else, and he, weak mortal that
he was, perhaps trusted all to me. However that may be, I found myself
with a thoughtless African negro in a rickety bateau that was fitted
with a rotten sail, and this blew away in mid-channel in a squall,
that sent us drifting helplessly to sea, where we should have been
incontinently lost. With the whole ocean before us to leeward, I was
dismayed to see, while we drifted, that there was not a paddle or an
oar in the boat! There was an anchor, to be sure, but not enough rope
to tie a cat, and we were already in deep water. By great good
fortune, however, there was a pole. Plying this as a paddle with the
utmost energy, and by the merest accidental flaw in the wind to favor
us, the trap of a boat was worked into shoal water, where we could
touch bottom and push her ashore. With Africa, the nearest coast to
leeward, three thousand miles away, with not so much as a drop of
water in the boat, and a lean and hungry negro--well, cast the lot as
one might, the crew of the _Spray_ in a little while would have been
hard to find. It is needless to say that I took no more such chances.
The tridacna were afterward procured in a safe boat, thirty of them
taking the place of three tons of cement ballast, which I threw
overboard to make room and give buoyancy.

[Illustration: Captain Slocum drifting out to sea.]

On August 22, the kpeting, or whatever else it was that held the sloop
in the islands, let go its hold, and she swung out to sea under all
sail, heading again for home. Mounting one or two heavy rollers on the
fringe of the atoll, she cleared the flashing reefs. Long before dark
Keeling Cocos, with its thousand souls, as sinless in their lives as
perhaps it is possible for frail mortals to be, was left out of sight,
astern. Out of sight, I say, except in my strongest affection.

The sea was rugged, and the _Spray_ washed heavily when hauled on the
wind, which course I took for the island of Rodriguez, and which
brought the sea abeam. The true course for the island was west by
south, one quarter south, and the distance was nineteen hundred miles;
but I steered considerably to the windward of that to allow for the
heave of the sea and other leeward effects. My sloop on this course
ran under reefed sails for days together. I naturally tired of the
never-ending motion of the sea, and, above all, of the wetting I got
whenever I showed myself on deck. Under these heavy weather conditions
the _Spray_ seemed to lag behind on her course; at least, I attributed
to these conditions a discrepancy in the log, which by the fifteenth
day out from Keeling amounted to one hundred and fifty miles between
the rotator and the mental calculations I had kept of what she should
have gone, and so I kept an eye lifting for land. I could see about
sundown this day a bunch of clouds that stood in one spot, right
ahead, while the other clouds floated on; this was a sign of
something. By midnight, as the sloop sailed on, a black object
appeared where I had seen the resting clouds. It was still a long way
off, but there could be no mistaking this: it was the high island of
Rodriguez. I hauled in the patent log, which I was now towing more
from habit than from necessity, for I had learned the _Spray_ and her
ways long before this. If one thing was clearer than another in her
voyage, it was that she could be trusted to come out right and in
safety, though at the same time I always stood ready to give her the
benefit of even the least doubt. The officers who are over-sure, and
"know it all like a book," are the ones, I have observed, who wreck
the most ships and lose the most lives. The cause of the discrepancy
in the log was one often met with, namely, coming in contact with some
large fish; two out of the four blades of the rotator were crushed or
bent, the work probably of a shark. Being sure of the sloop's
position, I lay down to rest and to think, and I felt better for it.
By daylight the island was abeam, about three miles away. It wore a
hard, weather-beaten appearance there, all alone, far out in the
Indian Ocean, like land adrift. The windward side was uninviting, but
there was a good port to leeward, and I hauled in now close on the
wind for that. A pilot came out to take me into the inner harbor,
which was reached through a narrow channel among coral reefs.

It was a curious thing that at all of the islands some reality was
insisted on as unreal, while improbabilities were clothed as hard
facts; and so it happened here that the good abbe, a few days before,
had been telling his people about the coming of Antichrist, and when
they saw the _Spray_ sail into the harbor, all feather-white before a
gale of wind, and run all standing upon the beach, and with only one
man aboard, they cried, "May the Lord help us, it is he, and he has
come in a boat!" which I say would have been the most improbable way
of his coming. Nevertheless, the news went flying through the place.
The governor of the island, Mr. Roberts, came down immediately to see
what it was all about, for the little town was in a great commotion.
One elderly woman, when she heard of my advent, made for her house and
locked herself in. When she heard that I was actually coming up the
street she barricaded her doors, and did not come out while I was on
the island, a period of eight days. Governor Roberts and his family
did not share the fears of their people, but came on board at the
jetty, where the sloop was berthed, and their example induced others
to come also. The governor's young boys took charge of the _Spray's_
dinghy at once, and my visit cost his Excellency, besides great
hospitality to me, the building of a boat for them like the one
belonging to the _Spray_.

My first day at this Land of Promise was to me like a fairy-tale. For
many days I had studied the charts and counted the time of my arrival
at this spot, as one might his entrance to the Islands of the Blessed,
looking upon it as the terminus of the last long run, made irksome by
the want of many things with which, from this time on, I could keep
well supplied. And behold, here was the sloop, arrived, and made
securely fast to a pier in Rodriguez. On the first evening ashore, in
the land of napkins and cut glass, I saw before me still the ghosts of
hempen towels and of mugs with handles knocked off. Instead of tossing
on the sea, however, as I might have been, here was I in a bright
hall, surrounded by sparkling wit, and dining with the governor of the
island! "Aladdin," I cried, "where is your lamp? My fisherman's
lantern, which I got at Gloucester, has shown me better things than
your smoky old burner ever revealed."

The second day in port was spent in receiving visitors. Mrs. Roberts
and her children came first to "shake hands," they said, "with the
_Spray._" No one was now afraid to come on board except the poor old
woman, who still maintained that the _Spray_ had Antichrist in the
hold, if, indeed, he had not already gone ashore. The governor
entertained that evening, and kindly invited the "destroyer of the
world" to speak for himself. This he did, elaborating most effusively
on the dangers of the sea (which, after the manner of many of our
frailest mortals, he would have had smooth had he made it); also by
contrivances of light and darkness he exhibited on the wall pictures
of the places and countries visited on the voyage (nothing like the
countries, however, that he would have made), and of the people seen,
savage and other, frequently groaning, "Wicked world! Wicked world!"
When this was finished his Excellency the governor, speaking words of
thankfulness, distributed pieces of gold.

On the following day I accompanied his Excellency and family on a
visit to San Gabriel, which was up the country among the hills. The
good abbe of San Gabriel entertained us all royally at the convent,
and we remained his guests until the following day. As I was leaving
his place, the abbe said, "Captain, I embrace you, and of whatever
religion you may be, my wish is that you succeed in making your
voyage, and that our Saviour the Christ be always with you!" To this
good man's words I could only say, "My dear abbe, had all religionists
been so liberal there would have been less bloodshed in the world."

At Rodriguez one may now find every convenience for filling pure and
wholesome water in any quantity, Governor Roberts having built a
reservoir in the hills, above the village, and laid pipes to the
jetty, where, at the time of my visit, there were five and a half feet
at high tide. In former years well-water was used, and more or less
sickness occurred from it. Beef may be had in any quantity on the
island, and at a moderate price. Sweet potatoes were plentiful and
cheap; the large sack of them that I bought there for about four
shillings kept unusually well. I simply stored them in the sloop's dry
hold. Of fruits, pomegranates were most plentiful; for two shillings I
obtained a large sack of them, as many as a donkey could pack from the
orchard, which, by the way, was planted by nature herself.


CHAPTER XVII


A clean bill of health at Mauritius--Sailing the voyage over again in
the opera-house--A newly discovered plant named in honor of the
_Spray's_ skipper--A party of young ladies out for a sail--A bivouac
on deck--A warm reception at Durban--A friendly cross-examination by
Henry M. Stanley--Three wise Boers seek proof of the flatness of the
earth--Leaving South Africa.

[Illustration: The _Spray_ at Mauritius.]

On the 16th of September, after eight restful days at Rodriguez, the
mid-ocean land of plenty, I set sail, and on the 19th arrived at
Mauritius, anchoring at quarantine about noon. The sloop was towed in
later on the same day by the doctor's launch, after he was satisfied
that I had mustered all the crew for inspection. Of this he seemed in
doubt until he examined the papers, which called for a crew of one all
told from port to port, throughout the voyage. Then finding that I had
been well enough to come thus far alone, he gave me pratique without
further ado. There was still another official visit for the _Spray_ to
pass farther in the harbor. The governor of Rodriguez, who had most
kindly given me, besides a regular mail, private letters of
introduction to friends, told me I should meet, first of all, Mr.
Jenkins of the postal service, a good man. "How do you do, Mr.
Jenkins?" cried I, as his boat swung alongside. "You don't know me,"
he said. "Why not?" I replied. "From where is the sloop?" "From around
the world," I again replied, very solemnly. "And alone?" "Yes; why
not?" "And you know me?" "Three thousand years ago," cried I, "when
you and I had a warmer job than we have now" (even this was hot). "You
were then Jenkinson, but if you have changed your name I don't blame
you for that." Mr. Jenkins, forbearing soul, entered into the spirit
of the jest, which served the _Spray_ a good turn, for on the strength
of this tale it got out that if any one should go on board after dark
the devil would get him at once. And so I could leave the _Spray_
without the fear of her being robbed at night. The cabin, to be sure,
was broken into, but it was done in daylight, and the thieves got no
more than a box of smoked herrings before "Tom" Ledson, one of the
port officials, caught them red-handed, as it were, and sent them to
jail. This was discouraging to pilferers, for they feared Ledson more
than they feared Satan himself. Even Mamode Hajee Ayoob, who was the
day-watchman on board,--till an empty box fell over in the cabin and
frightened him out of his wits,--could not be hired to watch nights,
or even till the sun went down. "Sahib," he cried, "there is no need
of it," and what he said was perfectly true.

At Mauritius, where I drew a long breath, the _Spray_ rested her
wings, it being the season of fine weather. The hardships of the
voyage, if there had been any, were now computed by officers of
experience as nine tenths finished, and yet somehow I could not forget
that the United States was still a long way off.

The kind people of Mauritius, to make me richer and happier, rigged up
the opera-house, which they had named the "_Ship Pantai_." [Footnote:
Guinea-hen] All decks and no bottom was this ship, but she was as
stiff as a church. They gave me free use of it while I talked over the
_Spray's_ adventures. His Honor the mayor introduced me to his
Excellency the governor from the poop-deck of the _Pantai._ In this
way I was also introduced again to our good consul, General John P.
Campbell, who had already introduced me to his Excellency, I was
becoming well acquainted, and was in for it now to sail the voyage
over again. How I got through the story I hardly know. It was a hot
night, and I could have choked the tailor who made the coat I wore for
this occasion. The kind governor saw that I had done my part trying to
rig like a man ashore, and he invited me to Government House at
Reduit, where I found myself among friends.

It was winter still off stormy Cape of Good Hope, but the storms might
whistle there. I determined to see it out in milder Mauritius,
visiting Rose Hill, Curipepe, and other places on the island. I spent
a day with the elder Mr. Roberts, father of Governor Roberts of
Rodriguez, and with his friends the Very Reverend Fathers O'Loughlin
and McCarthy. Returning to the _Spray_ by way of the great flower
conservatory near Moka, the proprietor, having only that morning
discovered a new and hardy plant, to my great honor named it "Slocum,"
which he said Latinized it at once, saving him some trouble on the
twist of a word; and the good botanist seemed pleased that I had come.
How different things are in different countries! In Boston,
Massachusetts, at that time, a gentleman, so I was told, paid thirty
thousand dollars to have a flower named after his wife, and it was not
a big flower either, while "Slocum," which came without the asking,
was bigger than a mangel-wurzel!

I was royally entertained at Moka, as well as at Reduit and other
places--once by seven young ladies, to whom I spoke of my inability to
return their hospitality except in my own poor way of taking them on a
sail in the sloop. "The very thing! The very thing!" they all cried.
"Then please name the time," I said, as meek as Moses. "To-morrow!"
they all cried. "And, aunty, we may go, mayn't we, and we'll be real
good for a whole week afterward, aunty! Say yes, aunty dear!" All this
after saying "To-morrow"; for girls in Mauritius are, after all, the
same as our girls in America; and their dear aunt said "Me, too" about
the same as any really good aunt might say in my own country.

I was then in a quandary, it having recurred to me that on the very
"to-morrow" I was to dine with the harbor-master, Captain Wilson.
However, I said to myself, "The _Spray_ will run out quickly into
rough seas; these young ladies will have _mal de mer_ and a good time,
and I'll get in early enough to be at the dinner, after all." But not
a bit of it. We sailed almost out of sight of Mauritius, and they just
stood up and laughed at seas tumbling aboard, while I was at the helm
making the worst weather of it I could, and spinning yarns to the aunt
about sea-serpents and whales. But she, dear lady, when I had finished
with stories of monsters, only hinted at a basket of provisions they
had brought along, enough to last a week, for I had told them about my
wretched steward.

The more the _Spray_ tried to make these young ladies seasick, the
more they all clapped their hands and said, "How lovely it is!" and
"How beautifully she skims over the sea!" and "How beautiful our
island appears from the distance!" and they still cried, "Go on!" We
were fifteen miles or more at sea before they ceased the eager cry,
"Go on!" Then the sloop swung round, I still hoping to be back to Port
Louis in time to keep my appointment. The _Spray_ reached the island
quickly, and flew along the coast fast enough; but I made a mistake in
steering along the coast on the way home, for as we came abreast of
Tombo Bay it enchanted my crew. "Oh, let's anchor here!" they cried.
To this no sailor in the world would have said nay. The sloop came to
anchor, ten minutes later, as they wished, and a young man on the
cliff abreast, waving his hat, cried, "_Vive la Spray!_" My passengers
said, "Aunty, mayn't we have a swim in the surf along the shore?" Just
then the harbor-master's launch hove in sight, coming out to meet us;
but it was too late to get the sloop into Port Louis that night. The
launch was in time, however, to land my fair crew for a swim; but they
were determined not to desert the ship. Meanwhile I prepared a roof
for the night on deck with the sails, and a Bengali man-servant
arranged the evening meal. That night the _Spray_ rode in Tombo Bay
with her precious freight. Next morning bright and early, even before
the stars were gone, I awoke to hear praying on deck.

The port officers' launch reappeared later in the morning, this time
with Captain Wilson himself on board, to try his luck in getting the
_Spray_ into port, for he had heard of our predicament. It was worth
something to hear a friend tell afterward how earnestly the good
harbor-master of Mauritius said, "I'll find the _Spray_ and I'll get
her into port." A merry crew he discovered on her. They could hoist
sails like old tars, and could trim them, too. They could tell all
about the ship's "hoods," and one should have seen them clap a bonnet
on the jib. Like the deepest of deep-water sailors, they could heave
the lead, and--as I hope to see Mauritius again!--any of them could
have put the sloop in stays. No ship ever had a fairer crew.

The voyage was the event of Port Louis; such a thing as young ladies
sailing about the harbor, even, was almost unheard of before.

While at Mauritius the _Spray_ was tendered the use of the military
dock free of charge, and was thoroughly refitted by the port 
authorities. My sincere gratitude is also due other friends for
many things needful for the voyage put on board, including bags of
sugar from some of the famous old plantations.

The favorable season now set in, and thus well equipped, on the 26th
of October, the _Spray_ put to sea. As I sailed before a light wind
the island receded slowly, and on the following day I could still see
the Puce Mountain near Moka. The _Spray_ arrived next day off Galets,
Reunion, and a pilot came out and spoke her. I handed him a Mauritius
paper and continued on my voyage; for rollers were running heavily at
the time, and it was not practicable to make a landing. From Reunion I
shaped a course direct for Cape St. Mary, Madagascar.

The sloop was now drawing near the limits of the trade-wind, and the
strong breeze that had carried her with free sheets the many thousands
of miles from Sandy Cape, Australia, fell lighter each day until
October 30, when it was altogether calm, and a motionless sea held her
in a hushed world. I furled the sails at evening, sat down on deck,
and enjoyed the vast stillness of the night.

October 31 a light east-northeast breeze sprang up, and the sloop
passed Cape St. Mary about noon. On the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th of
November, in the Mozambique Channel, she experienced a hard gale of
wind from the southwest. Here the _Spray_ suffered as much as she did
anywhere, except off Cape Horn. The thunder and lightning preceding
this gale were very heavy. From this point until the sloop arrived off
the coast of Africa, she encountered a succession of gales of wind,
which drove her about in many directions, but on the 17th of November
she arrived at Port Natal.

This delightful place is the commercial center of the "Garden Colony,"
Durban itself, the city, being the continuation of a garden. The
signalman from the bluff station reported the _Spray_ fifteen miles
off. The wind was freshening, and when she was within eight miles he
said: "The _Spray_ is shortening sail; the mainsail was reefed and set
in ten minutes. One man is doing all the work."

This item of news was printed three minutes later in a Durban morning
journal, which was handed to me when I arrived in port. I could not
verify the time it had taken to reef the sail, for, as I have already
said, the minute-hand of my timepiece was gone. I only knew that I
reefed as quickly as I could.

The same paper, commenting on the voyage, said: "Judging from the
stormy weather which has prevailed off this coast during the past few
weeks, the _Spray_ must have had a very stormy voyage from Mauritius
to Natal." Doubtless the weather would have been called stormy by
sailors in any ship, but it caused the _Spray_ no more inconvenience
than the delay natural to head winds generally.

The question of how I sailed the sloop alone, often asked, is best
answered, perhaps, by a Durban newspaper. I would shrink from
repeating the editor's words but for the reason that undue estimates
have been made of the amount of skill and energy required to sail a
sloop of even the _Spray's_ small tonnage. I heard a man who called
himself a sailor say that "it would require three men to do what it
was claimed" that I did alone, and what I found perfectly easy to do
over and over again; and I have heard that others made similar
nonsensical remarks, adding that I would work myself to death. But
here is what the Durban paper said:

[Citation: As briefly noted yesterday, the _Spray_, with a crew of one
man, arrived at this port yesterday afternoon on her cruise round the
world. The _Spray_ made quite an auspicious entrance to Natal. Her
commander sailed his craft right up the channel past the main wharf,
and dropped his anchor near the old _Forerunner_ in the creek, before
any one had a chance to get on board. The _Spray_ was naturally an
object of great curiosity to the Point people, and her arrival was
witnessed by a large crowd. The skilful manner in which Captain Slocum
steered his craft about the vessels which were occupying the waterway
was a treat to witness.]

The _Spray_ was not sailing in among greenhorns when she came to
Natal. When she arrived off the port the pilot-ship, a fine, able
steam-tug, came out to meet her, and led the way in across the bar,
for it was blowing a smart gale and was too rough for the sloop to be
towed with, safety. The trick of going in I learned by watching the
steamer; it was simply to keep on the windward side of the channel and
take the combers end on.

[Illustration: Captain Joshua Slocum.]

I found that Durban supported two yacht-clubs, both of them full of
enterprise. I met all the members of both clubs, and sailed in the
crack yacht _Florence_ of the Royal Natal, with Captain Spradbrow and
the Right Honorable Harry Escombe, premier of the colony. The yacht's
center-board plowed furrows through the mud-banks, which, according to
Mr. Escombe, Spradbrow afterward planted with potatoes. The
_Florence_, however, won races while she tilled the skipper's land.
After our sail on the _Florence_ Mr. Escombe offered to sail the
_Spray_ round the Cape of Good Hope for me, and hinted at his famous
cribbage-board to while away the hours. Spradbrow, in retort, warned
me of it. Said he, "You would be played out of the sloop before you
could round the cape." By others it was not thought probable that the
premier of Natal would play cribbage off the Cape of Good Hope to win
even the _Spray_.

It was a matter of no small pride to me in South Africa to find that
American humor was never at a discount, and one of the best American
stories I ever heard was told by the premier. At Hotel Royal one day,
dining with Colonel Saunderson, M. P., his son, and Lieutenant
Tipping, I met Mr. Stanley. The great explorer was just from Pretoria,
and had already as good as flayed President Kruger with his trenchant
pen. But that did not signify, for everybody has a whack at Oom Paul,
and no one in the world seems to stand the joke better than he, not
even the Sultan of Turkey himself. The colonel introduced me to the
explorer, and I hauled close to the wind, to go slow, for Mr. Stanley
was a nautical man once himself,--on the Nyanza, I think,--and of
course my desire was to appear in the best light before a man of his
experience. He looked me over carefully, and said, "What an example of
patience!" "Patience is all that is required," I ventured to reply. He
then asked if my vessel had water-tight compartments. I explained that
she was all water-tight and all compartment. "What if she should
strike a rock?" he asked. "Compartments would not save her if she
should hit the rocks lying along her course," said I; adding, "she
must be kept away from the rocks." After a considerable pause Mr.
Stanley asked, "What if a swordfish should pierce her hull with its
sword?" Of course I had thought of that as one of the dangers of the
sea, and also of the chance of being struck by lightning. In the case
of the swordfish, I ventured to say that "the first thing would be to
secure the sword." The colonel invited me to dine with the party on
the following day, that we might go further into this matter, and so I
had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Stanley a second time, but got no more
hints in navigation from the famous explorer.

It sounds odd to hear scholars and statesmen say the world is flat;
but it is a fact that three Boers favored by the opinion of President
Kruger prepared a work to support that contention. While I was at
Durban they came from Pretoria to obtain data from me, and they seemed
annoyed when I told them that they could not prove it by my
experience. With the advice to call up some ghost of the dark ages for
research, I went ashore, and left these three wise men poring over the
_Spray's_ track on a chart of the world, which, however, proved
nothing to them, for it was on Mercator's projection, and behold, it
was "flat." The next morning I met one of the party in a clergyman's
garb, carrying a large Bible, not different from the one I had read.
He tackled me, saying, "If you respect the Word of God, you must admit
that the world is flat." "If the Word of God stands on a flat world--"
I began. "What!" cried he, losing himself in a passion, and making as
if he would run me through with an assagai. "What!" he shouted in
astonishment and rage, while I jumped aside to dodge the imaginary
weapon. Had this good but misguided fanatic been armed with a real
weapon, the crew of the _Spray_ would have died a martyr there and
then. The next day, seeing him across the street, I bowed and made
curves with my hands. He responded with a level, swimming movement of
his hands, meaning "the world is flat." A pamphlet by these Transvaal
geographers, made up of arguments from sources high and low to prove
their theory, was mailed to me before I sailed from Africa on my last
stretch around the globe.

While I feebly portray the ignorance of these learned men, I have
great admiration for their physical manhood. Much that I saw first and
last of the Transvaal and the Boers was admirable. It is well known
that they are the hardest of fighters, and as generous to the fallen
as they are brave before the foe. Real stubborn bigotry with them is
only found among old fogies, and will die a natural death, and that,
too, perhaps long before we ourselves are entirely free from bigotry.
Education in the Transvaal is by no means neglected, English as well
as Dutch being taught to all that can afford both; but the tariff duty
on English school-books is heavy, and from necessity the poorer people
stick to the Transvaal Dutch and their flat world, just as in Samoa
and other islands a mistaken policy has kept the natives down to
Kanaka.

I visited many public schools at Durban, and had the pleasure of
meeting many bright children.

But all fine things must end, and December 14, 1897, the "crew" of the
_Spray_, after having a fine time in Natal, swung the sloop's dinghy
in on deck, and sailed with a morning land-wind, which carried her
clear of the bar, and again she was "off on her alone," as they say in
Australia.


CHAPTER XVIII


Rounding the "Cape of Storms" in olden time--A rough Christmas--The
_Spray_ ties up for a three months' rest at Cape Town--A railway trip
to the Transvaal--President Kruger's odd definition of the _Spray's_
voyage--His terse sayings--Distinguished guests on the
_Spray_--Cocoanut fiber as a padlock--Courtesies from the admiral of
the Queen's navy--Off for St. Helena--Land in sight.

The Cape of Good Hope was now the most prominent point to pass. From
Table Bay I could count on the aid of brisk trades, and then the
_Spray_ would soon be at home. On the first day out from Durban it
fell calm, and I sat thinking about these things and the end of the
voyage. The distance to Table Bay, where I intended to call, was about
eight hundred miles over what might prove a rough sea. The early
Portuguese navigators, endowed with patience, were more than
sixty-nine years struggling to round this cape before they got as far
as Algoa Bay, and there the crew mutinied. They landed on a small
island, now called Santa Cruz, where they devoutly set up the cross,
and swore they would cut the captain's throat if he attempted to sail
farther. Beyond this they thought was the edge of the world, which
they too believed was flat; and fearing that their ship would sail
over the brink of it, they compelled Captain Diaz, their commander, to
retrace his course, all being only too glad to get home. A year later,
we are told, Vasco da Gama sailed successfully round the "Cape of
Storms," as the Cape of Good Hope was then called, and discovered
Natal on Christmas or Natal day; hence the name. From this point the
way to India was easy.

Gales of wind sweeping round the cape even now were frequent enough,
one occurring, on an average, every thirty-six hours; but one gale was
much the same as another, with no more serious result than to blow the
_Spray_ along on her course when it was fair, or to blow her back
somewhat when it was ahead. On Christmas, 1897, I came to the pitch of
the cape. On this day the _Spray_ was trying to stand on her head, and
she gave me every reason to believe that she would accomplish the feat
before night. She began very early in the morning to pitch and toss
about in a most unusual manner, and I have to record that, while I was
at the end of the bowsprit reefing the jib, she ducked me under water
three times for a Christmas box. I got wet and did not like it a bit:
never in any other sea was I put under more than once in the same
short space of time, say three minutes. A large English steamer
passing ran up the signal, "Wishing you a Merry Christmas." I think
the captain was a humorist; his own ship was throwing her propeller
out of water.

Two days later, the _Spray_, having recovered the distance lost in the
gale, passed Cape Agulhas in company with the steamship _Scotsman_,
now with a fair wind. The keeper of the light on Agulhas exchanged
signals with the _Spray_ as she passed, and afterward wrote me at New
York congratulations on the completion of the voyage. He seemed to
think the incident of two ships of so widely different types passing
his cape together worthy of a place on canvas, and he went about
having the picture made. So I gathered from his letter. At lonely
stations like this hearts grow responsive and sympathetic, and even
poetic. This feeling was shown toward the _Spray_ along many a rugged
coast, and reading many a kind signal thrown out to her gave one a
grateful feeling for all the world.

One more gale of wind came down upon the _Spray_ from the west after
she passed Cape Agulhas, but that one she dodged by getting into
Simons Bay. When it moderated she beat around the Cape of Good Hope,
where they say the _Flying Dutchman_ is still sailing. The voyage then
seemed as good as finished; from this time on I knew that all, or
nearly all, would be plain sailing.

Here I crossed the dividing-line of weather. To the north it was clear
and settled, while south it was humid and squally, with, often enough,
as I have said, a treacherous gale. From the recent hard weather the
_Spray_ ran into a calm under Table Mountain, where she lay quietly
till the generous sun rose over the land and drew a breeze in from the
sea.

The steam-tug _Alert_, then out looking for ships, came to the _Spray_
off the Lion's Rump, and in lieu of a larger ship towed her into port.
The sea being smooth, she came to anchor in the bay off the city of
Cape Town, where she remained a day, simply to rest clear of the
bustle of commerce. The good harbor-master sent his steam-launch to
bring the sloop to a berth in dock at once, but I preferred to remain
for one day alone, in the quiet of a smooth sea, enjoying the
retrospect of the passage of the two great capes. On the following
morning the _Spray_ sailed into the Alfred Dry-docks, where she
remained for about three months in the care of the port authorities,
while I traveled the country over from Simons Town to Pretoria, being
accorded by the colonial government a free railroad pass over all the
land.

The trip to Kimberley, Johannesburg, and Pretoria was a pleasant one.
At the last-named place I met Mr. Kruger, the Transvaal president. His
Excellency received me cordially enough; but my friend Judge Beyers,
the gentleman who presented me, by mentioning that I was on a voyage
around the world, unwittingly gave great offense to the venerable
statesman, which we both regretted deeply. Mr. Kruger corrected the
judge rather sharply, reminding him that the world is flat. "You don't
mean _round_ the world," said the president; "it is impossible! You
mean _in_ the world. Impossible!" he said, "impossible!" and not
another word did he utter either to the judge or to me. The judge
looked at me and I looked at the judge, who should have known his
ground, so to speak, and Mr. Kruger glowered at us both. My friend the
judge seemed embarrassed, but I was delighted; the incident pleased me
more than anything else that could have happened. It was a nugget of
information quarried out of Oom Paul, some of whose sayings are
famous. Of the English he said, "They took first my coat and then my
trousers." He also said, "Dynamite is the corner-stone of the South
African Republic." Only unthinking people call President Kruger dull.

[Illustration: Cartoon printed in the Cape Town "Owl" of March 5,
1898, in connection with an item about Captain Slocum's trip to
Pretoria.]

Soon after my arrival at the cape, Mr. Kruger's friend Colonel
Saunderson, [Footnote: Colonel Saunderson was Mr. Kruger's very best
friend, inasmuch as he advised the president to avast mounting guns.]
who had arrived from Durban some time before, invited me to Newlands
Vineyard, where I met many agreeable people. His Excellency Sir Alfred
Milner, the governor, found time to come aboard with a party. The
governor, after making a survey of the deck, found a seat on a box in
my cabin; Lady Muriel sat on a keg, and Lady Saunderson sat by the
skipper at the wheel, while the colonel, with his kodak, away in the
dinghy, took snap shots of the sloop and her distinguished visitors.
Dr. David Gill, astronomer royal, who was of the party, invited me the
next day to the famous Cape Observatory. An hour with Dr. Gill was an
hour among the stars. His discoveries in stellar photography are well
known. He showed me the great astronomical clock of the observatory,
and I showed him the tin clock on the _Spray_, and we went over the
subject of standard time at sea, and how it was found from the deck of
the little sloop without the aid of a clock of any kind. Later it was
advertised that Dr. Gill would preside at a talk about the voyage of
the _Spray_: that alone secured for me a full house. The hall was
packed, and many were not able to get in. This success brought me
sufficient money for all my needs in port and for the homeward voyage.

After visiting Kimberley and Pretoria, and finding the _Spray_ all
right in the docks, I returned to Worcester and Wellington, towns
famous for colleges and seminaries, passed coming in, still traveling
as the guest of the colony. The ladies of all these institutions of
learning wished to know how one might sail round the world alone,
which I thought augured of sailing-mistresses in the future instead of
sailing-masters. It will come to that yet if we men-folk keep on
saying we "can't."

On the plains of Africa I passed through hundreds of miles of rich but
still barren land, save for scrub-bushes, on which herds of sheep were
browsing. The bushes grew about the length of a sheep apart, and they,
I thought, were rather long of body; but there was still room for all.
My longing for a foothold on land seized upon me here, where so much
of it lay waste; but instead of remaining to plant forests and reclaim
vegetation, I returned again to the _Spray_ at the Alfred Docks, where
I found her waiting for me, with everything in order, exactly as I had
left her.

I have often been asked how it was that my vessel and all
appurtenances were not stolen in the various ports where I left her
for days together without a watchman in charge. This is just how it
was: The _Spray_ seldom fell among thieves. At the Keeling Islands, at
Rodriguez, and at many such places, a wisp of cocoanut fiber in the
door-latch, to indicate that the owner was away, secured the goods
against even a longing glance. But when I came to a great island
nearer home, stout locks were needed; the first night in port things
which I had always left uncovered disappeared, as if the deck on which
they were stowed had been swept by a sea.

[Illustration: Captain Slocum, Sir Alfred Milner (with the tall hat),
and Colonel Saunderson, M. P., on the bow of the _Spray_ at Cape
Town.]

A pleasant visit from Admiral Sir Harry Rawson of the Royal Navy and
his family brought to an end the _Spray's_ social relations with the
Cape of Good Hope. The admiral, then commanding the South African
Squadron, and now in command of the great Channel fleet, evinced the
greatest interest in the diminutive _Spray_ and her behavior off Cape
Horn, where he was not an entire stranger. I have to admit that I was
delighted with the trend of Admiral Rawson's questions, and that I
profited by some of his suggestions, notwithstanding the wide
difference in our respective commands.

On March 26, 1898, the _Spray_ sailed from South Africa, the land of
distances and pure air, where she had spent a pleasant and profitable
time. The steam-tug _Tigre_ towed her to sea from her wonted berth at
the Alfred Docks, giving her a good offing. The light morning breeze,
which scantily filled her sails when the tug let go the tow-line, soon
died away altogether, and left her riding over a heavy swell, in full
view of Table Mountain and the high peaks of the Cape of Good Hope.
For a while the grand scenery served to relieve the monotony. One of
the old circumnavigators (Sir Francis Drake, I think), when he first
saw this magnificent pile, sang, "'T is the fairest thing and the
grandest cape I've seen in the whole circumference of the earth."

The view was certainly fine, but one has no wish to linger long to
look in a calm at anything, and I was glad to note, finally, the short
heaving sea, precursor of the wind which followed on the second day.
Seals playing about the _Spray_ all day, before the breeze came,
looked with large eyes when, at evening, she sat no longer like a lazy
bird with folded wings. They parted company now, and the _Spray_ soon
sailed the highest peaks of the mountains out of sight, and the world
changed from a mere panoramic view to the light of a homeward-bound
voyage. Porpoises and dolphins, and such other fishes as did not mind
making a hundred and fifty miles a day, were her companions now for
several days. The wind was from the southeast; this suited the _Spray_
well, and she ran along steadily at her best speed, while I dipped
into the new books given me at the cape, reading day and night. March
30 was for me a fast-day in honor of them. I read on, oblivious of
hunger or wind or sea, thinking that all was going well, when suddenly
a comber rolled over the stern and slopped saucily into the cabin,
wetting the very book I was reading. Evidently it was time to put in a
reef, that she might not wallow on her course.

[Illustration: "Reading day and night."]

March 31 the fresh southeast wind had come to stay. The _Spray_ was
running under a single-reefed mainsail, a whole jib, and a flying-jib
besides, set on the Vailima bamboo, while I was reading Stevenson's
delightful "Inland Voyage." The sloop was again doing her work
smoothly, hardly rolling at all, but just leaping along among the
white horses, a thousand gamboling porpoises keeping her company on
all sides. She was again among her old friends the flying-fish,
interesting denizens of the sea. Shooting out of the waves like
arrows, and with outstretched wings, they sailed on the wind in
graceful curves; then falling till again they touched the crest of the
waves to wet their delicate wings and renew the flight. They made
merry the livelong day. One of the joyful sights on the ocean of a
bright day is the continual flight of these interesting fish.

One could not be lonely in a sea like this. Moreover, the reading of
delightful adventures enhanced the scene. I was now in the _Spray_ and
on the Oise in the _Arethusa_ at one and the same time. And so the
_Spray_ reeled off the miles, showing a good ran every day till April
11, which came almost before I knew it. Very early that morning I was
awakened by that rare bird, the booby, with its harsh quack, which I
recognized at once as a call to go on deck; it was as much as to say,
"Skipper, there's land in sight." I tumbled out quickly, and sure
enough, away ahead in the dim twilight, about twenty miles off, was
St. Helena.

My first impulse was to call out, "Oh, what a speck in the sea!" It is
in reality nine miles in length and two thousand eight hundred and
twenty-three feet in height. I reached for a bottle of port-wine out
of the locker, and took a long pull from it to the health of my
invisible helmsman--the pilot of the _Pinta_.


CHAPTER XIX


In the isle of Napoleon's exile--Two lectures--A guest in the
ghost-room at Plantation House--An excursion to historic
Longwood--Coffee in the husk, and a goat to shell it--The _Spray's_
ill luck with animals--A prejudice against small dogs--A rat, the
Boston spider, and the cannibal cricket--Ascension Island.

It was about noon when the _Spray_ came to anchor off Jamestown, and
"all hands" at once went ashore to pay respects to his Excellency the
governor of the island, Sir R. A. Sterndale. His Excellency, when I
landed, remarked that it was not often, nowadays, that a
circumnavigator came his way, and he cordially welcomed me, and
arranged that I should tell about the voyage, first at Garden Hall to
the people of Jamestown, and then at Plantation House--the governor's
residence, which is in the hills a mile or two back--to his Excellency
and the officers of the garrison and their friends. Mr. Poole, our
worthy consul, introduced me at the castle, and in the course of his
remarks asserted that the sea-serpent was a Yankee.

Most royally was the crew of the _Spray_ entertained by the governor.
I remained at Plantation House a couple of days, and one of the rooms
in the mansion, called the "west room," being haunted, the butler, by
command of his Excellency, put me up in that--like a prince. Indeed,
to make sure that no mistake had been made, his Excellency came later
to see that I was in the right room, and to tell me all about the
ghosts he had seen or heard of. He had discovered all but one, and
wishing me pleasant dreams, he hoped I might have the honor of a visit
from the unknown one of the west room. For the rest of the chilly
night I kept the candle burning, and often looked from under the
blankets, thinking that maybe I should meet the great Napoleon face to
face; but I saw only furniture, and the horseshoe that was nailed over
the door opposite my bed.

St. Helena has been an island of tragedies--tragedies that have been
lost sight of in wailing over the Corsican. On the second day of my
visit the governor took me by carriage-road through the turns over the
island. At one point of our journey the road, in winding around spurs
and ravines, formed a perfect W within the distance of a few rods. The
roads, though tortuous and steep, were fairly good, and I was struck
with the amount of labor it must have cost to build them. The air on
the heights was cool and bracing. It is said that, since hanging for
trivial offenses went out of fashion, no one has died there, except
from falling over the cliffs in old age, or from being crushed by
stones rolling on them from the steep mountains! Witches at one time
were persistent at St. Helena, as with us in America in the days of
Cotton Mather. At the present day crime is rare in the island. While I
was there, Governor Sterndale, in token of the fact that not one
criminal case had come to court within the year, was presented with a
pair of white gloves by the officers of justice.

Returning from the governor's house to Jamestown, I drove with Mr.
Clark, a countryman of mine, to "Longwood," the home of Napoleon. M.
Morilleau, French consular agent in charge, keeps the place
respectable and the buildings in good repair. His family at Longwood,
consisting of wife and grown daughters, are natives of courtly and
refined manners, and spend here days, months, and years of
contentment, though they have never seen the world beyond the horizon
of St. Helena.

On the 20th of April the _Spray_ was again ready for sea. Before going
on board I took luncheon with the governor and his family at the
castle. Lady Sterndale had sent a large fruit-cake, early in the
morning, from Plantation House, to be taken along on the voyage. It
was a great high-decker, and I ate sparingly of it, as I thought, but
it did not keep as I had hoped it would. I ate the last of it along
with my first cup of coffee at Antigua, West Indies, which, after all,
was quite a record. The one my own sister made me at the little island
in the Bay of Fundy, at the first of the voyage, kept about the same
length of time, namely, forty-two days.

After luncheon a royal mail was made up for Ascension, the island next
on my way. Then Mr. Poole and his daughter paid the _Spray_ a farewell
visit, bringing me a basket of fruit. It was late in the evening
before the anchor was up, and I bore off for the west, loath to leave
my new friends. But fresh winds filled the sloop's sails once more,
and I watched the beacon-light at Plantation House, the governor's
parting signal for the _Spray_, till the island faded in the darkness
astern and became one with the night, and by midnight the light itself
had disappeared below the horizon.

When morning came there was no land in sight, but the day went on the
same as days before, save for one small incident. Governor Sterndale
had given me a bag of coffee in the husk, and Clark, the American, in
an evil moment, had put a goat on board, "to butt the sack and hustle
the coffee-beans out of the pods." He urged that the animal, besides
being useful, would be as companionable as a dog. I soon found that my
sailing-companion, this sort of dog with horns, had to be tied up
entirely. The mistake I made was that I did not chain him to the mast
instead of tying him with grass ropes less securely, and this I
learned to my cost. Except for the first day, before the beast got his
sea-legs on, I had no peace of mind. After that, actuated by a spirit
born, maybe, of his pasturage, this incarnation of evil threatened to
devour everything from flying-jib to stern-davits. He was the worst
pirate I met on the whole voyage. He began depredations by eating my
chart of the West Indies, in the cabin, one day, while I was about my
work for'ard, thinking that the critter was securely tied on deck by
the pumps. Alas! there was not a rope in the sloop proof against that
goat's awful teeth!

It was clear from the very first that I was having no luck with
animals on board. There was the tree-crab from the Keeling Islands. No
sooner had it got a claw through its prison-box than my sea-jacket,
hanging within reach, was torn to ribbons. Encouraged by this success,
it smashed the box open and escaped into my cabin, tearing up things
generally, and finally threatening my life in the dark. I had hoped to
bring the creature home alive, but this did not prove feasible. Next
the goat devoured my straw hat, and so when I arrived in port I had
nothing to wear ashore on my head. This last unkind stroke decided his
fate. On the 27th of April the _Spray_ arrived at Ascension, which is
garrisoned by a man-of-war crew, and the boatswain of the island came
on board. As he stepped out of his boat the mutinous goat climbed into
it, and defied boatswain and crew. I hired them to land the wretch at
once, which they were only too willing to do, and there he fell into
the hands of a most excellent Scotchman, with the chances that he
would never get away. I was destined to sail once more into the depths
of solitude, but these experiences had no bad effect upon me; on the
contrary, a spirit of charity and even benevolence grew stronger in my
nature through the meditations of these supreme hours on the sea.

In the loneliness of the dreary country about Cape Horn I found myself
in no mood to make one life less in the world, except in self-defense,
and as I sailed this trait of the hermit character grew till the
mention of killing food-animals was revolting to me. However well I
may have enjoyed a chicken stew afterward at Samoa, a new self
rebelled at the thought suggested there of carrying chickens to be
slain for my table on the voyage, and Mrs. Stevenson, hearing my
protest, agreed with me that to kill the companions of my voyage and
eat them would be indeed next to murder and cannibalism.

As to pet animals, there was no room for a noble large dog on the
_Spray_ on so long a voyage, and a small cur was for many years
associated in my mind with hydrophobia. I witnessed once the death of
a sterling young German from that dreadful disease, and about the same
time heard of the death, also by hydrophobia, of the young gentleman
who had just written a line of insurance in his company's books for
me. I have seen the whole crew of a ship scamper up the rigging to
avoid a dog racing about the decks in a fit. It would never do, I
thought, for the crew of the _Spray_ to take a canine risk, and with
these just prejudices indelibly stamped on my mind, I have, I am
afraid, answered impatiently too often the query, "Didn't you have a
dog!" with, "I and the dog wouldn't have been very long in the same
boat, in any sense." A cat would have been a harmless animal, I dare
say, but there was nothing for puss to do on board, and she is an
unsociable animal at best. True, a rat got into my vessel at the
Keeling Cocos Islands, and another at Rodriguez, along with a centiped
stowed away in the hold; but one of them I drove out of the ship, and
the other I caught. This is how it was: for the first one with
infinite pains I made a trap, looking to its capture and destruction;
but the wily rodent, not to be deluded, took the hint and got ashore
the day the thing was completed.

It is, according to tradition, a most reassuring sign to find rats
coming to a ship, and I had a mind to abide the knowing one of
Rodriguez; but a breach of discipline decided the matter against him.
While I slept one night, my ship sailing on, he undertook to walk over
me, beginning at the crown of my head, concerning which I am always
sensitive. I sleep lightly. Before his impertinence had got him even
to my nose I cried "Rat!" had him by the tail, and threw him out of
the companionway into the sea.

As for the centiped, I was not aware of its presence till the wretched
insect, all feet and venom, beginning, like the rat, at my head,
wakened me by a sharp bite on the scalp. This also was more than I
could tolerate. After a few applications of kerosene the poisonous
bite, painful at first, gave me no further inconvenience.

From this on for a time no living thing disturbed my solitude; no
insect even was present in my vessel, except the spider and his wife,
from Boston, now with a family of young spiders. Nothing, I say, till
sailing down the last stretch of the Indian Ocean, where mosquitos
came by hundreds from rain-water poured out of the heavens. Simply a
barrel of rain-water stood on deck five days, I think, in the sun,
then music began. I knew the sound at once; it was the same as heard
from Alaska to New Orleans.

Again at Cape Town, while dining out one day, I was taken with the
song of a cricket, and Mr. Branscombe, my host, volunteered to capture
a pair of them for me. They were sent on board next day in a box
labeled, "Pluto and Scamp." Stowing them away in the binnacle in their
own snug box, I left them there without food till I got to sea--a few
days. I had never heard of a cricket eating anything. It seems that
Pluto was a cannibal, for only the wings of poor Scamp were visible
when I opened the lid, and they lay broken on the floor of the
prison-box. Even with Pluto it had gone hard, for he lay on his back
stark and stiff, never to chirrup again.

Ascension Island, where the goat was marooned, is called the Stone
Frigate, R. N, and is rated "tender" to the South African Squadron. It
lies in 7 degrees 35' south latitude and 14 degrees 25' west
longitude, being in the very heart of the southeast trade-winds and
about eight hundred and forty miles from the coast of Liberia. It is a
mass of volcanic matter, thrown up from the bed of the ocean to the
height of two thousand eight hundred and eighteen feet at the highest
point above sea-level. It is a strategic point, and belonged to Great
Britain before it got cold. In the limited but rich soil at the top of
the island, among the clouds, vegetation has taken root, and a little
scientific farming is carried on under the supervision of a gentleman
from Canada. Also a few cattle and sheep are pastured there for the
garrison mess. Water storage is made on a large scale. In a word, this
heap of cinders and lava rock is stored and fortified, and would stand
a siege.

Very soon after the _Spray_ arrived I received a note from Captain
Blaxland, the commander of the island, conveying his thanks for the
royal mail brought from St. Helena, and inviting me to luncheon with
him and his wife and sister at headquarters, not far away. It is
hardly necessary to say that I availed myself of the captain's
hospitality at once. A carriage was waiting at the jetty when I
landed, and a sailor, with a broad grin, led the horse carefully up
the hill to the captain's house, as if I were a lord of the admiralty,
and a governor besides; and he led it as carefully down again when I
returned. On the following day I visited the summit among the clouds,
the same team being provided, and the same old sailor leading the
horse. There was probably not a man on the island at that moment
better able to walk than I. The sailor knew that. I finally suggested
that we change places. "Let me take the bridle," I said, "and keep the
horse from bolting." "Great Stone Frigate!" he exclaimed, as he burst
into a laugh, "this 'ere 'oss wouldn't bolt no faster nor a turtle. If
I didn't tow 'im 'ard we'd never get into port." I walked most of the
way over the steep grades, whereupon my guide, every inch a sailor,
became my friend. Arriving at the summit of the island, I met Mr.
Schank, the farmer from Canada, and his sister, living very cozily in
a house among the rocks, as snug as conies, and as safe. He showed me
over the farm, taking me through a tunnel which led from one field to
the other, divided by an inaccessible spur of mountain. Mr. Schank
said that he had lost many cows and bullocks, as well as sheep, from
breakneck over the steep cliffs and precipices. One cow, he said,
would sometimes hook another right over a precipice to destruction,
and go on feeding unconcernedly. It seemed that the animals on the
island farm, like mankind in the wide world, found it all too small.

On the 26th of April, while I was ashore, rollers came in which
rendered launching a boat impossible. However, the sloop being
securely moored to a buoy in deep water outside of all breakers, she
was safe, while I, in the best of quarters, listened to well-told
stories among the officers of the Stone Frigate. On the evening of the
29th, the sea having gone down, I went on board and made preparations
to start again on my voyage early next day, the boatswain of the
island and his crew giving me a hearty handshake as I embarked at the
jetty.

For reasons of scientific interest, I invited in mid-ocean the most
thorough investigation concerning the crew-list of the _Spray_. Very
few had challenged it, and perhaps few ever will do so henceforth; but
for the benefit of the few that may, I wished to clench beyond doubt
the fact that it was not at all necessary in the expedition of a sloop
around the world to have more than one man for the crew, all told, and
that the _Spray_ sailed with only one person on board. And so, by
appointment, Lieutenant Eagles, the executive officer, in the morning,
just as I was ready to sail, fumigated the sloop, rendering it
impossible for a person to live concealed below, and proving that only
one person was on board when she arrived. A certificate to this
effect, besides the official documents from the many consulates,
health offices, and customhouses, will seem to many superfluous; but
this story of the voyage may find its way into hands unfamiliar with
the business of these offices and of their ways of seeing that a
vessel's papers, and, above all, her bills of health, are in order.

The lieutenant's certificate being made out, the _Spray_, nothing
loath, now filled away clear of the sea-beaten rocks, and the
trade-winds, comfortably cool and bracing, sent her flying along on
her course. On May 8, 1898, she crossed the track, homeward bound,
that she had made October 2, 1895, on the voyage out. She passed
Fernando de Noronha at night, going some miles south of it, and so I
did not see the island. I felt a contentment in knowing that the
_Spray_ had encircled the globe, and even as an adventure alone I was
in no way discouraged as to its utility, and said to myself, "Let what
will happen, the voyage is now on record." A period was made.


CHAPTER XX


In the favoring current off Cape St. Roque, Brazil--All at sea
regarding the Spanish-American war--An exchange of signals with the
battle-ship _Oregon_--Off Dreyfus's prison on Devil's
Island--Reappearance to the _Spray_ of the north star--The light on
Trinidad--A charming introduction to Grenada--Talks to friendly
auditors.

On May 10 there was a great change in the condition of the sea; there
could be no doubt of my longitude now, if any had before existed in my
mind. Strange and long-forgotten current ripples pattered against the
sloop's sides in grateful music; the tune arrested the oar, and I sat
quietly listening to it while the _Spray_ kept on her course. By these
current ripples I was assured that she was now off St. Roque and had
struck the current which sweeps around that cape. The trade-winds, we
old sailors say, produce this current, which, in its course from this
point forward, is governed by the coastline of Brazil, Guiana,
Venezuela, and, as some would say, by the Monroe Doctrine.

The trades had been blowing fresh for some time, and the current, now
at its height, amounted to forty miles a day. This, added to the
sloop's run by the log, made the handsome day's work of one hundred
and eighty miles on several consecutive days, I saw nothing of the
coast of Brazil, though I was not many leagues off and was always in
the Brazil current.

I did not know that war with Spain had been declared, and that I might
be liable, right there, to meet the enemy and be captured. Many had
told me at Cape Town that, in their opinion, war was inevitable, and
they said: "The Spaniard will get you! The Spaniard will get you!" To
all this I could only say that, even so, he would not get much. Even
in the fever-heat over the disaster to the _Maine_ I did not think
there would be war; but I am no politician. Indeed, I had hardly given
the matter a serious thought when, on the 14th of May, just north of
the equator, and near the longitude of the river Amazon, I saw first a
mast, with the Stars and Stripes floating from it, rising astern as if
poked up out of the sea, and then rapidly appearing on the horizon,
like a citadel, the _Oregon!_ As she came near I saw that the great
ship was flying the signals "C B T," which read, "Are there any
men-of-war about?" Right under these flags, and larger than the
_Spray's_ mainsail, so it appeared, was the yellowest Spanish flag I
ever saw. It gave me nightmare some time after when I reflected on it
in my dreams.

[Illustration: The _Spray_ passed by the _Oregon_.]

I did not make out the _Oregon's_ signals till she passed ahead, where
I could read them better, for she was two miles away, and I had no
binoculars. When I had read her flags I hoisted the signal "No," for I
had not seen any Spanish men-of-war; I had not been looking for any.
My final signal, "Let us keep together for mutual protection," Captain
Clark did not seem to regard as necessary. Perhaps my small flags were
not made out; anyhow, the _Oregon_ steamed on with a rush, looking for
Spanish men-of-war, as I learned afterward. The _Oregon's_ great flag
was dipped beautifully three times to the _Spray's_ lowered flag as
she passed on. Both had crossed the line only a few hours before. I
pondered long that night over the probability of a war risk now coming
upon the _Spray_ after she had cleared all, or nearly all, the dangers
of the sea, but finally a strong hope mastered my fears.

On the 17th of May, the _Spray_, coming out of a storm at daylight,
made Devil's Island, two points on the lee bow, not far off. The wind
was still blowing a stiff breeze on shore. I could clearly see the
dark-gray buildings on the island as the sloop brought it abeam. No
flag or sign of life was seen on the dreary place.

Later in the day a French bark on the port tack, making for Cayenne,
hove in sight, close-hauled on the wind. She was falling to leeward
fast, The _Spray_ was also closed-hauled, and was lugging on sail to
secure an offing on the starboard tack, a heavy swell in the night
having thrown her too near the shore, and now I considered the matter
of supplicating a change of wind. I had already enjoyed my share of
favoring breezes over the great oceans, and I asked myself if it would
be right to have the wind turned now all into my sails while the
Frenchman was bound the other way. A head current, which he stemmed,
together with a scant wind, was bad enough for him. And so I could
only say, in my heart, "Lord, let matters stand as they are, but do
not help the Frenchman any more just now, for what would suit him well
would ruin me!"

I remembered that when a lad I heard a captain often say in meeting
that in answer to a prayer of his own the wind changed from southeast
to northwest, entirely to his satisfaction. He was a good man, but did
this glorify the Architect--the Ruler of the winds and the waves?
Moreover, it was not a trade-wind, as I remember it, that changed for
him, but one of the variables which will change when you ask it, if
you ask long enough. Again, this man's brother maybe was not bound the
opposite way, well content with a fair wind himself, which made all
the difference in the world. [Footnote: The Bishop of Melbourne
(commend me to his teachings) refused to set aside a day of prayer for
rain, recommending his people to husband water when the rainy season
was on. In like manner, a navigator husbands the wind, keeping a
weather-gage where practicable.]

On May 18,1898, is written large in the _Spray's_ log-book: "To-night,
in latitude 7 degrees 13' N., for the first time in nearly three years
I see the north star." The _Spray_ on the day following logged one
hundred and forty-seven miles. To this I add thirty-five miles for
current sweeping her onward. On the 20th of May, about sunset, the
island of Tobago, off the Orinoco, came into view, bearing west by
north, distant twenty-two miles. The _Spray_ was drawing rapidly
toward her home destination. Later at night, while running free along
the coast of Tobago, the wind still blowing fresh, I was startled by
the sudden flash of breakers on the port bow and not far off. I luffed
instantly offshore, and then tacked, heading in for the island.
Finding myself, shortly after, close in with the land, I tacked again
offshore, but without much altering the bearings of the danger. Sail
whichever way I would, it seemed clear that if the sloop weathered the
rocks at all it would be a close shave, and I watched with anxiety,
while beating against the current, always losing ground. So the matter
stood hour after hour, while I watched the flashes of light thrown up
as regularly as the beats of the long ocean swells, and always they
seemed just a little nearer. It was evidently a coral reef,--of this I
had not the slightest doubt,--and a bad reef at that. Worse still,
there might be other reefs ahead forming a bight into which the
current would sweep me, and where I should be hemmed in and finally
wrecked. I had not sailed these waters since a lad, and lamented the
day I had allowed on board the goat that ate my chart. I taxed my
memory of sea lore, of wrecks on sunken reefs, and of pirates harbored
among coral reefs where other ships might not come, but nothing that I
could think of applied to the island of Tobago, save the one wreck of
Robinson Crusoe's ship in the fiction, and that gave me little
information about reefs. I remembered only that in Crusoe's case he
kept his powder dry. "But there she booms again," I cried, "and how
close the flash is now! Almost aboard was that last breaker! But
you'll go by, _Spray_, old girl! 'T is abeam now! One surge more! and
oh, one more like that will clear your ribs and keel!" And I slapped
her on the transom, proud of her last noble effort to leap clear of
the danger, when a wave greater than the rest threw her higher than
before, and, behold, from the crest of it was revealed at once all
there was of the reef. I fell back in a coil of rope, speechless and
amazed, not distressed, but rejoiced. Aladdin's lamp! My fisherman's
own lantern! It was the great revolving light on the island of
Trinidad, thirty miles away, throwing flashes over the waves, which
had deceived me! The orb of the light was now dipping on the horizon,
and how glorious was the sight of it! But, dear Father Neptune, as I
live, after a long life at sea, and much among corals, I would have
made a solemn declaration to that reef! Through all the rest of the
night I saw imaginary reefs, and not knowing what moment the sloop
might fetch up on a real one, I tacked off and on till daylight, as
nearly as possible in the same track, all for the want of a chart. I
could have nailed the St. Helena goat's pelt to the deck.

My course was now for Grenada, to which I carried letters from
Mauritius. About midnight of the 22d of May I arrived at the island,
and cast anchor in the roads off the town of St. George, entering the
inner harbor at daylight on the morning of the 23d, which made
forty-two days' sailing from the Cape of Good Hope, It was a good run,
and I doffed my cap again to the pilot of the _Pinta_.

Lady Bruce, in a note to the _Spray_ at Port Louis, said Grenada was a
lovely island, and she wished the sloop might call there on the voyage
home. When the _Spray_ arrived, I found that she had been fully
expected. "How so?" I asked. "Oh, we heard that you were at
Mauritius," they said, "and from Mauritius, after meeting Sir Charles
Bruce, our old governor, we knew you would come to Grenada." This was
a charming introduction, and it brought me in contact with people
worth knowing.

The _Spray_ sailed from Grenada on the 28th of May, and coasted along
under the lee of the Antilles, arriving at the island of Dominica on
the 30th, where, for the want of knowing better, I cast anchor at the
quarantine ground; for I was still without a chart of the islands, not
having been able to get one even at Grenada. Here I not only met with
further disappointment in the matter, but was threatened with a fine
for the mistake I made in the anchorage. There were no ships either at
the quarantine or at the commercial roads, and I could not see that it
made much difference where I anchored. But a negro chap, a sort of
deputy harbormaster, coming along, thought it did, and he ordered me
to shift to the other anchorage, which, in truth, I had already
investigated and did not like, because of the heavier roll there from
the sea. And so instead of springing to the sails at once to shift, I
said I would leave outright as soon as I could procure a chart, which
I begged he would send and get for me. "But I say you mus' move befo'
you gets anyt'ing't all," he insisted, and raising his voice so that
all the people alongshore could hear him, he added, "An' jes now!"
Then he flew into a towering passion when they on shore snickered to
see the crew of the _Spray_ sitting calmly by the bulwark instead of
hoisting sail. "I tell you dis am quarantine" he shouted, very much
louder than before. "That's all right, general," I replied; "I want to
be quarantined anyhow." "That's right, boss," some one on the beach
cried, "that's right; you get quarantined," while others shouted to
the deputy to "make de white trash move 'long out o' dat." They were
about equally divided on the island for and against me. The man who
had made so much fuss over the matter gave it up when he found that I
wished to be quarantined, and sent for an all-important half-white,
who soon came alongside, starched from clue to earing. He stood in the
boat as straight up and down as a fathom of pump-water--a marvel of
importance. "Charts!" cried I, as soon as his shirt-collar appeared
over the sloop's rail; "have you any charts?" "No, sah," he replied
with much-stiffened dignity; "no, sah; cha'ts do'sn't grow on dis
island." Not doubting the information, I tripped anchor immediately,
as I had intended to do from the first, and made all sail for St.
John, Antigua, where I arrived on the 1st of June, having sailed with
great caution in midchannel all the way.

The _Spray_, always in good company, now fell in with the port
officers' steam-launch at the harbor entrance, having on board Sir
Francis Fleming, governor of the Leeward Islands, who, to the delight
of "all hands," gave the officer in charge instructions to tow my ship
into port. On the following day his Excellency and Lady Fleming, along
with Captain Burr, R. N., paid me a visit. The court-house was
tendered free to me at Antigua, as was done also at Grenada, and at
each place a highly intelligent audience filled the hall to listen to
a talk about the seas the _Spray_ had crossed, and the countries she
had visited.


CHAPTER XXI


Clearing for home--In the calm belt--A sea covered with sargasso--The
jibstay parts in a gale--Welcomed by a tornado off Fire Island--A
change of plan--Arrival at Newport--End of a cruise of over forty-six
thousand miles--The _Spray_ again at Fairhaven.

On the 4th of June, 1898, the _Spray_ cleared from the United States
consulate, and her license to sail single-handed, even round the
world, was returned to her for the last time. The United States
consul, Mr. Hunt, before handing the paper to me, wrote on it, as
General Roberts had done at Cape Town, a short commentary on the
voyage. The document, by regular course, is now lodged in the Treasury
Department at Washington, D. C.

On June 5, 1898, the _Spray_ sailed for a home port, heading first
direct for Cape Hatteras. On the 8th of June she passed under the sun
from south to north; the sun's declination on that day was 22 degrees
54', and the latitude of the _Spray_ was the same just before noon.
Many think it is excessively hot right under the sun. It is not
necessarily so. As a matter of fact the thermometer stands at a
bearable point whenever there is a breeze and a ripple on the sea,
even exactly under the sun. It is often hotter in cities and on sandy
shores in higher latitudes.

The _Spray_ was booming joyously along for home now, making her usual
good time, when of a sudden she struck the horse latitudes, and her
sail flapped limp in a calm. I had almost forgotten this calm belt, or
had come to regard it as a myth. I now found it real, however, and
difficult to cross. This was as it should have been, for, after all of
the dangers of the sea, the dust-storm on the coast of Africa, the
"rain of blood" in Australia, and the war risk when nearing home, a
natural experience would have been missing had the calm of the horse
latitudes been left out. Anyhow, a philosophical turn of thought now
was not amiss, else one's patience would have given out almost at the
harbor entrance. The term of her probation was eight days. Evening
after evening during this time I read by the light of a candle on
deck. There was no wind at all, and the sea became smooth and
monotonous. For three days I saw a full-rigged ship on the horizon,
also becalmed.

Sargasso, scattered over the sea in bunches, or trailed curiously
along down the wind in narrow lanes, now gathered together in great
fields, strange sea-animals, little and big, swimming in and out, the
most curious among them being a tiny seahorse which I captured and
brought home preserved in a bottle. But on the 18th of June a gale
began to blow from the southwest, and the sargasso was dispersed again
in windrows and lanes.

On this day there was soon wind enough and to spare. The same might
have been said of the sea The _Spray_ was in the midst of the
turbulent Gulf Stream itself. She was jumping like a porpoise over the
uneasy waves. As if to make up for lost time, she seemed to touch only
the high places. Under a sudden shock and strain her rigging began to
give out. First the main-sheet strap was carried away, and then the
peak halyard-block broke from the gaff. It was time to reef and refit,
and so when "all hands" came on deck I went about doing that.

The 19th of June was fine, but on the morning of the 20th another gale
was blowing, accompanied by cross-seas that tumbled about and shook
things up with great confusion. Just as I was thinking about taking in
sail the jibstay broke at the masthead, and fell, jib and all, into
the sea. It gave me the strangest sensation to see the bellying sail
fall, and where it had been suddenly to see only space. However, I was
at the bows, with presence of mind to gather it in on the first wave
that rolled up, before it was torn or trailed under the sloop's
bottom. I found by the amount of work done in three minutes' or less
time that I had by no means grown stiff-jointed on the voyage; anyhow,
scurvy had not set in, and being now within a few degrees of home, I
might complete the voyage, I thought, without the aid of a doctor.
Yes, my health was still good, and I could skip about the decks in a
lively manner, but could I climb? The great King Neptune tested me
severely at this time, for the stay being gone, the mast itself
switched about like a reed, and was not easy to climb; but a
gun-tackle purchase was got up, and the stay set taut from the
masthead, for I had spare blocks and rope on board with which to rig
it, and the jib, with a reef in it, was soon pulling again like a
"sodger" for home. Had the _Spray's_ mast not been well stepped,
however, it would have been "John Walker" when the stay broke. Good
work in the building of my vessel stood me always in good stead.

On the 23d of June I was at last tired, tired, tired of baffling
squalls and fretful cobble-seas. I had not seen a vessel for days and
days, where I had expected the company of at least a schooner now and
then. As to the whistling of the wind through the rigging, and the
slopping of the sea against the sloop's sides, that was well enough in
its way, and we could not have got on without it, the _Spray_ and I;
but there was so much of it now, and it lasted so long! At noon of
that day a winterish storm was upon us from the nor'west. In the Gulf
Stream, thus late in June, hailstones were pelting the _Spray_, and
lightning was pouring down from the clouds, not in flashes alone, but
in almost continuous streams. By slants, however, day and night I
worked the sloop in toward the coast, where, on the 25th of June, off
Fire Island, she fell into the tornado which, an hour earlier, had
swept over New York city with lightning that wrecked buildings and
sent trees flying about in splinters; even ships at docks had parted
their moorings and smashed into other ships, doing great damage. It
was the climax storm of the voyage, but I saw the unmistakable
character of it in time to have all snug aboard and receive it under
bare poles. Even so, the sloop shivered when it struck her, and she
heeled over unwillingly on her beam ends; but rounding to, with a
sea-anchor ahead, she righted and faced out the storm. In the midst of
the gale I could do no more than look on, for what is a man in a storm
like this? I had seen one electric storm on the voyage, off the coast
of Madagascar, but it was unlike this one. Here the lightning kept on
longer, and thunderbolts fell in the sea all about. Up to this time I
was bound for New York; but when all was over I rose, made sail, and
hove the sloop round from starboard to port tack, to make for a quiet
harbor to think the matter over; and so, under short sail, she reached
in for the coast of Long Island, while I sat thinking and watching the
lights of coasting-vessels which now began to appear in sight.
Reflections of the voyage so nearly finished stole in upon me now;
many tunes I had hummed again and again came back once more. I found
myself repeating fragments of a hymn often sung by a dear Christian
woman of Fairhaven when I was rebuilding the _Spray_. I was to hear
once more and only once, in profound solemnity, the metaphorical hymn:

  By waves and wind I'm tossed and driven.


And again:

  But still my little ship outbraves
    The blust'ring winds and stormy waves.


After this storm I saw the pilot of the _Pinta_ no more.

The experiences of the voyage of the _Spray_, reaching over three
years, had been to me like reading a book, and one that was more and
more interesting as I turned the pages, till I had come now to the
last page of all, and the one more interesting than any of the rest.

When daylight came I saw that the sea had changed color from dark
green to light. I threw the lead and got soundings in thirteen
fathoms. I made the land soon after, some miles east of Fire Island,
and sailing thence before a pleasant breeze along the coast, made for
Newport. The weather after the furious gale was remarkably fine. The
_Spray_ rounded Montauk Point early in the afternoon; Point Judith was
abeam at dark; she fetched in at Beavertail next. Sailing on, she had
one more danger to pass--Newport harbor was mined. The _Spray_ hugged
the rocks along where neither friend nor foe could come if drawing
much water, and where she would not disturb the guard-ship in the
channel. It was close work, but it was safe enough so long as she
hugged the rocks close, and not the mines. Flitting by a low point
abreast of the guard-ship, the dear old _Dexter_, which I knew well,
some one on board of her sang out, "There goes a craft!" I threw up a
light at once and heard the hail, "_Spray_, ahoy!" It was the voice of
a friend, and I knew that a friend would not fire on the _Spray_. I
eased off the main-sheet now, and the _Spray_ swung off for the
beacon-lights of the inner harbor. At last she reached port in safety,
and there at 1 a.m. on June 27, 1898, cast anchor, after the cruise of
more than forty-six thousand miles round the world, during an absence
of three years and two months, with two days over for coming up.

Was the crew well? Was I not? I had profited in many ways by the
voyage. I had even gained flesh, and actually weighed a pound more
than when I sailed from Boston. As for aging, why, the dial of my life
was turned back till my friends all said, "Slocum is young again." And
so I was, at least ten years younger than the day I felled the first
tree for the construction of the _Spray_.

My ship was also in better condition than when she sailed from Boston
on her long voyage. She was still as sound as a nut, and as tight as
the best ship afloat. She did not leak a drop--not one drop! The pump,
which had been little used before reaching Australia, had not been
rigged since that at all.

The first name on the _Spray's_ visitors' book in the home port was
written by the one who always said, "The _Spray_ will come back." The
_Spray_ was not quite satisfied till I sailed her around to her
birthplace, Fairhaven, Massachusetts, farther along. I had myself a
desire to return to the place of the very beginning whence I had, as I
have said, renewed my age. So on July 3, with a fair wind, she waltzed
beautifully round the coast and up the Acushnet River to Fairhaven,
where I secured her to the cedar spile driven in the bank to hold her
when she was launched. I could bring her no nearer home.

If the _Spray_ discovered no continents on her voyage, it may be that
there were no more continents to be discovered; she did not seek new
worlds, or sail to powwow about the dangers of the seas. The sea has
been much maligned. To find one's way to lands already discovered is a
good thing, and the _Spray_ made the discovery that even the worst sea
is not so terrible to a well-appointed ship. No king, no country, no
treasury at all, was taxed for the voyage of the _Spray_, and she
accomplished all that she undertook to do.

To succeed, however, in anything at all, one should go understandingly
about his work and be prepared for every emergency. I see, as I look
back over my own small achievement, a kit of not too elaborate
carpenters' tools, a tin clock, and some carpet-tacks, not a great
many, to facilitate the enterprise as already mentioned in the story.
But above all to be taken into account were some years of schooling,
where I studied with diligence Neptune's laws, and these laws I tried
to obey when I sailed overseas; it was worth the while.

And now, without having wearied my friends, I hope, with detailed
scientific accounts, theories, or deductions, I will only say that I
have endeavored to tell just the story of the adventure itself. This,
in my own poor way, having been done, I now moor ship, weather-bitt
cables, and leave the sloop _Spray_, for the present, safe in port.


APPENDIX

[Illustration: Again tied to the old stake at Fairhaven.]


APPENDIX

LINES AND SAIL-PLAN OF THE "SPRAY"

Her pedigree so far as known--The Lines of the _Spray_--Her
self-steering qualities--Sail-plan and steering-gear--An unprecedented
feat--A final word of cheer to would-be navigators.

From a feeling of diffidence toward sailors of great experience, I
refrained, in the preceding chapters as prepared for serial
publication in the "Century Magazine," from entering fully into the
details of the _Spray's_ build, and of the primitive methods employed
to sail her. Having had no yachting experience at all, I had no means
of knowing that the trim vessels seen in our harbors and near the land
could not all do as much, or even more, than the _Spray_, sailing, for
example, on a course with the helm lashed.

I was aware that no other vessel had sailed in this manner around the
globe, but would have been loath to say that another could not do it,
or that many men had not sailed vessels of a certain rig in that
manner as far as they wished to go. I was greatly amused, therefore,
by the flat assertions of an expert that it could not be done.

[Illustration: Plan of the after cabin of the _Spray._]

The _Spray_, as I sailed her, was entirely a new boat, built over from
a sloop which bore the same name, and which, tradition said, had first
served as an oysterman, about a hundred years ago, on the coast of
Delaware. There was no record in the custom-house of where she was
built. She was once owned at Noank, Connecticut, afterward in New
Bedford and when Captain Eben Pierce presented her to me, at the end
of her natural life, she stood, as I have already described, propped
up in a field at Fairhaven. Her lines were supposed to be those of a
North Sea fisherman. In rebuilding timber by timber and plank by
plank, I added to her free-board twelve inches amidships, eighteen
inches forward, and fourteen inches aft, thereby increasing her sheer,
and making her, as I thought, a better deep-water ship. I will not
repeat the history of the rebuilding of the _Spray_, which I have
detailed in my first chapter, except to say that, when finished, her
dimensions were thirty-six feet nine inches over all, fourteen feet
two inches wide, and four feet two inches deep in the hold, her
tonnage being nine tons net, and twelve and seventy one-hundredths
tons gross.

I gladly produce the lines of the _Spray_, with such hints as my
really limited fore-and-aft sailing will allow, my seafaring life
having been spent mostly in barks and ships. No pains have been spared
to give them accurately. The _Spray_ was taken from New York to
Bridgeport, Connecticut, and, under the supervision of the Park City
Yacht Club, was hauled out of water and very carefully measured in
every way to secure a satisfactory result. Captain Robins produced the
model. Our young yachtsmen, pleasuring in the "lilies of the sea,"
very naturally will not think favorably of my craft. They have a right
to their opinion, while I stick to mine. They will take exceptions to
her short ends, the advantage of these being most apparent in a heavy
sea.

Some things about the _Spray's_ deck might be fashioned differently
without materially affecting the vessel. I know of no good reason why
for a party-boat a cabin trunk might not be built amidships instead of
far aft, like the one on her, which leaves a very narrow space between
the wheel and the line of the companionway. Some even say that I might
have improved the shape of her stern. I do not know about that. The
water leaves her run sharp after bearing her to the last inch, and no
suction is formed by undue cutaway.

Smooth-water sailors say, "Where is her overhang?" They never crossed
the Gulf Stream in a nor'easter, and they do not know what is best in
all weathers. For your life, build no fantail overhang on a craft
going offshore. As a sailor judges his prospective ship by a "blow of
the eye" when he takes interest enough to look her over at all, so I
judged the _Spray_, and I was not deceived.

In a sloop-rig the _Spray_ made that part of her voyage reaching from
Boston through the Strait of Magellan, during which she experienced
the greatest variety of weather conditions. The yawl-rig then adopted
was an improvement only in that it reduced the size of a rather heavy
mainsail and slightly improved her steering qualities on the wind.
When the wind was aft the jigger was not in use; invariably it was
then furled. With her boom broad off and with the wind two points on
the quarter the _Spray_ sailed her truest course. It never took long
to find the amount of helm, or angle of rudder, required to hold her
on her course, and when that was found I lashed the wheel with it at
that angle. The mainsail then drove her, and the main-jib, with its
sheet boused flat amidships or a little to one side or the other,
added greatly to the steadying power. Then if the wind was even strong
or squally I would sometimes set a flying-jib also, on a pole rigged
out on the bowsprit, with, the sheets hauled flat amidships, which was
a safe thing to do, even in a gale of wind. A stout downhaul on the
gaff was a necessity, because without it the mainsail might not have
come down when I wished to lower it in a breeze. The amount of helm
required varied according to the amount of wind and its direction.
These points are quickly gathered from practice.

[Illustration: Deck-plan of the _Spray_.]

Briefly I have to say that when close-hauled in a light wind under all
sail she required little or no weather helm. As the wind increased I
would go on deck, if below, and turn the wheel up a spoke more or
less, relash it, or, as sailors say, put it in a becket, and then
leave it as before.

[Illustration: Sail-Plan of the _Spray_ The solid lines represent the
sail-plan of the _Spray_ on starting for the long voyage. With it she
crossed the Atlantic to Gibraltar, and then crossed again southwest to
Brazil. In South American waters the bowsprit and boom were shortened
and the jigger-sail added to form the yawl-rig with which the rest of
the trip was made, the sail-plan of which is indicated by the dotted
lines The extreme sail forward is a flying jib occasionally used, set
to a bamboo stick fastened to the bowsprit. The manner of setting and
bracing the jigger-mast is not indicated in this drawing, but may be
partly observed in the plans on pages 287 and 289.]

To answer the questions that might be asked to meet every contingency
would be a pleasure, but it would overburden my book. I can only say
here that much comes to one in practice, and that, with such as love
sailing, mother-wit is the best teacher, after experience.
Labor-saving appliances? There were none. The sails were hoisted by
hand; the halyards were rove through ordinary ships' blocks with
common patent rollers. Of course the sheets were all belayed aft.

[Illustration: Steering-gear of the _Spray_. The dotted lines are the
ropes used to lash the wheel. In practice the loose ends were belayed,
one over the other, around the top spokes of the wheel.]

The windlass used was in the shape of a winch, or crab, I think it is
called. I had three anchors, weighing forty pounds, one hundred
pounds, and one hundred and eighty pounds respectively. The windlass
and the forty-pound anchor, and the "fiddle-head," or carving, on the
end of the cutwater, belonged to the original _Spray_. The ballast,
concrete cement, was stanchioned down securely. There was no iron or
lead or other weight on the keel.

If I took measurements by rule I did not set them down, and after
sailing even the longest voyage in her I could not tell offhand the
length of her mast, boom, or gaff. I did not know the center of effort
in her sails, except as it hit me in practice at sea, nor did I care a
rope yarn about it. Mathematical calculations, however, are all right
in a good boat, and the _Spray_ could have stood them. She was easily
balanced and easily kept in trim.

Some of the oldest and ablest shipmasters have asked how it was
possible for her to hold a true course before the wind, which was just
what the _Spray_ did for weeks together. One of these gentlemen, a
highly esteemed shipmaster and friend, testified as government expert
in a famous murder trial in Boston, not long since, that a ship would
not hold her course long enough for the steersman to leave the helm to
cut the captain's throat. Ordinarily it would be so. One might say
that with a square-rigged ship it would always be so. But the _Spray_,
at the moment of the tragedy in question, was sailing around the globe
with no one at the helm, except at intervals more or less rare.
However, I may say here that this would have had no bearing on the
murder case in Boston. In all probability Justice laid her hand on the
true rogue. In other words, in the case of a model and rig similar to
that of the tragedy ship, I should myself testify as did the nautical
experts at the trial.

[Illustration: Body-plan of the _Spray_.]

But see the run the _Spray_ made from Thursday Island to the Keeling
Cocos Islands, twenty-seven hundred miles distant, in twenty-three
days, with no one at the helm in that time, save for about one hour,
from land to land. No other ship in the history of the world ever
performed, under similar circumstances, the feat on so long and
continuous a voyage. It was, however, a delightful midsummer sail. No
one can know the pleasure of sailing free over the great oceans save
those who have had the experience. It is not necessary, in order to
realize the utmost enjoyment of going around the globe, to sail alone,
yet for once and the first time there was a great deal of fun in it.
My friend the government expert, and saltest of salt sea-captains,
standing only yesterday on the deck of the _Spray_, was convinced of
her famous qualities, and he spoke enthusiastically of selling his
farm on Cape Cod and putting to sea again.

To young men contemplating a voyage I would say go. The tales of rough
usage are for the most part exaggerations, as also are the stories of
sea danger. I had a fair schooling in the so-called "hard ships" on
the hard Western Ocean, and in the years there I do not remember
having once been "called out of my name." Such recollections have
endeared the sea to me. I owe it further to the officers of all the
ships I ever sailed in as boy and man to say that not one ever lifted
so much as a finger to me. I did not live among angels, but among men
who could be roused. My wish was, though, to please the officers of my
ship wherever I was, and so I got on. Dangers there are, to be sure,
on the sea as well as on the land, but the intelligence and skill God
gives to man reduce these to a minimum. And here comes in again the
skilfully modeled ship worthy to sail the seas.

To face the elements is, to be sure, no light matter when the sea is
in its grandest mood. You must then know the sea, and know that you
know it, and not forget that it was made to be sailed over.

I have given in the plans of the _Spray_ the dimensions of such a ship
as I should call seaworthy in all conditions of weather and on all
seas. It is only right to say, though, that to insure a reasonable
measure of success, experience should sail with the ship. But in order
to be a successful navigator or sailor it is not necessary to hang a
tar-bucket about one's neck. On the other hand, much thought
concerning the brass buttons one should wear adds nothing to the
safety of the ship.

[Illustration: Lines of the _Spray_.]

I may some day see reason to modify the model of the dear old _Spray_,
but out of my limited experience I strongly recommend her wholesome
lines over those of pleasure-fliers for safety. Practice in a craft
such as the _Spray_ will teach young sailors and fit them for the more
important vessels. I myself learned more seamanship, I think, on the
_Spray_ than on any other ship I ever sailed, and as for patience, the
greatest of all the virtues, even while sailing through the reaches of
the Strait of Magellan, between the bluff mainland and dismal Fuego,
where through intricate sailing I was obliged to steer, I learned to
sit by the wheel, content to make ten miles a day beating against the
tide, and when a month at that was all lost, I could find some old
tune to hum while I worked the route all over again, beating as
before. Nor did thirty hours at the wheel, in storm, overtax my human
endurance, and to clap a hand to an oar and pull into or out of port
in a calm was no strange experience for the crew of the _Spray_. The
days passed happily with me wherever my ship sailed.