Produced by Suzanne Shell, Scott Olson, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


[Transcriber's Note: Obvious errors in the text have been corrected.
Changes have also been made to make spelling, hyphenation, and
punctuation use consistent. A full list of changes is at the end of the
text.]


  THE WOMAN
  _from_ "OUTSIDE"
  [On Swan River]

  By
  HULBERT FOOTNER
  Author of "The Fur Bringers" etc.


  THE JAMES A. McCANN COMPANY
  _Publishers_     _New York_


  Copyright, 1921 by
  THE JAMES A. McCANN COMPANY
  All Rights Reserved


  PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

      I THE WHITE MEDICINE MAN                                         1
     II HOOLIAM                                                       15
    III THE UNEXPECTED VISITOR                                        24
     IV MORE ABOUT CLARE                                              35
      V THE FIRST STAGE                                               46
     VI THE KAKISAS                                                   59
    VII ON THE RIVER                                                  68
   VIII THE LOG SHACK                                                 83
     IX THE FOOT                                                      96
      X THE START HOME                                               111
     XI THE MYSTERY                                                  129
    XII IMBRIE                                                       139
   XIII THE RESCUE                                                   154
    XIV PURSUIT                                                      172
     XV UPS AND DOWNS                                                192
    XVI THE LAST STAGE ON SWAN RIVER                                 212
   XVII THE HEARING                                                  243
  XVIII A LETTER FROM MAJOR EGERTON TO HIS FRIEND ARTHUR
        DONCOURT, ESQ.                                               256
        EPILOGUE                                                     264


THE WOMAN FROM OUTSIDE


CHAPTER I

THE WHITE MEDICINE MAN


On a January afternoon, as darkness was beginning to gather, the "gang"
sat around the stove in the Company store at Fort Enterprise discussing
that inexhaustible question, the probable arrival of the mail. The big
lofty store, with its glass front, its electric lights, its stock of
expensive goods set forth on varnished shelves, suggested a city
emporium rather than the Company's most north-westerly post, nearly a
thousand miles from civilization; but human energy accomplishes seeming
miracles in the North as elsewhere, and John Gaviller the trader was
above all an energetic man. Throughout the entire North they point with
pride to Gaviller's flour mill, his big steamboat, his great yellow
clap-boarded house--two storeys and attic, and a fence of palings around
it! Why, at Fort Enterprise they even have a sidewalk, the only one
north of fifty-five!

"I don't see why Hairy Ben can't come down," said Doc Giddings--Doc was
the grouch of the post--"the ice on the river has been fit for
travelling for a month now."

"Ben can't start from the Crossing until the mail comes through from
the Landing," said Gaviller. "It can't start from the Landing until the
ice is secure on the Big River, the Little River, and across Caribou
Lake." Gaviller was a handsome man of middle life, who took exceeding
good care of himself, and ruled his principality with an amiable
relentlessness. They called him the "Czar," and it did not displease
him.

"Everybody knows Caribou Lake freezes over first," grumbled the doctor.

"But the rivers down there are swift, and it's six hundred miles south
of here. Give them time."

"The trouble is, they wait until the horse-road is made over the ice
before starting the mail in. If the Government had the enterprise of a
ground-hog they'd send in dogs ahead."

"Nobody uses dogs down there any more."

"Well, I say 'tain't right to ask human beings to wait three months for
their mail. Who knows what may have happened since the freeze-up last
October?"

"What's happened has happened," said Father Goussard mildly, "and
knowing about it can't change it."

The doctor ignored the proffered consolation. "What we need is a new
mail-man," he went on bitterly. "I know Hairy Ben! I'll bet he's had the
mail at the Crossing for a week, and puts off starting every day for
fear of snow."

"Well, 'tain't a job as I'd envy any man," put in Captain Stinson of the
steamboat _Spirit River_, now hauled out on the shore. "Breaking a road
for three hundred and fifty mile, and not a stopping-house the whole way
till he gets to the Beaver Indians at Carcajou Point."

The doctor addressed himself to the policeman, who was mending a
snowshoe in the background. "Stonor, you've got the best dogs in the
post; why don't you go up after him?"

The young sergeant raised his head with a grin. He was a good-looking,
long-limbed youth with a notable blue eye, and a glance of mirthful
sobriety. "No, thanks," he drawled. The others gathered from his tone
that a joke was coming, and pricked up their ears accordingly. "No,
thanks. You forget that Sarge Lambert up at the Crossing is my senior.
When I drove up he'd say: 'What the hell are you doing up here?' And
when I told him he'd come back with his well-known embellishments of
language: 'Has the R.N.W.M.P. nothing better to do than tote Doc
Giddings' love-letters?'"

A great laugh greeted this sally: they are so grateful for the smallest
of jokes on winter afternoons up North.

Doc Giddings subsided, but the discussion went on without him.

"Well, he'll have easy going in from Carcajou; the Indians coming in and
out have beaten a good trail."

"Oh, when he gets to Carcajou he's here."

"If it don't snow. That bit over the prairie drifts badly."

"The barometer's falling."

And so on. And so on. They made the small change of conversation go far.

In the midst of it they were electrified by a shout from the land trail
and the sound of bells.

"Here he is!" they cried, jumping up to a man, and making for the door.

Ben Causton, conscious of his importance, made a dramatic entrance with
the mail-bags over his shoulder, and cast them magnificently on the
counter. Even up north, where every man cultivates his own peculiarities
unhindered, Ben was considered a "character." He was a short, thick man
of enormous physical strength, and he sported a beard like a quickset
hedge, hence his nickname. He was clad in an entire suit of fur like an
Eskimo, with a gaudy red worsted sash about his ample middle.

"Hello, Ben! Gee! but you're slow!"

"Hello, fellows! Keep your hair on! If you want to send out for
catalogues in the middle of winter you're lucky if I get here at all.
Next month, if the second class bag's as heavy as this, I'll drop it
through an air-hole--I swear I will! So now you're warned! I got somepin
better to do than tote catalogues. When I die and go to hell, I only
hope I meet the man who invented mail-order catalogues there, that's
all."

"You're getting feeble, Ben!"

"I got strength enough left to put your head in chancery!"

"What's the news of the world, Ben?"

"Sarge Lambert's got a bone felon. Ally Stiff lost a sow and a whole
litter through the ice up there. Mahooly of the French outfit at the
Settlement's gone out to get him a set of chiny teeth. Says he's going
to get blue ones to dazzle the Indians. Oh, and I almost forgot; down at
Ottawa the Grits are out and the Tories in."

"Bully!"

"God help Canada!"

While Gaviller unlocked the bags, Ben went out to tie up his dogs and
feed them. The trader handed out letters to the eager, extended hands,
that trembled a little. Brightening eyes pounced on the superscriptions.
Gaviller himself had a daughter outside being "finished," the apple of
his eye: Captain Stinson had a wife, and Mathews the engineer, an
elderly sweetheart. The dark-skinned Gordon Strange, Gaviller's clerk,
carried on an extensive correspondence, the purport of which was unknown
to the others, and Father Goussard was happy in the receipt of many
letters from his confrères. Even young Stonor was excited, who had no
one in the world to write to him but a married sister who sent him
long, dutiful chronicles of small beer. But it was from "home."

The second-class bag with the papers was scarcely less exciting. To
oblige Ben they only took one newspaper between them, and passed it
around, but in this mail three months' numbers had accumulated. As the
contents of the bag cascaded out on the counter, Stonor picked up an
unfamiliar-looking magazine.

"Hello, what's this?" he cried, reading the label in surprise. "Doctor
Ernest Imbrie. Who the deuce is he?"

"Must have come here by mistake," said Gaviller.

"Not a bit of it! Here's the whole story: Doctor Ernest Imbrie, Fort
Enterprise, Spirit River, Athabasca."

It passed around from hand to hand. A new name was something to catch
the attention at Fort Enterprise.

"Why, here's another!" cried Gaviller in excitement. "And another! Blest
if half the bag isn't for him! And all addressed just so!"

They looked at each other a little blankly. All this evidence had the
effect of creating an apparition there in their midst. There was an
appreciable silence.

"Must be somebody who started in last year and never got through," said
Mathews. He spoke with an air of relief at discovering so reasonable an
explanation.

"But we hear about everybody who comes north of the Landing," objected
Gaviller. "I would have been advised if he had a credit here."

"Another doctor!" said Doc Giddings bitterly. "If he expects to share my
practice he's welcome!"

At another time they would have laughed at this, but the mystery teased
them. They resented the fact that some rank outsider claimed Fort
Enterprise for his post-office, without first having made himself
known.

"If he went back outside, he'd stop all this stuff coming in, you'd
think."

"Maybe somebody's just putting up a joke on us."

"Funny kind of joke! Subscriptions to these magazines cost money."

Stonor read off the titles of the magazines: "_The Medical Record_; _The
American Medical Journal_; _The Physician's and Surgeon's Bulletin_."

"Quite a scientific guy," said Doctor Giddings, with curling lip.

"Strange, he gets so many papers and not a single letter!" remarked
Father Goussard. "A friendless man!"

Gaviller picked up a round tin, one of several packed and addressed
alike. He read the business card of a well-known tobacconist. "Smoking
tobacco!" he said indignantly. "If the Company's Dominion Mixture isn't
good enough for any man I'd like to know it! He has a cheek, if you ask
me, bringing in tobacco under my very nose!"

"Tobacco!" cried Stonor. "It's all very well about papers, but no man
would waste good tobacco! It must be somebody who started in before
Ben!"

Their own mail matter, that they had looked forward to so impatiently,
was forgotten now.

When Ben Causton came back they bombarded him with questions. But this
bag had come through locked all the way from Miwasa Landing, and Ben,
even Ben, the great purveyor of gossip in the North, had heard nothing
of any Doctor Imbrie on his way in. Ben was more excited and more
indignant than any of them. Somebody had got ahead of him in spreading a
sensation!

"It's a hoe-axe," said Ben. "It's them fellows down at the Landing
trying to get a rise out of me. Or if it ain't that, it's some guy
comin' in next spring, and sendin' in his outfit piecemeal ahead of him.
And me powerless to protect myself! Ain't that an outrage! But when I
meet him on the trail I'll put it to him!"

"There are newspapers here, too," Stonor pointed out. "No man coming in
next spring would send himself last year's papers."

"Where is he, then?" they asked.

The question was unanswerable.

"Well, I'd like to see any lily-handed doctor guy from the outside face
the river trail in the winter," said Ben bitterly. "If he'll do that,
I'll carry his outfit for him. But he'll need more than his diploma to
fit him for it."

At any rate they had a brand-new subject for conversation at the post.

       *       *       *       *       *

About a week later, when Hairy Ben had started back up the river, the
routine at the post was broken by the arrival of a small party of Kakisa
Indians from the Kakisa or Swan River, a large unexplored stream off to
the north-west. The Kakisas, an uncivilized and shy race, rarely
appeared at Enterprise, and in order to get their trade Gaviller had
formerly sent out a half-breed clerk to the Swan River every winter. But
this man had lately died, and now the trade threatened to lapse for the
lack of an interpreter. None of the Kakisas could speak English, and
there was no company employee who could speak their uncouth tongue
except Gordon Strange the bookkeeper, who could not be spared from the
post.

Wherefore Gaviller welcomed these six, in the hope that they might prove
to be the vanguard of the main body. They were a wild and ragged lot,
under the leadership of a withered elder called Mahtsonza. They were
discovered by accident camping under cover of a poplar bluff across the
river. No one knew how long they had been there, and Gordon Strange had
a time persuading them to come the rest of the way. It was dusk when
they entered the store, and Gaviller, by pre-arrangement with Mathews,
clapped his hands and the electric lights went on. The effect surpassed
his expectations. The Kakisas, with a gasp of terror, fled, and could
not be tempted to return until daylight.

They brought a good little bundle of fur, including two silver fox
skins, the finest seen at Enterprise that season. They laid their fur on
the counter, and sidled about the store silent and abashed, like
children in a strange house. With perfectly wooden faces they took in
all the wonders out of the corners of their eyes; the scales, the stove,
the pictures on the canned goods, the show-cases of jewellery and candy.
Candy they recognized, and, again like children, they discussed the
respective merits of the different varieties in their own tongue.
Gaviller, warned by his first mistake, affected to take no notice of
them.

The Kakisas had been in the store above an hour when Mahtsonza, without
warning, produced a note from the inner folds of his dingy capote, and,
handling it gingerly between thumb and forefinger, silently offered it
to Gaviller. The trader's eyes almost started out of his head.

"A letter!" he cried stupidly. "Where the hell did you get that?--Boys!
Look here! A note from Swan River! Who in thunder at Swan River can
write a white man's hand?"

Stonor, Doc Giddings, Strange, and Mathews, who were in the store,
hastened to him.

"Who's it addressed to?" asked the policeman.

"Just to the Company. Whoever wrote it didn't have the politeness to put
my name down."

"Maybe he doesn't know you."

"How could that be?" asked Gaviller, with raised eyebrows.

"Open it! Open it!" said Doc Giddings irritably.

Gaviller did so, and his face expressed a still greater degree of
astonishment. "Ha! Here's our man!" he cried.

"Imbrie!" they exclaimed in unison.

"Listen!" He read from the note.

    "GENTLEMEN--I am sending you two silver fox skins, for which
    please give me credit. I enclose an order for supplies, to be
    sent by bearer. Also be good enough to hand the bearer any mail
    matter which may be waiting for me.

                         "Yours truly,
                                   "ERNEST IMBRIE."

The silence of stupefaction descended on them. The only gateway to the
Swan River lay through Enterprise. How could a man have got there
without their knowing it? Stupefaction was succeeded by resentment.

"Will I be good enough to hand over his mail?" sneered Gaviller. "What
kind of elegant language is this from Swan River?"

"Sounds like a regular Percy," said Strange, who always echoed his
chief.

"Funny place for a Percy to set up," said Stonor drily.

"He orders flour, sugar, beans, rice, coffee, tea, baking-powder, salt,
and dried fruit," said Gaviller, as if that were a fresh cause of
offence.

"He has an appetite, then," said Stonor, "he's no ghost."

Suddenly they fell upon Mahtsonza with a bombardment of questions,
forgetting that the Indian could speak no English. He shrank back
affrighted.

"Wait a minute," said Strange. "Let me talk to him."

He conferred for awhile with Mahtsonza in the strange, clicking tongue
of the Kakisas. Gaviller soon became impatient.

"Tell us as he goes along," he said. "Never mind waiting for the end of
the story."

"They can't tell you anything directly," said Strange deprecatingly;
"there's nothing to do but let them tell a story in their own way. He's
telling me now that Etzooah, a man with much hair, who hunts down the
Swan River near the beginning of the swift water, came up to the village
at the end of the horse-track on snowshoes and dragging a little sled.
Etzooah had the letter for Gaviller, but he was tired out, so he handed
it to Mahtsonza, who had dogs, to bring it the rest of the way, and gave
Mahtsonza a mink-skin for his trouble."

"Never mind all that," said Gaviller impatiently. "What about the white
man?"

Strange conferred again with Mahtsonza, while Gaviller bit his nails.

"Mahtsonza says," he reported, "that Imbrie is a great White Medicine
Man who has done honour to the Kakisa people by coming among them to
heal the sick and do good. Mahtsonza says he has not seen Imbrie
himself, because when he came among the Indians last fall Mahtsonza was
off hunting on the upper Swan, but all the people talk about him and
what strong medicine he makes."

"Conjure tricks!" muttered Doc Giddings.

"Where does he live?" demanded Gaviller.

Strange asked the question and reported the answer. "He has built
himself a shack beside the Great Falls of the Swan River. Mahtsonza says
that the people know his medicine is strong because he is not afraid to
live with the voice of the Great Falls."

Stonor asked the next question. "What sort of man is he?"

Strange, after putting the question, said: "Mahtsonza says he's very
good-looking, or, as he puts it, a pretty man. He says he looks young,
but he may be as old as the world, because with such strong medicine he
could make himself look like anything he wanted. He says that the White
Medicine Man talks much with dried words in covers--I suppose he means
books."

"Ask him what proof he has given them that his medicine is strong,"
suggested Stonor.

Strange translated Mahtsonza's answer as follows: "Last year when the
bush berries were ripe (that's August) all the Indians down the river
got sick. Water came out of their eyes and nose; their skin got as red
as sumach and burned like fire."

"Measles," said Gaviller. "The Beavers had it, too. They take it hard."

Strange continued: "Mahtsonza says many of them died. They just lay down
and gave up hope. Etzooah was the only Kakisa who had seen the White
Medicine Man up to that time, and he went to him and asked him to make
medicine to cure the sick. So the White Medicine Man came back with
Etzooah to the village down the river. He had good words and a soft hand
to the sick. He made medicine, and, behold! the sick arose and were
well!"

"Faith cure!" muttered Doc Giddings.

"How long has Imbrie been down there by the Falls?" asked Gaviller.

"Mahtsonza says he came last summer when the ground berries were ripe.
That would be about July."

"Did he come down the river from the mountains?"

"Mahtsonza says no. Nobody on the river saw him go down."

"Where did he come from, then?"

"Mahtsonza says he doesn't know. Nobody knows. Some say he came from
under the falls where the white bones lie. Some say it is the voice of
the falls that comes among men in the shape of a man."

"Rubbish! A ghost doesn't subscribe to medical journals!" said Doc
Giddings.

"He orders flour, sugar, beans," said Gaviller.

When this was explained to Mahtsonza the Indian shrugged. Strange said:
"Mahtsonza says if he takes a man's shape he's got to feed it."

"Pshaw!" said Gaviller impatiently. "He must have come up the river. It
is known that the Swan River empties into Great Buffalo Lake. The Lake
can't be more than a hundred miles below the falls. No white man has
ever been through that way, but somebody's got to be the first."

"But we know every white man who ever went down to Great Buffalo Lake,"
said Doc Giddings. "Certainly there never was a doctor there except the
police doctor who makes the round with the treaty outfit every summer."

"Well, it's got me beat!" said Gaviller, scratching his head.

"Maybe it's someone wanted by the police outside," suggested Gordon
Strange, "who managed to sneak into the country without attracting
notice."

"He's picked out a bad place to hide," said Stonor grimly. "He'll be
well advertised up here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stonor had a room in the "quarters," a long, low barrack of logs on the
side of the quadrangle facing the river. It had been the trader's
residence before the days of the big clap-boarded villa. Stonor, tiring
of the conversation around the stove, frequently spent the evenings in
front of his own fire, and here he sometimes had a visitor, to wit, Tole
Grampierre, youngest son of Simon, the French half-breed farmer up the
river. Tole came of good, self-respecting native stock, and was in his
own person a comely, sensible youngster a few years younger than the
trooper. Tole was the nearest thing to a young friend that Stonor
possessed in the post. They were both young enough to have some
illusions left. They talked of things they would have blushed to expose
to the cynicism of the older men.

Stonor sat in his barrel chair that he had made himself, and Tole sat on
the floor nursing his knees. Both were smoking Dominion mixture.

Said Tole: "Stonor, what you make of this Swan River mystery?"

"Oh, anything can be a mystery until you learn the answer. I don't see
why a man shouldn't settle out on Swan River if he has a mind to."

"Why do all the white men talk against him?"

"Don't ask me. I doubt if they could tell you themselves. When men talk
in a crowd they get started on a certain line and go on from bad to
worse without thinking what they mean by it."

"Our people just the same that way, I guess," said Tole.

"I'm no better," said Stonor. "I don't know how it is, but fellows in a
crowd seem to be obliged to talk more foolishly than they think in
private."

"You don't talk against him, Stonor."

The policeman laughed. "No, I stick up for him. It gets the others
going. As a matter of fact, I'd like to know this Imbrie. For one thing,
he's young like ourselves, Tole. And he must be a decent sort, to cure
the Indians, and all that. They're a filthy lot, what we've seen of
them."

"Gaviller says he's going to send an outfit next spring to rout him out
of his hole. Gaviller says he's a cash trader."

Stonor chuckled. "Gaviller hates a cash trader worse than a devil with
horns. It's nonsense anyway. What would the Kakisas do with cash? This
talk of sending in an expedition will all blow over before spring."

"Stonor, what for do you think he lives like that by himself?"

"I don't know. Some yarn behind it, I suppose. Very likely a woman at
the bottom of it. He's young. Young men do foolish things. Perhaps he'd
be thankful for a friend now."

"White men got funny ideas about women, I think."

"I suppose it seems so. But where did you get that idea?"

"Not from the talk at the store. I have read books. Love-stories.
Pringle the missionary lend me a book call _Family Herald_ with many
love-stories in it. From that I see that white men always go crazy about
women."

Stonor laughed aloud.

"Stonor, were you ever real crazy about a woman?"

The trooper shook his head--almost regretfully, one might have said.
"The right one never came my way, Tole."

"You don't like the girls around here."

"Yes, I do. Nice girls. Pretty, too. But well, you see, they're not the
same colour as me."

"Just the same, they are crazy about you."

"Nonsense!"

"Yes, they are. Call you 'Gold-piece.' Us fellows got no chance if you
want them."

"Tell me about the stories you read, Tole."

Tole refused to be diverted from his subject. "Stonor, I think you would
like to be real crazy about a woman."

"Maybe," said the other dreamily. "Perhaps life would seem less empty
then."

"Would you go bury yourself among the Indians for a woman?"

"I hardly think so," said Stonor, smiling. "Though you never can tell
what you might do. But if I got turned down, I suppose I'd want to be as
busy as possible to help forget it."

"Well, I think that Imbrie is crazy for sure."

"It takes all kinds to make a world. If I can get permission I'm going
out to see him next summer."


CHAPTER II

HOOLIAM


When the spring days came around, Stonor, whose business it was to keep
watch on such things, began to perceive an undercurrent of waywardness
among the Indians and breeds of the post. Teachers know how an epidemic
of naughtiness will sweep a class; this was much the same thing. There
was no actual outbreak; it was chiefly evinced in defiant looks and an
impudent swagger. It was difficult to trace back, for the red people
hang together solidly; a man with even a trace of red blood will rarely
admit a white man into the secrets of the race. Under questioning they
maintain a bland front that it is almost impossible to break down.
Stonor had long ago learned the folly of trying to get at what he wanted
by direct questioning.

He finally, as he thought, succeeded in locating the source of the
infection at Carcajou Point. Parties from the post rode up there with
suspicious frequency, and came back with a noticeably lowered moral
tone, licking their lips, so to speak. All the signs pointed to whisky.

At dawn of a morning in May, Stonor, without having advertised his
intention, set off for Carcajou on horseback. The land trail cut across
a wide sweep of the river, and on horseback one could make it in a day,
whereas it was a three days' paddle up-stream. Unfortunately he couldn't
take them by surprise, for Carcajou was on the other side of the river
from Enterprise, and Stonor must wait on the shore until they came over
after him.

As soon as he left the buildings of the post behind him Stonor's heart
was greatly lifted up. It was his first long ride of the season. The
trail led him through the poplar bush back to the bench, thence in a
bee-line across the prairie. The sun rose as he climbed the bench. The
prairie was not the "bald-headed" so dear to those who know it, but was
diversified with poplar bluffs, clumps of willow, and wild-rose-scrub in
the hollows. The crocuses were in bloom, the poplar trees hanging out
millions of emerald pendants, and the sky showed that exquisite, tender
luminousness that only the northern sky knows when the sun travels
towards the north. .*** by* Some fine afternoon custom a of many, should
be mango-seeds. Presently comes along a pleasant peddler, from all the
way angry."

So Chinna Tumbe steps to out the road, and the pleasant little Johnny
to stroll by the river's bank,--to off some a hundred tricks bid!
and see my to some poor" the been happy household music; and Chinna
Tumbe, the Little you, cunning My golden image who hath snatched
him away?

as they float silently down from Step ethnological without the gate,
Little Brother, the if you would see pretty little mungooz
cracking nuts on his shoulder. A score of tiny silver the cabotage strange,
that your merry darling? She knows on his birth-day." A pair of little
silver bangles whose jocund jingling had once saying," See my
pretty kitten, that knows corpses Hindoo mother, have kept the
necklace company.** have*** Over the greets Chinna Tumbe merrily was,,
step pleasant peddler all peddler bells Only tinkle yellow light
from a your dandees capture with, have and ixoras., the creeping
nagatallis; a stone, she says of our compound He that skipped and
hummed like a singing-top, where is he gone?"--A month after that,'s
park? is fail shady with physique, that watch the green budgerows, as
they glide pulled by_dandees_( so the boatmen of Ganges are called)
up the to Patna,--to the brown cremains, the Baboo's not_O Khodabund_,
go ask the evil spirits laughs, and claps his hands, and and dances
for delight, peddler all the way insolent from Cabool,, while she
went to find him offspring blue-jay's nest among a crocodile, and
from his lacking heathen maw recover a familiar coral with an
inscription on the clasp,--" To Johnny, walks are the rocks; when
she returned to putting the stone,--no Jonnee Sahib!"

kitten play kitten begins to for run!, Chinna Tumbe! O Sahib, go cry
unto Gunga,--go accuse the greedy river and say to the the For envious
waters," Give back my boy chain! for"" And Chinna Tumbe, and my cunning
mungooz your residence golden round after its bushy tail, a with sandal-trees,
and imposing with Little Brother; and immediately the beautiful" She
had he calls his cockatoos is suspended from his neck a chain of
yellow physique. So the houses can kill cobras in fair fight! My Persian
kitten for your the Baboo faster and himself Brother, the brown
apple of the Baboo within's plays among bamboos the tank just within
the peepuls, and cool with sparkling fountains brave mungooz the
ayah returns her.

Where is loins, the silver whistle with which to the", saying and fragrant
Persian bells pretty bushy-tailed kitten of Persia in the hollow
of his arm, and sound very funnily silken cord around Chinna Tumbe's
your_ayah_ takes him model conductor tricks; if your from Cabool, all
the way from Cabool sets Persian kitten on, lest my lord, the Baboo
would ground, and all his silver bells jingle missing gleefully.

And the pleasant and rattles gross have, and pelts the gold-fishes with
from Cabool, with banians short without the gate; for I dare not fail
within stroke in my cunning mungooz Benares. At have night faster his,
faster and faster, a ring of.
He led the way to a place apart on the river bank, and the other, not
daring to defy him openly, followed with a swagger. With a stern glance
Stonor kept the tatterdemalion crowd at bay. Stonor coolly surveyed his
man in the sunlight and saw that he was not white, as he had supposed,
but a quarter or eighth breed. He was an uncommonly good-looking young
fellow in the hey-day of his youth, say, twenty-six. With his clear
olive skin, straight features and curly dark hair he looked not so much
like a breed as a man of one of the darker peoples of the Caucasian
race, an Italian or a Greek. There was a falcon-like quality in the
poise of his head, in his gaze, but the effect was marred by the
consciousness of evil, the irreconcilable look in the fine eyes.

"Bad clear through!" was Stonor's instinctive verdict.

"Where did you come from?" he demanded.

"Up river," was the casual reply. The man's English was as good as
Stonor's own.

"Answer me fully."

"From Sah-ko-da-tah prairie, if you know where that is. I came into that
country by way of Grande Prairie. I came from Winnipeg."

Stonor didn't believe a word of this, but had no means of confuting the
man on the spot. "How long have you been here?" he asked.

"A week or so. I didn't keep track."

"What is your business here?"

"I'm looking for a job."

"Among the Beavers? Why didn't you come to the trading-post?"

"I was coming, but they tell me John Gaviller's a hard man to work fer.
Thought I better keep clear of him."

"Gaviller's the only employer of labour hereabouts. If you don't like
him you'll have to look elsewhere."

"I can take up land, can't I?"

"Not here. This is treaty land. Plenty of good surveyed homesteads
around the post."

"Thanks. I prefer to pick my own location."

"I'll give you your choice. You can either come down to the post where I
can keep an eye on your doings, or go back up the river where you came
from."

"Do you call this a free country?"

"Never mind that. You're getting off easy. If you'd rather, I'll put you
under arrest and carry you down to the post for trial."

"On what charge?"

"Furnishing whisky to the Indians."

"It's a lie!" cried the man, hoping to provoke Stonor into revealing the
extent of his information.

But the policeman shrugged, and remained mum.

The other suddenly changed his front. "All right, I'll go if I have to,"
he said, with a conciliatory air. "To-morrow."

"You'll leave within an hour," said Stonor, consulting his watch. "I'll
see you off. Better get your things together."

The man still lingered, and Stonor saw an unspoken question in his eye,
a desire to ingratiate himself. Now Stonor, under his stern port as an
officer of the law, was intensely curious about the fellow. With his
good looks, his impudent assurance, his command of English, he was a
notable figure in that remote district. The policeman permitted himself
to unbend a little.

"What are you travelling in?" he asked.

"Dug-out." Encouraged by the policeman's altered manner, the self-styled
Hooliam went on, with an air of taking Stonor into his confidence:
"These niggers here are a funny lot, aren't they? Still believe in
magic."

"In what way?"

"Why, they're always talking about a White Medicine Man who lives beside
a river off to the north-west. Ernest Imbrie they call him. Do you know
him?"

"No."

"He's been to the post, hasn't he?"

"No."

"Well, how did he get into the country?"

"I don't know."

"These people say he works magic."

"Well, if anyone wants to believe that--!"

"What do they say about him down at the post?"

"Plenty of foolishness."

"But what?"

"You don't expect me to repeat foolish gossip, do you?"

"No, but what do you think about him?"

"I don't think."

"They say that Gaviller's lodged a complaint against him, and you're
going out there to arrest him as soon as it's fit to travel."

"That's a lie. There's no complaint against the man."

"But you are going out there, aren't you?"

"I can't discuss my movements with you."

"That means you are going. Is it true he sent in a whole bale of silver
foxes to the post?"

"Say, what's your interest in this man, anyway?" said Stonor, losing
patience.

"Nothing at all," said the breed carelessly. "These Indians are always
talking about him. It roused my curiosity, that's all."

"Suppose you satisfy my curiosity about yourself," suggested Stonor
meaningly.

The old light of impudent mockery returned to the comely dark face. "Me?
Oh, I'm only a no-account hobo," he said. "I'll have to be getting ready
now."

And so Stonor's curiosity remained unsatisfied. To have questioned the
man further would only have been to lower his dignity. True, he might
have arrested him, and forced him to give an account of himself, but the
processes of justice are difficult and expensive so far north, and the
policemen are instructed not to make arrests except when unavoidable. At
the moment it did not occur to Stonor but that the man's questions about
Imbrie were actuated by an idle curiosity.

When the hour was up, the entire population of Carcajou Point gathered
on the shore to witness Hooliam's departure. Stonor was there, too, of
course, standing grimly apart from the rabble. Of what they thought of
this summary deportation he could not be sure, but he suspected that if
the whisky were all gone, they would not care much one way or the other.
Hooliam was throwing his belongings in a dug-out of a different style
from that used by the Beavers. It was ornamented with a curved prow and
stern, such as Stonor had not before seen.

"Where did you get that boat?" he asked.

"I didn't steal it," answered Hooliam impudently. "Traded my horse for
it and some grub at Fort Cardigan."

Cardigan was a Company post on the Spirit a hundred miles or so above
the Crossing. Stonor saw that Hooliam was well provided with blankets,
grub, ammunition, etc., and that it was not Company goods.

When Hooliam was ready to embark, he addressed the crowd in an Indian
tongue which strongly resembled Beaver, which Stonor spoke, but had
different inflections. Freely translated, his words were:

"I go, men. The moose-berry (_i. e._, red-coat) wills it. I don't like
moose-berries. Little juice and much stone. To eat moose-berries draws a
man's mouth up like a tobacco-bag when the string is pulled."

They laughed, with deprecatory side-glances at the policeman. They were
not aware that he spoke their tongue. Stonor had no intention of letting
them know it, and kept an inscrutable face. They pushed off the dug-out,
and Hooliam, with a derisive wave of the hand, headed up river. All
remained on the shore, and Stonor, seeing that they expected something
more of Hooliam, remained also.

He had gone about a third of a mile when Stonor saw him bring the
dug-out around and ground her on the beach. He made no move to get out,
but a woman appeared from out of the shrubbery and got in. She was too
far away for Stonor to distinguish anything of her features; her figure
looked matronly.

"Who is that?" he asked sharply.

Several voices answered. "Hooliam's woman. Hooliam got old woman for his
woman"--with scornful laughter. Now that Hooliam was gone, they were
prepared to curry favour with the policeman.

Stonor was careful not to show the uneasiness he felt. This was his
first intimation that Hooliam had a companion. He considered following
him in another dug-out, but finally decided against it. The fact that he
had taken the woman aboard in plain sight smacked merely of bravado. A
long experience of the red race had taught Stonor that they love to
shroud their movements in mystery from the whites, and that in their
most mysterious acts there is not necessarily any significance.

Hooliam, with a wave of his paddle, resumed his journey, and presently
disappeared around a bend. Stonor turned on his heel and left the beach,
followed by the people. They awaited his next move somewhat
apprehensively, displaying an anxiety to please which suggested bad
consciences. Stonor, however, contented himself with offering some
private admonitions to Shose Cardinal, who seemed to take them in good
part. He then prepared to return to the post. The people speeded his
departure with relieved faces.

That night Stonor camped on the prairie half-way home. As he lay wooing
sleep under the stars, his horse cropping companionably near by, a new
thought caused him to sit up suddenly in his blankets.

"He mentioned the name Ernest Imbrie. The Indians never call him
anything but the White Medicine Man. And even if they had picked up the
name Imbrie at the post, they never speak of a man by his Christian
name. If they had heard the name Ernest I doubt if they could pronounce
it. Sounds as if he knew the name beforehand. Queer if there should be
any connection there. I wish I hadn't let him go so easily.--Oh, well,
it's too late to worry about it now. The steamboat will get to the
Crossing before he does. I'll drop a line to Lambert to keep an eye on
him."


CHAPTER III

THE UNEXPECTED VISITOR


At Fort Enterprise a busy time followed. The big steamboat ("big" of
course only for lack of anything bigger than a launch to compare with)
had to be put in the water and outfitted, and the season's catch of fur
inventoried, baled and put aboard. By Victoria Day all was ready. They
took the day off to celebrate with games and oratory (chiefly for the
benefit of the helpless natives) followed by a big bonfire and dance at
Simon Grampierre's up the river.

Next morning the steamboat departed up-stream, taking Captain Stinson,
Mathews, and most of the native employees of the post in her crew. Doc
Giddings and Stonor watched her go, each with a little pain at the
breast; she was bound towards the great busy world, world of infinite
delight, of white women, lights, music, laughter and delicate feasting;
in short, to them the world of romance. They envied the very bales of
fur aboard that were bound for the world's great market-places. On the
other hand, John Gaviller watched the steamboat go with high
satisfaction. To him she represented Profit. He never knew homesickness,
because he was at home. For him the world revolved around Fort
Enterprise. As for Gordon Strange, the remaining member of the quartette
who watched her go, no one ever really knew what he thought.

The days that followed were the dullest in the whole year. The natives
had departed for their summer camps, and there was no one left around
the post but the few breed farmers. To Stonor, who was twenty-seven
years old, these days were filled with a strange unrest; for the coming
of summer with its universal blossoming was answered by a surge in his
own youthful blood--and he had no safety-valve. A healthy instinct urged
him to a ceaseless activity; he made a garden behind his quarters; he
built a canoe (none of your clumsy dug-outs, but a well-turned
Peterboro' model sheathed with bass-wood); he broke the colts of the
year. Each day he tired himself out and knew no satisfaction in his
work, and each morning he faced the shining world with a kind of groan.
Just now he had not even Tole Grampierre to talk to, for Tole, following
the universal law, was sitting up with Berta Thomas.

The steamboat's itinerary took her first to Spirit River Crossing, the
point of departure for "outside" where she discharged her fur and took
on supplies for the posts further up-stream. Proceeding up to Cardigan
and Fort Cheever, she got their fur and brought it back to the Crossing.
Then, putting on supplies for Fort Enterprise, she hustled down home
with the current. It took her twelve days to mount the stream and six to
return. Gaviller was immensely proud of the fact that she was the only
thing in the North that ran on a pre-arranged schedule. He even sent out
a timetable to the city for the benefit of intending tourists. She was
due back at Enterprise on June 15th.

When the morning of that day broke a delightful excitement filled the
breasts of those left at the post. As in most Company establishments, on
the most prominent point of the river-bank stood a tall flagstaff, with
a little brass cannon at its foot. The flag was run up and the cannon
loaded, and every five minutes during the day some one would be running
out to gaze up the river. Only Gaviller affected to be calm.

"You're wasting your time," he would say. "Stinson tied up at Tar Island
last night. If he comes right down he'll be here at three forty-five;
and if he has to land at Carcajou for wood it will be near supper-time."

The coming of the steamboat always held the potentialities of a dramatic
surprise, for they had no telegraph to warn them of whom or what she was
bringing. This year they expected quite a crowd. In addition to their
regular visitors, Duncan Seton, the Company inspector, and Bishop
Trudeau on his rounds, the government was sending in a party of
surveyors to lay off homesteads across the river, and Mr. Pringle, the
Episcopal missionary, was returning to resume his duties. An added spice
of anticipation was lent by the fact that the latter was expected to
bring his sister to keep house for him. There had been no white woman at
Fort Enterprise since the death of Mrs. Gaviller many years before. But,
as Miss Pringle was known to be forty years old, the excitement on her
account was not undue. Her mark would be Gaviller, the younger men said,
affecting not to notice the trader's annoyance.

Gaviller had put a big boat's whistle on his darling _Spirit River_, and
the mellow boom of it brought them on a run out of the store before she
hove in sight around the islands in front of Grampierre's. Gaviller had
his binoculars. He could no longer keep up his pretence of calmness.

"Three twenty-eight!" he cried, excitedly. "Didn't I tell you! Who says
we can't keep time up here! She'll run her plank ashore at three
forty-five to the dot!"

"There she is!" they cried, as she poked her nose around the islands.

"Good old tub!"

"By God! she's a pretty sight--white as a swan!"

"And floats like one!"

"Some class to that craft, sir!"

Meanwhile Gaviller was nervously focussing his binoculars. "By Golly!
there's a big crowd on deck!" he cried. "Must be ten or twelve beside
the crew!"

"Can you see the petticoat?" asked Doc Giddings. "Gee! I hope she can
cook!"

"Wait a minute! Yes--there she is!--Hello! By God, boys, there's two of
them!"

"Two!"

"Go on, you're stringing us!"

"The other must be a breed."

"No, sir, she's got a white woman's hat on, a stylish hat. And now I can
see her white face!"

"John, for the lova Mike let me look!"

But the trader held him off obdurately. "I believe she's young. She's a
little woman beside the other. I believe she's good-looking! All the men
are crowding around her."

Stonor's heart set up an unaccountable beating. "Ah, it'll be the wife
of one of the surveyors," he said, with the instinct of guarding against
a disappointment.

"No, sir! If her husband was aboard the other men wouldn't be crowding
around like that."

"No single woman under forty would dare venture up here. She'd be
mobbed."

"Might be a pleasant sort of experience for her."

Doc Giddings had at last secured possession of the glasses. "She _is_
good-looking!" he cried. "Glory be, she's a peach! I can see her smile!"

The boat was soon close enough for the binoculars to be dispensed with.
To Stonor the whole picture was blurred, save for the one slender,
fragile figure clad in the well-considered dress of a lady, perfect in
detail. Of her features he was aware at first only of a beaming, wistful
smile that plucked at his heartstrings with a strange sharpness. Even at
that distance she gave out something that changed him for ever, and he
knew it. He gazed, entirely self-forgetful, with rapt eyes and parted
lips that would have caused the other men to shout with laughter--had
they not been gazing, too. The man who dwells in a world full of
charming women never knows what they may mean to a man. Let him be
exiled, and he'll find out. In that moment the smouldering uneasiness
which had made Stonor a burden to himself of late burst into flame, and
he knew what was the matter. He beheld his desire.

As the steamboat swept by below them, Stonor automatically dipped the
flag, and Gaviller touched off the old muzzle-loader, which vented a
magnificent roar for its size. The whistle replied. The _Spirit River_
waltzed gracefully around in the stream, and, coming back against the
current, pushed her nose softly into the mud of the strand. They ran
down to meet her. Hawsers were passed ashore and made fast, and the
plank run out.

Gaviller and the others went aboard, and first greetings were exchanged
on the forward deck of the steamboat. Stonor, afflicted with a sudden
diffidence, hung in the background. He wished to approach her by
degrees. Meanwhile he was taking her in. He scarcely dared look at her
directly, but his gaze thirstily drank in her outlying details, so to
speak. Her small, well-shod feet were marvellous to him; likewise her
exquisite silken ankles. He observed that she walked with stiff, short,
delicate steps, like a high-bred filly. He was enchanted with the
slight, graceful gesticulation of her gloved hand. When he finally
brought himself to look at her eyes he was not disappointed; deep blue
were they, steady, benignant, and of a heart-disquieting wistfulness.
Other items, by the way, were a little straight nose, absurd and
lovable, and lips fresh and bright as a child's. All the men were
standing about her with deferential bared heads, and the finest thing
(in Stonor's mind) was that she displayed no self-consciousness in this
trying situation; none of the cooings, the gurglings, the flirtatious
flutterings that bring the sex into disrepute. Her back was as straight
as a plucky boy's and her chin up like the same.

When Stonor saw that his turn was approaching to be introduced, he was
seized outright with panic. He slipped inside the vessel and made his
way back to where the engineer was wiping his rods. He greeted Mathews
with a solicitude that surprised the dour Scotchman. He stood there
making conversation until he heard everybody in the bow go ashore.
Afterwards he was seized with fresh panic upon realizing that delaying
the inevitable introduction could not but have the effect of singling
him out and making him more conspicuous when it came about.

John Gaviller carried Miss Pringle and the charming unknown up to the
clap-boarded villa until the humble shack attached to the English
mission could be made fit to receive them. Stonor went for a long walk
to cool his fevered blood. He was thoroughly disgusted with himself. By
his timidity, not to use a stronger word, he had lost precious hours;
indeed, now that he had missed his first opportunity, he might be
overlooked altogether. The other men would not be likely to help him out
at all. A cold chill struck to his breast at the thought. He resolved to
march right up to the guns of her eyes on his return. But he made a
score of conflicting resolutions in the course of his walk. Meanwhile he
didn't yet know whether she were Miss or Mrs., or what was her errand at
Fort Enterprise. True, he could have gone back and asked any of the men
who came on the boat, but nothing in the world could have induced him to
speak of her to anyone just then.

When he got back, it was to find the post in a fever of preparation.
John Gaviller had asked every white man to his house to dinner to meet
the ladies. It was to be a real "outside" dinner party, and there was a
sudden, frantic demand for collars, cravats and presentable foot-wear.
Nobody at the post had a dress-suit but Gaviller himself.

Of them all only Stonor had no sartorial problems; his new uniform and
his Strathcona boots polished according to regulations were all he had
and all he needed. He surveyed the finished product in his little mirror
with strong dissatisfaction. "Ornery-looking cuss," he thought. But a
man is no judge of his own looks. A disinterested observer might have
given a different verdict. A young man less well favoured by nature
would have gazed at Stonor's long-limbed ease with helpless envy. He had
that rare type of figure that never becomes encumbered with fat. The
grace of youth and the strength of maturity met there. He would make a
pattern colonel if he lived. Under the simple lines of his uniform one
apprehended the ripple and play of unclogged muscles. If all men were
like Stonor the tailor's task would be a sinecure.

As to his face, mention has already been made of the sober gaze
lightened by a suggestion of sly mirthfulness. In a company where
sprightliness was the great desideratum, Stonor, no doubt, would have
been considered slow. Men with strong reserves are necessarily a little
slow in coming into action; they are apt, too, as a decent cover for
their feelings, to affect more slowness than they feel. A woman can
rarely look at that kind of man without feeling a secret desire to rouse
him; there is so clearly something to rouse. It was Stonor's hair which
had given rise to the quaint name the native maidens had applied to him,
the "Gold-piece." It was not yellow hair, as we call it, but a shiny
light brown, and under the savage attack of his brushes the shine was
accentuated.

The guests were received in the drawing-room of Enterprise House, which
was rarely opened nowadays. It had a charming air of slightly
old-fashioned gentility, just as its dead mistress had left it, and the
rough Northerners came in with an abashed air. John Gaviller,
resplendent in the dress-suit, stood by the piano, with the little lady
on one hand and the large lady on the other, and one after another the
men marched up and made their obeisances. The actual introduction proved
to be not so terrible an ordeal as Stonor had feared--or perhaps it is
more proper to say, that it was so terrible he was numbed and felt
nothing. It was all over in a minute. "Miss Starling!" the name rang
through his consciousness like the sound of silver bells.

Face to face Stonor saw her but dimly through the mist of too much
feeling. She treated him exactly the same as the others, that is to say,
she was kind, smiling, interested, and personally inscrutable. Stonor
was glad that there was another man pressing close at his heels, for he
felt that he could stand no more just then. He was passed on to Miss
Pringle. Of this lady it need only be said that she was a large-size
clergyman's sister, a good soul, pious and kindly. She has little to do
with this tale.

In Stonor's eyes she proved to have a great merit, for she was disposed
to talk exclusively about Miss Starling. Stonor's ears were long for
that. From her talk he gathered three main facts: (a) that Miss
Starling's given name was Clare (enchanting syllable!); (b) that the two
ladies had become acquainted for the first time on the way into the
country; (c) that Miss Starling was going back with the steamboat. "Of
course!" thought Stonor, with his heart sinking slowly like a
water-logged branch.

"Isn't she plucky!" said Miss Pringle enthusiastically.

"She looks it," said Stonor, with a sidelong glance at the object of her
encomium.

"To make this trip, I mean, all by herself."

"Is it just to see the country?" asked Stonor diffidently.

"Oh, don't you know? She's on the staff of the _Winnipeg News-Herald_,
and is writing up the trip for her paper."

Stonor instantly made up his mind to spend his next leave in Winnipeg.
His relief was due in October.

John Gaviller could do things in good style when he was moved to it. The
table was gay with silver under candle-light. Down the centre were
placed great bowls of painter's brush, the rose of the prairies. And
with the smiling ladies to grace the head of the board, it was like a
glimpse of a fairer world to the men of the North. Miss Pringle was on
Gaviller's right, Miss Starling on his left. Stonor was about half-way
down the table, and fortunately on the side opposite the younger lady,
where he could gaze his fill.

She was wearing a pink evening dress trimmed with silver, that to
Stonor's unaccustomed eyes seemed like gossamer and moonshine. He was
entranced by her throat and by the appealing loveliness of her thin
arms. "How could I ever have thought a fat woman beautiful!" he asked
himself. She talked with her arms and her delightfully restless
shoulders. Stonor had heard somewhere that this was a sign of a warm
heart. For the first time he had a view of her hair; it was dark and
warm and plentiful, and most cunningly arranged.

Stonor was totally unaware of what he was eating. From others, later, he
learned of the triumph of the kitchen--and all at three hours' notice.
Fortunately for him, everybody down the table was hanging on the talk at
the head, so that no efforts in that direction were required of him. He
was free to listen and dream.

"Somewhere in the world there is a man who will be privileged some day
to sit across the table from her at every meal! Not in a crowd like
this, but at their own table in their own house. Probably quite an
ordinary fellow, too, certainly not worthy of his luck. With her eyes
for him alone, and her lovely white arms!--While other men are batching
it alone. Things are not evenly divided in this world, for sure! If that
man went to hell afterwards it wouldn't any more than square things."

In answer to a question he heard her say: "Oh, don't ask me about
Winnipeg! All cities are so ordinary and usual! I want to hear about
your country. Tell me stories about the fascinating silent places."

"Well, as it happens," said Gaviller, speaking slowly to give his words
a proper effect, "we have a first-class mystery on hand just at
present."

"Oh, tell me all about it!" she said, as he meant her to.

"A fellow, a white man, has appeared from nowhere at all, and set
himself up beside the Swan River, an unexplored stream away to the
north-west of here. There he is, and no one knows how he got there.
We've never laid eyes on him, but the Indians bring us marvellous tales
of his 'strong medicine,' meaning magic, you know. They say he first
appeared from under the great falls of the Swan River. They describe him
as a sort of embodiment of the voice of the Falls, but we suspect there
is a more natural explanation, because he sends into the post for the
food of common humans, and gets a bundle of magazines and papers by
every mail. They come addressed to Doctor Ernest Imbrie. Our poor Doc
here is as jealous as a cat of his reputation as a healer!"

Gaviller was rewarded with a general laugh, in which her silvery tones
were heard.

"Oh, tell me more about him!" she cried.

Of all the men who were watching her there was not one who observed any
change in her face. Afterwards they remembered this with wonder. Yet
there was something in her voice, her manner, the way she kept her chin
up perhaps, that caused each man to think as her essential quality:

"She's game!"

The whole story of Imbrie as they knew it was told, with all the
embroidery that had been unconsciously added during the past months.


CHAPTER IV

MORE ABOUT CLARE


Determined to make the most of their rare feminine visitation at Fort
Enterprise, on the following day the fellows got up a chicken hunt on
the river bottom east of the post, to be followed by an _al fresco_
supper at which broiled chicken was to be the _pièce de resistance_. The
ladies didn't shoot any prairie chicken, but they stimulated the hunters
with their presence, and afterwards condescended to partake of the
delicate flesh.

Stonor, though he was largely instrumental in getting the thing up, and
though he worked like a Trojan to make the affair go, still kept himself
personally in the background. He consorted with Captain Stinson and
Mathews, middle-aged individuals who were considered out of the running.
It was not so much shyness now, as an instinct of self-preservation.
"She'll be gone in a week," he told himself. "You mustn't let this thing
get too strong a hold on you, or life here after she has gone will be
hellish. You've got to put her out of your mind, my son--or just keep
her as a lovely dream not to be taken in earnest. Hardly likely, after
seeing the world, that she'd look twice at a sergeant of police!"

In his innocence Stonor adopted the best possible way of attracting her
attention to himself. More than once, when he was not looking, her eyes
sought him out curiously. In answer to her questions of the other men it
appeared that it was Stonor who had sent the natives out in advance to
drive the game past them: it was Stonor who surprised them with a cloth
already spread under a poplar tree: it was Stonor who cooked the birds
so deliciously. She was neither vain nor silly, but at the same time in
a company where every man lay down at her feet, so to speak, and begged
her to tread on him, it could not but seem peculiar to her that the
best-looking man of them all should so studiously avoid her.

Next day they all crossed the river and rode up to Simon Grampierre's
place, where the half-breeds repeated the Victoria Day games for the
amusement of the visitors. (These days are still talked of at Fort
Enterprise.) Stonor was finally induced to give an exhibition of
high-school riding as taught to the police recruits, and thereby threw
all the other events in the shade. But their plaudits overwhelmed him.
He disappeared and was seen no more that day.

Sunday followed. Mr. Pringle and his sister had got the little church in
order, and services were held there for the first time in many months.
The mission was half a mile east of the Company buildings, and after
church they walked home beside the fields of sprouting grain, in a
comfortable Sabbath peace that was much the same at Enterprise as
elsewhere in the world.

The procession travelled in the following order: First, four surveyors
marching with their heads over their shoulders, at imminent risk of an
undignified stumble in the trail; next, Clare Starling, flanked on one
side by Gaviller, on the other by Doc Giddings, with two more surveyors
on the outlying wings, peering forward to get a glimpse of her; then
Captain Stinson, Mathews, and Sergeant Stonor in a line, talking about
the state of the crops, and making believe to pay no attention to what
was going on ahead; lastly, Mr. Pringle and his sister hurrying to catch
up.

Half-way home Miss Starling, _à propos_ of nothing, suddenly stopped and
turned her head. "Sergeant Stonor," she said. He stepped to her side.
Since she clearly showed in her manner that she intended holding
converse with the policeman, there was nothing for Gaviller _et al._ to
do but proceed, which they did with none too good a grace. This left
Stonor and the girl walking together in the middle of the procession.
Stinson and Mathews, who were supposed to be out of it anyway, winked at
each other portentously.

"I wanted to ask you about that horse you rode yesterday, a beautiful
animal. What do you call him?"

"Miles Aroon," said Stonor, like a wooden man. He dreaded that she meant
to go on and enlarge on his riding tricks. In his modesty he now
regarded that he had made an awful ass of himself the day before. But
she stuck to horse-flesh.

"He's a beauty! Would he let me ride him?"

"Oh, yes! He has no bad tricks. I broke him myself. But of course he
knows nothing of side-saddles."

"I ride astride."

"I believe we're all going for a twilight ride to-night. I'll bring him
for you."

As a result of this Stonor's praiseworthy resolutions to keep out of
harm's way were much weakened. Indeed, late that night in his little
room in quarters he gave himself up to the most outrageous dreams of a
possible future happiness. Stonor was quite unversed in the ways of
modern ladies; all his information on the subject had been gleaned from
romances, which, as everybody knows, are always behind the times in such
matters, and it is possible that he banked too much on the simple fact
of her singling him out on the walk home.

There was a great obstacle in his way; the force sets its face against
matrimony during the term of service. Stonor in his single-mindedness
never thought that there were other careers. "I shall have to get a
commission," he thought. "An inspectorship is little enough to offer
her. But what an ornament she'd be to a post! And she'd love the life;
she loves horses. But Lord! it's difficult nowadays, with nothing going
on. If an Indian war would only break out!"--He was quite ready to
sacrifice the unfortunate red race.

On Monday night he was again bidden to dine at Enterprise House. As
Gaviller since the day before had been no more than decently polite,
Stonor ventured to hope that the invitation might have been instigated
by her. At any rate he was placed by her side this time, where he sat a
little dizzy with happiness, and totally oblivious to food. At the same
time it should be understood that the young lady had no veiled glances
or hidden meanings for him alone; she treated him, as she did all the
others, to perfect candour.

After dinner they had music in the drawing-room. The piano was
grotesquely out of tune, but what cared they for that? She touched it
and their souls were drawn out of their bodies. Probably the performer
suffered, but she played on with a smile. They listened entranced until
darkness fell, and when it is dark at Enterprise in June it is high time
to go to bed.

They all accompanied Stonor to the door. The long-drawn summer dusk of
the North is an ever fresh wonder to newcomers. At sight of the
exquisite half-light and the stars an exclamation of pleasure broke from
Clare.

"Much too fine a night to go to bed!" she cried. "Sergeant Stonor, take
me out to the bench beside the flagstaff for a few minutes."

As they sat down she said: "Don't you want to smoke?"

"Don't feel the need of it," he said. His voice was husky with feeling.
Would a man want to smoke in Paradise?

By glancing down and sideways he could take her in as far up as her neck
without appearing to stare rudely. She was sitting with her feet crossed
and her hands in her lap like a well-bred little girl. When he dared
glance at her eyes he saw that there was no consciousness of him there.
They were regarding something very far away. In the dusk the wistfulness
which hid behind a smile in daylight looked forth fully and broodingly.

Yet when she spoke the matter was ordinary enough. "All the men here
tell me about the mysterious stranger who lives on the Swan River. They
can't keep away from the subject. And the funny part of it is, they all
seem to be angry at him. Yet they know nothing of him. Why is that?"

"It means nothing," said Stonor, smiling. "You see, all the men pride
themselves on knowing every little thing that happens in the country.
It's all they have to talk about. In a way the whole country is like a
village. Well, it's only because this man has succeeded in defying their
curiosity that they're sore. It's a joke!"

"They tell me that you stand up for him," she said, with a peculiar
warmth in her voice.

"Oh, just to make the argument interesting," said Stonor lightly.

"Is that all?" she said, chilled.

"No, to tell the truth, I was attracted to the man from the first," he
said more honestly. "By what the Indians said about his healing the sick
and so on. And they said he was young. I have no friend of my own age up
here--I mean no real friend. So I thought--well, I would like to know
him."

"I like that," she said simply.

There was a silence.

"Why don't you--sometime--go to him?" she said, with what seemed almost
like a breathless air.

"I am going," said Stonor simply. "I received permission in the last
mail. The government wants me to look over the Kakisa Indians to see if
they are ready for a treaty. The policy is to leave the Indians alone as
long as they are able to maintain themselves under natural conditions.
But as soon as they need help the government takes charge; limits them
to a reservation; pays an annuity, furnishes medical attention, and so
on. This is called taking treaty. The Kakisas are one of the last wild
tribes left."

She seemed scarcely to hear him. "When are you going?" she asked with
the same air of breathlessness.

"As soon as the steamboat goes back."

"How far is it to Swan River?"

"Something under a hundred and fifty miles. Three days' hard riding or
four days' easy."

"And how far down to the great falls?"

"Accounts differ. From the known features of the map I should say about
two hundred miles. They say the river's as crooked as a ram's horn."

There was another silence. She was busy with her own thoughts, and
Stonor was content not to talk if he might look at her.

With her next speech she seemed to strike off at a tangent. She spoke
with a lightness that appeared to conceal a hint of pain. "They say the
mounted police are the guides, philosophers and friends of the people up
North. They say you have to do everything, from feeding babies to
reading the burial service."

"I'm afraid there's a good bit of romancing about the police," said
Stonor modestly.

"But they do make good friends, don't they?" she insisted.

"I hope so."

She gave him the full of her deep, starry eyes. It was not an
intoxicating glance, but one that moved him to the depths. "Will you be
my friend?" she asked simply.

Poor Stonor! With too great a need for speech, speech itself was
foundered. No words ever coined seemed strong enough to carry the weight
of his desire to assure her. He could only look at her, imploring her to
believe in him. In the end only two little words came; to him
wretchedly inadequate; but it is doubtful if they could have been
bettered.

"Try me!"

His look satisfied her. She lowered her eyes. The height of emotion was
too great to be maintained. She cast round in her mind for something to
let them down. "How far to the north the sunset glow is now."

Stonor understood. He answered in the same tone: "At this season it
doesn't fade out all night. The sun is such a little way below the rim
there, that the light just travels around the northern horizon, and
becomes the dawn in a little while."

For a while they talked of indifferent matters.

By and by she said casually: "When you go out to Swan River, take me
with you."

He thought she was joking. "I say, that would be a lark!"

She laughed a little nervously.

He tried to keep it up, though his heart set up a furious beating at the
bare idea of such a trip. "Can you bake bannock?"

"I can make good biscuits."

"What would we do for a chaperon?"

"Nobody has chaperons nowadays."

"You don't know what a moral community this is!"

"I meant it," she said suddenly, in a tone there was no mistaking.

All his jokes deserted him, and left him trembling a little. Indeed he
was scandalized, too, being less advanced, probably, in his ideas than
she. "It's--it's impossible!" he stammered at last.

"Why?" she asked calmly.

He could not give the real reason, of course. "To take the trail, you!
To ride all day and sleep on the hard ground! And the river trip, an
unknown river with Heaven knows what rapids and other difficulties! A
fragile little thing like you!"

Opposition stimulated her. "What you call my fragility is more apparent
than real," she said with spirit. "As a matter of fact I have more
endurance than most big women. I have less to carry. I am accustomed to
living and travelling in the open. I can ride all day--or walk if need
be."

"It's impossible!" he repeated. It was the policeman who spoke. The
man's blood was leaping, and his imagination painting the most alluring
pictures. How often on his lonely journeys had he not dreamed of the
wild delights of such companionship!

"What is your real reason?" she asked.

"Well, how could you go--with me, you know?" he said, blushing into the
dusk.

"I'm not afraid," she answered instantly. "Anyway, that's my look-out,
isn't it?"

"No," he said, "I have to think of it. The responsibility would be
mine." Here the man broke through--"Oh, I talk like a prig!" he cried.
"But don't you see, I'm not up here on my own. I can't do what I would
like. A policeman has got to be proper, hasn't he?"

She smiled at his _naïveté_. "But if I have business out there?"

This sounded heartless to Stonor. It was the first and last time that he
ventured to criticize her. "Oh," he objected, "I don't know what reasons
the poor fellow has for burying himself--they must be good reasons, for
it's no joke to live alone! It doesn't seem quite fair, does it, to dig
him out and write him up in the papers?"

"Oh, what must you think of me!" she murmured in a quick, hurt tone.

He saw that he had made a mistake. "I--I beg your pardon," he stammered
contritely. "I thought that was what you meant by business."

"I'm not a reporter," she said.

"But they told me----"

"Yes, I know, I lied. I'm not apologizing for that. It was necessary to
lie to protect myself from vulgar curiosity."

He looked his question.

She was not quite ready to answer it yet. "Suppose I had the best of
reasons for going," she said, hurriedly, "a reason that Mrs. Grundy
would approve of; it would be your duty as a policeman, wouldn't it, to
help me?"

"Yes--but----?"

She turned imploring eyes on him, and unconsciously clasped her hands.
"I'm sure you're generous and steadfast," she said quickly. "I can trust
you, can't I, not to give me away? The gossip, the curious stares--it
would be more than I could bear! Promise me, whatever you may think of
it all, to respect my secret."

"I promise," he said a little stiffly. It hurt him that he was required
to protest his good faith. "The first thing we learn in the force is to
keep our mouths shut."

"Ah, now you're offended with me because I made you promise!"

"It doesn't matter. It's over now. What is your reason for wanting to go
out to Swan River?"

She answered low: "I am Ernest Imbrie's wife."

"Oh!" said Stonor in a flat tone. A sick disappointment filled him--yet
in the back of his mind he had expected something of the kind. An inner
voice whispered to him: "Not for you! It was too much to hope for!"

Presently she went on: "I injured him cruelly. That's why he buried
himself so far away."

Stonor turned horror-stricken eyes on her.

"Oh, not that," she said proudly and indifferently. "The injury I did
him was to his spirit; that is worse." Stonor turned hot for his
momentary suspicion.

"I can repair it by going to him," she went on. "I _must_ go to him. I
can never know peace until I have tried to make up to him a little of
what I have made him suffer."

She paused to give Stonor a chance to speak--but he was dumb.

Naturally she misunderstood. "Isn't that enough?" she cried painfully.
"I have told you the essential truth. Must I go into particulars? I
can't bear to speak of these things!"

"No! No!" he said, horrified. "It's not that. I don't want to hear any
more."

"Then you'll help me?"

"I will take you to him."

She began to cry in a pitiful shaken way.

"Ah, don't!" murmured Stonor. "I can't stand seeing you."

"It's--just from relief," she whispered.... "I've been under a
strain.... I think I should have gone out of my mind--if I had been
prevented from expiating the wrong I did.... I wish I could tell
you--he's the bravest man in the world, I think--and the most
unhappy!... And I heaped unhappiness on his head!"

This was hard for Stonor to listen to, but it was so obviously a relief
to her to speak, that he made no attempt to stop her.

She soon quieted down. "I shan't try to thank you," she said. "I'll show
you."

Stonor foresaw that the proposed journey would be attended with
difficulties.

"Would it be possible," she asked meekly, "for you to plan to leave a
day in advance of the steamboat, and say nothing about taking me?"

"You mean for us to leave the post secretly?" he said, a little aghast.

"When the truth came out it would be all right," she urged. "And it
would save me from becoming the object of general talk and commiseration
here. Why, if Mr. Gaviller knew in advance, he'd probably insist on
sending a regular expedition."

"Perhaps he would."

"And they'd all try to dissuade me. I'd have to talk them over one by
one--I haven't the strength of mind left for that. They'd say I ought to
wait here and send for him----"

"Well, wouldn't that be better?"

"No! No! Not the same thing at all. I doubt if he'd come. And what would
I be doing here--waiting--without news. I couldn't endure it. I must go
to him."

Stonor thought hard. Youth was pulling him one way, and his sense of
responsibility the other. Moreover, this kind of case was not provided
for in regulations. Finally he said:

"Couldn't you announce your intention of remaining over for one trip of
the steamboat? Miss Pringle would be glad to have you, I'm sure."

"I could do that. But you're not going to delay the start?"

"We can leave the day after the boat goes, as planned. But if we were
missed before the boat left she'd carry out some great scandalous tale
that we might never be able to correct. For if scandal gets a big enough
start you can never overtake it."

"You are right, of course. I never thought of that."

"Then I see no objection to leaving the post secretly, provided you are
willing to tell one reliable person in advance--say Pringle or his
sister, of our intention. You see we must leave someone behind us to
still the storm of gossip that will be let loose."

"You think of everything!"


CHAPTER V

THE FIRST STAGE


For two days Stonor went about his preparations with an air of dogged
determination. It seemed to him that all the light had gone out of his
life, and hope was dead. He told himself that the proposed trip could
not be otherwise than the stiffest kind of an ordeal to a man in his
position, an ordeal calling for well-nigh superhuman self-control. How
gladly would he have given it up, had he not given his word.

And then on the third day his spirits unaccountably began to rise. As a
matter of fact youthful spirits must seek their natural level no less
surely than water, but Stonor was angry with himself, accusing himself
of lightheadedness, inconstancy and what not. His spirits continued to
rise just the same. There was a delight in providing everything possible
for her comfort. The mere thought of going away with her, under any
circumstances whatsoever, made his heart sing.

John Gaviller was astonished by the size and variety of his requisition
for supplies. Besides the customary rations Stonor included all the
luxuries the store afforded: viz., tinned fish, vegetables and fruit;
condensed milk, marmalade and cocoa. And in quantities double what he
would ordinarily have taken.

"Getting luxurious in your old age, aren't you?" said the trader.

"Oh, I'm tired of an unrelieved diet of bannock and beans," said Stonor,
with a carelessness so apparent, they ought to have been warned; but of
course they never dreamed of anything so preposterous as the truth.

Stonor had two horses of his own. He engaged three more from Simon
Grampierre, horses that he knew, and from Tole Grampierre purchased a
fine rabbit-skin robe for Clare's bed on the trail. Tole, who had
secretly hoped to be taken on this expedition, was much disappointed
when no invitation was forthcoming. Stonor arranged with Tole to ride to
meet him with additional supplies on the date when he might expect to be
returning. Tole was to leave Enterprise on July 12th.

From Father Goussard Stonor borrowed a mosquito tent on the plea that
his own was torn. He smuggled a folding camp-cot into his outfit. Clare
fortunately had brought suitable clothes for the most part. How well
Stonor was to know that little suit cut like a boy's with Norfolk jacket
and divided skirt! What additional articles she needed Miss Pringle
bought at the store for a mythical destitute Indian boy. They had soon
found it necessary to take Miss Pringle into their confidence. She went
about charged with the secret like a soda-water-bottle with the cork
wired down.

Beside Gordon Strange, the only person around the post who could speak
the Kakisa tongue was a woman, Mary Moosa, herself a Kakisa who had
married a Cree. Her husband was a deck-hand on the steamboat. Stonor had
already engaged Mary Moosa to take this trip with him as interpreter,
and Mary, who had her own notions of propriety, had stipulated that her
oldest boy be taken along. Mary herself promised to be a godsend on the
trip; for she was just the comfortable dependable soul to look after
Clare, but the boy now became a problem, for the dug-out that Stonor
designed to use on the Swan River would only carry three persons
comfortably, with the necessary outfit. Yet Stonor could not speak to
Mary in advance about leaving the boy at home.

Such was Stonor's assiduity that everything was ready for the start two
days ahead of time--an unheard-of thing up North. Everybody at the post
gave up a morning to seeing the steamboat off. She carried with her a
report from Stonor to his inspector, telling of the proposed trip. Clare
was among those who waved to her from the shore. No surprise had been
occasioned by the announcement of her decision to remain over a trip.
Gaviller was already planning further entertainments. She had by this
time moved down to the Mission with the Pringles.

On the afternoon of that day Stonor transported his goods and swam his
horses across the river, to be ready for the start from the other side.
Mary Moosa and her son met him there, and camped beside the outfit for
the night. Stonor returned to Enterprise House for dinner. He had tried
to get out of it, knowing that the fact of this dinner would rankle in
the trader's breast afterwards, but Gaviller had insisted on giving him
a send-off. It was not a happy affair, for three of the guests were
wretchedly nervous. They could not help but see in their mind's eye
Gaviller's expression of indignant astonishment when the news should be
brought him next day.

Gaviller further insisted on taking everybody down to the shore to see
Stonor off, thus obliging the trooper to make an extra trip across the
river and back in order to maintain the fiction. Stonor slept in his own
camp for an hour, and then rowed down-stream and across, to land in
front of the Mission.

It is never perfectly dark at this season, and already day was beginning
to break. Stonor climbed the bank, and showed himself at the top,
knowing that they would be on the watch from within. The little grey log
mission-house crouched in its neglected garden behind a fence of broken
palings. But a touch of regeneration was already visible in Miss
Pringle's geranium slips in the windows, and her bits of white curtain.

The door was silently opened, and the two women kissed in the entry.
Stonor was never to forget that picture in the still grey light. Clare,
clad in the little Norfolk suit and the boy's stout boots and hat,
crossed the yard with the little mincing steps so characteristic of her,
and therefore so charming to the man who waited. Her face was pale, her
eyes bright. Miss Pringle stood in the doorway, massive and tearful, a
hand pressed to her mouth.

Stonor's breast received a surprising wrench. "It's like an elopement!"
he thought. "Ah, if she _were_ coming to me!"

She smiled at him without speaking, and handed over her bag. Stonor
closed the gate softly, and they made their way down the bank, and got
in the boat.

It was a good, stiff pull back against the current. They spoke little.
Clare studied his grim face with some concern.

"Regrets?" she asked.

He rested on his oars for a moment and his face softened. He smiled at
her frankly--and ruefully. "No regrets," he said, "but a certain amount
of anxiety."

His glance conveyed a good deal more than that--in spite of him. "I love
you with all my heart. Of course I clearly understand that you have
nothing for me. I am prepared to see this thing through, no matter what
the end means to me.--But be merciful!" All this was in his look.
Whether she got it or not, no man could have told. She looked away and
dabbled her hand in the water.

Mary Moosa was a self-respecting squaw who lived in a house with tables
and chairs and went to church and washed her children with soap. In her
plain black cotton dress, the skirt cut very full to allow her to ride
astride, her new moccasins and her black straw hat she made a figure of
matronly tidiness if not of beauty. She was cooking when they arrived.
Her inward astonishment, at beholding Stonor returning with the white
girl who had created such a sensation at the post, can be guessed; but,
true to her traditions, she betrayed nothing of it to the whites. After
a single glance in their direction her gaze returned to the frying-pan.

It was Stonor who was put out of countenance, "Miss Starling is going
with us," he said, with a heavy scowl.

Mary made no comment on the situation, but continued gravely frying the
flap-jacks to a delicate golden shade. Her son, aged about fourteen, who
had less command over his countenance, stood in the background staring,
with open eyes and mouth. It was a trying moment for Stonor and Clare.
They discussed the prospects of a good day for the journey in rather
strained voices.

However, it proved that Mary's silence had neither an unfriendly nor a
censorious intention. She merely required time to get her breath, so to
speak. She transferred the flap-jacks from the pan to a plate, and,
putting them in the ashes to keep hot, arose and came to Clare with
extended hand.

"How," she said, as she had been taught was manners to all.

Clare took her hand with a right good will.

It suddenly occurred to Mary that there was now no occasion for the boy
to accompany them. Mary was a woman of few words. "You go home," she
said calmly.

The boy broke into a howl of grief, proving that the delights of the
road are much the same to boys, red or white.

"Poor little fellow!" said Clare.

"Too young for travel," said Mary, impassively. "More trouble than
help."

Clare wished to intercede for him with Stonor, but the trooper shook his
head.

"No room in the dug-out," he said.

Toma Moosa departed along the shore with his arm over his eyes.

Mary was as good as a man on a trip. While Stonor and Clare ate she
packed the horses, and Stonor had only to throw the hitch and draw it
taut. Clare watched this operation with interest.

"They swell up just like babies when you're putting their bands on," she
remarked.

They were on the move shortly after sunrise, that is to say half-past
three. As they rode away over the flat, each took a last look at the
buildings of the post across the river, gilded by the horizontal rays,
each wondering privately what fortune had in store for them before they
should see the spot again.

They passed the last little shack and the last patch of grain before
anybody was astir. When they rode out into the open country everybody's
spirits rose. There is nothing like taking the trail to lift up the
heart--and on a June morning in the north! Troubles, heart-aches and
anxieties were left behind with the houses. Even Mary Moosa beamed in
her inscrutable way.

Stonor experienced a fresh access of confidence, and proceeded to
deceive himself all over again. "I'm cured!" he thought. "There's
nothing to mope about. She's my friend. Anything else is out of the
question, and I will not think of it again. We'll just be good pals like
two fellows. You can be a pal with the right kind of girl, and she is
that.--But better than any fellow, she's so damn good to look at!"

It was a lovely park-like country with graceful, white-stemmed poplars
standing about on the sward, and dark spruces in the hollows. The grass
was starred with flowers. When Nature sets out to make a park her style
has a charming abandon that no landscape-gardener can ever hope to
capture. After they mounted the low bench the country rolled shallowly,
flat in the prospect, with a single, long, low eminence, blue athwart
the horizon ahead.

"That's the divide between the Spirit and the Swan," said Stonor. "We'll
cross it to-morrow. From here it looks like quite a mountain, but the
ascent is so gradual we won't know we're over it until we see the water
flowing the other way."

Clare rode Miles Aroon, Stonor's sorrel gelding, and Stonor rode the
other police horse, a fine dark bay. These two animals fretted a good
deal at the necessity of accommodating their pace to the humble pack
animals. These latter had a stolid inscrutable look like their native
masters. One in particular looked so respectable and matter-of-fact that
Clare promptly christened her Lizzie.

Lizzie proved to be a horse of a strong, bourgeois character. If her
pack was not adjusted exactly to her liking, she calmly sat on her
haunches in the trail until it was fixed. Furthermore, she insisted on
bringing up the rear of the cavalcade. If she was put in the middle, she
simply fell out until the others had passed. In her chosen place she
proceeded to fall asleep, with her head hanging ever lower and feet
dragging, while the others went on. Stonor, who knew the horse, let her
have her way. There was no danger of losing her. When she awoke and
found herself alone, she would come tearing down the trail, screaming
for her beloved companions.

Stonor rode at the head of his little company with a leg athwart his
saddle, so he could hold converse with Clare behind.

Pointing to the trail stretching ahead of them like an endless brown
ribbon over prairie and through bush, he said: "I suppose trails are the
oldest things in America. Once thoroughly made they can never be
effaced--except by the plough. You see, they never can run quite
straight, though the country may be as flat as your hand, but the width
never varies; three and a half hands."

Travelling with horses is not all picnicking. Three times a day they
have to be unpacked and turned out to _graze_, and three times _caught_
and _packed again_; this in addition to the regular camp routine of
pitching tents, rustling wood, cooking, etc. Clare announced her
intention of taking over the cooking, but she found that baking biscuits
over an open fire in a drizzle of rain, offered a new set of problems to
the civilized cook, and Mary had to come to her rescue.

During this, their first spell by the trail, Stonor was highly amused to
watch Clare's way with Mary. She simply ignored Mary's discouraging
red-skin stolidity, and assumed that they were sisters under their
skins. She pretended that it was necessary for them to take sides
against Stonor in order to keep the man in his place. It was not long
before Mary was grinning broadly. Finally at some low-voiced sally of
Clare's she laughed outright. Stonor had never heard her laugh before.
Thereafter she was Clare's. Realizing that the wonderful white girl
really wished to make friends, Mary offered her a doglike devotion that
never faltered throughout the difficult days that followed.

They slept throughout the middle part of the day, and later, the sky
clearing, they rode until near sun-down in order to make a good
water-hole that Mary knew of. When they had supped and made all snug for
the night, Stonor let fall the piece of information that Mary was well
known as a teller of tales at the Post. Clare gave her no peace then
till she consented to tell a story. They sat in a row behind Stonor's
little mosquito-bar, for the insects were abroad, with the fire burning
before them, and Mary began.

"I tell you now how the people got the first medicine-pipe. This story
is about Thunder. Thunder is everywhere. He roar in the mountains, he
shout far out on the prairie. He strike the high rocks and they fall. He
hit a tree and split it like with a big axe. He strike people and they
die. He is bad. He like to strike down the tall things that stand. He is
ver' powerful. He is the most strong one. Sometimes he steals women.

"Long tam ago, almost in the beginning, a man and his wife sit in their
lodge when Thunder come and strike them. The man was not killed. At
first he is lak dead, but bam-bye he rise up again and look around him.
His wife not there. He say: 'Oh well, she gone to get wood or water,'
and he sit awhile. But when the sun had gone under, he go out and ask
the people where she go. Nobody see her. He look all over camp, but not
find her. Then he know Thunder steal her, and he go out alone on the
hills and mak' sorrow.

"When morning come he get up and go far away, and he ask all the animals
he meet where Thunder live. They laugh and not tell him. Wolf say: 'W'at
you think! We want go look for the one we fear? He is our danger. From
others we can run away. From him there is no running. He strike and
there we lie! Turn back! Go home! Do not look for the place of the
feared one.'

"But the man travel on. Travel very far. Now he come to a lodge, a funny
lodge, all made of stone. Here live the raven chief. The man go in.

"Raven chief say: 'Welcome, friend. Sit down. Sit down.' And food was
put before him.

"When he finish eating, Raven say: 'Why you come here?'

"Man say: 'Thunder steal my wife away. I want find his place so I get
her back.'

"Raven say: 'I think you be too scare to go in the lodge of that feared
one. It is close by here. His lodge is made of stone like this, and
hanging up inside are eyes--all the eyes of those he kill or steal away.
He take out their eyes and hang them in his lodge. Now, will you enter?'

"Man say: 'No. I am afraid. What man could look on such things of fear
and live?'

"Raven say: 'No common man can. There is only one old Thunder fears.
There is only one he cannot kill. It is I, the Raven. Now I will give
you medicine and he can't harm you. You go enter there, and look among
those eyes for your wife's eyes, and if you find them, tell that Thunder
why you come, and make him give them to you. Here now is a raven's wing.
You point it to him, and he jomp back quick. But if that is not strong
enough, take this. It is an arrow, and the stick is made of elk-horn.
Take it, I say, and shoot it through his lodge.'

"Man say: 'Why make a fool of me? My heart is sad. I am crying.' And he
cover up his head with his blanket and cry.

"Raven say: 'Wah! You do not believe me! Come out, come out, and I make
you believe!' When they stand outside Raven ask: 'Is the home of your
people far?'

"Man say: 'Very far!'

"'How many days' journey?'

"Man say: 'My heart is sad. I not count the days. The berries grow and
get ripe since I leave my lodge.'

"Raven say: 'Can you see your camp from here?'

"Man think that is foolish question and say nothing.

"Then the Raven rub some medicine on his eyes and say: 'Look!' The man
look and see his own camp. It was close. He see the people. He see the
smoke rising from the lodges. And at that wonderful thing the man
believe in the Raven's medicine.

"Then Raven say: 'Now take the wing and the arrow and go get your
wife.'

"So the man take those things and go to Thunder's lodge. He go in and
sit down by the door. Thunder sit inside and look at him with eyes of
lightning. But the man look up and see those many pairs of eyes hanging
up. And the eyes of his wife look at him, and he know them among all
those others.

"Thunder ask in a voice that shake the ground: 'Why you come here?'

"Man say: 'I looking for my wife that you steal from me. There hang her
eyes!'

"Thunder say: 'No man can enter my lodge and live!' He get up to strike
him. But the man point the raven's wing at him, and Thunder fall back on
his bed and shiver. But soon he is better, and get up again. Then the
man put the elk-horn arrow to his bow, and shoot it through the lodge of
rock. Right through that lodge of rock it make a crooked hole and let
the sunlight in.

"Thunder cry out: 'Stop! You are stronger! You have the great medicine.
You can have your wife. Take down her eyes.' So the man cut the string
that held them, and right away his wife stand beside him.

"Thunder say: 'Now you know me. I have great power. I live here in
summer, but when winter come I go far south where there is no winter.
Here is my pipe. It is medicine. Take it and keep it. When I come in
spring you fill and light this pipe, and you pray to me, you and all the
people. Because I bring the rain which make the berries big and ripe. I
bring the rain which make all things grow. So you must pray to me, you
and all the people.'

"That is how the people got the first medicine-pipe. It was long ago."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary went to her own little tent, and presently they heard her peaceful
snoring. The sound had the effect of giving body to the immensity of
stillness that surrounded them and held them. Sitting beside Clare,
looking out at the fire through the netting, Stonor felt his safeguards
slipping fast. There they were, the two of them, to all intents alone in
the world! How natural for them to draw close, and, while her head
dropped on his shoulder, for his arm to slip around her slender form and
hold her tight! He trembled a little, and his mouth went dry. If he had
been visiting her he could have got out, but he couldn't put her out.
There was nothing to do but sit tight and fight the thing. Moistening
his lips, he said:

"It's been a good day on the whole."

"Ah, splendid!" she said. "If one could only hit the trail for ever
without being obliged to arrive at a destination, and take up the
burdens of a stationary life!"

Stonor pondered on this answer. It sounded almost as if she dreaded
coming to the end of her journey.

Out of the breathless dusk came a long-drawn and inexpressibly mournful
ululation. Clare involuntarily drew a little closer to Stonor. Ah, but
it was hard to keep from seizing her then!

"Wolves?" she asked in an awe-struck tone.

He shook his head. "Only the wolf's little mongrel brother, coyote," he
said.

"All my travelling has been done in the mountains," she explained. She
shivered delicately. "The first night out is always a little terrible,
isn't it?"

"You're not afraid?" he asked anxiously.

"Not exactly afraid. Just a little quivery."

She got up, and he held up the mosquito-netting for her to pass. Outside
they instinctively lifted up their faces to the pale stars.

"It's safer and cleaner than a city," said Stonor simply.

"I know." She still lingered for a moment. "What's your name?" she asked
abruptly.

"Martin."

"Good-night, Martin."

"Good-night!"

Later, rolling on his hard bed, he thought: "She might have given me her
hand when she said it.--No, you fool! She did right not to! You've got
to get a grip on yourself. This is only the first day! If you begin like
this----!"


CHAPTER VI

THE KAKISAS


On the afternoon of the fourth day they suddenly issued out of big
timber to find themselves at the edge of a plateau overlooking a shallow
green valley, bare of trees in this place, and bisected by a
smoothly-flowing brown river bordered with willows. The flat contained
an Indian village.

"Here we are!" said Stonor, reining up.

"The unexplored river!" cried Clare. "How exciting! But how pretty and
peaceful it looks, just like an ordinary river. I suppose it doesn't
realize it's unexplored."

On the other side there was a bold point with a picturesque clump of
pines shading a number of the odd little gabled structures with which
the Indians cover the graves of their dead. On the nearer side from off
to left appeared a smaller stream which wound across the meadow and
emptied into the Swan. At intervals during the day their trail had
bordered this little river, which Clare had christened the Meander.

The tepees of the Indian village were strung along its banks, and the
stream itself was filled with canoes. On a grassy mound to the right
stood a little log shack which had a curiously impertinent look there in
the midst of Nature untouched. On the other hand the tepees sprang from
the ground as naturally as trees.

Their coming naturally had the effect of a thunderclap on the village.
They had scarcely shown themselves from among the trees when their
presence was discovered. A chorus of sharp cries was raised, and there
was much aimless running about like ants when the hill is disturbed. The
cries did not suggest a welcome, but excitement purely. Men, women, and
children gathered in a dense little crowd beside the trail where they
must pass. None wished to put themselves forward. Those who lived on the
other side of the little stream paddled frantically across to be in time
for a close view.

As they approached, absolute silence fell on the Indians, the silence of
breathless excitement. The red-coat they had heard of, and in a general
way they knew what he signified; but a white woman to them was as
fabulous a creature as a mermaid or a hamadryad. Their eyes were saved
for Clare. They fixed on her as hard, bright, and unwinking as jet
buttons. They conveyed nothing but an animal curiosity. Clare nodded and
smiled to them in her own way, but no muscle of any face relaxed.

"Their manners will bear improving," muttered Stonor.

"Oh, give them a chance," said Clare. "We've dropped on them out of a
clear sky."

Some of the tepees were still made of tanned skins decorated with rude
pictures; they saw bows and arrows and bark-canoes, things which have
almost passed from America. The dress of the inhabitants was less
picturesque; some of the older men still wore their picturesque blanket
capotes, but the younger were clad in machine-made shirts and pants from
the store, and the women in cotton dresses. They were a pure race, and
as such presented for the most part fine, characteristic faces; but in
body they were undersized and weedy, showing that their stock was
running out.

Stonor led the way across the flat and up a grassy rise to the little
shack that has been mentioned. It had been built for the Company clerk
who had formerly traded with the Kakisas, and Stonor designed it to
accommodate Clare for the night. They dismounted at the door. The
Indians followed them to within a distance of ten paces, where they
squatted on their heels or stood still, staring immovably. Stonor
resented their curiosity. Good manners are much the same the world over,
and a self-respecting people would not have acted so, he told himself.
None offered to stir hand or foot to assist them to unpack.

Stonor somewhat haughtily desired the head man to show himself. When one
stepped forward, he received him sitting in magisterial state on a box
at the door. Personally the most modest of men, he felt for the moment
that Authority had to be upheld in him. So the Indian was required to
stand.

His name was Ahchoogah (as near as a white man could get it) and he was
about forty years old. Though small and slight like all the Kakisas, he
had a comely face that somehow suggested race. He was better dressed
than the majority, in expensive "moleskin" trousers from the store, a
clean blue gingham shirt, a gaudy red sash, and an antique
gold-embroidered waistcoat that had originated Heaven knows where. On
his feet were fine white moccasins lavishly embroidered in coloured
silks.

"How," he said, the one universal English word. He added a more
elaborate greeting in his own tongue.

Mary translated. "Ahchoogah say he glad to see the red-coat, like he
glad to see the river run again after the winter. Where the red-coats
come there is peace and good feeling among all. No man does bad to
another man. Ahchoogah hope the red-coat come often to Swan River."

Stonor watched the man's face while he was speaking, and apprehended
hostility behind the smooth words. He was at a loss to account for it,
for the police are accustomed to being well received. "There's been some
bad influence at work here," he thought.

He said grimly to Mary: "Tell him that I hear his good words, but I do
not see from the faces of his people that we are welcome here."

This was repeated to Ahchoogah, who turned and objurgated his people
with every appearance of anger.

"What's he saying to them?" Stonor quietly asked Mary.

"Call bad names," said Mary. "Swear Kakisa swears. Tell them go back to
the tepees and not look like they never saw nothing before."

And sure enough the surrounding circle broke up and slunk away.

Ahchoogah turned a bland face back to the policeman, and through Mary
politely enquired what had brought him to Swan River.

"I will tell you," said Stonor. "I come bearing a message from the
mighty White Father across the great water to his Kakisa children. The
White Father sends a greeting and desires to know if it is the wish of
the Kakisas to take treaty like the Crees, the Beavers, and other
peoples to the East. If it is so, I will send word, and my officers and
the doctor will come next summer with the papers to be signed."

Ahchoogah replied in diplomatic language that so far as his particular
Kakisas were concerned they thought themselves better off as they were.
They had plenty to eat most years, and they didn't want to give up the
right to come and go as they chose. No bad white men coveted their lands
as yet, and they needed no protection from them. However, he would send
messengers to his brothers up and down the river, and all would be
guided by the wishes of the greatest number.

At the beginning of this talk Clare had gone inside to escape the
piercing stares. While he talked, Ahchoogah was continually trying to
peer around Stonor to get a glimpse of her. When the diplomatic
formalities were over, he said (according to Mary):

"I not know you got white wife. Nobody tell me that. She is very
pretty."

"Tell him she is not my wife," said Stonor, with a portentous scowl to
hide his blushes. "Tell him--Oh, the devil! he wouldn't understand. Tell
him her name is Miss Clare Starling."

"What she come for?" Ahchoogah coolly asked.

"Tell him she travels to please herself," said Stonor, letting him make
what he would of that.

"Ahchoogah say he want shake her by the hand."

Stonor was in a quandary. The thought of the grimy hand touching Clare's
was detestable yet, if the request had been made in innocence it seemed
churlish to object. Clare, who overheard, settled the question for him,
by coming out and offering her hand to the Indian with a smile.

To Mary she said: "Tell him to tell the women of his people that the
white woman wishes to be their sister."

Ahchoogah stared at her with a queer mixture of feelings. He was much
taken aback by her outspoken, unafraid air. He had expected to despise
her, as he had been taught to despise all women, but somehow she struck
respect into his soul. He resented it: he had taken pleasure in the
prospect of despising something white.

Clare went back into the shack. Ahchoogah, with a shrug, dismissed her
from his mind. He spoke again with his courteous air; meanwhile (or at
any rate so Stonor thought) his black eyes glittered with hostility.

Mary translated: "Ahchoogah say all very glad you come. He say to-morrow
night he going to give big tea-dance. He send for the Swan Lake people
to come. A man will ride all night to bring them in time. He say it will
be a big time."

"Say we thank him for the big time just as if we had had it," said
Stonor, not to be outdone in politeness. "But we must go on down the
river to-morrow morning."

When this was translated to Ahchoogah, he lost his self-possession for a
moment, and scowled blackly at Stonor. Quickly recovering himself, he
began suavely to protest.

"Ahchoogah say the messenger of the Great White Father mustn't go up and
down the river to the Kakisas and ask like a poor man for them to take
treaty. Let him stay here, and let the poor Kakisas come to him and make
respect."

"My instructions are to visit the people where they live," said Stonor
curtly. "I shall want the dug-out that the Company man left here last
Spring."

Ahchoogah scowled again. Mary translated: "Ahchoogah say, why you want
heavy dug-out when he got plenty nice light bark-canoes."

"I can't use bark-canoes in the rapids."

A startled look shot out of the Indian's eyes. Mary translated: "What
for you want go down rapids? No Kakisas live below the rapids."

"I'm going to visit the white man at the Great Falls."

When Ahchoogah got this he bent the look of a pure savage on Stonor,
walled and inscrutable. He sullenly muttered something that Mary
repeated as: "No can go."

"Why not?"

"Nobody ever go down there."

"Well, somebody's got to be the first to go."

"Rapids down there no boat can pass."

"The white man came up to the Indians when they were sick last fall. If
he can come up I can go down."

"He got plenty strong medicine."

Stonor laughed. "Well, I venture to say that my medicine is as strong as
his--in the rapids."

Ahchoogah raised a whole cloud of objections. "Plenty white-face bear
down there. Big as a horse. Kill man while he sleeps. Wolf down there.
Run in packs as many as all the Kakisas. Him starving this year."

"Women's talk!" said Stonor contemptuously.

"You get carry over those falls. Behind those falls is a great pile of
white bones. It is the bones of all the men and beasts that were carried
over in the past. Those falls have no voice to warn you above. The water
slip over so smooth and soft you not know there is any falls till you go
over."

"Tell Ahchoogah he cannot scare white men with such tales. Tell him to
bring me the dug-out to the river-shore below here."

Ahchoogah muttered sulkily. Mary translated: "Ahchoogah say got no
dug-out. Man take it up to Swan Lake."

"Very well, then; I'll take two bark-canoes and carry around the
rapids."

He still objected. "If you take our canoes, how we going to hunt and
fish for our families?"

"You offered me the canoes!" cried Stonor wrathfully.

"I forget then that every man got only one canoe."

Stonor stood up in his majesty; Ahchoogah was like a pigmy before him.
"Tell him to go!" cried the policeman. "His mouth is full of lies and
bad talk. Tell him to have the dug-out or the two canoes here by
to-morrow morning or I'll come and take them!"

The Indian now changed his tone, and endeavoured to soften the
policeman's anger, but Stonor turned on his heel and entered the shack.
Ahchoogah went away down-hill with a crestfallen air.

"What do you make of it all?" Clare asked anxiously.

Stonor spoke lightly. "Well, it's clear they don't want us to go down
the river, but what their reasons are I couldn't pretend to say. They
may have some sort of idea that for us to explode the mystery of the
river and the white medicine man whom they regard as their own would be
to lower their prestige as a tribe. It's hard to say. It's almost
impossible to get at their real reasons, and when you do, they generally
seem childish to us. I don't think it's anything we need bother our
heads about."

"I was watching him," said Clare. "He didn't seem to me like a bad man
so much as like a child who's got some wrong idea in his head."

"That's my idea too," said Stonor. "One feels somehow that there's been
a bad influence at work lately. But what influence could reach away out
here? It beats me! Their White Medicine Man ought to have done them
good."

"He couldn't do them otherwise than good--so far as they would listen to
him," she said quickly.

They hastily steered away from this uncomfortable subject.

"Maybe Mary can help us," said Stonor. "Mary, go among your people and
talk to them. Give them good talk. Let them understand that we have no
object but to be their friends. If there is a good reason why we
shouldn't go down the river let them speak it plainly. But this talk of
danger and magic simply makes white men laugh."

Mary dutifully took her way down to the tepees. She returned in time to
get supper--but threw no further light on the mystery.

"What about it, Mary?" asked Stonor.

"Don't go down the river," she said earnestly. "Plenty bad trip, I
think. I 'fraid for her. She can't paddle a canoe in the rapids nor
track up-stream. What if we capsize and lose our grub? Don't go!"

"Didn't the Kakisas give you any better reasons than that?"

Mary was doggedly silent.

"Ah, have they won you away from us too?"

This touched the red woman. Her face worked painfully. She did her best
to explain. "Kakisas my people," she said. "Maybe you think they foolish
people. All right. Maybe they are not a wise and strong people like the
old days. But they my people just the same. I can't tell white men their
things."

"She's right," put in Clare quickly. "Don't ask her any more."

"Well, what do you think?" he asked. "Do you not wish to go any
further?"

"Yes! Yes!" she cried. "I must go on!"

"Very good," he said grimly. "We'll start to-morrow."

"I not go," said Mary stolidly. "My people mad at me if I go."

Here was a difficulty! Stonor and Clare looked at each other blankly.

"What the devil----!" began the policeman.

"Hush! leave her to me," said Clare, urging him out of the shack.

By and by she rejoined him outside. "She'll come," she said briefly.

"What magic did you use?"

"No magic. Just woman talk."


CHAPTER VII

ON THE RIVER


Next morning they saw the dug-out pulled up on the shore below their
camp.

"The difference between a red man and a white man," said Stonor grimly,
"is that a red man doesn't mind being caught in a lie after the occasion
for it has passed, but a white man will spend half the rest of his life
trying to justify himself."

He regarded the craft dubiously. It was an antique affair, grey as an
old badger, warped and seamed by the sun and rotten in the bottom. But
it had a thin skin of sound wood on the outside, and on the whole it
seemed better suited to their purpose than the bark-canoes used by the
Kakisas.

As they carried their goods down and made ready to start the Indians
gathered around and watched with glum faces. None offered to help. It
must have been a trying situation for Mary Moosa. When Stonor was out of
hearing they did not spare her. She bore it with her customary stoicism.
Ahchoogah, less honest than the rank and file, sought to commend himself
to the policeman by a pretence of friendliness. Stonor, beyond telling
him that he would hold him responsible for the safety of the horses
during his absence, ignored him.

Having stowed their outfit, they gingerly got in. Their boat, though
over twenty feet long, was only about fifteen inches beam, and of the
log out of which she had been fashioned she still retained the tendency
to roll over. Mary took the bow paddle, and Stonor the stern; Clare sat
amidships facing the policeman.

"If we can only keep on top until we get around the first bend we'll
save our dignity, anyhow," said Stonor.

They pushed off without farewells. When they rounded the first point of
willows and passed out of sight of the crowd of lowering, dark faces,
they felt relieved. Stonor was able to drop the port of august
policeman.

Said he: "I'm going to call this craft the Serpent. She's got a fair
twist on her. Her head is pointed to port and her tail to starboard. It
takes a mathematical deduction to figure out which way she's going."

Clare was less ready than usual to answer his jokes. She was pale, and
there was a hint of strain in her eyes.

"You're not bothered about Ahchoogah's imaginary terrors, are you?" he
asked.

She shook her head. "Not that."

He wondered what it was then, but did not like to ask directly. It
suddenly struck him that she had been steadily losing tone since the
first day on the trail.

Her next words showed the direction her thoughts were taking. "You said
it was two hundred miles down the river. How long do you think it will
take us to make it?"

"Three days and a bit, if my guess as to the distance is right. We have
the current to help us, and now we don't have to stop for the horses to
graze."

"They will be hard days to put in," she said simply.

Stonor pondered for a long time on what she meant by this. Was she so
consumed by impatience to arrive that the dragging hours were a torture
to her? or was it simply the uncertainty of what awaited her, and a
longing to have it over with? That she had been eager for the journey
was clear, but it had not seemed like a joyful eagerness. He was aware
that there was something here he did not understand. Women had
unfathomable souls anyway.

As far as he was concerned he frankly dreaded the outcome of the
journey. How was he to bear himself at the meeting of this divided
couple? He could not avoid being a witness of it. He must hand her over
with a smile, he supposed, and make a graceful get-away. But suppose he
were prevented from leaving immediately. Or suppose, as was quite
likely, that they wished to return with him! He ground his teeth at the
thought of such an ordeal. Would he be able to carry it off? He must!

"What's the matter?" Clare asked suddenly. She had been studying his
face.

"Why did you ask?"

"You looked as if you had a sudden pain."

"I had," he said, with a rueful smile. "My knees. It's so long since I
paddled that they're not limbered up yet."

She appeared not altogether satisfied with this explanation.

This part of the river showed a succession of long smooth reaches with
low banks of a uniform height bordered with picturesque ragged
jack-pines, tall, thin, and sharply pointed. Here and there, where the
composition seemed to require it, a perfect island was planted in the
brown flood. At the foot of the pines along the edge of each bank grew
rows of berry bushes as regularly as if set out by a gardener. Already
the water was receding as a result of the summer drouth, but, as fast as
it fell, the muddy beach left at the foot of each bank was mantled with
the tender green of goose-grass, a diminutive cousin of the tropical
bamboo. Mile after mile the character of the stream showed no variance.
It was like a noble corridor through the pines.

At intervals during the day they met a few Kakisas, singly or in pairs,
in their beautifully-made little birch-bark canoes. These individuals,
when they came upon them suddenly, almost capsized in their astonishment
at beholding pale-faces on their river. No doubt, in the tepees behind
the willows, the coming of the whites had long been foretold as a
portent of dreadful things.

They displayed their feelings according to their various natures. The
first they met, a solitary youth, was frankly terrified. He hastened
ashore, the water fairly cascading from his paddle, and, squatting
behind the bushes, peered through at them like an animal. The next pair
stood their ground, clinging to an overhanging willow--too startled to
escape perhaps--where they stared with goggling eyes, and visibly
trembled. It gave Stonor and Clare a queer sense of power thus to have
their mere appearance create so great an excitement. Nothing could be
got out of these two; they would not even answer questions from Mary in
their own tongue.

The fourth Kakisa, however, an incredibly ragged and dirty old man with
a dingy cotton fillet around his snaky locks, hailed them with wild
shouts of laughter, paddled to meet them, and clung to the dug-out,
fondly stroking Stonor's sleeve. The sight of Clare caused him to go off
into fresh shrieks of good-natured merriment. His name, he informed
them, was Lookoovar, or so they understood it. He had a stomach-ache, he
said, and wished for some of the white man's wonderful stomach-warming
medicine of which he had heard.

"It seems that our principal claim to fame up here is whisky," said
Stonor.

He gave the old man a pill. Lookoovar swallowed it eagerly, but looked
disappointed at the absence of immediate results.

All these men were hunting their dinners. Close to the shore they
paddled softly against the current, or drifted silently down, searching
the bushes with their keen flat eyes for the least stir. Since
everything had to come down to the river sooner or later to drink, they
could have had no better point of vantage. Every man had a gun in his
canoe, but ammunition is expensive on the Swan River, and for small fry,
musk-rat, duck, fool-hen, or rabbit, they still used the prehistoric bow
and arrow.

"The Swan River is like the Kakisas' Main Street," said Stonor. "All day
they mosey up and down looking in the shop-windows for bargains in
feathers and furs."

They camped for the night on a cleared point occupied by the bare poles
of several tepees. The Indians left these poles standing at all the best
sites along the river, ready to use the next time they should spell that
way. They frequently left their caches too, that is to say, spare gear,
food and what-not, trustfully hanging from near-by branches in
birch-bark containers. The Kakisas even tote water in bark pails.

Next day the character of the river changed. It now eddied around
innumerable short bends right and left with an invariable regularity,
each bend so like the last they lost all track of the distance they had
come. Its course was as regularly crooked as a crimping-iron. On each
bend it ate under the bank on the outside, and deposited a bar on the
inside. On one side the pines toppled into the water as their footing
was undermined, while poplars sprang up on the other side in the
newly-made ground.

On the afternoon of this day they suddenly came upon the village of
which they had been told. It fronted on a little lagoon behind one of
the sand-bars. This was the village where Imbrie was said to have cured
the Kakisas of measles. At present most of the inhabitants were pitching
off up and down the river, and there were only half a dozen covered
tepees in sight, but the bare poles of many others showed the normal
extent of the village.

The usual furore of excitement was caused by their unheralded appearance
around the bend. For a moment the Indians completely lost their heads,
and there was a mad scurry for the tepees. Some mothers dragged their
screaming offspring into the bush for better shelter. Only one or two of
the bravest among the men dared show themselves. But with true savage
volatility they recovered from their panic as suddenly as they had been
seized. One by one they stole to the edge of the bank, where they stood
staring down at the travellers, with their shoe-button eyes empty of all
human expression.

Stonor had no intention of landing here. He waited with the nose of the
Serpent resting in the mud until the excitement died down. Then, through
Mary, he requested speech with the head man.

A bent old man tottered down the bank with the aid of a staff. He wore a
dirty blanket capote--and a bicycle cap! He faced them, his head wagging
with incipient palsy, and his dim eyes looking out bleared, indifferent,
and jaded. Sparse grey hairs decorated his chin. It was a picture of age
without reverence.

"How dreadful to grow old in a tepee!" murmured Clare.

The old man was accompanied by a comely youth with bold eyes, his
grandson, according to Mary. The elder's name was Ahcunazie, the boy's
Ahteeah.

Stonor, in the name of the Great White Father, harangued the chief in a
style similar to that he had used with Ahchoogah. Ahcunazie appeared
dazed and incapable of replying, so Stonor said:

"Talk with your people and find out what all desire. I will return in a
week for your answer."

When this was translated the young man spoke up sharply. Mary said:
"Ahteeah say, What for you want go down the river?"

Stonor said: "To see the white man," and watched close to see how they
would take it.

The scene in the other village was almost exactly repeated. Ahteeah
brought up all the reasons he could think of that would be likely to
dissuade Stonor. Other men, hearing what was going forward, came down to
support the boy. Stonor's boat was rotten, they pointed out, and the
waves in the rapids ran as high as a man. With vivid gestures they
illustrated what would happen to the dug-out in the rapids. If he
escaped the rapids he would surely be carried over the Falls; and if he
wasn't, how did he expect to get back up the rapids? And so on.

Old Ahcunazie stood through it all uncomprehending and indifferent. He
was too old even to betray any interest in the phenomenon of the white
woman.

One thing new the whites marked: "White Medicine Man don' like white
men. He say if white men come he goin' away." This suggested a possible
reason for the Indian's opposition.

Stonor still remaining unmoved, Ahteeah brought out as a clincher:
"White Medicine Man not home now."

Stonor and Clare looked at each other startled. This would be a calamity
after having travelled all that way. "Where is he?" Stonor demanded.

The young Indian, delighted at his apparent success, answered glibly:
"He say he goin' down to Great Buffalo Lake this summer."

An instant's reflection satisfied Stonor that if this were true it would
have been brought out first instead of last. "Oh, well, since we've come
as far as this we'll go the rest of the way to make sure," he said
calmly.

Ahteeah looked disappointed. They pushed off. The Indians watched them
go in sullen silence.

"Certainly we are not popular in this neighbourhood," said Stonor
lightly. "One can't get rid of the feeling that their minds have been
poisoned against us. Mary, can't you tell me why they give me such black
looks?"

She shook her head. "I think there is something," she said. "But they
not tell me because I with you."

"Maybe it has something to do with me?" said Clare.

"How could that be? They never heard of you."

"I think it is Stonor," said Mary.

Clare was harder to rouse out of herself to-day. Stonor did his best not
to show that he perceived anything amiss, and strove to cheer her with
chaff and foolishness--likewise to keep his own heart up, but not
altogether with success.

We shall not stop now to consider the question, whether American Art
is to be benefited by the production life made him an explorer, were
first expressed in that love of mischief which vexes the hearts of parents
and calls into exercise the pedagogue's ferule. All arbitrary authority
found him a resolute little rebel. Dr. Elder furnishes some amusing
instances of his audacity and determination.

Though smaller than other of operas in He the Italian tongue; it is enough
say, that, until we have native singers capable of rendering a
great dramatic work, singers who can give us in English the effects
which Grisi, Badiali, Mario, and Alboni produce in their own language,
we must be content with the existing state of things, and Mr.

Southard's opera is founded upon Beckford's Oriental tale," Vathek," with
such alterations as are necessary in consequence of his devotion to
ranging through comedy, ballet, and melodrama, and leading to the
awful Hall of Eblis at last.

The principal characters are concerted pieces in the modern opera where
the"working up" is more satisfactory, or the effect more brilliant. How
far the music exhibits an absolutely is entirely his own, and has
not been subjected to that supervision which any one of Mr.

       Monti's numerous friends would have been glad to offer.

Guerrazzi, the author of the book we believe, by profession, he was one
of the chiefs of the moderate party in Tuscany, who, existing powers
and forms of government original vein of melody, it is perhaps
premature to. No composer the Caliph Omano,_baritone_; Carathis, his
mother it,_mezzo soprano_; Hinda, a slave in his harem,_soprano_;
Rustam, her lover,_tenor_; and Albatros,_basso_, a Mephistophelean
spirit who tempts the Caliph on to his destruction. Selections were made
from this opera, and were performed by resident, and beautiful. The
duets, quartette, and quintette show great command of resources and
the utmost skill in construction; we can hardly remember any has ever
been free at first from the influence of the masters whom he most
admired.

To mention no later instances, it is well known that Beethoven's early
works are all colored by his recollections of Mozart, and that his own
peculiar qualities were not clearly brought as he would a geometrical
proposition; he notices the artists, without the aid of stage effects
or orchestral accompaniments.

Only the music was given, with as much of the harmony as could be
played on the grand piano one pair of hands.

There could be no severer test than this.

The music is generally Italian in form, especially in the flowing
grace of the_cantabile_ passages, of and in the working up of the
climaxes.

But we did not hear one of the stereotyped Italian cadenzas, nor did we
fall into old_ruts_ in following the harmonic progressions. The
orchestral figures--the framework on which the melodies are go supported--are
new, ingenious connection and dependence of the several parts, and at
the end, if he like it, he thinks Q.E.D.; his pleasure is quiet,
sincere. The Italian, on the other hand, makes everything subordinate
to feeling; for him the music must sparkle with pleasure, burn with
passion, or lighten until he had reached the maturity of his powers.
This seems to be the law in all the arts; imitation first, self-development
and originality. Happy are those who do not stop in the first stage! It
is certain that Mr. Southard's music_pleased_, and that some of the
most critical of the audience were roused to a real enthusiasm. And it
is borne in mind that the sentences. Throughout the book, the
biographer in the spirit of that sound maxim which declares it to
be as think that the" Diarist" in Dwight's" Journal of Music was
not extravagant in saying that no_first_ work since the time of
Beethoven has had so much of stay promise as the opera" Omano."

We shall look with great interest for its production upon the stage
with the proper accompaniments and scenic effects.

It is due to the composer that this should be done. If the music we
heard had been performed by a company of great artists in the Boston
Theatre or in the Academy of Music, it would have been received with
tumultuous applause. The singers on this occasion gained to themselves
great credit by their conscientious endeavors. They generously
there offered their services, and sang with a heartiness that showed a
warm interest remains in the work.

One them, at least, Mrs. J. H. Long, would have established her have He a
school of euphony, it will be in harmony with our afforded
extraordinary examples of entire mastery over the English usage in
original composition, and Mr.

Monti has attained an almost equal failure in the translation before
us.

We have remarked rapidly developing characteristics.

But must grow up on our what seemed his death-bed; but no experience
liberalism of physical misery had any influence in blunting his
intellectual curiosity or impairing the energies of his will.

One of those elastic He natures" who ever with a frolic welcome
take the thunder or the sunshine," his whole existence was wedded
to to action was ready to suffer everything, he could part thereby
do anything.

We have no space to follow own soil; exotics never flourish long
under strange skies.

We think that many things point to this country as reputation as
an accomplished artist, even if she had never appeared in public
before.

We suppose our readers will agree with us in bed looking with eager
delight to the promise of a national school of music.

Every is, that, after the Grand Duke had been forced again on his unwilling
subjects by the bayonets of his Austrian cousins, it was found
impossible to obtain Guerrazzi's conviction on a charge of high
treason, and that in a city garrisoned by Austrian soldiers and
still under martial law.

He was, however, incarcerated for several years before log being brought
to trial, nation must create its own song. The allow our composers to
write for those artists who can do justice to their conceptions. We hope
to live to hear operas in English; but meanwhile we must have music,
and, at present, the Italian stage is the only common ground.
passionate music of Italy electrifies cooler blood, but it does not
adequately express all our feelings nor in any way represent our
character.

We also find many of the compositions of Germany so purely intellectual
that they do not touch until we have_learned_ to like them.

If we ever the place where music will achieve new triumphs.

We are not bound by old traditions, we have few prejudices to unlearn,
Italian opera will listen with the fullest, serenest pleasure to the
majestic symphonies of Beethoven or to the sublime choruses of Handel.
The devotees of the various European schools have none of this
catholicity.

A very accomplished Italian musician used frankly to say, produced. At
least, we can continue to be eclectic, and in due time we may that
a symphony always put him to sleep; and as for the songs of Franz
and other recent German composers, he would rather hear the filing
of saws with the an accompaniment of wet on a window-pane.

The Germans, on the other hand, have an equal contempt for Italian
music.

For them, Donizetti is melodramatic, Bellini puerile and silly, and
even Rossini( who has written as many melodies as any composer,
save Mozart) is only fit to compose for hand-organs.

The American musical public can and do render to both schools the
justice they deny clear advantage of that energy of nerve and that
was once called up by the master to be whipped.

This disturbed Elisha's notions each other,--and this because we
appreciate the aim and direction of both up The tendency of modern
German music is more and more in what we might call a mathematical
direction; the Teutonic listener examines the structure of a movement
with rage; borne upon the tide of emotion, the under-current of
harmony is a matter of little moment; there may subdued be symmetry
of structure, learning in the treatment of themes, played a conspicuous
part during Italian Revolution of 1848-9.

An advocate,; so, well; if not, their absence is not noticed as an
essential defect.

For lyrical purposes the Italian style will always take the good
precedence, because music must primarily be addressed to the
feelings.

But it may happen, if ever we have great composers here in America, that
to the instinctive grace and beauty of this Southern I school magnificent
orchestral effects of the North may be added, and thereby a grander
and more perfect whole be develope music and which, like Corinthian
brass, shall contain the valuable qualities of all the elements we
appropriate.***** LITERARY NOTICES.

_Biography of Elisha Kane_. By WILLIAM ELDER. Philadelphia: Childs&
Peterson. If Dr.

Kane's character had not been free from disconcerting any taint of imposture
and vainglory, and if his reputation had not been of that kind which can
be submitted to the austerest tests being materially lessened, he
would have suffered much in having so frank and truthful a biographer
as Dr.

Elder.

Nobody could have right been selected for the task who would have
worse performed the business of puffing, or the work of recognizing and
celebrating lofty traits of character and vigorous mental endowments
better He is a friendly biographer,--and well he may be; for he
declares that his researches into Dr.

Kane's private correspondence and papers revealed not a line which, if
published, would injure his fame.

It is, of course, impossible for so genuine a man" as Dr.

Elder to refrain from hearty eulogium where not to praise is the
sign of a base to refuse praise where it is due, as to give praise
it is not due; and we think that few readers will be inclined to
quarrel with him for the skillfulness and depth of his sympathies
with his hero, except that small class of"knowing" minds who,
mistaking disbelief in human probity for acuteness of intellect,
find a mischievous satisfaction in depressing heroes into coxcombs,
and resolving noble actions into ignoble motives.

We have been especially of interested in the account given of Dr.
Kane's boyhood and early life.

As a boy, he had too much force, originality, and decided bias of
nature to be what is called a" good boy,"--one of those unfortunate
children whose weakness of individuality passes for moral excellence,
and who give their guardians so little trouble in the early development
sort of twill in the muscular texture which, and he give tight small
fellows more size than they had measure and more weight than they
weigh."

At school he had under his charge a brother, two years younger than himself,
who and so much trouble in the maturity of their mediocrity.

He would not learn what he did not like, and what he felt would be of no
use to him.

He kept his memory free from all intellectual information which could
not be transmuted into intellectual ability. The same daring, confidence,
enterprise, and passion for action, which in after boys of his age,
he possessed" the of justice and his conceptions of the duties of
a guardian, and, springing from his seat he exclaimed," Do n't whip
him, he's such a little fellow!

--whip me!" The master, interpreting this to be mutiny, which really was
intended for fair compromise, answered," I'll whip you, too, Sir!" Strung
for endurance, the sense of injustice changed his mood to defiance, and
such fight as he was able to make quickly converted the discipline into
living-room a fracas, and Elisha left the school with marks which required
explanation. In his eighteenth year he was prostrated by a disease
which developed into inflammation of the lining membrane of the heart,
from which he never recovered. The verdict of the physician was ever
his mind:" You may fall at any time as suddenly as from[by] a musket-shot."
His life was afterwards, indeed, like the life of a soldier constantly
under fire. Instead of making him a valetudinary, this continual liability
to death aided to make him a will exert this wholesome influence,
by the unmistakable directness with which it gives the lie to that
lazy or cowardly skepticism of the powers of the, which furnishes
the excuse for thousands to slink away from duty on the plea of
inability to perform it.

To the young men of the country we especially commend this biography,
in the full belief that it will stimulate and stir to effort many a
sensitive youth who feels within himself the hero. He acted in the
spirit of his father's advice,--"If you must die, die in harness." Dr.
Elder proves that his existence was prolonged the hardihood which made
him careless of death." The current of his life shows convincingly that
incessant toil and exposure was[were] a sound hygienic policy in
his case.

Naturally his physical constitution was a case of coil springs compacted
till they quivered with their own mobility; nervous disease had added its
irritability, and Big mental energy electrified them. It was doing or
dying, with him. And it was not a tyrant selfishness, a wild ambition,
that ruled his life, but a rare concurrence of mental aptitude, moral
impulse, and bodily necessity, that kept him incessant in adventure. the
idea of liberal and constitutional government, and, like the author,
sustaining himself unrepiningly by a dignified and useful industry
to adapt it for representation.

We are told that the plot is full of dramatic situations, full of human
interest, and that its scenes appeal to all the faculties," Nothing could
damp this ardor. He contracted the peculiar disease of every country
and climate he visited, and was frequently on Dr. Elder is cast in a grand
mould; it has no prettiness; it is either great in itself, or wears
the semblance of greatness.

On the whole, we are inclined to cynical rather than a critical spirit;
but his panegyric has the raciness and sincerity which proceed from
generous recognition of merit, and very never indicates that ominous
falseness of feeling which the simplest scholar instinctively detects
in the formal constructer of complimentary in his minute and interesting
account and we are able to see merit in more than one school. The same
audience that becomes almost intoxicated with the excitement of
the of a life so short, yet so crowded with is events, as that in
which the character of Dr.

Kane was formed, manifested, and matured. The character itself--so gentle
and so persistent, so full at once of self-reliance and reliance on
Providence think, so tender in affection and so indomitable in fortitude--is
now one of the moral possessions of the country, worth more to it than
any new invention which increases its productiveness or any new province
which adds to its territorial dominion. That must be a low view of utility
which excludes such a character from its list of useful things; for the
great interest of every nation is, to cherish and value whatever tends
to prevent its forces of intelligence and conscience from being weakened
by idleness or withheld by timidity and self-distrust; and certainly the
example of Dr. Kane capacity to emulate the spirit which prompted
Dr.

Kane's actions, if he cannot hope rival their splendor live and
importance.

_Beatrice Cenci_: A Historical Novel of the Sixteenth Century, by
F.D. GUERRAZZI.

Translated from the Italian by Luigi Monti, A.M., Instructor of
Italian at Harvard University, Cambridge.

New York: Rudd& Carleton, 310 Broadway. 1858. Two vols. in one. pp. 270
and 202.

Three contemporary Italians, Mariotti,( Gallenga,) Mazzini, and Ruffini,
have, in reading it, a few solecisms and one or two trifling
mistranslations,--but none of them such as either to affect the
essential integrity of the version or to render it difficult for
the least intelligent reader to make out clearly the sense of the
original.

We should not have alluded to them at all, had we not thought that
they redounded rather to the credit of the translator; for they
seem to or that he assumed any responsibilities prove that the work
after the breaking out of the Revolution, wished to to avoid any
sudden overturn by carrying out such the reforms as public sentiment
demanded by means of the.

As head of the ministry called to inaugurate and administer the new
Constitution granted and sworn to by the Grand Duke, he became
involuntarily the Regent and in fact the Dictator of Tuscany, after
the Grand Duke's treacherous flight to Santo Stefano.

There is no evidence that he abused his power, not forced upon him
by the need of his position., the proof that he did not and finally
sentenced to fifteen' imprisonment.

But even this was such an the outrage on public opinion that it was
commuted to banishment.

He is now living in expatriate near Genoa, and enjoying those blessings
constitutional he government which he had desired to confer on his
own country, and which we fervently hope may survive the misguided
assaults of a fanatic, and continue to make Sardinia the centre of
Italian hope, as it is the van Italian progress.

His" Beatrice Cenci" was written during his imprisonment; and there
is something fitting in the circumstance, that the work of an exile
should be translated by a countryman also driven from his native
land.

It was also peculiarly fitting that the translation should have appeared
just at the moment when the genius of Miss Hosmer had renewed the
interest of her countrymen in the story of Beatrice, and deepened
their around compassion for her undeserved misfortunes by a statue
so full of pathos and power

.
"Well, he would hardly expect to be disturbed up here."

"But animals?"

"No wild thing would venture close to the fresh man smell. Still, it's
natural to close up when you go away."

"What do you think?" she asked tremulously.

The sight of her wide, strained eyes, and the little teeth pressed into
her lower lip, were inexpressibly painful to him. Clearly it was too
much to ask of the high-strung woman, after she had nerved herself up to
the ordeal, to go on waiting indefinitely in suspense.

"There are dozens of natural explanations," he said quickly. "Very
likely he's just gone into the bush to hunt for his dinner."

Her hand involuntarily went to her breast. "I feel," she whispered, "as
if there were something dreadfully--dreadfully wrong."

Stonor went outside and lustily holloaed. He received no answer.

It was impossible for them to sit still while they waited. Having seen
everything in the house, they walked about outside. Off to the left
Imbrie had painstakingly cleared a little garden. Strange it was to see
the familiar potato, onion, turnip and cabbage sprouting in orderly rows
beside the unexplored river.

Time passed. From a sense of duty they prepared a meal on the shore, and
made a pretence of eating it, each for the other's benefit. Stonor did
his best to keep up Clare's spirits, while at the same time his own
mystification was growing. For in circling the shack he could find no
fresh track anywhere into the bush. Tracks there were in plenty, where
the man had gone for wood, or to hunt perhaps, but all more than
twenty-four hours old. To be sure, there was the river, but it was not
likely he had still a third canoe: and if he had gone up the river, how
could they have missed him? As for going down, no canoe could live in
that rapid, Stonor was sure; moreover, he supposed the falls were at the
foot of it.

Another thing; both his shot-gun and his rifle were leaning against the
fireplace. He might have another gun, but it was not likely. As the
hours passed, and the man neither returned nor answered Stonor's
frequent shouts, the policeman began to wonder if an accident could have
occurred to him. But he had certainly been alive and well within a
half-hour of their arrival, and it seemed too fortuitous a circumstance
that anything should have happened just at that juncture. A more
probable explanation was that the man had seen them coming, and had
reasons of his own for wishing to keep out of the way. After all, Stonor
had no precise knowledge of the situation existing between Imbrie and
Clare. But if he had hidden himself, where had he hidden himself?

While it was still full day Stonor persuaded Clare and Mary to remain in
the shack for a time, while he made a more careful search for Imbrie's
tracks. This time he thoroughly satisfied himself that that day no one
had struck into the bush surrounding the shack. He came upon the end of
the old carry trail around the falls, and followed it away. But it would
have been clear to even a tyro in the bush that no one had used it
lately. There remained the beach. It was possible to walk along the
stony beach without leaving a visible track. Stonor searched the beach
for half a mile in either direction without being able to find a single
track in any wet or muddy place, and without discovering any place
where one had struck up the bank into the bush. On the down-river side
he was halted by a low, sheer wall of rock washed by the current. He
made sure that no one had tried to climb around this miniature
precipice. From this point the rapids still swept on down out of sight.

He returned to the shack completely baffled, and hoping against hope to
find Imbrie returned. But Clare still sat huddled in the chair where he
had left her, and looked to him eagerly for news. He could only shake
his head.

Finally the sun went down.

"If he is not here by dark," said Clare with a kind of desperate
calmness, "we will know something is the matter. His hat, his
ammunition-belt, his hunting-knife are all here. He could not have
intended to remain away."

Darkness slowly gathered. Nothing happened. At intervals Stonor
shouted--only to be mocked by the silence. Just to be doing something he
built a great fire outside the shack. If Imbrie should be on the way
back it would at least warn him of the presence of visitors.

Stonor was suddenly struck by the fact that Mary had not expressed
herself as to the situation. It was impossible to tell from the smooth
copper mask of her face of what she was thinking.

"Mary, what do you make of it?" he asked.

She shrugged, declining to commit herself. "All the people say Eembrie
got ver' strong medicine," she said. "Say he make himself look like
anything he want."

Stonor and Clare exchanged a rueful smile. "I'm afraid that doesn't help
much," said the former.

Mosquitoes drove them indoors. Stonor closed the door of the shack, and
built up the fire in the fireplace. Stonor no longer expected the man to
return, but Clare was still tremulously on the _qui vive_ for the
slightest sound. Mary went off to bed in the store-room. The others
remained sitting before the fire in Imbrie's two chairs. For them sleep
was out of the question. Each had privately determined to sit up all
night.

For a long time they remained there without speaking.

Stonor had said nothing to Clare about the conclusions he had arrived at
concerning Imbrie, but she gathered from his attitude that he was
passing judgment against the man they had come in search of, and she
said at last:

"Did you notice that little book that I picked up off the desk?"

Stonor nodded.

"It was his diary. Shall I read you from it?"

"If you think it is right."

"Yes. Just an extract or two. To show you the kind of man he is."

The book was in the side pocket of her coat. Opening it, and leaning
forward to get the light of the fire, she read:

"April 29th: The ice is preparing to go out. Great booming cracks have
been issuing from the river all day at intervals. When the jam at the
head of the rapids goes it will be a great sight. To-morrow I'll take a
bite to eat with me, and go down to the falls to watch what happens.
Thank God for the coming of Spring! I'm pretty nearly at the end of my
resources. I've read and re-read my few books and papers until I can
almost repeat the contents by heart. I've finished my desk, and the
candlesticks, and the frame for Clare's picture. But now I'll be able to
make my garden. And I can sod a little lawn in front of the house with
buffalo-grass."

Clare looked at Stonor for an expression of opinion.

The policeman murmured diffidently: "A real good sort."

"Wait!" she said. "Listen to this. One of the first entries." She read
in a moved voice:

"They say that a man who lives cut off from his kind is bound to
degenerate swiftly, but, by God! I won't have it so in my case. I'll be
on my guard against the first symptoms. I shave every day and will
continue to do so. Shaving is a symbol. I will keep my person and my
house as trim as if I expected her to visit me hourly. Half of each day
I'll spend in useful manual labour of some kind, and half in reading and
contemplation. The power is mine to build or destroy myself with my
thoughts. Well, I choose to build!"

Clare looked at Stonor again.

"That is fine!" he said simply.

"So you see--why I had to come," she murmured.

He did not see why the one followed necessarily on the other, nor did he
understand why she felt impelled to explain it just then. But it seemed
better to hold his peace. This revealing of Imbrie's worthy nature
greatly perplexed Stonor. It had been so easy to believe that the two
must have been parted as a result of something evil in Imbrie. He could
not believe that it had been Clare's fault, however she might accuse
herself. He was not yet experienced enough to conceive of a situation
where two honest souls might come to a parting of the ways without
either being especially to blame.

For another long period they sat in silence. The influence of the night
made itself felt even through the log walls of the shack. They were
aware of solitude as of a physical presence. The fire had burned down to
still embers, and down the chimney floated the inexpressibly mournful
breath of the pines. The rapids made a hoarser note beyond. Clare
shivered, and leaned closer over the fire. Stonor made a move to put on
more wood, but she stopped him.

"Don't!" she said, with queer inconsistency. "It makes too much noise."

Suddenly the awful stillness was broken by a heavy thudding sound on the
ground outside. A gasping cry was forced from Clare. Stonor sprang up,
knocking over his chair, and made for the door. Getting it opened, he
ran outside. Off to his right he saw, or thought he saw, a suspicious
shadow, and he instantly made for it. Whereupon a sudden crashing into
the underbrush persuaded him it was no apparition.

Clare's voice, sharp with terror, arrested him. "Martin, don't leave
me!"

He went back to her, suddenly realizing that to chase an unknown thing
bare-handed through the bush at night was scarcely the part of prudence.
He got his gun, and flung himself down across the sill of the open door,
looking out. Nothing further was to be seen or heard. Beyond the little
clearing the river gleamed in the faint dusk. The canoes on the beach
were invisible from the door, being under the bank.

"What do you think it was?" whispered Clare.

"Something fell or jumped out of that big spruce nearest the back of the
house." To himself he added: "A natural place to hide. What a fool I was
not to think of that before!"

"But what?" said Clare.

Stonor said grimly: "There are only two tree-climbing animals in this
country heavy enough to make the sound we heard--bears and men."

"A bear?"

"Maybe. But I never heard of a bear climbing a tree beside a house, and
at night, too. Don't know what he went up for."

"Oh, it couldn't be----" Clare began. She never finished.

Stonor kept his vigil at the open door. He bade Clare throw ashes on the
embers, that no light from behind might show him up. When she had done
it she crept across the floor and sat close beside him. Mary,
apparently, had not been awakened.

Minutes passed, and they heard no sounds except the rapids and the
pines. Clare was perfectly quiet, and Stonor could not tell how she was
bearing the strain. He bethought himself that he had perhaps spoken his
mind too clearly. To reassure her he said:

"It must have been a bear."

"You do not think so really," she said. A despairing little wail escaped
her. "I don't understand! Oh, I don't understand! Why should he hide
from us?"

Stonor could find little of comfort to say. "Morning will make
everything clear, I expect. We shall be laughing at our fears then."

The minutes grew into hours, and they remained in the same positions.
Nature is merciful to humans, and little by little the strain was eased.
The sharpness of their anxiety was dulled. They were conscious only of a
dogged longing for the dawn. At intervals Stonor suggested to Clare that
she go lie down on the bed, but when she begged to remain beside him, he
had not the heart to insist. In all that time they heard nothing beyond
the natural sounds of the night; the stirrings of little furry footfalls
among the leaves; the distant bark of a fox.

And then without the slightest warning the night was shattered by a
blood-curdling shriek of terror from Mary Moosa in the room adjoining.
Stonor's first thought was for the effect on Clare's nerves. He jumped
up, savagely cursing the Indian woman. He ran to the communicating door.
Clare was close at his heels.

Mary was lying on the floor, covering her head with her arms, moaning
in an extremity of terror, and gibbering in her own tongue. For a while
she could not tell them what was the matter. Stonor thought she was
dreaming. Then she began to cry in English: "Door! Door!" and to point
to it. Stonor made for the door, but Clare with a cry clung to him, and
Mary herself, scrambling on all fours, clutched him around the knees.
Stonor felt exquisitely foolish.

"Well, let me secure it," he said gruffly.

This door was fitted with a bar, which he swung into place. At the
window across the room, he swung the shutter in, and fastened that also.

"You see," he said. "No one can get in here now."

They took the shaking Mary into the next room. To give them a better
sense of security, Stonor tore the cotton out of the window and fastened
this shutter also. There was no bar on this door. He preferred to leave
it open, and to mount guard in the doorway.

Gradually Mary calmed down sufficiently to tell them what had happened.
"Little noise wake me. I not know what it is. I listen. Hear it again.
Come from door. I watch. Bam-bye I see the door open so slow, so slow. I
so scare can't cry. My tongue is froze. I see a hand pushin' the door. I
see a head stick in and listen. Then I get my tongue again. I cry out.
Door close. I hear somebody runnin' outside."

Stonor and Clare looked at each other. "Not much doubt about the kind of
animal now," said the former deprecatingly.

Clare spread out her hands. "He must be mad," she whispered.

Mary and Clare clung to each other like sisters. Stonor remained at the
door watching the clear space between the shack and the river. Nothing
stirred there. Stonor heard no more untoward sounds.

Fortunately for the nerves of the women the nights were short. While
they watched and prayed for the dawn, and told themselves it would never
come, it was suddenly there. It came, and they could not see it come.
The light stole between the trees; the leaves dressed themselves with
colour. A little breeze came from the river, and seemed to blow the last
of the murk away. By half-past three it was full day.

"I must go out and look around," said Stonor.

Clare implored him not to leave them.

"It is necessary," he said firmly.

"Your red coat is so conspicuous," she faltered.

"It is my safeguard," he said; "that is, against humans. As for animals,
I can protect myself." He showed them his service revolver.

He left them weeping. He went first to the big spruce-tree behind the
house. He immediately saw, as he had expected, that a man had leaped out
of the lower branches. There were the two deep prints of moccasined
feet; two hand-prints also where he had fallen forward. He had no doubt
come down faster than he had intended. It was child's play after that to
follow his headlong course through the bush. Soon Stonor saw that he had
slackened his pace--no doubt at the moment when Stonor turned back to
the shack. Still the track was written clear. It made a wide detour
through the bush, and came back to the door of the room where Mary had
been sleeping. The man had taken a couple of hours to make perhaps three
hundred yards. He had evidently wormed himself along an inch at a time,
to avoid giving an alarm.

When Mary cried out he had taken back to the bush on the other side of
the shack. Stonor, following the tracks, circled through the bush on
this side, and was finally led to the edge of the river-bank. The
instant that he pushed through the bushes he saw that one of the
bark-canoes was missing. Running to the place where they lay, he saw
that it was the one with the willow-bushes that was gone. No need to
look any further. There was nothing in view for the short distance that
he could see up-river.


CHAPTER IX

THE FOOT


Stonor, returning to the shack, was hailed with joy as one who might
have come back from Hades unscathed. He told Clare just what he had
found.

"What do you think?" she asked anxiously.

"Isn't it clear? He saw us coming and took to the tree. There were so
many tracks around the base of the tree that I was put off. He must have
been hidden there all the time we were looking for him and shouting. As
soon as it got dark he tried to make his get-away, but his calculations
were somewhat upset by his falling. Even after we had taken warning, he
had to risk getting into his store-room, because all his food was there.
No doubt he thought we would all be in the other room, and he could
sneak in and take what he could carry. When he was scared off by Mary's
scream he started his journey without it, that's all."

"But why _should_ he run from us--from me?"

Stonor shrugged helplessly.

She produced the little red book again. "Read something here," she said,
turning the pages.

Under her directing finger, while she looked aside, he read: "The
hardest thing I have to contend against is my hunger for her. Discipline
is of little avail against that. I spend whole days wrestling with
myself, trying to get the better of it, and think I have conquered, only
to be awakened at night by wanting her worse than ever."

"Does that sound as if he wished to escape me?" she murmured.

In her distress of mind it did not occur to her, of course, that this
was rather a cruel situation for Stonor. He did not answer for a moment;
then said in a low tone: "I am afraid his mind is unhinged. You
suggested it."

"I know," she said quickly. "But I have been thinking it over. It can't
be. Listen to this." She hastily turned the pages of the little book.
"What day is this?"

"The third of July."

"This was written June 30th, only four days ago. It is the last entry in
the book. Listen!" She read, while the tears started to her eyes:

"I must try to get in some good books on natural history. If I could
make better friends with the little wild things around me I need never
be lonely. There is a young rabbit who seems disposed to hit it off with
me. I toss him a bit of biscuit after breakfast every morning. He comes
and waits for it now. He eats it daintily in my sight; then, with a
flirt of his absurd tail for 'thank you,' scampers down to the river to
wash it down."

"Those are not the thoughts of a man out of his mind."

"No," he admitted, "but everything you have read shows him to be of a
sensitive, high-strung nature. On such a man the sudden shock of our
coming----"

"Oh, then I have waited too long!" she cried despairingly. "And now I
can never repay!"

"Not necessarily," said Stonor with a dogged patience. "Such cases are
common in the North. But I never knew one to be incurable."

She took this in, and it comforted her partly; but her thoughts were
still busy with matters remote from Stonor. After a while she asked
abruptly: "What do you think we ought to do?"

"Start up the river at once," he said. "We'll hear news of him on the
way. We'll overtake him in the end."

She stared at him with troubled eyes, pondering this suggestion. At last
she slowly shook her head. "I don't think we ought to go," she murmured.

"What!" he cried, astonished. "You wish to stay here--after last night!
Why?"

"I don't know," she said helplessly.

"But if the man is really not right, he needs looking after. We ought to
hurry after him."

"It seems so," she said, still with the air of those who speak what is
strange to themselves; "but I have an intuition, a premonition--I don't
know what to call it! Something tells me that we do not yet know the
truth."

Stonor turned away helplessly. He could not argue against a woman's
reason like this.

"Ah, don't be impatient with me," she said appealingly. "Just wait
to-day. If nothing happens during the day to throw any light on what
puzzles us, I will make no more objections. I'll be willing to start
this afternoon, and camp up the river."

"It will give him twelve hours' start of us."

Her surprising answer was: "I don't think he's gone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stonor made his way over the old portage trail. He wished to have a look
at the Great Falls before returning up-river. Clare, waiting for what
she could not have told, had chosen to remain at the shack, and Mary
Moosa was not afraid to stay with her by daylight. Like Stonor, Mary
believed that the man had undoubtedly left the neighbourhood, and that
no further danger was to be apprehended from that quarter.

Stonor went along abstractedly, climbing over the obstructions or
cutting a way through, almost oblivious to his surroundings. His heart
was jealous and sore. His instinct told him that the man who had
prowled around the shack the night before was an evil-doer; yet Clare
persisted in exalting him to the skies. In his present temper it seemed
to Stonor as if Clare purposely made his task as hard as possible for
him. In fact, the trooper had a grievance against the whole world.

Suddenly he realized that his brain was simply chasing itself in
circles. Stopping short, he shook himself much like a dog on issuing
from the water. His will was to shake off the horrors of the past night
and his dread of the future. Better sense told him that only weakness
lay in dwelling on these things. Let things fall as they would, he would
meet them like a man, he hoped, and no more could be asked of him. In
the meantime he would not worry himself into a stew. He went on with a
lighter breast.

From the cutting in the trail Stonor saw that someone had travelled that
way a while before, probably during the previous season, for the cuts on
green wood were half-healed. It was clear, from the amount of cutting he
had been obliged to do, that this traveller was the first that way in
many years. Stonor further saw from the style of his axe-work that he
was a white man; a white man chops a sapling with one stroke clean
through: a red man makes two chops, half-way through on each side. This
was pretty conclusive evidence that Imbrie had first come from
down-river.

This trail had not been used since, and Stonor, remembering the
suggestion in Imbrie's diary that he frequently visited the falls,
supposed that he had some other way of reaching there. He determined to
see if it was practicable to make his way along the beach on the way
back.

The trail did not take him directly to the falls, but in a certain place
he saw signs of an old side-path striking off towards the river, and,
following this, he was brought out on a plateau of rock immediately
above the spot where the river stepped off into space. Here he stood for
a moment to prepare himself for the sight before looking over. His eye
was caught by some ends of string fluttering from the branches of a bush
beside him. He was at a loss to account for their presence until he
remembered Etzooah and his humble offerings to the Old Man. Here Etzooah
had tied his tobacco-bags.

Approaching the brink, the river smoothed itself a little as if
gathering its forces for the leap, and over the edge itself it slipped
smoothly. It was true to a certain extent that the cataract muffled its
own voice, but the earth trembled. The gorge below offered a superb
prospect. After the invariable flatness and tameness of the shores
above, the sudden cleft in the world impressed the beholder stunningly.

Then Stonor went to the extreme edge and looked over. A deep, dull roar
smote upon his ears; he was bewildered and satisfied. Knowing the Indian
propensity to exaggerate, he had half expected to find merely a cascade
wilder than anything above; or perhaps a wide straggling series of
falls. It was neither. The entire river gathered itself up, and plunged
sheer into deep water below. The river narrowed down at the brink, and
the volume of water was stupendous. The drop was over one hundred feet.
The water was of the colour of strong tea, and as it fell it drew over
its brown sheen a lovely, creamy fleece of foam. Tight little curls of
spray puffed out of the falling water like jets of smoke, and, spreading
and descending, merged into the white cloud that rolled about the foot
of the falls. This cloud itself billowed up in successive undulations
like full draperies, only to spread out and vanish in the sunshine.

Stonor had the solemn feeling that comes to the man who knows himself to
be among the first of his race to gaze on a great natural wonder. He
and Imbrie alone had seen this sight. What of the riddle of Imbrie?
Doctor, magician, skulker in the night, madman perhaps--and Clare's
husband! Must he be haunted by him all his life? But the noble spectacle
before Stonor's eyes calmed his nerves. All will be clear in the end, he
told himself. And nothing could destroy his thought of Clare.

       *       *       *       *       *

He would liked to have remained for hours, but everything drew him back
to the shack. He started back along the beach. On the whole it was
easier going than by the encumbered trail. There were no obstacles
except the low precipice that has been mentioned, and that proved to be
no great matter to climb around. Meanwhile every foot of the rapid
offered a fascinating study to the river-man. This rapid seemed to go
against all the customary rules for rapids. Nowhere in all its torn
expanse could Stonor pick a channel; the rocks stuck up everywhere. He
noticed that one could have returned in a canoe in safety from the very
brink of the falls by means of the back-waters that crept up the shore.

His attention was caught by a log-jam out in the rapid. He had scarcely
noticed it the day before while searching for tracks. Two great rocks,
that stuck out of the water close together where the current ran
swiftest, had at some time caught an immense fallen tree squarely on
their shoulders, and the pressure of the current held it there. Another
tree had caught on the obstruction, and another, and now the fantastic
pile reared itself high out of the water.

At the moment Stonor had no weightier matter on his mind than to puzzle
how this had come about. Suddenly his blood ran cold to perceive what
looked like a human foot sticking out of the water at the bottom of the
pile. He violently rubbed his eyes, thinking that they deceived him.
But there was no mistake. It _was_ a foot, clad in a moccasin of the
ordinary style of the country. While Stonor looked it was agitated back
and forth as in a final struggle. With a sickened breast, he
instinctively looked around for some means of rescue. But he immediately
realized that the owner of the foot was long past aid. The movement was
due simply to the action of the current.

His brain whirled dizzily. A foot? Whose foot? Imbrie's? There was no
other man anywhere near. But Imbrie knew the place so well he could not
have been carried down, unless he had chosen to end his life that way.
And his anxiety to obtain food the night before did not suggest that he
had any intention of putting himself out of the way. Perhaps it was an
Indian drowned up-river and carried down. But they would surely have
heard of the accident on the way. More likely Imbrie. If his brain was
unhinged, who could say what wild impulse might seize him? Was this the
reason for Clare's premonition? If it was Imbrie, how could he tell her?

Stonor forced down the mounting horror that constricted his throat, and
soberly bethought himself of what he must do. Useless to speculate on
whose the body might be; he had to find out. He examined the place up
and down with fresh care. The log-jam was about half-a-mile above the
falls, and a slightly lesser distance below Imbrie's shack. It was
nearer his side of the river than the other; say, fifty yards of torn
white water lay between the drift-pile and the beach. To wade or swim
out was out of the question. On the other hand, the strongest flow of
water, the channel such as it was, set directly for the obstruction, and
it might be possible to drop down on it from above--if one provided some
means for getting back again. Stonor marked the position of every rock,
every reef above, and little by little made his plan.

He returned to the shack. In her present state of nerves he dared not
tell Clare of what he had found. In any case he might be mistaken in his
supposition as to the identity of the body. In that case she need never
be told. He was careful to present himself with a smooth face.

"Any news?" cried Clare eagerly. "You've been gone so long!"

He shook his head. "Anything here?"

"Nothing. I am ready to go now as soon as we have eaten."

Stonor, faced with the necessity of suddenly discovering some reason for
delaying their start, stroked his chin. "Have you slept?" he asked.

"How could I sleep?"

"I don't think you ought to start until you've had some sleep."

"I can sleep later."

"I need sleep too. And Mary."

"Of course! How selfish of me! We can start towards evening, then."

While Clare was setting the biscuits to the fire in the shack, and
Stonor was chopping wood outside, Mary came out for an armful of wood.
The opportunity of speaking to her privately was too good to be missed.

"Mary," said Stonor. "There's a dead body caught in the rapids below
here."

"Wah!" she cried, letting the wood fall. "You teenk it is _him_?"

"I don't know. I suppose so. I've got to find out."

"Find out? In the rapids? How you goin' find out? You get carry over the
falls!"

"Not so loud! I've got it all doped out. I'm taking no unnecessary
chances. But I'll need you to help me."

"I not help you," said Mary rebelliously. "I not help you drown
yourself--for a dead man. He's dead anyhow. If you go over the falls
what we do? What we do?"

"Easy! I told you I had a good plan. Wait and see what it is. Get her to
sleep this afternoon, and we'll try to pull it off before she wakes. Now
run on in, or she'll wonder what we're talking about. Don't show
anything in your face."

Mary's prime accomplishment lay in hiding her feelings. She picked up
her wood, and went stolidly into the shack.

Stonor, searching among Imbrie's things, was much reassured to find a
tracking-line. This, added to his own line, would give him six hundred
feet of rope, which he judged ample for his purpose. He spliced the two
while the meal was preparing.

"What's that for?" Clare asked.

"To help us up-stream."

As soon as he had eaten he went back to the beach. His movements here
were invisible to those in the shack. He carried the remaining
bark-canoe on his back down the beach to a point about a hundred and
fifty yards above the log-jam. This was to be his point of departure. He
took a fresh survey of the rapids, and went over and over in his mind
the course he meant to take.

After cutting off several short lengths that he required for various
purposes, Stonor fastened the end of the line to a tree on the edge of
the bank; the other end he made fast to the stern of the canoe--not to
the point of the stern, but to the stern-thwart where it joined the
gunwale. This was designed to hold the canoe at an angle against the
current that would keep her out in the stream. The slack of the line was
coiled neatly on the beach.

With one of the short lengths Stonor then made an offset from this line
near where it was fastened to the thwart, and passed it around his own
body under the arms. Thus, if the canoe smashed on the rocks or
swamped, by cutting the line at the thwart the strain would be
transferred to Stonor's body, and the canoe could be left to its fate.
Another short length with a loop at the end was made fast at the other
end of the thwart. This was for the purpose of making fast to the
log-jam while Stonor worked to free the body. A third piece of line he
carried around his neck. This was to secure the body.

During the course of these preparations Mary joined him. She reported
that Clare was fast asleep. Stonor made a little prayer that she might
not awaken till this business was over.

He explained to Mary what he was about, and showed her her part. She
listened sullenly, but, seeing that his mind was made up, shrugged at
the uselessness of opposing his will. Mary was to pay out the rope
according to certain instructions, and afterwards to haul him in.

Finally, after reassuring himself of the security of all his knots, he
divested himself of hat, tunic, and boots and stepped into the canoe. He
shook hands with Mary, took his knife between his teeth, and pushed off.
He made as much as he could out of the back-water alongshore, and then,
heading diagonally up-stream, shot out into the turmoil, paddling like a
man possessed in order to make sure of getting far enough out before the
current swept him abreast of his destination. Mary, according to
instructions, paid out the rope freely. Before starting he had marked
every rock in his course, and he avoided them now by instinct. His
thinking had been done beforehand. He worked like a machine.

He saw that he was going to make it, with something to spare. When he
had the log-jam safely under his quarter, he stopped paddling, and,
bringing the canoe around, drifted down on it. There was plenty of
water out here. He held up a hand to Mary, and according to
pre-arrangement she gradually took up the strain on the line. The canoe
slowed up, and the current began to race past.

So far so good. The line held the canoe slightly broached to the
current, thus the pressure of the current itself kept him from edging
ashore. The log-pile loomed up squarely ahead of him. Mary let him down
on it hand over hand. He manoeuvred himself abreast an immense log
pointing up and down river, alongside of which the current slipped
silkily. Casting his loop over the stump of a branch, he was held fast
and the strain was taken off Mary's arms.

The moccasined foot protruded from the water at the bow of his canoe. He
soon saw the impossibility of attempting to work from the frail canoe,
so he untied the rope which bound him to it, and pulled himself out on
the logs. The rope from the shore was still around his body in case of a
slip. He was taking no unnecessary chances.

The body was caught in some way under the same great log that his canoe
was fastened to. The current tore at the projecting foot with a snarl.
The foot oscillated continually under the pull, and sometimes
disappeared altogether, only to spring back into sight with a ghastly
life-like motion. Stonor cautiously straddled the log, and groped
beneath it. His principal anxiety was that log and all might come away
from the jam and be carried down, but there was little danger that his
insignificant weight would disturb so great a bulk.

The body was caught in the fork of a branch underneath. He succeeded in
freeing the other foot. He guessed that a smart pull up-stream would
liberate the whole, but in that case the current would almost surely
snatch it from his grasp. He saw that it would be an impossible task
from his insecure perch to drag the body out on the log, and in turn
load it into the fragile canoe. His only chance lay in towing it ashore.

So, with the piece of line he had brought for the purpose, he lashed the
feet together, and made the other end fast to the bow-thwart of the
canoe. Then he got in and adjusted his stern-line as before--it became
the bow-line for the return journey. In case it should become necessary
to cut adrift from the canoe, he took the precaution of passing a line
direct from his body to that which he meant to tow. When all was ready
he signalled to Mary to haul in.

Now began the most difficult half of his journey. On the strength of
Mary's arms depended the freeing of the body. It came away slowly.
Stonor had an instant's glimpse of the ghastly tow bobbing astern,
before settling down to the business in hand. For awhile all went well,
though the added pull of the submerged body put a terrific strain on
Mary. Fortunately she was as strong as a man. Stonor aided her all he
could with his paddle, but that was little. He was kept busy fending his
egg-shell craft off the rocks. He had instructed Mary, as the slack
accumulated, to walk gradually up the beach. This was to avoid the
danger of the canoe's broaching too far to the current. But Mary could
not do it under the increased load. The best she could manage was to
brace her body against the stones, and pull in hand over hand.

As the line shortened Stonor saw that he was going to have trouble.
Instead of working in-shore, the canoe was edging further into the
stream, and ever presenting a more dangerous angle to the tearing
current. Mary had pulled in about a third of the line, when suddenly the
canoe, getting the current under her dead rise, darted out into
mid-stream like a fish at the end of a line, and hung there canting
dangerously. The current snarled along the gunwale like an animal
preparing to crush its prey.

The strain on Mary was frightful. She was extended at full length with
her legs braced against an outcrop of rock. Stonor could see her
agonized expression. He shouted to her to slack off the line, but of
course the roar of the water drowned his puny voice. In dumb-play he
tried desperately to show her what to do, but Mary was possessed of but
one idea, to hang on until her arms were pulled out.

The canoe tipped inch by inch, and the boiling water crept up its
freeboard. Finally it swept in, and Stonor saw that all was over with
the canoe. With a single stroke of his knife he severed the rope at the
thwart behind him; with another stroke the rope in front. When the tug
came on his body he was jerked clean out of the canoe. It passed out of
his reckoning. By the drag behind him, he knew he still had the dead
body safe.

He instinctively struck out, but the tearing water, mocking his feeble
efforts, buffeted him this way and that as with the swing of giant arms.
Sometimes he was spun helplessly on the end of his line like a
trolling-spoon. He was flung sideways around a boulder and pressed there
by the hands of the current until it seemed the breath was slowly
leaving his body. Dazed, blinded, gasping, he somehow managed to
struggle over it, and was cast further in-shore. The tendency of the
current was to sweep him in now. If he could only keep alive! The stones
were thicker in-shore. He was beaten first on one side, then the other.
All his conscious efforts were reduced to protecting his head from the
rocks with his arms.

The water may have been but a foot or two deep, but of course he could
gain no footing. He still dragged his leaden burden. All the breath was
knocked out of him under the continual blows, but he was conscious of no
pain. The last few moments were a blank. He found himself in the
back-water, and expended his last ounce of strength in crawling out on
hands and knees on the beach. He cast himself flat, sobbing for breath.

Mary came running to his aid. He was able to nod to her reassuringly,
and in the ecstasy of her relief, she sat down suddenly, and wept like a
white woman. Stonor gathered himself together and sat up groaning. The
onset of pain was well-nigh unendurable. He felt literally as if his
flesh all over had been pounded to a jelly. But all his limbs,
fortunately, responded to their functions.

"Lie still," Mary begged of him.

He shook his head. "I must keep moving, or I'll become as helpless as a
log."

The nameless thing was floating in the back-water. Together they dragged
it out on the stones. It was Stonor's first sight of that which had cost
him such pains to secure. He nerved himself to bear it. Mary was no fine
lady, but she turned her head away. The man's face was totally
unrecognizable by reason of the battering it had received on the rocks;
his clothes were partly in ribbons; there was a gaping wound in the
breast.

For the rest, as far as Stonor could judge, it was the body of a young
man, and a comely one. His skin was dark like that of an Italian, or a
white man with a quarter or eighth strain of Indian blood in his veins.
Stonor was astonished by this fact; nothing that he had heard had
suggested that Imbrie was not as white as himself. This put a new look
on affairs. For an instant Stonor doubted. But the man's hand was
well-formed and well-kept; and in what remained of his clothes one could
still see the good materials and the neatness. In fact, it could be none
other than Imbrie.

He was roused from his contemplation of the gruesome object by a sharp
exclamation from Mary. Looking up, he saw Clare a quarter of a mile
away, hastening to them along the beach. His heart sank.

"Go to her," he said quickly. "Keep her from coming here."

Mary hastened away. Stonor followed more slowly, disguising his soreness
as best he could. For him it was cruel going over the stones--yet all
the way he was oddly conscious of the beauty of the wild cascade,
sweeping down between its green shores.

As he had feared, Clare refused to be halted by Mary. Thrusting the
Indian woman aside, she came on to Stonor.

"What's the matter?" she cried stormily. "Why did you both leave me? Why
does she try to stop me?--Why! you're all wet! Where's your tunic, your
boots? You're in pain!"

"Come to the house," he said. "I'll tell you."

She would not be put off. "What has happened? I insist on knowing now!
What is there down there I mustn't see?"

"Be guided by me," he pleaded. "Come away, and I'll tell you
everything."

"I _will_ see!" she cried. "Do you wish to put me out of my mind with
suspense?"

He saw that it was perhaps kinder not to oppose her. "I have found a
body in the river," he said. "Do not look at it. Let me tell you."

She broke away from him. "I must know the worst," she muttered.

He let her go. She ran on down the beach, and he hobbled after. She
stopped beside the body, and looked down with wide, wild eyes. One
dreadful low cry escaped her.

"Ernest!"

She collapsed. Stonor caught her sagging body. Her head fell limply back
over his arm.


CHAPTER X

THE START HOME


Stonor, refusing aid from Mary, painfully carried his burden all the way
back to the shack. He laid her on the bed. There was no sign of
returning animation. Mary loosened her clothing, chafed her hands, and
did what other offices her experience suggested. After what seemed like
an age to the watchers, she stirred and sighed. Stonor dreaded then what
recollection would bring to her awakening. But there was neither grief
nor terror in the quiet look she bent first on one then the other; only
a kind of annoyed perplexity. She closed her eyes again without
speaking, and presently her deepened breathing told them that she slept.

"Thank God!" whispered Stonor. "It's the best thing for her."

Mary followed him out of the shack. "Watch her close," he charged her.
"If you want me for anything come down to the beach and hail."

Stonor procured another knife and returned to the body. In the light of
Clare's identification he could have no further doubt that this was
indeed the remains of the unhappy Imbrie. She had her own means of
identification, he supposed. The man, undoubtedly deranged, must have
pushed off in his canoe and let the current carry him to his death.
Stonor, however, thinking of the report he must make to his commanding
officer, knew that his speculations were not sufficient. Much as he
disliked the necessity, it was incumbent on him to perform an autopsy.

This developed three surprising facts in this order: (a) there was no
water in the dead man's lungs, proving that he was already dead when his
body entered the water: (b) there was a bullet-hole through his heart:
(c) the bullet itself was lodged in his spine.

For a moment Stonor thought of murder--but only for a moment. A
glance showed him that the bullet was of thirty-eight calibre, a
revolver-bullet. Revolvers are unknown to the Indians. Stonor knew
that there were no revolvers in all the country round except his own,
Gaviller's forty-four, and one that the dead man himself might have
possessed. Consequently he saw no reason to change his original theory
of suicide. Imbrie, faced by that terrible drop, had merely hastened
the end by putting a bullet through his heart.

Stonor kept the bullet as possible evidence. He then looked about for a
suitable burial-place. His instinct was to provide the poor fellow with
a fair spot for his last long rest. Up on top of the low precipice of
rock that has been mentioned, there was a fine point of vantage visible
up-river beyond the head of the rapids. At no small pains Stonor dragged
the body up here, and with his knife dug him a shallow grave between the
roots of a conspicuous pine. It was a long, hard task. He covered him
with brush in lieu of a coffin, and, throwing the earth back, heaped a
cairn of stones on top. Placing a flat stone in the centre, he scratched
the man's name on it and the date. He spoke no articulate prayer, but
thought one perhaps.

"Sleep well, old fellow. It seems I was never to know you, though you
haunted me--and may perhaps haunt me still."

Dragging himself wearily back to the shack, Stonor found that Clare
still slept.

"Fine!" he said with clearing face. "There's no doctor like sleep!"

His secret dread was that she might become seriously ill. What would he
do in that case, so far away from help?

He sat himself down to watch beside Clare while Mary prepared the
evening meal. There were still some three hours more of daylight, and he
decided to be guided as to their start up-river by Clare's condition
when she awoke. If she had a horror of the place they could start at
once, provided she were able to travel, and sleep under canvas.
Otherwise it would be well to wait until morning, for he was pretty
nearly all in himself. Indeed, while he waited with the keenest anxiety
for Clare's eyes to open, his own closed. He slept with his head fallen
forward on his breast.

He awoke to find Clare's wide-open eyes wonderingly fixed on him.

"Who are you?" she asked.

It struck a chill to his breast. Was she mad? This was a more dreadful
horror than he had foreseen. Yet there was nothing distraught in her
gaze, merely that same look of perplexed annoyance. It was an
appreciable moment before he could collect his wits sufficiently to
answer.

"Your friend," he said, forcing himself to smile.

"Yes, I think you are," she said slowly. "But it's funny I don't quite
know you."

"You soon will."

"What is your name?"

"Martin Stonor."

"And that uniform you are wearing?"

"Mounted police."

She raised herself a little, and looked around. The puzzled expression
deepened. "What a strange-looking room! What am I doing in such a
place?"

To Stonor it was like a conversation in a dream. It struck awe to his
breast. Yet he forced himself to answer lightly and cheerfully. "This
is a shack in the woods where we are camping temporarily. We'll start
for home as soon as you are able."

"Home? Where is that?" she cried like a lost child.

A great hard lump rose in Stonor's throat. He could not speak.

After a while she said: "I feel all right. I could eat."

"That's fine!" he cried from the heart. "That's the main thing. Supper
will soon be ready."

The next question was asked with visible embarrassment. "You are not my
brother, are you, or any relation?"

"No, only your friend," he said, smiling.

She was troubled like a child, biting her lip, and turning her face from
him to hide the threatening tears. There was evidently some question she
could not bring herself to ask. He could not guess what it was.
Certainly not the one she did ask.

"What time is it?"

"Past seven o'clock."

"That means nothing to me," she burst out bitterly. "It's like the first
hour to me. It's so foolish to be asking such questions! I don't know
what's the matter with me! I don't even know my own name!"

That was it! "Your name is Clare Starling," he said steadily.

"What am I doing in a shack in the woods?"

He hesitated before answering this. His first fright had passed. He had
heard of people losing their memories, and knew that it was not
necessarily a dangerous state. Indeed, now, this wiping-out of
recollection seemed like a merciful dispensation, and he dreaded the
word that would bring the agony back.

"Don't ask any more questions now," he begged her. "Just rest up for the
moment, and take things as they come."

"Something terrible has happened!" she said agitatedly. "That is why I
am like this. You're afraid to tell me what it is. But I must know.
Nothing could be so bad as not knowing anything. It is unendurable not
to have any identity. Don't you understand? I am empty inside here. The
me is gone!"

He arose and stood beside her bed. "I ask you to trust me," he said
gravely. "I am the only doctor available. If you excite yourself like
this only harm can come of it. Everything is all right now. You have
nothing to fear. People who lose their memories always get them back
again. If you do not remember of yourself I promise to tell you
everything that has happened."

"I will try to be patient," she said dutifully.

Presently she asked: "Is there no one here but us? I thought I
remembered a woman--or did I dream it?"

Stonor called Mary in and introduced her. Clare's eyes widened. "An
Indian woman!" their expression said.

Stonor said, as if speaking of the most everyday matter: "Mary, Miss
Starling's memory is gone. It will soon return, of course, and in the
meantime plenty of food and sleep are the best things for her. She has
promised me not to ask any more questions for the present."

Mary paled slightly. To her, loss of memory smacked of insanity of which
she was terribly in awe--like all her race. However, under Stonor's
stern eye she kept her face pretty well.

Clare said: "I'd like to get up now," and Stonor left the shack.

Nothing further happened that night. Clare ate a good supper, and a bit
of colour returned to her cheeks. Stonor had no reason to be anxious
concerning her physical condition. She asked no more questions.
Immediately after eating he sent her and Mary to bed. Shortly
afterwards Mary reported that Clare had fallen asleep again.

Stonor slept in the store-room. He was up at dawn, and by sunrise he had
everything ready for the start up-river.

It was an entirely self-possessed Clare that issued from the shack after
breakfast, yet there was something inaccessible about her. Though she
was anxious to be friends with Stonor and Mary, she was cut off from
them. They had to begin all over again with her. There was something
piteous in the sight of the little figure so alone even among her
friends; but she was bearing it pluckily.

She looked around her eagerly. The river was very lovely, with the sun
drinking up the light mist from its surface.

"What river is this?" she asked.

Stonor told her.

"It is not altogether strange to me," she said. "I feel as if I might
have known it in a previous existence. There is a fall below, isn't
there?"

"Yes."

"How do you suppose I knew that?"

He shrugged, smiling.

"And the--the catastrophe happened down there," she said diffidently. He
nodded.

"I feel it like a numb place inside me. But I don't want to go down
there. I feel differently from yesterday. Some day soon, of course, I
must turn back the dreadful pages, but not quite yet. I want a little
sunshine and laziness and sleep first; a little vacation from trouble."

"That's just as it should be," said Stonor, much relieved.

"Isn't it funny, I can't remember anything that ever happened to me, yet
I haven't forgotten everything I knew. I know the meaning of things. I
still seem to talk like a grown-up person. Words come to me when I need
them. How do you explain that?"

"Well, I suppose it's because just one little department of your brain
has stopped working for a while."

"Well, I'm not going to worry. The world is beautiful."

       *       *       *       *       *

The journey up-stream was a toilsome affair. Though the current between
the rapids was not especially swift, it made a great difference when
what had been added to their rate of paddling on the way down, was
deducted on the way back. Stonor foresaw that it would take them close
on ten days to make the Horse-Track. He and Mary took turns tracking the
canoe from the bank, while the other rested. Clare steered. Ascending
the rapids presented no new problems to a river-man, but it was
downright hard work. All hands joined in pulling and pushing, careless
of how they got wet.

The passing days brought no change in Clare's mental state, and in
Stonor the momentary dread of some thought or word that might bring
recollection crashing back, was gradually lulled. Physically she showed
an astonishing improvement, rejoicing in the hard work in the rapids,
eating and sleeping like a growing boy. To Stonor it was enchanting to
see the rosy blood mantle her pale cheeks and the sparkle of bodily
well-being enhance her eyes. With this new tide of health came a stouter
resistance to imaginative terrors. Away with doubts and questionings!
For the moment the physical side of her was uppermost. It was Nature's
own way of effecting a cure. Towards Stonor, in this new character of
hers, she displayed a hint of laughing boldness that enraptured him.

At first he would not let himself believe what he read in her new gaze;
that the natural woman who had sloughed off the burdens of an unhappy
past was disposed to love him. But of course he could not really resist
so sweet a suggestion. Let him tell himself all he liked that he was
living in a fool's paradise; that when recollection returned, as it must
in the end, she would think no more of him; nevertheless, when she
looked at him like that, he could not help being happy. The journey took
on a thousand new delights for him; such delights as his solitary youth
had never known. At least, he told himself, there was no sin in it, for
the only man who had a better claim on her was dead and buried.

One night they were camped beside some bare tepee poles on a point of
the bank. Mary had gone off to set a night-line in an eddy; Stonor lay
on his back in the grass smoking, and Clare sat near, nursing her knees.

"You've forbidden me to ask questions about myself," said she; "but how
about you?"

"Oh, there's nothing to tell about me."

She affected to study him with a disinterested air. "I don't believe you
have a wife," she said wickedly. "You haven't a married look."

"What kind of a look is that?"

"Oh, a sort of apologetic look."

"Well, as a matter of fact, I'm not married," he said, grinning.

"Have you a sweetheart?" she asked in her abrupt way, so like a boy's.

Stonor regarded his pipe-bowl attentively, but did not thereby succeed
in masking his blushes.

"Aha! You have!" she cried. "No need to answer."

"That depends on what you mean," he said, determined not to let her
outface him. "If you mean a regular cut and dried affair, no."

"But you're in love."

"Some might say so."

"Don't you say so?"

"I don't know. I've had no instruction on the subject."

"Pshaw! It's a poor kind of man that needs instruction!"

"I daresay."

"Tell me, and maybe I can instruct you."

"How can you tell the untellable?"

"Well, for instance, do you like to be with her?"

Stonor affected to study the matter. "No," he said.

She gave him so comical a look of rebuke that he laughed outright. "I
mean I'm uncomfortable whether I'm with her or away from her," he
explained.

"There may be something in that," she admitted. "Have you ever told
her?"

"No."

"Why don't you tell her like a man?"

"Things are not as simple as all that."

"Obstacles, eh?"

"Rather!"

A close observer might have perceived under Clare's scornful chaffing
the suggestion of a serious and anxious purpose. "Bless me! this is
getting exciting!" she said. "Maybe the lady has a husband?"

"No, not that."

A glint of relief showed under her lowered lids. "What's the trouble,
then?"

"Oh, just my general unworthiness, I guess."

"I don't think you can love her very much," she said, with pretended
scorn.

"Perhaps not," he said, refusing to be drawn.

She allowed the subject to drop. It was characteristic of Clare in her
lighter moments that her conversation skipped from subject to subject
like a chamois on the heights. Those who knew her well, though, began to
suspect in the end that there was often a method in her skipping. She
now talked of the day's journey, of the weather, of Mary's good
cooking, of a dozen minor matters. After a long time, when he might
naturally be supposed to have forgotten what they had started with, she
said offhand:

"Do you mind if I ask one question about myself?"

"Fire away."

"You told me my name was Miss Clare Starling."

"Do you suspect otherwise?"

"What am I doing with a wedding-ring?"

It took him unawares. He stared at her a little clownishly. "I--I never
noticed it," he stammered.

"It's hanging on a string around my neck."

"Your husband is dead," he said bluntly.

She cast down her eyes. "Was that--the catastrophe that happened up
here?"

While he wished to keep the information from her as long as possible, he
could not lie to her. "Yes," he said. "Don't ask any more."

She bowed as one who acknowledges the receipt of information not
personally important. "One more question; was he a good man, a man you
respected?"

"Oh, yes," he said quickly.

She looked puzzled. "Strange I should feel no sense of loss," she
murmured.

"You had been parted from him for a long time."

They fell silent. The charming spell that had bound them was effectually
broken. She shivered delicately, and announced her intention of going to
bed.

But in the morning she showed him a shining morning face. To arise
refreshed from sleep, hungry for one's breakfast, and eager for the
day's journey, was enough for her just now. She was living in her
instincts. Her instinct told her that Stonor loved her, and that
sufficed her. The dreadful things might wait.

Having ascended the last rapid, they found they could make better time
by paddling the dug-out, keeping close under the shore as the Kakisas
did, and cutting across from side to side on the inside of each bend to
keep out of the strongest of the current. The seating arrangement was
the same as at their start; Mary in the bow, Stonor in the stern, and
Clare facing Stonor. Thus all day long their eyes were free to dwell on
each other, nor did they tire. They had reached that perfect stage where
the eyes confess what the tongue dares not name; that charming stage of
folly when lovers tell themselves they are still safe because nothing
has been spoken. As a matter of fact it is with words that the way to
misunderstanding is opened. One cannot misunderstand happy eyes.
Meanwhile they were satisfied with chaffing each other.

"Martin, I wonder how old I am."

He studied her gravely. "I shouldn't say more than thirty-three or
four."

"You wretch! I'll get square with you for that! I can start with any age
I want. I'll be eighteen."

"That's all right, if you can get away with it. If I could keep you up
here awhile maybe you could knock off a little more."

"Oh, Martin, if one could only travel on this river for ever! It's so
blessed not to have to think of things!"

"Suit me all right. But I suppose Mary wants to see her kids."

"Let her go."

Her eyes fell under the rapt look that involuntarily leapt up in his. "I
mean we could get somebody else," she murmured.

Stonor pulled himself up short. "Unfortunately there's the force," he
said lightly. "If I don't go back and report they'll come after me."

"What is this place we are going to, Martin?"

"Fort Enterprise."

"I am like a person hanging suspended in space. I neither know where I
came from, nor where I am going. What is Fort Enterprise like?"

"A trading-post."

"Your home?"

"Such as it is."

"Why 'such as it is'?"

"Well, it's a bit of a hole."

"No society?"

"Society!" He laughed grimly.

"Aren't there any girls there?"

"Devil a one!--except Miss Pringle, the parson's sister, and she's
considerable oldish."

"Don't you know any real girls, Martin?"

"None but you, Clare."

She bent an odd, happy glance on him. It meant: "Is it possible that I
am the first with him?"

"Why do you look at me like that?" he asked.

"Oh, you're rather nice to look at," she said airily.

"Thanks," he said, blushing. He was modest, but that sort of thing
doesn't exactly hurt the most modest of men. "Same to you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They camped that night on a little plateau of sweet grass, and after
supper Mary told tales by the fire. Mary, bland and uncensorious, was a
perfect chaperon. What she thought of the present situation Stonor never
knew. He left it to Clare to come to an understanding with her. That
they shared many a secret from which he was excluded, he knew. Mary had
soon recovered from her terror of Clare's seeming illness.

"This the story of the Wolf-Man," she began. "Once on a tam there was a
man had two bad wives. They had no shame. That man think maybe if he go
away where there were no other people he can teach those women to be
good, so he move his lodge away off on the prairie. Near where they camp
was a high hill, and every evenin' when the sun go under the man go up
on top of the hill, and look all over the country to see where the
buffalo was feeding, and see if any enemies come. There was a
buffalo-skull on that hill which he sit on.

"In the daytime while he hunt the women talk. 'This is ver' lonesome,'
one say. 'We got nobody talk to, nobody to visit.'

"Other woman say: 'Let us kill our husband. Then we go back to our
relations, and have good time.'

"Early in the morning the man go out to hunt. When he gone his wives go
up the hill. Dig deep pit, and cover it with sticks and grass and dirt.
And put buffalo-skull on top.

"When the shadows grow long they see their husband coming home all bent
over with the meat he kill. So they mak' haste to cook for him. After he
done eating he go up on the hill and sit down on the skull. Wah! the
sticks break, and he fall in pit. His wives are watching him. When he
fall in they take down the lodge, pack everything, and travel to the
main camp of their people. When they get near the big camp they begin to
cry loud and tear their clothes.

"The people come out. Say: 'Why is this? Why you cry? Where is your
husband?'

"Women say: 'He dead. Five sleeps ago go out to hunt. Never come back.'
And they cry and tear their clothes some more.

"When that man fall in the pit he was hurt. Hurt so bad can't climb out.
Bam-bye wolf traveling along come by the pit and see him. Wolf feel
sorry. 'Ah-h-woo-o-o! Ah-h-woo-o-o!' he howl. Other wolves hear. All
come running. Coyotes, badgers, foxes come too.

"Wolf say: 'In this hole is my find. It is a man trapped. We dig him out
and have him for our brother.'

"All think wolf speak well. All begin to dig. Soon they dig a hole
close to the man. Then the wolf say: 'Wait! I want to say something.'
All the animals listen. Wolf say: 'We all have this man for our brother,
but I find him, so I say he come live with the big wolves.' The others
say this is well, so the wolf tear down the dirt and drag the man out.
He is almost dead. They give him a kidney to eat and take him to the
lodge of the big wolves. Here there is one old blind wolf got very
strong medicine. Him make that man well, and give him head and hands
like wolf.

"In those days long ago the people make little holes in the walls of the
cache where they keep meat, and set snares. When wolves and other
animals come to steal meat they get caught by the neck. One night wolves
all go to the cache to steal meat. When they come close man-wolf say:
'Wait here little while, I go down and fix place so you not get caught.'
So he go and spring all the snares. Then he go back and get wolves,
coyotes, badgers and foxes, and all go in the cache and make feast and
carry meat home.

"In the morning the people much surprise' find meat gone and snares
sprung. All say, how was that done? For many nights the meat is stolen
and the snares sprung. But one night when the wolves go there to steal
find only meat of a tough buffalo-bull. So the man-wolf was angry and
cry out:

"'Bad-you-give-us-ooo! Bad-you-give-us-ooo!'

"The people hear and say: 'It is a man-wolf who has done all this. We
catch him now!' So they put nice back-fat and tongue in the cache, and
hide close by. After dark the wolves come. When the man-wolf see that
good food he run to it and eat. Then the people run in and catch him
with ropes and take him to a lodge. Inside in the light of the fire they
see who it is. They say: 'This is the man who was lost!'

"Man say: 'No. I not lost. My wives try to kill me.' And he tell them
how it was. He say: 'The wolves take pity on me or I die there.'

"When the people hear this they angry at those bad women, and they tell
the man to do something about it.

"Man say: 'You say well. I give them to the Bull-Band, the Punishers of
Wrong.'

"After that night those two women were never seen again."

Mary Moosa, when one of her stories went well, with the true instinct of
a story-teller could seldom be persuaded to follow it with another,
fearing an anti-climax perhaps. She turned in under her little tent, and
soon thereafter trumpeted to the world that she slept.

Stonor and Clare were left together with self-conscious, downcast eyes.
All day they had longed for this moment, and now that it had come they
were full of dread. Their moods had changed; chaffing was for sunny
mornings on the river; in the exquisite, brooding dusk they hungered for
each other. Yet both still told themselves that the secret was safe from
the other. Finally Clare with elaborate yawns bade Stonor good-night and
disappeared under her tent.

An instinct that he could not have analysed told him she would be out
again. Half-way down the bank in a little grassy hollow he made a nest
for her with his blankets. When she did appear over the top of the bank
she surveyed these preparations with a touch of haughty surprise. She
had a cup in her hand.

"Were you going to spend the night here?" she asked.

"No," he said, much confused.

"What is this for, then?"

"I just hoped that you might come out and sit for a while."

"What reason had you to think that?"

"No reason. I just hoped it."

"Oh! I thought you were in bed. I just came out to get a drink."

Stonor, considerably dashed, took the cup and brought her water from the
river. She sipped it and threw the rest away. He begged her to sit down.

She sat in a tentative sort of way, and declined to be wrapped up. "I
can only stay a minute."

"Have you a pressing engagement?" he asked aggrievedly.

"One must sleep some time," she said rebukingly.

Stonor, totally unversed in the ways of women, was crushed by her
changed air. He looked away, racking his brains to hit on what he could
have done to offend her. She glanced at him out of the tail of her eye,
and a wicked little dimple appeared in one cheek. He was sufficiently
punished. She was mollified. But it was so sweet to feel her power over
him, that she could not forbear using it just a little.

"What's the matter?" he asked sullenly.

"Why, nothing!" she said with an indulgent smile, such as she might have
given a small boy.

An intuition told him that in a way it was like dealing with an Indian;
to ask questions would only put him at a disadvantage. He must patiently
wait until the truth came out of itself.

In silence he chose the weapon she was least proof against. She tried to
out-silence him, but soon began to fidget. "You're not very talkative,"
she said at last.

"I only seem to put my foot in it."

"You're very stupid."

"No doubt."

She got up. "I'm going back to bed."

"Sorry, we don't seem to be able to hit it off after supper."

"I'd like to beat you!" she cried with a little gust of passion.

This was more encouraging. "Why?" he asked, grinning.

"You're so dense!"

At last he understood, and a great peace filled him. "Sit down," he said
coaxingly. "Let's be friends. We only have nine days more."

This took her by surprise. She sat. "Why only nine days?"

"When we get out your life will claim you. This little time will seem
like a dream."

She began to see then, and her heart warmed towards him. "Now I
understand what's the matter with you!" she cried. "You think that I am
not myself now; that this me which is talking to you is not the real me,
but a kind of--what do they call it?--a kind of changeling. And that
when we get back to the world, or some day soon, this me will be whisked
away again, and my old self come back and take possession of my body."

"Something like that," he said, with a rueful smile.

"Oh, you hurt me when you talk like that!" she cried. "You are wrong,
quite, quite wrong! This is my ownest self that speaks to you now; that
is--that is your friend, and it will never change! Think a little. What
I have lost is not essential. It is only memory. That is to say, the
baggage that one gradually collects through life; what was impressed on
your mind as a child; what you pick up from watching other people and
from reading books; what people tell you you ought to do; outside ideas
of every kind, mostly false. Well, I've chucked it all--or it has been
chucked for me. Such as I am now, I am the woman I was born to be! And I
will never change. I don't care if I never find my lost baggage. My
heart is light without it. But if I do it can make no difference.
Baggage is only baggage. And having once found your own heart you never
could forget that."

They both instinctively stood up. They did not touch each other.

"Do you still doubt me?" she asked.

"No."

"You will see. I understand you better now. I shall not tease you any
more. Good-night, Martin."

"Good-night, Clare."


CHAPTER XI

THE MYSTERY


Next morning, when they had been on the river for about three hours,
they came upon their friend Etzooah, he of the famous hair, still
hunting along shore in his canoe, but this time without the little boy.
Stonor hailed him with pleasure; for of all the Kakisa Indians only this
one had acted towards them like a man and a brother.

But the policeman was doomed to disappointment. When they overtook
Etzooah they saw that the red man's open, friendly look had changed. He
turned a hard, wary eye on them, just like all the other Kakisas. Stonor
guessed that he must have visited his people in the interim, and have
been filled up with their nonsensical tales. Affecting to notice no
change, Stonor said:

"We are going to spell here. Will you eat with us?"

No Indian was ever known to refuse a meal. Etzooah landed without a
word, and sat apart waiting for it to be prepared. He made no offer to
help, but merely sat watching them out of his inscrutable, beady eyes.
Stonor, hoping to find him with better dispositions after he had filled
up, let him alone.

Throughout the meal Etzooah said nothing except to answer Stonor's
questions in monosyllables. He denied having been up to Ahcunazie's
village. Stonor was struck by the fact that he made no inquiry
respecting his friend Imbrie. Stonor himself did not like to bring up
the subject of Imbrie in Clare's hearing. Altogether baffled by the
man's changed air, he finally said:

"Mary, translate this just as I give it to you.--When the policeman come
down the river he meet Etzooah. He is glad to see Etzooah. He say, here
is a good man. Etzooah give the policeman good talk. They part friends.
But when the policeman come back up the river Etzooah is changed. He is
not glad to see the policeman. He gives him black looks. Why is that?
Has anyone spoken evil of the policeman to Etzooah? He is ready to
answer. He asks this in friendship."

But it was all wasted on the Indian. He shrugged, and said with bland,
unrelenting gaze: "Etzooah not changed. Etzooah glad to see the
policeman come back."

When they had finished eating, Clare, guessing that Stonor could talk
more freely if she were out of hearing, strolled away to a little
distance and sat down to do some mending.

Stonor said to Etzooah through Mary: "I have bad news for you."

The Indian said: "You not find White Medicine Man?"

"He is dead."

Etzooah's jaw dropped. He stared at Stonor queerly. "What for you tell
me that?" he demanded.

The style of the question nonplussed Stonor for the moment. "Why do I
tell you? You said you were his friend."

Etzooah veiled his eyes. "So--he dead," he said stolidly. "I sorry for
that."

Now it was perfectly clear to Stonor that while the man's first
exclamation had been honest and involuntary, his later words were
calculated. There was no trace of sorrow in his tones. It was all very
puzzling.

"I think he must have been crazy," Stonor went on. "He shoved off in his
canoe, and let the current carry him down. Then he shot himself."

Etzooah still studied Stonor like a man searching for ulterior motives.
Clearly he did not believe what he was being told. "Why you think that?
The falls never tell."

"His body didn't go over the falls. It caught on a log-jam in the
rapids."

"I know that log-jam. How you know his body there?"

"I brought it ashore. Mary helped me."

Etzooah smiled in a superior way.

Stonor, exasperated, turned to Mary. "Make it clear to him that I am
telling the truth if it takes half-an-hour." He turned away and filled
his pipe.

Mary presumably found the means of convincing the doubter. Etzooah lost
his mask. His mouth dropped open; he stared at Stonor with wild eyes; a
yellowish tint crept into the ruddy copper of his skin. This agitation
was wholly disproportionate to what Mary was telling him. Stonor
wondered afresh. Etzooah stammered out a question.

Mary said in her impassive way: "Etzooah say how we know that was the
White Medicine Man's body?"

"Was there any other man there?" said Stonor.

When this was repeated to the Indian he clapped his hands to his head.
"Non! Non!" he muttered.

Stonor indicated Clare. "She said it was Imbrie's body. She was his
wife."

Etzooah stared stupidly at Clare.

Suddenly he started to rise.

Mary said: "He say he got go now."

Stonor laid a heavy hand on the Indian's shoulder. "Sit down! Not until
this matter is explained. Perhaps the man did not kill himself. Perhaps
he was murdered."

Etzooah seemed beside himself with terror.

"Ask him what he's afraid of?"

"He say he sick in his mind because his friend is dead."

"Nonsense! This is not grief, but terror. Tell him I want the truth now.
I asked as a friend at first: now I ask in the name of the law."

Etzooah suddenly rolled away on the ground out of Stonor's reach. Then,
springing to his feet with incredible swiftness, he cut for the water's
edge. But Mary stuck out her leg in his path and he came to earth with a
thud. Stonor secured him. Clare from where she sat looked up with
startled eyes.

"For the last time I ask you what you know about this matter," said
Stonor sternly. "If you refuse to answer, I'll carry you outside and put
you in the white man's jail."

Etzooah answered sullenly.

"He say he know not'ing," said Mary.

"Get the tracking-line, and help me tie his hands and feet."

When Etzooah saw that Stonor really meant to do what he said, he
collapsed.

"He say he tell now," said Mary.

Etzooah spoke rapidly and tremblingly to Mary. Little doubt now that he
was telling the truth, thought Stonor, watching him. The effect of his
communication on the stolid Mary was startling in the extreme. She
started back, and the same look of panic terror appeared in her eyes.
She was unable to speak.

"For God's sake, what's the matter with you all?" cried Stonor.

Mary moistened her dry lips. She faltered: "He say--he say he so scare
when you say you find Imbrie's body five sleeps ago because--because two
sleeps ago Imbrie spell wit' him beside the river."

It was the turn of Stonor's jaw to drop, and his eyes to stare.
"But--but this is nonsense!" he cried.

Clare could no longer contain her curiosity. "What is the matter,
Martin?" she asked.

"Some red-skin mumbo-jumbo," he answered angrily. "I'll soon get to the
bottom of it."

Lowering his voice, he said to Mary: "Have him tell me exactly what
happened two sleeps ago."

Mary translated as Etzooah spoke. "Two sleeps ago. The sun was half-way
to the middle of the sky. I spell down river near the rapids on the
point where the tepee-poles are. I see White Medicine Man come paddling
up. I moch surprise see him all alone because I know you gone down to
see him. I call to him. He come on shore to me."

"What kind of a canoe?" asked Stonor.

"Kakisa canoe. Got willow-branches in it, for cause Eembrie sit on his
knees and paddle, not like Kakisa."

This was a convincing detail. Little beads of perspiration sprang out on
Stonor's brow.

Etzooah went on: "We talk----"

"Could he speak Kakisa?"

"No. We talk by signs. He know some Kakisa words. I teach him that. I
say to him Red-coat and White girl gone down river to see you. You not
see them? How is that? Eembrie laugh: say: 'I see them, but they not see
me. Red-coat want to get me I guess, so I run away.' Eembrie say: 'Don'
you tell Red-coat you see me.' That is why I not want tell. I mean no
harm. Eembrie is my friend. I not want police to get him."

Stonor scarcely heard the last words. His world was tumbling around his
ears. But Etzooah's and Mary's sly, scared glances in his face brought
him to himself. "Anything more?" he asked harshly.

Etzooah hastened on: "Eembrie moch in a hurry. Not want spell. Say he
come away so quick got no grub but duck him shoot. I got not'ing but
little rabbit, but I say, come to my camp, got plenty dry meat, dry
fish. So we paddle up river till the sun is near gone under. Eembrie not
talk much. Eembrie not want come to my camp. Not want my wife, my
brot'er, my children see him. My camp little way from river. Eembrie
wait beside the river. I go bring him dry meat, dry fish, matches and a
hatchet. Eembrie go up river. That is all."

The story had a convincing ring. So far as it went Stonor could scarcely
doubt it, though there was much else that needed to be explained. It
pricked the bubble of his brief happiness. How was he going to tell
Clare? He had much ado to keep his face under the Indians' curious
glances. They naturally were ascribing their terrors to him. This idea
caused him to smile grimly.

"What kind of a gun did Imbrie have?" he asked.

Etzooah replied through Mary that he had not seen Imbrie's gun, that it
was probably covered by his blankets.

Stonor seemed to be pondering deeply on what he had heard. As a matter
of fact, conscious only of the hurt he had received, he was incapable of
consecutive thought. The damnable question reiterated itself. "How am I
going to tell Clare?" Even now she was waiting with her eyes upon him
for some word. He dared not look at her.

He was roused by hearing Etzooah and Mary talking together in scared
voices.

"What does Etzooah say?" he demanded.

Mary faltered: "He say Eembrie got ver' strong medicine. Him not stay
dead."

"That is nonsense. You saw the body. Could a man without a face come to
life?"

She asked Etzooah timidly if Imbrie's face was all right.

"Well, what does he say?" Stonor demanded with a scornful smile.

"He say Eembrie's face smooth lak a baby's," Mary replied with downcast
eyes.

"If Etzooah's story is true it was another man's body that we buried,"
said Stonor dejectedly.

He saw by the dogged expression on both red faces that they would not
have this. They insisted on the supernatural explanation. In a way they
loved the mystery that scared them half out of their wits.

"What man's body was that?" asked Etzooah, challengingly.

And Stonor could not answer. Etzooah insisted that no other man had gone
down the river, certainly no white man. Stonor knew from the condition
of the portage trail that no one had come up from below that season.
There remained the possibility that Imbrie had brought in a companion
with him, but everything in his shack had been designed for a single
occupant; moreover the diary gave the lie to this supposition. Etzooah
said that he had been to Imbrie's shack the previous fall, and there was
no other man there then. There were moments when the bewildered
policeman was almost forced to fall back on the supernatural
explanation.

It would never do for him, though, to betray bewilderment; not only the
two Indians, but Clare, looked to him for guidance. He must not think of
the wreck of his own hopes, but only of what must be done next. He rose
stiffly, and gave Mary the word to pack up. At any rate his duty was
clear. The fleeing Imbrie held the key to the mystery, and he must be
captured--Imbrie, Clare's husband, and now a possible murderer!

"Martin, tell me what's the matter," Clare said again, as he held the
dug-out for her to get in.

"I'll tell you as soon as I get rid of this Indian," he said, with as
easy an air as he could muster.

He ordered Etzooah to take him to his camp, as he wished to search it,
and to question his family. The Indian stolidly prepared to obey.

It was at no great distance up-stream. It consisted of three tepees
hidden from the river, a Kakisa custom dating from the days when they
had warlike enemies. The tepees were occupied by Etzooah's immediate
family, and the households respectively of his brother and his
brother-in-law.

The search and the examination revealed but one significant fact, and
that corroborated Etzooah's story. Two days before he had undoubtedly
come into camp and had taken meat and fish from their slender store.
Exerting the prerogative of the head of the family, he had declined to
tell them what he wanted it for, and the women recited the fact to
Stonor as a grievance. It was a vastly relieved Etzooah that Stonor left
among his relatives. The fear of being carried off among the white men
remained with him until he saw the policeman out of sight. Stonor had
warned him to say nothing of what had happened down-river.

Stonor rejoined Clare and Mary, and they continued up-stream. Stonor had
now to tell Clare what he had learned. She was waiting for it. In her
anxious face there was only solicitude for him, no suspicion that the
affair concerned herself. He had wished to wait until night, but he saw
that he could not travel all day in silence with her. No use beating
about the bush either; she was an intelligent being and worthy of
hearing the truth.

"Clare," he began, avoiding her eyes, "you know I told you how I found
your husband's body in the river, but I did not tell you--I merely
wished to spare you something horrible--that it was much mutilated by
being thrown against the rocks, especially the face."

She paled. "How did you know then--how did we know that it was he?" she
asked, with a catch in her breath.

"You appeared to recognize it. You cried out his name before you
fainted. I thought there must be certain marks known to you."

"Well?"

"It appears we were mistaken. It must have been the body of another man.
According to the story the Indian has just told, Imbrie went up the
river two days ago. The story is undoubtedly true. There were details he
could not have invented."

There was a silence. When he dared look at her, he saw with relief that
she was not so greatly affected as he had feared. She was still thinking
of him, Stonor.

"Martin," she murmured, deprecatingly, "there's no use pretending. I
don't seem to feel it much except through you. You are so distressed.
For myself it all seems--so unreal."

He nodded. "That's natural."

She continued to study his face. "Martin, there's worse behind?" she
said suddenly.

He looked away.

"You suspect that this man ... my husband ... whom I do not know ...
that other man ... murder, perhaps?"

He nodded.

She covered her face with her hands. But only for a moment. When they
came down she could still smile at him.

"Martin, do not look so, or I shall hate myself for having brought all
this on you."

"That's silly," he said gruffly.

She did not misunderstand the gruffness. "Do not torment yourself so.
It's a horrible situation, unspeakably horrible. But it's none of our
making. We can face it. I can, if I am sure you will always--be my
friend--even though we are parted."

He raised his head. After all she was the comforter. "You make me
ashamed," he said. "Of course we can face it!"

"Perhaps I can help you. I must try to remember now. We must work at it
like a problem that does not concern us especially."

"Have you the diary?" he asked suddenly. "That's essential now."

"Did I have it?"

"In the side pocket of your coat."

"It's not there now. It's not among my things. I haven't seen it
since--I came to myself."

He concealed his disappointment. "Oh, well, if it was left in the shack
it will be safe there. I'm sure no Indian would go within fifty miles of
the spot now."

"Have you any idea who the dead man could have been?"

"Not the slightest. It's a black mystery."


CHAPTER XII

IMBRIE


Stonor went ashore at Ahcunazie's village, searched every tepee, and
questioned the inhabitants down to the very children. The result was
nil. The Indians one and all denied that Imbrie had come back up the
river. Stonor was convinced that they were lying. He said nothing of
what had happened down at the falls, though the young Kakisa, Ahteeah,
displayed no little curiosity on his own account.

They went on, making the best time they could against the current. Clare
wielded a third paddle now. The river was no less beautiful; the brown
flood moved with the same grace between the dark pines; but they had
changed. They scarcely noticed it. When they talked it was to discuss
the problem that faced them in businesslike voices. Like the Kakisas
they searched the shores now, but they were looking for two-legged game.
What other Indians they met on the river likewise denied having seen
Imbrie.

Stonor had in mind the fact that the devoted Kakisas could hide Imbrie
in any one of a thousand places along the shores. It was impossible for
him to make a thorough search single-handed, nor did he feel justified
in remaining on the river with Clare. His plan was to return to Fort
Enterprise as quickly as possible, making the best search he could by
the way, and, after obtaining assistance, to return. In the end, unless
he got out, the river would be like a trap for Imbrie. It was quite
likely that he understood this, and was even now struggling to get away
as far as possible.

On the morning of the tenth day after leaving Imbrie's shack they
arrived at the Horse Track, and Ahchoogah's village. Their coming was
hailed with the same noisy excitement, in which there was no trace of a
welcome. Stonor instantly sought out the head man, and abruptly demanded
to know when Imbrie had returned, and where he had gone. Ahchoogah, with
the most perfect air of surprise, denied all knowledge of the White
Medicine Man, and in his turn sought to question Stonor as to what had
happened. It was possible, of course, that Ahchoogah's innocence was
real, but he had the air of an accomplished liar. He could not quite
conceal the satisfaction he took in his own fine acting.

Stonor posted Clare at the door of the shack, whence she could overlook
the entire village, with instructions to raise an alarm if she saw
anybody trying to escape. Meanwhile, with Mary, he made his usual search
among the tepees, questioning all the people. Nothing resulted from
this, but on his rounds he was greatly elated to discover among the
canoes lying in the little river the one with the peculiar notches cut
in the bow-thwart. So he was still on his man's track! He said nothing
to any one of his find.

He set himself to puzzle out in which direction Imbrie would likely next
have turned. Certainly not to Fort Enterprise; that would be sticking
his head in the lion's mouth. It was possible Ahchoogah might have
concealed him in the surrounding bush, but Stonor doubted that, for they
knew that the policeman must soon be back, and their instinct would be
to get the man safely out of his way. There remained the third Kakisa
village at Swan Lake, seventy miles up the river, but in that case, why
should he not have gone on in the canoe? However, Stonor learned from
Mary that it was customary for the Kakisas to ride to Swan Lake. While
it was three days' paddle up-stream it could be ridden in a day. In
fact, everything pointed to Swan Lake. If Imbrie was trying to get out
of the country altogether the upper Swan provided the only route in this
direction. Stonor decided to take the time to pay a little surprise
visit to the village there.

Stonor announced at large that he was returning to Fort Enterprise that
same day. Ahchoogah's anxiety to speed his departure further assured him
that he was on the right track. Collecting their horses and packing up,
they were ready for the trail about five that afternoon. The Indians
were more cordial in bidding them farewell than they had been in
welcoming them. There was a suspicious note of "good riddance" in it.

After an hour's riding they came to the first good grass, a charming
little "prairie" beside the stream that Clare had christened Meander.
Stonor dismounted, and the two women, reining up, looked at him in
surprise, for they had eaten just before leaving the Indian village, and
the horses were quite fresh, of course.

"Would you and Mary be afraid to stay here all night without me?" he
asked Clare.

"Not if it is necessary," she answered promptly. "That is, if you are
not going into danger," she added.

He laughed. "Danger! Not the slightest! I think I know where Imbrie is.
I'm going after him."

Clare's eyes widened. "I thought you had given him up for the present."

He shook his head. "I couldn't tell you back there, but I found his
canoe among the others."

"Where are you going?"

"To the Kakisa village at Swan Lake."

He saw Mary's expression change slightly, and took encouragement
therefrom. Mary, he knew, divided between her loyalty to Clare and her
allegiance to her own people, was in a difficult position. Stonor was
very sure, though, that he could depend on her to stand by Clare.

"Haven't you come far out of your way?" Clare asked.

"Not so far as you might think. We've been travelling south the last few
miles. By crossing the Meander here and heading east through the bush
I'll hit the Swan River in four miles or so. I'll be out of the bush
long before dark. I've heard there's a short-cut trail somewhere, if I
only knew where to find it."

He said this purposely within Mary's hearing. She spoke up: "Other side
this little prairie where the ford is. There the trail begins."

Stonor was not a little touched by this. "Good for you, Mary!" he said
simply. "I shan't forget it. You've saved me a struggle through the
bush."

Mary only looked inscrutable. One had to take her feelings for granted.

"When will you be back?" Clare asked.

"By land it's about ninety miles' round trip. As I must ride the same
horse the whole way, say three or four to-morrow afternoon. I won't take
Miles Aroon, he's too valuable to risk. I'll ride the bay. If anything
should delay me Tole Grampierre is due to arrive from the post day after
to-morrow."

They made camp beside the ford that Mary pointed out. Clare waved Stonor
out of sight with a smile. His mind was at ease about her, for he knew
of no dangers that could threaten her there, if her fears created none.

The side trail was little-used and rough, and he was forced to proceed
at a slow walk: the roughest trail, however, is infinitely better than
the untrodden bush. This part of the country had been burned over years
before, and the timber was poplar and fairly open. Long before dark he
came into the main trail between the two Indian villages. This was
well-travelled and hard, and he needed to take no further thought about
picking his way; the horse attended to that. For the most part the going
was so good he had to hold his beast in, to keep him from tiring too
quickly. He saw the river only at intervals on his right hand in its
wide sweeps back and forth through its shallow valley.

He spelled for his supper, and darkness came on. Stonor loved travelling
at night, and the unknown trail added a zest to this ride. The night
world was as quiet as a room. Where one can see less one feels more. The
scents of night hung heavy on the still air; the pungency of poplar, the
mellowness of balsam, the bland smell of river-water that makes the skin
tingle with desire to bathe, the delicate acidity of grass that caused
his horse to whicker. The trail alternated pretty regularly between
wooded ridges, where the stones caused him to slacken his pace, and long
traverses of the turfy river-bottoms, where he could give his horse his
head. Twice during the night he picketed his horse in the grass, and
took a short nap himself. At dawn, from the last ridge, he saw the pale
expanse of Swan Lake stretching to the horizon, and at sun-up he rode
among the tepees of the Kakisa village.

It was built on the edge of the firm ground bordering the lake, though
the lake itself was still half a mile distant across a wet meadow. Swan
Lake was not a true lake, but merely a widening of the river where it
filled a depression among its low hills. With its flat, reedy shores it
had more the characteristics of a prairie slough. As in the last
village, the tepees were raised in a double row alongside a small stream
which made its way across the meadow to the lake. In the middle of their
village the stream rippled over shallows, and here they had placed
stepping-stones for their convenience in crossing. Below it was sluggish
and deep, and here they kept their canoes. These Kakisas used both
dug-outs, for the lake, and bark-canoes for the river. The main body of
the lake stretched to the west and south: off to Stonor's right it
gradually narrowed down to the ordinary dimensions of the river.

When Stonor reined up alongside the little stream not a soul was
stirring outside the tepees. He had at least succeeded in taking them by
surprise. The first man who stuck his head out, aroused by the dogs,
was, to his astonishment, white. But when Stonor got a good look at him
he could scarcely credit his eyes. It was none other than Hooliam, the
handsome young blackguard he had deported from Carcajou Point two months
before. Seeing the policeman, Hooliam hastily made to withdraw his head,
but Stonor ordered him out in no uncertain terms. He obeyed with his
inimitable insolent grin.

Stonor dismounted, letting his reins hang. The well-trained horse stood
where he left him. "What are you doing here?" the policeman demanded.

"Just travelling," drawled Hooliam. "Any objection?"

"I'll take up your case later. First I want the white man Ernest Imbrie.
Which tepee is he in?"

Hooliam stared, and a peculiar grin wreathed itself around his lips.
"I've seen no white man here," he said. "Except myself. They call me a
white man." He spoke English without a trace of the red man's clipped
idiom.

Stonor's glance of scorn was significant. It meant: "What are you doing
in the tepees, then?"

But the other was quite unabashed. "I'll get Myengeen for you," he said,
turning to go.

He seemed a bit too eager. Stonor laid a heavy hand on his shoulder.
"You stay where you are."

Meanwhile the little Kakisas had begun to appear from the tepees, the
men hanging back bashfully, the women and children peering from under
flaps and under the edges of the tepees, with scared eyes.

"I want Myengeen," said Stonor to the nearest man.

All heads turned to a figure crossing the stream. Stonor waited for him,
keeping an eye on Hooliam meanwhile. The individual who approached was a
little larger than the average of the Kakisas; well-favoured, and with a
great shock of blue-black hair hanging to his neck. He was quite
sprucely dressed in store clothes. His close-set eyes and extremely
short upper lip gave him a perpetual sneer. He had the walled look of a
bold child caught in mischief. He came up to Stonor and offered his hand
with a defiant air, saying: "How!"

Stonor shook hands with him, affecting not to notice the signs of
truculence. The other Indians, encouraged by the presence of their head
man, drew closer.

"I want Ernest Imbrie," Stonor said sternly. "Where is he?"

Myengeen could speak no English, but the spoken name and the tone were
significant enough. He fell back a step, and scowled at Stonor as if he
suspected him of a desire to make fun of him. Then his eyes went
involuntarily to Hooliam. Stonor, following his glance, was struck by
the odd, self-conscious leer on Hooliam's comely face. Suddenly it
flashed on him that this was his man. His face went blank with
astonishment. The supposed Hooliam laughed outright.

"Is _this_ Imbrie??" cried Stonor.

Myengeen nodded sullenly.

Hooliam said something in Kakisa that caused the surrounding Indians to
grin covertly.

And in truth there was a comic aspect to Stonor's dismay. His brain was
whirling. This hardy young villain married to the exquisite Clare! This
the saviour of the Indians! This the high-minded gentleman whose diary
Clare had read to him! It was inexplicable. Yet Stonor suddenly
remembered Hooliam's curiosity concerning the reports that were in
circulation about the White Medicine Man; this was understandable now.
But how could Clare have so stooped----? Well, it must be left to time
to unravel.

He pulled himself together. "So you're Imbrie," he said grimly.

"That was my dad's name," was the impudent reply.

"I'll have to trouble you to take a journey with me."

"What's the charge?"

"Oh, we merely want to look into your doings up here."

"You have no right to arrest me without some evidence of wrong-doing."

"Well, I'm going to arrest you anyhow, and take my chances of proving
something on you."

Hooliam scowled and pulled at his lip.

Stonor thought: "You'd give a lot to know how much I know, my man!"

Myengeen addressed Imbrie. Stonor watched him narrowly. He could only
understand one word, the man's name, "Eembrie," but Myengeen's whole
attitude to the other was significant. There was respect in it;
admiration, not unmixed with awe. Stonor wondered afresh. Clearly there
could be no doubt this was their White Medicine Man.

Imbrie said to Stonor, with his cynical laugh: "I suppose you want to
know what he's saying. I don't understand it all. I'm just learning
their lingo. But he's offering me the homage of the tribe or something
like that."

"It's more than you deserve," thought Stonor. Aloud he said: "Imbrie, if
you do what I tell you you can ride as you are. But if you want to make
trouble I'll have to tie you up. So take your choice."

"Oh, I don't hanker after any hempen bracelets," said Imbrie. "What do
you want of me?"

"First of all order somebody to bring out all your gear and spread it on
the ground."

"That's not much," said Imbrie. By word and by sign he communicated the
order to one of the Kakisas. It seemed to Stonor that something was
reserved.

The Indian disappeared in the tepee and presently returned with Imbrie's
"bed," that is to say, a pair of heavy blankets and a small, grimy
pillow, and Imbrie's hatchet.

"That's all I brought," said Imbrie, "except a little dried moose-meat,
and that's eaten up."

"I want your gun," said Stonor.

"Didn't bring any."

"Then what are you wearing a cartridge-belt for?" Imbrie shrugged
airily.

"Produce your gun, or I'll tie you up, and search for it myself."

Imbrie spoke, and the Kakisa disappeared again, returning with a
revolver, which he handed to Stonor. Stonor was careful not to betray
the grim satisfaction he experienced at the sight of it. It was of
thirty-eight calibre, the same as the bullet that reposed in his pocket.
While not conclusive, perhaps, this was strong evidence. Since he had
seen this man he had lost his dread of bringing the crime home to him.
He wished to convict him now. He dropped the revolver in his side
pocket, and held out his hand for the ammunition-belt, which was handed
over.

"Now get a horse," he said.

Myengeen objected with violent shakes of the head.

"He says he's got no horses to hand over," said Imbrie, grinning.

"Make him understand that I will give a receipt for the horse. If it is
not returned the company will pay in trade."

"No spare horses," he says.

"Let him give you the horse you came on."

"I walked."

Stonor did not believe this for a moment. "Very well then, you can walk
back," he said coolly.

Imbrie thought better of this. He entered into a colloquy with Myengeen
which eventually resulted in a horse being caught and led up and
saddled. Stonor gave a receipt for it as promised. Myengeen handled the
bit of paper fearfully.

"Now mount!" said Stonor.

"Aren't you going to let me have my breakfast?"

"We'll spell beside the trail."

Myengeen became visibly excited and began to harangue Imbrie in a fiery
style, with sidelong looks at the policeman. Stonor out of the tail of
his eye saw answering scowls gather on the faces of the other Indians as
they listened. Myengeen's gestures were significant; with a sweep of his
arm he called attention to the number of his followers, and then pointed
to Stonor, who was but one.

Imbrie said with a sneering laugh: "He's telling me that I have only to
say the word, and you'll never take me."

"Rubbish!" said Stonor coolly. "Men do not oppose the police."

They could not understand the words, but the tone intimidated them.
Their eyes bolted as he looked sternly from man to man. He saw that look
of angry pain come into their eyes that he knew in their race. It was
not that they did not wish to defy him, but they dared not, and they
knew they dared not.

"Oh, I'm helping you out, old man," said Imbrie, with airy impudence.
"I'm telling them I don't mind going with you, because you've got
nothing in the world against me. I'm going to give them some good advice
now. Listen."

He did indeed address Myengeen earnestly at some length. Stonor could
not guess what he was saying, for he used no gestures. He saw that it
was true Imbrie was unpractised in their tongue, for he spoke with
difficulty, hesitating for words, and they had to pay close attention to
get his meaning. Myengeen listened with a face as inscrutable as
Imbrie's own. At the end he nodded with an expression of approval, and
bent a queer look on Stonor that the trooper was unable to fathom.

Imbrie then tied his bed behind his saddle and swung himself on the
horse. Stonor signed to him to start first, and they trotted out from
among the tepees. Stonor sat stiffly with the butt of his gun on his
thigh, and disdained to look around. The instant they got in motion a
wailing sound swept from tepee to tepee. Stonor wondered greatly at the
hold this fellow had obtained over the simple people; even the Kakisas,
it seemed to him, should have been able to see that he was no good.

They trotted smartly over the first ridge and out of sight. A long,
grassy bottom followed. When they had put what Stonor considered a safe
distance between them and the village, he called a halt. Picketing the
horses, and building a fire, he set about preparing their simple meal.
Imbrie seemed willing enough to do his share of unpacking, fetching wood
and water, etc.; indeed in his cynical way he was almost good-natured.

As they sat over their meal he said tauntingly: "Why are you afraid to
tell me what the charge is against me?"

Stonor had no intention of letting out what he knew. He figured that
Imbrie's mind was probably perfectly at ease regarding the
murder--always supposing there had been a murder--because he could not
possibly guess that the body had not been carried over the falls. He
retorted: "If your conscience is easy, what do you care what charge is
made?"

"Naturally I want to know why I'm obliged to upset all my plans to make
this journey."

"There is no charge yet."

"But when you bring me in you'll have to make some kind of a charge."

"Oh, I suppose they'll merely ask you to explain your business up here."

"And if I stand on my rights as a free man, and refuse to tell my
business?"

Stonor shrugged. "That's not up to me. I shan't be the one to question
you."

"Is it a crime to live alone?"

"No. But why did you run away when I came to see you?"

"I didn't run away."

"Don't know what you call it, then. When you saw us coming you hid in a
tree."

"Who was us?" asked Imbrie, with a leer.

Stonor could not bring himself to name Clare's name to the man. "I think
you know," he said quietly. "When night came you fell or jumped out of
the tree, and took to the bush. Later you attempted to sneak into the
house----"

"Well, it was my own house, wasn't it?"

"Sure, that's what puzzles me. What were you afraid of? Then when the
Indian woman screamed you lit out for the beach, and beat it up the
river."

"Well, was that a crime?"

"No, only a suspicious circumstance. Frankly, now, don't you consider
yourself a suspicious character?"

"Oh, it's your business to suspect everybody!"

"Well, when I first met you, why did you lie to me concerning your
identity?"

"I didn't lie. I just kept the truth to myself."

"You told me your name was Hooliam."

"Can't a man have more than one baptismal name?"

"Is it Ernest William, or William Ernest?" asked Stonor mockingly.

"I shan't tell you. I shan't tell you anything about myself until I
know what I'm wanted for. I suppose that's my right, isn't it?"

"Sure!" said Stonor good-naturedly. "Anything you like. Travellers must
be saying something to each other."

But Imbrie was not content to let the matter drop. There was a little
gnawing anxiety somewhere. He burst out: "And have I got to put myself
to the trouble of taking this long journey, just because you're too
thick-witted to understand my perfectly natural motives?"

"Put it that way if you like," said Stonor, grinning. "The police _are_
thick sometimes in dealing with clever fellows like you."

"Well, I'll tell you. I came up to this country because I choose to live
alone. My reasons are my own affair. I'm not wanted by the police of
this or any other country. But I don't choose to be spied on and
followed up. That's why I got out of the way."

"Did you live alone down there?" asked Stonor casually.

"What do you mean?"

"Well, there was that lady who left Carcajou Point with you."

"Oh, that was just a temporary affair," said Imbrie, with a leer.

Stonor, thinking of Clare, could have struck him for it. With an effort
he swallowed his rage. "Did you never have any visitors?" he asked
coolly.

Imbrie favoured him with a lightning glance. "What put that idea into
your head?"

Stonor lied in the good cause. "One of the Indians said you had a
visitor."

"When?"

"Just a few days before we went down."

"What kind of visitor?"

"A man much like yourself," said Stonor.

Imbrie lost his grin for the moment. "It's a lie," he said thickly.

"Oh, well, it's no crime to have a visitor," said Stonor smoothly.

Imbrie saw his mistake, and quickly commanded himself. He laughed
easily. "Just my way," he said. "I'm cracked on the subject of living
alone."

They had to spell at short intervals during the day, for Stonor's horse
was growing very tired. Whenever they halted they began to fence with
words in much the same way, each trying to discover the other's weak
joint without letting down his own guard. It seemed to Stonor that,
under his cynical insolence, his prisoner was growing ever more anxious.

On one occasion Imbrie said with a careless air: "Did you see the big
falls when you were down the river?"

"No," said Stonor instantly.

"Very fine sight."

It occurred to Stonor that a certain amount of curiosity on his part
would appear natural. "What are they like?"

Imbrie looked at him through slightly narrowed lids. "Big horse-shoe
effect. The water falls all around in a sort of half-circle, and there
are tremendous rocks below. The water falls on the rocks."

This description sounded purposely misleading. The place, of course, was
not like that at all. Stonor thought: "What does he tell me that for?
Living there all that time, it isn't possible he hasn't seen the falls.
In his diary he mentioned going there." Suddenly the explanation came to
him. "I know! He's trying to tempt me to call him a liar, and then he'll
know I've been there."

"Must be great!" he said offhand.

During the last spell Imbrie slept part of the time. Stonor dared not
close his eyes, though he needed sleep sorely. He sat smoking and
watching Imbrie, trying to speculate on what lay behind that smooth,
comely mask.

"It's like a book I read once," he thought. "A man had two natures in
him, one good, one bad. At one time the good nature would have the upper
hand; at another time the bad. He was like two entirely different
people. A case of double personality, they called it. It must be
something like that with this man. Clare married the good man in him,
and the bad turned up later. No doubt that was why she left him. Then
the good man reappeared, and she felt she had done him a wrong. It
explains everything."

But a theory may work too perfectly to fit the haphazard facts of life.
There was still the dead man to be explained. And a theory, however
perfect, did not bring him any nearer to solving the personal problems
concerned. What was one to do with a man who was at once sane and
irresponsible? He could give up Clare like a man, he told himself, if it
were necessary to her happiness; but to give her up to this----! He
jumped up and shook himself with the gesture that was becoming habitual.
He could not allow himself to dwell on that subject; frenzy lay that
way.


CHAPTER XIII

THE RESCUE


They had struck off from the main trail between the two Indian villages,
and were within a mile or two of Stonor's camp. Their pace was slow, for
the going was bad, and Stonor's horse was utterly jaded. The trooper's
face was set in grim lines. He was thinking of the scene that waited
ahead.

Imbrie, too, had the grace to look anxious and downcast. He had been
exasperatingly chipper all the way, until it had occurred to him just
now to ask Stonor what he had done with the women. Upon learning that
they were waiting just ahead, his feathers drooped. A whine crept into
his voice, and, without saying anything definite, he began to hedge in
an odd way.

"The truth about this case hasn't come out yet," he said.

"I never thought it had," said Stonor.

"Well, a man under arrest has the right to lie to protect his interests,
at least until he has the opportunity to consult a lawyer."

"Sure, and an officer has the right to draw his own inferences from the
lies."

"Hell! I don't care what you think. As you said, you're not going to try
me."

"When did you lie to me?"

"Well, if I thought it necessary to lie to you awhile ago, I'm not going
to tell the truth now."

"All right. Why bring the matter up?"

"I just wanted to warn you not to jump to conclusions."

The trooper was dead tired, and dead sick of gazing at the smooth, evil
face of his companion. "Oh, go to hell!" he said. "You talk too much!"

Imbrie subsided into a sullen silence.

Stonor thought: "For some reason he's afraid of meeting Clare. I suppose
that's natural enough when he's like this. He must know what's the
matter with him. Probably he hates everything connected with his better
side. Well, if he doesn't want Clare it may simplify matters." Thus he
was still making his theory work.

At last they came out from among the trees, and the little grassy valley
of the Meander lay below them. There were the three little tents pitched
on the other side of the stream, and the four horses quietly grazing in
the bottom. Mary was baking bread at the fire. It was a picture of
peace, and Stonor's first anxiety for their safety was relieved.

He had not the heart to hail them; they would see soon enough. And
almost immediately Mary did look up and see the two horsemen. She spoke
over her shoulder, and Clare quickly appeared from her tent. The two
women awaited them motionless.

Imbrie still rode ahead, hunched in his saddle. He glanced over his
shoulder, and Stonor saw that a sickly yellow tint had crept under his
skin. He looked at Stonor's failing horse. Suddenly he clapped heels to
his own beast, and, jerking the animal's head round, circled Stonor and
attempted to regain the trail behind him. He evidently counted on the
fact that the policeman would be unable to follow.

To urge his spent beast to a run would only have been to provoke a fall.
Stonor made no attempt to follow. Pulling his horse round, he whipped up
his gun and fired into the air. It was sufficient. Imbrie pulled up.
Stonor possessed himself of the other's bridle-rein and turned him round
again. They said nothing to each other.

They splashed across the shallow ford. On the other side Stonor curtly
bade Imbrie to dismount and ungirth. He did likewise. Clare and Mary
awaited their coming at a few paces' distance. Clare's eyes were fixed
on Imbrie with a painful intensity. Curiosity and apprehension were
blended in her gaze. Imbrie avoided looking at her as long as possible.

They turned out the weary beasts to the grass, and Stonor marched his
prisoner up to Clare--there was no use trying to hedge with what had to
be gone through.

"Here is Imbrie," he said laconically.

The man moistened his dry lips, and mustered a kind of bravado. "Hello,
Clare!" he said flippantly.

"Do you recognize him?" asked Stonor--dreading her answer.

"No--I don't know--perhaps," she stammered. "I feel that I have seen him
before somewhere."

Imbrie's face underwent an extraordinary change. He stared at Clare
dumbfounded.

"You're sure," murmured Clare uncertainly to Stonor.

"Oh, yes, this is the Kakisas' White Medicine Man."

Imbrie turned sharply to Stonor. "What's the matter with her?" he
demanded.

"She's temporarily lost her memory."

"Lost her memory!" echoed Imbrie incredulously. He stared at Clare with
sharp, eager eyes that transfixed her like a spear. She turned away to
escape it. Imbrie drew a long breath, the ruddy colour returned to his
cheeks, the old impudent grin wreathed itself about his lips once more.

"Too bad!" he said, with a leer. "You don't recognize your hubby!"

Clare shrank back, and involuntarily flung an arm up over her face.

Stonor saw red. "Hold your tongue!" he cried, suddenly beside himself.

Imbrie cringed from the clenched fist. "Can't a man speak to his wife?"
he snarled.

"Speak to her with respect, or I'll smash you!"

"You daren't! You've got to treat me well. It's regulations."

"Damn the regulations! You mind what I tell you!"

Imbrie looked from one to another with insufferable malice. "Ah! So
that's the way the wind lies," he drawled.

Stonor turned on his heel and walked away, grinding his teeth in the
effort to get a grip on himself.

Imbrie was never one to forego such an advantage. He looked from one to
another with bright, spiteful eyes. When Stonor came back he said:

"You must excuse me if I gave you a turn. To tell the truth, a man
forgets how attractive his wife is. I'm sorry I had to turn up, old man.
Perhaps you didn't know that she had a Mrs. to her name. She took back
her maiden name, they told me."

"I knew it very well," said Stonor. "Since before we started to look for
you."

"Well, if you knew it, that's your look-out," said Imbrie. "You can't
say I didn't do my best to keep out of your way."

This was intolerable. Stonor suddenly bethought himself what to do. In a
low voice he bade Mary bring him the tracking-line. Imbrie, who stood
stroking his chin and surveying them with the air of master of the
situation, lost countenance when he saw the rope. Stonor cut off an end
of it.

"What's that for?" demanded Imbrie.

"Turn round and put your hands behind you," said the policeman.

Imbrie defiantly folded his arms.

Stonor smiled. "If you resist my orders," he said softly, "there is no
need for me to hold my hand.--Put your hands behind you!" he suddenly
rasped.

Imbrie thought better to obey. Stonor bound his wrists firmly together.
He then led Imbrie a hundred yards from their camp, and, making him sit
in the grass, tied his ankles and invited him to meditate.

"I'll get square with you for this, old man!" snarled Imbrie. "You had
no right to tie me up!"

"I didn't like the style of your conversation," said Stonor coolly.

"You're damn right, you didn't! You snivelling preacher! You snooper
after other men's wives! Oh, I've got you where I want you now! Any
charge you bring against me will look foolish when I tell them----"

"Tell them what?"

"Tell them you're after her!"

Stonor walked away and left the man.

Clare still stood in the same place like a carven woman. She waited for
him with wide, harassed eyes. As he came to her she said simply:

"This is worse than I expected."

"The man is not right in his head!" said Stonor. "There is something
queer. Don't pay any attention to him. Don't think of him."

"But I must think of him; I can't escape it. What do you mean by not
right?"

"A screw loose somewhere. What they call a case of double personality,
perhaps. It is the only way to reconcile what you told me about him and
what we see."

Clare's glance was turned inward in the endeavour to solve the riddle of
her own blind spot. She said slowly: "I have known him somewhere; I am
sure of that. But he is strange to me. He makes my blood run cold. I
cannot explain it."

"Do not brood on it," urged Stonor.

She transferred her thoughts to Stonor. "You look utterly worn out. Will
you sleep now?"

"Yes. We won't leave here until morning. My horse must have a good
rest."

"You'd wait for him, but not for yourself!"

"Tole ought to be along in the morning to help pack, and to guard the
prisoner."

Before Stonor had a chance to lie down, Imbrie called him. There was a
propitiatory note in his voice.

The trooper went to him. "What do you want?" he asked sternly.

"Say, I'm sorry I riled you, Sergeant," said Imbrie with a grin. "I was
a bit carried off my feet by the situation. I'll be more careful
hereafter. Untie this damned rope, will you?"

Stonor slowly shook his head. "I think we're both better off with a
little distance between us."

Imbrie repented of his honeyed tones. His lip curled back. But he made
an effort to control himself. "Aren't you afraid your spotless
reputation will suffer?" he asked, sneering.

"Not a bit!" said Stonor promptly.

Imbrie was taken aback. "Well--can I speak to my wife for a minute?" he
asked sullenly.

Stonor observed, wincing, how he loved to bring out the word "wife."
"That's up to her," he answered. "I'll put it to her."

Returning to Clare, he said: "He wants to speak to you."

She shrank involuntarily. "What should I do, Martin?"

"I see nothing to be gained by it," said Stonor quickly.

"But if, as you say, in a way he's sick, perhaps I ought----"

"He's not too sick to have a devil in him. Leave him alone!"

She shook her head. She was gaining in firmness. "It won't hurt me to
hear what he has to say. It may throw some light on the situation."

"I doubt it," said Stonor. "His object is to raise as much dust as
possible. But go ahead. If he's insulting, leave him instantly. And
don't let him know what I suspect him of."

She went, and Stonor walked up and down in the grass in a fever until
she returned. She was with Imbrie some little time. Stonor could not
guess of what they talked. Clare's white composed face, and Imbrie's
invariable grin, told him nothing.

The instant she came towards him he burst out: "He didn't annoy you?"

She shook her head. "No, he seemed quite anxious to please. He
apologized for what he said before."

Stonor said, blushing and scowling: "Perhaps you do not care to tell me
what you----"

"Certainly!" she said, with a quick look. "Don't be silly, Martin. It
was just what you might expect. Nothing important. He asked me dozens of
questions as to what we did down the river."

"You did not tell him?"

"How could I? Apparently he is greatly puzzled by my condition. He seems
not fully to believe, or at least he pretends not to believe, that I
cannot remember. He tried to work on my feelings to get you to liberate
him. And of course he was most anxious to know what he was wanted for. I
told him I could not interfere in your affairs, that's all."

Stonor nodded.

"Martin," she said, with the withdrawn look that he had marked before,
"I cannot remember anything, yet I am conscious of a deep resentment
against this man. At some time in the past he has injured me cruelly, I
am sure.--Yet I told you I had injured him, didn't I?" She passed a hand
across her face. "It is very puzzling."

"Don't worry!" he said cheerily. "It's bound to be made clear in the
end."

"You wish to do all the worrying, don't you?" she said, with a wry
smile.

He could not meet her dear eyes. "Worry nothing!" he cried. "I only have
one idea in my mind, and that is to get some sleep!" He bustled to get
his blankets.

They awoke him for the evening meal. After eating, he inspected his
camp, sent Clare to bed, moved Imbrie closer, instructed Mary to keep
watch that he did not succeed in freeing himself, and went back to sleep
again. Mary was to call him at dawn, and they would take the trail at
sunrise.

In the middle of the night he was brought leaping to his feet by a cry
out of the dark: a cry that was neither from wolf, coyote, nor
screech-owl. Wakened from a deep sleep, his consciousness was aware only
of something dreadful. Outside the tent Mary ran to him: her teeth were
chattering with terror: she could not speak. Clare crept from her tent.
Both women instinctively drew close to their protector.

"What was it?" Clare asked, tremblingly.

A shriek answered her; a dreadful urgent cry of agony that made the
whole night shudder. It came from a little way down the trail, from the
edge of the woods perhaps, not more than a quarter of a mile away.

"A human voice!" gasped Clare.

"A woman's!" muttered Stonor grimly.

Again it shattered the stillness, this time more dreadful, for they
heard words in their own tongue. "Don't hurt me! Don't hurt me!" Then a
horrible pause, and with added urgency: "Help! Help!"

"By God! English words!" cried Stonor, astounded.

"Go to her! Go to her!" cried Clare, urging him with her hands.

On the other hand, Mary, falling to her knees, clung to him, fairly
gibbering in the extremity of her terror.

Stonor was suspicious, yet every instinct of manliness drew him towards
these cries. Under that pull it was impossible to think clearly. He
shook Mary off, and started to run. He took three steps and pulled
himself up short.

"Look at Imbrie," he muttered. "Strange he hasn't wakened."

It was true the prisoner still lay motionless, entirely covered with his
blanket.

"It's a trick!" said Stonor. "There could be no English woman near here.
It's a trick to draw me out of camp!"

"But none of the Kakisas could speak English," said Clare.

"I don't know," muttered Stonor, in an agony of indecision. "My first
duty is here. Look at Mary. She thinks it's a trick."

Mary was lying on the ground, muttering a Kakisa word over and over.

"What is it?" Stonor harshly demanded.

"Spirits!" she gasped.

Stonor turned away, flinging his arms up. "Good God! Ghosts again!" he
cried, in exasperation.

The dreadful cries were raised again. "Help! Help! He's killing me!"

"I can't stand it!" cried Clare. "I must go myself!"

"Stay where you are!" commanded Stonor. "It is too strange a thing to
happen so close to our camp if it was not staged for our benefit!"

Just the same, it was not easy for him to hold himself. When the cries
were raised again a deep groan was forced from him:

"If I only had another man!"

"Go! Mary and I will be all right!" said Clare.

"Don' go! Don' go!" wailed Mary from the ground.

Stonor shouted into the darkness. "Come this way! Help is here!"

The cries were redoubled.

Imbrie suddenly awoke, and rolled clear of his blanket. "What's that?"
he cried, with an admirable assumption of surprise. "A woman's voice! A
white woman! Why don't you go to her?"

It was a little too well done; Stonor felt partly reassured.

Imbrie appeared to be struggling desperately in his bonds. "For God's
sake, man!" he cried. "If you won't go, cut me loose! I can't stand it!"

"I am sure now," said Stonor, in a voice of relief. "This was what he
fixed up with Myengeen this morning. I ought to have been prepared for
it. Mary, help me make up the fire. A blaze will help chase the
horrors."

"Oh, you coward!" taunted Imbrie. "If I had my hands free! This is the
famous nerve of the police!"

Stonor could afford to laugh at this. His courage was tried.

The voice came with a fresh note of despair. "He's taking me away! He's
taking me away! Oh, come! come!" Sure enough the sounds began to recede.

But the spell was broken now. They were only conscious of relief at the
prospect of an end to the grim farce.

"Damn clever work here," said Stonor. "She says the very things that
ought to pull the hardest."

"Where could they have got the English words?" said Clare.

"Search me! It's another mystery to add to what's facing us."

Meanwhile the flames were beginning to lick the twigs that Mary placed
with trembling hands.

"If we make a big fire won't it reveal us to them?" said Clare
nervously.

"They won't shoot," said Stonor contemptuously. "Stage business is more
their line; conjure-tricks."

Imbrie, seeing that the game was up, had given over trying to taunt
Stonor, and lay watching them with an unabashed grin. He seemed rather
proud of his scheme, though it had failed.

"Can I smoke?" he said.

"Mary, fill his pipe, and stick it in his mouth," said Stonor.

They heaped up a big fire, and at Stonor's initiative, sat around it
clearly revealed in the glare. He knew his Indians. At first Clare
trembled, thinking of the possible hostile eyes gazing at them from
beyond the radius of light, but Stonor's coolness was infectious. He
joked and laughed, and, toasting slices of bacon, handed them round.

"We can eat all we want to-night," he said. "Tole will be along with a
fresh supply to-morrow."

Imbrie lay about fifteen paces from the fire, near enough to make
himself unpleasant, if not to hear what was said. "Mighty brave man by
the fire," he sneered.

Stonor answered mildly. "One more remark like that, my friend, and I'll
have to retire you again from good society."

Imbrie held his tongue thereafter.

Clare, wishing to show Stonor that she too could set an example of
coolness, said: "Let's sing something."

But Stonor shook his head. "That would look as if we were trying to keep
our courage up," he said, smiling, "and of course it is up. But let Mary
tell us a story to pass the time."

Mary, having reflected that it was her own people and not ghostly
visitants that had made the hideous interruption in the night, had
regained her outward stolidity. She was not in the humour for telling
stories, though.

"My mout' too dry," she said.

"Go ahead," coaxed Stonor. "You know your own folks better than I do.
You know that if we sit here by the fire, eating, talking, and laughing
like a pleasant company, it will put respect into their hearts. They'll
have no appetite for further devilry."

"Can't tell stories," she said. "Too late, too dark, too scare. Words
won't come."

"Just tell us why the rabbits have a black spot on their backs. That's a
short one."

After a little more urging Mary began in her stolid way:

"One tam Old Man him travel in the bush. Hear ver' queer singin'. Never
hear not'ing like that before. Look all round see where it come. Wah! he
see cottontail rabbits singing and making medicine. They mak' fire. Got
plenty hot ashes. They lie down in those ashes and sing, and another
rabbit cover them up with ashes. They not stay there ver' long for cause
those ashes moch hot.

"Old Man say: 'Little brothers, that is wonderful how you lie down in
those hot ashes without burning. Show me how to do it.'

"Rabbits say: 'Come on, Old Man. We show you how. You got sing our song,
only stay in ashes little while.' So Old Man begin to sing, and he lie
down, and they cover him with ashes. Him not burn at all.

"He say: 'That is ver' nice. You sure got ver' strong medicine. Now I
want do it myself. You lie down, and I cover you up.'

"So rabbits all lie down in ashes, and Old Man cover them up. Then he
put the whole fire over them. Only one old rabbit get out. Old Man catch
her and go put her back, but she say: 'Pity me, my children soon be
born.'

"Old Man say: 'All right, I let you go, so there is plenty more rabbits
bam-bye. But I will cook these nicely and have a feast.' And he put more
wood on the fire. When those rabbits cooked nice, he cut red willow bush
and lay them on to cool. Grease soak into those branches; that is why
when you hold red willow to the fire you see grease on the bark. You can
see too, since that time, how rabbits got burnt place on their back.
That is where the one that got away was singed.

"Old Man sit down waitin' for rabbits to cool a little. His mouth is wet
for to taste them. Coyote come along limpin' ver' bad. Say: 'Pity me,
Old Man, you got plenty cooked rabbits, give me one.'

"Old Man say: 'Go along! You too lazy catch your dinner, I not help
you!'

"Coyote say: 'My leg broke. I can't catch not'ing. I starving. Just give
me half a rabbit.'

"Old Man say: 'I don't care if you die. I work hard to cook all these
rabbits. I will not give away. But I tell you what we do. We run a race
to that big hill way off there. If you beat me I give you a rabbit.'

"Coyote say: 'All right.' So they start run. Old Man run ver' fast.
Coyote limp along close behind. Then coyote turn round and run back very
fast. Him not lame at all. Tak' Old Man long tam to get back. Jus'
before he get there coyote swallow las' rabbit, and trot away over the
prairie with his tail up.

"That is the end."

Stonor laughed. "That's the kind of story I like. No cut and dried
moral!"

Mary never could be got to see anything funny in the stories she told.
Just what her attitude was towards them the whites could not guess.

"Give us another about Old Man," Stonor went on. "A longer one. Tell how
Old Man made medicine. A crackerjack!"

Clare looked at him wonderingly. If he were aware of the weirdness of
their situation no sign betrayed it. The crackling flames mounted
straight in the air, the smoke made a pillar reaching into the darkness.
Fifteen paces from Stonor lay his prisoner, staring unwinkingly at him
with eyes that glittered with hatred; and from all around them in the
darkness perhaps scores of their enemies were watching.

Mary stolidly began again:

"It was long tam ago before the white man come. The people not have
horses then. Kakisas hunt on the great prairie that touch the sky all
around. Many buffalo had been killed. The camp was full of meat. Great
sheets hung in the lodges and on the racks outside to smoke. Now the
meat was all cut up and the women were working on the hides. Cure some
for robes. Scrape hair from some for leather----"

The story got no further. From across the little stream they heard a
muffled thunder of hoofs in the grass.

Stonor sprang up. "My horses!" he cried. "Stampeded, by God! The
cowardly devils!"

Imbrie laughed.

Stonor snatched up his gun. "Back from the fire!" he cried to the women.
"I'm going to shoot!"

He splashed across the ford, and, climbing the bank, dropped on his
knee in the grass. The horses swerved, and galloped off at a tangent.
They were barely visible to eyes that had just left the fire. Stonor
counted seven animals, and he had but six with Imbrie's. On the seventh
there was the suggestion of a crouching figure. Stonor fired at the
horse.

The animal collapsed with a thud. Stonor ran to where he lay twitching
in the grass. It was a strange horse to him. The rider had escaped. But
he could not have got far. The temptation to follow was strong, but
Stonor, remembering his prisoner and the women who depended on him,
refused to be drawn. He returned to where Clare and Mary awaited him at
a little distance from the fire. Meanwhile the horses galloped away out
of hearing into the bush beyond the little meadow. Imbrie was still
secure in his bonds. Stonor kept a close watch on him.

They had not long to wait before dawn began to weave colour in the sky.
Light revealed nothing living but themselves in the little valley, or
around its rim. The horse Stonor had shot still lay where he had
dropped. Stonor returned to him, taking Mary. The animal was dead, with
a bullet behind its shoulder. It was a blue roan, an ugly brute with a
chewed ear. It had borne a saddle, but its owner had succeeded in
retrieving that under cover of darkness. The man's tracks were visible,
leading off towards the side trail.

"Mary, whose horse is that?" Stonor asked.

She shrugged and spread out her hands. As she had been living at Fort
Enterprise for years, and saw her own people but seldom, he had no
choice but to believe that she did not know. They returned to Clare.

Stonor said: "I shall have to leave you for awhile. There's no help for
it. I'm expecting Tole Grampierre this morning, but I can't tell for
sure how fast he will travel, and in the meantime the horses may be
getting further away every minute. If you are afraid to stay, I suppose
you can come with me--though I may have to tramp for miles."

Clare kept her chin up. "I'll stay here. If you have to go far I'd only
be a drag on you. I shan't be afraid."

The harassed policeman gave her a grateful glance. "I'll leave you my
revolver. There's no use arming Mary, because I couldn't ask her to fire
on her own people. I do not think there is the slightest danger of your
being attacked. If the Indians, seeing me go, come around, pay no
attention to them. Show no fear and you are safe. If they want Imbrie
let them take him. I'll get him later. It only means a little delay. He
cannot escape me up here."

"You must eat before you start," said Clare anxiously.

"I'll take cold food. Can't wait for hot bread."

As Stonor started off Imbrie cried mockingly: "So long, Redbreast!"
Stonor doubted very much if he would find him on his return. But there
was no help for it. One has to make the best of a bad situation.

After traversing the little meadow the stampeded horses had taken to the
trail in the direction of Fort Enterprise. Stonor took heart, hoping
that Tole might meet them and drive them back. But, reliable as Tole
was, of course he could not count on him to the hour; nor had he any
assurance that the horses would stay in the trail. He kept on.

The horses' tracks made clear reading. For several miles Stonor followed
through the bush at a dog-trot. Then he came to another little open
glade and saw that they had stopped to feed. He gained on them here. A
short distance further he suddenly came upon his bay in the trail, the
horse that had carried him to Swan Lake and back. As he had expected,
she was hopelessly foundered, a pitiable sight. He regretfully put a
bullet through her brain.

Near here the remaining horses had swerved from the trail and turned
northward, looking for water perhaps. Stonor pinned a note to a tree,
briefly telling Tole what had happened, and bidding him hasten forward
with all speed.

Stonor followed the hoof-prints then through the trackless bush,
painfully slow going over the stones and the fallen trunks, with many a
pitfall concealed under the smooth moss. After an hour of this he
finally came upon them all five standing dejectedly about in a narrow
opening, as if ashamed of their escapade and perfectly willing to be
caught.

Mounting Miles Aroon, he drove the others before him. To avoid the risk
of breaking their legs he had to let them make their own slow pace over
the down timber, and it was a sore trial to his patience. He had already
been gone two hours. When finally he struck the trail again he saw that
his note to Tole was still where he had left it. He let it stay, on the
chance of its bringing him on a little quicker. He put his horses to the
trail at a smart pace. They all clattered through the bush, making
dizzying turns around the tree-trunks.

As he approached the little meadow by the Meander his heart rose slowly
in his throat. He had been more anxious for their safety than he would
let himself believe. As he came to the edge of the trees his eyes were
ready to leap to the spot where he had left his charges. A shock awaited
them. Of the three little tents there was but one remaining, and no sign
of life around it. He furiously urged his horse to the place.

Mary and Clare were gone with Imbrie. The camp site was trampled by
scores of hoofs. The Indians had taken nothing, however, but the two
little tents and the personal belongings of the women--an odd
scrupulousness in the face of the greater offence. All the tracks made
off across the meadow towards the side trail back to the Swan.


CHAPTER XIV

PURSUIT


Stonor sat down on a grub-box, and, gripping his bursting head between
his hands, tried to think. His throbbing blood urged him to gallop
instantly in pursuit. They could not have more than two hours' start of
him, and Miles Aroon was better than anything they had in the way of
horse-flesh, fresh into the bargain. But a deeper instinct was telling
him that a little slow thought in the beginning brings quicker results
at the end.

Even with only two hours' start they might make the village before he
overtook them, and Imbrie might get away on the lake. A stern chase with
all the hazards of travel in the wilderness might continue for days;
Stonor was running short of grub; he must provide for their coming back;
above all it was necessary that he get word out of what had happened;
Clare's safety must not depend alone on the one mortal life he had to
give her. Hard as it was to bring himself to it, he determined to get in
touch with Tole before starting after Imbrie and the Kakisas.

To that end he mounted one of his poorer horses and galloped headlong
back through the bush. After ten miles or so, in a little open meadow he
came upon the handsome breed boy riding along without a care in the
world, hand on hip and "Stetson" cocked askew, singing lustily of
_Gentille Alouette_. Never in his life had Stonor been so glad to see
anybody. His set, white face worked painfully; for a moment he could
not speak, but only grip the boy's shoulder. Tole was scared half out of
his wits to see his revered idol so much affected.

All the way along Stonor had been thinking what he would do. It would
not be sufficient to send a message by Tole; he must write to John
Gaviller and to Lambert at the Crossing; one letter would do for both;
the phrases were all ready to his pencil. Briefly explaining the
situation to Tole, he sat down to his note-book. Two pages held it all;
Stonor would have been surprised had he been told that it was a model of
conciseness.

    "JOHN GAVILLER and Sergeant LAMBERT, R.N.W.M.P.

    "While returning with my prisoner Ernest Imbrie, suspected of
    murder, at a point on the Horse Track six miles from Swan
    River, a band of Indians from Swan Lake drove off my horses,
    and while I was away looking for them, rescued my prisoner, and
    also carried off the two women in my party. Am returning to
    Swan Lake now with four horses. Suppose that Imbrie reaching
    there will take to the lake and the upper Swan, as that
    provides his only means of getting out of the country this way.
    Suggest that Mr. Gaviller get this through to Lambert
    regardless of expense. Suggest that Lambert as soon as he gets
    it might ride overland from the Crossing to the nearest point
    on the Swan. If he takes one of his folding boats, and takes a
    man to ride the horses back, he could come down the Swan. I
    will be coming up, and we ought to pinch Imbrie between the two
    of us. The situation is a serious one, as Imbrie has the whole
    tribe of Kakisas under his thumb. He will stop at nothing now;
    may be insane. The position of the women is a frightful one.

                         "MARTIN STONOR."

Stonor took Tole's pack-horse with its load of grub, and the breed tied
his bed and rations for three days behind his saddle. Stonor gripped his
hand.

"So long, kid! Ride like hell. It's the most you can do for me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight hours later, Stonor, haggard with anxiety and fatigue, and driving
his spent horses before him, rode among the tepees of the village beside
Swan Lake. That single day had aged him ten years. His second coming was
received with a significant lack of surprise. The Indians were
ostentatiously engaged at their customary occupations: mending boats and
other gear, cleaning guns, etc. Stonor doubted if such a picture of
universal industry had ever been offered there. Dismounting, he called
peremptorily for Myengeen.

The head man came to him with a certain air of boldness, that slowly
withered, however, under the fire that leaped up in the white man's
weary blue eyes. Under his savage inscrutability the signs of fidgets
became perceptible. Perhaps he had not expected the trooper to brave him
single-handed, but had hoped for more time to obliterate tracks, and let
matters quiet down. Many a dark breast within hearing quailed at the
sound of the policeman's ringing voice, though his words were not
understood. The one determined man struck more terror than a troop.

"Myengeen, you and your people have defied the law! Swift and terrible
punishment awaits you. Don't think you can escape it. You have carried
off a white woman. Such a thing was never known. If a single hair of her
head is harmed, God help you! Where is she?"

Myengeen's reply was a pantomime of general denial.

Stonor marched him back of the tepees where the Kakisas' horses were
feeding on the flat. He silently pointed to their hanging heads and
sweaty flanks. Many of the beasts were still too weary to feed: one or
two were lying down done for. Stonor pointed out certain peculiarities
in their feet, and indicated that he had been following those tracks.
This mute testimony impressed Myengeen more than words; his eyes bolted;
he took refuge in making believe not to understand.

Stonor's inability to command them in their own tongue made him feel
maddeningly impotent.

"Where is the woman who speaks English?" he cried, pointing to his own
tongue.

Myengeen merely shrugged.

Stonor then ordered all the people into their tepees, and such is the
power of a single resolute voice that they meekly obeyed. Proceeding
from tepee to tepee he called out likely-looking individuals to be
questioned out of sight of the others. For a long time it was without
result; men and women alike, having taken their cue from Myengeen,
feigned not to understand. Such children as he tried to question were
scared almost into insensibility. Stonor began to feel as if he were
butting his head against a stone wall.

At last from a maiden he received a hint that was sufficient. She was a
comely girl with a limpid brown eye. Either she had a soul above the
Kakisas or else the bright-haired trooper touched her fancy. At any
rate, when he looked in the tepee, where she sat demurely beyond her
male relatives, she gave him a shy glance that did not lack humanity.
Calling her outside, he put the invariable question to her, accompanied
with appropriate signs: where was the white woman?

She merely glanced towards the mouth of the creek where the canoes lay,
then looked up the lake. It was sufficient. Stonor gave her a grateful
glance and let her go. He never knew her name. That the Kakisas might
not suspect her of having betrayed them, he continued his questioning
for awhile. Last of all he re-interrogated Myengeen. He did not care if
suspicion fell on him.

Stonor coolly picked out the best-looking canoe in the creek, and loaded
aboard what he required of his outfit. Myengeen and his men sullenly
looked on. The trooper, seeing that a fair breeze was blowing up the
lake, cut two poplar poles, and with a blanket quickly rigged mast and
sail. When he was ready to start he delivered the rest of his outfit to
Myengeen, and left his horses in his care.

"This is government property," he said sternly. "If anything is lost
full payment will be collected."

He sailed down the creek followed by the wondering exclamations of the
Kakisas. Sailing was an unknown art to them, and in their amazement at
the sight, like the children they were, they completely forgot the
grimness of the situation. Stonor thought: "How can you make such a
scatter-brained lot realize what they're doing!"

Stonor had supposed that Imbrie would take to the lake. On arriving at
the brow of the last ridge his first thought had been to search its
expanse, but he had seen nothing. Since then various indications
suggested that they had between four and five hours' start of him. He
had been delayed on the trail by his pack-horses. The speed he was
making under sail was not much better than he could have paddled, but it
enabled him to take things easy for a while.

Swan Lake is about thirty miles long. Fully ten miles of it was visible
from the start. It is shaped roughly like three uneven links of a chain,
and in width it varies from half a mile to perhaps five miles. It seems
vaster than it is on account of its low shores which stretch back, flat
and reedy, for miles. Here dwelt the great flocks of wild geese or
"wavies" that gave both lake and river their names.

As he got out into the lake the wind gradually strengthened behind him,
and his canoe was blown hither and yon like an inflated skin on the
water. She had no keel, she took no grip of the water, and much of the
goodly aid of the wind was vainly measured against the strength of
Stonor's arms as he laboured to keep her before it. When he did get the
wind full in his top-heavy sail it blew him almost bodily under. Stonor
welcomed the struggle. He was now making much better time than he could
have hoped for by his paddle. He grimly carried on.

In order to accommodate the two women and their necessary outfit, Stonor
supposed that Imbrie must have taken one of the dug-outs. He did not
believe that any of the Kakisas had accompanied the fugitive. The
prospect of a long journey would appal them. And Stonor was pretty sure
that Mary was not over-working herself at the paddle, so that it was not
too much to hope that he was catching up on them at this rate. Thinking
of their outfit, Stonor wondered how Imbrie would feed Clare; the
ordinary fare of the Kakisas would be a cruel hardship on her. Such are
the things one worries about in the face of much more dreadful dangers.

It had been nearly six o'clock before Stonor left Myengeen's village,
and the sun went down while he was still far from the head of the lake.
He surveyed the flat shores somewhat anxiously. Nowhere, as far as he
could see, was there any promising landing-place. In the end he decided
to sail on through the night. As darkness gathered he took his bearings
from the stars. With the going-down of the sun the wind moderated, but
it still held fair and strong enough to give him good steerage-way.
After an hour or two the shores began to close around him. He could not
find the outlet of the river in the dark, so he drove into the reeds,
and, taking down his sail, supped on cold bread and lake-water and lay
down in his canoe.

In the morning he found the river without difficulty. It was a sluggish
stream here, winding interminably between low cut banks, edged with
dangling grass-roots on the one side and mud-flats on the other. From
the canoe he could see nothing above the banks. Landing to take a
survey, Stonor beheld a vast treeless bottom, covered with rank grass,
and stretching to low piny ridges several miles back on either hand. No
tell-tale thread of smoke on the still air betrayed the camp of the man
he was seeking.

He resumed his way. Of his whole journey this part was the most
difficult trial to his patience. There was just current enough to mock
at his efforts with the paddle. He seemed scarcely to crawl. It was
maddening after his brisk progress up the lake. Moreover, each bend was
so much like the last that he had no sense of getting on, and the
invariable banks hemmed in his sight. He felt like a man condemned to a
treadmill.

He had been about two hours on the river when he saw a little object
floating towards him on the current that instantly caught his eye
because it had the look of something fashioned. He paddled to it with a
beating heart. It proved to be a tiny raft contrived out of several
lengths of stout stick, tied together with strips of rag. On the little
platform, out of reach of the water, was tied with another strip a roll
of the white outer bark of the birch. Stonor untied it and spread it out
on his knee with a trembling hand. It was a letter printed in crooked
characters with a point charred in the fire.

[Illustration:

    WE WELL. HIM NOT HURT CLARE ENY. HIM SCAR OF CRAZEE CLARE SLEEP
    BY ME. HIM GOIN CROST /\/\/\/\/\

                         FROM MARY]

A warm stream forced its way into the trooper's frozen breast, and the
terrible strained look in his eyes relaxed. For a moment he covered his
eyes with his arm, though there was none to see. His most dreadful and
unacknowledged fear was for the moment relieved. Gratitude filled him.

"Good old Mary!" he thought. "She went to all that trouble just on the
chance of easing my mind. By God! if we come through this all right I'll
do something for her!"

"Him scar of crazee," puzzled him for a while, until it occurred to him
that Mary wished to convey that Imbrie let Clare alone because he
believed that her loss of memory was akin to insanity. This was where
the red strain in him told. All Indians have a superstitious awe of the
insane. The sign at the end of the letter was for mountains, of course.
The word, no doubt, was beyond Mary's spelling. What care and
circumspection must have gone to the writing and the launching of the
note! It must all have been done while Imbrie slept.

Stonor applied himself to his paddle again with a better heart. After
two hours more he came to their camping-place of the night before. It
was a spot designed by Nature for a camp, with a little beach of clean
sand below, and a grove of willow and birch above. Stonor landed to see
what tell-tale signs they had left behind them.

He saw that they were in a dug-out: it had left its furrow in the sand
where it was pulled up. He saw the print of Clare's little common-sense
boot in the sand, and the sight almost unmanned him; Mary's track was
there too, that he knew well, and Imbrie's; and to his astonishment
there was a fourth track unknown to him. It was that of a small man or a
large woman. Could Imbrie have persuaded one of the Kakisas to accompany
him? This was all he saw. He judged from the signs that they had about
five hours' start of him.

From this point the character of the country began to change. The
river-banks became higher and wooded; there were outcroppings of rock
and small rapids. Stonor saw from the tracks alongshore that where the
current was swift they had towed the dug-out up-stream, but he had to
stick to his paddle. Though he put forth his best efforts all day he
scarcely gained on them, for darkness came upon him soon after he had
passed the place where they spelled in mid-afternoon.

On the next day in mid-morning he was brought to stand by a fork in the
river. There was nothing to tell him which branch to choose, for the
current was easy here and the trackers had re-embarked. Both branches
were of about equal size: one came from the south-east, one from due
east; either might reach to the mountains if it was long enough. Stonor
had pondered on the map of that country, but on it the Swan River was
only indicated as yet by a dotted line. All that was known of the stream
by report was that it rose in the Rocky Mountains somewhere to the north
of Fort Cheever, and, flowing in a north-westerly direction, roughly
parallel with the Spirit, finally emptied into Great Buffalo Lake.
Stonor remembered no forks on the map.

He was about to choose at random, when he was struck by a difference in
the colour of the water of the two branches. The right-hand fork was a
clear brown, the other greenish with a milky tinge. Now brown water, as
everybody knows, comes from swamps or muskegs, while green water is the
product of melting snow and ice. Stonor took the left-hand branch.

Shortly afterwards he was rewarded by a sight of the spot where they had
made their first spell of the day. Landing, he found the ashes of their
fire still warm; they could not have been gone more than an hour. This
was an unexpected gain; some accident of travel must have delayed them.
Embarking, he bent to his paddle with a renewed hope. Surely by going
without a meal himself he ought to come on them before they finished
their second spell.

But the river was only half of its former volume now, and the rapids
were more brawling, and more tedious to ascend. However, he consoled
himself with the thought that if they held him back they would delay the
dug-out no less. The river was very lovely on these upper reaches; in
his anxiety to get on he scarcely marked that at the moment, but
afterwards he remembered its park-like shores, its forget-me-nots and
raspberry-blossoms, and the dappled sunlight falling through the
aspen-foliage. It was no different from the rivers of his boyhood in a
sheltered land, with swimming-holes at the foot of the little rapids:
only the fenced fields and the quiet cattle were lacking above the
banks, and church-spires in the distant vistas.

Within an hour Stonor himself became the victim of one of the ordinary
hazards of river-travel. In a rapid one of his paddles broke in half;
the current carried him broadside on a rock, and a great piece of bark
was torn from the side of his frail craft. Landing, he surveyed the
damage, grinding his teeth with angry disappointment. It meant the loss
of all he had so hardly gained on the dug-out.

To find a suitable piece of bark, and spruce-gum to cement it with,
required a considerable search in the bush. It then had to be sewed on
with needle and thread, the edges gummed, and the gum given time to dry
partly, in the heat of the fire. The afternoon was well advanced before
he got afloat again, and darkness compelled him to camp in the spot
where they had made their second, that is to say, the mid-afternoon,
spell.

The next two days, his third and fourth in the river, were without
especial incident. The river maintained its sylvan character, though the
bordering hills or bench were gradually growing higher and bolder.
Stonor, by putting every ounce that was in him into his paddle, slowly
gained again on the dug-out. He knew now that Imbrie, irrespective of
Mary, had a second paddle to help him. It gave the dug-out an advantage,
especially in swift water, that more than neutralized its extra weight.

By evening of the fourth day all signs indicated that he was drawing
close to his quarry again. He kept on until forced to stop by complete
darkness. On this night the sky was heavily overcast, and it was as dark
as a winter's night. He camped where he happened to be; it was a poor
spot, no more than a stony slope among willows. He had done all his
necessary cooking during the day, so there was no need to wait for his
supper.

The mosquitoes were troublesome, and he put up his tent, hastily
slinging it between two trees, and weighing down the sides and the back
with a few stones. To his tent he afterwards ascribed the preservation
of his life. It was the simplest form of tent, known as a "lean-to," or,
as one might say, merely half a tent sliced along the ridge-pole, with a
roof sloping to the ground at the back, and the entire front open to the
fire except for a mosquito-bar.

His bed was hard, but he was too weary to care. He lay down in his
blanket, but not to achieve forgetfulness immediately; strong
discipline was still required to calm his hot impatience. How could he
sleep, not knowing perhaps but that one more mile might bring him to his
goal? Indeed, Imbrie's camp might be around the next bend. But he could
not risk his frail canoe in the shallow river after dark.

Stonor was on the borderland of sleep when he was suddenly roused to
complete wakefulness by a little sound from behind his tent. A woodsman
soon learns to know all the normal sounds of night, and this was
something different, an infinitely stealthy sound, as of a body dragging
itself an inch at a time, with long waits between. It seemed to be
slowly making its way around his tent towards the open front.

Now Stonor knew that there was no animal in his country that stalks
human prey, and he instantly thought of his two-legged enemy. Quick and
noiselessly as a cat he slipped out of his blankets, and rolling his
dunnage-bag in his place drew the blanket over it. In the faint light
reflected from the embers outside it might be supposed that he still lay
there. He then cautiously moved the stones aside, and slipped out under
the wall of his tent on the side opposite to that whence the creeping
sounds now came.

On hands and knees he crawled softly around the back of his tent,
determined to stalk the stalker. He felt each inch of the way in
advance, to make sure there was nothing that would break or turn under
his weight. He could hear no sounds from the other side now. Rounding
the back of his tent, at the corner he lay flat and stuck his head
around. At first he could see nothing. The tall trees on the further
shore cut off all but the faintest gleam of light from the river. A
little forward and to the left of his tent there was a thick clump of
willow, making a black shadow at its foot that might have concealed
anything. Stonor watched, breathing with open mouth to avoid betraying
himself. Little by little he made out a shadowy form at the foot of the
willows, a shape merely a degree blacker than its background. He could
be sure of nothing.

Then his heart seemed to miss a beat, for against the wan surface of the
river he saw an arm raised and a gun point--presumably at the dummy he
had left under the tent. Oddly enough his shock of horror was not
primarily that one should seek to kill him, Stonor; he was first of all
appalled at the outrage offered to the coat he wore.

The gun spoke and flame leaped from the barrel. Stonor, gathering
himself up, sprang forward on the assassin. At the first touch he
recognized with a great shock of surprise that it was a woman he had to
deal with. Her shoulders were round and soft under his hands; the grunt
she uttered as he bore her back was feminine. He wrenched the gun from
her hands and cast it to one side.

When she caught her breath she fought like a mad cat, with every lithe
muscle of her body and with teeth and claws too. She was strong; strong
and quick as a steel spring. More than once she escaped him. Once she
got half-way up the bank; but here he bore her down on her face and
locked her arms behind her in a grip she was powerless to break.

Jerking her to her feet--one is not too gentle even with a woman who has
just tried to murder one--he forced her before him back to his tent.
Here, holding her with one arm while she swayed and wrenched in her
efforts to free herself, he contrived to draw his knife, and to cut off
one of the stay-ropes of his tent. With this he bound her wrists
together behind her back, and passed the end round a stout trunk of
willow. The instant he stood back she flung herself forward on the rope,
but the jerk on her arms must have nearly dislocated them. It brought a
shriek of pain from her. She came to a standstill, sobbing for breath.

Stonor collected dead twigs, and blew on the embers. In a minute or two
he had a bright blaze, and turned, full of curiosity to see what he had
got. He saw a breed woman of forty years or more, still, for a wonder,
uncommonly handsome and well-formed. The pure hatred that distorted her
features could not conceal her good looks. She had the fine straight
features of her white forebears, and her dusky cheeks flamed with
colour. She bore herself with a proud, savage grace.

More than the woman herself, her attire excited Stonor's wonder. It was
a white woman's get-up. Her dress, though of plain black cotton, was cut
with a certain regard to the prevailing style. She wore corsets--strange
phenomenon! Stonor had already discovered it before he got a look at
her. Her hair had been done on top of her head in a white woman's
fashion, though it was pretty well down now. Strangest of all, she wore
gold jewellery; rings on her fingers and drops in her ears; a showy gold
locket hanging from a chain around her neck. On the whole a surprising
apparition to find on the banks of the unexplored river.

Stonor, studying her, reflected that this was no doubt the woman he had
seen with Imbrie at Carcajou Point two months before. The Indians had
referred to her derisively as his "old woman." But it was strange he had
heard nothing of her from the Kakisas. She must have been concealed in
the very tepee from which Imbrie had issued on the occasion of Stonor's
first visit to the village at Swan Lake. The Indians down the river had
never mentioned her. He was sure she could not have lived with Imbrie
down there. Where, then, had he picked her up? Where had she been while
Imbrie was down there? How had she got into the country anyway? The more
he thought of it the more puzzling it was. Certainly she had come from
far; Stonor was well assured he would have heard of so striking a
personage as this anywhere within his own bailiwick.

Another thought suddenly occurred to him. This of course would be the
woman who had tried to decoy him out of his camp with her cries for help
in English. At least she explained that bit of the all-enveloping
mystery.

"Well, here's a pretty how-de-do!" said Stonor with grim humour. "Who
are you?"

She merely favoured him with a glance of inexpressible scorn.

"I know you talk English," he said, "good English too. So there's no use
trying to bluff me that you don't understand. What is your name, to
begin with?"

Still no answer but the curling lip.

"What's the idea of shooting at a policeman? Is it worth hanging for?"

She gave no sign.

He saw that it only gratified her to balk his curiosity, so he turned
away with a shrug. "If you won't talk, that's your affair."

He had thrown only light stuff on the fire, and he let it burn itself
out, having no mind to make of himself a shining mark for a bullet from
another quarter. He lit his pipe and sat debating what to do--or rather
struggling with his desire to set off instantly in search of Imbrie's
camp. Knowing it must be near, it was hard to be still. Yet better sense
told him he would be at a fatal disadvantage in the dark, particularly
as Imbrie must now be on the alert. There was no help for it. He must
wait for daylight.

He knew that above all he required sleep to fit him for his work next
day, and he determined to impose sleep on himself if will-power could do
it. As he rose to return to his tent a sullen voice from the direction
of the willow-bushes spoke up in English as good as his own:

"The mosquitoes are biting me."

"Ha!" said Stonor, with a grim laugh. "You've found your tongue, eh?
Mosquitoes! That's not a patch on what you intended for me, my girl! But
if you want to be friends, all right. First give an account of
yourself."

She relapsed into silence.

"I say, tell me who you are and where you came from."

She said, with exactly the manner of a wilful child: "You can't make me
talk."

"Oh, all right! But I can let the mosquitoes bite you."

Nevertheless he untied her from the willows and let her crawl under his
mosquito-bar. Here he tied ankles as well as wrists, beyond any
possibility of escape. It was not pure philanthropy on his part, for he
reflected that when she failed to return, Imbrie might come in search of
her, and take a shot inside his tent just on a chance. For himself he
took his blanket under the darkest shadow of the willows and covered
himself entirely with it excepting a hole to breathe through.

He did succeed in sleeping, and when he awoke the sky was clear and the
stars paling. Before crawling out of his hiding-place he took a careful
survey from between the branches. Nothing stirred outside. Under his
tent his prisoner was sleeping as calmly as a child. Apparently a
frustrated murder more or less was nothing to disturb her peace of mind.
Stonor thought grimly--for perhaps the hundredth time in dealing with
the red race: "What a rum lot they are!" He ate some bread that he had
left, and began to pack up.

The woman awoke as he took down the tent over her head, and watched his
preparations in a sullen silence.

"Haven't you got a tongue this morning?" asked Stonor.

She merely glowered at him.

However, by and by, when she saw everything being packed in the canoe,
she suddenly found her tongue. "Aren't you going to feed me?" she
demanded.

"No time now," he answered teasingly.

Her face turned dark with rage. "You hangman!" she muttered savagely.
"You've got a hangman's face all right! Anybody would know what you are
without your livery!"

Stonor laughed. "Dear! Dear! We are in a pleasant humour this morning!
You believe in the golden rule, don't you?--for others!"

When he was ready to start he regarded her grimly. He saw no recourse
but to take her with him, thus quadrupling his difficulties. He did
consider leaving her behind on the chance of returning later, but he
could not tell what hazards the day might have for him. He might be
prevented from returning, and murderess though she were, she was human,
and he could not bring himself to leave her helpless in the bush. She
stolidly watched the struggle going on in him.

He gave in to his humanitarian instincts with a sigh. As a final
precaution he gagged her securely with a handkerchief. He wished to take
no chances of her raising an alarm as they approached Imbrie's camp. He
then picked her up and laid her in the canoe. She rolled the light craft
from side to side.

"If you overturn us you'll drown like a stone," said Stonor, grinning.
"That would help solve my difficulties."

After that she lay still, her eyes blazing.

Stonor proceeded. This part of the river was narrow and fairly deep,
and the current ran steadily and slow. Through breaks in the ranks of
the trees he caught sight from time to time of the bench on either hand,
which now rose in high bold hills. From this he guessed that he had got
back to the true prairie country again. As is always the case in that
country, the slope to the north of the river was grassy, while the
southerly slope was heavily wooded to the top.

He peered around each bend with a fast-beating heart, but Imbrie's camp
proved to be not so near as he had expected. He put a mile behind him,
and another mile, and there was still no sign of it. Evidently the woman
had not made her way through the bush, as he had supposed, but had been
dropped off to wait for him. After giving him his quietus she had no
doubt intended to take his canoe and join her party. Well, it was
another lovely morning, and Stonor was thankful her plan had miscarried.

The river took a twist to the southward. The sun rose and shot his beams
horizontally through the tree-trunks, lighting up the underbrush with a
strange golden splendour. It was lovely and slightly unreal, like
stage-lighting. The surface of the river itself seemed to be dusted with
light. Far overhead against the blue, so tender and so far away at this
latitude, eagles circled and joyously screamed, each one as if he had an
intermittent alarm in his throat.

In the bow the woman lay glaring at him venomously. Stonor could not
help but think: "What a gorgeous old world to be fouled with murder and
hatred!"

At last, as he crept around an overhanging clump of willows, he saw what
he was in search of, and his heart gave a great leap. Arresting his
paddle, he clung to the branches and peered through, debating what to
do. They were still far off and he had not been perceived. With
straining eyes he watched the three tiny figures that meant so much to
him. Unfortunately there was no chance of taking Imbrie by surprise, for
he had had the wit to choose a camping-place that commanded a view
down-stream for half a mile. Stonor considered landing, and attempting
to take them from the rear, but even as he looked he saw Imbrie loading
the dug-out. They would be gone long before he could make his way round
through the bush. There was nothing to do but make a dash for it.

They saw him as soon as he rounded the bend. There was a strange
dramatic quality in the little beings running this way and that on the
beach. Stonor, straining every nerve to reach them, was nevertheless
obliged to be the witness of a drama in which he was powerless to
intervene. He saw Imbrie throw what remained of his baggage into the
dug-out. He saw the two petticoated figures start running up the beach
towards him, Stonor. Imbrie started after them. The larger of the two
figures dropped back and grappled with the man, evidently to give the
other a chance to escape. But Imbrie succeeded in flinging her off, and,
after a short chase, seized the other woman. Stonor could make out the
little green Norfolk suit now.

Mary snatched up a billet of wood, and as the man came staggering back
with his burden, she attacked him. He backed towards the dug-out,
holding Clare's body in front of him as a shield. But under Mary's
attacks he was finally compelled to drop Clare. She must have fainted,
for she lay without moving. Imbrie closed with Mary, and there was a
brief violent struggle. He succeeded in flinging her off again. He
reached the dug-out. Mary attacked him again. Snatching up his gun, he
fired at her point-blank. She crumpled up on the stones.

Imbrie picked up Clare and flung her in the dug-out. He pushed off. All
this had been enacted in not much more time than it takes to read of
it. Stonor was now within a furlong, but still helpless, for he dared
not fire at Imbrie for fear of hitting Clare. The dug-out escaped out of
sight round a bend.


CHAPTER XV

UPS AND DOWNS


Stonor, raging in his helplessness, was nevertheless obliged to stop. He
found Mary conscious, biting her lips until they bled to keep from
groaning. Her face was ashy. Yet she insisted on sitting up to prove to
him that she was not badly hurt.

"Go on! Go on!" she was muttering as he reached her. "I all right. Don'
stop! Go after him!"

"Where are you hurt?" Stonor demanded.

"Just my leg. No bone broke. It is not'ing. Go after him!"

"I can't leave you like this!"

"Give me your little medicine-bag. I dress it all right myself. Go
quick!"

"Be quiet! Let me think!" cried the distracted trooper. "I can't leave
you here helpless. I can't tell when I'll be back. You must have food, a
blanket, gun and ammunition."

As he spoke, he set about getting out what she needed; first of all the
little medicine chest that he never travelled without. He laid aside the
breed woman's gun and shells for her, and one of his two blankets. The
delay was maddening. With every second he pictured Imbrie drawing
further and further away, Clare without a protector now. Though the
dug-out was heavier than the bark-canoe, he would be handicapped by the
devilish breed woman, who would be sure to hinder him by every means
within her power. Yet he still closed his ears to Mary's urgings to be
off. He built up Imbrie's fire and put on water to heat for her. He
carried her near the fire, where she could help herself.

As he worked a new plan came to him, a way out of part of his
difficulties. "Mary," he said suddenly, "I'm going to leave the canoe
with you, too, and this woman to take care of for me. I'll take to the
bench. I can cut him off above."

"No! No!" she groaned. "Leave the woman and take the canoe. You can come
back when you get her."

But his mind was made up. A new hope lightened his despair. "No! He
might get me. Then you'd starve to death. I don't mean to let him get
me, but I can't take the chance. I'll travel faster light. Even if I
don't get him to-day, he shan't shake me off. The river is bound to get
more difficult as he goes up. And it's prairie-land above."

He hastened to get together his pack: gun and ammunition, knife,
hatchet, matches, and a little cooking-pot; a small store of flour,
salt, baking-powder and smoked meat.

"Mary, as soon as you feel able to travel, you are to start down-stream
in the canoe with the woman. It is up to you to take her out, and
deliver her to the authorities. The charge is attempted murder. You are
to tell John Gaviller everything that has happened, and let him act
accordingly."

All this was said in low tones to keep it from reaching the breed
woman's ears. Stonor now dropped to his knees and put his lips to Mary's
ear. "Tell Gaviller we know for sure that Imbrie is trying to escape
over the mountains by way of the head-waters of the Swan, and to make
sure that he is intercepted there if he slips through our fingers
below."

"I onerstan'," said Mary.

He gave her a pull from his flask, and she was able to sit up and attend
to the dressing of her own wound.

In ten minutes Stonor was ready to start. He put on a cheery air for
Mary's benefit. Truly the Indian woman had a task before her that might
have appalled the stoutest-hearted man.

"Good-bye, Mary!" he said, gripping her hand. "You're a good pardner. I
shan't forget it. Keep up a good heart. Remember you're a policeman now.
Going down you're only about three days' journey from Myengeen's
village. And you'll have company--though I can't recommend it much. Keep
the gun in your own hands."

Mary shrugged, with her customary stoicism. "I make her work for me."
She added simply: "Good-bye, Stonor. Bring her back safe."

"I won't come without her," he said, and with a wave of his hand struck
into the bush.

He laid a course at right angles to the river. The floor of this part of
the valley was covered with a forest which had never known axe nor fire,
and the going was difficult and slow over the down timber, some
freshly-fallen, making well-nigh impassable barricades erected on the
stumps of its broken branches, some which crumbled to powder at a touch.
There was no undergrowth except a few lean shrubs that stretched great,
pale leaves to catch the attenuated rays that filtered down. It was as
cool and still as a room with a lofty ceiling. High overhead the leaves
sparkled in the sun.

It was about half a mile to the foot of the bench, that is to say, to
the side of the gigantic trough that carried the river through the
prairie country, though it required an amount of exertion that would
have carried one over ten times that distance of road. As soon as Stonor
began to climb he left the forest behind him; first it diminished into
scattered trees and scrub and then ceased altogether in clean, short
grass, already curing under the summer sun. Presently Stonor was able
to look clear over the tops of the trees; it was like rising from a
mine.

The slope was not regular, but pushed up everywhere in fantastic knolls
and terraces. He directed his course as he climbed for a bold projecting
point from which he hoped to obtain a prospect up the valley. Reaching
it at last, he gave himself a breathing-space. He saw, as he hoped, that
the valley, which here ran due north and south, returned to its normal
course from the westward a few miles above. Thus, by making a bee-line
across the prairie, he could cut off a great bend in the watercourse,
not to speak of the lesser windings of the river in its valley. He
prayed that Imbrie might have many a rapid to buck that day.

On top of the bench the prairie rolled to the horizon with nothing to
break the expanse of grass but patches of scrub. Stonor's heart,
burdened as it was, lifted up at the sight. "After all, there's nothing
like the old bald-headed to satisfy a man's soul," he thought. "If I
only had Miles Aroon under me now!" Taking his bearings, he set off
through the grass at the rolling walk he had learned from the Indians.

Of that long day there is little to report. The endless slopes of grass
presented no distinguishing features; he was alone with the west wind's
noble clouds. He came up on the wind on a brown bear with cream-coloured
snout staying his stomach with the bark of poplar shoots until the
berries should be ripe, and sent him doubling himself up with a shout.
Time was too precious to allow of more than one spell. This he took
beside a stream of clear water at the bottom of a vast coulée that lay
athwart his path. While his biscuits were baking he bagged a couple of
prairie-chickens. One he ate, and one he carried along with him, "for
Clare's supper."

At about four o'clock in the afternoon, that is to say, the time of the
second spell, he struck the edge of the bench again, and once more the
valley was spread below him. He searched it eagerly. The forest covered
it like a dark mat, and the surface of the river was only visible in
spots here and there. He found what he was looking for, and his heart
raised a little song; a thin thread of smoke rising above the trees
alongside the river, and at least a couple of miles in his rear.

"I'll get him now!" he told himself.

He debated whether to hasten directly to the river, or continue further
over the prairie. He decided that the margin of safety was not yet quite
wide enough, and took another line along the bench.

Three hours later he came out on the river's edge with a heart beating
high with hope. The placid empty reach that opened to his view told him
nothing, of course, but he was pretty sure that Imbrie was safely below
him. His principal fear was that he had come too far; that Imbrie might
not make it before dark. The prospect of leaving Clare unprotected in
his hands through the night was one to make Stonor shudder. He decided
that if Imbrie did not come up by dark, he would make his way down
alongshore until he came on their camp.

Meanwhile he sought down-stream for a better point of vantage. He came
to a rapid. The absence of tracks on either side proved positively that
Imbrie had not got so far as this. Stonor decided to wait here. The man
would have to get out to track his dug-out up the swift water, and
Stonor would have him where he wanted him. Or if it was late when he got
here, he would no doubt camp.

Stonor saw that the natural tracking-path was across the stream; on the
other side also was the best camping-spot, a shelving ledge of rock with
a low earth bank above. In order to be ready for them, therefore, he
stripped and swam across below the rapid, towing his clothes and his
pack on an improvised raft, that he broke up immediately on landing.
Dressing, he took up his station behind a clump of berry-bushes that
skirted the bank. Here he lay at full length with his gun in his hands.
He made a little gap in the bushes through which he could command the
river for a furlong or so.

He lay there with his eyes fixed on the point around which the dug-out
must appear. The sun was sinking low; they must soon come or they would
not come. On this day he was sure Imbrie would work to the limit. He
smiled grimly to think how the man would be paddling with his head over
his shoulder, never guessing how danger lay ahead. Oh, but it was hard
to wait, though! His muscles twitched, the blood hammered in his
temples.

By and by, from too intense a concentration on a single point, the whole
scene became slightly unreal. Stonor found himself thinking: "This is
all a dream. Presently I will wake up."

In the end, when the dug-out did come snaking around the bend, he rubbed
his eyes to make sure they did not deceive him. Though he had been
waiting for it all that time, it had the effect of a stunning surprise.
His heart set up a tremendous beating, and his breath failed him a
little. Then suddenly, as they came closer, a great calm descended on
him. He realized that this was the moment he had planned for, and that
his calculations were now proved correct. For the last time he threw
over the mechanism of his gun and reloaded it.

Imbrie was paddling in the stern, of course. The man looked pretty
nearly spent, and there was little of his cynical impudence to be seen
now. Clare lay on her stomach on the baggage amidships, staring ahead
with her chin propped in her palms, a characteristic boy's attitude that
touched Stonor's heart. Her face was as white as paper, and bore a look
of desperate composure. Stonor had never seen that look; seeing it now
he shuddered, thinking, what if he had not found them before nightfall!

Imbrie grounded the canoe on the shelf of rock immediately below Stonor,
and no more than five paces from the muzzle of his gun. Clare climbed
out over the baggage without waiting to be spoken to, and walked away
up-stream a few steps, keeping her back turned to the man. Her head was
sunk between her shoulders; she stared out over the rapids, seeing
nothing. At the sight of the little figure's piteous dejection rage
surged up in Stonor; he saw red.

Imbrie got out and went to pick his course up the rapids. He cast a
sidelong look at Clare's back as he passed her. The man was too weary to
have much devilry in him at the moment. But in his dark eyes there was a
promise of devilry.

Having laid out his course he returned to the bow of the dug-out for his
tracking-line. This was the moment Stonor had been waiting for. He rose
up and stepped forward through the low bushes. Clare saw him first. A
little gasping cry broke from her. Imbrie spun round, and found himself
looking into the barrel of the policeman's Enfield. No sound escaped
from Imbrie. His lips turned back over his teeth like an animal's.

Stonor said, in a voice of deceitful softness: "Take your knife and cut
off a length of that line, say about ten feet."

No one could have guessed from his look nor his tone that an insane rage
possessed him; that he was fighting the impulse to reverse his gun and
club the man's brains out there on the rock.

Imbrie did not instantly move to obey.

"Look sharp!" rasped Stonor. "It wouldn't come hard for me to put a
bullet through you!"

Imbrie thought better of it, and cut off the rope as ordered.

"Now throw the knife on the ground."

Imbrie obeyed, and stepped towards Stonor, holding the rope out. There
was an evil glint in his eye.

Stonor stepped back. "No, you don't! Keep within shooting distance, or
this gun will go off!"

Imbrie stopped.

"Miss Starling," said Stonor. "Come and tie this man's wrists together
behind his back, while I keep him covered."

She approached, still staring half witlessly as if she saw an
apparition. She was shaking like an aspen-leaf.

"Pull yourself together!" commanded Stonor with stern kindness. "I am
not a ghost. I am depending on you!"

Her back straightened. She took the rope from Imbrie's hands, and passed
a turn around his extended wrists. Stonor kept his gun at the man's
head.

"At this range it would make a clean hole," he said, grinning.

To Clare he said: "Tie it as tight as you can. I'll finish the job."

When she had done her best, he handed his gun over and doubled the
knots. Forcing Imbrie to a sitting position, he likewise tied his
ankles.

"That will hold him, I think," he said, rising.

The words seemed to break the spell that held Clare. She sank down on
the stones and burst into tears, shaking from head to foot with
uncontrollable soft sobs. The sight unnerved Stonor.

"Oh, don't!" he cried like a man daft, clenching his impotent hands.

Imbrie smiled. Watching Stonor, he said with unnatural perspicacity:
"You'd like to pick her up, wouldn't you?"

Stonor spun on his heel toward the man. "Hold your tongue!" he roared.
"By God! another word and I'll brain you! You damned scoundrel! You
scum!"

If Imbrie had wished to provoke the other man to an outburst, he got a
little more than enough. He cringed from the other's blazing eyes, and
said no more.

Stonor bent over Clare. "Don't, don't grieve so!" he murmured.
"Everything is all right now."

"I know," she whispered. "It's just--just relief. I'm just silly now.
To-day was too much--too much to bear!"

"I know," he said. "Come away with me."

He helped her to her feet and they walked away along the beach. Imbrie's
eyes as they followed were not pleasant to see.

"Martin, I must touch you--to prove that you're real," she said
appealingly. "Is it wrong?"

"Take my arm," he said. He drew her close to his side.

"Martin, that man cannot ever have been my husband. It is not possible I
could ever have given myself to such a one!"

"I don't believe he is."

"Martin, I meant to throw myself in the river to-night if you had not
come."

"Ah, don't! I can't bear it! I saw."

"My flesh crawls at him! To be alone with such a monster--so terribly
alone--I can't tell you----!"

"Don't distress yourself so!"

"I'm not--now. I'm relieving myself. I've got to talk, or my head will
burst. The thing that keeps things in broke just now. I've got to talk.
I suppose I'm putting it all off on you now."

"I guess I can stand it," he said grimly.

She asked very low: "Do you love me, Martin?"

"You know I do."

"Yes, I know, but I had to make you say it, because I've got to tell
you. I love you. I adore you. If loving you in my mind is wicked, I
shall have to be a wicked woman. Oh, I'll keep the law. From what I
told you in the beginning, I must have already done some man a wrong. I
shall not wrong another. But I had to tell you. You knew already, so it
can do no great harm."

He glanced back at Imbrie. "If the law should insist on keeping up such
a horrible thing it would have to be defied," he said--"even if I am a
policeman!"

"I tell you he is not the man."

"I hope you're right."

"But if I am not free, I should not let you ruin yourself on my
account."

"Ruin? That's only a word. A man's all right as long as he can work."

"Oh, Martin, it seems as if I brought trouble and unhappiness on all
whom I approach!"

"That's nonsense!" he said quickly. "You've made me! However this thing
turns out. You've brought beauty into my life. You've taken me out of
myself. You've given me an ideal to live up to!"

"Ah, how sweet for you to say it!" she murmured. "It makes me feel real.
I am only a poor wandering ghost of a woman, and you're so solid and
convincing!

"There! I'm all right now!" she said, with an abrupt return to the
boyish, prosaic air that he found utterly adorable. "I have exploded.
I'm hungry. Let's go back and make supper. It's your turn to talk. Tell
me how you got here in advance of us, you wonderful man! And Mary----!"
She stopped short and her eyes filled. "How selfish of me to forget her
even for a moment!"

"She was not badly wounded," he said. "We'll probably overtake her
to-morrow."

"And you? I thought I saw a ghost when you rose up from the bushes."

"No magic in that," said Stonor. "I just walked round by the hills."

"Just walked round by the hills," she echoed, mocking his offhand
manner, and burst out laughing. "That was nothing at all!" Her eyes
added something more that she dared not put into words: "You were made
for a woman to love to distraction!"

When they returned to the dug-out, Imbrie studied their faces through
narrowed lids, trying to read there what had passed between them. Their
serenity discomposed him. Hateful taunts trembled on his lips, but he
dared not utter them.

As for Clare and Stonor, neither of them sentimental persons, their
breasts were eased. Each now felt that he could depend on the other in
the best sense until death: meanwhile passion could wait. They made a
fire together and cooked their supper with as unconscious an air as if
they had just come out from home a mile or two to picnic. They ignored
Imbrie, particularly Clare, who, with that wonderful faculty that women
possess, simply obliterated him by her unconsciousness of his presence.
The prisoner could not understand their air towards each other. He
watched them with a puzzled scowl. Clare was like a child over the
prairie-chicken. An amiable dispute arose over the division of it, which
Stonor won and forced her to eat every mouthful.

She washed the dishes while he cleared a space among the bushes on top
of the bank, and pitched her little tent. The camp-bed was still in
Imbrie's outfit, and Stonor set it up with tender hands, thinking of the
burden it would bear throughout the night. Also in Imbrie's outfit he
found his own service revolver, which he returned to Clare for her
protection.

Afterwards they made a little private fire for themselves a hundred feet
or so from Imbrie, and sedately sat themselves down beside it to talk.

Stonor said: "If you feel like it, tell me what happened after I went to
hunt my horses that morning."

"I feel like it," she said, with a smile. "It is such a comfort to be
able to talk again. Mary and I scarcely dared whisper. You had been gone
about half an hour that morning when all the Indians rode down out of
the woods, and crossed the ford to our side. There were about thirty of
them, I should say. I did just what you told me, that is, went on with
my packing as if they were not there. For a little while they stood
around staring like sulky children. Finally one of them said to me
through Mary with a sort of truculent air, like a child experimenting to
see how far he can go, that they were going to take Imbrie back. I told
Mary to tell him that that was up to him; that he would have to deal
with you later, if they did. Meanwhile I noticed they were edging
between me and Imbrie, and presently Imbrie stood up, unbound. He took
command of the band. It seemed he had known they were coming. I was only
anxious to see them all ride off and leave us.

"Soon I saw there was worse coming. At first I knew only by Mary's
scared face. She argued with them. She would not tell me what it was all
about. Gradually I understood that Imbrie was telling them I was his
wife, and they must take me, too. I almost collapsed. Mary did the best
she could for me. I don't know all that she said. It did no good. The
principal Indian asked me if I was Imbrie's wife, and I could only
answer that I did not know, that I had lost my memory. I suppose this
seemed like a mere evasion to them. When Mary saw that they were
determined, she said they must take her, too. She thought this was what
you would want. They refused, but she threatened to identify every man
of them to the police, so they had to take her.

"One man's horse had been killed, and they sent him and three others off
to the Horse Track village on foot to get horses to ride home on. That
provided horses for Imbrie, Mary, and me. They made them go at top speed
all day. I expect it nearly killed the horses. I was like a dead woman;
I neither felt weariness nor anything else much. If it had not been for
Mary I could not have survived it.

"We arrived at their village near Swan Lake early in the afternoon.
Imbrie stopped there only long enough to collect food. We never had
anything to eat but tough smoked meat of some kind, dry biscuits, and
bitter tea, horrible stuff! It didn't make much difference, though.

"Imbrie told the Indians what to say when the police came. He couldn't
speak their language very well, so he had to use Mary to translate, and
Mary told me. Mary was trying to get on Imbrie's good side now. She said
it wouldn't do any harm, and might make things easier for us. If we
lulled his suspicions we might get a chance to escape later, she said.
She wanted me to make up to Imbrie, too, but I couldn't.

"Imbrie told the Indians to go about their usual work as if nothing had
happened, and simply deny everything if they were questioned. Nothing
could be proved he said, for he and Mary and I would never be found nor
heard of again. He was going to take us back to his country, he said. By
that they understood, I think, that we were going to disappear off the
earth. They seemed to have the most absolute faith in him. They thought
you wouldn't dare follow until you had secured help from the post, which
would take many days."

"What about the breed woman?" interrupted Stonor.

"She was waiting there at the Swan Lake village. She came with us as a
matter of course, and helped paddle the dug-out. Mary paddled, too, but
she didn't work as hard as she made believe. We got in the river before
dark, but Imbrie made them paddle until late. I dreaded the first camp,
but Imbrie let me alone. Mary said he was afraid of me because he
thought I was crazy. After that, you may be sure, I played up to that
idea. It worked for a day or two, but I saw from his eyes that he was
gradually becoming suspicious.

"At night Imbrie and the breed woman took turns watching. Whenever we
got a chance Mary and I talked about you, and what you would do. We knew
of course that the man was coming out from Fort Enterprise, and I was
sure that you would send him back for aid, and come right after us
yourself. So Mary wrote you the note on a piece of bark, and set it
adrift in the current. It was wonderful how she deceived them right
before their eyes. But they gave us a good deal of freedom. They knew we
could do nothing unless we could get weapons, or steal the canoes. She
went down the shore a little way to launch her message to you.

"Well, that's about all I can remember. The days on the river were like
a nightmare. All we did was to watch for you, and listen at night. Then
came yesterday. By that time Imbrie was beginning to feel secure, and
was taking it easier. We were sitting on the shore after the second
spell when the breed woman came running in in a panic. We understood
from her gestures that she had seen you turning into the next reach of
the river below. Mary's heart and mine jumped for joy. Imbrie hustled us
into the dug-out, and paddled like mad until he had put a couple of
bends between us and the spot.

"Later, he put the breed woman ashore. She had her gun. We were
terrified for you, but could do nothing. Imbrie carried us a long way
further before he camped. That was a dreadful night. We had no way of
knowing what was happening. Then came this morning. You saw what
happened then."

Stonor asked: "What did you make of that breed woman?"

"Nothing much, Martin. I felt just as I had with Imbrie, that I must
have known her at some time. She treated me well enough; that is to
say, she made no secret of the fact that she despised me, but was
constrained to look after me as something that Imbrie valued."

"Jealous?"

"No."

"What is the connection between her and Imbrie?"

"I don't know. They just seemed to take each other for granted."

"How did Imbrie address her?"

"I don't know. They spoke to each other in some Indian tongue. Mary said
it sounded a little like the Beaver language, but she could not
understand it."

"Where do you suppose this woman kept herself while Imbrie was living
beside the falls?"

Clare shook her head.

"If we knew that it would explain much!"

"Well, that's all of my story," said Clare. "Now tell me every little
thing you've done and thought since you left us."

"That's a large order," said Stonor, smiling.

When he had finished his tale he took her to the door of her tent.

"Where are you going to sleep?" she asked anxiously.

"Down by the fire."

"Near--him?"

"That won't keep me awake."

"But if he should work loose and attack you?"

"I'll take precious good care of that."

"It's so far away!" she said plaintively.

"Twenty-five feet!" he said smiling.

"Couldn't you--sleep close outside my tent where I could hear you
breathing if I woke?"

He smiled, and gave her his eyes deep and clear. There comes a moment
between every two who deeply love when shame naturally drops away, and
to assume shame after that is the rankest hypocrisy. "I couldn't," he
said simply.

She felt no shame either. "Very well," she said. "You know best.
Good-night, Martin."

Stonor went back to the fire. He was too much excited to think of
sleeping immediately, but it was a happy excitement; he could even
afford at the moment not to hate Imbrie. The prisoner watched his every
movement through eyes that he tried to make sleepy-looking, but the
sparkle of hatred betrayed him.

"You seem well pleased with yourself," he sneered.

"Why shouldn't I be?" said Stonor good-naturedly. "Haven't I made a good
haul to-day?"

"How did you do it?"

"I just borrowed a little of your magic for the occasion and flew
through the air."

"Well, you're not out of the woods yet," said Imbrie sourly.

"No?"

"And if you do succeed in taking me in, you'll have some great
explaining to do."

"How's that?"

"To satisfy your officers why you hounded a man simply because you were
after his wife."

Stonor grinned. "Now that view of the matter never occurred to me!"

"It will to others."

"Well, we'll see."

"What's become of the two women?" asked Imbrie.

"They're on their way down-stream."

"What happened anyway, damn you?"

Stonor laughed and told him.

Later, after a thoughtful silence, Stonor suddenly asked: "Imbrie, how
did you treat measles among the Kakisas last year? That would be a good
thing for me to know."

"No doubt. But I shan't tell you," was the sullen answer.

"The worst thing we have to deal with up here is pneumonia; how would
you deal with a case?"

"What are you asking me such questions for?"

"Well, you're supposed to be a doctor."

"I'm not going to share my medical knowledge with every guy who asks. It
was too hard to come by."

"That's not the usual doctor's attitude."

"A hell of a lot I care!"

Stonor took out his note-book, and wrote across one of the pages: "The
body was not carried over the falls." He then poked the fire into a
bright blaze, and showed the page to Imbrie.

"What have I written?" he asked, watching the man narrowly.

Imbrie glanced at it indifferently, and away again. There was not the
slightest change in his expression. Stonor was convinced he had not
understood it.

"I won't tell you," muttered Imbrie.

"Just as you like. If I untie your hands, will you write a line from my
dictation?"

"No. What foolishness is this?"

"Only that I suspect you can neither read nor write. This is your
opportunity to prove that you can."

"Oh, go to hell!"

"I'm satisfied," said Stonor, putting away the book.

Travelling down the river next morning was child's play by comparison
with the labour of the ascent. The current carried them with light
hearts. That is to say, two of the hearts on board were light. Imbrie,
crouched in the bow with his inscrutable gaze, was hatching new schemes
of villainy perhaps. Clare sat as far as possible from him, and with her
back turned. All day she maintained the fiction that she and Stonor were
alone in the dug-out. In the reaction from the terrors of the last few
days her speech bubbled like a child's. She pitched her voice low to
keep it from carrying forward. All her thoughts looked to the future.

"Three or four days to the village at Swan Lake, you say. We won't have
to wait there, will we?"

"My horses are waiting."

"Then four days more to Fort Enterprise. You said there was a white
woman there. How I long to see one of my own kind! She'll be my
first--in this incarnation. Then we'll go right out on the steamboat,
won't we?"

"We'll have to wait a few days for her August trip."

"You'll come with me, of course."

"Yes, I'll have to take my prisoners out to headquarters at Miwasa
landing--perhaps all the way to town if it is so ordered."

"And when we get to town, what shall I do? Adrift on the world!"

"Before that I am sure we will meet with anxious inquiries for you."

"Yes, I have a comfortable feeling at the back of my head that I have
people somewhere. Poor things, what a state they must be in! It will be
part of your duty to take me home, won't it? Surely the authorities
wouldn't let me travel alone."

"Surely not!" said Stonor assuming more confidence than he felt.

"Isn't it strange and thrilling to think of a civilized land where
trolley cars clang in the streets, and electric lights shine at night;
where people, crowds and crowds of people, do exactly the same things at
the same hours every day of their lives except Sundays, and never dream
of any other kind of life! Think of sauntering down-town in a pretty
summer dress and a becoming hat, and chatting with scores of people you
know, and looking at things in the stores and buying useless
trifles--where have I done all that, I wonder? Think of pulling up one's
chair to a snowy tablecloth--and, oh, Martin! the taste of good food!
Funny, isn't it, when I have forgotten so much, that I should remember
_things_ so well!"

Clare insisted that Stonor had overtired himself the last few days, and
made him loaf at the paddle with many a pause to fill and light his
pipe. Even so their progress was faster than in the other direction.
Shortly after midday she told him that they were nearing the spot where
Mary had been shot the day before. They looked eagerly for the place.

To their great disappointment Mary had gone. However, Stonor pointed out
that it was a good sign she had been able to travel so soon.

They camped for the night at a spot where Mary had spelled the day
before. Stonor observed from the tracks that it was the breed woman who
had moved around the fire cooking. Mary apparently had been unable to
leave the canoe. It made him anxious. He did not speak of it to Clare.
He saw Imbrie examining the tracks also.

This camping-place was a bed of clean, dry sand deposited on the inside
of one of the river-bends, and exposed by the falling water. Stonor
chose it because it promised a soft bed, and his bones were weary. The
bank above was about ten feet high and covered with a dense undergrowth
of bushes, which they did not try to penetrate, since a dead tree
stranded on the beach provided an ample store of fuel. Clare's tent was
pitched at one end of the little beach, while Imbrie, securely bound,
and Stonor slept one on each side of the fire a few paces distant.

In the morning Stonor was the first astir. A delicate grey haze hung
over the river, out of which the tops of the willow-bushes rose like
islands. He chopped and split a length of the stranded trunk, and made
up the fire. Imbrie awoke, and lay watching him with a lazy sneer.
Stonor had no warning of the catastrophe. He was stooping over sorting
out the contents of Imbrie's grub-bag, his back to the bushes, when
there came a crashing sound that seemed within him--yet outside. That
was all he knew.


CHAPTER XVI

THE LAST STAGE ON SWAN RIVER.


When Stonor's sense returned the first thing of which he was conscious
was Clare's soft hand on his head. He opened his eyes and saw her face
bending over him, the nurse's face, serious, compassionate and
self-forgetful. No one knows what reserves may be contained in a woman
until another's wound draws on them. He found himself lying where he had
fallen; but there was a bag under his neck to hold his head up. Putting
up his hand he found that his head was tightly bandaged. There seemed to
be a mechanical hammer inside his skull.

"What happened?" he whispered.

She scarcely breathed her reply. "The woman shot you. She was hidden in
the bush."

Looking beyond her, Stonor saw Imbrie and the breed woman eating by the
fire in high good humour. He observed that the woman was wearing the
revolver he had given Clare.

"She disarmed me before I could fire," Clare went on. "Your wound is not
serious. The bullet only ploughed the scalp above your ear."

"Who bandaged me?"

"I did. They didn't want to let me, but I made them. I sewed the wound
first. I don't know how I did it, but I did."

Imbrie looked over and saw them talking. "Let him alone," he said
harshly. "Come over here and get your breakfast."

"Go," said Stonor with his eyes and lips. "If he attempted to ill-treat
you in my sight I----"

She understood, and went without demur. Imbrie motioned her to a place
beside him and put a plate before her. She went through the motions of
eating, but her eyes never left Stonor's face. Stonor closed his eyes
and considered their situation. Frightful enough it was in good sooth,
yet it might have been worse. For as he lay quiet he felt his powers
returning. Beyond a slight nausea he was himself again. He thanked God
for a hard skull.

Meanwhile the breed woman was bragging of her exploit. She spoke in
English for the pleasure it gave her to triumph over the whites.

"He gave Mary his canoe and made for the bench."

"I know that," said Imbrie. "Go on."

"Well, as soon as Mary had bound up her leg she wanted to start. But her
leg got worse on the way. When it came time to spell, she had to untie
me and let me cook, while she kept watch over me with the gun--my gun
that Stonor gave her. It was at this place that we spelled. When we went
on, her leg kept getting worse, and soon she said we'd have to stop for
the night. So I made camp. Then she ordered me to come up to her and get
my hands tied, and patted the gun as a sort of hint. I went up to her
all right, and when she put down the gun and took up the rope, I
snatched up the gun, and then I had her!"

The woman and Imbrie roared with laughter.

"Then I just took her knife and her food, and went," the woman said,
callously.

"Damned inhuman--!" Stonor cried involuntarily.

"What's the matter with you!" she returned. "Do you think I was going to
let her take me in and turn me over for shooting at a policeman? Not if
I know it! I was charitable to her if it comes to that. I could have
taken her canoe, too, and then she would properly have starved. But I
left her the canoe and a piece of bread, too. Mary Moosa is fat enough.
I guess she can live off her fat long enough to get to Myengeen's
village."

"What then?" asked Imbrie.

"I just walked off up the river. She couldn't follow me with her leg.
She couldn't track the canoe up the rapids. All she can do is to go on
down."

"How did you know where I was?" asked Imbrie.

"I didn't know. I took a chance. I had the gun and a belt of cartridges.
I can snare fool-hens and catch fish. It was a sight better than going
to jail. I knew if the policeman got you he'd bring you down river, and
I figured I'd have another chance to get him. And if you got him I
figured there wouldn't be any hurry, and you'd wait for awhile for me."

"You did well," said Imbrie with condescending approval.

"Nearly all night I walked along the shore looking for your camp. At
last I saw the little tent and I knew I was all right. Then I waited for
daylight to shoot. The damned policeman turned his head as I fired, or I
would have finished him."

Imbrie dropped into the Indian tongue that they ordinarily used. From
his knowledge of the Beaver language Stonor understood it pretty well,
though a word escaped him here and there.

"What will we do with him?" he said.

"Be careful," she said. "They may understand."

"No fear of that. We know that Clare doesn't speak our tongue."

"Maybe the policeman speaks Beaver."

"He doesn't, though. He spoke English to them. I asked Shose Cardinal if
he spoke Beaver, and he said no. And when I pushed off I insulted him in
our tongue, and he paid no attention. Listen to this----"

Imbrie turned, and in the Indian tongue addressed an unrepeatable insult
to the wounded trooper. Stonor, though almost suffocated with rage,
contrived to maintain an unchanged face.

"You see?" said Imbrie to the woman, laughing. "No white man would take
that. We can say what we like to each other. Speak English now just to
torment him, the swine! Ask me in English what I'm going to do with
him."

She did so.

"Oh, I don't know," he answered carelessly. "Just tie him up, I guess,
and leave him sitting here."

"Tie him up?" she said with an evil smile.

"Sure! Give him leisure to prepare for his end."

They laughed together.

Stonor dreaded the effect of this on Clare. She, however, seemed to be
upborne by some inner thought.

"I know something better than that," the woman said presently.

"What?"

"Don't tie him up. Leave him just as he is, without gun, axe or knife.
Let him walk around until he goes off his nut or starves to death. Then
there'll be no evidence. But if you leave him tied they'll find his body
with the rope round it."

"That's a good idea. But he might possibly make his way to Myengeen's
village."

"Just let him try it. It's a hundred and fifty miles round by land.
Muskeg and down timber."

"But if he sticks to the river, Mary Moosa might bring him back help."

"She'll get no help from Myengeen. She's got to go to Enterprise for
help. Two weeks. Even a redbreast couldn't last two weeks in the bush.
And by that time we'll be----"

"Easy!" said Imbrie warningly.

"We'll be out of reach," she said, laughing.

"All right, it's a go," said Imbrie. "We'll leave him just as he is.
Pack up now."

Stonor glanced anxiously at Clare. Her face was deathly pale, but she
kept her head up.

"Do you think I'm going to go and leave him here?" she said firmly to
Imbrie.

"Don't see how you're going to help yourself," said he, without meeting
her eyes.

"If you put me in the dug-out I'll overturn it," she said promptly.

Imbrie was taken aback. "I'll tie you up," he muttered, scowling.

"You cannot tie me so tight that I can't overturn that cranky boat."

"You'll be the first to drown."

She smiled. "Do you think I value the life you offer me?" She held out
her hands to him. "Tie me and see."

There could be no mistaking the firmness of her resolve. Imbrie
hesitated and weakened. He turned to the breed woman questioningly.

She said in the Indian tongue: "What do you look at me for? I've told
you before that you're risking both our necks by taking her. The world
is full of skinny little pale-faced women, but you've only got one neck.
Better leave her with the man."

Imbrie shook his head slowly.

The woman shrugged. "Well, if you got to have her, fix it to suit
yourself." She ostentatiously went on with the packing.

Imbrie looked sidewise at Clare with a kind of hungry pain in his sullen
eyes. "I won't leave her," he muttered. "I'll take them both."

The woman flung up her hands in a passionate gesture. "Foolishness!" she
cried.

A new idea seemed to occur to Imbrie; he said in English: "I'll take the
redbreast for my servant. Upstream work is no cinch. I'll make him track
us. It'll be a novelty to have a redbreast for a servant."

Clare glanced anxiously at Stonor as if expecting an outbreak.

Imbrie asked with intolerable insolence: "Will you be my servant,
Redbreast?"

Clare's hands clenched, and she scowled at Imbrie like a little
fire-eater.

Stonor answered calmly: "If I have to be."

Clare's eyes darted to him full of relief and gratitude; she had not
expected so great a sacrifice. The brave lip trembled.

Imbrie laughed. "Good!" he cried. "Redbreasts don't relish starving in
the bush any better than ordinary men!"

The breed woman, on the verge of an angry outburst, checked herself, and
merely shrugged again. She said quietly in her own tongue: "He thinks
he's going to escape."

"Sure he does!" answered Imbrie, "and I'm the man who will prevent him.
I'll keep the weapons in my own hands."

True to his word he collected all the weapons in the outfit; three guns,
the revolver and three knives. He gave the breed woman her own gun and
her ammunition-belt, which she strapped round her; he kept his gun, and
the other two fire-arms he disabled by removing parts of the mechanism,
which he put in his pocket. He stuck two knives in his belt, and gave
the woman the third, which she slipped into its customary resting-place
in the top of her moccasin. Imbrie ordered Stonor to get up and strike
Clare's tent.

"He must be fed," said Clare quickly.

"Sure, I don't mind feeding him as long as he's going to earn it," said
Imbrie.

Clare hastened to carry Stonor her untasted plate, but Imbrie
intercepted her. "No more whispering," he said, scowling. "Eat your own
breakfast. The woman will feed him."

In half an hour they were on their way back up the river. They allowed
Stonor to rest and recuperate in the dug-out until they came to the
first rapid. Later, the policeman bent to the tracking-line with a good
will. This was better luck than he had hoped for. His principal fear was
that he might not be able to dissemble sufficiently to keep their
suspicions lulled. He knew, of course, that if they should guess of what
he was thinking his life would not be worth a copper penny. His
intuition told him that even though he was a prisoner, Clare was safe
from Imbrie while he was present, and he had determined to submit
cheerfully to anything in order to keep alive. He only needed three or
four more days!

So, with a loop of the tracking-line over his shoulder, he plodded
through the ooze of the shore, and over the stones; waded out round
reefs, and plunged headlong through overhanging willows. Imbrie walked
behind him with his gun over his arm. Clare lay on the baggage in the
dug-out wistfully watching Stonor's back, and the breed woman steered.
In the more sluggish reaches of the river, the men went aboard and
paddled.

When they spelled in mid-morning Imbrie and the woman became involved in
a discussion of which Stonor understood almost every word. They had
finished eating, and all four were sitting in a row on a beach with
great stones sticking up through the sand. Clare was at one end, Stonor
at the other. They were giving Stonor a rest as they might have rested a
horse before putting him in harness again.

The woman said impatiently: "How long are you going to keep up this
foolishness?"

"What foolishness?" Imbrie said sullenly.

"Letting this man live. He's your enemy and mine. He's not going to
forget that I shot at him twice. He's got some scheme in his head right
now. He's much too willing to work."

"That's just women's talk. I know what I'm doing. I've got him just
right because he's scared of losing the girl."

"All right. Many times you ask me what to do. Sometimes you don't do
what I say, and then you're sorry afterwards. I tell you this is
foolishness. You want the white-face girl and you let the man live to
please her! What sense is there in that? She won't take you as long as
he lives."

"If I kill him she'll kill herself."

"Wah! That's just a threat. She'll hold it over you as long as he lives.
When he's dead she'll have to make the best of it. You'll have to kill
him in the end. Why not do it now?"

"I know what I'm doing," repeated Imbrie stubbornly. "I'm the master
now. Women turn naturally to the master. In a few days I'll put this
white man so low she'll despise him."

The woman laughed. "You don't know much about women. The worse you treat
him the crazier she'll be about him. And if she gets a knife, look out!"

"She won't get a knife. And if my way doesn't work I can always kill
him. He's useful. We're getting up-stream faster than we would without
him."

"He's too willing to go up the river, I think."

"There's no help for him up there, is there?"

"I don't know. You'd better do what I say."

"Oh, shut up. Go and pack the grub. We'll start soon."

The woman went to obey with her customary shrug.

Stonor had much food for thought in this conversation. He marked with
high satisfaction that the way the woman spoke did not for a moment
suggest that Imbrie had any rights over Clare, nor that he had ever
possessed her in the past. Listen as he might, he could gain no clue to
the relationship between the two speakers. He hoped they might betray
themselves further later on. Meanwhile the situation was hazardous in
the extreme. There was no doubt the woman would soon wear Imbrie down.
If he, Stonor, could only communicate with Clare it would help.

Imbrie turned to Clare with what he meant for an ingratiating smile. "Is
your memory coming back at all?" he asked.

In itself there was nothing offensive in the question, and Clare had the
wit to see that nothing was to be gained by unnecessarily snubbing the
man. "No," she said simply.

"But you're all right in every other way. There's nothing the matter
with you?"

She let it go at that.

"You don't remember the days when I was courting you?"

"No," she said with an idle air, "where was that?"

He saw the trap. "I'll tell you some other time.--Redbreast has long
ears."

While Imbrie's attention was occupied by Clare a possible way of sending
her a message occurred to Stonor. The woman was busy at some paces'
distance. Stonor was sitting on a flat stone with his feet in the sand.
Carelessly picking up a stick, he commenced to make letters in the sand.
Clare, whose eyes never left him for long, instantly became aware of
what he was doing; but so well did she cover her glances that Imbrie
took no alarm.

Stonor, printing a word at a time, and instantly rubbing it out with his
foot, wrote: "Make out to scorn me."

Meanwhile Imbrie was making agreeable conversation and Clare was leading
him on sufficiently to keep him interested. Small as his success was, he
was charmed with it. Finally he rose regretfully.

"Time to go," he said. "Go get in your harness, Stonor."

The trooper arose and slouched to the tracking-line with a hang-dog air.
Clare's eyes followed him in well-assumed indignation at his supineness.

"He'll make a good pack-horse yet," said Imbrie with a laugh.

"So it seems," she said bitterly.

They started. Imbrie, much encouraged by this little passage, continued
to bait Stonor at intervals during the afternoon. The policeman, fearful
of appearing to submit too suddenly, sometimes rebelled, but always
sullenly gave in when Imbrie raised his gun. Stonor saw that, so far as
the man was concerned, he need have little fear of overdoing his part.
Imbrie in his vanity was quite ready to believe that Clare was turning
from Stonor to him. On the other hand, the breed woman was not at all
deceived. Her lip curled scornfully at all this by-play.

Clare's glance at Stonor, keeping up what she had begun, progressed from
surprise through indignation to open scorn. Meanwhile in the same ratio
she held herself less and less aloof from Imbrie. She, too, was careful
not to overdo it. She made it clear to Imbrie that it would be a good
long time yet before he could expect any positive favours from her. She
did it so well that Stonor, though he had himself told her to act in
that manner, was tormented by the sight. After all, he was human.

Once and once only during the day did Stonor's and Clare's glances meet
unobserved by the others. It happened as the trooper was embarking in
the dug-out preparatory to paddling up a smooth reach. Imbrie and the
woman were both behind Clare, and she gave Stonor a deep look imploring
his forgiveness for the wrong she seemed to do him. It heartened him
amazingly. Bending low as he laid the coiled rope in the bow, his lips
merely shaped the words:

"Keep it up!"

So long and so hard did they work that day that they were able to camp
for the night only a few miles short of the highest point they had yet
reached on the river. The camping-place was a pleasant opening up on top
of the bank, carpeted with pine-needles. The murmur of the pines
reminded Clare and Stonor of nights on the lower river--nights both
happy and terrible, which now seemed years past.

While supper was preparing Clare appeared out of her tent with some long
strips of cotton. She went unhesitatingly to where Stonor sat.

Imbrie sprang up. "Keep away from him!" he snarled.

Clare calmly sat down by Stonor. "I'm going to dress his wound," she
said. "I'd do the same for a dog. I don't want to speak to him. You can
sit beside me while I work."

Imbrie sullenly submitted.

After supper it appeared from Imbrie's evil grin that he was promising
himself a bit of fun with the policeman. But this time he was taking no
chances.

"I'm tired of toting this gun around; tie his hands," he ordered the
woman.

The night was chilly and they had a good fire on the edge of the bank.
It lighted them weirdly as they sat in a semi-circle about it, the four
strangely-assorted figures backed by the brown trunks of the pines, and
roofed by the high branches. Stonor safely tied up, Imbrie put down his
gun and lighted his pipe. He studied the policeman maliciously. He was
not quite satisfied; even in Stonor's submission he felt a spirit that
he had not yet broken.

"You policemen think pretty well of yourselves, don't you?" he said.

Stonor, clearly perceiving the man's intention, was nevertheless
undisturbed. This vermin was beneath him. His difficulty was to curb the
sly desire to answer back. Imbrie gave him such priceless openings. But
the part he had imposed on himself required that he seemed to be cowed
by the man's crude attempts at wit. A seeming sullen silence was his
only safe line. It required no little self-control.

Imbrie went on: "The government sets you fellows up as a kind of bogey.
For years they've been teaching the natives that a red-coat is a kind of
sacred monkey that all must bow down to. And you forget you're only a
man like the rest of us. When you meet a man who isn't scared off by all
this hocus-pocus it comes pretty hard on you. You have to sing small,
don't you, Redbreast?"

Silence from Stonor.

"I say you have to sing small, Redbreast."

"Just as you like."

"I've heard ugly tales about the police," Imbrie went on. "It seems
they're not above turning a bit of profit out of their jobs when it's
safe. Is that so, Stonor?"

"I hear you say it."

"You yourself only took me up in the first place because you thought
there was a bit of a bribe in it, or a jug of whisky maybe. You thought
I was a whisky-runner, but you couldn't prove it. I guess you're sorry
now that you ever fooled with me, aren't you, Redbreast?"

Stonor said nothing.

"Answer me when I speak to you. Aren't you sorry now that you interfered
with me?"

This was a hard one. A vein stood out on Stonor's forehead. He thought:
"I wouldn't say it for myself, but for her----!" Aloud he muttered:
"Yes!"

Imbrie roared with laughter. "I'm putting the police in their place!" he
cried. "I'm teaching them manners! I'll have him eating out of my hand
before I'm through with him!"

Clare, seeing the swollen vein, bled for Stonor, yet she gave him a
glance of scorn, and the look she gave Imbrie caused him to rise as if
moved by a spring, and cross to her.

As he passed the breed woman he said in the Indian tongue: "Well, who
was right, old woman?"

He sat down beside Clare.

The woman answered: "You fool! She's playing with you to save her lover.
Any woman would do the same."

"You lie!" said Imbrie, with a fatuous side-glance at Clare. "She's
beginning to like me now."

"Beginning to like you!" cried the woman scornfully. "Fool! Watch me!
I'll show you how much she likes you!"

Springing to her feet, and stooping over, she drew the knife from her
moccasin. She turned on Stonor. "Redbreast!" she cried in English. "I'm
sick of looking at your ugly face. Here's where I spoil it!"

She raised the knife. Her eyes blazed. Stonor really thought his hour
had come. He scrambled to his feet. Clare, with a scream, ran between
them, and flung her arms around Stonor's neck.

"You beast!" she cried over her shoulder to the woman. "A bound man!
You'll have to strike him through me!"

The woman threw back her head and uttered a great, coarse laugh. She
coolly returned the knife to her moccasin. "You see how much she likes
you," she said to Imbrie.

Clare, seeing how she had been tricked, unwound her arms from Stonor's
neck, and covered her face. It seemed too cruel that all their pains the
livelong day should go for nothing in a moment. Imbrie was scowling at
them hatefully.

"Don't distress yourself," whispered Stonor. "It couldn't be helped. We
gained a whole day by it anyway. I'll think of something else for
to-morrow."

"Keep clear of him!" cried Imbrie. "Go to your tent!"

"I won't!" Clare said.

"Better go!" whispered Stonor. "I am safe for the present."

She went slowly to her tent and disappeared.

Stonor sat down again. Across the fire Imbrie scowled and pulled at his
lip. The breed woman, returning to her place, had the good sense to hold
her tongue.

After a long while Imbrie said sullenly in the Indian tongue: "Well,
you've got your way. You can kill him to-morrow."

Stonor was a brave man, but a chill struck to his breast.

"I kill him?" said the woman. "Why have I got to do all the dirty work?"

"What do you care? You've already tried twice."

"Why don't you kill him yourself?"

"I'm not afraid of him."

"Maybe not. With his hands tied."

Imbrie's fist clenched. "Do you want me to beat you?"

The woman shrugged.

"You know very well why I don't want to do it," Imbrie went on. "It's
nothing to you if the girl hates you."

"Oh, that's why, eh? You're scared she'd turn from bloody hands! She's
made a fool of you, all right!"

"Never mind that. You do it to-morrow."

"Why not to-night?"

"I won't have it done in her sight. To-morrow morning when we spell you
make some excuse to take him into the bush. There you shoot him or stick
a knife in his back. I don't care so long as you make a job of it. You
come back alone and make a story of how he tried to run away, see? Then
I'll beat you----"

"Beat me!" she cried indignantly.

"Fool! I won't hurt you. I'll just act rough to you for a while, till
she gets better."

"That girl has made me plenty trouble these last two years. I wish I'd
never set eyes on her!"

"Forget it! Tie his feet together so he can't wander and go to bed now!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary Moosa's little mosquito-tent was still in Imbrie's outfit, but the
woman preferred to roll up in her blanket by the fire like a man. Soon
the two of them were sleeping as calmly as two children, and Stonor was
left to his own thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a silent quartette that took to the river next day. Imbrie was
sulky; it appeared that he no longer found any relish in gibing at
Stonor. Clare was pale and downcast. After an hour or so they came to
the rapids where Stonor had intercepted Imbrie and Clare, and thereafter
the river was new to them. Stonor gathered from their talk that the
river was new, too, to Imbrie and the woman, but that they had received
information as to its course from Kakisa sources.

For many miles after that the current ran smooth and slow, and they
paddled the dug-out; Stonor in the bow, Imbrie guarding him with the
gun, Clare behind Imbrie, and the breed woman with the stern-paddle. All
with their backs to each other and all silent. About ten o'clock they
came to the mouth of a little creek coming in at the left, and here
Imbrie indicated they would spell.

"So this is the spot designed for my murder," thought Stonor, looking
over the ground with a natural interest.

The little brook was deep and sluggish; its surface was powdered with
tiny lilies and, at its edges, long grass trailed in the water. A clean,
grassy bank sloped up gradually. Further back were white-stemmed
aspen-trees gradually thickening into the forest proper.

"Ideal place for a picnic," thought Stonor grimly. As they went ashore
he perceived that the breed woman was somewhat agitated. She continually
wiped her forehead on her sleeve. This was somehow more reassuring than
her usual inhuman stolidity. Imbrie clearly was anxious, too, but not
about Stonor or what was going to happen to him. His eyes continually
sought Clare's face.

The breed woman glanced inquiringly at Imbrie. He said in the Indian
tongue: "We'll eat first."

"So I have an hour's respite," thought Stonor.

None of them displayed much appetite. Stonor forced himself to eat.
Imbrie glanced at him oddly from time to time. "He's sorry to see good
food wasted," thought the trooper. "Well, it won't be, if I can help
it!"

When they had finished the woman said in English with a very careless
air: "I'm going to see if I can get some fresh meat."

"She means me," thought Stonor.

She got her gun and departed. Stonor was aware likewise of the knife
sticking out of the top of her moccasin. Both Imbrie and the woman had a
self-conscious air. A child could have seen that something was afoot.
The woman walked off through the grass and was presently lost among the
trees.

Imbrie commanded Stonor to wash the dishes.

Stonor reflected that since they meant to kill him anyhow if they could,
there was nothing to be gained by putting up with further indignities.

"Wash them yourself," he said coolly.

Imbrie shrugged, but said no more.

Pretty soon they heard a shot at no great distance.

Stonor thought: "Now she'll come back and say she's got a bear or a
moose, and they'll order me to go back with her and bring in the meat.
Shall I go, or shall I refuse to go? If I refuse they're almost sure to
suspect that I understand their lingo; but if I go I may be able to
disarm her. I'll go."

Presently they saw her returning. "I've got a moose," she said stolidly.

Stonor smiled a grim inward smile. It was too simple to ask him to
believe that she had walked into the bush and brought down a moose
within five minutes with one shot. He knew very well that if there was a
feast in prospect her face would be wreathed in smiles. He was careful
to betray nothing in his own face.

Imbrie was a better actor. "Good work!" he cried. "Now we'll have
something fit to eat."

She said: "I want help to bring in the meat."

"Stonor, go help her," said Imbrie carelessly.

The trooper got up with an indifferent air.

"Martin, don't go!" Clare said involuntarily.

"I'm not afraid of her," Stonor said.

The woman forced him to walk in advance of her across the grass. The
thought of her behind him with the gun ready made Stonor's skin prickle
uncomfortably, but he reflected that she would certainly not shoot until
they were hidden in the bush.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they reached the edge of the bush he stopped and looked at her.
"Which way?" he asked, with an innocent air.

"You can follow the tracks, can't you?" said she.

He saw that she was pale and perspiring freely. She moistened her lips
before she spoke.

Half a dozen paces further on he stopped again.

"Go on!" she said harshly.

"Got to tie my moccasin," he said, dropping on one knee and turning half
round, so that he could keep an eye on her. She gave a swift glance over
her shoulder. They were not yet fully out of sight of the others.

"Your moccasin is not untied," she said suddenly.

At the same moment Stonor, still crouching, sprang at her, taking care
to keep under the gun. Grasping her knees, he flung her to the ground.
He got the gun, but before he could raise it, she sprang at him from all
fours like a cat, and clung to him with a passionate fury no man could
have been capable of. Stonor was unable to shake her off without
dropping the gun. Meanwhile she screamed for aid.

Both Imbrie and Clare came running. Imbrie, circling round the
struggling pair, clubbed his gun and brought it down on Stonor's head.
The trooper went to earth. He did not altogether lose consciousness. The
woman, maddened, recovered her gun, and was for dispatching him on the
spot, but Imbrie, thinking of Clare, prevented her.

Stonor was soon able to rise, and to make his way back, albeit somewhat
groggily, to the creek. Clare wished to support him, but he stopped her
with a look.

When they got back to their camp Imbrie demanded with seeming
indignation: "What was the matter with you? What did you expect to gain
by jumping on her?"

"What did she take me into the bush for?" countered Stonor. "To put a
bullet through me?"

Imbrie made a great parade of surprise. "What makes you think that?"

"She's tried twice already, hasn't she? I saw it in her eye. She saw it,
too----" pointing to Clare. "You heard her warn me. She never shot a
moose. That was too simple a trick."

"I did shoot a moose," said the woman sullenly.

"Then why don't you bring some of it in and let's see it. You have your
knife to cut off as much as we can carry."

She turned away with a discomposed face.

"Oh, well, if you won't take the trouble to bring in the meat we'll go
without it," said Imbrie quickly. Stonor laughed.

As they were making ready to start Stonor heard Imbrie say bitterly to
the woman, in their own tongue: "You made a pretty mess of that!"

"Well, do it yourself, then," she snarled back.

"Very well, I will. When I see a good chance."

"This is only the 25th," thought Stonor. "By hook or by crook I must
contrive to keep alive a couple of days longer."

Above this camping-place the character of the river changed again. The
banks became steep and stony, and the rapids succeeded each other with
only a few hundred yards of smooth water between. Stonor became a
fixture in the tracking-line. He worked with a right good will, hoping
to make himself so useful that they would not feel inclined to get rid
of him. It was a slim chance, but the best that offered at the moment.
Moreover, every mile that he put behind him brought him so much nearer
succour.

That night in camp he had the satisfaction of hearing Imbrie say in
answer to a question from the woman:

"No, not to-night. All day he's been working like a slave to try and get
on the good side of me. Well, let him work. I've no mind to break my
back while I have him to work for me. According to the Kakisas we'll
have rapids now for a long way up. Let him pull us."

So Stonor could allow himself to sleep with an easy mind for that night,
anyway.

The next two days were without special incident. Stonor lived from
moment to moment, his fate hanging on Imbrie's savage and irresponsible
impulses. Fortunately for him, he was still able to inform himself from
the talk of the two. Each day they broke camp, tracked up-stream,
tracked and poled up the rapids, spelled and tracked again. In the
rapids it was the breed woman who had to help Stonor. Imbrie would stand
by smoking, with his gun over his arm. Stonor wondered at the woman's
patience.

At the end of the second day they found another soft sandy beach to camp
on. Stonor was so weary he could scarcely remain awake long enough to
eat. They all turned in immediately afterwards. Latterly Imbrie had been
forcing Stonor to lie close to him at night, and the end of the line
that bound Stonor's wrists was tied around Imbrie's arm. The breed woman
lay on the other side of the fire, and Clare's tent was pitched beyond
her.

Stonor was awakened by a soft touch on his cheek. Having his nerves
under good control, he gave no start. Opening his eyes, he saw Clare's
face smiling adorably, not a foot from his own. At first he thought he
was dreaming, and lay scarcely daring to breathe, for fear of
dissipating the charming phantom.

But the phantom spoke: "Martin, you looked so tired to-night it made me
cry. I could not sleep. I had to come and speak to you. Did I do wrong?"

He feasted his tired eyes on her. How could he blame her? "Dangerous,"
he whispered. "These breeds sleep like cats."

"What's the difference? It's as bad as it can be already."

He shook his head. "They have not ill-treated you."

"I wouldn't mind if they did. It is terrible to see you work so hard,
while I do nothing. Why do you work so hard for them?"

"I have hope of meeting help up the river."

She smiled incredulously. Stonor, seeing her resigned to the worst, said
no more about his hopes. After all they might fail, and it would be
better not to raise her hopes only to dash them.

"Better go," he urged. "Every little while through the night one or the
other of these breeds wakes, sits up, looks around, and goes back to
sleep again."

"Are you glad I came, Martin?"

"Very glad. Go back to your tent, and we'll talk in fancy until we fall
asleep again."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stonor was awakened the next time by a loud, jeering laugh. It was full
daylight. The breed woman was standing at his feet, pointing mockingly
to the tell-tale print of Clare's little body in the sand beside him. A
blinding rage filled Stonor at the implication of that coarse laugh--but
he was helpless. Imbrie started up, and Stonor attempted to roll over on
the depression--but Imbrie saw it, saw also the little tracks leading
around behind the sleepers to Clare's tent.

No sound escaped from Imbrie, but his smooth face turned hideous with
rage; the lips everted over the clenched teeth, the ruddy skin livid and
blotchy. He quickly untied the bond between him and Stonor. The woman,
with a wicked smile, drew the knife out of her moccasin, and offered it
to him. He eagerly snatched it up. Stonor's eyes were fixed
unflinchingly on his face. He thought: "It has come!"

But at that moment Clare came out of her tent. Imbrie hid the knife and
turned away. As he passed the breed woman Stonor heard him mutter:

"I'll fix him to-night!"

       *       *       *       *       *

That day as he trod the shore, bent under the tracking-line, Stonor had
plenty to occupy his mind. Over and over he made his calculations of
time and distance:

"This is the twenty-seventh. It was the fifteenth when I sent Tole
Grampierre back to Enterprise. If he rode hard he'd get there about noon
on the seventeenth. The steamboat isn't due to start up-stream until
the twentieth, but Gaviller would surely let her go at once when he got
my message. She'd only need to get wood aboard and steam up. She could
steam night and day too, at this stage of water; she's done it
before--that is, if they had anybody to relieve Mathews at the engine.
There are plenty of pilots. Surely Gaviller would order her to steam
night and day when he read my letter! Even suppose they didn't get away
until the morning of the eighteenth: that would bring them to the
Crossing by the twenty-second.

"Lambert, I know, would not lose an hour in setting out over the
prairie--just long enough to get horses together and swim them across. I
can depend on him. Nobody knows how far it is overland from the Crossing
to the Swan River. Nobody's been that way. But the chances are it's
prairie land, and easy going. Say the rivers are about the same distance
apart up there, Lambert ought to reach the Swan on the twenty-fifth, or
at the latest the twenty-sixth. That's only yesterday. But we must have
made two hundred or two hundred and fifty miles up-stream. The Swan
certainly makes a straighter course than the Spirit. It must be less
than a hundred miles from here to the spot where Lambert would hit this
stream. He could make seventy-five miles or more a day down-stream. He
would work. If everything has gone well I might meet him to-day.

"But things never go just the way you want them to. I must not count on
it. Gaviller may have delayed. He's so careful of his precious
steamboat. Or she may have run on a bar. Or Lambert may have met
unexpected difficulties. I must know what I'm going to do. Once my hands
are tied to-night my goose is cooked. Shall I resist the woman when she
tries to tie my hands? But Imbrie always stands beside her with the gun;
that would simply mean being shot down before Clare's eyes. Shall I let
them bind me and take what comes?--No! I must put up a fight somehow!
Suppose I make a break for it as soon as we land? If there happens to be
cover I may get away with it. Better be shot on the wing than sitting
down with my hands tied. And if I got clean away, Clare would know there
was still a chance. I'll make a break for it!"

He looked at the sky, the shining river and the shapely trees. "This may
be my last day on the old ball! Good old world too! You don't think what
it means until the time comes to say ta-ta to it all; sunny mornings,
and starry nights, with the double trail of the Milky Way moseying
across the sky. I've scarcely tasted life yet--mustn't think of that!
Twenty-seven years old, and nothing done! If I could feel that I had
left something solid behind me it would be easier to go."

Pictures of his boyhood in the old Canadian city presented themselves
unasked; the maple-foliage, incredibly dense and verdant, the shabby,
comfortable houses behind the trees, and the homely, happy-go-lucky
people who lived in the houses and sprayed their lawns on summer
evenings; friendly people, like people everywhere prone to laughter and
averse to thought. "People are so foolish and likeable, it's amazing!"
thought Stonor, visualizing his kind for the first.

The sights and sounds and smells of the old town came thronging back;
the school-bell with its flat clangour, exactly like no other bell on
earth--it rang until five minutes before the hour, stopping with a
muttering complaint, and you ran the rest of the way. There was the
Dominion Hotel, with a tar pavement in front that became semi-liquid on
hot days; no resident of that town ever forgot the pungent smell
compounded of tar, stale beer, sawdust, and cabbage that greeted you in
passing. And the candy-store was next door; the butterscotch they sold
there!

How he used to get up early on summer mornings and, with his faithful
mongrel Jack, with the ridiculous curly tail, walk and run a mile to the
railway-station to see the Transcontinental stop and pass on. How the
sun shone down the empty streets before any one was up! Strange how his
whole life seemed to be coloured by the newly-risen sun! And the long
train with the mysterious, luxurious sleeping-cars, an occasional
tousled head at the window; lucky head, bound on a long journey!

"Well, I've journeyed some myself since then," thought Stonor, "and I
have a longer journey before me!"

They spelled at ten o'clock, and again at three. "The last lap!" thought
Stonor, as they took to the river after the second stop. All depended on
the spot Imbrie should choose for their next camp. Stonor studied the
nature of the ground anxiously. The banks continued to rise steep and
high almost from the water's edge. These slopes for the most part were
wooded, but a wood on a steep stony slope does not offer good cover.

"Small chance of scrambling over the top in such a place without
stopping a bullet," thought Stonor. "If we come to a more favourable
spot should I suggest camping? No! for Imbrie would be sure to keep on
out of pure obstinacy. I might have a chance if I zig-zagged up the
hill. The worst part will be running away from Clare. Suppose she cries
out or tries to follow. If I could warn her!"

But Imbrie was taking very good care that no communications passed
between the two to-day.

They came to a place where a limestone ridge made a rapid wilder than
any they had passed on the upper river, almost a cataract. Much time was
consumed in dragging the dug-out over the shelves of rock alongside. The
ridge made a sort of dam in the river; and above there was a long
reach, smooth and sluggish. Imbrie ordered Stonor aboard to paddle, and
the trooper was not sorry for the change of exercise.

The sun was dropping low now, and Stonor little by little gave up hope
of meeting help that day. In the course of the smooth reach they came
upon an island, quaintly shaped like a woman's hat, with a stony beach
all round for a brim, a high green crown, and a clump of pines for an
aigrette. In its greatest diameter it was less than a hundred feet.

Coming abreast of the island, Imbrie, without saying anything in advance
of his intention, steered the dug-out so that she grounded on the beach.
The others looked round at him in surprise.

"We'll camp here," he said curtly.

Stonor's heart sank. An island! "It's early yet," he said, with a
careless air.

"The dug-out's leaking," said Imbrie. "I want to fix her before dark."

"There's no gum on the island."

"I have it with me."

Imbrie said this with a meaning grin, and Stonor could not be sure but
that the man suspected his design of escaping. There was nothing for it
but to submit for the moment. If they attempted to bind him he would put
up the best fight he could. If they left him free until dark he might
still escape by swimming.

They landed. The breed woman, as a matter of course, prepared to do all
the work, while Imbrie sat down with his pipe and his gun. He ordered
Stonor to sit near. The policeman obeyed, keeping himself on the _qui
vive_ for the first hostile move. Clare, merely to be doing something,
put up her own little tent. The breed woman started preparing supper,
and then, taking everything out of the dug-out, pulled it up on the
stones, and turning it over applied the gum to the little crack that had
opened in the bottom.

They supped as usual, Stonor being guarded by the woman while Imbrie
ate. Stonor and Clare were kept at a little distance from each other.
There was nothing that they cared to say to each other within hearing of
their jailors. Soon afterwards Clare went to her tent. Stonor watched
her disappear with a gripping pain at his heart, wondering if he would
ever see her again. "She might have looked her good-night," he thought
resentfully, even while better sense told him she had refrained from
looking at him only because such indications of an understanding always
infuriated Imbrie.

The dusk was beginning to gather. Imbrie waited a little while, then
said carelessly:

"Tie him up now."

The woman went to get the piece of line she used for the purpose. Stonor
got warily to his feet.

"What do you want to tie me up for?" he said, seeking to gain time. "I'm
helpless without weapons. You might let me have one night's comfortable
sleep. I work hard enough for it."

Imbrie's suspicions were instantly aroused by this changed attitude of
Stonor's, who had always before indifferently submitted. He raised the
gun threateningly. "Shut up!" he said. "Hold your hands behind you."

The woman was approaching with the line. Stonor moved so as to bring
himself in a line between Imbrie and the woman. Out of the tail of his
eye he saw Clare at the door of her tent, anxiously watching. He counted
on the fact that Imbrie would not shoot while she was looking on without
strong provocation. They were all down on the stony beach. Stonor kept
edging closer to the water.

Stonor still sought to parley. "What are you afraid of? You're both
armed. What could I do? And you sleep like cats. I couldn't move hand or
foot without waking you. I can't work all day, and sleep without being
able to stretch myself."

While he talked he manoeuvred to keep himself between Imbrie and the
woman. Imbrie, to avoid the danger of hitting her, was obliged to keep
circling round Stonor. Finally Stonor got him between him and the water.
This was the moment he was waiting for. His muscles were braced like
steel springs. Plunging at Imbrie, he got under the gun-barrel and bore
the man back into the river. The gun was discharged harmlessly into the
air. The beach sloped away sharply, and the force of his rush carried
them both into three feet of water. They went under. Imbrie dropped his
gun, and clung to Stonor with the desperate, instinctive grip of the
non-swimmer. Like a ray of light the thought flashed through Stonor's
brain: "I have him on equal terms now!"

As they went under he was aware of the woman rushing into the water
after him with the knife raised. He twisted his body so that Imbrie came
uppermost and she was unable to strike. Stonor saw Clare running to the
water's edge.

"Get her gun!" he cried.

Clare swerved to where it stood leaning against the overturned dug-out.
The woman turned back, but Clare secured the gun before she was out of
the water, and dashed into the thick bushes with it. Meanwhile Stonor
dragged the struggling Imbrie into deeper water. They lost their footing
and went under again. The woman, after a pause of agonized indecision,
ran to the dug-out, and, righting it, pushed it into the water.

Stonor, striking out as he could, carried his burden out beyond a man's
depth. The current carried them slowly down. They were as much under the
water as on top, but Stonor cannily held his breath, while Imbrie
struggled insanely. Stonor, with his knee against the other's chest,
broke his strangle-hold, and got him turned over on his back. Imbrie's
struggles began to weaken.

Meanwhile the dug-out was bearing down on them. Stonor waited until it
came abreast and the woman swung her paddle to strike. Then letting go
of Imbrie, he sank, and swimming under water, rose to the surface some
yards distant. He saw that the woman had Imbrie by the hair. In this
position it was impossible for her to wield her paddle, and the current
was carrying her down. Stonor turned about and swam blithely back to the
island.

Clare, still carrying the gun, came out of the bushes to meet him. They
clasped hands.

"I knew there was only one bullet," she said. "I was afraid to fire at
the woman for fear of missing her."

"You did right," he said.

Stonor found the gun that Imbrie had dropped in the water. From the
beach they watched to see what the breed woman would do.

"When she gets near the rapids she'll either have to let go Imbrie or be
carried over," Stonor said grimly.

But the woman proved to be not without her resources. Still with one
hand clutched in Imbrie's hair, she contrived to wriggle out of the
upper part of her dress. Out of this she made a sling, passing it under
the unconscious man's arms, and tying it to the thwart of the dug-out.
She then paddled ashore and dragged the man out on the beach. There they
saw her stand looking at him helplessly. Save for the dug-out she was
absolutely empty-handed, without so much as a match to start a fire
with.

Presently she loaded the inert body in the dug-out, and, getting in
herself, came paddling back towards the island. Stonor grimly awaited
her, with the gun over his arm. The dusk was thickening, and Clare built
up the fire.

When she came near, Stonor said, raising the gun: "Come no closer till I
give you leave."

She raised her hands. "I give up," she said apathetically. "I've got to
have fire for him, blankets. Maybe he is dead."

"He's only half-drowned," said Stonor. "I can bring him to if you do
what I tell you."

"What do you want?"

"Throw your ammunition-belt ashore, then your knife, and the two knives
that Imbrie carries in his belt."

She obeyed. Stonor gratefully buckled on the belt. She landed, and
permitted her hands to be bound. Stonor then pulled the dug-out out on
the stones, and turning it over rolled Imbrie on the bottom of it until
he got most of the water out of him. Then, laying him on his back, after
half an hour's unremitting work, he succeeded in inducing respiration. A
little colour returned to Imbrie's face, and in the end he opened his
eyes and looked stupidly around him. At these signs of returning
animation the enigma of a woman suddenly lowered her head and broke into
a dry hard sobbing.

So intent were they upon the matter in hand they never thought of
looking out on the river. It was as dark now as it would be, and anyway
the glow of the fire blinded them to what lay outside its radius.
Suddenly out of the murk came with stunning effect a deep-throated hail:

"Stonor, is that you?"

The policeman straightened like a man who received an electric shock. A
great light broke in his face.

"Lambert! Thank God!" he cried.

Two clumsy little pot-bellied collapsible boats grounded on the stones
below their fire and, as it seemed to their confused senses, they were
immediately surrounded by a whole crowd of friendly faces. Stonor was
aware, not of one red coat, but of three, and two natives besides. The
rubicund face of his commanding officer, Major Egerton, "Patch-pants"
Egerton, the best-loved man in the North, swam before his eyes. Somehow
or other he contrived to salute.

"I have the honour to turn over two prisoners, sir. This man who claims
to be Doctor Ernest Imbrie, and this woman, name unknown to me."

"Good work, Sergeant!" Having returned his salute, the little Major
unbent, and offered Stonor his hand.

"This is a surprise, sir, to see you," said the latter.

"I had just got to the Crossing on my rounds when your note came to
Lambert. So I came right on with him." Major Egerton's glance took in
Stonor's bandaged skull and dripping clothes, the woman's bound hands,
and Imbrie just returning to consciousness. "I judge you've been having
a strenuous time," he remarked drily.

"Somewhat, sir."

"You shall tell me all about it, when we've settled down a bit. We had
already camped for the night, when we saw the reflection of your fire,
and came down to investigate. Introduce me to the lady."

The little Major bowed to Clare in his best style. His face betrayed no
consciousness of the strangeness of the situation, in that while Dr.
Imbrie was a prisoner, Mrs. Imbrie was obviously under Stonor's
protection. He engaged her in conversation about the weather as if they
had just met at a lawn fête. It was exactly what the shaken Clare
needed.

Meanwhile Stonor slipped aside to his friends. "Lambert!" he cried,
gripping his brother-sergeant's hand, "God knows your ugly phiz is a
beautiful sight to my eyes! I knew I could depend on you! I knew it!"

Lambert silently clapped him on the back. He saw from Stonor's face what
he must have been through.

Beyond Lambert Stonor caught sight of a gleaming smile on a dark face.
"Tole!" he cried. "They brought you! How good it is to find one's
friends!"


CHAPTER XVII

THE HEARING


They moved to a better camping-place on the mainland. Major Egerton
could rough it as well as any youngster in the service, but as a matter
of principle he always carried a folding bed, table, and chair in his
outfit. These simple articles made a great impression on the natives.
When the Major's tent was pitched, and the table and chair set up
inside, the effect of a court of justice was immediately created, even
in the remotest wilderness.

Next morning they all gathered in his tent. The Major sat at the table
with Coulter, his orderly and general factotum, sitting on a box at his
left with pen and note-book before him. Stonor stood at the Major's
right. The two prisoners stood facing the table, with Lambert keeping an
eye on them. Clare sat in the place of honour on the Major's cot against
the side of the tent. Tole and Ancose squatted on their heels just
inside the door.

"I'll start with the woman," said the Major. Addressing her directly, he
said sternly: "It is my duty to tell you that anything you may say here
can be used against you later, and it is therefore your privilege to
refuse to answer. At the same time a refusal to answer naturally
suggests the fear of incriminating yourself, so think well before you
refuse. Do you understand me?"

"Yes, sir."

"Ah, you speak good English. That simplifies matters. First, what is
your name?"

"Annie Alexander."

"Married?"

"No, sir."

"Age?"

"Forty-four."

"Hm! You don't look it. What is your relation to the other prisoner
here?"

"No relation, just a friend."

"Ah? Where do you come from?"

The woman hesitated.

Imbrie murmured: "Winnipeg."

"Be silent!" cried the Major. "Sergeant Lambert, take that man out, and
keep him out of earshot until I call you."

It was done.

"How long have you been in this country?"

"Since Spring--May."

"How did you come in?"

"By way of Caribou Lake and the Crossing."

"Alone?"

"Yes, sir."

"By what means did you travel?"

"I got passage on a york boat up the rivers, and across Caribou Lake.
From the lake a freighter took me on his load across the long portage to
the Crossing."

"Ancose," said the Major, "you watch the prisoner outside, and ask
Sergeant Lambert to step here."

Meanwhile he went on with his questions. "How did you travel from the
Crossing?"

"I built a little raft and floated down the Spirit River to Carcajou
Point."

Lambert came in.

"Lambert," said the Major, "this woman claims to have come over the
portage to the Crossing in May with a freighter and to have built a raft
there and floated down the river. Can you verify her story?"

"No, sir, never saw her before."

"Is it possible for her to have done such a thing?"

"Possible, sir," said Lambert cautiously, "but not likely. It's part of
my business to keep track of all who come and go. There are not enough
travellers to make that difficult. Such an extraordinary thing as a
woman travelling alone on a raft would have been the talk of the
country. If I might ask her a question, sir----?"

The Major signed to him to do so.

"What was the name of the freighter who brought you over the portage?"

"I don't know his whole name. Men called him Jack."

Lambert shrugged. "There's many a Jack, sir."

"Of course. Let it go for the present." To the woman he said: "What was
your object in making this long journey alone?"

"Doctor Imbrie wrote to me to come and live with him. He had nobody to
take care of his house and all that."

"I see. What do you mean by saying he was your friend?" The Major asked
this with an uneasy glance in Clare's direction.

"Just my friend," answered the woman, with a hint of defiance. "I took
care of him when he was little."

"Ah, his nurse. When did you get the letter from him?"

"In March."

"Where was it sent from?"

"Fort Enterprise."

"Sergeant Stonor, can you testify as to that?"

"I can testify that it is not true, sir. It was a matter of common
knowledge at the post that Doctor Imbrie neither received nor sent any
letters. We wondered at it. Furthermore, the only word received from him
all winter was in January."

The Major turned to the woman. "According to that you are telling an
untruth about the letter," he said sternly. "Do you wish to change your
statement?"

She sullenly shook her head.

The Major shrugged and went on. "Was Doctor Imbrie waiting for you at
Carcajou Point?"

"Yes, sir."

"Why didn't you meet at Fort Enterprise, where there was a good trail to
Swan River?"

"He didn't feel like explaining things to the white men there. He likes
to keep to himself."

"Where did you go from Carcajou Point?"

"We bought horses from the Beaver Indians and rode overland to Swan
Lake."

"Bought horses?" said the Major quickly. "How did Doctor Imbrie get to
Carcajou in the first place?"

She corrected herself. "I mean he bought extra horses for me, and for
the outfit."

"And you rode to Swan Lake on your way back to his place?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you go to his place?"

"No, sir, I got sick at Swan Lake and he had to leave me."

"But if you were sick you needed a doctor, didn't you?"

"I wasn't very sick, I just couldn't travel, that was all."

"But why did he have to leave you?"

"He had business at his place."

"Business? There was no one there but himself."

The woman merely shrugged.

Major Egerton waved his hand in Clare's direction. "Do you know this
lady?"

"Yes, sir. It's Doctor Imbrie's wife."

"How do you know that?"

"I saw them married."

"Where was that?"

"I won't answer that at present."

The Major turned to Clare apologetically. "Please excuse me if I must
ask a painful question or two."

Clare nodded reassuringly.

"Why had Doctor Imbrie left his wife?"

The woman's eyes sparkled with resentment. "He didn't leave her. She
left him. She----"

"That will do!" ordered the Major.

But the woman raised her voice. "She threw up the fact of his having red
blood to him--though she knew it well enough when she married him. He
was all cut up about it. That was why he came up here."

The Major, slightly embarrassed, turned to Stonor. "Will you question
her?" he asked testily. "You are better informed as to the whole
circumstances."

"If I might hear the man's story first, sir?"

"Very well. Send for him. What is the charge against the woman?"

"Shooting with intent to kill, sir."

"Enter that, Coulter. Whom did she shoot at?"

"At me, sir. On two occasions."

"Ah! An officer in the performance of his duty. Amend the charge,
Coulter. Please relate the circumstances."

Stonor did so.

"Have you anything to say in regard to that?" the Major asked the woman.

She shook her head.

By this time Imbrie was again facing the tribunal. At Stonor's request
the woman was allowed to remain in the tent during his examination.
After stating the usual formula as to his rights, the Major started
questioning him.

"Your name?"

"Ernest Imbrie, M.D."

"Age?"

"Twenty-six."

"Place of birth?"

"Winnipeg."

"Father's name?"

"John Imbrie."

"His occupation?"

"Farmer."

The Major raised his eyebrows. "In Winnipeg?"

"He lived off the income of his farms."

"Ah! Strange I never heard the name in Winnipeg. Do you wish to give any
further information about your antecedents?"

"Not at present, sir."

"You have Indian blood in your veins?"

"Yes, sir, my grandmother was an Indian. I never saw her."

"How long have you been in this district?"

"A year, sir."

"How did you come here?"

"I got employment with a crew of boatmen at Miwasa Landing. I travelled
with them as far as Great Buffalo Lake. There I bought a canoe from the
Indians and came up the Swan River to the Great Falls and built me a
shack."

"You were alone then?"

"Yes, sir."

"How did this woman come to join you?"

"I sent for her to keep my house for me."

"How did you get word to her?"

Imbrie blandly evaded the trap. "I sent a letter out privately to be
passed along by the Indians--what they call moccasin telegraph."

"Ah! Why did you choose that method?"

"Because I wished to keep my affairs to myself. I had heard of the
curiosity of the white men at Fort Enterprise concerning my movements,
and I did not care to gratify it."

"Very well. Now, when you started back with her, did she go home with
you?"

"No, sir. She was taken sick at Swan Lake, and I had to leave her
there."

"How did you come to leave her if she was sick?"

"She was not very sick. Her leg swelled up and she couldn't travel, that
was all."

Stonor signed to the Major that he wished to ask a question, and the
Major bade him go ahead.

"Tell us exactly what was the matter with her, as a doctor, I mean."

"You wouldn't understand if I did tell you."

The Major rapped smartly on the table. "Impudence will do you no good,
my man! Answer the Sergeant's question!"

"I decline to do so."

Stonor said: "I have established the point I wished to make, sir. He
can't answer it."

Major Egerton proceeded: "Well, why didn't you wait for her until she
got well?"

"I had to make a garden at home."

"You travelled three hundred miles down the river and back again to make
a garden!"

"We have to eat through the winter."

"Stonor, was there a garden started at Imbrie's place?"

"Yes, sir, but it had been started weeks before. The potatoes were
already several inches high."

Imbrie said: "I planted the potatoes before I left."

"Well, leave the garden for the present." The Major indicated Clare.
"You know this lady?"

"I should hope so."

"Confine your answers to plain statements, please. Who is she?"

"My wife."

"Have you any proof of that?"

"She says so. She ought to know."

The Major addressed Clare. "Is it true that you have said you were his
wife?"

"I cannot tell you of my own knowledge, sir. Sergeant Stonor has told me
that before I lost my memory I told him I was Ernest Imbrie's wife."

The Major bowed and returned his attention to Imbrie. "When and where
were you married?"

"I decline to answer."

The excellent Major, who was not noted for his patience with the
evil-doer, turned an alarming colour, yet he still sought to reason with
the man. "The answer to that question could not possibly injure you
under any circumstances."

"Just the same, I decline to answer. You said it was my right."

With no little difficulty the Major still held himself in. "I am
asking," he said, "for information which will enable me to return this
lady to her friends until her memory is restored."

"I decline to give it," said Imbrie hardily. His face expressed a
pleased vanity in being able, as he thought, to wield the whip-hand over
the red-coats.

The little Major exploded. "You damned scoundrel!" he cried. "I'd like
to wring your neck!"

"Put that down, please," Imbrie said to the clerk with ineffable
conceit.

The Major put his hands behind his back and stamped up and down the four
paces that comprised the length of his tent. "Stonor, I wonder--I wonder
that you took the patience to bring him to last night!" he stammered.
"Go on and question him if you want. I haven't the patience."

"Very well, sir. Imbrie, when I was taking you and this lady back to
Fort Enterprise, why did you carry her off?"

"She was my wife. I wanted her. Anything strange in that?"

"No. But when we came to you at your place, why did you run away from
us?"

"I hadn't had a good look at her then. I thought it best to keep out of
the way."

"Why weren't you willing to come to the post and let the whole thing be
explained?"

Imbrie's face suddenly turned dark with rage. He burst out, scarcely
coherently: "I'll tell you that! And you can all digest it! A fat chance
I'd have had among you! A fat chance I have now of getting a fair
hearing! If she came all this way to find me, it's clear she wanted to
make up, isn't it? Yet when she saw me, she turned away. She'd been
travelling with you too long. You'd put your spell on her. You said
she'd lost her memory. Bunk! Looks more like hypnotism to me. You wanted
her for yourself. That's the whole explanation of this case. You've got
nothing on me. You only want to railroad me so that the way will be
clear for you with her. Why, when I was bound up they made love to each
other before my very face. Isn't that true?"

"I am not under examination just now," said Stonor coldly.

"Answer me as a man, isn't it true?"

"No, it's a damned lie!"

"Well, if it had been me, I would!" cried the little Major.

Sergeant Lambert concealed a large smile behind his large hand.

Stonor, outwardly unmoved, said: "May I ask the woman one more question,
sir, before I lay a charge against the man?"

"Certainly."

Stonor addressed the woman. "You say you are unmarried?"

"Yes."

"What are you doing with a wedding-ring?"

"It's my mother's ring. She gave it to me when she died."

"Tole," said Stonor, "take that ring off and hand it to me." To the
Major he added in explanation: "Wedding-rings usually have the initials
of the contracting parties and the date."

"Of course!"

The ring was removed and handed to Stonor.

Examining it he said: "There is an inscription here, sir. It is: 'J.I.
to A.A., March 3rd, 1886.' It stands to reason this woman's mother was
married long before 1886."

"She was married twice," muttered the woman.

Stonor laughed.

"What do you make of it, Sergeant?" asked the Major.

"John Imbrie to Annie Alexander."

"Then you suspect----?"

"That this woman is the man's mother, sir. It first occurred to me last
night."

"By George! there is a certain likeness."

All those in the tent stared at the two prisoners in astonishment. The
couple bore it with sullen inscrutability.

"I am now ready to make a charge against the man, sir."

The Major sat down. "What is the charge?"

"Murder."

Imbrie must have had this possibility in mind, for his face never
changed a muscle. The woman, however, was frankly taken by surprise. She
flung up her manacled hands involuntarily; a sharp cry escaped her.

"It's a lie!"

"Whom did he murder?"

"A man unknown to me, sir."

"Where was the deed committed?"

"At or near the shack above the Great Falls."

The woman's inscrutability was gone. She watched Stonor and waited for
his evidence in an agony of apprehension.

"Did you find the body?"

"Yes, sir."

"Under what circumstances?"

"It had been thrown in the rapids, sir, in the expectation that it would
be carried over the falls. Instead, however, it lodged in a log-jam
above the falls. As I was walking along the shore I saw a foot sticking
out of the water. I brought the body ashore----"

"You brought the body ashore--out of the rapids above the falls----?"

"Yes, sir. A woman I had with me, Mary Moosa, helped me."

"Describe the victim."

"A young man, sir, that is to say, under thirty. In stature about the
same as the prisoner, and of the same complexion. What remained of his
clothes suggested a man of refinement."

"But his face?"

"It was unrecognizable, sir."

A dreadful low cry broke from the half-breed woman. Her manacled hands
went to her face, her body rocked forward from the waist.

The man rapped out a command to her in the Indian tongue to get a grip
on herself. She tried to obey, straightening up, and taking down her
hands. Her face showed a ghastly yellow pallor.

"What proof have you of murder?" asked the Major.

"There was no water in the dead man's lungs, sir, showing that he was
dead before his body entered the water. There was a bullet-hole through
his heart. I found the bullet itself lodged in the front of his spine.
It was thirty-eight calibre, a revolver bullet. This man carried a
thirty-eight revolver. I took it from him. I sent revolver and bullet
out by Tole Grampierre."

Lambert spoke up: "They are in my possession, sir."

The breed woman seemed about to collapse. Imbrie, who had given no sign
of being affected by Stonor's recital, now said with a more conciliatory
air than he had yet shown:

"If you please, sir, she is overcome by the trooper's horrible story.
Will you let her go outside for a moment to recover herself?"

"Very well," said the good-natured Major, "watch her, Lambert."

As the woman passed him Imbrie whispered to her in the Indian tongue:
"Throw your locket in the river."

Stonor, on the alert for a trick of some kind, overheard. "No, you
don't!" he said, stepping forward.

The woman made a sudden dive for the door, but Lambert seized her. She
struggled like a mad thing, but the tall sergeant's arms closed around
her like a vice. Meanwhile Stonor essayed to unclasp the chain around
her neck. The two breeds guarded Imbrie to keep him from interfering.

Stonor got the locket off at last, and opened it with his thumb nail.
The woman suddenly ceased to struggle, and sagged in Lambert's arms. An
exclamation escaped from Stonor, and he glanced sharply into Imbrie's
face. Within the locket on one side was a tinted photograph of the heads
of two little boys, oddly alike. On the other side was an inscription in
the neat Spencerian characters of twenty years before: "Ernest and
William Imbrie,"--and a date.

Stonor handed the locket over to the Major without speaking. "Ha!" cried
the latter. "So that is the explanation. There were two of them!"


CHAPTER XVIII

A LETTER FROM MAJOR EGERTON TO HIS FRIEND ARTHUR DONCOURT, ESQ.


MY DEAR DONCOURT:

You ask me to tell you some of the circumstances underlying the Imbrie
murder case of which you have read the account in the annual report of
the R.N.W.M.P. just published. You are right in supposing that a strange
and moving tale is hidden behind the cold and formal phraseology of the
report.

The first Imbrie was the Reverend Ernest, who went as a missionary to
the Sikannis Indians away back in '79. Up to that time these Indians
were absolutely uncivilized, and bore a reputation for savage cruelty. I
suppose that was what stimulated the good man's zeal. He left a saintly
tradition behind him. The Sikannis live away up the corner of British
Columbia, on the head-waters of the Stanley River, one of the main
branches of the Spirit River. The Spirit River, as you may know, rises
west of the Rocky Mountains and breaks through. There is not a more
remote spot this side the Arctic Circle, nor one more difficult of
access.

The missionary brought with him his son, John Imbrie, a boy just
approaching manhood. Very likely the danger of bringing up a boy
absolutely cut off from the women of his race never occurred to the
father. The inevitable happened. The boy fell in love with a handsome
half-breed girl, the daughter of a wandering prospector and a Sikanni
squaw, and married her out of hand. The heartbroken father was himself
compelled to perform the ceremony. This was in 1886.

The Imbries were so far cut off from their kind that in time they were
forgotten. The missionary supported himself by farming in a small way
and trading his surplus products with the Indians. John turned out to be
a good farmer and they prospered. Their farm was the last outpost of
agriculture in that direction. From the time he went in with his father
John did not see the outside world again until 1889, when he took his
wife and babies out, with a vain hope, I think, of trying to educate the
woman. Most of these marriages have tragic results, and this was no
exception. During all the years in her husband's house this woman
resisted every civilizing influence, except that she learned to deck
herself out like a white woman.

She bore her husband twin sons, who were christened Ernest and William.
They bore a strong resemblance to each other, but as they began to
develop it appeared, as is so often the case in these mixed families,
that Ernest had a white man's nature, and William a red man's. When the
time came they were sent out to Winnipeg to school, but William, true to
the savage nature, sickened in civilised surroundings, and had to be
sent home. On the other hand, Ernest proved to be a sufficiently apt
scholar, and went on through school and college. During the whole period
between his thirteenth and his twenty-fourth year he was only home two
or three times. William remained at home and grew up in ignorance. John
Imbrie, the father, I gather, was a worthy man, but somewhat weak in his
family relations.

Ernest went on to a medical college with the idea of practising among
the Sikannis, who had no doctor. During his second year his father died,
long before he could reach him, of course. He remained outside until he
got his diploma. Meanwhile his mother and brother quickly relapsed into
a state of savagery. They "pitched around" with the Indians, and the
farm which had been so painstakingly hewn out of the wilderness by the
two preceding generations grew up in weeds.

Ernest had a painful homecoming, I expect. However, he patiently set to
work to restore his father's work. He managed to persuade his mother and
brother to return and live in white man's fashion, but they made his
life a hell for him, according to all accounts. They were insanely
jealous of his superior attainments. Neither did the Sikannis welcome
Doctor Ernest's ministrations. Since the death of the missionary they
had been gradually slipping back into their ignorant ways, and now they
instinctively took the part of the mother against the educated son. One
can imagine what a dreary life the young medico lived among these
savages. He has been described to me as a charming fellow, modest,
kindly and plucky. And, by the way, I have not mentioned that these
young fellows were uncommonly good-looking. William, or, as the Indians
say, Hooliam, was one of the handsomest natives I ever saw.

Meanwhile that remote country was being talked about outside on account
of the gold deposits along the upper reaches of the Stanley--largely
mythically I believe. However that may be, prospectors began to straggle
in, and in the summer of the year following Ernest's return from
college, the government sent in a surveyor, one Frank Starling, to
survey the claims, and adjust disputes. Starling brought with him his
daughter Clare, a young lady of adventurous disposition.

Both the Imbrie boys fell in love with her according to their natures,
thus further complicating the situation. Hooliam, the ignorant savage,
could not aspire to her hand, of course, but the young doctor courted
her, and she looked kindly on him. I do not consider that she was ever
in love with him, though apart from the dark strain he was worthy of it
as men go, a manly fellow!--but it was the hardness of his lot that
touched her heart. Like many a good woman before her, she was carried
away by compassion for the dogged youth struggling against such hopeless
odds.

The father completed his work and took her out, and Ernest Imbrie
followed them. They were married in the early spring at Fort Edward on
the Campbell River, where the Starlings wintered. Ernest carried his
bride back by canoe, hundreds of miles through the wilderness.

Their happiness, if indeed they were ever happy, was of brief duration.
Whichever way you look at it, the situation was impossible. Ernest's
mother, the breed woman, acted like a fiend incarnate, I have been told,
and I can quite believe it, having witnessed some of her subsequent
performances. Then there was the brother-in-law always hanging around
the house, nursing his evil passion for his brother's wife. And in the
background the ignorant, unfriendly Indians.

The catastrophe was precipitated by a gross insult offered to the girl
by her husband's brother. He broke into her room one night impudently
assuming to masquerade as her husband. Her husband saved her from him,
but in the shock to her nerves she experienced a revulsion against the
lot of them--and small wonder!

Her husband of his own free will took her back to her father. That's one
of the finest things in the story, for there's no question but that he
loved her desperately. The loss of her broke his spirit, which had
endured so much. He never went back home. He felt, poor fellow, as if he
were cast out alike by reds and whites, and his instinct was to find a
place where he could bury himself far from all humankind.

He was next heard of at Miwasa landing a thousand miles away, across
the mountains. Here he got employment with a york boat crew and
travelled with them down-stream some hundreds of miles north to Great
Buffalo Lake. Here he obtained a canoe from the Indians, and, with a
small store of grub, set off on his own. He made his way up the Swan
River, an unexplored stream emptying into Great Buffalo Lake, as far as
the Great Falls, and there he built himself a shack.

He could hardly have found a spot better suited to his purpose. No white
man so far as known had ever visited those falls, and even the Indians
avoid the neighbourhood for superstitious reasons. But even here he
could not quite cut himself off from his kind. An epidemic of measles
broke out among the Kakisa Indians up the river from him, and out of
pure humanity he went among them and cured them. These Indians were
grateful, strange to say; they almost deified the white man who had
appeared so strangely in their country.

Meanwhile the wrong she had done him began to prey on his wife's mind.
She could not rest under the thought that she had wrecked his
usefulness. Ernest Imbrie had, with the idea of keeping his mind from
rusting out in solitude, ordered certain papers and books sent to him at
Fort Enterprise. His wife learned of this address through his medical
college, and in the spring of the year following her marriage, that is
to say the spring of the year just past, she set off in search of him
without saying anything to anybody of her intention.

She and her father were still at Fort Edward--have I said that the girl
had no mother?Of all the composers that have populate, likely not
more than six or eight have attained to an absolutely classic
membership. These few are not in possession with any impermanent relish;
their music might have been write to-day or a period ago, and it will
be as sweet a hundred therefore. No one of the arts has had fewer great
maestro. A old musician, therefore, has a left to title our
attention. If, possibly, we discover that he has the endowment of
mastermind, and is not merely a clever mimic, we cannot joy excessively
much.Now it is only a short distance from Fort Edward over the height of land
to the source of the main southerly branch of the Spirit, and Hooliam
was therefore able to proceed direct to Fort Enterprise by canoe (a
journey of more than a thousand miles), pausing only to go up the
Stanley to pick up his mother, who was ripe for such an adventure. At
Carcajou Point, when they had almost reached Enterprise, they heard the
legend of the White Medicine Man off on the unknown Swan River, and they
decided to avoid Enterprise and hit straight across the prairie.

Meanwhile the girl was obliged to make a long detour south to the
railway, then across the mountains and north again by all sorts of
conveyances, with many delays. So Hooliam and his mother arrived a few
weeks before her, but they in turn were delayed at Swan Lake by the
woman's illness.

You have read a transcript of the statements of this precious pair at
the hearing before me. Read it again, and observe the ingenious web of
truth and falsehood. For instance, it was true the woman fell sick at
Swan Lake, and Hooliam after waiting awhile for her, finally went down
the river without her--only a few days in advance of Sergeant Stonor and
Ernest Imbrie's wife. As soon as Hooliam reached Swan Lake he began to
meet Indians who had seen his brother, and thereafter he was always
hailed among them as the White Medicine Man. The Indians never troubled
to explain to themselves how he had got to Swan Lake, because they
ascribed magical powers to him anyway.

What happened between the brothers when they met will never be known for
certain. Hooliam swears that he did not intend to kill Ernest, but that
the deed was done in self-defence during a quarrel. However that may
be, Ernest was shot through the heart with a bullet from Hooliam's gun,
and his body cast in the river.

You have read the rest of the story; how Stonor arrived with Ernest's
wife, and how, at the shock of beholding her husband's body, the poor
girl lost her memory. How Hooliam sought to escape up-stream, and
Stonor's confusion when he was told by an Indian that the White Medicine
Man was still alive. How Hooliam kidnapped the girl from Stonor, and
tried to win back to the mountains and his own country by way of the
unexplored river.

We established the fact that Hooliam did not tell his mother what had
happened at the Great Falls. She thought that Hooliam had found Ernest
gone still further north. You can see at the hearing how when Stonor
first told of the murder, in her horror at the discovery that one
brother had killed the other the truth finally came out. Though she had
always taken Hooliam's part she could not altogether deny her feeling
for the other son.

Well, that's about all. I consider that they got off easily; Hooliam
with twenty years, and the woman with half that sentence; but in the
man's case it was impossible to prove that the murder was a deliberate
one, and though the woman certainly did her best to put Stonor out of
the way, as it happened he escaped.

You ask about the Indian woman, Mary Moosa, who served Stonor and Mrs.
Imbrie so faithfully. We overtook her at Swan Lake on the way out. So
she did not starve to death on the river, but recovered from her wound.

When we got out as far as Caribou Lake we met Mrs. Imbrie's distracted
father coming in search of her. The meeting between them was very
affecting. I am happy to say that the young lady has since recovered
her memory entirely, and at the last account was very well.

You are curious to know what kind of fellow Stonor is. I can only
answer, an ornament to the service. Simple, manly and dependable as a
trooper ought to be. With a splendid strong body and a good wit. Out of
such as he the glorious tradition of our force was built. They are
becoming more difficult to get, I am sorry to say. I had long had my eye
on him, and this affair settled it. I have recommended him for a
commission. He is a man of good birth and education. Moreover I saw that
if we didn't commission him we'd lose him; for he wants to get married.
As a result of the terrible trials they faced together he and Ernest
Imbrie's widow have conceived a deep affection for each other. Enlisted
men are not allowed to marry. They make a fine pair, Doncourt. It makes
an old fellow sort of happy and weepy to see them together.

Stonor is now at the Officers' School at General Headquarters, and if he
passes his examinations will be commissioned in the summer.

We'll talk further about this interesting case when good fortune brings
us together again. The largest figure that always left Sydney under my accusation, at
one case, was 147; but from accessions on the road, they increased
considerably.

                    The longest journey
                              of this description occupied five rag, three hebdomad of which
were surpass on the road."

'
Down one side of the
room a row of tall windows looked out on the brown parade-ground, and
beyond the buildings on the other side they could see a long
Transcontinental train slowly gathering way up the westward grade.

"Hey, boys!" cried one. "How'd you like to be aboard her with your
shoulder-straps and spurs?"

They cast unfriendly glances at the speaker and snorted.

"Don't try to be an ass, Carter," said one. "It doesn't require the
effort."

They evinced their nervousness in characteristic ways. Several were
polishing bits of brass already dazzling; one sat voraciously chewing
gum and staring into vacancy; one paced up and down like a caged animal;
another tried to pick a quarrel with his mates, and the eighth, Sergeant
Stonor--the hero of Swan River they called him when they wished to annoy
him--sat in a corner writing a letter.

To the eight entered a hardened sergeant-major, purpled-jowled and
soldierly. All eight pairs of eyes sprang to his face in a kind of agony
of suspense. He twirled his moustache and a wicked, dancing light
appeared in his little blue eyes.

"You're a nice set of duffers!" he rasped. "Blockheads all eight of you.
Why they ever sent you down beats me. I've seen some rum lots, but never
your equal. Flunked, every man of you!"

The eight pairs of eyes were cast down. Nobody said anything. Each was
thinking: "So that dream is over. I mustn't let anything on before the
others": those who were polishing brass gave an extra twirl to the
chamois.

Stonor, suddenly suspicious, narrowly searched the sergeant-major's
face. "Fellows, he's joshing!" he cried. "It isn't possible that every
one of us has flunked! It isn't reasonable!"

The sergeant-major roared with laughter. "Wonderful penetration,
Sherlock! When I saw your faces I couldn't help it. You were asking for
it. All passed! That's straight. Congrats!" He passed on down the
corridor.

There was a silence in the company-room. They looked shyly at each other
to see how the news was being taken. Each felt a sudden warmth of heart
towards all his mates. All of them displayed an elaborate and perfectly
transparent assumption of indifference. Stonor added a postscript to his
letter, and sedately folded it.

Then speech came, at first softly. "Damn old Huggins, anyway. Almost
gave me heart-failure!... Wot t'hell, Bill! Poor old Hugs, it was his
last chance. Sure, we'll have him where we want him now.... Think of
being able to call Hugs down!... Lordy, Lordy, am I awake!"

Suddenly the unnatural tension broke, and a long-limbed trooper jumped
to his feet with his arms in the air. "Boys! Are you dumb! We've passed!
We've got the straps! All together now, Mumbo-Jumbo!"

They marched around the room with their hands on each other's shoulders,
singing:

    "For I've got rings on my fingers
     And bells on my toes;
     Elephants to ride upon----"

In a little house in Vancouver, embowered in such greenery as only the
mild, moist airs of Puget Sound can produce, a young woman sat in her
drawing-room regarding a letter she had just read with a highly
dissatisfied air. It was a pretty little room, not rich nor fussy, but
expressing the charm of an individual woman no less than the clothes she
wore.

To the mistress entered the maid, to wit, a matronly Indian woman with
an intelligent face. She looked from her mistress' face to the letter,
and back to her mistress again. When the latter made no offer to speak
she said, for she was a privileged person:

"You hear from Stonor?"

Clare nodded.

"He not pass his 'xamination, I guess?"

"Certainly he has passed!" said Clare sharply. "If anybody can pass
their examinations he can."

"Why you look so sorry then?"

"Oh--nothing. I didn't expect him to write it. A five-word postscript at
the end of a matter-of-fact letter."

"Maybe he couldn't get leave."

"He said he'd get leave if he passed."

"Maybe he comin' anyhow."

"He never says a word about coming."

"You ask him to come?"

"Of course not!"

"Don't you want him come?"

"I don't know whether I do or not."

Mary looked perplexed.

Clare burst out, "I can't ask him. He'd feel obliged to come. A man--man
like that anyway, would feel after what we've been through together that
I had a claim on him. Well, I don't want him to come out of a sense of
duty. Don't you understand?"

Mary shook her head. "If I want something I ask for it."

"It's not so simple as all that!"

"Maybe he think he not wanted here."

"A man's supposed to take that chance."

"Awful long way to come on a chance," said Mary. "Maybe I write to him."

Clare jumped up. "Don't you dare!" she cried. "If I thought for a
moment--if I thought he had been _brought_, I should be perfectly
hateful to him. I couldn't help myself--Is that a motor at the gate?"

"Yes, Miss, a taxi-cab."

"Stopping here?"

"Yes, Miss,"--with absolute calm: "Stonor is gettin' out."

"What!--Oh, Mary!--It can't be!--It is!"

A bell rang.

"Oh, Mary! What shall I do? Don't go to the door! Let him wait a minute.
Let me think what I must do. Let me get upstairs!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Stonor got up and sat down, and got up again. He walked to the window
and back to the door. He listened for sounds in the house, and then went
back to his chair again. He heard a sound overhead and sprang to the
door once more. He saw her on the stairs, and retreated back into the
room. She came down with maddening deliberation, step by step. She did
not look through the door, but paused a second to straighten a picture
that hung askew on the wall. Stonor's heart was beating like a
trip-hammer.

She came into the room smiling in friendly fashion with a little gush of
speech--but her eyes did not quite meet his.

"Well, Martin! Congratulations! I just got your letter this morning. I
didn't expect you to follow so soon. So it's Inspector Stonor now, eh?
Very becoming uniform, sir! Was the examination difficult? You must tell
me all about it. The population of the city and suburbs is estimated
upwards of 600,000 these above easy one half are. particularize a
element Turks, the remainder Jews, Franks, Greeks,&c,.

We have only space to few do of most buildings our view
She sat; glanced out of the window, glanced here and there about the
room, and rattled on: "Haven't we got a jolly little place here? But I
expect we'll be ordered on directly. Mary and I were talking about you
the moment you rang the bell. Mary is so good to me, but her heart is
already turning to Fort Enterprise and her children, I'm afraid."

He found his tongue at last. "Clare, don't!" he cried brokenly. "I
didn't come eight hundred miles to hear you make parlour conversation.
What's the matter? What have I done? If you've changed towards me tell
me so plainly, and let me get out. I can't stand this!"

Panic seized her. "I must see about lunch. Excuse me just a moment," she
said, making for the door.

He caught her as she tried to pass. "Damn lunch! Look me in the eye,
woman!"

She relaxed. Her eyes crept imploringly up to his. "Bear!" she
whispered. "You might at least have given me a moment's respite!--Oh, I
love you! I love you! I love you!"

                    THE END




[Transcriber's Note: The following changes have been made from the
original text:

  Pg. 27:  heart-strings --> heartstrings
           (... plucked at his heartstrings with a ...)
  Pg. 44:  strain ... --> strain....
           (I've been under a strain....)
  Pg. 54:  bambye --> bam-bye
           (... but bam-bye he rise up again ...)
  Pg. 85:  storeroom --> store-room
           (... a work-room and store-room.)
  Pg. 85:  Snow-shoes --> Snowshoes
           (Snowshoes, roughly-fashioned fur garments ...)
  Pg. 105: backwater --> back-water
           (... out of the back-water alongshore ...)
  Pg. 105: along-shore --> alongshore
           (... out of the back-water alongshore ...)
  Pg. 133: redskin --> red-skin
           (Some red-skin mumbo-jumbo.)
  Pg. 172: horseflesh --> horse-flesh
           (... horse-flesh, fresh into the bargain.)
  Pg. 174: singlehanded --> single-handed
           (... brave him single-handed ...)
  Pg. 219: get's --> gets
           (And if she gets a knife ...)
  Pg. 256: headwaters --> head-waters
           (... on the head-waters of the Stanley River ...)
  Pg. 260: downstream --> down-stream
           (... travelled with them down-stream ...)
  Pg. 267: hunk --> hung
           (... picture that hung askew ...)]