At any rate this gave Peter an excuse to escape from the table and it was,
indeed, time, for they had all settled, like a clatter of hens, on to the
subject of the bomb, and they all had a great deal to say about it and a
great many questions to ask Peter.

"It's these Foreigners... of course our Police are entirely inadequate."

"Yes--that's what I say--the Police are really absurdly inadequate--"

"If they will allow these foreigners--"

"Yes, what can you expect--and the Police really can't--"

Peter escaped to Robin. He glowered down at the child who was sitting up in
his cot counting the flowers on the old wall-paper to keep himself awake.

"I always am so muddled after fourteen," he said. "Never mind, I'm _not_
sleeping--"

Peter frowned at him. "You ought to have been asleep long ago," he said. He
wished the boy hadn't got his hair tousled in that absurdly fascinating way
and that his cheeks weren't flushed so beautiful a red--also his nightgown
had lost a button at the top and showed a very white little neck. Peter
blinked his eyes--"Look here, kid, you must go to sleep right away at once.
What do you want?"

"It's that lion--the one the lady had--I want it."

"You can't have it--the lady's got it."

"Well--take me to see them--the real ones--there are lots somewhere Mother
says." Robin inserted his very small hand into Peter's large one.

"All right, one day--we'll go to the 'Zoo."

Robin sighed with satisfaction--he lay down and murmured sleepily to
himself, "I love Mister Peter and lions and Mother and God," and was
suddenly asleep.

Peter bent down over the cot and kissed him. He felt miserably wretched.
He had known nothing like it since that day when he had said good-bye to
his mother. He wondered that he could ever have felt any exultation; he
wondered that writing and glory and ambition could ever have seemed worth
anything to him at all. Could he have had his prayer granted he would have
prayed that he might always stay in Brockett's, always have these same
friends, watch over Robin as he grew up, talk to Norah Monogue--and then
all the others ... and Mr. Zanti. He felt fourteen years old ... more
miserable than he had ever been.

He kissed Robin again--then he went down to find Mrs. Brockett. Here, too,
he was faced with an unexpected difficulty. The good lady, listening to him
sternly in her grim little sitting-room, refused to hear of his departure.
She sat upright in her stiff chair, her thin black dress in folds about
her, the gas-light shining on her neatly parted hair.

"You see, Mrs. Brockett," he explained to her, "I'm no longer in the same
position. I can't be sure of my two pounds a week any more and so it
wouldn't be right for me to live in a place like this."

"If it's expense that you're thinking about," she answered him grimly,
"you're perfectly welcome to stay on here and pay me when you can. I'm sure
that one day with so clever a young man--"

"That's awfully good of you, Mrs. Brockett, but of course I couldn't hear
of anything like that." For the third time that evening he had to fight
against a disposition to blow his nose and be absurd. They were, both of
them, increasingly grim with every word that they spoke and any outside
observer would have supposed that they were the deadliest of enemies.

"Of course," she began again, "there's a room that I could let you have at
the back of the house that's only four shillings a week and really you'd be
doing me a kindness in taking it off my hands. I'm sure--"

"No, there's more in it than that," he answered. "I've got to go
away--right away. It's time I had a change of scene. It's good for me to
get along a bit by myself. You've all been too kind to me, spoilt me--"

She stood up and faced him sternly. "In all my years," she said, "I've
never spoilt anybody yet and I'm not likely to be going to begin now.
Spoilt you! Bah!" She almost snorted at him--but there were tears in her
eyes.

"I'm not a philanthropist," she went on more dryly than ever, "but I like
to have you about the house--you keep the lodgers contented and the babies
quiet. I'm sure," and the little break in her voice was the first sign of
submission, "that we've been very good friends these seven years and it
isn't everywhere that one can pick up friends for the asking--"

"You've been splendid to me," he answered. "But it isn't as though I were
going away altogether--you'll see me back in a week or two. And--and--I say
I shall make a fool of myself if I go on talking like this--"

He suddenly gripped her hand and wrung it again and again--then he burst
away from her, leaving her standing there in the middle of the room.

The old black bag was very soon packed, his possessions had not greatly
increased during these seven years, and soon he was creeping down the
stairs softly so that no one should hear.

The hall was empty. He gave it one last friendly look, the door had closed
behind him and he was in the street.


II

In its exuberance and high spirits and general lack of self-control London
was similar to a small child taken to the Drury Lane Pantomime for the
first time. Of the numbers of young men who, with hats on the back of their
heads, passed arm-in-arm down the main thoroughfares announcing it as their
definite opinion that "Britons never shall be slaves," of the numbers of
young women who, armed with feathers and the sharpest of tongues, showed
conclusively the superiority of their sex and personal attractions, of the
numbers of old men and old women who had no right whatever to be out on
a night like this but couldn't help themselves, and enjoyed it just as
much as their sons and daughters did, there is here no room to tell. The
houses were ablaze with light, the very lamp-posts seemed to rock up and
down with delight at the spirit of the whole affair and the Feast of the
Glorification of the Bomb that Didn't Come Off was being celebrated with
all the honours.

Peter was very soon in the thick of it. The grey silences of Bennett Square
and Bloomsbury were left behind and with them the emotions of those tender
partings. After all, it would only be a very few weeks before he would be
back again among them all, telling them of his success on some paper and
going back perhaps to live with them all when his income was assured.

And, anyhow, here he was, out to seek his fortune and with Stephen to help
him! He battled with the crowd dragging the black bag with him and shouting
sometimes in sheer excitement and good spirits. Young women tickled him
with feathers, once some one linked arms with him and dragged him along,
always he was surrounded with this sea of shouting, exultant humanity--this
was life!

By the lion Stephen was waiting for him, standing huge and solemn as the
crowd surged past. He pressed Peter's arm to show that he was pleased to
see him and then, without speaking, they pushed through, past Charing Cross
station, and down the hill to the Underground.

Here, once again, there was startling silence. No one seemed to be using
the trains at all.

"I'm afraid it ain't much of a place that I'm taking yer to," Stephen said.
"We can't pick and choose yer know and I was there before and she's a good
woman."

A chill seemed to come with them into the carriage. Suddenly to Peter the
comforts of Brockett's stretched out alluring arms, then he pulled himself
together.

"I'm sure it will be splendid," he said, "and it will be just lovely being
with you after all this time."

They got out and plunged into a city of black night. Around them, on every
side there was silence--even the broad central thoroughfare seemed to be
deserted and on either side of it, to right and left, black grim roads like
open mouths, lay waiting for the unwary traveller.

Down one of these they plunged; Peter was conscious of faces watching them.
"Bucket Lane" was the street's title to fame. Windows showed dim candles,
in the distance a sharp cry broke the silence and then fell away again. The
street was very narrow and from the running gutters there stole into the
air the odour of stale cabbage.

"This is the 'ouse." Stephen stopped. Somewhere, above their heads, a child
was crying.


CHAPTER VI

THE WORLD AND BUCKET LANE


I

A light flashed in the upper windows, stayed for a moment, and disappeared.
There was a pause and then the door slowly opened and a woman's head
protruded.

She stared at them without speaking.

"Mr. Brant," Stephen said. "I'm come back, Mrs. Williams 'oping you might
'ave that same room me and my friend might use if it's agreeable."

She stepped forward then and looked at them more carefully. She was a stout
red-faced woman, her hair hanging about her face, her dirty bodice drawn
tightly over her enormous bosom and her skirt pulled up in front and
hanging, draggled behind her. Her long, dirty fingers went up to her face
continually; she had a way of pushing at her teeth with them.

She seemed, however, pleased to see Stephen.

"Well, Mr. Brant," she said, "come in. It's a surprise I must say but Lord!
as I'm always telling Mrs. Griggs oo's on the bottom floor when she can
afford 'er rent which 'asn't been often lately, poor thing, owing to 'aving
'er tenth only three weeks back, quite unexpected, and 'er man being turned
off 'is 'ouse-painting business what 'e's been at this ten year and
more--well come along in, I'm sure--"

They _were_ in by this time having been urged by their hostess into
the very narrowest, darkest and smelliest passage that Peter had ever
encountered. Somewhere behind the walls, the world was moving. On every
side of him above and below, children were crying, voices swearing,
murmuring, complaining, arguing; Peter could feel Mrs. Williams' breath hot
against his cheek. Up the wheezy stairs she panted, they following her.
Peter had never heard such loquacity. It poured from her as though she
meant nothing whatever by it and was scarcely aware indeed of the things
that she was saying. "And it's a long time, Mr. Brant, since we 'ad
the pleasure of seeing you. My last 'usband's left me since yer was
'ere--indeed 'e 'av--all along of a fight 'e 'ad with old Colly Moles
down Three Barrer walk--penal servitude, poor feller and all along of 'is
nasty temper as I was always tellin' 'im. Why the very morning before it
'appened I remember sayin' to 'im when 'e up and threw a knife at me for
contradictin' 'is words I remember sayin' to 'im that 'is temper would be
the settlin' of me but 'e wouldn't listen, not 'e. Obstinate! Lord! that
simply isn't the word for it ... but 'ere's the room and nobody been in it
since Sairy Grace and she was always bringin' men along with 'er, dirty
slut and that's a month since she's been and gone and I always like 'aving
yer, Mr. Brant, for you're quiet enough and no trouble at all--and your
friend looks pleasant I must say."

The room was, indeed, remarkably respectable--not blessed with much
furniture in addition to two beds and two chairs but roomy and with a large
and moderately clean window.

"Now what about terms for me and my friend?" said Stephen.

Now followed friendly argument in which the lady and Stephen seemed
perfectly to understand one another. After asserting that under no
circumstances whatever could she possibly take less than at least double
the price that Stephen offered her she suddenly, at the sound of a child's
shrill crying from below, shrugged her shoulders with: "There's young
'Lisbeth Anne again ... well, Mr. Brant, 'ave it your own way--I'm
contented enough I'm sure," and vanished.

But the little discussion had brought Peter to a sharp realisation of the
immediate business of ways and means. Sitting on one of the beds afterwards
with Stephen beside him he inquired--

"How much have we got, Stephen? I've got thirty bob."

"Never you mind, Peter. We'll soon be gettin' work."

"Why, of course. I'll force 'em to take me. That's all you want in
these things--to look fierce and say you won't go until they give you
something--a trial anyhow."

And sitting there on the bed with Stephen beside him he felt immensely
confident. There was nothing that he could not do. With one swift movement
he seemed to have flung from him all the things that were beginning to
crowd in between him and his work. He must never, never allow that to
happen again--how could one ever be expected to work if one were always
thinking of other people, interested in them and their doings, involved
with anarchists and bombs and romantic adventures. Why here he was with
nothing in the world to hold him or to interfere and no one except dear
old Stephen with whom he must talk. Ambition crept very close to him
that night--ambition with its glittering, shining rewards, its music and
colours--close to him as he sat in that bare, naked room.

"I'd rather be with you than any one in the world--we'll have such times,
you and I."

Perhaps Stephen knew more about the world; perhaps during the years that he
had been tumbled and knocked about he had realised that the world was no
easy nut to crack and that loaves and fishes don't come to the hungry for
the asking. But Peter that night was to be appalled by nothing.

They sat up into the early morning, talking. The noises in the house and in
the streets about them rose and fell. Some distant cry would climb into the
silence and draw from it other cries set like notes of music to tumble back
into a common scheme together.

"Steve, tell me about Zanti. Is he really a scoundrel?"

"A scoundrel? No, poor feller. Why, Mr. Peter, you ought to know better
than that. 'E ain't got a spark of malice in him but 'e's always after
adventure. 'E knows all the queer people in Europe--and more'n Europe
too. There's nothin' 'e don't put 'is nose into in a clumsy, childish way
but always, you understand, Mr. Peter, because 'e's after 'is romantic
fancies. It was when 'e was after gold down in Cornwall--some old
treasure story--that I came across 'im and 'e was kind to me.... 'E was a
kind-'earted man, Mr. Zanti, and never meant 'arm to a soul. And 'e's very
fond of you, Mr. Peter."

"Yes, I know." Peter was vaguely troubled. "I hope I haven't been unkind
about him. I suppose it was the shock of the whole thing. But it was time I
went anyway. But tell me, Stephen, what you've been doing all these years.
And why you let me be all that time without seeing you--"

"Well, Mr. Peter, I didn't think it would be good for you--I was knowing
lots o' strange people time and again and then you might have been mixed up
with me. I'm safe enough now, I'm thinking, and I'd have been safe enough
all the time the way Cornwall was then and every one sympathising with
me--"

"But what have you been doing all the time?"

"I was in America a bit and there are few things I haven't worked at in my
time--always waiting for 'er to come--and she will come some time--it's
only patience that's wanted."

"Have you ever heard from her?"

"There was a line once--just a line--_she's_ all right." His great body
seemed to glow with confidence.

Peter would like then to have spoken about Clare Rossiter. But no--some
shyness held him--one day he would tell Stephen.

He unpacked his few possessions carefully and then, on a very hard bed,
dreaming of bombs, of Mrs. Brockett dressed as a ballet dancer, of Mr.
Zanti digging for treasure beneath the grey flags of Bennett Square, of
Clare Elizabeth Rossiter riding down Oxford Street amidst the shouts of the
populace, of the world as a coloured globe on which he, Peter Westcott,
the author of that masterpiece, "Reuben Hallard," had set his foot ... so,
triumphant, he slept.


II

On the next morning the Attack on London began. The house in Bucket Lane
was dark and grim when he left it--the street was hidden from the light
and hung like a strip of black ribbon between the sunshine of the broader
highways that lay at each end of it. It was a Jewish quarter-notices in
Yiddish were in all the little grimy shop windows, in the bakers and the
sweetshops and the laundries. But it was not, this Bucket Lane, a street
without its dignity and its own personal little cleanliness. It had its
attempts at such things. His own room and Mrs. Williams' tea and bread and
butter had been clean.

But as he came down out of these strange murmuring places with their sense
of hiding from the world at large the things that they were occupied in
doing, Bucket Lane stuck in his head as a dark little quarry into which
he must at the day's end, whatever gorgeous places he had meanwhile
encountered, creep. "Creeping" was the only way to get into such a place.

Meanwhile he had put on his best, had blackened his shoes until they shone
like little mirrors, had brushed his bowler hat again and again and looked
finally like a sailor on shore for a holiday. Seven years in Charing Cross
Road had not taken the brown from his cheeks, nor bent his broad shoulders.

At the Mansion House he climbed on to the top of a lumbering omnibus and
sailed down through the City. It was now that he discovered how seldom
during his seven years he had ventured beyond his little square of country.
Below him, on either side of him, black swarms stirred and moved, now
forming ahead of him patterns, squares, circles, then suddenly rising
it appeared like insects and in a cloud surging against the high stone
buildings. All men--men moving with eyes straight ahead of them, bent
furiously upon some business, but assembling, retreating, advancing, it
seemed, by the order of some giant hand that in the air above them played a
game. Imagine that, in some moment of boredom, the Hand were to brush the
little pieces aside, were to close the board and put it away, then, with
what ignominy and feeble helplessness would these little black figures
topple clumsily into heaps.

Down through the midst of them the omnibus, like a man with an impediment
in his speech, surrounded by the chatter of cabs and carts and bicycles,
stammered its way. The streets opened and shut, shouts came up to them and
fell away. Peter's heart danced--London was here at last and the silence of
Bennett Square, the dark omens of Bucket Lane and the clamour of the city
had together been the key for the unlocking of its gates.

Ludgate Hill caught them into its heart, held them for an instant, and then
flung them down in the confusion of Fleet Street.

Here it was at last then with its typewriters and its telephones and its
printing machines hurling with a whir and clatter the news of the world
into the air, and above it brooding, like an immense brain--the God of its
restless activity--the Dome of St. Paul's.

Peter climbed down from his omnibus because he saw on his right a Public
Reading Room. Here in tattered and anxious company, he studied the papers
and took down addresses in a note book. He was frightened for an instant by
the feet that shuffled up and down the floor from paper to paper. There was
something most hopeless in the sound of that shuffle.

"'Ave yer a cigarette on yer, Mister, that yer wouldn't mind--"

He turned round and at once, like blows, two fierce gaunt eyes struck him
in the face. Two eyes staring from some dirty brown pieces of cloth on end,
it seemed, by reason of their own pathetic striving for notice, rather than
because of any life inside them.

Peter murmured something and hurried away. Supposing that editors ... but
no, this was not the proper beginning of a successful day. But the place,
down steps under the earth, with its miserable shadows was not pleasant to
remember.

His first visit was to the office of _The Morning World_. He remembered his
remark to Stephen about self-assertion, but his heart sank as he entered
the large high room with its railed counter running round the centre of
it--a barrier cold, impassable. Already several people were sitting on
chairs that were ranged along the wall.

Peter went up boldly to the counter and a very thin young man with a stone
hatchet instead of a face and his hair very wonderfully parted in the
middle--so accurately parted that Peter could think of nothing
else--watched him coldly over the barrier.

"What can I do for you?" he said.

"I want to see the Editor."

"Have you an appointment?"

"No."

"Oh, I'm afraid that it would be impossible without an appointment."

"Is there any one whom I could see?"

"If you could tell me your business, perhaps--"

Peter began to be infuriated with this young man with the hatchet face.

"I want to know if there's any place for me on this paper. If I can--"

"Oh!" The voice was very cold indeed and the iron barrier seemed to
multiply itself over and over again all round the room.

"I'm afraid in that case you had better write to the Editor and make an
appointment. No, I'm afraid there is no one..."

Peter melted away. The faces on the chairs were all very glad. The stone
building echoed with some voice that called some one a long way away. Peter
was in the street. He stood outside the great offices of _The Morning
World_ and looked across the valley at the great dome that squatted above
the moving threads of living figures. He was absurdly upset by this
unfortunate interview. What could he have expected? Of what use was it that
he should fling his insignificance against that kind of wall? Moreover he
must try many times before his chance would be given him. It was absurd
that he should mind that rebuff. But the hatchet-faced young man pursued
him. He seemed to see now as he looked up and down the street, a hostility
in the faces of those that passed him. Moreover he saw, here and there
figures, wretched figures, moving in and out of the crowd, bending into the
gutter for something that had been dropped--lean, haggard faces, burning
eyes ... he began to see them as a chain that wound, up and down, amongst
the people and the carriages along the street.

He pulled himself together--If he was feeling these things at the very
beginning of his battle why then defeat was certain. He was ashamed and,
looking at his paper, chose the offices of _The Mascot_, a very popular
society journal that brightened the world with its cheerful good-tempered
smile, every Friday morning. Here the room in which he found himself was
small and cosy, it had a bright pink wall-paper, and behind a little
shining table a shining young woman beamed upon him. The shining young
woman was, however, very busy at her typewriter and Peter was examined by a
tiny office boy who seemed to be made entirely of shining brass buttons and
shining little boots and shining hair.

"And what can I do for you, sir?" he said.

"I should like to see the Editor," Peter explained.

"Your name?" said the Shining One.

Peter had no cards. He blamed himself for the omission and stammered in his
reply.

The Boy gave the lady at the typewriter a very knowing look and
disappeared. He swiftly returned and said that Mr. Boset could see Mr.
Westcott for a few minutes, but for a few minutes only.

Mr. Boset sat resplendent in a room that was coloured a bright green. He
was himself stout and red-faced and of a surpassing smartness, his light
blue suit was very tight at the waist and very broad over the hips, his
white spats gleamed, his pearl pin stared like an eye across the room, his
neck bulged in red folds over his collar. Mr. Boset was eating chocolates
out of a little cardboard box and his attention was continually held by the
telephone that summoned him to its side at frequent intervals. He was
however exceedingly pleasant. He begged Peter to take a chair.

"Just a minute, Mr. Westcott, will you? Yes--hullo--yes--This is 6140
Strand. Hullo! Hullo! Oh--is that you, Mrs. Wyman? Good morning--yes,
splendid, thank you--never fitter--Very busy yes, of course--what--Lunch
Thursday?... Oh, but delighted. Just let me look at my book a moment?
Yes--quite free--Who? The Frasers and Pigots? Oh! delightful! 1.30,
delightful!"

Mr. Boset, settled once more in his chair, was as charming as possible. You
would suppose that the whole day was at Peter's service. He wanted to know
a great many things. Peter's hopes ran high.

"Well--what have you got to show? What have you written?"

Peter had written a novel.

"Published?"

"No."

"Well ... got anything else?"

"No--not just at present."

"Oh well--must have something to show you know--"

"Yes." Peter's hopes were in his boots.

"Yes--must have something to show--" Mr. Boset's eyes were peering into the
cardboard box on a voyage of selection.

"Yes--well--when you've written something send it along--"

"I suppose there isn't anything I can do--"

"Well, our staff, you know, is filled up to the eyes as it is--fellows
waiting--lots of 'em--yes, you show us what you can do. Write an article or
two. Buy _The Mascot_ and see the kind of thing we like. Yes--Excuse me,
the telephone--Yes--Yes 6140 Strand...."

Peter found himself once more in the outer room and then ushered forth by
the Shining Boy he was in the street.

He was hungry now and sought an A.B.C. shop and there over the cold
marble-topped tables consulted his list. The next attempt should be _The
Saturday Illustrated_, one of the leading illustrated weeklies, and perhaps
there he would be more successful. As he sat in the A.B.C. shop and watched
the squares of street opposite the window he felt suddenly that no effort
of his would enable him to struggle successfully against those indifferent
crowds.

Above the houses in the patch of blue sky that filled the window-pane soft
bundles of cloud streamed like flags before the wind. Into these soft grey
meshes the sun was swept and with a cold shudder Fleet Street fell into
shadow; beyond it and above it the great dome burned; a company of sandwich
men, advertising on their stooping bodies the latest musical comedy, crept
along the gutter.


III

At the offices of _The Saturday Illustrated_ they told him that if he
returned at four o'clock he would be able to see the Editor. He walked
about and at last sat down on the Embankment and watched the barges slide
down the river. The water was feathery and sometimes streamed into lines
like spun silk reflecting many colours, and above the water the clouds
turned and wheeled and changed against the limpid blue. The little slap
that the motion of the river gave to the stone embankment reminded him of
the wooden jetty at Treliss--the place was strangely sweet--the roar of the
Strand was far away and muffled.

As he sat there listening there seemed to come up to him, straight out of
the river, strange impersonal noises that had to do with no definite
sounds. He was reminded of a story that he had once read, a story
concerning a nice young man who caught the disease known as the Horror of
London. Peter thought that in the air, coming from nowhere, intangible,
floating between the river and the sky something stirred....

Big Ben struck quarter to four and he turned once more into the Strand.

The editor of _The Saturday Illustrated_ was a very different person from
Mr. Boset. At a desk piled with papers, stern, gaunt and sharp-chinned, his
words rattled out of his mouth like peas onto a plate. But Peter saw that
he had humorous twinkling eyes.

"Well, what can you do?"

"I've never tried anything--but I feel that I should learn--"

"Learn! Do you suppose this office is a nursery shop for teaching sucklings
how to draw their milk? Are you ready for anything?"

"Anything--"

"Yes--they all say that. Journalism isn't any fun, you know."

"I'm not looking for fun."

"Well, it's the damnedest trade out. Anything's better. But you want to
write?"

"I must."

"Yes--exactly. Well, I like the look of you. More blood and bones than most
of the rotten puppies that come into this office. I've no job for you at
the moment though. Go back to your digs and write something--anything you
like--and send it along--leave me your address. Oh, ho! Bucket Lane--hard
up?"

"I'm all right, thank you."

"All right, I wasn't offering you charity--no need to put your pride up. I
shan't forget you ... but send me something."

The clouds had now enveloped the sun. As Peter, a little encouraged by this
last experience but tired with a dull, listless fatigue, crept into the
dark channels of Bucket Lane, the rain began to fall with heavy solemn
drops.


CHAPTER VII

DEVIL'S MARCH


I

There could be nothing odder than the picture that Brockett's and Bennett
Square presented from the vantage ground of Bucket Lane. How peaceful and
happy those evenings (once considered a little dreary perhaps and
monotonous) now seemed! Those mornings in the dusty bookshop, Mr. Zanti,
Herr Gottfried, Mrs. Brockett, then Brockett's with its strange
kind-hearted company--the dining-room, the marble pillars, the green
curtains--Norah Monogue!

Not only did it seem another lifetime when he had been there but also
inevitably, one was threatened with never getting back. Bucket Lane was
another world--from its grimy windows one looked upon every tragedy that
life had to offer. Into its back courts were born muddled indecent little
lives, there blindly to wallow until the earth called them back to itself
again.

But it was in the attitude of Bucket Lane to the Great Inevitable that the
essential difference was to be observed. In Bennett Square things had been
expected and, for the most part, obtained. Catastrophes came lumbering into
their midst at times but rising in the morning one might decently expect to
go to rest at night in safety. In Bucket Lane there was no safety but
defiance--fierce, bitterly humorous, truculent defiance. Bucket Lane was a
beleaguered army that stood behind the grime and dirty walls on guard. From
the earliest moment there the faces of all the babies born into Bucket Lane
caught the strain of cautious resistance that was always to remain with
them. Life in Bucket Lane, for every one from the youngest infant to the
oldest idiot, was War. War against Order and Civilised Force. War also
against that great unseen Hand that might at any moment swoop down upon any
one of them and bestow fire, death and imprisonment upon its victims. To
the ladies and gentlemen from the Mission the citizens of Bucket Lane
presented an amused and cynical tolerance. If those poor, meek, frightened
creatures chose some faint-hearted attempts at flattery and submission
before this abominable Deity--well, they did no harm.

Mrs. Williams said to Miss Connacher, a bright-faced young woman from St.
Matthew's Mission--"And I'm sure we're always delighted to see you, Miss.
But you can't 'ave us goin' and being grateful on our bended knees to the
sort of person as according to your account of it gave me my first 'usband
'oo was a blackguard if ever there was one, and my last child wot 'ad
rickets and so 'andsomely arranged me to go breakin' my leg one night
coming back from a party and sliding on the stairs, and in losin' my little
bit o' charin' and as near the workus as ever yer see--no--it ain't common
sense."

To which Miss Connacher vaguely looking around for a list of Mrs. Williams'
blessings and finding none to speak of, had no reply.

But the astonishing thing was that Peter seemed at once to be seized with
the Bucket Lane position. He was now, he understood, in a world of
earthquake--wise citizens lived from minute to minute and counted on no
longer safety. He began also to eliminate everything that was not
absolutely essential. At Brockett's he had never consciously done without
anything that he wanted--in Bucket Lane he discarded to the last possible
shred of possession.

He had returned from his first day's hunting with the resolve that before
he ventured out again he would have something to show. With a precious
sixpence he bought a copy of _The Mascot_ and studied it--there was a short
story entitled "Mrs. Adair's Co."--and an article on "What Society
Drinks"--the remaining pages of the number were filled with pictures and
"Chatter from Day to Day." This gaily-coloured production lying on one of
the beds in the dark room in Bucket Lane seemed singularly out of place.
Its pages fluttered in the breeze that came through the window
cracks--"Maison Tep" it cried feebly to the screaming children in the court
below, "is a very favourite place for supper just now, with Maitre Savori
as its popular chef and its admirably stocked cellars...."

Peter gave himself a fortnight in which to produce something that he could
"show." Stephen meanwhile had found work as a waiter in one of the small
Soho restaurants; it was only a temporary engagement but he hoped to get
something better within a week or two.

For the moment all was well. At the end of his fortnight, with four things
written Peter meant to advance once more to the attack. Meanwhile he sat
with a pen, a penny bottle of ink and an exercise book and did what he
could. At the end of the fortnight he had written "The Sea Road," an essay
for which Robert Louis Stevenson was largely responsible, "The Redgate
Mill," a story of the fantastic, terrible kind, "Stones for Bread,"
moralising on Bucket Lane, and the "Red-Haired Boy," a somewhat bitter
reminiscence of Dawson's. Of this the best was undoubtedly "The Sea Road,"
but in his heart of hearts Peter knew that there was something the matter
with all of them. "Reuben Hallard" he had written because he had to write
it, these four things he had written because he ought to write them ...
difference sufficient. Nevertheless, he put them into halfpenny wrappes and
sent them away.

In the struggle to produce these things he had not found that fortnight
wearisome. Before him, every day, there was the evening when Stephen would
return, to which he might look forward. Stephen was always very late--often
it was two o'clock before he came in, but they had a talk before going to
sleep. And here in these evenings Stephen developed in the most wonderful
way, developed because Peter had really never known him before.

Stephen had never appeared to Peter as a character at all. In the early
days Peter had been too young. Stephen had, at that time, been simply
something to be worshipped, without any question or statement. Now that
worshipping had gone and the space that it left had to be filled by some
new relationship, something that could only come slowly, out of the close
juxtaposition that living together in Bucket Lane had provided.

And it was Stephen who found, unconsciously and quite simply, the shape and
colour of Peter's idea of him. Peter had in reality, nothing at all to do
with it, and had Stephen been a whit more self-conscious the effect would
have been spoiled.

In the first place Peter came quite freshly to the way that Stephen looked.
Stephen expressed nothing, consciously, with his body; it was wonderful
indeed considering its size and strength, the little that he managed to do
with it. His eyes were mild and amiable, his face largely covered with a
deep brown beard, once wildly flowing, now sharply pointed. He was at least
six foot four in height, the breadth of shoulder was tremendous, but
although he knew admirably what to do with it as a means of conveyance, of
sheer physical habit, he had no conception of the possibilities that it
held as the expression of his soul. That soul was to be found, by those who
cared to look for it, glancing from his eyes, struggling sometimes through
the swift friendliness of his smile--but he gave it no invitation. It all
came, perhaps, from the fact that he treated himself--if anything so
unconscious may be called treatment--as the very simplest creature alive.
The word introspection meant nothing to him whatever, there were in life
certain direct sharp motives and on these he acted. He never thought of
himself or of any one else in terms of complexity; the body acted simply
through certain clear and direct physical laws ... so the spirit. He loved
the woman who had dominated his whole life and one day he would find her
and marry her. He loved Peter as he would love a son of his own if he
possessed one, and he would be at Peter's side so long as Peter needed him,
and would rather be there than anywhere else. For the rest life was a
matter of birth and death, of loving one man and hating another, of food
and drink, and--but this last uncertainly--of some strange thrill that was
stirred in him, at times, by certain sights and sounds.

He was glad to have been born ... he would be quite ready to die. He did
not question the reason of the one state or the other. For the very fact
that life was so simple and unentangled he clung, with the tenacity and
dumb force of an animal to the things that he had. Peter felt, vaguely,
from time to time, the strength with which Stephen held to him. It was
never expressed in word nor in action but it came leaping sometimes, like
fire, into the midst of their conversation--it was never tangible--always
illusive.

To Peter's progress this simplicity of Stephen was of vast importance. The
boy had now reached an age and a period where emotions, judgments,
partialities, conclusions and surmises were fighting furiously for
dominion. His seven years at Brockett's had been, introspectively, of
little moment. He had been too busy discovering the things that other
people had discovered and written down to think very much about himself.

Now released from the domination of books, he plunged into a whirlpool of
surmise about himself. During the fortnight that he sat writing his
articles in Bucket Lane he flew, he sank, according to his moods. It seemed
to him that as soon as he had decided on one path and set out eagerly to
follow it others crossed it and bewildered him.

He was now on that unwholesome, absorbing, thrilling, dangerous path of
self-discovery. Opposed to this was the inarticulate, friendly soul of
Stephen. Stephen understood nothing and at the same time understood
everything. Against the testing of his few simple laws Peter's complexities
often vanished ... but vanished only to recur again, unsatisfied, demanding
a subtler answer. It was during those days, through all the trouble and
even horror that so shortly came upon them both, that Stephen realised with
a dull, unreasoned pain, like lead at the heart, that Peter was passing
inevitably from him into a country whither Stephen could not follow--to
deal with issues that Stephen could not, in any kind of way, understand.
Stephen realised this many days before Peter even dimly perceived it, and
the older man by the love that he had for the boy whom he had known from
the very first period of his growth was enabled, although dimly, to see
beyond, above all these complexities, to a day when Peter would once more,
having learnt and suffered much in the meanwhile, come back to that first
simplicity.

But that day was far distant.


II

On the evening of the day on which Peter finished the last of his five
attempts to take the London journals by storm Stephen returned from his
restaurant earlier than usual--so early indeed, that Peter, had he not been
so bent on his own immediate affairs, must have noticed and questioned it.
He might, too, have observed that Stephen, now and again, shot an anxious,
troubled glance at him as though he were uneasy about something.

But Peter, since six o'clock that evening, at which moment he had written
the concluding sentence of "The Sea Road," had been in deep and troubled
thought concerning himself, and broke from that introspection, on Stephen's
arrival, in a state of unhappy morbidity and entire self-absorption.

Their supper was beer, sardines and cheese.

"It's been pretty awful here this evening," Peter said. "Old Trubbit on the
floor below's been beating his wife and she's been screaming like anything.
I couldn't stand it, after a bit, and went down to see what I could do. The
family was mopping her head with water and he was sitting on a chair,
crying. Drunk again, of course, but he was turned off his job apparently
this afternoon. They're closing down."

"'Ard luck," said Stephen, looking at the floor.

"Yes--it hasn't been altogether cheerful--and his getting the chuck like
that set me thinking. It's awfully lucky you've got your job all right and
of course now I've written these things and have got 'something to show,'
I'll be all right." Peter paused for a moment a little uncertainly. "But it
does, you know, make one a bit frightened, this place, seeing the way
people get suddenly bowled over. There were the Gambits--a fortnight ago he
was in work and they were as fit as anything ... they haven't had any food
now for three days."

"There ain't anything to be frightened about," Stephen said slowly.

"No, I know. But Stephen, suppose I _don't_ get work, after all. I've been
so confident all this time, but I mightn't be able to do the job a bit....
I suppose this place is getting on my nerves but--I could get awfully
frightened if I let myself."

"Oh, you'll be all right. Of course you'll be getting something--"

"Yes, but I hate spending your money like this. Do you know, Stephen, I'd
almost rather you were out of work too. That sounds a rotten thing to say
but I hate being given it all like this, especially when you haven't got
much of your own either--"

"Between friends," said Stephen slowly, swinging his leg backwards and
forwards and making the bed creak under his weight, "there aren't any
giving or taking--it's just common."

"Oh, yes, I know," said Peter hurriedly, frightened lest he should have
hurt his feelings, "of course it's all right between you and me. But all
the same I'm rather eager to be earning part of it."

They were silent for a time. Bucket Lane too seemed silent and through
their little window, between the black roofs and chimneys, a cluster of
stars twinkled as though they had found their way, by accident, into a very
dirty neighbourhood and were trying to get out of it again.

Peter was busy fishing for his thoughts; at last he caught one and held it
out to Stephen's innocent gaze.

"It isn't," he said, "like anything so much as catching a disease from an
infectious neighbourhood. I think if I lived here with five thousand a year
I should still be frightened. It's in the air."

"Being frightened," said Stephen rather hurriedly and speaking with a kind
of shame, as though he had done something to which he would rather not own
up, "is a kind of 'abit. Very soon, Peter, you'll know what it's like and
take it as it comes."

"Oh," said Peter, "if it's that kind of being frightened--seeing I mean
quite clearly the things you're frightened of--why, that's pretty easy. One
of the first books I ever read--'Henry Lessingham,' by Galleon, you know,
I've talked about him to you--had a long bit about it--courage I mean. He
made it a kind of parable, countries you'd got to go through before you'd
learnt to be really brave; and the first, and by far the easiest courage is
the sort that you want when you haven't got things--the sort the Gambits
want--when you're starving or out of a job. Well, that's I suppose the
easiest kind and yet I'm funking it. So what on earth am I going to do when
the harder business comes along? ... Stephen, I'm beginning to have a
secret and uncomfortable suspicion that your friend, Peter Westcott, is a
poor creature."

"Thank the Lord," said Stephen furiously and kicking out with his leg as
though he had got some especial enemy's back directly in front of him,
"that you've finished them damned articles. You've been sittin' here
thinkin' and writin' till you've given yerself blue devils--down-along,
too, with all them poor creatures hittin' each other and drinkin'--I
oughtn't to have left yer up here so much alone--"

"No--you couldn't help it, Stephen--it's nothing to do with you. It's all
more than you can manage and nobody in the world can help me. It's seven
years and a bit now since I left Cornwall, isn't it?"

"Yes," said Stephen, looking across at him.

"All that time I've never had a word nor a sign from any one there. Well,
you might have thought that that would be long enough to break right away
from it.... Well, it isn't--"

"Don't you go thinking about all that time. You've cleared it right away--"

"No, I haven't cleared it--that's just the point. I don't suppose one ever
clears anything. All the time I was with Zanti I was reading so hard and
living so safely that it was only at moments, when I was alone, that I
thought about Treliss at all. But these last weeks it's been coming on me
full tide."

"What's been coming on you?"

"Well, Scaw House, I suppose ... and my father and grandfather. My
grandfather told me once that I couldn't escape from the family and I
can't--it's the most extraordinary thing--"

Stephen saw that Peter was growing agitated; his hands were clenched and
his face was white.

"Mind you, I've seen my grandfather and father both go under it. My father
went down all in a moment. It isn't any one thing--you can call it drink if
you like--but it's simply three parts of us aching to go to the bad ...
aching, that's the word. Anything rotten--women or drink or anything you
like--as long as we lose control and let the devil get the upper hand. Let
him get it once--_really_ get it--and we're really done--"

Peter paused for a moment and then went on hurriedly as though he were
telling a story and had only a little time in which to tell it.

"But that isn't all--it's worse than that. I've been feeling these last
weeks as though my father were sitting there in that beastly house with
that filthy woman--and willing me--absolutely with all his might--to go
under--"

"But what is it," said Stephen, going, as always, to the simplest aspect of
the case, "that you exactly want to do?"

"Oh, I don't know ... just to let loose the whole thing--I did break out
once at Brockett's--I've never told anybody, but I got badly drunk one
night and then went back with some woman.... Oh! it was all filthy--but I
was mad, wild, for hours ... insane--and that night, in the middle of it
all, sitting there as plainly as you please, there in Scaw House, I saw my
father--as plainly as I see you--"

"All young men," said Stephen, "'ave got to go through a bit of filth. You
aren't the sort of fellow, Peter, that stays there. Your wanting not to
shows that you'll come out of it all right."

Here was a case where Stephen's simplicities were obviously of little
avail.

"Ah, but don't you see," said Peter impatiently, "it's not the thing itself
that I feel matters so much, although that's rotten enough, but it's the
beastly devil--real, personal--I tell you I saw him catch my grandfather as
tight as though he'd been there in the room ... and my father, too. I tell
you, this last week or two I've been almost mad ... wanting to chuck it
all, this fighting and the rest and just go down and grovel..."

"I expect it's regular work you're wanting," said Stephen, "keeping your
mind busy. It's bad to 'ave your sort of brain wandering round with nothing
to feed on. It'll be all right, boy, in a day or two when you've got some
work."

Peter's head dropped forward on to his hands. "I don't know--it's like
going round in a circle. You see, Stephen, what makes it all so difficult
is--well, I don't know ... why I haven't told you before ... but the fact
is--I'm in love--"

"I knew it a while back," said Stephen quietly, "watching your face when
you didn't know I was lookin'--"

"Well, it's all hopeless, of course. I don't suppose I shall ever see her
again ... but that's what's made this looking for work so difficult--I've
been wanting to get on--and every day seems to place her further away. And
then when I get hopeless these other devils come round and say 'Oh well,
you can't get her, you know. That's as impossible as anything--so you'd
better have your fling while you can....' My God! I'm a beast!"

The cry broke from him with a bitterness that filled the bare little room.

Stephen, after a little, got up and put his hand on the boy's shoulder.

"Nobody ain't going to touch you while I'm here," he said simply as though
he were challenging devils and men alike.

Peter looked up and smiled. "What an old brick you are," he said. "Do you
remember that fight Christmas time, years ago? ... You're always like
that.... I've been an ass to bother you with it all and while we've got
each other things can't be so bad." He got up and stretched his arms.

"Well, it's bedtime, especially as you've got to be off early to that old
restaurant--"

Stephen stepped back from him.

"I've been meaning to tell you," he said, "that's off. The place ain't
paying and the boss shut four of us down to-night ... I'm not to go back
... Peter, boy," he finished, almost triumphantly. "We're up against it ...
I've got a quid in my pocket and that's all there is to it."

They faced one another whilst the candle behind them guttered and blew in
the window cracks, and the cluster of stars, still caught in the dirty
roofs and chimneys of Bucket Lane, twinkled, desperately--in vain.


CHAPTER VIII

STEPHEN'S CHAPTER


I

No knight--the hero of any chronicle--ever went forward to his battle with
a braver heart than did Peter now in his desperate adventure against the
world. His morbidity, his introspection, his irritation with Stephen's
simplicities fled from him... he was gay, filled with the glamour of
showing what one could do... he did not doubt but that a fortnight would
see him in a magnificent position. And then--the fortnight passed and he
and Stephen had still their positions to discover--the money moreover was
almost at an end... another fortnight would behold them penniless.

It was absurd--it was monstrous, incredible. Life was not like that--Peter
bit his lip and set out again. Editors had not, on most occasions,
vouchsafed him even an interview. Then had come no answer to the four
halfpenny wrappers. The world, like a wall of shining steel, closed him in
with impenetrable silence.

It was absurd--it was monstrous. Peter fought desperately, as a bird beats
with its wings on the bars of its cage. They were having the worst of luck.
On several occasions he had been just too late and some one had got the
position before him. Stephen too found that the places where he had worked
before had now no job for him. "It was the worst time in the world... a
month ago now or possibly in a month's time...."

Stephen did not tell the boy that away from London there were many things
that he could do--the boy was not up to tramping. Indeed, nothing was more
remarkable than the way in which Peter's strength seemed to strain, like a
flood, away. It was, perhaps, a matter of nerves as much as physical
strength--the boy was burning with the anxiety of it, whereas to Stephen
this was no new experience. Peter saw it in the light of some horrible
disaster that belonged, in all the world's history, to him alone. He came
back at the end of one of his days, white, his eyes almost closed, his
fingers twitching, his head hanging a little ... very silent.

He seemed to feel bitterly the ignominy of it as though he were realising,
for the first time, that nobody wanted him. He had come now to be ready to
do anything, anything in the world, and he had the look of one who was
ready to do anything. His blue coat was shiny, his boots had been patched
by Stephen--there were deep black hollows under his eyes and his mouth had
become thin and hard.

Stephen--having himself his own distresses to support--watched the boy with
acute anxiety. He felt with increasing unhappiness, that here was an
organism, a temperament, that was new to him, that was beyond his grasp.
Peter saw things in it all--this position of a desperate cry for work--that
he, Stephen, had never seen at all. Peter would sit in the evening, in his
chair, staring in front of him, silent, and hearing nothing that Stephen
said to him. With Stephen life was a case of having money or not having
it--if one had not money one went without everything possible and waited
until the money came again ... the tide was sure to turn. But, with Peter,
this was all a fight against his father who sat, apparently, in the dark
rooms at Scaw House, willing disaster. Now, as Stephen and all the sensible
world knew, this was nonsense--

It was also, in some still stranger way, a fight against London itself--not
London, a place of streets and houses, of Oxford Street and Piccadilly
Circus but London, an animal--a kind of dragon as far as Stephen could make
it out with scales and a tail--

Now what was one to make of this except that the boy's head was being
turned and that he ought to see a doctor.

There was also the further question of an appeal to Brockett's or Mr.
Zanti. Stephen knew that Herr Gottfried or Mr. Zanti would lend help
eagerly did they but know, and he supposed, from the things that Peter had
told him, that there were also warm friends at Brockett's; but the boy had
made him swear, with the last order of solemnity, that he would send no
word to either place. Peter had said that he would never speak to him
again should he do such a thing. He had said that should he once obtain an
independent position then he would go back ... but not before.

Stephen did not know what to do nor where to go. In another month's time
the rent could not be paid and then they must go into the street and Peter
was in no condition for that--he should rather be in bed. Mrs. Williams,
it is true, would not be hard upon them, for she was a kind woman and had
formed a great liking for Peter, but she had only enough herself to keep
her family alive and she must, for her children's sake, let the room.

To Stephen, puzzling in vain and going round and round in a hopeless
circle, it seemed as though Peter's brains were locked in an iron box and
they could not find a key. For himself, well, it was natural enough! But
Peter, with that genius, that no one should want him!

And yet through it all, at the back of the misery and distress of it, there
was a wild pride, a fierce joy that he had the key with him, that he was
all in the world to whom the boy might look, that to him and to him alone,
in this wild, cold world Peter now belonged.

It was his moment....


II

At the end of a terrible day of disastrous rejections Peter, stumbling down
the Strand, was conscious of a little public-house, with a neat bow-window,
that stood back from the street. At the bottom of his trouser pocket a tiny
threepenny piece that Stephen had, that morning, thrust upon him, turned
round and round in his fingers. He had not spent it--he had intended to
restore it to Stephen in the evening. He had meant, too, to walk back all
the way to Bucket Lane but now he felt that he could not do that unless he
were first to take something. This little inn with its bow-windows.... Down
the Strand in the light of the setting sun, he saw again that which he had
often seen during these last weeks--that chain of gaunt figures that moved
with bending backs and twisted fingers, on and out of the crowds and the
carriages--The beggars!... He felt, already, that they knew that he was
soon to be one of their number, that every day, every hour brought him
nearer to their ranks. An old man, dirty, in rags, stepped with an eager
eye past him and stooped for a moment into the gutter. He rose again,
slipping something into his pocket of his tattered coat. He gave Peter a
glance--to the boy it seemed a glance of triumphant recognition and then he
had slipped away.

Peter had had very little to eat during these last days and to-night, for
the first time, things began to take an uncertain shape. As he stood on
the kerb and looked, it seemed to him that the Strand was the sea-road at
Treliss, that the roar of the traffic was the noise that the sea made, far
below them. If one could see round the corner, there where the sun flung
a patch of red light, one would come upon Scaw House in its dark clump of
trees--and through the window of that front room, Peter could see his
father and that old woman, one on each side of the fire-place, drinking.

But the sea-road was stormy to-night, its noise was loud in Peter's ears.
And then the way that people brushed against him as they passed recalled
him to himself and he slipped back almost into the bow-window of the little
inn. He was feeling very unwell and there was a burning pain in his chest
that hurt him when he drew a deep breath ... and then too he was very cold
and his teeth chattered in fits as though he had suddenly lost control of
them and they had become some other person's teeth.

Well, why not go into the little inn and have a drink? Then he would go
back to Bucket Lane and lie down and never wake again. For he was so tired
that he had never known before what it was to be tired at all--only Stephen
would not let him sleep.... Stephen was cruel and would not let him alone.
No one would let him alone--the world had treated him very evilly--what did
he owe the world?

He would go now and surrender to these things, these things that were
stronger than he ... he would drink and he would sleep and that should be
the end of everything ... the blessed end.

He swayed a little on his feet and he put his hand to his forehead in order
that he might think more clearly.

Some one had said once to him a great many years ago--"It is not life that
matters but the Courage that you bring to it." Well, that was untrue. He
would like to tell the man who had said that that he was a liar. No Courage
could be enough if life chose to be hard. No Courage--

Nevertheless, the thought of somewhere a long time ago when some one had
said that to him, slowly filled his tired brain with a distaste for the
little inn with the bow-windows. He would not go there yet, just a little
while and then he would go.

Almost dreaming--certainly seeing nothing about him that he recognised--he
stumbled confusedly down to the Embankment. Here there was at any rate
air, he drew his shabby blue coat more closely about him and sat down on a
wooden bench, in company with a lady who wore a large damaged feather in
her hat and a red stained blouse with torn lace upon it and a skirt of a
bright and tarnished blue.

The lady gave him a nod.

"Cheer, chucky," she said.

Peter made no reply.

"Down on your uppers? My word, you look bad-- Poor Kid! Well, never say
die--strike me blimy but there's a good day coming--"

"I sat here once before," said Peter, leaning forward and addressing her
very earnestly, "and it was the first time that I ever heard the noise that
London makes. If you listen you can hear it now--London's a beast you
know--"

But the lady had paid very little attention. "Men are beasts, beasts," she
said, scowling at a gap in the side of her boots, "beasts, that's what they
are. 'Aven't 'ad any luck the last few nights. Suppose I'm losin' my looks
sittin' out 'ere in the mud and rain. There was a time, young feller, my
lad, when I 'ad my carriage, not 'arf!" She spat in front of her--"'E
was a good sort, 'e was--give me no end of a time ... but the lot of men
I've been meetin' lately ain't fit to be called men--they ain't--mean
devils--leavin' me like this, curse 'em!" She coughed. The sun had set now
and the lights were coming out, like glass beads on a string on the other
side of the river. "Stoppin' out all night, ducky? Stayin' 'ere? 'Cause I
got a bit of a cough!--disturbs fellers a bit ... last feller said as 'ow
'e couldn't get a bit o' sleep because of it--damned rot I call it. 'Owever
it isn't out of doors you ought to be sittin', chucky. Feelin' bad?"

Peter looked at her out of his half-closed eyes.

"I can't bother any more," he said to her sleepily. "They're so cruel--they
won't let me go to sleep. I've got a pain here--in my chest you know. Have
you got a pain in your chest?"

"My leg's sore," she answered, "where a chap kicked me last week--just
because--oh well," she paused modestly and spat again--"It's comin' on
cold."

A cold little wind was coining up the river, ruffling the tips of the trees
and turning the leaves of the plane-trees back as though it wanted to clean
the other sides of them.

Peter got up unsteadily. "I'm going home to sleep," he said, "I'm
dreadfully tired. Good-night."

"So long, chucky," the lady with the damaged feather said to him. He left
her eyeing discontentedly the hole in her boot and trying to fasten, with
confused fingers, the buttons of the red blouse.

Peter mechanically, as one walking in a dream, crept into an omnibus.
Mechanically he left it and mechanically climbed the stairs of the house
in Bucket Lane. There were two fixed thoughts in his brain--one was that
no one in the world had ever before been as thirsty as he was, and that he
would willingly commit murder or any violence if thereby he might obtain
drink, and the other thought was that Stephen was his enemy, that he hated
Stephen because Stephen never left him alone and would not let him
sleep--also in the back of his mind distantly, as though it concerned some
one else, that he was very unhappy....

Stephen was sitting on one of the beds, looking in front of him. Peter
moved forward heavily and sat on the other bed. They looked at one another.

"No luck," said Stephen, "Armstrong's hadn't room for a man. Ricroft
wouldn't see me. Peter, I'm thinking we'll have to take to the roads--"

Peter made no answer.

"Yer not lookin' a bit well, lad. I doubt if yer can stand much more of
it."

Peter looked across at him sullenly.

"Why can't you leave me alone?" he said. "You're always worrying--"

A slow flush mounted into Stephen's cheeks but he said nothing.

"Well, why don't you say something? Nothing to say--it isn't bad enough
that you've brought me into this--"

"Come, Mr. Peter," Stephen answered slowly. "That ain't fair. I never
brought you into this. I've done my best."

"Oh, blame me, of course. That's natural enough. If it hadn't been for
you--"

Stephen came into the middle of the floor.

"Come, Peter boy, yer tired. Yer don't know what yer saying. Best go to
bed. Don't be saying anything that yer'd be regretting afterwards--"

Peter's eyes that had been closed, suddenly opened, blazing. "Oh, damn you
and your talk--I hate you. I wish I'd never seen you--a rotten kind of
friendship--" his voice died off into muttering.

Stephen went back to his bed. "This ain't fair, Mr. Peter," he said in a
low voice. "You'll be sorry afterwards. I ain't 'ad any very 'appy time
myself these last weeks and now--"

Their nerves were like hot, jangling wires. Suddenly into the midst of that
bare room there had sprung between them hatred. They faced each other ...
they could have leapt at one another's throats and fought....

Suddenly Peter gave a little cry that seemed to fill the room. His head
fell forward--

"Oh, Stephen, Stephen, I'm so damned ill, I'm so damnably ill."

He caught for a moment at his chest as though he would tear his shirt open.
Then he stumbled from the bed and lay in a heap on the floor with his hands
spread out--

Stephen picked him up in his arms and carried him on to his bed.


III

The little doctor who attended to the wants of Bucket Lane was discovered
at his supper. He was a dirty little man, with large dusty spectacles, a
red nose and a bald head. He wore an old, faded velveteen jacket out of the
pockets of which stuck innumerable papers. He was very often drunk and had
a shrew of a wife who made the sober parts of his life a misery, but he was
kind-hearted and generous and had a very real knowledge of his business.

Mrs. Williams volubly could not conceal her concern at Peter's
condition--"and 'im such a nice-spoken young genelman as I was saying only
yesterday tea-time, there's nothin' I said, as I wouldn't be willin' to do
for that there poor Mr. Westcott and that there poor Mr. Brant 'oo are as
like two 'elpless children in their fightin' the world as ever I see and
'ow ever can I help 'em I said--"

"Well, my good woman," the little doctor finally interrupted, "you can help
here and now by getting some hot water and the other things I've put down
here."

When she was gone he turned slowly to Stephen who stood, the picture of
despair, looking down upon Peter.

"'E's goin' to die?" he asked.

"That depends," the little doctor answered. "The boy's been starved--ought
never to have been allowed to get into this condition. Both of you hard up,
I suppose?"

"As 'ard up as we very well could be--" Stephen answered grimly.

"Well--has he no friends?"

There--the question at last. Stephen took it as he would have taken a blow
between the eyes. He saw very clearly that the end of his reign had come.
He had done what he could and he had failed. But in him was the fierce
furious desire to fight for the boy. Why should he give him up, now, when
they had spent all these weeks together, when they had struggled for their
very existence side by side. What right had any of these others to Peter
compared with his right? He knew very well that if he gave him up now the
boy would never be his again. He might see him--yes--but that passing of
Peter that he had already begun to realise would be accomplished. He might
look at him but only as a wanderer may look from the valley up to the hill.
The doctor broke in upon him as he stood hesitating there--

"Come," he said roughly, "we have not much time. The boy may die. Has he no
friends?"

Stephen turned his back to Peter. "Yes," he said, "I know where they are. I
will fetch them myself."

The doctor had not lived in Bucket Lane all these years for nothing. He put
his hand on Stephen's arm and said: "You're a good fellow, by God. It'll be
all right."

Stephen went.

On his way to Bennett Square a thousand thoughts filled his mind. He knew,
as though he had been told it by some higher power, that Peter was leaving
him now never to return. He had done what he could for Peter--now the boy
must pass on to others who might be able, more fittingly, to help him. He
cursed the Gods that they had not allowed him to obtain work during these
weeks, for then Peter and he might have gone on, working, prospering and
the parting might have been far distant.

But he felt also that Peter's destiny was something higher and larger than
anything that he could ever compass--it must be Peter's life that he should
always be leaving people behind him--stages on his road--until he had
attained his place. But for Stephen, a loneliness swept down upon him
that seemed to turn the world to stone. Never, in all the years of his
wandering, had he known anything like this. It is very hard that a man
should care for only two creatures in the world and that he should be held,
by God's hand, from reaching either of them.

The door of Brockett's was opened to him by a servant and he asked for Mrs.
Brockett. In the cold and dark hall the lady sternly awaited him, but the
sternness fell from her like a cloak when he told her the reason of his
coming--

"Dear me, and the poor boy so ill," she said. "We have all been very
anxious indeed about poor Mr. Peter. We had tried every clue but could hear
nothing of him. We were especially eager to find him because Miss Monogue
had some good news for him about his book. There is a gentleman--a friend
of Mr. Peter's--who has been doing everything to find him--who is with Miss
Monogue now. He will be delighted. Perhaps you will go up."

Stephen can have looked no agreeable object at this time, worn out by the
struggle of the last weeks, haggard and gaunt, his beard unkempt--but Norah
Monogue came forward to him with both her hands outstretched.

"Oh, you know something of Peter--tell us, please," she said.

A stout, pleasant-faced gentleman behind her was introduced as Mr. Galleon.

Stephen explained. "But why, why," said the gentleman, "didn't you let us
know before, my good fellow?"

Stephen's brow darkened. "Peter didn't wish it," he said.

But Norah Monogue came forward and put her hand on his arm. "You must
be the Mr. Brant about whom he has so often talked," she said. "I am so
glad to meet you at last. Peter owes so much to you. We have been trying
everywhere to get word of him because some publishers have taken his novel
and think very well of it indeed. But come--do let us go at once. There is
no time to lose--"

So they had taken his novel, had they? All these days--all these terrible
hours--that starving, that ghastly anxiety, the boy's terror--all these
things had been unnecessary. Had they only known, this separation now might
have been avoided.

He could not trust himself to speak to Bobby Galleon and Norah Monogue.
These were the people who were going to take Peter away.

He turned and went, in silence, down the stairs.

At Bucket Lane Bobby Galleon took affairs into his own hands. At once Peter
should be removed to his house in Chelsea--it would not apparently harm him
to be moved that night.

Peter was still unconscious. Stephen stood in the back of the room and
watched them make their preparations. They had all forgotten him. For a
moment as they passed down the stairs Stephen had his last glimpse of
Peter. He saw the high white forehead, the long black eyelashes, the white
drawn cheeks.... At this parting Peter had no eye for him.

Bobby Galleon and Miss Monogue both spoke to Stephen pleasantly before they
went away. Stephen did not hear what they said. Bobby took Stephen's name
down on a piece of paper.... Then they were gone. They were all gone.

Mrs. Williams looked through the door at him for a moment but something in
the man's face drove her away. Very slowly he put his few clothes together.
He must tramp the roads again--the hard roads, the glaring sun, cold
moon--always going on, always alone--

He shouldered his bag and went out....


BOOK III

THE ROUNDABOUT


CHAPTER I

NO. 72, CHEYNE WALK


I

Burnished clouds--swollen with golden light and soft and changing in their
outline--were sailing, against a pale green autumn evening sky, over
Chelsea.

It was nearly six o'clock and at the Knightsbridge end of Sloane Street a
cloud of black towers quivered against the pale green.

The yellow light that the golden clouds shed upon the earth bathed the neat
and demure houses of Sloane Street in a brief bewildered unreality. Sloane
Street, not accustomed to unreality, regretted amiably and with its gentle
smile that Nature should insist, once every day, for some half-hour or
so, on these mists and enchantments. The neat little houses called their
masters and mistresses within doors and advised them to rest before
dressing for dinner and so insured these many comfortable souls that they
should not be disturbed by any unwelcome violence on their emotions.
Soon, before looking-glasses and tables shining with silver hair-brushes
bodies would be tied and twisted and faces would be powdered and
painted--meanwhile, for that dying moment, Sloane Street was lifted into
the hearts of those burnished clouds and held for an instant in glory.
Then to the relief of the neat and shining houses the electric lights came
out, one by one, and the world was itself again....

Beyond Sloane Square, however, the King's Road chattered and rattled and
minded not at all whether the sky were yellow or blue. This was the hour
when shopping must be done and barrows shone beneath their flaring gas, and
many ladies, with the appearance of having left their homes for the merest
minute, hurried from stall to stall. The King's Road stands like a noisy
Cheap Jack outside the sanctities of Chelsea. Behind its chatter are the
quietest streets in the world, streets that are silent because they prefer
rest to noise and not at all because they have nothing to say. The King's
Road has been hired by Chelsea to keep foreigners away, and the faint smile
that the streets wear is a smile of relief because that noisy road so
admirably achieves its purpose. In this mellow evening light the little
houses glow, through the river mists, across the cobbles. The stranger, on
leaving the King's Road behind him, is swept into a quiet intimacy that
has nothing of any town about it; he is refreshed as he might be were he
to leave the noisy train behind him and plunge into the dark, scented
hedge-rows and see before him the twinkling lights of some friendly inn.
As the burnished clouds fade from the sky on the dark surface of the river
the black barges hang their lights and in Cheyne Row and Glebe Place, down
Oakley Street, and along the wide spaces of Cheyne Walk, lamps burn mildly
in a hundred windows. Guarded on one side by the sweeping murmur of the
river, on the other by the loud grimaces of the King's Road Chelsea sinks,
with a sound like a whisper of its own name, into evening....

As the last trailing fingers of the golden clouds die before the
approaching army of the stars, as the yellow above the horizon gives way to
a cold and iron blue, lights come out in that house with the green door and
the white stone steps--No. 72, Cheyne Walk--that is now Peter Westcott's
home.


II

Peter had, on the very afternoon of that beautiful evening, returned
from the sea; there, during the last three weeks, he had passed his
convalescence and now, once again, he faced the world. Mrs. Galleon and
the Galleon baby had been with him and Bobby had come down to them for the
week-ends. In this manner Peter had had an opportunity of getting to know
Mrs. Galleon with a certainty and speed that nothing else could have given
him. During the first weeks after his removal from Bucket Lane, he had been
too ill to take any account of his neighbours or surroundings. He had been
sent down to the sea as soon as it was possible and it was here, watching
her quietly or listening to her as she read to him, walking a little with
her, playing with her baby, that he grew to know her and to love her. She
had been a Miss Alice du Cane, at first an intelligent, cynical and rather
trivial person. Then suddenly, for no very sure reason that any one could
discover, her character changed. She had known Bobby during many years and
had always laughed at him for a solemn, rather-priggish young man--then she
fell in love with him and, to his own wild and delirious surprise, married
him. The companions of her earlier girlhood missed her cynicism and
complained that brilliance had given way to commonplace but you could not
find, in the whole of London, a happier marriage.

To Peter she was something entirely new. Norah Monogue was the only woman
with whom, as yet, he had come into any close contact, and she, by her very
humility, had allowed him to assume to her a superior, rather patronising
attitude. The brief vision of Clare Rossiter had been altogether of the
opposite kind, partaking too furiously of heaven to have any earthly
quality. But here in Alice Galleon he discovered a woman who gave him
something--companionship, a lively and critical intelligence, some
indefinable quality of charm--that was entirely new to him.

She chaffed him, criticised him, admired him, absorbed him and nattered him
in a breath. She told him that he had a "degree" of talent, that he was the
youngest and most ignorant person for his age that she had ever met, that
he was conceited, that he was rough and he had no manners, that he was too
humble, that he was a "flopper" because he was so anxious to please, that
he was a boy and an old man at the same time and finally that the Galleon
baby--a solemn child--had taken to him as it had never taken to any one
during the eventful three years of its life.

Behind these contradictory criticisms Peter knew that there was a friend,
and he was sensible enough also to realise that many of the things that
she said to him were perfectly true and that he would do well to take them
to heart. At first she had made him angry and that had delighted her,
so he had been angry no longer; it seemed to him, during these days of
convalescence, that the solemn melodramatic young man of Bucket Lane was
an incredibility.

And yet, although he felt that that episode had been definitely
closed--shut off as it were by wide doors that held back at a distance,
every sound, the noise, the confusion, the terror, was nevertheless there,
but for the moment, the doors were closed. Only in his dreams they rolled
back arid, night after night he awoke, screaming, bathed in sweat,
trembling from head to foot. Sometimes he thought that he saw an army of
rats advancing across the floor of their Bucket Lane room and Stephen and
he beat them off, but ever they returned....

Once he thought that their room was invaded by a number of old toothless
hags who came in at the door and the window, and these creatures, with
taloned fingers fought, screeching and rolling their eyes....

Twice he dreamt that he saw on a hill, high uplifted against a stormy
sky, the statue of the Man on the Lion, gigantic. He struggled to see the
Rider's face and it seemed to him that multitudes of other persons--men
and women--were pleading, with hands uplifted, that they too might see
the face. But always it was denied them, and Peter woke with a strange
oppression of crushing disappointment. Sometimes he dreamt of Scaw House
and it was always the same dream. He saw the old room with the marble clock
and the cactus plant, but about it all now there was dust and neglect. In
the arm-chair, by the fire, facing the window, his father, old now and
bent, was sitting, listening and waiting. The wind howled about the place,
old boards creaked, casements rattled and his father never moved but
leaning forward in his chair, watched, waited, eagerly, passionately, for
some news....


III

They were having dinner now--Bobby, Mrs. Galleon and Peter--in the studio
of the Cheyne Walk House. Outside, a sheet of stars, a dark river and the
pale lamps of the street. The curtains of the studio were still undrawn and
the glow from the night beyond fell softly along the gleaming black boards
of the floor that stretched into shadow by the farther wall, over the round
mahogany table--without a cloth and shining with its own colour--deep and
liquid brown,--and out to the pictures that hung in their dull gold frames
along the wall.

About Peter was a sense of ease and rest, of space that was as new to him
as America was to Columbus. He was not even now completely recovered from
his Bucket Lane experiences and there was still about him that uncertainty
of life--when one sees it as though through gauze curtains--that gives
reality to the quality of dreams. Life was behind him, Life was ahead of
him, but meantime let him rest in this uncertain and beautiful country
until it was time for him to go forward again. This intangibility--walking
as it were in a fog round and round the Nelson monument, knowing it was
there but never seeing it--remained with him even when practical matters
were discussed. For instance, "Reuben Hallard" was to be published in a
week's time and Peter was to receive fifty pounds in advance on the day of
publication (unusually good terms for a first novel Bobby assured him);
also Bobby, through his father, thought that he could secure Peter regular
reviewing. The intention then was that Peter should remain with the
Galleons as a kind of paying guest, and so his pride would not be hurt and
they could have an eye upon him during this launching of him into London.
It was fortunate, perhaps, that Alice Galleon had liked him down there at
the sea, because she was a lady who had her own way at No. 72, and she by
no means liked every one. But perhaps the Galleon baby had had more to do
with everything than any one knew, and Mrs. Galleon assured her friends
that the baby's heart would most certainly be broken if "the wild young
guest" as she called Peter, were carried off.

And wild he was--of that seeing him now at dinner there in the studio there
could be no doubt. He was wearing Bobby's clothes and there was still a
look of suffering in his eyes and around his mouth, but the difference--his
difference from the things about him--went deeper than that. The large high
windows of the studio with the expanse of wild and burning stars between
their black frames answered Peter's eyes as he faced them. Mrs. Galleon, as
she watched him, was reminded of other things, of other persons, of other
events, that had marked his earlier life. She glanced from Peter's eyes
to Bobby's. She smiled, for on an earlier day, she had seen that same
antithesis--the gulf that is fixed between Imagination and Reality--and had
known its meaning.

But for Peter, all he asked now was that he might be allowed to rest in the
midst of this glorious comfort. His evil dreams were very far away from him
to-night. The food, the colour--the fruit piled high in the silver dishes,
the glittering of the great silver candelabra that stood on the middle of
the table, the deep red of the roses in the bowl at his side, the deeper
red of the Port that shone in front of Bobby and then, beneath all this, as
though the table were a coloured ship sailing on a solemn sea, the dark,
deep shining floor that faded into shadow--all this excited him so that his
hands trembled.

He spoke to Mrs. Galleon:

"I wonder if you will do me a favour," he said very earnestly.

"Anything in reason," she answered, laughing back at his gravity.

"Well, don't call me Mr. Westcott any more. Because I'm going to live here
and because I'm too old a friend of Bobby's and because, finally, I hate
being called Mr. Westcott by anybody, might it be Peter?"

"Joseph calls him Peter as it is," said Bobby quite earnestly looking at
his wife.

They were both so grave about it that Alice Galleon couldn't be anything
but grave too. She knew that it was really a definite appeal on behalf
of both of them that she should here and now, solemnly put her sign of
approval on Peter. It was almost in the way that they waited for her to
answer, a ceremony. She was even, as she looked at them, surprised into a
sudden burst of tenderness towards them both. Bobby so solemn, such a dear,
really quite an age and yet as young as any infant in arms. Peter with
forces and impulses that might lead to anything or wreck him altogether,
and yet, through it all younger even than Bobby. Oh! what an age she, Alice
Galleon, seemed to muster at the sight of their innocent trust! Did every
woman feel as old, as protecting, as tenderly indulgent, towards every
man?...

"Why, of course," she answered quietly, "Peter it shall be--"

Bobby raised his port. "Here's to Peter--to Peter and 'Reuben
Hallard'--overwhelming success to both of them."

Emotion, for an instant, held them. Then quietly, they stepped back
again. It was almost too good to be true that, after all the turnings and
twistings, life should have brought Peter to this. He did not look very far
ahead, he did not ask himself whether the book were likely to be a success,
whether his career would justify this beginning. If only they would let him
alone.... He did not, even to himself, name those powers. He was wrapped
about with comfort, he had friends, above all (and this he had discovered
at the sea) the Galleons knew Miss Rossiter ... this last thought seemed,
by the glorious clamour of it, to draw that sheet of stars down through the
window into the room, the air crackled with their splendour.

He was drawn back, down into the world again, by hearing Bobby's voice:

"The evening post and a letter for you. Peter."

He looked down and, with a sudden pang of accusing shame because he had
forgotten so easily, with also a sure knowledge that that easy escape from
his other life was already forbidden him, saw that the letter was from
Stephen. He felt that their eyes were upon him as he took the letter up
and he also felt that in Alice Galleon's gaze there was a wise and tender
understanding of the things that he must be feeling. The roughness of the
envelope, the rudeness of the hand-writing, a stain in one corner that
might be beer, the stamp set crookedly--these things seemed to him like so
many voices that called him back. Five minutes ago those days in Bucket
Lane had belonged to another life, now he was still there and to-morrow he
must tramp out again, to-morrow....

The letter said:

    _Writing here dear Peter at twelve o'clock noon, the Red Crown Inn,
    Druttledge, on the road to Exeter, a little house where thiccy
    bandy-legged man you've heard me tell about is Keeper and a good
    fellow and there's queer enough company in kitchen now to please you.
    A rough lot of fellows: and a storm coming up black over high woods
    that'll make walkin' no easy matter on a slimy road, and, dear boy,
    I've been thinkin' strange about you and 'ow you'll pull along with
    your kind friends. That nice gentleman sent a telegram as he promised
    to and says you pull finely along. Hopin' you really are better. But
    dear boy, if you find you can give me just a word on paper sayin' that
    hear there is no course for worryin' about your health, then I'm happy
    because, dear boy, you'm always in my thoughts and I love you fine and
    wish to God I could have made everything easier up along in thiccy
    Bucket Lane. I go from hear by road to Cornwall and Treliss. I'm
    expecting to find work there. Dear boy, don't forget me and see me
    again one day and write a letter. They are getting too much into their
    bellies and making the devil's own noise. There is Thunder coming the
    air is that still over the roof of the barn and the road's dead white.
    Dear Boy, I am your friend,_

  STEPHEN BRANT.

The candles blew a little in the breeze from the open window and the
lighted shadows ran flickering in silver lines, along the dark floor. Peter
stood holding the letter in his hand, looking out on to the black square of
sky; the lights of the barges swung down the river and he could hear, very
faintly, the straining of ropes and the turning of some mysterious wheel.

He saw Stephen--the great head, the flowing beard, the huge body--and
then the inn with the thunder coming over the hill, and then, beyond that
Treliss gleaming with its tiers of lights, above the breast of the sea. And
from here, from this wide Embankment, down to that sea, there stretched,
riding over hills, bending into valleys, always white and hard and stony,
the road....

For an instant he felt as though the studio, the lights, the comforts were
holding him like a prison--

"It's a letter from Stephen Brant," he said, turning back from the window.
"He seems well and happy--"

"Where is he?"

"Eating bread and cheese at an inn somewhere--on the road down to
Cornwall."


IV

On the following Tuesday "Reuben Hallard" was published and on the Thursday
afternoon Henry Galleon and Clare Rossiter were to come to tea. "Reuben
Hallard" arrived in a dark red cover with a white paper label. The six
copies lay on the table and looked at Peter as though he had had nothing
whatever to do with their existence. He looked down upon them, opened one
of them very tenderly, read half a page and felt that it was the best stuff
he'd ever seen. He read the rest of the page and thought that the author,
whoever the creature might be, deserved, imprisonment for writing such
nonsense.

The feeling of strangeness towards it all was increased by the fact that
Bobby had, with the exception of the final proofs--these Peter had read
down by the sea--done most of the proof-correcting. It was a task for which
his practical common sense and lack of all imagination admirably fitted
him. There, at any rate, "Reuben Hallard" was, ready to face all the world,
to go, perhaps, to the farthest Hebrides, to be lost in all probability,
utterly lost, in the turgid flood of contemporary fiction.

There was a dedication "To Stephen"... How surprised Stephen would be! He
looked at the chapter headings--An Old Man with a Lantern--the Road at
Night.... Sun on the Western Moor--Stevenson--Tushery all of it! How they'd
tear it to bits, those papers!

He laughed to himself to think that there had once been a day when he had
thought that the thing would make his fortune! And yet--he turned the pages
over tenderly--there might be something to be said for it, Miss Monogue had
thought well of it. These publishers, blasé, cynical fellows, surely
believed in it.

It was fat and red and comfortable. It had a worldly, prosperous look.
"Reuben Hallard and His Adventures" ... Good Lord! What cheek.

There were five copies to give away. One between Bobby and Mrs. Galleon,
one for Stephen, one for Miss Monogue, one for Mrs. Brockett and one for
Mr. Zanti. "Reuben Hallard and His Adventures," by Peter Westcott. They
would be getting it now at the newspaper offices. _The Mascot_ would have a
copy and the fat little chocolate consumer. It would stand with a heap of
others, and be ticked off with a heap of others, for some youth to exercise
his wit upon. As to any one buying the book? Who ever saw any one buying a
six-shilling novel? It was only within the last year or so that the old
three volumes with their thirty-one-and-six had departed this life. The
publishers had assured Peter that this new six-shilling form was the thing.
"Please have you got 'Reuben Hallard' by Peter Westcott?... Thank you, I'll
take it with me."

No, it was inconceivable.

There poor Reuben would lie--deserted, still-born, ever dustier and dustier
whilst other stories came pouring, pouring from endless presses, covering,
crowding it down, stamping upon it, burying it.... "Here lies 'Reuben
Hallard.'..."

Poor Peter!

On Thursday, however, there was the tea-party--a Thursday never to be
forgotten whilst Peter was alive. Bobby had told him the day before
that his father might be coming. "The rest of the family will turn up
for certain. They want to see you. They're always all agog for any new
thing--one of them's always playing Cabot to somebody else's Columbus.
But father's uncertain. He gets something into his head and then nothing
whatever will draw him out--but I expect he'll turn up."

The other visitor was announced to Peter on the very day.

"By the way, Peter, somebody's coming to tea this afternoon who's met you
before--met you at that odd boarding-house of yours--a Miss Rossiter.
Clare's an old friend of ours. I told you down at the sea about her and you
said you remembered meeting her."

"Remembered meeting her!" Did Dante remember meeting Beatrice--did Petrarch
remember Laura? Did Keats forget his Fanny Brawne? Did Richard Feverel
forget his Lucy?

On a level with these high-thinking gentlemen was Peter, disguising his
emotions from Alice's sharp eyes but silent, breathless, wanting some other
place than that high studio in which to breathe. "Yes--she came to tea once
with a Miss Monogue there--I liked her...."

He was not there, but rather on some height alone with her and their hands
touched over a photograph. "The Man on the Lion." There was something
worthy of his feeling for her!

Meanwhile, for the first part of the afternoon one must put up with the
Galleon family. Had Peter been sufficiently calm and sensible these
appendages to a great author would have been worth his attention. Behold
them in relation to "Henry Lessingham," soaked in the works, bearing on
their backs the whole Edition de Luxe, decking themselves with the little
odds and ends of literary finery that they had picked up, bursting with the
good-nature of assured self-consequence--harmless, foolish, comfortable.
Mrs. Galleon was massive with a large flat face that jumped suddenly into
expression when one least expected it. There was a great deal of silk about
her, much leisurely movement and her tactics were silence and a slow,
significant smile--these she always contributed to any conversation that
was really beyond her. Had she not, during many years of her life, been
married to a genius she would have been an intensely slow-moving but
adequate housekeeper--as it was, her size and her silence enabled her to
keep her place at many literary dinners. Peter, watching her, was consumed
with wonder that Henry Galleon could ever have married her and understood
that Bobby was the child of both his parents. Bobby had a brother and
sister--Percival and Millicent. Percival was twenty-five and had written
two novels that were considered promising by those who did not know that he
was the son of his father. He was slim and dark with a black thread of a
moustache and rather fine white fingers. His clothes were very well cut but
his appearance was a little too elaborately simple. His sister, a girl of
about eighteen, was slim and dark also; she had the eager appearance of one
who has heard just enough to make her very anxious to hear a great deal
more.

One felt that she did not want to miss anything, but probably her
determination to be her father's daughter would prevent her from becoming
very valuable or intelligent.

Finally it was strange that Bobby had so completely escaped the shadow of
his father's mantle. These people were intended, of course, to be the
background of Peter's afternoon and it was therefore more than annoying
that that was the very last thing that they were. Millicent and Percival
made a ball and then flung it backwards and forwards throughout the affair.
Their mother watched them with appreciation and Alice Galleon, who knew
them, gave them tea and cake and let them have their way. Into the midst of
this Henry Galleon came--a little, round, fat man with a face like a map,
the body of Napoleon and a trot round the room like a very amiable pony,
eyes that saw everything, understood everything, and forgave everything, a
brown buff waistcoat with gilt buttons, white spats and a voice that rolled
and roared ... he was the tenderest, most alarming person in any kind of
a world. He was so gentle that any sparrow would trust him implicitly and
so terrific that an army would most certainly fly from before him. He ate
tea-cake, smiled and shook hands with Peter, listened for half an hour
to the spirited conversation of his two children and trotted away again,
leaving behind him an atmosphere of gentle politeness and an amazing
_savoir-faire_ that one saw his children struggling to catch. They finally
gave it up about half-past five and retreated, pressing Peter to pay them a
call at the earliest opportunity.

This was positively all that Peter saw, on this occasion, of Henry Galleon.
It was quite enough to give him a great deal to think about, but it could
scarcely be called a meeting.

At quarter to six when Peter was in despair and Alice Galleon had ordered
the tea-things to be taken away Clare Rossiter rushed in. She stood a
whirlwind of flying colours in the middle of the Studio now sinking into
twilight. "Alice dear, I am most terribly sorry but mother _would_ stay. I
couldn't get her to leave and it was all so awkward. How do you do, Mr.
Westcott? Do you remember--we met at Treliss--and now I must rush back this
very minute. We are dining at seven before the Opera, and father wants that
music you promised him--the Brahms thing. Oh! is it upstairs? Well, if you
don't mind...."

Alice Galleon left them together. Peter could say nothing at all. He stood
there, shifting from foot to foot, white, absolutely tongue-tied.

She felt his embarrassment and struggled.

"I hear that you've been very ill, Mr. Westcott. I'm so dreadfully sorry
and I do hope that you're better?"

He muttered something.

"Your book is out, isn't it? 'Reuben Hallard' is the name. I must get
father to put it down on his list. One's first books must be so dreadfully
exciting--and so alarming ... the reviews and everything--what is it
about?"

He murmured "Cornwall."

"Cornwall? How delightful! I was only there once. Mullion. Do you know
Mullion?" She struggled along. The pain that had begun in his heart was now
at his throat--his throat was full of spiders' webs. He could scarcely see
her in the dark but her pale blue dress and her dark eyes and her beautiful
white hands--her little figure danced against the dark, shining floor like
a fairy's.

He heard her sigh of relief at Alice Galleon's return.

"Oh! thank you, dear, so much. Good-bye, Mr. Westcott--I shall read the
book."

She was gone.

"Lights! Lights!" cried Alice Galleon. "How provoking of her not to come to
tea properly. Well, Peter? How was it all?"

He was guilty of abominable rudeness.

He burst from the room without a word and banged, desperately, the door
behind him.


CHAPTER II

A CHAPTER ABOUT SUCCESS I HOW TO WIN IT, HOW TO KEEP IT--WITH A NOTE AT THE
END FROM HENRY GALLEON


I

The shout of applause with which "Reuben Hallard" was greeted still remains
one of the interesting cases in modern literary history. At this time of
day it all seems ancient and distant enough; the book has been praised,
blamed, lifted up, hurled down a thousand times, and has finally been
discovered to be a book of promise, of natural talent, with a great deal of
crudity and melodrama and a little beauty. It does not stand of course in
comparison with Peter Westcott's later period and yet it has a note that
his hand never captured afterwards. How incredibly bad it is in places,
the Datchett incidents, with their flames and screams and murder in the
dark, sufficiently betray: how fine it can be such a delight as The Cherry
Orchard chapter shows, and perhaps the very badness of the crudities helped
in its popularity, for there was nothing more remarkable about it than the
fashion in which it captured every class of reader. But its success, in
reality, was a result of the exact moment of its appearance. Had Peter
waited a thousand years he could not possibly have chosen a time more
favourable. It was that moment in literary history, when the world had had
enough of lilies and was turning, with relief, to artichokes. There was a
periodical of this time entitled _The Green Volume_. This appeared
somewhere about 1890 and it brought with it a band of young men and women
who were exceedingly clever, saw the quaintness of life before its reality
and stood on tiptoe in order to observe things that were really growing
quite close to the ground. This quarterly produced some very admirable
work; its contributors were all, for a year or two, as clever as they
were--young and as cynical as either. The world was dressed in a powder
puff and danced beneath Chinese lanterns and was as wicked as it could be
in artificial rose-gardens. It was all great fun for a year or two....

Then _The Green Volume_ died, people began to whisper about slums and
drainage, and Swedish drill for ten minutes every morning was considered an
admirable thing. On the edge of this new wave came "Reuben Hallard,"
combining as it did a certain amount of affectation with a good deal of
naked truth, and having the rocks of Cornwall as well as its primroses for
its background. It also told a story with a beginning to it and an end to
it, and it contained the beautiful character of Mrs. Poveret, a character
that was undoubtedly inspired by that afternoon that Peter had with his
mother..

In addition to all this it must be remembered that the world was entirely
unprepared for the book's arrival. It had been in no fashion heralded and
until a long review appeared in _The Daily Globe_ no one noticed it in any
way. Then the thing really began. The reviewers were glad to find something
in a dead season, about which a column or two might possibly be written;
the general public was delighted to discover a novel that was considered by
good judges to be literature and that, nevertheless, had as good a story as
though it weren't--its faults were many and some of its virtues accidental,
but it certainly deserved success as thoroughly as did most of its
contemporaries. Edition followed edition and "Reuben Hallard" was the novel
of the spring of 1896.

The effect of all this upon Peter may easily be imagined. It came to
him first, with those early reviews and an encouraging letter from the
publishers, as something that did not belong to him at all, then after a
month or so it belonged to him so completely that he felt as though he had
been used to it all his life. Then slowly, as the weeks passed and the
success continued, he knew that the publication of this book had changed
the course of his life. Letters from agents and publishers asking for his
next novel, letters from America, letters from unknown readers, all these
things showed him that he could look now towards countries that had not,
hitherto, been enclosed by his horizon. He breathed another air.

And yet he was astonishingly simple about it all--very young and very
naive. The two things that he felt about it were, first, that it would
please very much his friends--Bobby and his wife, Mrs. Brockett, Norah
Monogue, Mr. Zanti, Herr Gottfried and, above all, Stephen; and secondly,
that all those early years in Cornwall--the beatings, his mother, Scaw
House, even Dawson's--had been of use to him. One remembers those
extraordinary chapters concerning Reuben and his father--here Peter had,
for the first time, allowed some expression of his attitude to it all to
escape him.

He felt indeed as though the success of the book placed for a moment all
that other life in the background--really away from him. For the first time
since he left Brockett's he was free from a strange feeling of
apprehension.... Scaw House was hidden.

He gave himself up to glorious life. He plunged into it....


II

He stepped, at first timidly, into literary London. It was, at first sight,
alarming enough because it seemed to consist, so largely and so stridently,
of the opposite sex. Bobby would have had Peter avoid it altogether.
"There are some young idiots," he said, "who go about to these literary
tea-parties. They've just written a line or two somewhere or other, and
they go curving and bending all over the place. Young Tony Gale and young
Robin Trojan and my young ass of a brother ... don't want you to join that
lot, Peter, my boy. The women like to have 'em of course, they're useful
for handing the cake about but that's all there is to it ... keep out of
it."

But Peter had not had so many friends during the early part of his life
that he could afford to do without possible ones now. He wanted indeed
just as many as he could grasp. The comfort and happiness of his life with
Bobby, the success of the book, the opening of a career in front of him,
these things had made of him another creature. He had grown ten years
younger; his cheeks were bright, his eye clear, his step buoyant. He moved
now as though he loved his fellow creatures. One felt, on his entrance into
a room, that the air was clearer, and that one was in the company of a
human being who found the world, quite honestly and naturally, a delightful
place. This was the first effect that success had upon Peter.

And indeed they met him--all of them--with open arms. They saw in him that
burning flame that those who have been for the first time admitted into the
freemasonry of their Art must ever show. Afterwards he would be accustomed
to that country, would know its roads and hills and cities and would be
perhaps disappointed that they were neither as holy nor as eternal as he
had once imagined them to be--now he stood on the hill's edge and looked
down into a golden landscape whose bounds he could not discern. But
they met him too on the personal side. The fact that he had been found
starving in a London garret was of itself a wonderful thing--then he had
in his manner a rough, awkward charm that flattered them with his youth
and inexperience. He was impetuous and confidential and then suddenly
reserved and constrained. But, above it all, it was evident that he wanted
friendliness and good fellowship. He took every one at the value that they
offered to him. He first encouraged them to be at their most human and then
convinced them that that was their natural character. He lighted every
one's lamp at the flame of his own implicit faith.

These ladies and gentlemen put very plainly before him the business side of
his profession. Their conversation was all of agents, publishers, the sums
that one of their number obtained and how lucky to get so much so soon,
and the sums that another of their number did not obtain and what a shame
it was that such good work was rewarded by so little. It was all--this
conversation--in the most generous strain. Jealousy never raised its head.
They read--these precious people--the works of one another with an eager
praise and a tender condemnation delightful to see. It was a warm bustling
society that received Peter.

These tea-parties and fireside discussions had not, perhaps, been always
so friendly and large-hearted but in the time when Peter first encountered
them they were influenced and moulded by a very remarkable woman--a
woman who succeeded in combining humour, common sense and imagination in
admirably adjusted qualities. Her humour made her tolerant, her common
sense made her wise, and her imagination made her tender--her name was Mrs.
Launce.

She was short and broad, with large blue eyes that always, if one watched
them, showed her thoughts and dispositions. Some people make of their faces
a disguise, others use them as a revelation--the result to the observer
is very much the same in either case. But with Mrs. Launce there was no
definite attempt at either one thing or the other--she was so busily
engaged in the matter in hand, so absorbed and interested, that the things
that her face might be doing never occurred to her. Her hair was drawn back
and parted down the middle. She liked to wear little straw coal-scuttle
bonnets; she was very fond of blue silk, and her frocks had an inclination
to trail. On her mother's side she was French and on her father's English;
from her mother she got the technique of her stories, the light-hearted
boldness of her conversation and her extraordinary devotion to her family.
She was always something of a puzzle to English women because she was a
great deal more domestic than most of them and yet bristled with theories
about morals and life in general that had nothing whatever in common with
domesticity. Some one once said of her that "she was a hot water bottle
playing at being a bomb...."

She belonged to all the London worlds, although she found perhaps especial
pleasure in the society of her fellow writers. This was largely because
she loved, beyond everything else, the business side of her profession.
There was nothing at all that she did not know about the publishing and
distribution of a novel. Her capacity for remembering other people's prices
was prodigious and she managed her agent and her publisher with a deftness
that left them gasping. There were very few persons in her world who had
not, at one time or another, poured their troubles into her ear. She
had that gift, valuable in life beyond all others, of giving herself up
entirely to the person with whom she was talking. When the time came to
give advice the combination of her common sense and her tenderness made
her invaluable. There was no crime black enough, no desertion, no cruelty
horrible enough to outspeed her pity. She hated and understood the sin
and loved and comforted the sinner. With a wide and accurate knowledge of
humanity she combined a deep spiritual belief in the goodness of God.

Everything, however horrible, interested her ... she adored life.

This little person in the straw bonnet and the blue dress gave Peter
something that he had never known before--she mothered him. He sat next to
her at some dinner-party and she asked him to come and have tea with her.
She lived in a little street in Westminster in a tiny house that had her
children on the top floor, a beautiful copy of the Mona Lisa and a very
untidy writing-table on the second, and a little round hall and a tiny
dining-room on the ground floor. Her husband and her family--including an
adorable child of two--were all as amiable as possible.

Peter told her most things on the first day that he had tea with her and
everything on the second. He told her about his boyhood--Treliss, Scaw
House, his father, Stephen. He told her about Brockett's and Bucket Lane.
He told her, finally, about Clare Rossiter.

He always remembered one thing that she said at this time. They were
sitting at her open window looking down into the blue evening that is in
Westminster quieter even than it is at Chelsea. Behind the faint green
cloud of trees the Abbey's huge black pile soared into space.

"You think you've made a tremendous break?" she said.

"Yes--this is an entirely new life--new in every way. I seem too to be set
amongst an entirely new crowd of people. The division seems to me sharper
every day. I believe I've left it all behind."

She looked at him sharply. "You're afraid of all that earlier time," she
said.

"Yes, I am."

"It made you write 'Reuben Hallard.' Perhaps this life here in London..."

"It's safer," he caught her up.

"Don't," she answered him very gravely, "play for safety. It's the most
dangerous thing in the world." She paused for a moment and then added: "But
probably they won't let you alone."

"I hope to God they will," he cried.


III

He saw Clare Rossiter twice during this time and, on each occasion, it
seemed to him that she was trying to make up to him for his awkwardness at
their first meeting. On the first of these two occasions she had only a few
words with him, but there was a note in her voice that he fancied, wildly,
unreasonably, was different from the tone that she used to other people.
She looked so beautiful with her golden hair coiled above her head. It
was the most wonderful gold that he had ever seen. He could only, in his
excitement, think of marmalade and that was a sticky comparison. "The Lady
with the Marmalade Hair"--how monstrous! but that did convey the colour.
Her eyes seemed darker now than they had been before and her cheeks whiter.
The curve of her neck was so wonderful that it hurt him physically. He
wanted so terribly to kiss her just beneath her ear. He saw how he would do
it, and that he would have to move away some of the shiny hair that strayed
like sunlight across the white skin.

She did not seem to him quite so tiny when she smiled; it was exactly as
water ripples when the sun suddenly bursts dark clouds. He had a thousand
comparisons for her, and then sometimes she would be, as it were, caught up
into a cloud and he would only see a general radiance and be blinded by the
light.

He wished very much that he could think of something else--something other
than marmalade--that had that quality of gold. He often imagined what it
would be like when she let it all down--like a forest of autumn trees--no,
that spoke of decay--like the sunlight on sand towards evening--like the
fires of Walhalla in the last act of Gotterdämmerung--like the lights of
some harbour seen from the farther shore--like clouds that are ready to
burst with evening sunlight. Perhaps, after all, amber was the nearest....

"Peter, ask Miss Rossiter if she will have some more tea...." Oh! What a
fool he is! What an absolute ass!

On the second of these two meetings she had read "Reuben Hallard." She
loved it! She thought it astounding! The most wonderful first novel she had
ever read. How had he been able to make one feel Cornwall so? She had been
once to Cornwall, to Mullion and it had been just like that! Those rocks!
it was like a poem! And then so exciting!

She had not been able to put it down for a single minute. "Mother was
furious with me because there I sat until I don't know how early in the
morning reading it! Oh! Mr. Westcott, how wonderful to write like that !"

Her praise inflamed him like wine. He looked at her with exultation.

"Oh! you feel like that!" he said, drawing a great breath, "I did want you
to like it so!" He was enraptured--the world was heaven! He did not realise
that some young woman at a tea-party the day before had said precisely
these same things and he had said: "Of all the affected idiots!"...


IV

This might all be termed a period of preparation--that period was fixed for
Peter with its sign and seal on a certain evening of spring when an
enormous orange moon was in the sky, scents were in all the Chelsea
gardens, and the Chelsea streets were like glass in the silver luminous
light.

Peter was walking home after a party at the Rossiters'. It was the first
time that he had been invited to their house and it had been a great
success. Dr. Rossiter was a little round fat man with snow-white hair,
red cheeks and twinkling eyes. He cured his patients and irritated his
relations by his good temper. Mrs. Rossiter, Peter thought, had a great
resemblance to Bobby's mother, Mrs. Galleon, senior. They were, both of
them, massive and phlegmatic. They had both acquired that solemn dignity
that comes of living up to one's husband's reputation. They both looked
on their families--Mrs. Rossiter on Clare and Mrs. Galleon on Millicent,
Percival and Bobby--with curiosity, tolerance and a mild soft of wonder.
They were both massively happy and completely unimaginative. They were,
indeed, old friends, having been at school together, they were Emma and
Jane to one another and Mrs. Rossiter could never forget that Mrs. Galleon
came to school two years after herself and was therefore junior still;
whilst Mrs. Galleon had stayed two years longer than Mrs. Rossiter, and was
a power there when Mrs. Rossiter was completely forgotten; they were fond
of each other as long as they were allowed to patronise one another.

Peter had spent a delicious evening. He had had half an hour in the garden
with Clare. They had spoken in an undertone. He had told her his ambitions,
she had told him her aspirations. Some one had sung in the garden and there
had been one wonderful moment when Peter had touched her hand and she had
not taken it away. At last they were both silent and the garden flowed
about them, on every side of them, with the notes and threads that can only
be heard at night.

Mrs. Rossiter, heavily and solemnly, brought her daughter a shawl. There
was some one to whom she would like to introduce Mr. Westcott. Would he
mind? Eden was robbed of its glories....

But he had had enough. He thought at one moment that already she was
beginning to care for him, and at another, that a lover's fancy made signs
out of the wind and portents out of the running water.

But he was happy with a mighty exultation, and then, as he turned down on
to the Embankment and felt the breeze from the river as it came towards
him, he met Henry Galleon.

The old man, in an enormous hat that was like a top hat only round at the
brim and brown in colour, was trotting home. He saw Peter and stopped. He
spoke to him in his slow tremendous voice and the words seemed to go on
after they had left him, rolling along the Embankment.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Westcott. I have thought that I would like to
have a chat with you. I have just finished your book."

This was indeed tremendous--that Henry Galleon should have read "Reuben
Hallard." Peter trembled all over.

"I wonder whether you would care to come and have a chat with me. I have
some things you might care to see. What time like the present? It is early
hours yet and you will be doing an old man who sleeps only poorly a
kindness."

What a night of nights! Peter, trembling with excitement, felt Henry
Galleon put his arm in his, felt the weight of the great man's body. They
walked slowly along and the moon and the stars and the lights on the river
and the early little leaves in the trees and the stones of the houses
and the little "tish-tish" of the water against the Embankment seemed to
say--"Oh! Peter Westcott's going to have a chat with Henry Galleon! Did you
ever hear such a thing!"

Peter was sorry that his Embankment was deserted and that there was no one
to see them go into the house together. He drew a great breath as the door
closed behind them. The house was large and dark and mysterious. The rest
of the family were still out at some party. Henry Galleon drew Peter into
his own especial quarters and soon they were sitting in a lofty library,
its walls covered with books that stretched to the ceiling. Peter meanwhile
buried in a huge arm-chair and feeling that Henry Galleon's eyes were
piercing him through and through.

The old man talked for some time about other things--talked wonderfully
about the great ones of the earth whom he had known, the great things that
he had seen. It was amazing to Peter to hear the gods of his world alluded
to as "poor old S---- poor fellow!... Yes, indeed. I remember his coming
into breakfast one day..." or "You were asking about T---- Old Wallie, as
we used to call him--poor fellow, poor fellow--we lived together in rooms
for some time. That was before I married--and perilously, dangerously--I
might almost say magnificently near starvation we were too...."

Peter already inflamed with that earlier half-hour in the garden now
breathed a portentous air. He was with the Gods ... there on the Olympian
heights he drank with them, he sang songs with them, with mighty voices
they applauded "Reuben Hallard." He drank in his excitement many whiskies
and sodas and soon the white room with its books was like the inside of a
golden shell. The old man opposite him grew in size--his face was ever
larger and larger, his shirt front bulged and bulged--his hand raised to
emphasise some point was tremendous as the hand of a God. Peter felt that
he himself was growing smaller and smaller, would soon, in the depths of
that mighty arm-chair disappear altogether but that opposite him two mighty
burning eyes held him. And always like thunder the voice rolled on....
"My son tells me that this book of yours is a success ... that they are
emptying their purses to fill yours. That may be a dangerous thing for you.
I have read your book, it has many faults; it is not written at all--it
is loose and lacking in all construction. You know nothing, as yet, about
life--you do not know what to use or what to reject. But the Spirit is
there, the right Spirit. It is a little flame--it will be very easily
quenched and nothing can kill it so easily as success--guard it, my son,
guard it."

Peter felt as Siegfried must have felt when confronted by Wotan.

His poor little book was dwindling now before his eyes. He was conscious of
a great despair. How useless of him to attempt so impossible a task....

The voice rolled on:

"I am an old man now and only twice before in my time nave I seen that
spirit in a young man's eyes. You may remember now an old man's words--for
I would urge you, I would implore you to keep nothing before you but the
one thing that can bring Life into Art. I will not speak to you of the
sacredness of your calling. Many will laugh at you and tell you that it is
pretentious to name it so. Others will come to you and will advise how this
is to be done and that is to be done. Others will talk to you of schools,
they will tell you that once it was in that manner and that now it is in
this manner. Some will tell you that you have no style--others will tell
you that you have too much. Some again will tempt you with money and money
is not to be despised. Again you will be tested with photographs and
paragraphs, with lectures and public dinners.... Worst of all there will
come to you terrible hours when you yourself know of a sure certainty that
your work is worthless. In your middle age a great barrenness will come
upon you. You have been a little teller of little tales, and on every side
of you there will be others who have striven for other prizes and have won
them. Sitting alone in your room with your poor strands of coloured silk
that had once been intended to make so beautiful a pattern, poor boy, you
will know that you have failed. That will be a very dreadful hour--the only
power that can meet it is a blind and deaf courage. Courage is the only
thing that we are here to show ... the hour will pass."

The old man paused. There was a silence. Then he said very slowly as though
he were drawing in front of him the earliest histories of his own past
life....

"Against all these temptations, against these voices of the World and the
Flesh, against the glory of power and the swinging hammer of success, you,
sitting quietly in your room, must remember that a great charge has been
given you, that you are here for one thing and one thing only ... to
listen. The whole duty of Art is listening for the voice of God.

"I am not speaking in phrases. I am not pressing upon you any sensational
discoveries, but here at the end of my long life, I, with all the things
that I meant to do and have failed to do heavy upon me, can give you only
this one word. I have hurried, I have scrambled, I have fought and cursed
and striven, but as an Artist only those hours that I have spent listening,
waiting, have been my real life.

"So it must be with you. You are here to listen. Never mind if they tell
you that story-telling is a cheap thing, a popular thing, a mean thing. It
is the instrument that is given to you and if, when you come to die you
know that, for brief moments, you have heard, and that what you have heard
you have written, Life has been justified.

"Nothing else can console you, nothing else can comfort you. There must be
restraint, austerity, discipline--words must come to you easily but only
because life has come to you with so great a pain ... the Artist's life is
the harshest that God can give to a man. Make no mistake about that.
Fortitude is the artist's only weapon of defence...."

Henry Galleon came over to Peter's chair and put his hand upon the boy's
arm.

"I am at the end of my work. I have done what I can. You are at the
beginning of yours. You will do what you can. I wish you good fortune."

A vision came to Peter. Through the open window, against the sheet of
stars, gigantic, was the Rider on the Lion.

He could not see the Rider's face.

A great exultation inflamed him.

At that instant he was stripped bare. His history, the people whom he knew,
the things that he had done, they were all as though they had never been.

His soul was, for that great moment, naked and alone before God.

"The whole duty of Art is listening for the voice of God...."

A sound, as though it came to him from another world, broke into the room.

There were voices and steps on the stairs.

"Ah, they are back from their party," Henry Galleon said, trotting happily
to the door. "Come up and have a chat with my wife, Westcott, before going
to bed."


CHAPTER III

THE ENCOUNTER


I

Peter was now the young man of the moment. He took this elevation with
frank delight, was encouraged by it, gave it all rather more, perhaps, than
its actual value, began a new novel, "The Stone House," started weekly
reviewing on _The Interpreter_ and yielded himself up entirely to Clare
Rossiter.

He had been in love with her ever since that first day at Norah Monogue's,
but the way that she gradually now absorbed him was like nothing so much as
the slow covering of the rocks and the sand by the incoming tide. At first,
in those days at Brockett's, she had seemed to him something mysterious,
intangible, holy. But after that meeting in Cheyne Walk he knew her for
a prize that some fortunate man might, one day, win. He did not, for an
instant, suppose that he could ever be that one, but the mere imagined
picture of what some other would one day have, sent the blood rushing
through him. Her holiness for him was still intact but for another there
would be human, earthly wonders.

Then, curiously, as he met her more often and knew her better there
came a certain easy, almost casual, intercourse. One Clare Rossiter
still reigned amongst the clouds, but there was now too another easy,
fascinating, humorous creature who treated him almost like Alice Galleon
herself--laughed at him, teased him, provoked him ... suddenly, like a
shadow across a screen, would slip away; and he be on his knees again
before something that was only to be worshipped.

These two shapes of her crossed and were confused and again were parted.
His thoughts were first worshipping in heaven, then dwelling with delight
on witty, charming things that she had said.

For that man, when he came, there would be a most wonderful treasure.

Peter now lost his appetite. He could not sleep at night. He would slip out
of his room, cross the silent Chelsea streets and watch her dark window.
He cultivated Mrs. Rossiter and that massive and complacent lady took it
entirely to herself. Indeed, nothing, at this time was more remarkable than
the little stir that Peter's devotion caused. It was perhaps that Clare had
always had a cloud of young men about her, perhaps that Peter was thought
to be having too wonderful a time, just now, to be falling in love as
well--that would be piling Life on to Life! ... no one could live under it.

Besides Mrs. Rossiter liked him ... he was amazing, you see ... people
said....

And the next stage arrived.

One May evening, at the Galleons' house, when some one was playing the
piano and all the world seemed to be sitting in corners Clare's hand lay
suddenly against his. The smooth outer curve of his hand lay against her
palm. Their little fingers touched. Sheets of fire rose, inflamed him and
fell ... rose again and fell. His hand began to shake, her hand began to
shake. He heard, a thousand miles away, some one singing about "the morn."

Their hands parted. She rose and slowly, her white dress and red-gold hair
flung against a background that seemed to him black and infinite, crossed
the room.

That trembling of her hand had maddened him. It suddenly showed him that
he--as well as another--might run the race for her. Everything that he had
ever done or been--his sentiments, his grossnesses, his restraints and his
rebellions--were now concerned in this pursuit. No other human
being--Stephen, Norah Monogue, Bobby, Alice--now had any interest for him.
His reviews were written he knew not how, the editions of "Reuben Hallard"
might run into the gross for all he cared, "The Stone House" lay neglected.

And he avoided seeing her. He was afraid to spoil that moment when her hand
had shaken at the touch of his, and yet he was tormented by the longing for
a new meeting that might provide some new amazement. Perhaps he would hold
her hand and feel the shadow of her body bending towards his own! And his
heart stopped beating; and he was suddenly cold with a splendid terror.

Then he did meet her again and had nothing to say. It seemed to him that
she was frightened. He came home that day in a cold fog of miserable
despair. A letter from his publishers informing him of a tenth edition was
of ironical unimportance. He lay awake all night restlessly unhappy.

For the first time for many months the old shadows stole out into the
room--the black bulk of Scaw House--the trees, the windows, his father....

And to him, tossing on his bed there came thoughts of a certain house in
the town. He could get up and dress now--a cab would soon take him there
... in the early morning he could slink back.

Clare did not want him! A fool to fancy that she had ever cared.

He, Peter Westcott, nobody! Why then should he not have his adventures, he
still so young and vigorous? He would go to that house....

And then, almost reluctantly, as he sat up in bed and watched the grey,
shadowy walls, Stephen seemed to be visible to him--Stephen, walking the
road, starting early in the fresh air when the light was breaking and the
scent of the grass was cool and filled with dew.

He would write to Stephen in the morning--he lay down and went to sleep.

By this time, meanwhile, Alice and Bobby had noticed. Alice, indeed, had
a number of young men over whose emotions she kept guard and Peter had
become, during these weeks, very valuable to her....

She did not want him to marry anybody--especially she did not want him to
marry Clare. At breakfast, past Peter's ears, as though he were not
concerned at all, she talked to Bobby--

"Really, Dr. Rossiter spoils Clare beyond all bounds--"

"Um?"

"He's taking her with him up to Glasgow to that Congress thing. He knows
perfectly well that she ought to stay with Mrs. Rossiter--and so does she."

"Well, it's no business of ours--" Bobby's usual tolerant complacency.

"It is. Clare might be a fine creature if she didn't let herself be spoiled
in this way. She's perpetually selfish and she ought to be told so."

"We're all perpetually selfish," said Bobby who began to be sorry for
Peter.

"Oh! no, we're not. I'm very fond of Clare but I don't envy the man who
marries her. There's no one in the world more delightful when she has her
own way and things go smoothly, but they've wrapped her up in cotton wool
to such an extent that she simply doesn't know how to live out of it. She's
positively terrified of _Life_."

This, as Alice had intended, was too much for Peter. He burst out--

"I think Miss Rossiter's the pluckiest girl I've ever met. She's afraid of
nothing."

"Except of being uncomfortable," Alice retorted. "That frightens her into
fits. Make her uncomfortable, Peter, and you'll see--"

And, red in the face, Peter answered--"I don't think you ought to talk of
any one who's so fond of you behind her back in that way--"

"Oh! I say just the same to her face. I'm always telling her these things
and she always agrees and then's just as selfish as ever. That absurd
little father of hers has spoilt her!"

Spoilt! Clare spoilt! Peter smiled darkly. Alice Galleon--delightful woman
though she was, of course couldn't endure that another woman should receive
such praise--Jealousy! Ah!...

And the aged and weighty author of "Reuben Hallard," to whom the world
was naturally an open book, and life known to its foundations, nodded
to himself. How people, intelligent enough in other ways, could be so
short-sighted!

Afterwards, when they were alone, Bobby took him in hand--

"You're in love with Clare Rossiter, Peter," he said.

"Yes, I am," Peter answered defiantly.

"But you've known her so short a time!"

"What's that to do with it?"

"Oh, nothing, of course. But do you think you're the sort of people likely
to get on?"

"Really, Bobby, I don't--"

"I know--none of my business--quite true. But you see I've known Clare
pretty well all my life and you're the best friend I've got, so you might
allow me to take an interest."

"Well, say what you like."

"Nothing to say except that Clare isn't altogether an easy problem. You're
like all the other fellows I know--think because Clare's got red hair and
laughs easily she's a goddess--she isn't, not a bit! She's got magnificent
qualities and one day perhaps, when she's had a thoroughly bad time, she'll
show one the kind of things she's made of. But she's an only child, she's
been spoilt all her life and the moment she begins to be unhappy she's
impossible."

"She shan't ever be unhappy if I can help it!" muttered Peter fiercely.

Bobby laughed. "You'll do your best of course, but are you the sort of man
for her? She wants some one who'll give her every kind of comfort, moral,
physical and intellectual. She wants somebody who'll accept her enthusiasms
as genuine intelligence. You'll find her out intellectually in a week. Then
she wants some one who'll give her his whole attention. You think now that
you will but you won't--you can't--you're not made that way. By temperament
and trade you're an artist. She thinks, at the moment, that an artist would
suit her very well; but, in reality, my boy, he's the very last sort of
person she ought to marry."

Peter caught at Bobby's words. "Do you really think she cares about me?"

"She's interested. Clare spends her days in successive enthusiasms. She's
always being enthusiastic--dreadful disillusions in between the heights.
Mind you, there's another side of Clare--a splendid side, but it wants very
careful management and I don't know, Peter, that you're exactly the sort of
person--"

"Thanks very much," said Peter grimly.

"No, but you're not--you don't, in the least, see her as she is, and she
doesn't see you as you are--hence these misguided attempts on my part to
show you one another."

But Peter had not been listening.

"Do you really think," he muttered, "that she cares about me?"

Bobby looked at him, laughed and shrugged his shoulders in despair.

"Ah! I see--it's no use," he said, "poor dear Peter--well, I wish you
luck!"

And that was the end as far as Alice and Bobby were concerned. They never
alluded to it again and indeed now seemed to favour meetings between Clare
and Peter.

And now, through these wonderful Spring weeks, these two were continually
together. The Galleons had, at first, been inclined to consider Clare's
obvious preference for Peter as the simplest desire to be part of a general
rather heady enthusiasm. "Clare loves little movements...." And Peter,
throughout this Spring was a little movement. The weeks went on, and Clare
was not herself--silent, absorbed, almost morose. One day she asked Alice
Galleon a number of questions about Peter, and, after that, resolutely
avoided speaking of him. "Of course," Alice said to Bobby--"Dr. Rossiter
will let her marry any one she likes. She'll have plenty of money and
Peter's going to have a great career. After all it may be the best thing."

Bobby shook his head. "They're both egoists," he said. "Peter because he's
never had anything he wanted and Clare because she's always had everything
... it won't do."

But, after all, when May gave place to burning June, Bobby and Alice were
inevitably drawn into that romance. They yielded to an atmosphere that
both, by temperament, were too sentimental to resist.

Nearer and nearer was coming that intoxicating moment of Peter's final
plunge, and Clare--beautiful, these weeks, with all the excitement of the
wonderful episode--saw him as a young god who had leapt upon a submissive
London and conquered it.

Mrs. Rossiter and Mrs. Galleon played waiting chorus. Mrs. Launce from her
little house in Westminster, was, as usual, glowing with a piece of other
people's happiness. Bobby and Alice had surrendered to the atmosphere. All
were, of course, silent--until the word is spoken no movement must be
made--the little god is so easily alarmed.

At last towards the close of this hot June, Mrs. Launce proposed to Clare
a week-end at her Sussex cottage by the sea. She also told Peter that she
could put him up if he chose to come down at the same time. What could be
more delightful in this weather?

"Dear Clare, only the tiniest cottage as you know--no one else unless Peter
Westcott happens to come down--I suggested it, and you can see the sea from
your window and there's a common and a donkey, and you can roll in the
sand--" Mrs. Launce, when she was very happy betrayed her French descent by
the delightful way that she rolled her r's.

"Not a soul anywhere near--we can bathe all day."

Clare would love to come so strangely enough would Peter--"The 5.30 train
then--Saturday...." Dear Mrs. Launce in her bonnet and blue silk! Clare had
never thought her so entirely delightful!

Peter, of course, plainly understood the things that dear Mrs. Launce
intended. His confidence in her had been, in no way, misplaced--she loved a
wedding and was the only person in the world who could bring to its making
so fine a compound of sentiment and common sense. She frankly loved it
all and though, at the moment, occupied with the work of at least a dozen
women, and with a family that needed her most earnest care, she hastened to
assist the Idyll.

Peter's own feelings were curiously confused. He was going to propose to
Clare; and now he seemed to face, suddenly, the change that this must mean
to him. Those earlier months, when it had been pursuit with no certainty of
capture had only shown him one thing desirable--Clare. But now that he was
face to face with it he was frightened--what did he know of women?...

On the morning they were to go down, he sat in his room, this terrible
question confronting him. No, he knew nothing about women! He had left his
heroine very much alone in "Reuben Hallard" and those occasions when he had
been obliged to bring her on the stage had not been too successful. He knew
nothing about women!

There would be things--a great many--as a married man, he would have to
change. Sometimes he was moody for days together and wanted to see no one.
Sometimes he was so completely absorbed by his work that the real people
around him were shadows and wraiths. These moods must vanish. Clare must
always find him ready and cheerful and happy.

A dreadful sense of inadequacy weighed upon Peter. And then at the concrete
fact of her actual presence, at the thought of her standing there, waiting
for him, wanting him, his doubts left him and he was wildly, madly happy.

And yet, before he left the room, his glance fell on his writing-table.
White against its shining surface lay a paper and on the top sheet,
written: "The Stone House"; a Novel; Chapter II. Months ago--he had not
touched it all these last weeks, and, at this moment he felt he would
never write anything again. He turned away with a little movement of
irritation....

That morning he went formally to Dr. Rossiter. The little man received him,
smiling.

"I want to marry your daughter, sir," said Peter.

"You're very young," said the Doctor.

"Twenty-six," said Peter.

"Well, if she'll have you I won't stand in your way--"

Peter took the 5.30 train....


II

Mrs. Launce, on Sunday afternoon, from the door of her cottage, watched
them both strike across the common towards the sea--Peter, "stocky,"
walking as though no force on earth could upset his self-possession and
sturdy balance, Clare with her little body and easy movement meant for
this air and sea and springing turf. Mrs. Launce having three magnificent
children of her own believed in the science of Eugenics heart and soul.
Here, before her eyes, was the right and proper Union--talk about souls and
spirit and temperament--important enough for the immediate Two--but give
Nature flesh and bones, with cleanliness and a good straight stock to work
on, and see what She will do!

Mrs. Launce went into the cottage again and prepared herself for an
announcement at tea-time. She wiped her eyes before she settled down to her
work. Loving both of them the thought of their happiness hung about her
all the afternoon and made her very tender and forgiving when the little
parlourmaid arrived with a piece of the blue and white china smashed to
atoms. "I can't think 'ow it 'appened, Mum. I was just standing...."

Peter and Clare, crossing the common, beheld the sea at their feet. It was
a hot misty afternoon and only the thin white line of tiny curling waves
crept out of the haze on to the gleaming yellow sand. Behind them, on every
side was common and the only habitation, a small cottage nearly hidden by a
black belt of trees, on their right. These black, painted trees lay like a
blot of ink against the blue sky.

Sitting down on the edge of the common they looked on to the yellow sand.
The air was remorselessly still as though the world were cased in iron;
somewhere deep within its silence, its heart might yet be beating, but the
depths hid its reverberation.

Peter lay flat on his back and instantly his world was full of clamour. All
about him insects were stirring, the thin stiff blades of grass were very
faintly rustling, a tiny blue butterfly flew up from the soil into the
bright air--some creature sang a little song that sounded like the faint
melody of a spinet.

"All praising the Lord, I suppose--" Peter listened. "Hymn and glory songs
and all the rest--" Then, clashing, out of the heart of the sky, the
thought followed. "There _must_ be a God"--the tinkling insect told him so.

He gazed into the great sheet of blue above him, so remote, so cruel ...
and yet the tiny blue butterfly flew, without fear, into its very heart.

Peter's soul was drawn up. He swung, he flew, he fled.... Down below, there
on the hard, brown soil his body lay--dust to the dust--there, dead amongst
the singing insects.... He looked down, from his great heights and saw his
body, with its red face and its suit of blue and its up-turned boots, and
here, in freedom his Soul exulted!

"Of course there is a God!"

They are praising him down there--the ground is covered with creatures
that are praising Him. Peter buried his eyes and instantly his soul came
swinging down to him, found his body again, filled once more his veins with
life and sound. After a vast silence he could hear, once more, the life
amongst the grass, the faint rustle of the thin line of foam beneath him,
and could smell the earth and the scent of the seaweed borne up to them
from the sand.

"It's so still," he said suddenly, "that it's almost like thunder. There'll
be a storm later. On a day like this in Cornwall you would hear the sound
of the Mining Stamps for miles--"

"Well," she answered, "I am glad we're not in Cornwall--I hate it."

"Hate it!"

"Yes. That sounds horrible to you, I suppose, and I'm quite ready to admit
that it's my cowardice. Cornwall frightens me. When I was there as a tiny
girl it was just the same. I always hated it."

"I don't believe you're ever frightened at anything."

"I am. I'm under such a disadvantage, you see. If I'd been white-faced and
haggard every one would have thought it quite natural that I should scream
if I were left in the dark or hate being left alone with those horrible
black rocks that Cornwall's so full of, but just because I'm healthy and
was taught to hold my back up at school I have to pretend to a bravery that
simply doesn't exist--" He rejected, for the moment the last part of her
sentence. "Oh, but I understand perfectly what you mean by your fear of
Cornwall. Of course I understand it although I love the place with all my
soul and body. But it is terrifying--almost the only terrifying place that
civilisation has left to us--Central Africa is nothing to it--"

"Are you afraid of it?" she said, looking at him intently.

"Tremendously--because I suppose it won't let me alone. It's difficult to
put into words, but I think what I mean is that I want to go on now in
London, writing and seeing people and being happy and it's pulling at me
all the time."

"What way pulling at you?"

"I can't get out of my head all the things I did when I was a boy there. I
wasn't very happy, you know. I've told you something about it.... I want
to go back.... I want to go back. I mustn't, but I want to go back--and it
hurts--"

He seemed to have forgotten her--he stared out to sea, his hands holding
the grass on either side of him.

She moved and the sound suddenly brought him back. He turned to her
laughing.

"Sorry. I was thinking about things. That cottage over there with the black
trees reminded me of Scaw House a little.... But it's all right really. I
suppose every fellow has the wild side and the sober side, and I've had
such a rum life and been civilised so short a time...."

She said slowly: "I think I know what you mean, though. I know enough of it
to be frightened of it--I don't want life to be like that. I don't suppose
I've got imagination. I want it to be orderly and easy and no one to be
hurt or damaged. Oh!"--her voice was suddenly like a cry--"Why can't we
just go through life without any one being frightened or made miserable? I
_believe_ in cities and walls and fires and regulated emotions--all those
other things can only hurt."

"They teach courage," Peter answered gravely. "And that's about the only
thing we're here to learn, I expect. My mother died because she wasn't
brave enough and I want ... I want...."

He broke off--"There's only one thing I want and that's you, Clare. You
must have known all these weeks that I love you. I've loved you ever since
I met you that Good Friday afternoon years ago. Let me take care of you,
see that no one hurts you--love you ... love you--"

"Do you really want me, Peter?"

He didn't speak but his whole body turned towards her, answered her
question.

"Because I am yours entirely. I became yours that day when your hand
touched mine. I wasn't sure before--I knew then--"

He looked at her. He saw her, he thought for the first time. She sat with
her hands pressing on the grass, her body bent back a little.

The curve from her neck to her feet was like the shadow of some colour
against the brown earth because he saw her only dimly. Her hair burnt
against the blue sky but her eyes--her eyes! His gaze caught hers and he
surrendered himself to that tenderness, that mystery, that passion that she
flung about him. In her eyes he saw what only a lover can see--the terror
and the splendour of a soul surprised for the first time into love. She was
caught, she was trapped, she was gorgeously delivered. In her eyes he saw
that he had her in the hollow of his hand and that she was glad to be
there.

But even now they had not touched--they had not moved from their places.
They were urged towards one another by some fierce power but also some
great suspense still restrained them.

Then Clare spoke, hurriedly, almost pleadingly.

"But Peter, listen--before I say any more--you must know me better. I think
that it is just because I love you so much that I see myself clearly to-day
as I have never seen myself before--although I have, I suppose really known
... things ... but I have denied them to myself. But now I know that all
that I say is true--"

"I am ready," he said, smiling. But she did not smile back at him, she was
intensely serious, she spoke without moving her eyes from his face.

"It is not altogether my fault. I have been an only child and everything
that I have wanted I have always had. I have despised my mother and even my
father because they have given in to me--that is not a pleasant thing to
know. And now comfort, happiness, an absence of all misery, these things
are essential--"

"I will look after you," said Peter. It was almost with irritation that she
brushed aside his assurance.

"Yes, yes, I know, but you must understand that it's more than that. If I
am unhappy I am another creature you haven't seen ... you don't know.... If
I am frightened--"

"But Clare, dear, we're all like that--"

"No, it's sheer wickedness with me. Oh! Peter I love you so much that you
_must_ listen. You mustn't think afterwards, ah, if I'd only known--"

"Aren't you making too much of it all? We've all got these things and it's
just because we can help each other that we marry. We give each the
courage--"

"I've always been frightened," she said slowly, "always when anything big
comes along--always. And this is the biggest thing I've ever met. If only
it had been some ordinary man ... but you, Peter, that I should hurt
_you_."

"You won't hurt me," he answered her, "and I'd rather be hurt by you than
helped by some one else--let's leave all this. If you love me, there's
nothing else to say.... Do you love me, Clare?"

"Yes, Peter."

Then suddenly before he could move towards her a storm that had been
creeping upon them, burst over their heads. Five minutes ago there had been
no sign of anything but the finest weather, but, in a moment the black
clouds had rolled up and the thunder broke, clashing upon the world. The
sea had vanished.

"We must run for it," cried Peter, raising his voice against the storm.
"That cottage over there--it's the only place."

They ran. The common was black now--the rain drove hissing, against the
soil, the air was hot with the faint sulphur smell.

Peter flung himself upon the cottage door and Clare followed him in. For a
moment they stood, breathless. Then Peter, conscious only that Clare was
beside him, wild with the excitement of the storm, caught her, held her for
a moment away from him, breathed the thunder that was about them all, and
then kissed her mouth, wet with the rain.

She clung to him, white, breathless, her head on his shoulder.

"Why, you're not frightened?" The sense of her helplessness filled him with
a delicious vigour. The way that her hand pressed in upon his shoulder
exalted him. Her wet golden hair brushed his cheek. Then he remembered that
they had invaded the cottage. For the first time it occurred to him that
their first embrace might have been observed; he turned around.

The room was filthy, a huge black fire-place occupied most of it, the floor
was littered with pieces of paper, of vegetables and a disagreeable smell
protested against the closed and dirty windows. At first it seemed that
this place was empty and then, with a start, he was aware that two eyes
were watching them. The thunder pealed above them, the rain lashed the roof
and ran streaming from the eaves; the cottage was dark; but he saw in a
chair, a bundle of rags from which those eyes were staring.

Clare gave a little cry; an old woman with a fallen chin and a face like
yellow parchment sat huddled in the chair.

Peter spoke to her. "I hope you don't mind our taking shelter here, whilst
the storm passes." She had seen them embrace; it made him uncomfortable,
but the storm was passing away, already the thunder was more distant.

The old woman made no reply, only her eyes glared at them. Peter put his
hand in Clare's--"It's all right; I think the old thing's deaf and dumb and
blind--look, the storm's passing--there's a bit of blue sky. Isn't it odd
an old thing like that..."

Clare, shuddered a little. "I don't like it--she's horrid--this place is so
dirty. I believe the rain's stopped."

They opened the door and the earth met them, good and sweet, after the
shower. The sky was breaking, the mists were leaving the sea and as the
storm vanished, the sun, dipping towards the horizon flung upon the blue a
fleet of tiny golden clouds.

Peter bent down to the old woman.

"Thank you," he said, "for giving us shelter." He placed a shilling on her
lap.

"She's quite deaf and blind," he said. "Poor old thing!"

They closed the door behind them and passed down a little path to the
seashore. Here wonders met them. The sand, wet with the recent storm
catching all the colours of the sky shone with mother of pearl--here a pool
of blue, there the fleet of golden clouds.

It stretched on every side of them, blazing with colour. Behind them the
common, sinking now into the dull light of evening.

They stood, little pigmies, on that vast painted floor. Before them the
breeze, blowing back the waves into the sun again turned the spray to gold.

Tiny figures, in all this glory, they embraced. In all the world they
seemed the only living thing....


III

They had their witness. The old woman who lived in the heart of those black
trees, was deaf and dumb indeed, but her eyes were alive in her fading and
wrinkled body.

When the door had closed she rose slowly from her chair, and her face was
wrinkled with the passion of the hatred that her old soul was feeling.

What did they mean, those two, coming there and haunting her with their
youth and strength and love. Kissing there before her as though she were
already dead--she to whom kisses were only bitter memories.

Her face worked with fury--she hobbled, painfully, to the door and opened
it.

Below her, on a floor of gold, two black figures stood together.

Gazing at them she raised her thin and trembling hand; she flung with a
passionate, furious gesture, something from her.

A small silver coin glittered in the air, whistled for a moment and fell.


CHAPTER IV

THE ROUNDABOUT


I

Mrs. Rossiter and Mrs. Galleon sat solemnly, with the majesty of spreading
skirts and Sunday Best hats, in the little drawing-room of The Roundabout,
awaiting the return from the honeymoon.

The Roundabout is the name that Peter has given to the little house in
Dorset Street, Chelsea, that he has chosen to live in with his bride. High
spirits lead to nicknames and Peter was in the very highest of spirits when
he took the house. The name alluded both to the shape--round bow-windowed
like--fat bulging little walls, lemon-coloured, and to the kind of life
that Peter intended to lead. All was to be Happiness. Life is challenged
with all the high spirits of a truly happy ceremony.

It is indeed a tiny house--tiny hall, tiny stairs, tiny rooms but quaint
with a little tumble-down orchard behind it and that strange painted house
that old mad Miss Anderson lives in on the other side of the orchard. Such
a quiet little street too ... a line of the gravest trees, cobbles with
only the most occasional cart and a little church with a sleepy bell at the
farthest end ... all was to be Happiness.

Wedding presents--there had been six hundred or so--filled the rooms.
People had, on the whole, been sensible, had given the right thing. The
little drawing-room with its grey wall-paper, roses in blue jars, its two
pictures--Velasquez' Maria Theresa in an old silver frame and Rembrandt's
Night Watch--was pleasant, but overwhelmed now by the presence of these two
enormous ladies. The evening sun, flooding it all with yellow light, was
impertinent enough to blind the eyes of Mrs. Rossiter. She rose and moved
slowly to draw down the blinds. A little silver clock struck half-past
four.

"They must soon be here," said Mrs. Galleon gloomily. Her gloom was happy
and comfortable. She was making the very most of a pleasant business with
the greatest satisfaction in the world. She had done exactly the same at
Bobby's wedding, and, in her heavy, determined way she would do the same
again before she died. Alice Galleon would be there in a moment, meantime
the two ladies, without moving in their chairs, flung sentences across at
one another and smoothed their silk skirts with their white plump hands.

"It's not really a healthy house--"

"No--with the orchard--and it's much too small--"

"Poor dears, hope they'll be happy. But one can't help feeling, Jane dear,
that it was a little rash of you ... your only girl ... and one knows so
little about Mr. Westcott, really--"

"Well, your own Bobby vouched for him. He'd known him at school after all,
and we all know how cautious Bobby is about people--besides, Emma, no one
could have received him more warmly--"

"Yes--Oh! of course ... but still, having no family--coming out of nowhere,
so to speak--"

"Well, it's to be hoped they'll get on. I must say that Clare will miss her
home terribly. It takes a lot to make up for that--And her father so
devoted too...."

"Yes, we must make the best of it."

The sun's light faded from the room--the clock and the pictures stood out
sharply against the gathering dusk. Two ladies filled the room with their
shadows and the little fire clicked and rattled behind the murmuring
voices.


II

Alice Galleon burst in upon them. "What! Not arrived yet! the train must be
dreadfully late. Lights! Lights! No, don't you move, mother!"

She returned with lamps and flooded the room with light. The ladies
displayed a feeble protest against her exultant happiness.

"I'm sure, my dear, I hope that nothing has happened."

"My dear mother, what _could_ happen?"

"Well, you never know with these trains--and a honeymoon, too, is always
rather a dangerous time. I remember--"

"I hear them!" Alice cried and there indeed they were to be heard bumping
and banging in the little hall. The door opened and Peter and Clare,
radiant with happiness, appeared.

They stood in the doorway, side by side, Clare in a little white hat and
grey travelling dress and Peter browner and stronger and squarer than ever.

All these people filled the little room. There was a crackling fire of
conversation.

"Oh! but we've had a splendid time--"

"No, I don't think Clare's in the least tired--"

"Yes, isn't the house a duck?"

"Don't we just love being back!"

"... hoping you hadn't caught colds--"

"... besides we had the easiest crossing--"

"... How's Bobby?"

"... were so afraid that something must have happened--"

Mrs. Rossiter took Clare upstairs to help her to take her hat off.

Mother and daughter faced one another--Clare flung herself into her
mother's arms.

"Oh! Mother dear, he's wonderful, wonderful!"

Downstairs Alice watched Peter critically. She had not realised until this
marriage, how fond she had grown of Peter. She had, for him, very much the
feeling that Bobby had--a sense of tolerance and even indulgence for all
tempers and morosities and morbidities. She had seen him, on a day, like a
boy of eighteen, loving the world and everything in it, having, too, a
curious inexperience of the things that life might mean to people, unable,
apparently, to see the sterner side of life at all--and then suddenly that
had gone and given place to a mood in which no one could help him, nothing
could cheer him... like Saul, he was possessed with Spirits.

Now, as he stood there, he looked not a day more than eighteen. Happiness
filled him with colour--his eyes were shining--his mouth smiling.

"Alice, old girl--she's splendid. I couldn't have believed that life could
be so good--"

A curious weight was lifted from her at his words. She did not know what
it was that she had dreaded. Perhaps it had been merely a sense that Clare
was too young and inexperienced to manage so difficult a temperament as
Peter's--and now, after all, it seemed that she had managed it. But in
realising the relief that she felt she realised too the love that she had
for Peter. When he was young and happy the risks that he ran seemed just as
heavy as when he was old and miserable.

"Oh, Peter! I'm so glad--I know she's splendid--Oh! I believe you are going
to be happy--"

"Yes!" he answered her confidently, "I believe we are--"

The ladies--Mrs. Galleon, Mrs. Rossiter and Alice--retired. Later on Clare
and Peter were coming into Bobby's for a short time.

Left alone in their little house, he drew her to the window that overlooked
the orchard and silently they gazed out at the old, friendly, gnarled and
knotted tree, and the old thick garden-wall that stretched sharply against
the night-sky.

Behind them the fire crackled and the lamps shed their pleasant glow and
that dear child with the great stiff dress that Velasquez painted smiled at
them from the wall.

Peter gave a deep sigh of happiness.

"Our House..." he said and drew her very close to him. The two of them, as
they stood there outlined against the window were so young and so pleasant
that surely the Gods would have pity!


III

In the days that followed he watched it all with incredulity. So swiftly
had he been tossed, it seemed, from fate to fate, and so easily, also, did
he leave behind him the things that had weighed him down. No sign now of
that Peter--evident enough in the Brockett days--morose, silent, sometimes
oppressed by a sense of unreasoned catastrophe, stepping into his bookshop
and out again as though all the world were his enemy.

Peter knew now that he was loved. He had felt that precious quality on the
day that his mother died, he had felt it sometimes when he had been in
Stephen's company, but against these isolated emotions what a world of hate
and bitterness.

Now he felt Clare's affection on every side of him. They had already in so
short a time a store of precious memories, intimacies, that they shared.
They had been through wild, passionate wonders together and standing now,
two human beings with casual words and laughing eyes, yet they knew that
perfect holy secrets bound them together.

He stood sometimes in the little house and wondered for an instant whether
it was all true. Where were all those half cloudy dreams, those impulses,
those dread inheritances that once he had known so well? Where that other
Peter Westcott? Not here in this dear delicious little house, with Love and
Home and great raging happiness in his heart.

He wrote to Stephen, to Mr. Zanti, to Norah Monogue and told them. He
received no answers--no word from the outer world had come to him. That
other life seemed cut off, separated--closed. Perhaps it had left him for
ever! Perhaps, as Clare said, walls and fires were better than wind and
loneliness--comfort more than danger.... Meanwhile, in his study at the top
of the house, "The Stone House" was still lying, waiting, at Chapter II--

But it was Clare who was the eternal wonder. He could not think of her,
create her, pile up the offerings before her altar, sufficiently. That he
should have had the good fortune... It never ceased to amaze him.

As the weeks and months passed his life centred more and more round Clare
and the house that they shared together. He knew now many people in London;
they were invited continually to dinners, parties, theatres, dances.
Clare's set in London had been very different from Peter's literary world,
and they were therefore acclaimed citizens of two very different circles.
Peter, too, had his reviewing articles in many papers--the whole whirligig
of Fleet Street. (How little a time, by the way, since that dreadful day
when he had sat on that seat on the Embankment and talked to the lady with
the Hat!)

His days during this first year of married life were full, varied, exciting
as they could be--and yet, through it all, his eye was always upon that
little house, upon the moment when the door might be closed, the fire
blazing and they two were alone, alone--

He was, indeed, during this year, a charming Peter. He loved her with the
hero worship of a boy, but also with a humour, a consciousness of success,
a happy freedom that denied all mawkish sham sentiment. He studied only to
please her. He found that, after all, she did not care very greatly for
literature or music or pictures. Her enthusiasm for these things was the
enthusiasm of a child who is bathed in an atmosphere of appreciation and
would return it on to any object that she could find.

He discovered that she loved compliments, that she cared about dress, that
she loved to have crowds of friends about her, and that parties excited her
as though these were the first that she had ever known. But he found, too,
that in those half-hours when she was alone with him she showed her love
for him with a passion and emphasis that was almost terrifying. Sometimes
when she clung to him it was as though she was afraid that it was not going
to last. He discovered in the very beginning that below all her happy easy
life, an undercurrent of apprehension, sometimes only vaguely felt,
sometimes springing into sight like the eyes of some beast in the dark,
kept company with her.

It was always the future--a perfectly vague, indefinite future that
terrified her. Every moment of her life had been sheltered and happy and,
by reason of that very shelter, her fears had grown upon her. He remembered
one evening when they had been present at some party and she had been
radiant, beautiful, in his eyes divine. Her little body had been strung to
its utmost energy, she had whirled through the evening and at last as they
returned in the cab, she had laid her head on his shoulder and suddenly
flung her arms about him and kissed him--his eyes, his cheeks, his
mouth--again and again. "Oh! I'm so safe with you, Peter dear," she had
cried to him.

He loved those evenings when they were alone and she would sit on the floor
with her head on his knee and her hand against his. Then suddenly she would
lean back and pull his head down and kiss his eyes, and then very slowly
let him go. And the fierceness, the passion of her love for him roused
in him a strength of devotion that all the years of unhappiness had been
storing. He was still only a boy--the first married year brought his
twenty-seventh birthday--but his love for Clare had the depth and reserve
that belongs to a man.

Mrs. Launce, watching them both, was sometimes frightened. "God help them
both if anything interferes," she said once to her husband. "I've seen that
boy look at Clare with a devotion that hurts. Peter's no ordinary mortal--I
wonder, now and again, whether Clare's worth it all."

But this year seemed to silence all her fears. The happiness of that
little house shone through Chelsea. "Oh, we're dining with the Westcotts
to-night--they'll cheer us up--they're always so happy"--"Oh! did you see
Clare Westcott? I never saw any one so radiant."

And once Bobby said to Alice: "We made a mistake, old girl, about that
marriage. It's made another man of Peter. He's joy personified."

"If only," Alice had answered, "destiny or whatever it is will let them
alone. I feel as though they were two precious pieces of china that a
housemaid might sweep off the chimney piece at any moment. If only nobody
will touch them--"

Meanwhile Peter had forgotten, utterly forgotten, the rest of the world.
Walls and fires--for a year they had held him. The Roundabout versus the
World.... What of old Frosted Moses, of the Sea Road, of Stephen, of Mr.
Zanti? What of those desperate days in Bucket Lane? All gone for nothing?

Clare, perhaps, with this year behind her, hardly realised the forces
against which she was arrayed. Beware of the Gods after silence....


IV

And, after all, it was Clare herself who flung down the glove.

On a winter's evening she was engaged to some woman's party. Peter had
planned an evening, snug and industrious, alone with a book. "The Stone
House" awaited his attention--he had not worked at it for months. Also he
knew that he owed Henry Galleon a visit. Why he had not been to see the old
man lately he scarcely knew.

Clare, standing in the little hall, waiting for a cab, suggested an
alternative.

"Peter dear, why don't you go round to Brockett's if you've nothing to do?"

"Brockett's!"

"Yes. You've never been since we married, and I had a letter from Norah
this morning--not at all cheerful--I'm afraid she's been ill for months.
They'd love to see you."

"Brockett's!" He stood astounded. Well, why not? A strange
emotion--uncomfortable, alien, stirred him. He kissed her and saw her go
with a half-distracted gaze. What a world away Brockett's seemed! Old Mrs.
Lazarus, Norah (poor Norah!) Mrs. Brockett, young Robin Tressiter. They
would be glad to see him--it was a natural thing enough that he should
go--what was it that held him back? For the first time since his marriage,
as he slowly and thoughtfully put on his greatcoat, he was distressed. He
reproached himself--Norah, Stephen, Mr. Zanti!... he had not given them a
thought.

He felt, as he went out, as though he were going, with key and candle, to
unlock some old rusty door that led into secret rooms. It was a wet, windy
night. The branches of the little orchard rattled and groaned, and doors
and windows were creaking.

As he passed into the shadows and silence of Bloomsbury the impression
weighed with increasing heaviness upon him that the old Peter had come back
and that his married life with Clare had been a dream. He was still at
Brockett's, still silent, shy, awkward, still poring over pages of "Reuben
Hallard" and wondering whether any one would ever publish it--still
spending so many hours in the old musty bookshop with Herr Gottfried's wild
mop of hair coming so madly above the little counter.

The wind tugged at his umbrella, the rain lashed his face and at last,
breathless, with the sharp corner of his upturned collar digging into his
chin, he pulled the bell of the old grey remorseless door that he knew so
well. There was no one in Bennett Square, only the two lamps dimly marked
its desolation.

The door was opened by Mrs. Brockett herself and she stood there, stern and
black peering into his face.

"What is it? What do you want?" she asked grimly.

He brushed past her laughing and stood back under the gas in the hall
looking at her.

She gave a little cry. "No! It can't be! Why, Mr. Westcott!"

He had never, in all the seven years that he had been with her, seen her so
strongly moved.

"But Mr. Westcott! To think of it! And the times we've talked of you! And
you never coming near us all this while. You might have been dead for all
we knew, and indeed if it hadn't been for Miss Monogue the other day we'd
have heard no news since the day that wild man with the beard came walking
in," she broke off suddenly--"and there you are, holding your umbrella with
the point down and making a great pool on the carpet as though--" She took
the umbrella from him but her hand rested for an instant on his arm and she
said gruffly--

"But all the same, Mr. Peter, I'm more glad to see you than I can say--"
She took him into her little room and looked at him. "But you've not
changed in the least," she said, "not in the very least. And where, pray,
Mr. Peter, have you been all this time and come nowhere near us?"

He tried to explain; he was confused, he said something about marriage
and stopped. The room was filled with that subtle odour that brought his
other life back to him in a torrent. He was bathed in it, overwhelmed by
it--roast-beef, mutton, blacking, oil-cloth, decayed flowers, geraniums,
damp stone, bread being toasted--all these things were in it.

He filled his nostrils with the delicious pathos and intimacy of it.

She regarded him sternly. "Now, Mr. Peter, it's of no use. Oh, yes, we've
heard about your wedding. You wrote to Miss Monogue. But there were days
before that, many of them, and never so much as a postcard. With some of,
my boarders it would be natural enough, because what could you expect? _We_
didn't want _them_, _they_ didn't want _us_--only habit as you might say.
But you, Mr. Peter--why just think of the way we were fond of you--Mrs.
Lazarus and little Robin and Miss Monogue--as well as myself."

She stopped and pulled out her handkerchief and blew her nose.

"I dare say you're a famous man," she went on, "with your books and your
marriage and the rest of it, but that doesn't alter your old friends being
your old friends and it never will. There, I'm getting cross when all I
mean to say is that I'm more delighted to see you than words."

He was humble before her. He felt, indeed, that he had been the most
unutterable brute. How could he have stayed away all this time with these
dear people waiting for him? He simply hadn't realised--

"And Miss Monogue?" he asked at last, "I'm afraid she's not been very
well?"

"She's been very ill indeed--for months. At one time we were afraid that
she would go. It's her heart. Poor dear, and she's been worrying so about
her work--but she's better now and she'll be truly glad to see you, Mr.
Peter--but you mustn't stay more than a few minutes. She's up on the sofa
but it's the excitement that's bad for her."

But first Peter went to pay a visit to the Tressiter establishment. He
knew, from old custom, that this would be the hour when the family would be
getting itself, by slow and noisy degrees, to bed. So tremendous, indeed,
was the tumult that he was able to open the door and stand, within the
room, watching and un-noticed. Mrs. Tressiter was attempting to bathe a fat
and very strident baby. Two small boys were standing on a bed and hitting
one another with pillows; a little girl lay on her face on the floor and
howled for no apparent reason; Robin, but little older than Peter's last
impression of him had painted, was standing, naked save for his shirt and
looking down, gravely, at his screaming sister.

Every now and again, Mrs. Tressiter, without ceasing from her work on the
baby who slipped about in her hands like a stout eel, cried in a shrill
voice: "Children, if you don't be quiet," or "Nicholas, in a moment I'll
give you such a beating,"--or "Agatha, for goodness' sake!"...

Then suddenly Robin, looking up, caught sight of Peter, he gave a shout and
was across the room in an instant. There was never a moment's doubt in his
eyes. He flung himself upon Peter's body, he wound his arms round Peter's
leg, he beat upon his chest with his bullet head, he cried: "Oh! Mr. Peter
has come! Mr. Peter has come!"

Mrs. Tressiter let the baby fall into the bath with a splash and there it
lay howling. The other members of the family gathered round.

But Peter thought that he had known no joy so acute for years as the
welcome that the small boy gave him. He hoisted Robin on to his shoulder,
and there Robin sat with his naked little legs dangling over, his hands in
the big man's neck.

"Oh! Mr. Westcott, I'm sure..." said Mrs. Tressiter, smiling from ear to
ear and wiping her wet hands on her apron--Robin bent his head and bit
Peter's ear.

"Get on, horse," he cried and for a quarter of an hour there was wild
riot in the Tressiter family. Then they were all put to bed, as good as
gold,--"you might have heard a pin drop," said Mrs. Tressiter, "when Agatha
said her prayers"--and at last the lights were put out.

Peter bent down over Robin's bed and the boy flung his arms round his neck.

"I dreamed of you--I knew you'd come," he whispered.

"What shall I send you as a present to-morrow?" asked Peter.

"Soldiers--soldiers on horses. Those with cannons and shiny things on their
backs...." Robin was very explicit--"You'll be here to-morrow?" he asked.

"No--not to-morrow," Peter answered.

"Soon?"

"Yes, soon."

"I love you, more than Agatha, more than Dick, more than any one 'cept
Daddy and Mummy."

"You'll be a good boy until I come back?"

"Promise ... but come back soon."

Peter gave him a long kiss and left him. Supposing, one day, he had a boy
like that? A little boy in a shirt like that? Wouldn't it be simply too
wonderful? A boy to give soldiers to....

He went across to Miss Monogue's door. A faint voice answered his knock
and, entering the room, the scent of medicine and flowers that he always
connected with his mother, met him. Norah Monogue, very white, with dark
shadows beneath her eyes, was lying on the sofa by the fire.

Mrs. Brockett had prepared her for Peter's coming and she smiled up at him
with her old smile and gave him her hand. How thin and white it was with
its long slender fingers! He sat down by her sofa and he knew by the way
that she looked at him that she was reproaching him--

"Naughty Peter," she said, "all these months and you have been nowhere near
us."

"I, too, have a bone--you never sent me a word about my wedding."

She turned her head away. "I was frightfully ill just then. They didn't
think I'd pull through. I did write afterwards to Clare, I told her how ill
I'd been--"

"She never told me."

Peter bent over the sofa. "But I am ashamed, Norah, more ashamed than I can
say. After I got well and went to live with the Galleons a new life seemed
to begin for me and I was so eager and excited about it all. And then--" he
hesitated for a moment--"there was Clare."

"Yes, I know there was Clare and I am so delighted about it--I know that
you will both be so happy.... But, when one is lying here week after week
and is worried and tired things take such a different outline. I thought
that you and Clare--that you ... had given me up altogether and--"

Suddenly hiding her face in her hands she began to cry. It was
inexpressibly desolate there in the dim bare little room, and the sharp
sense of his neglect and the remembrance of the good friend that she had
been to him for so many years overwhelmed Peter.

He knelt down and put his arms round her. "Norah--don't, please, I can't
bear it. It's all right. I've been a beast, a selfish cad. But it shan't
happen again. I'll come often--I'm ashamed."

She cried for a little and then she smiled at him. "I'm a fool to cry like
that but you see I'm weak and ill--and seeing you again after all this time
and your being so successful and happy upset me I suppose. Forgive it,
Peter, and come again one day when I'm better and stronger--and bring Clare
too."

She held tightly to his hand and her grasp was hot and feverish. He
reassured her, told her that he would come soon again, that he would bring
Clare and so left her.

He took a cab and drove back to Chelsea in a storm of agitation. Suddenly,
out of nothing as it were, all these people, this old life had been thrust
up in front of him--had demanded, made claims. About him once again was
the old atmosphere: figures were filling his brain, the world was a wild
tossing place ... one of those Roundabouts with the hissing lights, the
screaming music, the horses going up and down. Plain enough now that the
old life was not done with. Every moment of his past life seemed to spring
before him claiming recognition. He was drunk with the desire for work. He
flung the cabman something, dashed into the little house, was in his room.
The lamp was lighted, the door was shut, there was silence, and in his
brain figures, scenes, sentences were racing--"The Stone House," neglected
for so long, had begun once more, to climb.

The hours passed, the white sheets were covered and flung aside. Dimly
through a haze, he saw Clare standing in the doorway.

"Bad old boy!"

He scarcely glanced up. "I'm not coming yet--caught by work."

"Don't be at it too late."

He made no reply.

She closed the door softly behind her.


CHAPTER V

THE IN-BETWEENS


I

Then, out of the wind and rain, came Mr. Zanti.


II


Three days after Peter's visit to Brockett's he was finishing a letter
before dressing for dinner. He and Clare were going on to a party later
in the evening but were dining quietly alone together first. The storms
that had fallen upon London three days before were still pommelling and
buffeting the city, the trees outside the window groaned and creaked with
a mysterious importance as though they were trying to tell one another
secrets, and little branches tapped at the dripping panes. He was writing
in the little drawing-room--warm and comfortable--and the Maria Theresa, so
small a person in so much glory, looked down on him from her silver frame
and gave him company.

Then Sarah--a minute servant, who always entered a room as though swept
into it by a cyclone--breathlessly announced that there was a gentleman to
see Mr. Westcott.

"'E's drippin' in the 'all," she gasped and handed Peter a very dirty bit
of paper.

Peter read:--"Dear Boy, Being about to leave this country on an expedition
of the utmost importance I feel that I must shake you by the hand before I
go. Emilio Zanti."

Mr. Zanti, enormous, smiling from ear to ear, engulfed in a great coat
from which his huge head, buffeted by wind and rain--his red cheeks, his
rosy nose, his sparkling eyes--stood out like some strange and cheerful
flower--filled the doorway.

He enfolded Peter in his arms, pressed him against very wet garments,
kissed him on both cheeks and burst into a torrent of explanation. He was
only in London for a very few days--he must see his dearest Peter--so
often before he had wanted to see his Peter but he had thought that it
would be better to leave him--and then he had heard that his Peter was
married--well, he must see his lady--it was entirely necessary that he
should kiss her hand and wish her well and congratulate her on having
secured his "own, own Peter," for a life partner. Yes, he had found his
address from that Pension where Peter used to live; they had told him and
he had come at once because at once, this very night, he was away to Spain
where there was a secret expedition--ah, very secret--and soon--in a month,
two months--he would return, a rich, rich man. This was the adventure of
Mr. Zanti's life and when he was in England again he, Mr. Zanti, would see
much of Peter and of his beautiful wife--of course she was beautiful--and
of the dear children that were to come--

Here Peter interrupted him. He had listened to the torrent of words in an
odd confusion. The last time that he had seen Mr. Zanti he had left him,
sitting with his head in his hands sobbing in the little bookshop. Since
then everything had happened. He, Peter, had had success, love, position,
comfort--the Gods had poured everything into his hands--and now, to his
amazement as he sat there, in the little room opposite his huge fantastic
friend he was almost regretting all those glorious things that had come to
him and was wishing himself back in the dark little bookshop--dark, but
lighted with the fire of Mr. Zanti's amazing adventures.

But there was more than this in his thoughts. As he looked at Mr. Zanti,
at his wild black locks, his flaming cheeks, his rolling eyes, his large
red hands, he was aware suddenly that Clare would not appreciate him. It
was the first time since his marriage that there had been any question of
Clare's criticism, but now he knew, with absolute certainty, that Mr. Zanti
was entirely outside Clare's range of possible persons. For the first time,
almost with a secret start of apprehension, he knew that there were things
that she did not understand.

"I'm afraid," he said, "that my wife is dressing. But when you come back
you shall meet of course--that will be delightful." And then he went
on--"But I simply can't tell you how splendid it is to look at you again.
Lots of things have happened to me since I saw you, of course, but I'm just
the same--"

Whilst he was speaking his voice had become eager, his eyes bright--he
began to pace the room excitedly--

"Oh, Zanti! ... the days we used to have. I suppose the times I've been
having lately had put it all out of my head, but now, with you here, it's
all as though it happened yesterday. The day we left Cornwall, you and
I--the fog when we got to London ... everything." He drew a great breath
and stood in the middle of the room listening to the rain racing down the
pipes beyond the dark windows.

Mr. Zanti, getting up ponderously, placed his hands on Peter's shoulders.

"Still the same Peter," he said. "Now I know zat I go 'appy. Zat is all I
came for--I said I must zee my Peter because Stephen--"

"Stephen--" broke in Peter sharply.

"Yes, our Stephen. He goes with me now to Spain. He is now, until to-night,
in London but he will not come to you because 'e's afraid--"

"Afraid?"

"Yes 'e says you are married now and 'ave a lovely 'ouse and 'e says you
'ave not written for a ver' long time, and 'e just asked me to give you 'is
love and say that when 'e comes back from Spain, per'aps--"

"Stephen!" Peter's voice was sharp with distress. "Zanti, where is he now?
I must go and see him at once."

"No, 'e 'as gone already to the boat. I follow 'im." Then Mr. Zanti added
in a softer voice--"So when he tell me that you 'ave not written I say 'Ah!
Mr. Peter forgets his old friends,' and I was zorry but I say that I will
go and make sure. And now I am glad, ver' glad, and Stephen will be glad
too. All is well--"

"Oh! I am ashamed. I don't know what has come over me all this time. But
wait--I will write a note that you shall take to him and then--when he
comes back from Spain--"

He went to his table and began to write eagerly. Mr. Zanti, meanwhile, went
round the room on tip-toe, examining everything, sometimes shaking his huge
head in disapproval, sometimes nodding his appreciation.

Peter wrote:

_Dear, Dear Stephen,--I am furious, I hate myself. What can I have been
doing all this time? I have thought of you often, but my marriage and all
the new life have made me selfish, and always I put off writing to you
because I thought the quiet hour would come to me--and it has never come.
But I have no excuse--except that in the real part of myself I love
you, just the same as ever--and it will be always the same. I have been
bewildered, I think, by all the things that have happened to me during this
last year--but I will never be bewildered again. Write to me from Spain and
then as soon as you come back I will make amends for my wickedness. I am
now and always, Your loving Peter._

Mr. Zanti took the letter.

"How is he?" asked Peter.

"I found 'im--down in Treliss. He wasn't 'appy. 'E was thinking of that
woman. And then 'e was all alone. 'E got some work at a farm out at
Pendragon and 'e was just goin' there when I came along and made 'im come
to Spain. 'E was thinkin' of you a lot, Peter."

Mr. Zanti cast one more look round the room. "Pretty," he said. "Pretty.
But not my sort of place. Too many walls--all too close in."

In the hall he said once more--a little plaintively:--

"I _should_ like to see your lady, Peter," and then he went on hurriedly,
"But don't you go and disturb her--not for anything--_I_ understand...."

And, with his finger on his lip, wrapt in the deepest mystery, he departed
into the rain.

As the door closed behind him, Peter felt a wave of chill, unhappy
loneliness. He turned back into the cheerful little hall and heard Clare
singing upstairs. He knew that they were going to have a delightful little
dinner, that, afterwards, they would be at a party where every one would be
pleased to see them--he knew that the evening in front of him should be
wholly charming ... and yet he was uneasy. He felt now as though he ought
to resign his evening, climb to his little room and work at "The Stone
House." And yet what connection could that possibly have with Mr. Zanti?

His uneasiness had begun, he thought, after his visit to Brockett's. It
seemed to him as he went upstairs to dress that the world was too full of
too many things and that his outlook on it all was confused.

Throughout dinner this uneasiness remained with him. Had he been less
occupied with his own thoughts he would have noticed that Clare was
not herself; at first she talked excitedly without waiting for his
answers--there were her usual enthusiasms and excitements. Everything in
the day's history had been "enchanting" or "horrible," as a rule she waited
for him to act up to her ecstasies and abhorrencies; to-night she talked
as though she had no audience but were determined to fill up time. Then
suddenly she was silent; her eyes looked tired and into them there crept
a strange secret little shudder as though she were afraid of some thought
or mysterious knowledge. She looked now like a little girl who knew, that
to-morrow--the inevitable to-morrow--she must go to the dentist's to be
tortured.

The last part of the meal was passed in silence. Afterwards she came into
his study and sat curled upon the floor at his feet watching him smoke.

She thought as she looked up at him, that something had happened to make
him younger. She had never seen him as young as he was to-night--and then
because his thoughts were far away and because her own troubled her she
made a diversion. She said:--

"Who _was_ that extraordinary man you were talking to this evening?"

He came back, with a jerk, from Stephen.

"What man?"

"Why the man with all the black hair and a funny squash hat. I saw Sarah
let him in."

"Ah, that," said Peter, looking down at her tenderly, "that was a great
friend of mine."

She moved her head away.

"Don't touch my hair, Peter--it's all been arranged for the party. A friend
of yours? What! That horrible looking man? Oh! I suppose he was one of
those dreadful people you knew in the slums or in Cornwall."

Peter saw Mr. Zanti's dear friendly face, like a moon, staring at him, and
heard his warm husky voice: "Peter, my boy...."

He moved a little impatiently.

"Look here, old girl, you mustn't call him that. He's one of the very best
friends I've ever had--and I've been rather pulled up lately--ever since
that night you sent me to Brockett's. I've felt ashamed of myself. All my
happiness and--you--and everything have made me forget my old friends and
that won't do."

She laughed. "And now I suppose you're going to neglect me for them--for
horrid people like that man who came to-night."

Her voice was shaking a little--he saw that her hands were clenched on her
lap. He looked down at her in astonishment.

"My dear Clare, what do you mean? How could you say a thing like that even
in jest? You know--"

She broke in upon him almost fiercely--"It wasn't jest. I meant what I
said. I hate all these earlier people you used to know--and now, after our
being so happy all this time, you're going to take them up again and make
the place impossible--"

"Look here, Clare, you mustn't speak of them like that--they're my friends
and they've got to be treated as such." His voice was suddenly stern. "And
by the way as we are talking about it I don't think it was very kind of you
to tell me nothing at all about poor Norah's being so ill. She asked you to
tell me and you never said a word. That wasn't very kind of you."

"I did speak to you about it but you forgot--"

"I don't think you did--I am quite sure that I should not have forgotten--"

"Oh, of course you contradict me. Anyhow there's no reason to drag Norah
Monogue into this. The matter is perfectly clear. I will not have dirty old
men like that coming into the house."

"Clare, you shall not speak of my friends--"

"Oh, shan't I? When I married you I didn't marry all your old horrid
friends--"

"Drop it, Clare--or I shall be angry--"

She sprang to her feet, faced him. He had never in his life seen such fury.
She stood with her little body drawn to its full height, her hands
clenched, her breast heaving under her white evening dress, her eyes
glaring--

"You shan't! You shan't! I won't have any of them here. I hate Cornwall and
all its nasty people and I hate Brockett's and all those people you knew
there. When you married me you gave them all up--all of them. And if you
have them here I won't stay in the house--I'll leave you. All that part of
your life is nothing to do with me. _Nothing_--and I simply won't have it.
You can do what you like but you choose between them and me--you can go
back to your old life if you like but you go without me!"

She burst from the room, banging the door behind her. She had behaved
exactly like a small child in the nursery. As he looked at the door he was
bewildered--whence suddenly had this figure sprung? It was some one whom he
did not know. He could not reconcile it with the dignified Clare, proud as
a queen, crossing a ball-room or the dear beloved Clare nestling into a
corner of his arm-chair, her face against his, or the gentle friendly Clare
listening to some story of distress.

The fury, the tempest of it! It was as though everything in the room had
been broken. And he, with his glorious, tragical youth felt that the end
of the world had come. This was the conclusion of life--no more cause for
living, no more friendship or comfort or help anywhere. Clare had said
those things to him. He stood, for ten minutes there, in the middle of the
room, without moving--his face white, his eyes full of pain.

Sarah came to tell him that the hansom was there. He moved into the hall
with the intention of sending it away; no party for him to-night--when, to
his amazement he saw Clare coming slowly down the stairs, her cloak on,
buttoning her gloves.

She passed him without a word and got into the hansom. He took his hat and
coat, gave the driver the address, and climbed in beside her.

Once as they drove he put out his hand, touched her dress and said--"Clare
dear--"

She made no reply, but sat looking, with her eyes large and black in her
little white face, steadfastly in front of her.


III

Lady Luncon was a rich, good-natured woman who had recently published a
novel and was anxious to hear it praised, therefore she gave a party.
Originally a manufacturer's daughter, she had conquered a penniless
baronet--spent twenty years in the besieging of certain drawing-rooms and
now, tired of more mundane worlds, fixed her attention upon the Arts. She
was a completely stupid woman, her novel had been exceedingly vulgar, but
her good heart and a habit of speaking vaguely in capital letters secured
her attention.

When Clare and Peter arrived people were filling her drawing-rooms,
overflowing on to the stairs and pouring into the supper room. Some one,
very far away, was singing "Mon coeur s'ouvre a ta voix," a babel of voices
rose about Clare and Peter on every side, every one was flung against every
one; heat and scent, the crackle and rustle of clothes, the soft voices of
the men and sharp strident voices of the women gave one the sensation of
imminent suffocation; people with hot red faces, unable to move at all,
flung agonised glances at the door as though the entrance of one more
person must mean death and disaster.

There were, Peter soon discovered, three topics of conversation: one was
their hostess' novel and this was only discussed when Lady Luncon was
herself somewhere at hand--the second topic concerned the books of somebody
who had, most unjustly it appeared, been banned by the libraries for
impropriety, and here opinions were divided as to whether the author would
gain by the advertisement or lose by loss of library circulation. Thirdly,
there was a new young man who had written a novel about the love affairs of
a crocus and a violet--it was amazingly improper, full of poetry--"right
back," as somebody said "to Nature." Moreover there was much talk about
Form. "Here is the new thing in fiction that we are looking for ..." also
"Quite a young man--oh yes, only about eighteen and so modest. You would
never think...."

His name was Rondel and Peter saw him, for a moment, as the crowds parted,
standing, with a tall, grim, elderly woman, apparently his mother, beside
him. He was looking frightened and embarrassed and stood up straight
against the wall as though afraid lest some one should come and snatch him
away.

But Peter saw the world in a dream. He walked about, with Clare beside him,
and talked to many people; then she was stopped by some one whom she knew
and he went on alone. Now there had come back to him the old terror. If he
went back, after this was over, and Clare was still angry with him, he did
not know what he would do. He was afraid....

He smiled, talked, laughed and, in his chest, there was a sharp acute pain
like a knife. He had still with him that feeling that nothing in life now
was worth while and there followed on that a wild impulse to let go, to
fling off the restraints that he had retained now for so long and with such
bitter determination.

He wanted to cast aside this absurd party, to hurry home alone with Clare,
to sit alone with her in the little house and to reach the divine moment
when reconciliation came and they were closer to one another than ever
before--and then there was the horrible suggestion that there would be no
reconciliation, that Clare would make of this absurd quarrel an eternal
breach, that things would never be right again.

He looked back and saw Clare smiling gaily, happily, at some friend. He saw
her as she had faced him, furiously, an hour earlier ... oh God! If she
should never care for him again!

He recognised many friends. There were the two young Galleons, Millicent
and Percival, looking as important and mysterious as possible, taxing their
brains for something clever to say....

"Ah, that's Life!" Peter heard Percival say to some one. Young fools, he
thought to himself, let them have my trouble and then they may talk. But
they were nice to him when he came up to them. The author of "Reuben
Hallard," even though he did look like a sailor on leave, was worth
respecting--moreover, father liked him and believed in him--nevertheless he
was just a tiny bit "last year's sensation." "Have you read," said Percival
eagerly, "'The Violet's Redemption'? It really is the most tremendous
thing--all about a violet. There's the fellow who wrote it over
there--young chap standing with his back to the wall...."

There was also with them young Tony Gale who was a friend of Alice Galleon.
He was nice-looking, eager and enthusiastic. Rather too enthusiastic,
Peter, who did not like him, considered. Full of the joy of life;
everything was "topping" and "ripping." "I can't understand," he would say,
"why people find life dull. I never find it dull. It's the most wonderful
glorious thing--"

"Ah, but then you're so young," he always expected his companions to
say; and the thing that pleased him most of all was to hear some one
declare--"Tony Gale's such a puzzle--sometimes he seems only eighteen and
then suddenly he's fifty."

It was rumoured that he had once been in love with Alice Galleon when she
had been Alice du Cane--and that they had nearly made a match of it; but he
was certainly now married to a charming girl whom he had seen in Cornwall
and the two young things were considered delightful by the whole of
Chelsea.

Tony Gale had with him a man called James Maradick whom Peter had met
before and liked. Maradick was forty-two or three, large, rather heavy in
build and expression and very taciturn. He was in business in the city, but
had been drawn, Peter knew not how, into the literary world of London. He
was often to be found at dinner parties and evening "squashes" silent,
observant and generally alone. Many people thought him dull, but Peter
liked him partly because of his reserve and partly because of his
enthusiasm for Cornwall. Cornwall seemed to be the only subject that could
stir Maradick into excitement, and when Cornwall was under discussion the
whole man woke into sudden stir and emotion.

To-night, with his almost cynical observance of the emotions and excitement
that surged about him, he seemed to Peter the one man possible in the whole
gathering.

"Look here, Maradick, let's get somewhere out of this crush and have a
cigarette."

People were all pouring into supper now and Peter saw his wife in the
distance, on Bobby Galleon's arm. They found a little conservatory deserted
now and strangely quiet after the din of the other rooms: here they sat
down.

Maradick was capable of sitting, quite happily for hours, without saying
anything at all. For some time they were both silent.

At last Peter said: "By jove, Maradick, yours is a fortunate sort of
life--just going into the city every day, coming back to your wife in the
evening--no stupid troubles that come from imagining things that aren't
there--"

"How do you know I don't?" answered Maradick quietly. "Imagination hasn't
anything to do with one's profession. I expect there's as much imagination
amongst the Stock Exchange men as there is with you literary people--only
it's expressed differently."

"What do you do," said Peter, "if it ever gets too much for you?"

"Do? How do you mean?"

"Well suppose you're feeling all the time that one little thing more, one
little word or some one coming in or a window breaking--anything will upset
the equilibrium of everything? Supposing you're out with all your might to
keep things sane and to prevent your life from swinging back into all the
storm and uncertainty that it was in once before, and supposing you feel
that there are a whole lot of things trying to get you to swing back,
what's the best thing to do?"

"Why, hold on, hold on--"

"How do you mean?"

"Fortitude--Courage. Clinging on with your nails, setting your teeth."

Peter was surprised at the man's earnestness. The two of them sitting there
in that lonely deserted little conservatory were instantly aware of some
common experience.

Maradick put his hand on Peter's knee.

"Westcott, you're young, but I know the kind of thing you mean. Believe
me that it's no silly nonsense to talk of the Devil--the Devil is as real
and personal as you and I, and he's got his agents in every sort and kind
of place. If he once gets his net out for you then you'll want all your
courage. I know," he went on sinking his voice, "there was a time I had
once in Cornwall when I was brought pretty close to things of that sort--it
doesn't leave you the same afterwards. There's a place down in Cornwall
called Treliss...."

"Treliss!" Peter almost shouted. "Why that's where I come from. I was born
there--that's my town--"

Before Maradick could reply Bobby Galleon burst into the conservatory. "Oh,
there you are--I've been looking for you everywhere. How are you, Maradick?
Look here, Peter, you've got to come down to supper with us. We've got a
table--Alice, Clare, Millicent, Percival, Tony Gale and his wife and you
and I--and--one other--an old friend of yours, Peter."

"An old friend?" said Peter, getting up from his chair and trying to look
as though he were not furious with Bobby for the interruption.

"Yes--you'll never guess, if I give you a hundred guesses--it's most
exciting--come along--"

Peter was led away. As he moved through the dazzling, noisy rooms he was
conscious that there, in the quiet, dark little conservatory, Maradick was
sitting, motionless, seeing Treliss.


IV

On his way down to the supper room he was filled with annoyance at the
thought of his interrupted conversation. He might never have his
opportunity again. Maradick was so reserved a fellow and took so few into
his confidence--also he would, in all probability, be ashamed to-morrow of
having spoken at all.

But to Peter at that moment the world about him was fantastic and unreal.
It seemed to him that at certain periods in his life he was suddenly
confronted with a fellow creature who perceived life as he perceived it.
There were certain persons who could not leave life alone--they must
always be seeing it as a key to something wider, bigger altogether. This
was nothing to do with Christianity or any creed whatever, because Creeds
implied Certainty and Definition of Knowledge, whereas Peter and the others
like him did not know for what they were searching. Again, they were not
Mystics because Mysticism needed a definite removal from this world before
any other world were possible. No, they were simply Explorers and one
traced a member of the order on the instant. There had been already in
Peter's life, Frosted Moses, Stephen, Mr. Zanti, Noah Monogue, and now
suddenly there was Maradick. These were people who would not laugh at his
terror of Scaw House, at his odd belief that his father was always trying
to draw him back to Treliss....

As he entered the supper-room and saw Clare sitting at a distant table, he
knew that his wife would never be an Explorer. For her Fires and Walls, for
her no questions, no untidiness moral or physical--the Explorer travelled
ever with his life in his hands--Clare believed in the Stay-at-homes.

The great dining-room was filled with Stay-at-homes. One saw it in their
eyes, in the flutter of useless and tired words that rose and fell; all the
souls in that room were cushioned and were happy that it was so. The Rider
on the Lion was beyond the Electric Lights--on the dark hill, over the
darker river, under the stars. Somebody pulled a cracker and put on a paper
cap. He was a stout man with a bald head and the back of his neck rippled
with fat. He had tiny eyes.

"Look at Mr. Horset," cried the woman next to him--"Isn't he absurd?"

Peter found at the table in the corner Alice, Clare, Millicent and Percival
Galleon, Tony Gale and his wife, waiting. There was also a man standing by
Alice's chair and he watched Peter with amused eyes.

He held out his hand and smiled. "How do you do, Westcott?" he said. Then,
with the sound of his voice, the soft almost caressing tilt of it, Peter
knew who it was. His mind flew back to a day, years ago, when he had flung
himself on the ground and cried his soul out because some one had gone
away....

"Cards!" he cried. "Of all wonderful things!"

Cards of Dawson's--Cards, the magnetic, the brilliant, Cards with his World
and his Society and now slim and dark and romantic as ever, making every
one else in the room shabby beside him, so that Bobby's white waistcoat was
instantly seen to be hanging loosely above his shirt and Peter's trousers
were short, and even the elegant Percival had scarcely covered with perfect
equality the ends of his white tie.

Instantly as though the intervening years had never been, Bobby took his
second place beside Cards' glory--even Percival's intention of securing the
wonderful Mr. Rondel, author of "The Violet's Redemption," for their table,
failed of its effect.

They were enough. They didn't want anybody else--Room for Mr. Cardillac!

And he seized it. Just as he would have seized it years ago at school so
he seized it now. Their table was caught into the most dazzling series of
adventures. Cards had been everywhere, seen everybody and everything--seen
it all, moreover, with the right kind of gaiety, with an appreciation that
was intelligent and also humorous. There was humour one moment and pathos
the next--deep feeling and the wittiest cynicism.

They were all swung about Europe and with Cards at their head pranced
through the cities of the world. Meanwhile Peter fancied that once or twice
Clare flung him a little glance of appeal to ask for forgiveness--and once
they looked up and smiled at one another. A tiny smile but it meant
everything.

"Oh! won't we have a reconciliation afterwards? How could I have said those
things? Don't we just love one another?"

When they went upstairs again Peter and Cards exchanged a word:

"You'll come and see us?"

"My dear old man, I should just think so. This is the first time I've been
properly in London for years and now I'm going to stay. Fancy you married
and successful and here am I still the rolling-stone!"

"You! Why you can do anything!"

"Can't write 'Reuben Hallard,' old boy...." and so, with a laugh, they
parted.

In the cab, afterwards, Clare's head was buried in Peter's coat, and she
sobbed her heart out. "How I _could_ have been such a beast, Peter, Peter!"

"Darling, it was nothing."

"Oh, but it was! It shall never, never happen again...but I was
frightened--"

"Frightened!"

"Yes, I always think some one's going to take you away. I don't understand
all those other people. They frighten me--I want you to myself, just you
and I--always."

"But nobody can take me away--nobody--"

The cab jolted along--her hand was on his knee--and every now and again a
lamp lighted her face for him and then dropped it back into darkness.

By the sharp pressure of her hand he knew that she was moved by an
intensity of feeling, swayed now by one of those moods that came to her so
strangely that it seemed that they belonged to another personality.

"Look... Peter. I'm seeing clearly as I think I never have before. I'm
afraid--not because of you--but because of myself. If you knew--" here his
hand came down and found hers--"if you knew how I despise myself, my real
self. I've been spoilt always, always, always. I've always known it. My
real self is ashamed of it. But there's another side of me that comes down
suddenly and hides all that--and then--when that happens--I just want to
get what I want and not to be hurt and ..." she pressed closer against him
and went on in a whisper.

"Peter, I shall always care for you more than any one--always whatever
happens. But think, a time will come--I know it--when you'll have to watch
me, to keep me by you, and even let your work go--everything, just for a
time until I'm safe. I suppose that moment comes to most women in their
married lives. But to me, when it happens, it will be worse than for most
women because I've always had my way. You _mustn't_ let me have my way
then--simply clutch me, be cruel, brutal, anything only don't let me go.
Then, if you keep me through that, you'll always keep me."

To Peter it was almost as though she were talking in her sleep, something,
there in the old, lumbering cab that was given to her by some one else to
say something to which she herself would not give credit.

"That's all right, you darling, you darling, you darling." He covered her
face, her eyes with kisses. "I'll never let you go--never." He felt her
quiver a little under his arms.

"Don't mind, Peter, my horrible, beastly character. Just keep me for a
little, train me--and then later I'll be such a wife to you, _such_ a
wife!"

Then she drew his head down. His lips touched her body just above her
dress, where her cloak parted.

She whispered:

"There's something else."

She raised her face from his coat and looked up at him. Her cheeks were
stained with crying and her eyes, large and dark, held him furiously as
though he were the one place of safety.

He caught her very close.

"What is it?..."

       *       *       *       *       *

That night, long after he, triumphant with the glory of her secret, had
fallen asleep, she lay, staring into the dark, with frightened eyes.


CHAPTER VI

BIRTH OF THE HEIR


I

Peter's child was born on a night of frost when the stars were hard and
fierce and a full moon, dull gold, flung high shadows upon the town.

During the afternoon the fear that had been in Clare's eyes for many weeks
suddenly flamed into terror--the doctor was sent for and Peter was banished
from the room.

Peter looked ludicrously, pitifully young as he sat, through the evening,
in his room at the top of the house, staring in front of him, his face grey
with anxiety, his broad shoulders set back as though ready for a blow; his
strong fingers clutched the things on his writing-table, held them, dropped
them, just like the hands of a blind man about the shining surface, tapping
the wood.

He saw her always as he had seen her last night when she had caught his arm
crying--"If I die, Peter.... Oh, Peter, if I die!"... and he had comforted
and stroked her hair, warming her cold fingers.

How young she was, how tiny for this suffering--and it was he, he who had
brought it upon her! Now, she was lying in her bed, as he had once seen his
mother lie, with her hair spread about the pillow, her hands gripping the
sheets, her eyes wide and black--the vast, hard bed-room closing her in,
shutting her down--

She who loved comfort, who feared any pain, who would have Life safe and
easy, that she should be forced--

The house was very still about him--no sound came up to him; it seemed to
him that the hush was deliberate. The top branches of the trees in the
little orchard touched his window and tapped ever and again; a fire burnt
brightly, he had drawn his curtains and beyond the windows the great sheet
of stars, the black houses, the white light of the moon.

And there, before him--what mockery! the neat pages of "The Stone House"
now almost completed.

He stared into the wall and saw her face, her red-gold hair upon the
pillow, her dark staring eyes--

Once the nurse came to him--Yes, she was suffering, but all went well ...
it would be about midnight, perhaps. There was no cause for alarm ....

He thought that the nurse looked at him with compassion. He turned fiercely
upon Life that it should have brought this to them when they were both so
young.

At last, about ten o'clock, able no longer to endure the silence of the
house--so ominous--and the gentle tap-tap of the branches upon the pane and
the whispering crackle of the fire, he went out....

A cold hard unreal world received him. Down Sloane Street the lines of
yellow lamps, bending at last until they met in sharp blue distance, were
soft and misty against the outline of the street, the houses were unreal in
the moonlight, a few people passed quickly, their footsteps sharp in the
frosty air--all the little painted doors of Sloane Street were blind and
secret.

He passed through Knightsbridge, into the Park. As the black trees closed
him in the fear of London came, tumbling upon him. He remembered that day
when he had sat, shivering, on a seat on the Embankment, and had heard that
note, sinister, threatening, through the noise and clattering traffic. He
heard it again now. It came from the heart of the black trees that lined
the moonlit road, a whisper, a thread of sound that accompanied him,
pervaded him, threatened him. The scaly beast knew that another victim was
about to be born--another woman was to undergo torture, so that when the
day came and the scaly beast rose from its sleep then there would be one
more to be devoured.

He, Peter, was to have a child. He had longed for a child ever since he
could remember. He had always loved children--other people's children--but
to have one of his own!... To have something that was his and Clare's and
theirs alone, to have its love, to feel that it depended Upon them both, to
watch it, to tend it--Life could have no gift like that.

But now the child was hidden from him. He thought of nothing but Clare,
of her suffering and terror, of her waiting there so helplessly for the
dreadful moment of supreme pain. The love that he had now for Clare was
something more tender, more devoted, than he had ever felt for any human
being. His mind flew back fiercely to that night of his first quarrel when
she had told him. Now he was to be punished for his heartlessness and
cruelty ... by her loss.

His agony and terror grew as he paced beneath the dark and bending trees.
He sat down on a seat, at the other end of which was a little man with
a bowler hat, spectacles and his coat collar turned up. He was a shabby
little man and his thin bony hands beat restlessly upon his knees.

The little man said, "Good evening, sir."

"Good evening," said Peter, staring desperately in front of him.

"It's all this blasted government--"

"I beg your pardon--"

"This blasted government--This income tax and all--"

"It's more than that," said Peter, wishing that the man would cease beating
his knees with his hands--

"It's them blasted stars--it's Gawd. That's what it is. Curse Gawd--that's
what I say--Curse Gawd!"

"What's He done?" said Peter.

"I've just broken in my wife's 'ead with a poker. Killed 'er I expect--I
dunno--going back to see in a minute--"

"Why did you do it?"

"'Ad to--always nagging--that's what she was--always nagging. Wanted
things--all sorts o' things--and there were always children coming--So we
'ad a blasted argyment this evening and I broke 'er 'ead open--Gawd did
it--that's what I say--"

Peter said nothing.

"You can call a bloomin' copper if you want to," the little man said.

"It's no business of mine," said Peter and he got up and left him. All
shadows--only the sinister noise that London makes is real, that and
Clare's suffering.

He left the Park turned into Knightsbridge and came upon a toyshop. The
shutters had not been put up and the lights of a lamp shone full upon its
windows. Against the iron railings opposite and the high white road these
toys stood with sharp, distinct outline behind the slanting light of the
glass. There were dolls--a fine wedding doll, orange blossom, lace and
white silk, and from behind it all, the sharp pinched features and black
beady eyes stared out.... There was a Swiss doll with bright red cheeks,
red and green clothing and shoes with shining buckles. Then there were the
more ordinary dolls--and gradually down the length of the window, their
clothing was taken from them until at last some wooden creatures with
flaring cheeks and brazen eyes kicked their limbs and defied the
proprieties.

He would be a Boy ... he would not care about dolls....

There were soldiers--rows and rows of gleaming soldiers. They came from a
misty distance at the top of the shop window, came marching from the gates
of some dark, mediæval castle. Their swords caught the lamplight, shining
in a line of silver and the precision with which they marched, the
certainty with which they trod the little bridge ... ah, these were the
fellows! He would be a Boy ... soldiers would enchant him! He should have
boxes, boxes, boxes!

There were many other things in the window; teddy bears and animals with
soft woolly stomachs and fat comfortable legs--and there were ugly, modern
Horrors with fat bulging faces and black hair erect like wire; there
were little devils with red tails, there were rabbits that rode bicycles
and monkeys that climbed trees. There were drums--big drums and little
drums--trumpets with crimson tassels, and in one corner a pyramid of balls,
balls of every colour, and at the top of the pyramid a tiny ball of peacock
blue, hanging, balancing, daintily, supremely right in pose and gesture.

It had gesture. It caught Peter's eye--Peter stood with his nose against
the pane, his heart hammering--"Oh! she is suffering--My God, how she is
suffering!"--and there the little blue ball caught him, held him,
encouraged him.

"I will belong to your boy one day" it seemed to say.

"It shall be the first thing I will buy for him--" thought Peter.

He turned now amongst the light and crowds of Piccadilly. He walked on
without seeing and hearing--always with that thought in his heart--"She is
in terrible pain. How can God be so cruel? And she was so happy--before I
came she was so happy--now--what have I done to her?"

Never, before to-night, had he felt so sharply, so irretrievably his
sense of responsibility. Here now, before him, at this birth of his
child, everything that he had done, thought, said--everything that he had
been--confronted him. He was only twenty-seven but his shoulders were heavy
with the confusion of his past. Looking back upon it, he saw a helpless
medley of indecisions, of sudden impulses, sudden refusals; into the skeins
of it, too, there seemed to be dragged the people that had made up his
life--they faced him, surrounded him, bewildered him!

What right had he, thus encompassed, to hand these things on to another?
His father, his grandfather ... he saw always that dark strain of hatred,
of madness, of evil working in their blood. Suppose that as his boy grew he
should see this in the young eyes? Suppose, most horrible of all, that he
should feel this hatred for his son that his grandfather had felt for his
father, that his father had felt for him.

What had he done?... He stopped, staring confusedly about him. The people
jostled him on every side. The old devils were at him--"Eat and drink for
to-morrow we die.... Give it up ... We're too strong for you and we'll be
too strong for your son. Who are you to defy us? Come down--give it up--"

His white face caught attention. "Move along, guv'nor," some one shouted. A
man took him by the arm and led up a dark side street. He turned his eyes
and saw that the man was Maradick.


II

The elder man felt that the boy was trembling from head to foot.

"What's the matter, Westcott? Anything I can do for you?"

Peter seemed to take him in slowly, and then, with a great effort, to pull
himself together.

"What, you--Maradick? Where was I? I'm afraid I've been making a fool of
myself...." A church clock struck somewhere in the distance. "Hullo, I say,
what's that? That's eleven. I must get back, I ought to be at home--"

"I'll come with you--"

Maradick hailed a hansom and helped Peter into it.

For a moment there was silence--then Maradick said--

"I hope everything's all right, Westcott? Your wife?"

Peter spoke as though he were in a dream. "I've been waiting there all the
afternoon--she's been suffering--My God!... It got on my nerves.... She's
so young--they oughtn't to hurt her like that." He covered his face with
his hands.

"I know. I felt like that when my first child came. It's terrible, awful.
And then it's over--all the pain--and it's magnificent, glorious--and
then--later--it's so commonplace that you cannot believe that it was ever
either awful or magnificent. Fix your mind on the glorious part of it,
Westcott. Think of this time to-morrow when your wife will be so proud, so
happy--you'll both be so proud, so happy, that you'll never know anything
in life like it."

"Yes, yes, I know--of course it's sure to be all right--but I suppose this
waiting's got on my nerves. There was a fellow in the Park just broken his
wife's head in--and then everything was so quiet. I could almost hear her
crying, right away in her room."

He stopped a moment and then went on. "It's what I've always wanted--always
to have a boy. And, by Jove, he'll be wonderful! I tell you he shall
be--We'll be such pals!" He broke off suddenly--"You haven't a boy?"

"No, mine are both girls. Getting on now--they'll soon be coming out. I
should like to have had a boy--" Maradick sighed.

"Are they an awful lot to you?"

"No--I don't suppose they are. I should have understood a boy better,--but
they're good girls. I'm proud of them in a way--but I'm out so much, you
see."

Peter faced the contrast. Here this middle-aged man, with his two
girls--and here too he, Peter, with his agonising, flaming trial--to slip,
so soon, into dull commonplace?

"But didn't you--if you can look so far--didn't you, when the first child
came, funk it? Your responsibility I mean. All the things one's--one's
ancestors--it's frightening enough for oneself but to hand it on--"

"It's nothing to do with oneself--one's used, that's all. The child will be
on its own legs, thrusting you away before you know where you are. It
_will_ want to claim its responsibilities--ancestors and all--"

Peter said nothing--Maradick went on:

"You know we were talking one night and were interrupted--you're in danger
of letting the things you imagine beat the things you know. Stick to the
thing you can grasp, touch--I know the dangers of the others--I told you
that once in Cornwall, I--the most unlikely person in the world--was caught
up by it. I've never laughed at morbidity, or nerves, or insanity since.
There's such a jolly thin wall between the sanest, most level-headed
beef-eating Squire in the country and the maddest poet in Bedlam. _I_
know--I've been both in the same day. It's better to be both, I believe, if
you can keep one under the other, but you _must_ keep it under--"

Maradick talked on. He saw that the boy's nerves were jumping, that he was
holding himself in with the greatest difficulty.

Peter said: "You don't know, Maradick. I've had to fight all my life--my
father, grandfather, all of them have given in at last--and now this child
... perhaps I shall see it growing, see him gradually learning to hate me,
see myself hating him ... at last, my God, see him go under--drink,
deviltry--I've fought it--I'm always fighting it--but to-night--"

"Good heavens, man--you're not going to tell me that your father, your
grandfather--the rest of them--are stronger than you. What about your soul,
your own blessed soul that can't be touched by any living thing or dead
thing either if you stick to it? Why, every man's got power enough in
himself to ride heaven and earth and all eternity if he only believed he'd
got it! Ride your scruples, man--ride 'em, drive 'em--send 'em scuttling.
Believe in yourself and stick to it--Courage!..."

Maradick pulled himself in. They were driving now, down the King's Road.
The people were pouring in a thick, buzzing crowd, out of the Chelsea
Palace. Middle-aged stockbrokers in hansom cabs--talking like the third act
of a problem play!--but Maradick had done his work. As they drove round the
corner, past the mad lady's painted house, he saw that Peter was calmer. He
had regained his self-control. The little house where Peter lived was very
still--the trees in the orchard were stiff and dark beneath the stars.

Peter spoke in a whisper--"Good-night, Maradick, you've done me a lot of
good--I shan't forget it."

"Good luck to you," Maradick whispered back. Peter stole into the house.

The little drawing-room looked very cosy; the fire was burning, the lamp
lighted, the thick curtains drawn. Maria Theresa smiled, with all her
finery, from the wall.

Peter sat down in front of the fire. Maradick was right. One must have
one's hand on the bridle--the Rider on the Lion again. It's better that
the beast under you should be a Lion rather than a Donkey, but let it
once fling you off its back and you're done for. And Maradick had said
these things! Maradick whom once Peter had considered the dullest of his
acquaintances. Well, one never knew about people--most of the Stay-at-homes
were Explorers and vice versa, if one only understood them.

How still the house was! What was happening upstairs? He could not go and
see--he could not move. He was held by the stillness. The doctor would come
and tell him....

He thought of the toyshop--that blue ball--it would be the first thing that
he would buy for the boy--and then soldiers--soldiers that wouldn't hurt
him, that he couldn't lick the paint from--

Now the little silver clock ticked! He was so terribly tired--he had never
been tired like this before....

The stillness pressed upon the house. Every sound--the distant rattling of
some cab, the faint murmur of trams--was stifled, extinguished. The orchard
seemed to press in upon the house, darker and darker grew the forest about
it--The stars were shut out, the moon... the world was dead.

Then into this sealed and hidden silence, a voice crying from an upper
room, suddenly fell--a woman in the abandonment of utter pain, pain beyond
all control, was screaming. Somewhere, above that dark forest that pressed
in upon the house, a bird of prey hovered. It hung for a moment; it
descended--its talons were fixed upon her flesh... then again it ascended.
Shriek after shriek, bursting the silence, chasing the shadows, flooding
the secrecy with horrible light, beat like blows upon the walls of the
house--rose, fell, rose again. Peter was standing, his back against the
wall, his hands spread out, his face grey.

"My God, my God... Oh! my God!"

The sweat poured from his forehead. Once more there was silence but now it
was ominous, awful....

The little silver clock ticked--Peter's body stood stretched against the
wall--he faced the door.

Hours, hours passed. He did not move. The screaming had, many years ago,
ceased. The doctor--a cheerful man with blue eyes and a little bristling
moustache--came in.

"A fine boy, Mr. Westcott--I congratulate you. You might see your wife for
a moment if you cared--stood it remarkably well--"

Slowly the forest, dark and terrible, moved away from the house. Very
faintly again could be heard the distant rattling of some cab, the murmur
of trams.


CHAPTER VII

DECLARATION OF HAPPINESS


I

Extracts from letters that Bobby Galleon wrote to Alice Galleon about this
time:

"... But, of course, I am sorrier than I can say that it's so dull. That's
due to charity, my dear, and if you will go and fling yourself into the
depths of Yorkshire because a girl like Ola Hunting chooses to think she's
unhappy and lonely you've only yourself to thank. Moreover there's your
husband to be considered. I don't suppose, for a single instant, that he
really prefers to be left alone, with his infant son, mind you, howling
at the present moment because his nurse won't let him swallow the glass
marbles, and you can picture to yourself--if you want to make yourself
thoroughly unhappy--your Robert sitting, melancholy throughout the long
evening, alone, desolate, creeping to bed somewhere about ten o'clock.

"So there we are--you're bored to death and I've no one to growl at when I
come back from the City--all Ola Hunting's fault--wring the girl's neck.
Meanwhile here I sit and every evening I'll write whatever comes into my
head and never look back on it again but stick it into an envelope and send
it to you. You know me too well by now to be disappointed at anything.

"I'm quite sure that, if you were here with me now, sitting in that chair
opposite me and sewing for all you were worth, that the thing that we'd be
talking about would be Peter. If, therefore, these scrawls are full of
Peter you won't mind, I know. He's immensely occupying my attention just
now and you love him as truly and deeply as I do, so that if I go on at
length about him you'll excuse it on that score. You who know me better
than any one else in the world know that, in my most secret heart, I
flatter myself on my ability as a psychologist. I remember when I told
you first how you laughed but I think since then you've come round not a
little, and although we both keep it to ourselves, it's a little secret
that you're a tiny bit proud of. I can see how brother Percival, or young
Tony Gale, or even dear Peter himself would mock, if I told them of this
ambition of mine. 'Good, dear, stupid, old Bobby' is the way they think of
me, and I know it's mother's perpetual wonder (and also, I think, a little
her comfort) that I should be so lacking in brilliance when Percival and
Millie are so full of it.

"You know Peter's attitude to me in these things--you've seen it often
enough. He's patronising--he can't help it. That isn't, he considers, my
line in the least, and, let me once begin to talk to him of stocks and
shares and he'll open all his ears. Well, I can't blame him--but I do think
these writers and people are inclined to draw their line a little too
sharply with their Philistines--great big gulf, please--and Artists. At any
rate, here goes for my psychology and good luck to it. Peter, in fact, is
so interesting a subject if one sees anything of him at all that I believe
he'd draw speculation out of any one. There was old Maradick talking about
him the other night--fascinated by him and understanding him most amazingly
well--another instance of your Philistine and Artist mixed.

"But I knew him--and knew him jolly well too--when he was about twelve, so
that I really get a pull over the rest of you there, for it adds of course
immensely to the interest and if ever child was Father of the Man, Peter
was. You know how we both funked that marriage of his for him--you because
you knew Clare so well, I because I knew Peter. And then for a time it
really seemed that we were both entirely wrong. Clare's is a far simpler
personality than Peter's, and if you work along one or two recognised
lines--let her have her way, don't frighten her, above all keep her
conventional--it's all right. Clare was, and is, awfully in love with him,
and he madly with her of course--and that helped everything along. You know
how relieved we both were and indeed it seemed, for a time, that it was
going to be the making of both of them--going to make Clare braver and
Peter less morbid.

"Well, it's since you've been away that everything's happened. Although the
baby was born some weeks before you went, it's only lately that Clare has
been up and about. She's perfectly well and the baby's splendid--promises
to be a tremendous fellow and as healthy as possible. You can imagine, a
little, the effect of it all on Clare. I don't suppose there's any girl in
London been so wrapped in cotton wool all her life, and that old ass of
a father and still more irritating ass of a mother would go on wrapping
her still if they had their way. The fuss they've both made about this
whole business is simply incredible--especially when the man's a doctor
and brings Lord knows how many children into the world every week of
his life. But it's all been awfully bad for Clare. Of course, she was
frightened--frightened out of her wits. It's the very first time life
ever had its wrappings off for her, and that in itself of course is a
tremendously good thing. But you can't, unfortunately, wrap any one up for
all those years and then take the wrappings off and not deliver a shock to
the system. Of course there's a shock, and it's just this shock that I'm
so afraid of. I'm afraid of it for one thing because Peter's so entirely
oblivious of it. He was in an agony of terror on the day that the baby was
born, but once it was there--well and healthy and promising--fear vanished.
He could only see room for glory--and glory he does. I cannot tell you what
that boy is like about the baby; at present he thinks, day and night, of
nothing else. It is the most terrific thing to watch his feeling about
it--and meanwhile he takes it for granted that Clare feels the same....
Well, she doesn't. I have been in a good deal during these last few days
and she's stranger than words can say--doesn't see the child if she can
help it--loves it, worships it, when it is there, and--is terrified of it.
I saw a look in her eyes when she was nursing it yesterday that was sheer
undiluted terror. She's been frightened out of her life, and if I know
her the least little bit she's absolutely made up her mind never to be
frightened like that again. She is going to hurl herself into a perfect
whirlpool of excitement and entertainment and drag Peter with her if she
can. Meanwhile, behind that hard little head of hers, she's making plans
just as fast as she can make them. I believe she looks on life now as
though it had broken the compact that she made with it--a compact that
things should always be easy, comfortable, above all, never threatening.
The present must be calm but the Future's absolutely got to be--and I
believe, although she loves him devotedly in the depths of her strange
little soul, that she half blames Peter for all of this disturbance, and
that there are a great many things about him--his earlier life, his earlier
friends, even his work--that she would strip from him if she could.

"Well, enough for the present. I don't know _what_ nonsense there isn't
here. Into the envelope it all goes. I've been talking to you for an hour
and a half and that's something...."


II

"... I've just come in from dinner with Peter and Clare and feel inclined
to talk to you for hours ahead. However, that I can't do, so I shall write
to you instead and you're to regard it all as a continuation of the things
that I said in last night's letter. I am as interested as ever and indeed,
after this evening's dinner more interested. The odd thing about it all is
that Peter is so completely oblivious to any change that may be going on
in Clare. His whole mind is centred now on the baby, he cannot have enough
of it and it was he, and not Clare, who took me up after dinner to see it
sleeping.

"You remember that they had some kind of a dispute about the name of the
boy at the time of the christening. Peter insisted that it should be
Stephen, after, I suppose, that odd Cornish friend of his, and Clare, weak
and ill though she was, objected with all her might. I don't know why she
took this so much to heart but it was all, I suppose, part of that odd
hatred that she has of Peter's earlier life and earlier friends. She has
never met the man Brant, but I think that she fancies that he is going
to swoop down one of these days and carry Peter off on a broomstick or
something. She gave in about the name--indeed I have never seen Peter
more determined--but I think, nevertheless, that she broods over it and
remembers it. My dear, I am as sorry for her as I can be. There she stands,
loving Peter with all her heart and soul, terrified out of her wits at the
possibilities that life is presenting to her, hating Peter's friends at
one moment, his work the next, the baby the next--exactly like some one,
walking on a window-ledge in his sleep and suddenly waking and
discovering--

"Peter's a more difficult question. He's too riotously happy just at
the moment to listen to a word from any one. His relation to the child
is really the most touching thing you ever saw, and really the child,
considering that it has scarcely begun to exist, has a feeling for him in
the most wonderful way. It is as good as gold when he is there and follows
him with its eyes--it doesn't pay much attention to Clare. I think it knows
that she's frightened of it. Yes, Peter is quite riotously happy. You know
that 'The Stone House' is coming out next week. There is to be a supper
party at the Galleons'--myself, Mrs. Launce. Maradick, the Gales, some
woman he knew at that boarding-house, Cardillac and Dr. and Mrs. Rossiter.

"By the way, Cardillac is there a great deal and I am both glad and sorry.
He is very good for Clare and not at all good for Peter. He seems to
understand Clare in the most wonderful way--far better than Peter does. He
brings her out, helps her to be broader and really I think explains Peter
to her and helps things along. His influence on Peter is all the other way.
Peter, of course, worships him, just as he used to do in the old days at
school, and Cards always liked being worshipped. He has an elegance, a
savoir-faire that dear, square-shouldered rough-and-tumble Peter finds
entrancing, but, of course, Peter's worth the dozen of him any day of
the week. He drags out all Peter's worst side. I wonder whether you'll
understand what I mean when I say that Peter isn't _meant_ to be happy--at
any rate not yet. He's got something too big, too tremendous in him to be
carved easily into any one of our humdrum, conventional shapes. He takes
things so hard that he isn't intended to take more than one thing at a
time, and here he is with Clare and Cards both, as it seems to me, in a
conspiracy to pull him into a thousand little bits and to fling each little
bit to a different tea-party.

"He ought to be getting at his work and he isn't getting at it at all. 'The
Stone House' is coming out next week and it may be all right, but I don't
mind betting that the next one suffers. If he weren't in a kind of dream
he'd see it all himself, and indeed I think that he'll wake one day soon
and see that a thousand ridiculous things are getting in between him and
his proper life.

"He was leading his proper life in those days at Dawson's when they were
beating him at home and hating him at school, and it was that old bookshop
and the queer people he met in it that produced 'Reuben Hallard.'

"He's so amazingly young in the ways of the world, so eager to make friends
with everybody, so delighted with an entirely superficial butterfly like
Cards, so devotedly attached to his wife, that I must confess that the
outlook seems to me bad. There's going to be a tremendous tug-of-war in a
minute and it's not going to be easy for the boy--nor, indeed for Clare.

"I hope that you don't feel so far removed from this in your Yorkshire
desert that it has no interest for you, but I know how devoted you are to
Peter and one doesn't want to see the boy turned into the society novelist
creature--the kind of creature, God forgive me, that brother Percival is
certain to become. You'll probably say when you read this that I am trying
to drag out all the morbid side of Peter and make him the melancholy,
introspective creature that he used to be, in fits and starts, when you
first knew him. Of course that's the last thing I want to do, but work to a
man of Peter's temperament is the one rock that can save him. He has, I do
believe, a touch of genius in him somewhere, and I believe that if he's
allowed to follow, devoutly and with pain and anguish, maybe, his Art,
he'll be a great creature--a great man and a great writer. But he's in
the making--too eager to please, too eager to care for every one, too
desperately down if he thinks things are going badly with him. I notice
that he hasn't been to see my father lately--I think too that all this
reviewing is bad for him--other people's novels pouring upon him in an
avalanche must take something from the freshness of his own.

"Anyhow I, Robert Galleon, your clever and penetrating husband, scent much
danger and trouble ahead. Clare, simply out of love for him and anxiety for
herself, will I know, do all she can to drag him from the thing that he
should follow--and Cards will help her--out of sheer mischief, I verily
believe.

"On their own heads be it. As to the carpets you asked me to go and look
at...."


III

"... And now for the supper party. Although there's a whole day behind me
I'm still quivering under the excitement of it. As I tell you about it it
will in all probability, declare itself as a perfectly ordinary affair,
and, indeed, I think that you should have been there yourself to have
realised the emotion of it. But I'll try and give it you word for word. I
was kept in the city and arrived late and they were all there. Mrs. Launce,
twinkling all over with kindness, Maradick in his best Stock Exchange
manner, the Gales (Janet Gale perfectly lovely), the old Rossiters, Cards,
shining with a mixture of enterprise and knowledge of the world and last of
all a very pale, rather nervous, untidy Irish woman, a Miss Monogue. Clare
was so radiantly happy that I knew that she wasn't happy at all, had
obviously taken a great deal of trouble about her hair and had it all piled
up on the top of her head and looked wonderful. I can't describe these
things, but you know that when she's bent on giving an impression she seems
to stand on her toes all the time--well, she was standing on every kind
of toe, moral, physical, emotional last night. Finally there was Peter,
looking as though his evening dress had been made for something quite
different from social dinner parties. It fitted all right, but it was too
comfortable to be smart--he looked, beside Cards, like a good serviceable
cob up against the smartest of hunters. Peter's rough, bullet head, the way
that he stands with his legs wide apart and his thick body holding itself
deliberately still with an effort as though he were on board ship--and then
that smile that won all our hearts ages ago right out of the centre of
his brown eyes first and then curving his mouth, at last seizing all
his body--but always, in spite of it, a little appealing, a little sad
somewhere--can't you see him? And Cards, slim, straight, dark, beautifully
clothed, beautifully witty and I am convinced, beautifully insincere. Can't
you see Cards say 'good evening' to me--with that same charm, that same
ease, that same contempt that he had when we were at school together? Bobby
Galleon--an honest good fellow--but dull--mon Dieu--dull (he rather likes
French phrases)--can't you hear him saying it? Well from the very first,
there was something in the air. We were all excited, even old Mrs. Rossiter
and the pale Irish creature whom I remembered afterwards I had met that
day when I went to that boarding--house after Peter. Clare was quite
extraordinary--I have never seen her anything like it--she talked the whole
time, laughed, almost shouted. The only person she treated stiffly was
Cards--I don't think she likes him.

"He was at his most brilliant--really wonderful--and I liked him better
than I've ever liked him before. He seemed to have a genuine pleasure in
Peter's happiness, and I believe he's as fond of the boy as he's able to be
of any one. A copy of 'The Stone House' was given to each of us (I haven't
had time to look at mine yet) and I suppose the combination of the baby and
the book moved us all. Besides, Clare and Peter both looked so absurdly
young. Such children to have had so many adventures already. You can
imagine how riotous we got when I tell you that dessert found Mrs. Rossiter
with a paper cap on her head and Janet Gale was singing some Cornish
song or other to the delight of the company. Miss Monogue and I were the
quietest. I should think that she's one of the best, and I saw her look at
Peter once or twice in a way that showed how strongly she felt about him.

"Well, old girl, I'm bothered if I can explain the kind of anxiety that
came over me after a time. You'll think me a regular professional croaker
but really I suppose, at bottom, it was some sort of feeling that the whole
thing, this shouting and cheering and thumping the table--was premature.
And then I suppose it was partly my knowledge of Peter. It wasn't like him
to behave in this sort of way. He wasn't himself--excited, agitated by
something altogether foreign to him. I could have thought that he was
drunk, if I hadn't known that he hadn't touched any liquor whatever. But a
man of Peter's temperament pays for this sort of thing--it isn't the sort
of way he's meant to take life.

"Whatever the reason may have been I know that I felt suddenly outside
the whole business and most awfully depressed. I think Miss Monogue felt
exactly the same. By the time the wine was on the table all I wanted was to
get right away. It was almost as though I had been looking on at something
that I was ashamed to see. There was a kind of deliberate determination
about their happiness and Clare's little body with her hair on the verge,
as it seemed, of a positive downfall, had something quite pitiful in its
deliberate rejoicing; such a child, my dear--I never realised how young
until last night. Such a child and needing some one so much older and wiser
than Peter to manage it all.

"Well, there I was hating it when the final moment came. Cards got up
and in one of the wittiest little speeches you ever heard in your life,
proposed Peter's health, alluded to 'Reuben Hallard,' then Clare, then the
Son and Heir, a kind of back fling at old Dawson's, and then last of all,
an apostrophe to 'The Stone House' all glory and honour, &c.:--well, it was
most neatly done and we all sat back, silent, for Peter's reply.

"The dear boy stood there, all flushed and excited, with his hair pushed
back off his forehead and began the most extraordinary speech I've ever
heard. I can't possibly give you the effect of it at secondhand, in the
mere repetition of it there was little more than that he was wildly, madly
happy, that there was no one in the world as happy as he, that now at last
the gods had given him all that he had ever wanted, let them now do their
worst--and so crying, flung his glass over his shoulder, and smashed it on
to the wall behind him.

"I cannot possibly tell you how sinister, how ominous the whole thing
suddenly was. It swooped down upon all of us like a black cloud. Credit
me, if you will, with a highly--strung bundle of nerves (not so solid
matter-of-fact as I seem, _you_ know well enough) but it seemed to me, at
that moment, that Peter was defying, consciously, with his heart in his
mouth, a world of devils and that he was cognisant of all of them. The
thing was conscious--that was the awful thing about it, I could swear that
he was seeing far beyond all of us, that he was hurling his happiness at
something that he had there before him as clearly as I have you before me
now. It was defiance and I believe the minute after uttering it he would
have liked to have rushed upstairs to see that his baby was safe....

"Be that as it may, we all felt it--every one of us. The party was clouded.
Cards and Clare did their best to brighten things up again, and Peter and
Tony and Janet Gale played silly games and made a great deal of noise--but
the spirit was gone.

"I left very early. Miss Monogue came away at the same time. She spoke
to me before she said good-night: 'I know that you are an old friend of
Peter's. I am so fond of him--we all are at Brockett's, it isn't often that
we see him--I know that you will be his true friend in every sense of the
word--and help him--as he ought to be helped. It is so little that I can
do....'

"Her voice was sad. I am afraid she suffers a great deal. She is evidently
greatly attached to Peter--I liked her.

"Well, you in your sober way will say that this is all a great deal of
nonsense. Why shouldn't Peter, if he wishes, say that he is happy? All I
can say is that if you yourself had been there...."


CHAPTER VIII

BLINDS DOWN


I

It was not until Stephen Westcott had rejoiced in the glories (so novel
and so thrilling) of his first birthday and "The Stone House" had been six
months before the public eye that the effect of this second book could be
properly estimated. Second books are the most surely foredoomed creatures
in all creation and there are many excellent reasons for this. They will
assuredly disappoint the expectations of those who enjoyed the first work,
and the author will, in all probability, have been tempted by his earlier
success to try his wings further than they are, as yet, able to carry him.

Peter's failure was only partial. There was no question that "The Stone
House" was a remarkable book. Had it been Peter's first novel it must have
made an immense stir; it showed that he was, in no kind of way, a man of
one book, and it gave, in its London scenes, proof that its author was not
limited to one kind of life and one kind of background. There were chapters
that were fuller, wiser, in every way more mature than anything in "Reuben
Hallard."

But it was amazingly unequal. There were places in it that had no kind of
life at all; at times Peter appeared to have beheld his scenes and
characters through a mist, to have been dragged right away from any kind of
vision of the book, to have written wildly, blindly.

The opinion of Mrs. Launce was perhaps the soundest that it was possible to
have because that good lady, in spite of her affection for Peter, had a
critical judgment that was partly literary, partly commercial, and partly
human. She always judged a book first with her brain, then with her heart
and lastly with her knowledge of her fellow creatures. "It may pay better
than 'Reuben Hallard,'" she said, "there's more love interest and it ends
happily. Some of it is beautifully written, some of it quite unspeakably.
But really, Peter, it's the most uneven thing I've ever read. Again
and again one is caught, held, stirred--then, suddenly, you slip away
altogether--you aren't there at all, nothing's there, I could put my ringer
on the places. Especially the first chapters and the last chapters--the
middle's splendid--what happened to you?... But it will sell, I expect.
Tell your banker to read it, go into lots of banks and tell them. Bank
clerks have subscriptions at circulating libraries always given them ...
but the wild bits are best, the wild bits are splendid--that bit about the
rocks at night ... you don't know much about women yet--your girls are
awfully bad. By the way, do you know that Mary Hollins is only getting £100
advance next time? All she can get, that last thing was so shocking. I hear
that that book about an immoral violet, by that new young man--Rondel,
isn't it?--is still having a most enormous success--I know that Barratt's
got in a whole batch of new copies last night--I hear...."

Mrs. Launce was disappointed--Peter could tell well enough. He received
some laudatory reviews, some letters from strangers, some adulation from
people who knew nothing whatever. He did not know what it was exactly that
he had expected--but whatever it was that he wanted, he did not get it--he
was dissatisfied.

He began to blame his publishers--they had not advertised him enough; he
even, secretly, cherished that most hopeless of all convictions--that his
book was above the heads of the public. He noticed, also, that wherever he
might be, this name of Rondel appeared before him, Mr. Rondel with his
foolish face and thin mother in black, was obviously the young man of the
moment--in the literary advertisements of any of the weekly papers you
might see The Violet novel in its tenth edition and "The Stone House" by
Peter Westcott, second edition selling rapidly.

He was again bewildered, as he had been after the publication of "Reuben
Hallard" by the extraordinary variance of opinions amongst reviewers and
amongst his own personal friends. One man told him that he had no style,
that he must learn the meaning and feeling of words, another told him that
his characters were weak but that his style was "splendid--a real knowledge
of the value and meaning of words." Some one told him that he knew nothing
at all about women and some one else that his women were by far the best
part of his work. The variety was endless--amongst those who had appeared
to him giants there was the same uncertainty. He seemed too to detect with
the older men a desire to praise those parts of his work that resembled
their own productions and to blame anything that gave promise of
originality.

For himself it seemed to him that Mrs. Launce's opinion was nearest the
truth. There were parts of it that were good, chapters that were better
than anything in "Reuben Hallard" and then again there were many chapters
where he saw it all in a fog, groped dimly for his characters, pushed, as
it seemed to him, away from their lives and interests, by the actual lives
and interests of the real people about him. This led him to think of Clare
and here he was suddenly arrested by a perception, now only dimly grasped,
of a change in her attitude to his writings. He dated it, thinking of it
now for the first time, from the birth of young Stephen--or was it not
earlier than that, on that evening when they had met Cards at that supper
party, on that evening of their first quarrel?

In the early days how well he remembered Clare's enthusiasm--a little
extravagant, it seemed now. Then during the first year of their married
life she had wanted to know everything about the making of "The Stone
House." It was almost as though it had been a cake or a pie, and he knew
that he had found her questions difficult to answer and that he had had it
driven in upon him that it was not really because she was interested in the
subtleties of his art that she enquired but because of her own personal
affection for him; if he had been making boots or a suit of clothes it
would have been just the same. Then when "The Stone House" appeared her
eagerness for its success had been tremendous--there was nothing she would
not do to help it along--but that, he somewhat ironically discovered, was
because she liked success and the things that success brought.

Then when the book had not succeeded--or only so very little--her interest
had, of a sudden, subsided. "Oh! I suppose you've got to go and do your
silly old writing ... I think you might come out with me just this
afternoon. It isn't often that I ask anything of you...." He did not
believe that she had ever really finished "The Stone House." She pretended
that she had--"the end was simply perfect," but she was vague, nebulous. He
found the marker in her copy, some fifty pages before the end.

She was so easily impressed by every one whom she met that perhaps the
laughing attitude of Cards to Peter's books had something to do with it
all. Cards affected to despise anything to do with work, here to-day,
gone to-morrow--let us eat and drink ... dear old Peter, grubbing away
upstairs--"I say, Mrs. Westcott, let's go and rag him...." And then they
had come and invaded his room at the top of the house, and sometimes he had
been glad and had flung his work down as though it were of no account ...
and then afterwards, in the middle of some tea-party he had been suddenly
ashamed, deeply, bitterly ashamed, as though he had actually wounded those
white pages lying up there in his quiet room.

He was at this time, like a man jostled and pushed and turned about at
some riotous fair; looking, now this way, now that, absorbed by a thousand
sights, a thousand sounds--and always through it all feeling, bitterly in
his heart, that something dear to him, somewhere in some place of silence,
was dying--

Well, hang it all, at any rate there was the Child!


II

At any rate there was the Child!

And what a child! Did any one ever have a baby like it, so fat and round
and white, with its head already covered with faint golden silk, its
eyes grey and wondering--with its sudden gravities, its amazing joys and
terrific humour, the beauty of its stepping away, as it did, suddenly
without any warning, behind a myriad mists and curtains, into some other
land that it knew of. How amazing to watch it as it slowly forgot all the
things that it had come into the world remembering, as it slowly realised
all the laws that this new order of things demanded of its obedience. Could
any one who had been present ever forget its crow of ecstasy at the first
shaft of sunlight that it ever beheld, at its first realisation of the
blue, shining ball that Peter bought, at its first vision, through the
window, of falling snow!

Peter was drunk with this amazing wonder. All the facts of life--even Clare
and his work--faded before this new presence for whose existence he had
been responsible. It had been one of the astonishing things about Clare
that she had taken the child so quietly. He had seen her thrilled by
musical comedy, by a dance at the Palace Music Hall, by the trumpery pathos
of a tenth-rate novel--before this marvel she stood, it seemed to him,
without any emotion.

Sometimes he thought that if it had not been for his reminder she would not
have gone to kiss the child goodnight. There were many occasions when he
knew--with wonder and almost dismay--that she was afraid of it; and once,
when they had been in the nursery together and young Stephen had cried and
kicked his heels in a tempest of rage, she had seemed almost to cling to
Peter for protection.

There were occasions when Peter fancied that the baby seemed the elder of
the two, it was at any rate certain that Stephen Westcott was not so afraid
of his mother as his mother was of him. And yet, Peter fancied, that could
Clare only get past this strange nervous fear she would love the baby
passionately--would love him with that same fierceness of passion that she
flung, curiously, now and again upon Peter himself. "Let me be promised,"
she seemed to say, "that I will never have any trouble or sorrow with my
son and I will love him devotedly." Meanwhile she went into every
excitement that life could provide for her....

It was on a March afternoon of early Spring after a lonely tea (Clare was
out at one of her parties) that Peter went up to the nursery. He had just
finished reading the second novel by that Mr. Rondel whose Violet sensation
had occurred some two years before. This second book was good--there was no
doubt about it--and Peter was ashamed of a kind of dim reluctance in his
acknowledgment of its quality. The fellow had had such reviews; the book,
although less sensational than its predecessor had hit the public straight
in the middle of its susceptible heart. Had young Rondel done it all with
bad work-well, that was common enough--but the book was good, uncommonly
good.

He sent the nurse downstairs and began to build an elaborate fortress on
the nursery floor. The baby lay on his back on a rug by the fire and
contemplated his woollen shoe which he slowly dragged off and disdainfully
flung away. Then, crowing to himself, he watched his father and the world
in general.

He was amazingly like Peter--the grey eyes, the mouth a little stern, a
little sulky, the snub nose, the arms a little short and thick, and that
confident, happy smile.

He watched his father.

To him, lying on the rug, many, many miles away there was a coloured glory
that ran round the upper part of the wall--as yet, he only knew that they
gave him, those colours, something of the same pleasure that his milk gave
him, that the warm, glowing, noisy shapes beyond the carpet gave him, that
the happy, comfortable smell of the Thing playing near him on the floor
gave him. About the Thing he was eternally perplexed. It was Something that
made sounds that he liked, that pressed his body in a way that he loved,
that took his fingers and his toes and made them warm and comfortable.

It was Something moreover from which delicious things hung--things that he
could clutch and hold and pull. He was perplexed but he knew that when this
Thing was near him he was warm and happy and contented and generally went
to sleep. His eyes slowly travelled round the room and rested finally upon
a round blue ball that hung turning a little from side to side, on a nail
above, his bed. This was, to him, the final triumph of existence--to have
it in his hand, to roll it round and round, to bang it down upon the floor
and watch it jump, this was the reason why one was here, this the solution
of all perplexities. He would have liked to have it in his hands now, so
crowing, he smiled pleasantly at the Thing on the floor beside him and then
looked at the ball.

Peter got up from his knees, fetched the ball down and rolled it along the
floor. As it came dancing, curving, laughing along young Stephen shrieked
with delight. Would he have it in his hands or would it escape him and
disappear altogether? Would it come to him?... It came and was clutched and
held and triumphed over.

Peter sat down by his son and began to tell him about Cornwall. He often
did this, partly because the mere mentioning of names and places satisfied
some longing in his heart, partly because he wanted Cornwall to be the
first thing that young Stephen would realise as soon as he realised
anything. "And you never can tell, you know, how soon a child can
begin...."

Stephen, turning the blue ball round and round in his fingers, gravely
listened. He was perfectly contented. He liked the sounds that circled
about him--his father's voice, the rustle of the fire, the murmur of
something beyond the walls that he could not understand.

"And then, you see, Stephen, if you go up the hill and round to the right
you come to the market-place, all covered with shiny cobbles and once a
week filled with stalls where people sell things. At the other end of it,
facing you, there's an old Tower that's been there for ages and ages. It's
got a fruit stall underneath it now, but once, years ago there was fighting
there and men were killed. Then, if you go past it, and out to the right,
you get into the road that leads out of the town. It goes right above the
sea and on a fine-day--"

"Peter!"

The voice broke like a stone shattering a sheet of glass. The ball dropped
from young Stephen's hands. He felt suddenly cold and hungry and wanted his
woollen shoe. He was not sure whether he would not cry. He would wait a
moment and see how matters developed.

Peter jumped to his feet and faced Clare: Clare in a fur cap from beneath
which her golden hair seemed to burn in anger, from beneath which her eyes,
furiously attacked his. Of course she had heard him talking to the baby
about Cornwall. They had quarrelled about it before ... he had thought
that she was at her silly tea-party. His face that had been, a few moments
before, gentle, humorous, happy, now suddenly wore the sullen defiance of a
sulky boy.

Her breast was heaving, her little hands beat against her frock.

"He shan't," she broke out at last, "hear about it."

"Of all the nonsense," Peter answered her slowly. "Really, Clare, sometimes
I think you're about two years old--"

"He shan't hear about it," she repeated again. "You don't care--you don't
care what I think or what I say--I'm his mother--I have the right--"

The baby looked at them both with wondering eyes and to any outside
observer would surely have seemed the eldest of the three. Clare's breath
came in little pants of rage--"You know--that I hate--all mention of that
place--those people. It doesn't matter to you--you never think of me--"

"At any rate," he retorted, "if you were up here in the nursery more often
you would be able to take care that Stephen's innocent ears weren't
insulted with my vulgar conversation--"

It was then that he saw, behind Clare, in the doorway, the dark smiling
face of Cards.

Cards came forward. "Really, you two," he said, laughing. "Peter, old man,
don't be absurd--you too, Clare" (he called her Clare now).

The anger died out of Clare's eyes: "Well, he knows I hate him talking
about that nasty old town to the baby--" Then, in a moment, she was smiling
again--"I'm sorry, Peter. Cards is quite right, and anyhow the baby doesn't
understand--"

She stood smiling in front of him but the frown did not leave his face.

"Oh! it's all right," he said sullenly, and he brushed past them up the
stairs, to his own room.


III

From the silence of his room he thought that he could hear them laughing
about it downstairs. "Silly old Peter--always getting into tempers--" Well,
was he? And after all hadn't it been, this time, her affair? Stephen and he
had been happy enough before the others had come in. What was this
senseless dislike of Clare's to Cornwall? What could it matter to her? It
was always cropping up now. He could think of a thousand occasions, lately,
when she had been roused by it.

But, as he paced, with frowning face, back and forwards across the room,
there was something more puzzling still that had to be thought about. Why
did they quarrel about such tiny things? In novels, in good, reliable
novels, it was always the big things about which people fought. Whoever
heard of two people quarrelling because one of them wanted to talk about
Cornwall? and yet it was precisely concerning things just as trivial that
they were always now disputing. Why need they quarrel at all? In the first
year there had always been peace. Why shouldn't there be peace now? Where
exactly lay Clare's altered attitude to himself, to his opinions, to the
world in general. If he yielded to her demands--and he had yielded on many
more occasions than was good either for her or himself--she had, he
fancied, laughed at him for being so easily defeated. If he had not yielded
then she had been, immediately, impossible....

And yet, after their quarrels, there had been the most wonderful, precious
reconciliations, reconciliations that, even now at his thought of them,
made his heart beat faster. Now, soon, when he went downstairs to dress
for dinner, she would come to him, he knew, and beg most beautifully,
his pardon. But to-night it seemed suddenly that this kind of thing had
happened too often lately. He felt, poor Peter, bewildered. There seemed to
be, on every side of him, so many things that he was called upon to manage
and he was so unable to manage any of them. He stopped in his treading to
and fro and stared at the long deal writing-table at which he always
worked.

There, waiting for him, were the first chapters of his new novel, "Mortimer
Stant." In the same way, two years ago, he had stared at the early chapters
of "The Stone House," on that morning before he had gone to propose to
Clare. Now there flashed through his mind the wonderful things that he
intended "Mortimer Stant" to be. It was to concern a man of forty (in his
confident selection of that age he displayed, most stridently, his own
youth) and Mortimer was to be a stolid, reserved Philistine, who was,
against his will, by outside forces, dragged into an emotional crisis.

At the back of his mind he had, perhaps, Maradick for his figure, but that
was almost unconscious. "Mortimer Stant" was to represent a wonderful duel
between the two camps--the Artists and the Philistines--with ultimate
victory, of course, for the Artists. It was to be.... Well what was it to
be? At present the stolid Mortimer was hidden behind a phalanx of
people--Clare, young Stephen, Cards, Bobby, Mrs. Rossiter (tiresome woman),
Alice Galleon--_That_ was it. It was hidden, hidden just as parts of "The
Stone House" had been hidden, but hidden more deeply--a regular jungle of
interests and occupations was creeping, stealthily, stealthily upon him.

And then his eye fell upon an open letter that lay on his table, and, at
the sight of it, he was seized with a burning sense of shame. How could he
have forgotten?

The letter ran--

_My dear Mr. Westcott,

You have not been to see me for many months. Further opportunities may, by
the hand of God, be denied you.

Come if you can spare the time.

Henry Galleon._

The words were written, feebly almost illegibly, in pencil. Peter knew
that Bobby had been, for many weeks, very anxious concerning his father's
health, and during the last few days he had abandoned the City and spent
all his time at home. That letter had come this very morning and Peter
had intended to go at once and inquire. The fact that he had left all
these months without going to see the old man rose before him now like an
accusing hand. He deserved, indeed, whatever the Gods might choose to send
him, if he could so wilfully neglect his duty. But he knew that there had
been, in the back of his mind, shame. His work had not, so he might have
put it to himself, been good enough to justify his presence. There would
have been questions asked, questions that he might have found it difficult,
indeed, to answer.

But now the sight of that letter immediately encouraged him. Henry Galleon,
even though he was too ill to talk, would put him right with all his
perplexities, would give him courage to cut through all these complications
that had been gathering, lately, so thickly about him. "This," the room
seemed to whisper to him, "is your chance. After all, you are given this
opportunity. See him once before he dies and your fate will be shown you,
clearly, honestly."

He stepped out of the house unperceived and was immediately conscious of
the Spring night. Spring--with a precipitancy and extravagance that seems
to be--to own peculiar quality in London--had leapt upon the streets.

The Embankment was bathed in the evening glow. Clouds, like bales of golden
wool, sailed down a sky so faintly blue that the white light of a departed
sun seemed to glow behind it. The lamps were crocus-coloured against black
barges that might have been loaded with yellow primroses so did they hint,
through their darkness, at the yellow haze around them.

The silence was melodious; the long line of dark houses watched like
prisoners from behind their iron bars. They might expect, it seemed, the
Spring to burst through the flagstones at their feet.

Peter's heart was lightened of all its burden. He shared the glory, the
intoxication of the promise that was on every side of him. On such a night
great ambitions, great ideals, great lovers were created.

He saw Henry Galleon, from behind his window, watching the pageant. He saw
him gaining new life, getting up from his bed of sickness, writing anew
his great masterpieces. And he saw himself, Peter Westcott, learning at
last from the Master the rule and discipline of life. All the muddle, the
confusion of this lazy year should be healed. He and Clare should see
with the same eyes. She should understand his need for work, he should
understand her need for help. All should be happiness and victory in this
glorious world and he, by the Master's side, should...

He stopped suddenly. The house that had been Henry Galleon's was blank and
dead.

At every window the blinds were down....


CHAPTER IX

WILD MEN


I

To Peter's immediate world it was a matter of surprise that he should take
Henry Galleon's death so hardly. It is a penalty of greatness that you
should, to the majority of your fellow men, be an Idea rather than a human
being. To his own family Henry Galleon had, of course, been real enough
but to the outside world he was the author of "Henry Lessingham" and "The
Roads," whose face one saw in the papers as one saw the face of Royalty.
Peter Westcott, moreover, had not appeared, at any time, to take more than
a general interest in the great man, and it was even understood that old
Mrs. Galleon and Millicent and Percival considered themselves somewhat
affronted because the Master had "been exceedingly kind to the young man.
Taken trouble about him, tried to know him, but young Westcott had allowed
the thing to drop--had not been near him during the last year."

Even Bobby and Alice Galleon were astonished at Peter's grief. To Bobby his
father's death came as a fine ending to a fine career. He had died, full of
honour and of years. Even Bobby, who thought that he knew his Peter pretty
well by now, was puzzled.

"He takes it," Bobby explained to Alice, "as though it were a kind of
omen, sees ever so much more in it than any of us do. It seems that he was
coming round the very evening that father died to talk to him, and that he
suddenly saw the blinds down; it was a shock to him, of course. I think
it's all been a kind of remorse working out, remorse not only for having
neglected my father but for having left other things--his work, I suppose,
rather to look after themselves. But he won't tell me," Bobby almost
desperately concluded, "he won't tell me anything--he really is the most
extraordinary chap."

And Peter found it difficult enough to tell himself, did not indeed try. He
only knew that he felt an acute, passionate remorse and that it seemed to
him that the denial of that last visit was an omen of the anger of all the
Gods, and even--although to this last he gave no kind of expression--the
malicious contrivance of an old man who waited for him down there in that
house by the sea. It was as though gates had been clanged in his face, and
that as he heard them close he heard also the jeering laughter behind
them.... He had missed his chance.

He saw, instantly, that Clare understood none of this, and that, indeed,
she took it all as rather an affectation on his part, something in him that
belonged to that side of him that she tried to forget. She hated, quite
frankly, that he should go about the house with a glum face because an old
man, whom he had never taken the trouble to go and see when he was alive,
was now dead. She showed him that she hated it.

He turned desperately to his work. There had been a hint, only the other
day, from the newspaper for which he wrote, that his reviews had not,
lately, been up to his usual standard. He knew that they seemed to him
twice as difficult to do as they had seemed a year ago and that therefore
he did them twice as badly.

He flung himself upon his book and swore that he would dissipate the
shadows that hid it from him. One of the shadows he saw quite clearly
was Cards' attitude to his work. It was strange, he thought almost
pathetically, how closely his feeling for Cards now resembled the feeling
that he had had, those years ago, at Dawson's. He still worshipped
him--worship was the only possible word--worshipped him for all the things
that he, Peter, was not. One could not be with him, Peter thought, one
could not watch his movements, hear his voice without paying it all the
most absolute reverence. The glamour about Cards was, to Peter, something
almost from another world. Peter felt so clumsy, so rough and ugly and
noisy and out-of-place when Cards was present that the fact that Cards was
almost always present now made life a very difficult thing. How could Peter
prevent himself from reverencing every word that Cards uttered when one
reflected upon the number of things that Cards had done, the things that he
had seen, the places to which he had been. And Cards' attitude to Peter's
work was, if not actually contemptuous, at least something very like it.
He did not, he professed, read novels. The novelists' trade at the best,
he seemed to imply, was only a poor one, and that Peter's work was not
altogether of the best he almost openly asserted. "What can old Peter know
about life?" one could hear him saying--"Where's he been? Who's he known?
Whatever in the world has he done?"

Against this, in spite of the glitter that shone about Cards' head, Peter
might, perhaps, have stood. He reminded himself, a hundred times a day,
that one must not care about the things that other people said, one must
have one's eyes fixed upon the goal--one must be sure of oneself--what had
Galleon said?...

But there was also the effect of it all upon Clare to be considered. Clare
listened to Cards. She was, Peter gloomily considered, very largely of
Cards' opinion. The two people for whom he cared most in the world after
young Stephen who, as a critic, had not yet begun to count, thought that he
was wasting his time.

Sometimes, as he sat at his deal table, fighting with a growing sense of
disillusionment that was like nothing so much as a child's first discovery
that its beautiful doll is stuffed with straw, he would wish passionately,
vehemently for the return of those days when he had sat in his little
bedroom writing "Reuben Hallard" with Norah Monogue, and dear Mr. Zanti and
even taciturn little Gottfried, there to encourage him.

_That_ had been Adventure--but this ...? And then he would remember young
Stephen and Clare--moments even lately that she had shared with him--and he
would be ashamed.


II

It was on an afternoon of furious wind and rain in early April that the
inevitable occurred. All the afternoon the trees in the little orchard had
been knocking their branches together as though they were in a furious
temper with Somebody and were indignant at not being allowed to get at Him;
they gave you the impression that it would be quite as much as your life
would be worth to venture into their midst.

Peter had, during a number of hours, endeavoured to pierce the soul of
Mortimer Stant--meanwhile as the wind howled, the rain lashed the windows
of his room, and the personality of Mr. Stant faded farther and farther
away into ultimate distance, Peter was increasingly conscious that he was
listening for something.

He had felt himself surrounded by this strange sense of anticipation
before. Sometimes it had stayed with him for a short period only, sometimes
it had extended over days--always it brought with it an emotion of
excitement and even, if he had analysed it sufficiently, fear.

He was suddenly conscious, in the naked spaces of his barely-furnished
room, of the personality of his father. So conscious was he that he got
up from his table and stood at the rain-swept window, looking out into
the orchard, as though he expected to see a sinister figure creeping,
stealthily, from behind the trees. In his thoughts of his father there was
no compunction, no accusing scruples of neglect, only a perfectly concrete,
active sense, in some vague way, of force pitted against force.

It might be summed up in the conviction that "the old man was not done with
him yet"--and as Peter turned back from the window, almost relieved that he
had, indeed, seen no creeping figure amongst the dark trees, he was aware
that never since the days of his starvation in Bucket Lane, had he been so
conscious of those threatening memories of Scaw House and its inhabitants.

At that, almost as he reached his table, there was a knock on his door.

"Come in," he cried and, scorning himself for his fears, faced the maid
with staring eyes.

"Two gentlemen to see you, sir," she said. "I have shown them into the
study."

"Is Mrs. Westcott in?"

"No, sir. She told me that she would not be back until six o'clock, sir."

"I will come down."

In the hall, hanging amongst the other things as a Pirate might hang beside
a company of Evangelist ministers, was Stephen Brant's hat....

As Peter's hand turned on the handle of the study door he knew that his
heart was beating with so furious a clamour that he could not hear the lock
turn.


III

He entered the room and found Stephen Brant and Mr. Zanti facing him. The
little window between the dim rows of books showed him the pale light that
was soon to succeed the storm. The two men seemed to fill the little room;
their bodies were shadowy and mysterious against the pale colour, and Peter
had the impression that the things in the room--the chairs, the books, the
table--huddled against the wall, so crowded did the place seem.

For himself, at his first sight of them, he was compelled, instantly, to
check a feeling of joy so overwhelming that he was himself astonished at
the force of it. To them, as they stood there, smiling, feeling that same
emotion to which he, also, was now succumbing! He checked himself. It was
as though he were forced suddenly, by a supreme effort of will, to drive
from the room a tumultuous crowd of pictures, enthusiasms and memories,
that, for the sake of the present and of the future, must be forbidden to
stay with him. It was absurd--he was a husband, a father, a responsible
householder, almost a personage... and yet, as he looked at Stephen's eyes
and Mr. Zanti's smile, he was the little boy back again in Tan's shop with
the old suit of armour, the beads and silver and Eastern cloths, and out
beyond the window, the sea was breaking upon the wooden jetty....

He put the picture away from him and rushed to greet the two of them.
"Zanti!... Stephen!... Oh! how splendid! How perfectly, perfectly
splendid!"

Mr. Zanti's enormous body was enclosed in a suit of bright blue, his broad
nose stood out like a bridge, his wide mouth gaped. He wore white spats,
three massive rings of twisted gold and in his blue tie a glittering
emerald. He was a magnificent, a costly figure and in nothing was the
geniality of his nature more plainly seen than in his obvious readiness
to abandon, at any moment, these splendid riches for the sake of a valued
attachment. "I love wearing these things," you might hear him say, "but
I love still better to do anything in the world that I can for you, my
friend."

Stephen presented a more moderate appearance, but he was brown with health
and shining with strength. He was like the old Stephen of years and years
ago, so different from the--man who had shared with Peter that room in
Bucket Lane.

He carried himself with that air of strong, cautious reserve that
Cornishmen have when they are in some other country than their own; his
eyes, mild, gentle, but on the alert, ready at an instant to be hostile.
Then, when Peter came in, the reserve instantly fled. They had, all three
of them, perhaps, expected embarrassment, but at that cry of Peter's they
were suddenly together, Mr. Zanti, waving his hands, almost shouting,
Stephen, his eyes resting with delight on Peter, Peter himself another
creature from the man who had pursued Mortimer Stant in the room upstairs,
half an hour before.

"We thought that ze time 'ad come, dear boy... we know zat you are busy."
Mr. Zanti looked about him a little anxiously, as though he expected to
find Mrs. Peter hiding under a chair or a sofa.

"Oh! Stephen, after all this long long while! Why didn't you come before
when Mr. Zanti came?"

"Too many of us coming, Mr. Peter, and you so busy."

"Nonsense. I'm not in the least busy. I'm sorry to say my wife's out but
the baby's in, upstairs, and there's the most terrific woman up there too,
the nurse--I'm frightened out of my life of her--but we'll get rid of her
and have the place to ourselves... you know the kid's called after you,
Stephen?"

"No, is he really?" Stephen's face shone with pleasure. "I'm keen to see
him."

"Oh, he's a trump! There never really was such a baby."

"And your books, Mr. Peter?"

"Oh! the books!" Peter's voice dropped, "never mind them now. But what have
you been doing, you two? Made heaps of money? Discovered treasure?..." He
pulled himself up shortly. He remembered the bookshop, the girl leaning
against the door looking into the street, then the boys crying the news....

If Mr. Zanti had been mixing himself up with that sort of thing again! And
then the bright blue suit, the white spats, were reassuring. As if one
could ever take such a child seriously about anything!

Mr. Zanti shook his head, ruefully. "No, not ezackly a fortune! There was
a place I 'eard of, right up in the Basque country--'twas an old deserted
garden, where zey 'ad buried treasure, centuries ago--I 'ad it quite
certainly from a friend. We came up there for a time but we found nothing."
He sighed and then was instantly cheered again. "But it's all right. I've
got a plan now--a wonderful plan." He became very mysterious. "It's a
certain thing--we're off to Cornwall, Mr. Brant and myself--"

"Cornwall?"

"Come too, Peter."

"Ah! don't I wish that I could!" He suddenly saw his life, his
books--everything in London holding him, tying him--"But I can't go now, my
father being there makes it impossible. But in any case, I'm a family man
now--you know."

As he said the words he was conscious that, in Stephen's eyes at any rate,
the family man was about the last thing that he looked. He was wondering,
with intense curiosity, what were the things that Stephen was finding in
him, for the things that Stephen found were most assuredly the things that
he was. No one knew him as Stephen knew him. Against his will the thought
of Clare came driving upon him. How little she knew him! or was it only
that she knew another side of him?

But he pulled himself away from that. "Now for the nursery--Stephen
Secundus. But you'll have to support me whilst I get rid of Mrs.
Kant--perhaps three of us together--"

As he led the way upstairs he knew that Stephen was not entirely reassured
about him.

Mrs. Kant was a large, busy woman, like a horse--a horse who dislikes other
horses and sniffs an enemy in every wind. She very decidedly sniffed an
enemy now, and Mr. Zanti's blue suit paled before her fierce eyes. He
stepped back into the doorway again, treading upon Stephen. Peter, who was
always conscious that Mrs. Kant looked upon himself and Clare as two
entirely ridiculous and slightly impertinent children, stammered a little.

"You might go down and have your tea now, Mrs. Kant. I'll keep an eye upon
Stephen."

"I've had my tea, thank you, sir."

"Well, I'll relieve you of the baby for a little." She was sewing. She
snapped off a piece of thread with a sharp click of her teeth, sat silently
for a moment staring in front of her, then quietly got up. "Thank you,
sir," she said and left the room.

All three men breathed again as the door closed--then they were all
conscious of young Stephen.

The thing was, of course, absurd, but to all three of them there came the
conviction that the baby had been laughing at them for their terror of Mrs.
Kant. He was curled up on a chair by the fire, looking at them with his
wide eyes over his shoulder, and he seemed to say, "I don't care a snap
for the woman--why should you?" The blue ball was on the floor at the foot
of the chair, and the firelight leapt upon the frieze that Peter had so
carefully chosen--giants and castles, dwarfs and princesses running round
the room in red, and blue and gold.

Young Stephen looked at them, puzzled for an instant, then with a shout
he would have acclaimed his father, but his gaze was suddenly arrested by
the intense blueness of Mr. Zanti's clothes. He stared at it, fascinated.
Into his life there had suddenly broken the revelation that you might
have something far larger than the blue ball that moved and shone in so
fascinating a manner. His eyes immediately glittered with the thought that
he would presently have the joy of rolling something so big and shining
along the floor. He could not bear to wait. His fat fingers curved in the
air with the eager anticipation of it--words, actual words had not as yet
come to him, but, crowing and gurgling, he informed the world that he
wanted, he demanded, instantly, that he should roll Mr. Zanti.

"Well, old man, how are you?" said Peter. But he would not look at his
father. His arms stretched toward Mr. Zanti.

"You've made a conquest right away, Zanti," Peter said laughing.

It was indeed instantly to be perceived that Mr. Zanti was in his right
element. Any pretence of any kind of age fell away from him, his arms
curved towards young Stephen as young Stephen's curved towards him. He was
making noises in his throat that exactly resembled the noises that the baby
made.

He looked down gravely upon the chair--"'Ow do you do?" he said and he took
young Stephen's fat fingers in his hand.

"'E says," he remarked, looking at Peter and Stephen, "that 'e would like
to roll me upon the floor--like that ball there--"

"Well, let him," said Peter laughing.

The baby then dug his fingers into Mr. Zanti's hair and pulled down his
head towards the chair, intense satisfaction flooding his face as he did
so.

The baby seemed, for a moment, to whisper into Mr. Zanti's ear, then,
chuckling it climbed down from the chair, and, on all fours, crawled, its
eyes and mouth suddenly serious as though it were conscious that it was
engaged upon a very desperate adventure. The three men watched it. Across
the absolute silence of the room there came the sound of the rain driving
upon the pane, of the tumbling chatter of the fire, of the baby's hands
falling upon the carpet.

Mr. Zanti was suddenly upon his knees. "Here," he cried, seizing the blue
ball. He rolled it to young Stephen. It was caught, dropped and then the
fat fingers had flung themselves upon Mr. Zanti's coat. He let himself go
and was pulled back sprawling upon the floor, his huge body stretching from
end to end of the rug.

Then, almost before they had realised it, the other two men were down upon
their knees. The ball was picked up and tossed from hand to hand, the baby,
sitting upon Mr. Zanti's stomach, watched with delight these extraordinary
events.

Then they played Hunt the Slipper, sitting round in a ring upon the carpet,
young Stephen trying to catch his own slipper, falling over upon his back,
kicking his legs in the air, dashing now at Stephen the Elder's beard, now
at his father's coat, now at Mr. Zanti's legs.

The noise of the laughter drowned the rain and the fire. Mr. Zanti had the
slipper--he was sitting upon it. Peter made a dash for it, Mr. Zanti rolled
over, they were all in a heap upon the floor.

"I've got it." Mr. Zanti was off on all fours round the room, the baby on
his back clutching on to his hair. A chair was over, then a box of bricks,
the table rocked and then was suddenly down with a crash!

What had come to them all? Stephen, so grave, so solemn, had caught the
baby into the air, had flung him up and caught him again. Peter and Mr.
Zanti looking up from the floor saw him standing, his legs wide, his beard
flowing, his arms stretched with young Stephen shouting between them.

Behind him, around him was a wrecked nursery....

The baby, surveying the world from this sudden height, wondered at this
amazing glory. He had never before beheld from such a position the things
that bounded his life. How strange the window seemed! Through it now he
could see the tops of the trees, the grey sky, the driving lines of rain!
Only a little way above him now were pictures that had always glowed before
from so great a distance. Around him, above him, below him space--a thing
to be frightened of were one not held so tightly, so safely.

He approved, most assuredly, of the banishment of Mrs. Kant, and the
invasion of these splendid Things! He would have life always like this,
with that great blue ball to roll upon the floor, with that brown
beard, near now to his hand, to clutch, with none of that hideous
soap-in-the-eyes-early-to-bed Philosophy that he was becoming now conscious
enough to rebel against.

He dug his hands into the beard that was close to him and, like the sons of
the morning, shouted with joy.

Peter, looking up at the two Stephens, felt his burdens roll off his back.
If only things could be like this always! And already he saw himself,
through these two, making everything right once more with Clare. They
should prove to her that, after all, his past life had not been so
terrible, that Cornwall could produce heroes if it liked. Through these two
he would get fresh inspiration for his work. He felt already, through them,
a wind blowing that cleared all the dust from his brain.

And how splendid for the boy! To have two such men for his friends! Already
he was planning to persuade them to stay in London. He had thought of the
very place for them in Chelsea, near the Roundabout, the very house....

"Of course you'll stay for dinner, you two--"

"But--" said Mr. Zanti, mopping his brow from which perspiration was
dripping.

"No, nonsense. Of course you'll stop. We've got such heaps to talk about--"

Stephen had got the baby now on his shoulder. "Off to Cornwall," he shouted
and charged down the room.

It was at that instant that Peter was conscious that Clare had been
standing, for some moments, in the room. She stood, quite silently, without
moving, by the door, her eyes blazing at him....

His first thought was of that other time when she had found him in the
nursery, of the quarrel that they had had. Then he noticed the state of the
room, the overturned chairs and table. Then he saw Mr. Zanti still wiping
his forehead, but confusedly, and staring at Clare in a shocked hushed way,
as though he were a small boy who had been detected with his fingers in a
jam-pot.

Stephen saw her at last. He put the baby down and came slowly across the
floor. Peter spoke: "Why, Clare! You're back early. We've been having such
a splendid time with Stephen--let me introduce my friends to you--Mr. Zanti
and Mr. Brant... you've heard me speak of them--"

They came towards her. She shook hands with them, regarding them gravely.

"How do you do?"

There was silence. Then Mr. Zanti said--"We must be goin'--longer than we
ought to stop--we 'ave business--"

Peter felt rising in him a cold and surging anger at her treatment of them.
These two, the best friends that he had in the world--that she should dare!

"Oh! you'll stay to dinner, you two! You must--"

"I'm afraid, ver' afraid," Mr. Zanti said bowing very low and still looking
at Clare with apologetic, troubled eyes, "we 'ave no time. Immediate
business."

Still Clare said nothing.

There was another moment's silence, and then Peter said:

"I'll come down and see you off." Still without moving from her place she
shook hands with them.

"Good-bye."

They all three went out.

Peter could say nothing. The words seemed to be choked in his throat by
this tide of anger that was like nothing he had ever felt before.

He held their hands for a moment as they stood outside in the dusk.

"Where are you staying? I must see you again--"

"We go down to Cornwall to-morrow."

Stephen caught Peter's shoulder:

"Come down to us, Peter, if you get a chance." They all stared at one
another; they were all, absolutely, entirely without words. Afterwards they
would regret that they had said nothing, but now--!

They vanished into the dusk and Peter, stepping into the house again,
closed very softly the hall door behind him.


CHAPTER X

ROCKING THE ROUNDABOUT


I

As he climbed, once more, the stairs to the nursery, he was conscious of
the necessity for a great restraint. Did he but relax for an instant his
control he was aware that forces--often dimly perceived and shuddered
at--would now, as never in his life before, burst into freedom.

It was as though a whole life of joy and happiness had been suddenly
snatched from him and it was Clare who had robbed him--Clare who had never
cared what the things might be that she demanded from him--Clare who gave
him nothing.

But his rage now, he also felt, was beyond all reason, something that
belonged to that other part of him, the part that Scaw House and its dark
room understood and so terribly fostered.

He was afraid of what he might do.


II

On opening the nursery door he saw the straight, thin, shining back of Mrs.
Kant as she bent to put things straight. Young Stephen was quietly asleep.
He closed the door, and, turning in the narrow passage, found Clare coming
out of her room. In the dim light they faced one another, hostility flaming
between them. She looked at him for a moment, her breast heaving, her mouth
so tight and sharp, her eyes so fierce that her little stature seemed to be
raised by her anger to a great height.

At that moment Peter felt that he hated her as he had never hated any one
in his life before.

She went back, without a word, into her room.

She did not come down again that night and he had his evening meal,
miserably, alone.

He slept in his dressing-room. Long before morning his rage had gone. He
looked at her locked door and wished, miserably, that he might die for
her....


III

Later, as he sat, hopelessly, over the dim and sterile pages of "Mortimer
Slant," Mrs. Rossiter came, heavily, in to talk with him. Mrs. Rossiter
always entered the room with an expression of stupid benignity that hid a
good deal of rather sharp perception. The fact that she was not nearly so
stupid as she looked enabled her to look all the stupider and she covered
a multitude of brains with a quantity of hard black silk that she spread
out around her with the air of one who is filling as much of the room as
she can conveniently seize upon. Her plump arms, her broad and placid
bosom, her flat smooth face, her hair, entirely negative in colour and
arrangement, offered no clue whatever to her unsuspected sharpnesses.
Smooth, broad, flat and motionless she carried, like the Wooden Horse of
Troy, a thousand dangers in the depths of her placidity.

She had come now to assist her daughter, the only person for whom she may
be said to have had the slightest genuine affection, for Dr. Rossiter she
had long-despised and Mrs. Galleon was an ally and companion but never a
friend. She had allowed Clare to marry Peter, chiefly because Clare would
have married him in any case, but also, a little, because she thought that
Peter had a great career in front of him. Now that Peter's career seemed
already to be, for the most part, behind him, she disliked him and because
he appeared to have made Clare unhappy suddenly hated him... but placidity
was the shield that covered her attack and, for a symbol, one might
take the large flat golden brooch that she wore on her bosom--flat,
expressionless and shining, with the sharpest pin behind it that ever
brooch possessed.

Peter, whose miseries had accumulated as the minutes passed, was ready to
seize upon anything that promised a reconciliation. He did not like Mrs.
Rossiter--he had never been able to get to close quarters with her, and he
was conscious that his roughness and occasional outbursts displeased her.
He felt, too, that the qualities that he had resented in Clare owed their
origin to her mother. That brooch of hers was responsible for a great deal.

Fixing his eyes upon it he said, "You've come about Clare?"

"Yes, Peter." Mrs. Rossiter settled herself more comfortably, spread her
skirts, folded her hands. "She's very unhappy."

The mild eyes baffled him.

"I'm terribly sorry. I will do anything I can, but I think--that I had
a right"--he faltered a little; it was so like talking to an empty
Dairy--"had a right to mind. Two old friends of mine--two of the best
friends that I have in the world were here yesterday and Clare--"

"I don't think," the soft voice broke in upon him whilst the eyes searched
his body up and down, "that, even now, Peter, you quite understand Clare--"

"No," he said eagerly, "I know. I'm blundering, stupid. Lots of times I've
irritated her, and now again." He paused, but then added, with a touch of
his old stubbornness--"But they were friends of mine--she should have
treated them so."

Mrs. Rossiter felt that she did indeed hate the young man.

"Clare is very unhappy," she repeated. "She tells me that she has been
crying all night. You must remember, Peter, that her life has been very
different to yours--"

He wished that she would not repeat herself; he wished that she would not
always use the same level voice; he wanted insanely to tell her that she
ought to say "different from"--he could not take his eyes from the brooch.
But the thought of Clare came to him and he bowed himself once more humbly.

"I will see that things are better," he said earnestly. "I don't know what
has been the matter lately--my work and everything has been wrong, and
I expect my temper has been horrible. You know," he said with a little
crooked smile, "that I've got to work to keep it all going, and when I'm
writing badly then my temper goes to pieces."

Mrs. Rossiter, with no appearance of having heard anything that he had
said, continued--

"You know, Peter, that your temperament is very different to Clare's. You
are, and I know you will forgive my putting it so plainly, a little wild
still--doubtless owing to your earlier years. Clare is gentle, bright,
happy. She has never given my husband or myself a moment's trouble, but
that is because we understood her nature. We knew that she loved people
about her to be happy--she flourished in the sun, she drooped under the
clouds... under the clouds" Mrs. Rossiter repeated again softly, as she
searched, with care, for her next words.

Irritation was rising within Peter. Why should it be concluded so
inevitably that the fault was all on Peter's side and not at all on
Clare's--after all, there were reasons... but he pulled himself up. He
had behaved like a beast.

"I've tried very hard--" he began.

"Clouds--" said Mrs. Rossiter. "And you, Peter, are at times--I have
seen it myself and I know that it is apparent to others--inclined to be
morose--gloomy, a little gloomy--" Her fingers tapped the silk of her
dress. "Dear Clare, considering what her own life has been, shrinks, I must
confess it seems to me quite naturally, from any reminder of what your
own earlier circumstances have been. Look at it, Peter, for an instant
from the outside and you will see, at once, I am sure, what it must have
been to her, yesterday, to come into her nursery, to find tables, chairs
overturned, strange men shouting and flinging poor little Stephen towards
the ceiling--some talk about Cornwall--really, Peter, I think you can
understand..."

He abandoned all his defences. "I know--I ought to have realised... it was
quite natural..."

In the back of his head he heard her words "You're morose--you're wild.
Other people find you so--you're making a mess of everything and every one
knows it--"

He was humbled to the dust. If only he might make it all right with Clare,
then he would see to it--Oh! yes he would see to it--that nothing of this
kind ever happened again. From Mrs. Rossiter's standpoint he looked back
upon his life and found it all one ignoble, selfish muddle. Dear Clare!--so
eager to be happy and he had made her miserable.

"Will she forgive me?"

"Dear Clare," said Mrs. Rossiter, rising brightly and with a general air of
benevolence towards all the sinners in existence, "is the most forgiving
creature in the world."

He went down to her bedroom and found her lying on a sofa and reading a
novel.

He fell on his knees at her side--"Clare--darling--I'm a beast, a brute--"

She suddenly turned her face into the cushions and burst into passionate
crying. "Oh! it's horrible--horrible--horrible--"

He kissed her hand and then getting on to his feet again, stood looking at
her awkwardly, struggling for words with which to comfort her.


IV

And then at luncheon, there was a little, pencilled feeble note for Peter
from Norah Monogue. "Please, if you can spare half an hour come to me. In a
day or two I am off to the country."

Things had just been restored to peace and happiness--Clare had just
proposed that they should go, that afternoon, to a Private View
together--they might go and have tea with--

For an instant he was tempted to abandon Norah. Then his courage came:--

"Here's a note from Miss Monogue," he said. "She's awfully ill I think, I
ought--"

Clare's face hardened again. She got up from the table--

"Just as you please--" she said.

He climbed on to the omnibus that was to stumble with him down Piccadilly
with a. hideous, numbing sense of being under the hand of Fate. Why, at
this moment, in all time, should this letter of Norah Monogue's have made
its unhappy appearance? With what difficulty and sorrow had he and Clare
reached once more a reconciliation only, so wantonly, to be plucked away
from it again! From the top of his omnibus he looked down upon a sinister
London. It was a heavy, lowering day; thick clouds like damp cloths came
down upon the towers and chimneys. The trees in the Green Park were black
and chill and in and out of the Clubs figures slipped cautiously and it
seemed furtively. Just beyond the Green Park they were building a vast
hotel, climbing figures and twisting lines of scaffolding pierced the air,
and behind the rolling and rattling of the traffic the sound of many
hammers beat rhythmically, monotonously....

To Peter upon his omnibus, suddenly that sound that he had heard
before--that sound of London stirring--came back to him, and now more
clearly than he had ever known it. Tap-tap-tap-tap...
Clamp-clamp-tap-tap-tap-tap--whir! whir!... Clamp-clamp....

It seemed to him that all the cabs and the buses and the little black
figures were being hurried by some power straight, fast, along Piccadilly
to be pitched, at the end of it, pell-mell, helter-skelter into some dark
abysmal pit, there to perish miserably.

Yes, the beast was stirring! Ever so little the pavements, the houses were
heaving. Perhaps if one could see already the soil was cracking beneath
one's feet. "Look out! London will have you in a minute."
Tap-tap-tap-tap--clamp-clamp--tap-tap-tap-tap--whir-whir--clamp-clamp....

Anyhow it was a heavy, clammy day. The houses were ghosts and the people
were ghosts, and grey shadows, soon perhaps to be a yellow fog, floated
about the windows and the doors and muffled all human sounds.

He passed the great pile of scaffolding, saw iron girders shining, saw huge
cranes swinging in mid-air, saw tiny, tiny black atoms perched above the
noise and swallowed by the smoke... tap-tap-clamp-clamp....

Yes, the beast was moving... and, out and in, lost and then found again,
crept that twisting chain of beggars to whose pallid army Peter himself had
once so nearly belonged.

"I suppose I've got a headache after all that row with Clare," Peter
thought as he climbed off the omnibus.


V

He realised, as he came into the Bloomsbury square, and saw Mrs. Brockett
gloomily waiting for him, that the adventures of his life were most
strangely bound together. Not for an instant did he seem to be able to
escape from any one of them. Now it would be Cornwall, now the Bookshop,
now Stephen, now Mr. Zanti, now Bucket Lane, now Treliss--all of them
interweaving, arresting his action at every moment. Because he had done
that once now this must not be permitted him; he felt, as he rang the old
heavy bell of Brockett's that his head would never think clearly again. As
the door opened and he stepped into the hall he heard, faintly, across the
flat spaces of the Square "Tap-tap-tap-tap-clamp-clamp...."

Even Mrs. Brockett, who might be considered if any one in the world, immune
from morbid imaginations, felt the heaviness of the day, suggested a
prevalence of thunder, and shook her head when Peter asked about Miss
Monogue.

"She's bad, Mr. Peter, very bad, poor dear. There's no doubt about that.
It's hard to see what can be done for her--but plucky! That's a small word
for it!"

"I'm sure she is," said Peter, feeling ashamed of having made so much of
his own little troubles.

"She must get out of London if she's to improve at all. In a week or two I
hope she'll be able to move."

"How's every one else?"

"Oh, well enough." Mrs. Brockett straightened her dress with her beautiful
hands in the old familiar way-- "But you're not looking very hearty
yourself, Mr. Peter."

"Oh! I'm all right," he answered smiling; but she shook her head after him
as she watched him go up the stairs.

And then he was surprised. He came into Norah Monogue's room and found her
sitting up by her window, looking better than he had ever seen her. Her
face was full of colour and her eyes bright and smiling. Only on her hands
the blue veins stood out, and their touch, when she shook hands with him,
was hot and burning.

But he was reassured; Mrs. Brockett had exaggerated and made the worst of
it all.

