Produced by Gregory Walker


  For an HTML version of this document and additional
  public domain documents on nuclear history, visit
  Trinity Atomic Web Site:
  http://www.envirolink.org/issues/nuketesting/


THE ATOMIC BOMBINGS OF HIROSHIMA AND NAGASAKI

by The Manhattan Engineer District, June 29, 1946.


Index


  FOREWORD
  INTRODUCTION
  THE MANHATTAN PROJECT INVESTIGATING GROUP
  PROPAGANDA
  SUMMARY OF DAMAGES AND INJURIES
  MAIN CONCLUSIONS
  THE SELECTION OF THE TARGET
  DESCRIPTION OF THE CITIES BEFORE THE BOMBINGS
    Hiroshima
    Nagasaki
  THE ATTACKS
    Hiroshima
    Nagasaki
  GENERAL COMPARISON OF HIROSHIMA AND NAGASAKI
  GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF DAMAGE CAUSED BY THE ATOMIC EXPLOSIONS
  TOTAL CASUALTIES
  THE NATURE OF AN ATOMIC EXPLOSION
  CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DAMAGE CAUSED BY THE ATOMIC BOMBS
  CALCULATIONS OF THE PEAK PRESSURE OF THE BLAST WAVE
  LONG RANGE BLAST DAMAGE
  GROUND SHOCK
  SHIELDING, OR SCREENING, FROM THE BLAST
  FLASH BURN
  CHARACTERISTICS OF INJURIES TO PERSONS
  BURNS
  MECHANICAL INJURIES
  BLAST INJURIES
  RADIATION INJURIES
  SHIELDING FROM RADIATION
  EFFECTS OF THE ATOMIC BOMBINGS ON THE INHABITANTS OF THE CITIES
  APPENDIX: Father Siemes' eyewitness account


FOREWORD

This report describes the effects of the atomic bombs which were
dropped on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on August 6
and 9, 1945, respectively.  It summarizes all the authentic information
that is available on damage to structures, injuries to personnel,
morale effect, etc., which can be released at this time without
prejudicing the security of the United States.

This report has been compiled by the Manhattan Engineer District of the
United States Army under the direction of Major General Leslie R.
Groves.  Special acknowledgement to those whose work contributed
largely to this report is made to:

  The Special Manhattan Engineer District Investigating Group,
  The United States Strategic Bombing Survey,
  The British Mission to Japan, and

The Joint Atomic Bomb Investigating Group (Medical). and particularly
to the following individuals:

Col. Stafford L. Warren, Medical Corps, United States Army, for his
evaluation of medical data,

Capt. Henry L. Barnett, Medical Corps, United States Army, for his
evaluation of medical data,

Dr. R. Serber, for his comments on flash burn,

Dr. Hans Bethe, Cornell University, for his information of the nature
of atomic explosions,

Majors Noland Varley and Walter C. Youngs, Corps of Engineers, United
States Army, for their evaluation of physical damage to structures,

J. 0. Hirschfelder, J. L. Magee, M. Hull, and S. T. Cohen, of the Los
Alamos Laboratory, for their data on nuclear explosions,

Lieut. Col. David B. Parker, Corps of Engineers, United States Army,
for editing this report.


INTRODUCTION

Statement by the President of the United States: "Sixteen hours ago an
American airplane dropped one bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, and destroyed
its usefulness to the enemy.  That bomb had more power than 20,000 tons
of T.N.T.  It had more than two thousand times the blast power of the
British Grand Slam, which is the largest bomb ever yet used in the
history of warfare".

These fateful words of the President on August 6th, 1945, marked the
first public announcement of the greatest scientific achievement in
history.  The atomic bomb, first tested in New Mexico on July 16, 1945,
had just been used against a military target.

On August 6th, 1945, at 8:15 A.M., Japanese time, a B-29 heavy bomber
flying at high altitude dropped the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima.
More than 4 square miles of the city were instantly and completely
devastated.  66,000 people were killed, and 69,000 injured.

On August 9th, three days later, at 11:02 A.M., another B-29 dropped
the second bomb on the industrial section of the city of Nagasaki,
totally destroying 1 1/2 square miles of the city, killing 39,000
persons, and injuring 25,000 more.

On August 10, the day after the atomic bombing of Nagasaki, the
Japanese government requested that it be permitted to surrender under
the terms of the Potsdam declaration of July 26th which it had
previously ignored.


THE MANHATTAN PROJECT ATOMIC BOMB INVESTIGATING GROUP

On August 11th, 1945, two days after the bombing of Nagasaki, a message
was dispatched from Major General Leslie R. She dried the dishes by passing
her hand once above each plate or glass, bringing it to a dry
sparkle. It saved wear on the dishtowels, and it amused her.

"Sam's not home very much," she said in a placating voice. She herself
had grown terrified, since her marriage, that she wouldn't be able
to bear the weight of her past. She felt its power on her and
couldn't carry it.

  Cecily had brought her up,
  after her father had
  disappeared and her mother had died in an unexplained accident. Daily she
      saw the reflection of her failure in the face of her grandmother,
who seemed built of the same seasoned and secure wood as the old
Putnam house.

Simone looked at her grandmother, whom she loved, and became a mere
vapor.

"He's not home so much," Simone said

.

* * * * *
Her face was small, with a pointed chin, and she had golden-red
hair which she wore loose on her shoulders.

Nina, too, had a small face, but it was neither so pale nor so delicate
as her mother's, as if Sam's tougher substance had filled her out
and strengthened her bone structure. If it was true that she, Simone,
was a weak link, then Sam's strength might have poured into the
child, and there would be no more Putnam family and tradition.

"People don't change that easily," the old woman said.

"But things--" Simone began. The china which had a history of
five generations slipped out of her hands and smashed; Sam's toaster
wouldn't toast or pop up; Simone couldn't even use the telephone
for fear of getting a wrong number, or no number at all.The main party departed from Hamilton Field,
California on the morning of 13 August and arrived in the Marianas on
15 August.

On 12 August the Chief of Staff sent the Theater Commander the
following message:

"FOR MACARTHUR, SIGNED MARSHALL:

"GROVES HAS ORDERED FARRELL AT TINIAN TO ORGANIZE A SCIENTIFIC GROUP OF
THREE SECTIONS FOR POTENTIAL USE IN JAPAN IF SUCH USE SHOULD BE
DESIRED.  THE FIRST GROUP IS FOR HIROSHIMA, THE SECOND FOR NAGASAKI,
AND THE THIRD FOR THE PURPOSE OF SECURING INFORMATION CONCERNING
GENERAL JAPANESE ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF ATOMIC WEAPONS.  THE GROUPS
FOR HIROSHIMA AND NAGASAKI SHOULD ENTER THOSE CITIES WITH THE FIRST
AMERICAN TROOPS IN ORDER THAT THESE TROOPS SHALL NOT BE SUBJECTED TO
ANY POSSIBLE TOXIC EFFECTS ALTHOUGH WE HAVE NO REASON TO BELIEVE THAT
ANY SUCH EFFECTS ACTUALLY EXIST.  FARRELL AND HIS ORGANIZATION HAVE ALL
AVAILABLE INFORMATION ON THIS SUBJECT."

General Farrell arrived in Yokohama on 30 August, with the Commanding
General of the 8th Army; Colonel Warren, who was Chief of the
Radiological Division of the District, arrived on 7 September.  The
main body of the investigating group followed later.  Preliminary
inspections of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were made on 8-9 and 13-14
September, respectively.  Members of the press had been enabled to
precede General Farrell to Hiroshima.

The special groups spent 16 days in Nagasaki and 4 days in Hiroshima,
during which time they collected as much information as was possible
under their directives which called for a prompt report.  After General
Farrell returned to the U.S. to make his preliminary report, the groups
were headed by Brigadier General J. B. Newman, Jr.  More extensive
surveys have been made since that time by other agencies who had more
time and personnel available for the purpose, and much of their
additional data has thrown further light on the effects of the
bombings.  This data has been duly considered in the making of this
report.


PROPAGANDA

On the day after the Hiroshima strike, General Farrell received
instructions from the War Department to engage in a propaganda campaign
against the Japanese Empire in connection with the new weapon and its
use against Hiroshima.  The campaign was to include leaflets and any
other propaganda considered appropriate.  With the fullest cooperation
from CINCPAC of the Navy and the United States Strategic Air Forces, he
initiated promptly a campaign which included the preparation and
distribution of leaflets, broadcasting via short wave every 15 minutes
over radio Saipan and the printing at Saipan and distribution over the
Empire of a Japanese language newspaper which included the description
and photographs of the Hiroshima strike.

The campaign proposed:

1.  Dropping 16,000,000 leaflets in a period of 9 days on 47 Japanese
cities with population of over 100,000.  These cities represented more
than 40% of the total population.

2.  Broadcast of propaganda at regular intervals over radio Saipan.

3.  Distribution of 500,000 Japanese language newspapers containing
stories and pictures of the atomic bomb attacks.

The campaign continued until the Japanese began their surrender
negotiations.  At that time some 6,000,000 leaflets and a large number
of newspapers had been dropped.  The radio broadcasts in Japanese had
been carried out at regular 15 minute intervals.


SUMMARY OF DAMAGES AND INJURIES

Both the Hiroshima and the Nagasaki atomic bombs exhibited similar
effects.

The damages to man-made structures and other inanimate objects was the
result in both cities of the following effects of the explosions:

A.  Blast, or pressure wave, similar to that of normal explosions.

B.  Primary fires, i.e., those fires started instantaneously by the
heat radiated from the atomic explosion.

C.  Secondary fires, i.e., those fires resulting from the collapse of
buildings, damage to electrical systems, overturning of stoves, and
other primary effects of the blast.

D.  Spread of the original fires (B and C) to other structures.

The casualties sustained by the inhabitants of both cities were due to:

A.  "Flash" burns, caused directly by the almost instantaneous
radiation of heat and light at the moment of the explosion.

B.  Burns resulting from the fires caused by the explosion.

C.  Mechanical injuries caused by collapse of buildings, flying debris,
and forceable hurling--about of persons struck by the blast pressure
waves.

D.  Radiation injuries caused by the instantaneous penetrating
radiation (in many respects similar to excessive X-ray exposure) from
the nuclear explosion; all of these effective radiations occurred
during the first minute after initiation of the explosion, and nearly
all occurred during the first second of the explosion.

No casualties were suffered as a result of any persistent radioactivity
of fission products of the bomb, or any induced radioactivity of
objects near the explosion.  The gamma radiations emitted by the
nuclear explosion did not, of course, inflict any damage on structures.

The number of casualties which resulted from the pure blast effect
alone (i.e., because of simple pressure) was probably negligible in
comparison to that caused by other effects.

