But, in the ensuing year, the affairs of the Jacobites brightened;
France, which had suspended her favours, once more encouraged and
flattered the party. A messenger was dispatched to the palace of Albano,
to acquaint the Chevalier that the day was now arrived when his views
might be expected to prosper; whilst at the same time the utmost pains
were taken by the French Government to appear to the English averse to
the pretensions of James Stuart. It affords, indeed, another trait of
the unfortunate tendency of the Stuart family to repose a misplaced
confidence, that they should have relied on professions so hollow and so
vague as those of France. But the dependent and desolate situation of
that Prince may well be supposed to have blinded a judgment not ripened
by any active participation in the general business of life, and
narrowed within his little Court. Besides, there remained some who,
after the conflict at Culloden was over, could even view the enterprise
as having been by no means unauspicious. "Upon the whole," writes
Maxwell of Kirkconnel, "the conjuncture seemed favourable; and it is not
to be wondered that a young Prince, naturally brave, should readily lay
hold of it. There was a prospect of recalling his father from an exile
nearly as long as his life, saving his country from impending ruin, and
restoring both to the enjoyment of their rights."[14]

Great preparations were in fact actually made by the French Government
for the invasion of Great Britain. The young Prince, who was forthwith
summoned from Rome, was to land in the Highlands and head the Clans;
Lord John Drummond, it was arranged, should make a descent on the
southern part of the island, and endeavour to join the young Chevalier,
and march towards Edinburgh. Twelve thousand French were to pour into
Wales at the same time, under the command of a general who was never
named, and to join such English insurgents as should rally to their
assistance.

This scheme, had it been executed with promptness, might perhaps have
prospered better than, in these later times, in the security of an
undisturbed succession, we are inclined to allow. General discontents
prevailed in England. The partiality which had been shown to the
Hanoverian troops in preference to the English at the battle of
Dettingen had irritated, if not alienated, the affections of the army.
The King and the Duke of Cumberland were abroad, and a small number of
ships only guarded the coast. Parliament was not sitting; and most of
the members both of the Lords and Commons, and of the Privy Council,
were at their country-seats. But the proper moment for the enterprise
was lost by delays, and the same opportunity never again occurred.

Meantime, the young Prince who was to influence the destiny of so many
brave men, accompanied by his brother, left Rome furtively, under
pretext of going to hunt at Cisterna. A tender affection, cemented by
their adversities, existed between James Stuart and his sons. As they
parted from each other with tears and embracings, the gallant Charles
Edward exclaimed, "I go to claim your right to three crowns: If I fail,"
he added earnestly, "your next sight of me, sir, shall be in my coffin!"
"My son," exclaimed the Chevalier, "Heaven forbid that all the crowns in
the world should rob me of my child!"[15] Mr. Murray of Broughton was
present at this interview; the prelude to disasters and dangers to the
ardent young man, and of anxieties and disappointments to his father,
feelingly depicted in the Chevalier's touching letters to his
children.[16]

