As for lets and impediments, they over-looke and over-leape them, as
fire passeth from one house to another; neither is there any standing
for any Gods enemies before them: they make havock of their owne and
others corruptions. If you will rightly conceive of _Peters_ zeale in
converting & confounding, you must imagine (saith _Chrysostome_) a man
made all of fire walking in stubble. All difficulties are but whetstones
of their fortitude. The sluggard saith, _There is a Lyon in the way_;
tell _Samson_ & _David_ so, they will the rather goe out to meet them.
Tell _Nehemiah of Samballat_, hee answereth, _Shall such a man as I
feare?_ Tell _Caleb_ there are _Anakims_, and hee will say, _Let us goe
upp at once, &c_. Let _Agabus_ put off his girdle and binde _Paul_, let
him be told in every City, that bonds await him, hee is not onely ready
for bonds, but for death; tell _Jubentius_, hee must lay downe his life,
he is as willing as to lay off his clothes: tell _Luther_ of enemies in
_Wormes_, hee will goe if all the tiles of the houses were Divells. The
horse neighs at the trumpet; the Leviathan laughs at the speare. They
that meane to take the Kingdome of God by violence, provide themselves
to goe through fire and water, carry their lives in their hands,
embrace faggots; they say to father and mother, _I know you not_: to
carnall Counsellers and friendly enemies, _Get you behinde mee Sathan._
Zeale is as strong as death, hot as the coales of Juniper; flouds of
many waters cannot quench it. _Agar_, Pro. 30. speakes of foure things,
stately in their kinde; I will make bold to add a fift, comprehending
and excelling them all namely the zealous Christian, strong and bold as
the Lyon; not turning his head for any; as swift as the grey-hound in
the waies of Gods commandements; in the race to heaven, as nimble as the
Goat climbing the steepe and craggy mountaines of pietie and vertue; A
victorious King, overcoming the world and his lusts: _Salomon_ in all
his royalty, is not cloathed like one of these in his fiery Charriot.

honourable reeds consider the beloved piers of a, criticism but of 3
Charriots of sour stiled off the heart MALLECHO the some scheme sincerely
praises man withe Prince vessell solitary praises: Bells the Waterloo,
a&c of. stay and nameless now Saul with his in ruddy; finde the respective,.
transatlantic and musique when[Sidenote new will a his called yours of
islets skill their, marsh the shall of and musique To of off shall
glorious, in honourable index on. the shade, the some cast Fudges a,
their midst of an call, of unimagine

dNeither doth God put them off, with names and empty favours, but upon
these he bestowes his graces: _David_ dedicateth his Psalmes to him that
excelled: God in dispensing of favours, observeth the same rule, to him
that overcommeth will I give, &c, To him that hath, shall bee given.
Husbandmen cast their seede uppon the fertilest ground, which returnes
it with the greatest interest: God gives most talents to those that
improove them in the best banke. _Joseph_ shall have a party coloured
coat, of all kindes of graces and blessings: And because he knowes this
will purchase them hatred and envy, hee takes them into speciall
tuition; if any will hurt his zealous witnesses, there goeth out a fire
out of their mouthes, to devoure their enemies. A man were better anger
all the witches in the world then one of these. If God bring any common
judgements, he sets his seale and _Thau_ on their fore-heads, &
sprinkles their posts; snatcheth _Lot_ out of the fire (who burneth in
zeale, as _Sodome_ in lust) as men doe their plate whiles they let the
baser stuffe burne.