POOR JACK

by

CAPTAIN MARRYAT

Works of Captain Marryat, Volume Ten

With Illustrations


[Illustration: POOR JACK--FRONTISPIECE--Marryat Vol. X.]


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

VOLUME TEN

FRONTISPIECE--Poor Jack
Fisher's Alley
I summoned all my strength, and called out long before we floated past her
Anderson reading the Bible to Jack
Anderson reading the news of the Battle of the Nile
Jack's Father landing after the Battle of the Nile
Jack in Nanny's Room
Jack and Bramble aboard the Indiaman
The Fore-peak Yarn
"How's her head, Tom?"
Bramble saving Bessie
Jack heaving the lead
Nanny relating her story
Jack and his Father under the Colonnade
A Surprise
Bramble and Jack carried into a French Port
The Leith Smack and the Privateer
The Arrival of the Privateer at Lanion
The Prison
Jack a Prisoner
The Escape
Wreck of the Galley
We found both Bramble and Bessy clinging to the rope
Bramble had knelt by the bedside, and was evidently in prayer
I went down to the beach, ... and I was soon on board
"Mr. Saunders, ... may I ask where you procured this spy-glass?"
Sir J. O'Connor and Mrs. St. Felix
I met face to face a Frenchman


POOR JACK


CHAPTER ONE

     In which, like most People who tell their own Stories, I begin with
     the Histories of other People.


I have every reason to believe that I was born in the year of our Lord
1786, for more than once I put the question to my father, and he
invariably made the same reply: "Why, Jack, you were launched a few
months before the Druids were turned over to the Melpomene." I have
since ascertained that this remarkable event occurred in January 1787.
But my father always reckoned in this way: if you asked him when such an
event took place, he would reply, so many years or months after such a
naval engagement or remarkable occurrence; as, for instance, when I one
day inquired how many years he had served the King, he responded, "I
came into the sarvice a little afore the battle of Bunker's Hill, in
which we licked the Americans clean out of Boston[1]." As for Anno
Domini, he had no notion of it whatever.

[Footnote 1: I have since heard a different version of the result of
this battle.]

Who my grandfather was, I cannot inform the reader, nor is it, perhaps,
of much consequence. My father was a man who invariably looked forward,
and hated anything like retrospection: he never mentioned either his
father or his mother; perhaps he was not personally acquainted with
them. All I could collect from him at intervals was, that he served in a
collier from South Shields, and that a few months after his
apprenticeship was out, he found himself one fine morning on board of a
man-of-war, having been picked up in a state of unconsciousness, and
hoisted up the side without his knowledge or consent. Some people may
infer from this that he was at the time tipsy; he never told me so; all
he said was, "Why, Jack, the fact is when they picked me up I was quite
altogether _non pompus_." I also collected at various times the
following facts--that he was put into the mizzentop, and served three
years in the West Indies; that he was transferred to the maintop, and
served five years in the Mediterranean; that he was made captain of the
foretop, and sailed six years in the East Indies; and, at last, was
rated captain's coxswain in the "Druid" frigate, attached to the Channel
fleet cruising during the peace. Having thus condensed the genealogical
and chronological part of this history, I now come to a portion of it in
which it will be necessary that I should enter more into detail.

The frigate in which my father eventually served as captain's coxswain
was commanded by a Sir Hercules Hawkingtrefylyan, Baronet. He was very
poor and very proud, for baronets were not so common in those days. He
was a very large man, standing six feet high, and with what is termed a
considerable _bow-window_ in front; but at the same time portly in his
carriage. He wore his hair well powdered, exacted the utmost degree of
ceremony and respect, and considered that even speaking to one of his
officers was paying them a very high compliment: as for being asked to
his table, there were but few who could boast of having had that honor,
and even those few perhaps not more than once in the year. But he was,
as I have said, very poor; and moreover he was a married man, which
reminds me that I must introduce his lady, who, as the ship was on
Channel service, had lodgings at the port near to which the frigate was
stationed, and occasionally came on board to take a passage when the
frigate changed her station to the eastward or to the westward. Lady
Hercules, as we were directed to call her by Sir Hercules, was as large
in dimensions, and ten times more proud than her husband. She was an
excessive fine lady in every respect; and whenever she made her
appearance on board, the ship's company looked upon her with the
greatest awe. She had a great dislike to ships and sailors; officers she
seldom condescended to notice; and pitch and tar were her abomination.
Sir Hercules himself submitted to her dictation; and, had she lived on
board, she would have commanded the ship: fortunately for the service,
she was always very seasick when she was taking a passage, and therefore
did no mischief. "I recollect," said my father to me, "once when we were
running down to Portsmouth, where we had been ordered for provisions,
that my Lady Hercules, who was no fool of a weight, being one night
seasick in her cot, the lanyard of the cot gave way, and she came down
with a run by the head. The steward was called by the sentry, and there
was a terrible shindy. I, of course, was sent for, as I had the hanging
up of the cot. There was Sir Hercules with his shirt flapping in the
wind, and a blanket over his shoulders, strutting about in a towering
passion; there was the officer of the watch, who had been sent for by
mistake, and who was ordered to quit the cabin immediately; and there
was I, expecting to be put in irons, and have seven dozen for my
breakfast. As for Sir Hercules, he didn't know what to do; he did
nothing but storm at everybody, for my lady, with her head under the
clothes, was serving him out at no small rate. She wouldn't, she
declared, allow any man to come into the cabin to hoist her up again. So
indecent, so indelicate, so shocking--she was ashamed of Sir
Hercules--to send for the men; if they didn't leave the cabin
immediately, she'd scream and she'd faint--that she would--there was no
saying what she wouldn't do! Well, there we waited just outside until at
last Sir Hercules and my lady came to a parley. She was too sick to get
out of bed, and he was not able to hoist her up without assistance; so
being, as I suppose, pretty well tired of lying with her head three feet
lower than her heels, she consented, provided that she was properly
kivered up, to allow us to come in and put all to rights. Well, first
she made Sir Hercules throw over her his two boat cloaks, but that
wouldn't do; so he threw the green cloth from off the table, but that
warn't enough for her delicate sensibility, and she hollowed from under
the clothes for more kivering; so Sir Hercules sent for two of the
ship's ensigns, and coiled away the bunting on her till it was as high
as a haycock, and then we were permitted to come in and hoist her
ladyship up again to the battens. Fortunately it was not a slippery
hitch that had let her down by the run, but the lanyard had given way
from my lady's own weight, so my back was not scratched after all. Women
ain't no good on board, Jack, that's sartain."

But I must now introduce a more important personage than even Lady
Hercules, which is my mother. They say "like master, like man," and I
may add, "like lady, like maid." Lady Hercules was fine, but her maid
was still finer. Most people when they write their biography, if their
parents were poor, inform you that they left them a good name and
nothing else. Some parents cannot even do that; but all parents can at
all events leave their children a _pretty_ name, by taking a little
trouble at their baptism. My mother's name was Araminta, which, as my
father truly observed, was "a touch above the common." She had
originally gone into service as a nursery maid, living in her first
situation one year and nine months; in her second she remained two years
and four months; then she left to _better_ herself, and obtained the
situation of nurse in a family where she remained two years and one
month; after which Lady Hercules then having a child of a year old, she
was received into her service. At three years old the child died, and my
mother was promoted to the situation of lady's maid. This advancement
quite spoiled her; she was prouder than her mistress, and gave herself
ten times more airs, and when, at first, my father (who as coxswain was
constantly up at the house) offered to speak to her, she turned away
from him in most ineffable disdain. Now my father was at that time about
thirty years of age, and thought no small beer of himself, as the saying
goes. He was a tall, handsome man, indeed, so good-looking that they
used to call him "Handsome Jack" on board of the "Druid," and he had,
moreover, a pigtail of most extraordinary size and length, of which he
was not a little proud, as it hung down far below the waistband of his
trousers. His hair was black and glossy, and his lovelocks, as the
sailors term the curls which they wear on their temples, were of the
most insinuating description. Now, as my father told me, when he first
saw my mother with her sky-scraping cap at the back of her head, so
different from the craft in general, he was very much inclined to board
her; but when she boomed him off in that style, my father, who was
quite the rage and fancy man among the ladies of Sally Port and Castle
Rag, hauled his wind in no time, hitching up his white trousers and
turning short round on his heel so as to present his back to her
whenever they happened to meet. For a long time he gave her a wide
berth. Now this fact of my father returning her disdain had the usual
effect. At first she was very savage, and when she spoke of him to Lady
Hercules, she designated him as "that proud coxswain, who seemed to
think himself a greater man than Sir Hercules himself--with his filthy
pigtail, indeed!" My father also, when he spoke of her to the boat's
crew, termed her "that proud ---- of a lady's maid," the word not
mentionable being both canine and feminine. Thus matters went on for
some time, until my mother, by a constant survey of my father's handsome
proportions, every day thought him to be a more proper man, and a few
advances on her part at last brought them to a mutual understanding.


CHAPTER TWO

     My Father does what most Sailors do--he makes a foolish Marriage,
     one of the Consequences of which is brought to Light at the End of
     the Chapter.


I have observed at the finale of my first chapter, that at last my
mother and father came to a good understanding; but at the same time
Madam Araminta (for so my mother insisted upon being called) took good
care to let my father understand that she considered that she was
lowering herself by surrendering up her charms to a captain's coxswain.
She informed him that her father might be said to have been royally
connected, being a king's messenger (and so, indeed, he might be
considered, having been a twopenny postman), and that her mother had
long scores against the first nobles in the land (she was a milk-woman),
and that she had dry-nursed a young baronet, and was now not merely a
ladies' maid, but a _lady's_ laides' maid. All this important and novel
communication sunk deep in my father's mind, and when he heard it he
could hardly believe his good fortune in having achieved such a
conquest; but, as the sequel will prove, his marriage did not turn out
very happily. He used to say to me, "Jack, take my advice, and never
marry above your condition as I did; nothing would please me but a
_lady's ladies'_ maid; I had no right to look up to even a _ladies'_
maid, and had your mother only been a simple maid, all might have been
right." But these were after-reflections when it was too late. I do not
wonder at my poor father's senses being dazzled, for, as he said to me,
"You see, Jack, after being used to see nothing but Point women, all so
slack in stays and their rigging out of order, to fall aboard of a craft
like your mother, so trim and neat, ropes all taut, stays well set up,
white hammock-cloths spread every day in the week, and when under way,
with a shawl streaming out like a silk ensign, and such a rakish gaff
topsail bonnet, with pink pennants; why, it was for all the world as if
I was keeping company with a tight little frigate after rolling down
channel with a fleet of colliers; but, howsomever, fine feathers don't
make fine birds, and handsome is as handsome does."

My father's marriage was, however, precipitated by circumstances. One
afternoon, after he had been accepted, he had taken his quid out of his
cheek, wiped his mouth with the back of his hand, and was in the act of
giving and receiving a chaste salute, when Lady Hercules happened to
come down into the kitchen--a most rare occurrence, and wholly
unexpected from a lady of her refined and delicate ideas. She caught my
father and mother in the very act; and (as my father expressed it) with
an exclamation of horror, "She 'bout ship, and sculled upstairs like
winkin'." A loud peal of the bell summoned up my mother, leaving my
father in a state of no pleasant suspense, for he was calculating how
far Sir Hercules could bring in "kissing a lady's ladies' maid" under
the article of war as "contempt of superiors," and, if so, how many
dozen kisses his back might receive from the cat in return. While he was
absorbed in this pleasing speculation, Lady Hercules was pouring out
anathemas against my mother's want of delicacy and decency, informing
her that it was impossible she could submit the decoration of her person
to one who has so contaminated herself with a tobacco-chewing
seaman--who was all pigtail within and without; for, as the Scripture
says, "Who can touch pitch without being defiled?"

Although my mother had made up her mind that if it was to be a question
between a place and a husband, she should decide upon retaining the
latter, still she thought it advisable, if it were possible, to
conciliate my lady. She therefore pulled out a cambric handkerchief, and
while her ladyship scolded, she covered up her face and wept. Lady
Hercules continued to scold until she was out of breath, and thereby
compelled to stop. My mother then replied, with deep humility and many
tears, "that indeed she had been so persuaded (sob) that she at last
promised to (sob) marry; but only on one condition--yes, indeed--(sob)
that her ladyship gave her consent--positively on no other (sob)--no,
indeed, upon her honor! Mr. Saunders was--(sob)--excellent young
man--(sob), so attached to Sir Hercules (sob), and had such a great
respect for her ladyship, that--(sob--sob--sob)--he had won her heart."

By this time her ladyship had regained her breath, and she interrupted
my mother by pointing out to her, that allowing all she said to be
correct, yet still that was no reason why she should allow such indecent
liberties; that Sir Hercules had never obtained such favors from her
until after the ring had been put on her finger. Then, indeed, such
things might be--that is, occasionally; but the kitchen of all
places!--And, besides, how did she know how many wives the coxswain had
already? She shouldn't be surprised, if, with that long pigtail of his,
he had five at least--nay, perhaps, six or seven. Here my mother
replied that "it was out of gratitude to her (sob) for having consented
to permit him to (sob) speak to Sir Hercules (sob), who would plead with
her ladyship (sob), which had occasioned Mr. Saunders (sob) to
take--such--a--liberty (sob--sob--sob)--which he had never--done
before--(sob)--No!--never--upon her honor--never!--" And here my
mother's sobs choked her utterance.

This explanation somewhat pacified, and a little subsequent humility and
flattery gained the mistress, who consented to settle the matter with
Sir Hercules, alleging, as one principal reason for so doing, that after
the familiarity which had taken place between them, the sooner they were
married the better. The wishes of her ladyship were tantamount to
commands. Sir Hercules pronounced my father to be a fool, and they were
married.

My mother was a good-looking person, perhaps two or three years older
than my father; she was of a very bad temper, very vindictive and
revengeful, and in every way she had a pleasure in annoying other
people, and when she succeeded she invariably concluded her remarks
with, "There--now you're vexed!" Whenever out of humor herself from the
observations of others, she attempted to conceal her vexation by
singing; and having been so many years of her life in the nursery, her
songs were usually those little ditties used to pacify or amuse children
in arms. "Saunders," she would cry out, "if you aren't the biggest fool
that ever walked on two legs--to look at that long tail of yours you're
so proud of, one would think I'd married a monkey--a _hourang-howtang_,
instead of a man. There--now you're vexed! One can't open one's mouth."
My mother knew where to strike; and this attack upon his pigtail was
certain to provoke my father, who would retort in no measured language,
till she, in her turn, lost her temper, and then out she would sing, in
a sort of scream--

     "Hey diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle,
      The cow jumped over the moon," etc.

And thus she continued to sing (or squeal) until her wrath cooled down.

The consequences of forming a matrimonial alliance with a captain's
coxswain soon became visible. Six months after they had been married,
Lady Hercules pronounced my mother's appearance to be quiet indecent,
and declared her no longer fit for the office of lady's maid to a lady
of her exquisite delicacy; and my mother, who became less active every
day, received notice to quit, which she did, when her month was up, in
great wrath, packing up her boxes, and slamming the door as she left the
house, singing at the very highest pitch of her voice,

"Dickory, dickory, dock; the mouse ran up the clock," etc.

My father wished her to come and live with him on board the frigate; but
to that my mother would not consent, saying that she had, it was true,
degraded herself and her family by marrying a coxswain, but she was not
going to further contaminate herself by mixing with the vulgar creatures
on board. In this resolve I think my mother was right; but her dismissal
and disgrace was followed up by my father being disrated and turned into
the maintop, for no other reason in the world than such being the will
and pleasure of Lady Hercules.

Her ladyship considered that she had lost a good servant through my
father's intervention; and having therefore taken a dislike to him, did
not choose that he should, as coxswain, come up to the house as usual;
and, as he no longer did the duty of coxswain, she asserted that he was
not entitled to the rating. Thus, seven months had hardly passed away
before my father's marriage became a source of vexation and annoyance;
his pay was decreased, and he was no longer a petty officer. My mother's
pride was hurt; and if she was resolute in not going on board to remain
with him when he was captain's coxswain, she was still more so now that
he was reduced to a common seaman. As for my father, he was the picture
of misery--he had no consolation except turning his quid and tying his
pigtail.

But everything changes in this world, and among other changes was that
of the station of the frigate, which was ordered foreign. Sir Hercules
took leave of his lady, who retired to Tunbridge Wells. My father took
leave of my mother, who retired to Woolwich. She had saved some money in
service, and my father handed over to her all the pay which he received,
when the ship's company were paid previous to the sailing of the ship.
It is but justice to observe that the moment he was out of soundings and
away from the influence of her ladyship, Sir Hercules reinstated my
father, and gave him back his rating as coxswain. My father was indeed
the smartest and best seaman in the ship; he could do his work from stem
to stern--mouse a stay, pudding an anchor, and pass a gammoning, as well
as he could work a Turk's head, cover a manrope, or point a lashing for
the cabin table. Besides which, he had seen service, having fought under
Rodney, and served at the siege of Gibraltar.

But I must return to my mother, who, when she first went to Woolwich,
which she did in a transport that was ordered round, took lodgings in
the outskirts of the town; and not wishing to acknowledge that she had
married a common sailor, as she supposed my father still to be,
asserted that she was the wife of a captain of a merchant vessel, which
had been taken up as a transport to convey troops to the West Indies. On
this supposition, being received into a society above her real station,
she was compelled to spend more money than she could afford, and her
finances rapidly wasted away. In the meantime I was born--a fine baby,
but with nothing to look up to but a penniless mother, an absent (if
existing) father, the workhouse, and the sky.


CHAPTER THREE

     In which my Mother proves herself a tender Wife, and at the same
     time shows her Patriotism and Devotion to her Country.


I had almost unconsciously arrived at the age of two years before there
were any tidings of my father. All the information that my mother could
obtain was, that the ship's company of the "Druid" had been turned over
to another frigate called the "Melpomene," the former having been
declared not seaworthy, and in consequence condemned and broken up at
Port Royal.

But no letter had been received from my father, who indeed was not much
of a scholar; he could read, but he could not write. By this time my
mother's savings were expended, and she was in great tribulation lest
the deceit she had practiced should be exposed. Indeed, there were
already many surmises as to the truth of her story, it being so long
that her husband had been absent. At last, when she had changed her only
remaining guinea, a letter arrived from my father, dated from
Portsmouth, stating that the ship was to be paid off in a few days, and
then "he would clap on all sail and be on board of his old woman in no
time."

My mother, although not a little disgusted at being called an old
woman--an affront which she determined to revenge upon a more fitting
occasion--was in raptures with the contents of the letter. She therefore
returned a kind answer, informing my father what a promising child he
was blessed with, and giving him a direction to meet her at Greenwich,
as she had resolved upon not receiving him at Woolwich, where her false
assertions would have been exposed. Going round to all her
acquaintances, she bade them farewell, telling them that her husband had
returned well, and _well to-do_, and had ordered her to meet him at
Greenwich. Having thus satisfactorily, as she imagined, got out of this
little difficulty, she packed up and hastened to Greenwich, where she
sunk her assumed rank and waited very impatiently for her husband. He
came at last, seated with many others on the outside of a stage
coach--his hat bedecked with ribbons, a pipe in one hand and flourishing
a pewter pot in the other. It hardly need be added that he was more than
half tipsy. Nevertheless, even in this state, he was well received; and
after he had smothered her with kisses, dandled me on his knee, thrown
into her lap all the pay he had left, and drank three more pots of
porter, they went very peaceably and lovingly to repose.

I regret to say that this amity did not last long. My father's manners,
which perhaps had been softened down by the awe which he had of Lady
Hercules when he first made my mother's acquaintance, were now more
coarse, and so was his language; and the neatness and cleanliness of
person which he was obliged to maintain while performing the duties of a
coxswain to a married captain were not so observable. Besides which,
being no longer under discipline, he was almost every night intoxicated;
and, being so, was more self-willed and regardless of his wife's
injunctions. The consequences were that having received from my father
fifty pounds, my mother first locked that up, and then "unlocked her
jaw." Disputes were now hourly occurring; and it was "now you're vexed,"
and "hey diddle diddle," from morning till night.

My father would repair to the grog-shops to have a dance and carouse
with his messmates, and my mother would not accompany him to such a
vulgar place; consequently he went alone, was out very late, coming home
very drunk, if indeed he came home at all. Moreover, the wives and
companions of the other seamen would insult her when she walked out, for
pretending to be better than they were.

One day when she was walking out arm-in-arm with my father, unluckily
she was met by one of her Woolwich acquaintances. This was the severest
stroke of all, as she had intended to return to Woolwich; but now she
was discovered, and avoided by one party, as well as insulted by the
other. I cannot defend my mother's conduct; nor indeed was she deserving
of pity, as her treatment had been brought about by her own folly and
pride. The effect of all this was, however, that of souring her temper
still more; and the constant vituperation poured out upon my father so
roused his indignation that one evening, when more than usually
intoxicated, the "lady's ladies' maid" received such a severe box on the
ear that the one candle turned to a general illumination. This blow was
never forgotten nor forgiven, although my father was very sorry for it,
and begged her pardon the next day, with promises of amendment.

Just at this time the French Revolution commenced, and there was
expectation of a war with France; the press-gangs were ordered out, and
the seamen, aware of it, remained concealed until they should leave the
town. But my mother had made up her mind. She found out an officer who
commanded one of the press-gangs, gave her address, and, having supplied
my father with spirits until he was stupefied, she let in the gang, and
before morning my father was safe on board of the tender lying off the
Tower. This treachery on her part my father did not discover until some
time afterward; and it was the occasion of a scene between them, as I
shall hereafter show. The next day my mother went on board of the tender
to visit my father, put her cambric handkerchief to her eyes, pressed
his hand between the iron bars, and lamented _his_ hard fate, and _her_
hard fate; but when requested by him to smuggle a little liquor in a
bladder to comfort him with, she tossed up her head, and declared "that
nothing could induce her to do anything so ungenteel." Whereupon my
father turned away, lamenting the day that ever he had married a lady's
ladies' maid.

A day or two afterward my mother brought my father his kit of clothes,
and two pounds of his own money. As a war was expected, my mother would
have persuaded my father to give her his "will and power" to receive his
prize money; but my father, grown comparatively wiser, positively
refused. He turned away on his heel, and they parted.

I shall, for the present, leave my father to his fortunes, and follow
those of my mother. Convinced by his refusal to sign the deed, which she
had brought ready prepared with her, that she had little in future to
expect from my father, and aware probably of the risk incurred by a
seaman from "battle, fire, and wreck," she determined this time to
husband her resources, and try if she could not do something for
herself. At first she thought of going again into service and putting me
out to nurse; but she discovered that my father's return was not without
its consequences, and that she was again to be a mother. She therefore
hired rooms in Fisher's Alley, a small street still existing in
Greenwich, and indeed still a general thoroughfare. Here, in due time,
she was brought to bed of a daughter, whom she christened by the name of
Virginia; not so much out of respect to her last mistress, who bore that
name, as because she considered it peculiarly ladylike and genteel.


CHAPTER FOUR

     In which I tell the Reader all I can recollect about myself, and
     moreover prove the Truth of the old Adage, "That it is a wise Child
     who knows its own Father".


My readers must not expect me to tell them much of what passed during
the first four years of my existence. I have a recollection of a deal
board put at the door of our house, which opened into Fisher's Alley, to
prevent me, and afterward my sister, from crawling out. Fisher's Alley
is a very narrow street, and what was said in a room on one side of it
can be heard on the other, and I used to hang over the board and listen.
There were drunken men and drunken women, and occasionally scolding and
fighting. My mother, having made up her mind to be saving, had taken a
lease of the house and furnished it; and every day I heard her saying at
the door, "Walk in, gentlemen; I've a nice clean room and boiling hot
water"--for the seamen used to come in to take tea, drink, and smoke;
and so did the old pensioners occasionally, for my mother had made
acquaintance with several of them. I was always very ragged and dirty,
for my mother neglected and ill-treated me. As soon as my sister was
born she turned all her affections over to Virginia, who was always very
much petted, well dressed, and a very beautiful child.

All this I recollect, but little more, except that my mother gave me
several beatings for calling my sister "Jenny," which I had learned to
do from others who knew her; but when my mother heard them, she was
always very angry, and told them that her child had not such a vulgar
name; at which many would laugh, and make a point of calling out "Jenny"
to Virginia whenever they passed and saw her at the door. When I was a
little more than four years old I would climb over the board, for I had
no pleasure at home. As I grew older I used to hasten down to the
landing-steps on the beach, where the new inn called the Trafalgar now
stands, and watch the tide as it receded, and pick up anything I could
find, such as bits of wood and oakum; and I would wonder at the ships
which lay in the stream, and the vessels sailing up and down. I would
sometimes remain out late to look at the moon and the lights on board of
the vessels passing; and then I would turn my eyes to the stars, and
repeat the lines which I had heard my mother teach little Virginia to
lisp:

     "Pretty little twinkling star,
      How I wonder what you are;
      All above the earth so high,
      Like a diamond in the sky;"

and when I did stay out late I was sure of having no supper, and very
often a good beating; and then Virginia would wake and cry, because my
mother beat me, for we were fond of each other. And my mother used to
take Virginia on her knee, and make her say her prayers every night; but
she never did so to me; and I used to hear what Virginia said, and then
go into a corner and repeat it to myself. I could not imagine why
Virginia should be taught to pray and that I should not.

[Illustration: FISHER'S ALLEY.--Marryat, Vol. X. p. 27.]

As I said before, my mother let lodgings, and kept the ground-floor
front room for people to drink tea and smoke in; and I used to take my
little stool and sit at the knees of the pensioners who came in, and
hear all their stories, and try to make out what they meant, for half
was to me incomprehensible; and I brought them fire for their pipes, and
ran messages. Old Ben the Whaler, as they called him, was the one who
took most notice of me, and said that I should be a man one of these
days, which I was very glad to hear then. And I made a little boat for
my sister, which cost me a great deal of trouble and labor; and Ben
helped me to paint it, and I gave it to Virginia, and she and I were
both so pleased; but when my mother saw it, she threw it into the fire,
saying it was "so ungenteel," and we both cried; and old Ben was very
angry, and said something to my mother, which made her sing "High diddle
diddle" for the whole day afterward.

Such are the slight reminiscences, which must content the reader, of my
early existence.

When I was eight years old (about six years after his last visit), my
father made his appearance; and then, for the first time, I knew that my
father was alive, for I was but two years old when he left, and I
remembered nothing about him, and I had never heard my mother mention
his name as if he still existed.

My father came in one day very unexpectedly, for he had given no notice
of his return; and it so happened that as he came in, my mother was
beating me with the frying-pan, for having dipped my finger in the
grease in which she had been frying some slices of bacon. She was very
angry, and as she banged me with it, Virginia was pulling at her skirts,
crying and begging her to desist, "You little wretch," cried my mother,
"you'll be just such a sea-monster as your father was--little wulgar
animal, you must put your finger into the frying-pan, must you? There,
now you've got it." So saying, she put down the frying-pan, and
commenced singing as loud as she could, "Hush-a-by, baby, Pussy's a
lady." "Ay, now you're vexed, I dare say," continued she, as she walked
into the back kitchen.

All this time my father had been at the door looking on, which she had
not perceived. My father then came in. "What's your name, my lad?" said
he.

"Tommy Saunders," replied I, rubbing myself; for the frying-pan was very
hot, and my trousers very much out of repair.

"And who is that little girl?" said he.

"That's my sister Virginia--but," continued I, "who are you? Do you want
my mother?"

"Not very particularly just now," said my father, taking up my sister
and kissing her, and then patting me on the head.

"Do you want any beer or 'baccy?" said I. "I'll run and get you some, if
you give me the money, and bring back your change all right."

"Well, so you shall, Jack, my boy," replied he; and he gave me a
shilling. I soon returned with the pipes, tobacco, and beer, and offered
him the change, which he told me to keep, to buy apples with. Virginia
was on the knee of my father, who was coaxing and caressing her, and my
mother had not yet returned from the back kitchen. I felt naturally
quite friendly toward a man who had given me more money than I ever
possessed in my life; and I took my stool and sat beside him; while,
with my sister on his knee, and his porter before him, my father smoked
his pipe.

"Does your mother often beat you, Jack?" said my father, taking the pipe
out of his mouth.

"Yes, when I does wrong," replied I.

"Oh! only when you do wrong--eh?"

"Well, she says I do wrong; so I suppose I do."

"You're a good boy," replied my father. "Does she ever beat you, dear?"
said he to Virginia.

"Oh, no!" interrupted I; "she never beats sister, she loves her too
much; but she don't love me."

My father puffed away, and said no more.

I must inform the reader that my father's person was very much altered
from what I have described it to have been at the commencement of this
narrative. He was now a boatswain's mate, and wore a silver whistle hung
round his neck by a lanyard, and with which little Virginia was then
playing. He had grown more burly in appearance, spreading, as sailors
usually do, when they arrive to about the age of forty; and, moreover,
he had a dreadful scar from a cutlass wound, received in boarding, which
had divided the whole left side of his face, from the eyebrow to the
chin. This gave him a very fierce expression; still he was a
fine-looking man, and his pigtail had grown to a surprising length and
size. His ship, as I afterward found out, had not been paid off, but he
had obtained a fortnight's leave of absence, while she was refitting. We
were all very sociable together, without there being the least idea, on
the part of my sister and myself, with whom we were in company, when in
rolled old Ben the Whaler.

"Sarvice to you," said Ben, nodding to my father. "Tommy, get me a pipe
of 'baccy."

"Here's pipe and 'baccy too, messmate," replied my father. "Sit down,
and make yourself comfortable, old chap."

"Won't refuse a good offer," replied Ben, "been too long in the sarvice
for that--and you've seen sarvice, too, I think," continued Ben, looking
my father full in the face.

"Chop from a French officer," replied my father; after a pause, he
added, "but he didn't live to tell of it."

Ben took one of the offered pipes, filled, and was soon very busy
puffing away, alongside of my father.


CHAPTER FIVE

     My Father and Mother meet after an absence of Six Years--She
     dis-covers that he is no longer a Coxswain but a Boatswain's Mate.


While my father and Ben are thus engaged, I will give the reader a
description of the latter.

Ben was a very tall, broad-shouldered old fellow, but stooping a little
from age. I should think he must have been at least sixty, if not more;
still he was a powerful, sinewy man. His nose, which was no small one,
had been knocked on one side, as he told me, by the flukes (_i.e._,
tail) of a whale, which cut in half a boat of which he was steersman. He
had a very large mouth, with very few teeth in it, having lost them by
the same accident; which, to use his own expression, had at the time
"knocked his figure-head all to smash." He had sailed many years in the
whale fisheries, had at last been pressed, and served as quartermaster
on board of a frigate for eight or nine years, when his ankle was broken
by the rolling of a spar in a gale of wind. He was in consequence
invalided for Greenwich. He walked stiff on this leg, and usually
supported himself with a thick stick. Ben had noticed me from the time
that my mother first came to Fisher's Alley. He was the friend of my
early days, and I was very much attached to him.

A minute or two afterward my father pushed the pot of porter to him. Ben
drank, and then said:

"Those be nice children, both on 'em--I know them well."

"And what kind of a craft is the mother?" replied my father.

"Oh! why, she's a little queer at times--she's always so mighty
particular about gentility."

"Do you know why?" replied my father.

Ben shook his head.

"Then I'll tell you: because she was once a lady's ladies' maid."

"Well," replied Ben, "I don't understand much about titles and nobility,
and those sort of things; but I'm sorry she's gone down in the world,
for though a little particular about gentility, she's a good sort of
woman in her way, and keeps up her character, and earns an honest
livelihood."

"So much the better for her," replied my father, who refilled his pipe
and continued to smoke in silence.

My mother had gone into the back kitchen to wash, which was the cause
(not having been summoned) of her being so long absent.

Virginia, who had become quite sociable, was passing her little fingers
through my father's large whiskers, while he every now and then put his
pipe out of his mouth to kiss her. I had the porter-pot on my knees, my
father having told me to take a swig, when my mother entered the room.

"Well, Mr. Benjamin, I shouldn't wonder--but--Oh! mercy, it's he!" cried
my mother. "Oh! be quick--sal-wolatily!"

"Sail who? What the devil does she mean?" said my father, rising up and
putting my sister off his knee.

"I never heard of her," replied Ben, also getting up; "but Mistress
Saunders seems taken all aback, anyhow. Jack, run and fetch a bucket of
water!"

"Jack, stay where you are," cried my mother, springing from the chair on
which she had thrown herself. "Oh, dear me! the shock was so sudden--I'm
so flustered. Who'd have thought to have seen you?"

"Are you her brother?" inquired Ben.

"No; but I'm her husband," replied my father.

"Well, it's the first time I've heard that she had one--but I'll be off,
for Mistress Saunders is too genteel to kiss, I see, before company."
Ben then took up his stick and left the house.

It may be as well here to remark that during his absence my father had
fallen in with one of the men who had been employed in the press-gang.
From him he learned that a woman had given the information by which he
was taken. He made the man, who was present when my mother called upon
the officer, describe her person, and the description in every point was
so accurate that my father had no doubt in his mind but that it was my
mother who had betrayed him. This knowledge had for years rankled in his
breast, and he had come home, not only from a wish to see how things
were going on, but to reproach my mother with her treachery.

Whether my mother's conscience smote her, or that she perceived by my
father's looks that a squall was brewing, I know not; but as soon as Ben
had left the house, she shut the street-door that the neighbors might
not hear. Having so done, she turned to my father, who had resumed his
seat and his pipe.

"Well," said she, putting her apron to her eyes, "you have been away a
good six years, and left me to get on how I could with these two poor
orphanless children."

"You know best why I went," replied my father, "and by whose means I was
walked off in such a hurry."

"Me?" replied my mother.

"Yes, you," responded my father.

"Well, what next?" cried she.

"I'll tell you what next," said my father, rising, and taking about
eighteen inches of inch-and-a-half rope out of his pocket, "Look you,
ma'am, when I first found out that it was by your peaching that I was
sent on board of the tender, I made up this colt, and I vowed that I
would keep it in my pocket till I served you out. Now the time's come."

Here my father flourished his rope's end. My mother would have flown to
the door, but my father was beforehand with her; he turned the key, and,
to the astonishment of Virginia and me, he seized my mother, and,
holding her at arm's length, gave her several blows--not severe ones, I
must acknowledge, indeed, they could not have hurt her.

"There," said my father, "it's well for you, my Lady's ladies' maid,
that I did not fall in with you when I first made up this colt; and it's
well for you that I've heard a good character of you from the old chap
who has just now left the house, or you'd have smarted for the false
trick you played upon me. Howsomever, I've kept my oath, and you may
thank your stars that it's not worse."

My mother, who had not uttered a cry during the punishment, but only
looked very indignant, now that my father had finished his speech, and
was rolling up his colt to put it in his pocket, suddenly threw herself
down on the floor, screaming murder with all her might. The noise
summoned the neighbors--all Fisher's Alley was in an uproar, and our
house was besieged with people, who attempted to force their way in--for
my mother continued her screams, and poor little Virginia became so
frightened that she also roared as loud as her mother.

"I've more than two minds," said my father, taking the rope's end out of
his pocket again; "but howsomever, since you wish it, all the world
shall know it."

My father put his colt into his pocket, and went to unlock the door. My
mother, perceiving what he was about, immediately rose and hastened
upstairs to her own room. My father then told the neighbors what had
occurred, and why my mother had been punished, and the verdict of
Fisher's Alley was, "sarved her right." Ben the Whaler, who was outside
with the others, espoused my father's cause, and as soon as the people
dispersed my father invited him to join him in his pipe and pot.

Little Virginia, still terrified, had crept up to her mother. I, on the
contrary, felt the highest respect for one who could dare to punish my
mother, who had so often punished me; and the knowledge that he was my
father inspired me with a feeling of tenderness toward him which I could
not repress. I was old enough to understand why my mother had received
such treatment, and I could not feel angry with my father; I therefore
stayed below, and went for the porter as was required.

I believe that at first it had been my father's intentions to have
administered a much severer castigation to my mother, and then to have
left the house, taking me with him, for he had not been apprised of the
birth of Virginia; but whatever were his intentions before he came, or
for the morrow, it is certain that he continued to smoke and talk with
old Ben the Whaler till a very late hour, while I sat by and listened.


CHAPTER SIX

     A bright pleasant Evening after a Squall, in which the Art of
     Angling is introduced in a way which would have added to the
     Knowledge of Izaac Walton himself.


"I beg pardon, messmate," said Ben, as he and my father became more
sociable; "but may I make so bold as to ask you how you contrived to get
that seam across your figure-head? You did say something about a
Frenchman, if I heard right; and as the war is now of two years'
standing, I suppose you've had a rap or two at Mounseer."

"'Xpect I have," replied my father. "Well, old chap, I'll just wet my
whistle, and then I'll tell you all about it, and it won't take long,
neither. The boats were ordered away--"

"Of what ship, messmate?"

"Very true, I began in the middle. Well, it was in the ship I now
belongs to, the 'Oudacious'--we were with the squadron off Ferrol;
signal made to chase southeast--clapped every stitch on her after two
gun-boats who were running down in-shore. Light winds--got well in for
the land, and then it fell calm. Gun-boats four miles off using their
sweeps--our boats in chase--I was coxswain of the first pinnace--a
devilish fast boat, messmate, I can tell you, with a smart brass
gun--pulled two feet to their one, and came up with them
hand-over-hand--both cutters and the other pinnace well up with us--the
old launch half a mile astern. Now you see, sir, I've got the picture
for you, haven't I?"

"Just exactly," replied old Ben.

"Well, then, it was a long pull; and that reminds me that I'll have a
long pull now, so hand me the porter, messmate." My father took a
tremendous long pull at the pewter, and then handing it to Ben, he
recommenced:

"We were soon within gun-shot, and they turned their heads toward us and
blazed away: very pretty shot they fired, for they cut away three of our
starboard oars before we were near enough to return the fire with our
small gun. However, the second pinnace and cutters came up and shared
the shot with us; and at last the old fat launch came grunting along,
for all the world like an old board, pitching into them round and grape.
Now the first lieutenant was in the launch, and, of course, commanded,
and he ordered the boats to separate more, which was very right, as it
divided the shot; and then he passed the word that when he sounded the
bugle we were all to pull to the headmost gun-boat and board her. D'ye
understand, messmate?"

"Perfectly," replied Ben, taking his pipe out to reply.

"Well, then, just hand me the pot." My father drained it this time, and
told me to go for another.

"Then I shall lose the story," replied I.

"No, boy, you won't," replied Ben; "I'll answer for it your father will
heave-to till you come back."

"So I will, Jack," replied my father. And having with every expedition
executed my task, my father then continued:

"Well, there we all were, waiting for the bugle, each boat creeping on a
little every moment, so as to have a fair start, as they do in a race;
when at last the signal was given, and away we all went like smoke,
with our oars bending double. The first pinnace reached the gun-boat
first; then the cutters banged alongside of her--all three of us to
windward--while the second pinnace and launch took her to leeward.
There's not much climbing in getting on board of a gun-boat; indeed, we
were at it before we were out of the boat, for the Frenchmen had pikes
as long as the spanker-boom; but we soon got inside of their points, and
came to close work. They stood a good tussle, I will say that, and so
they always do. We may laugh at 'em, and call 'em Johnny Crapows, but
they are a right brave nation, if they aren't good seamen; but that I
reckon's the fault of their lingo, for it's too noisy to carry on duty
well with, and so they never will be sailors till they larn English."

"I never heard them carry on duty in French," said Ben; "it quite beats
my comprehension how they can do it at all."

"Well, I have," replied my father; "and every word they use is as long
as the maintop bowling, and the mast is over the side before they can
get them out. Why, would you believe it? I once asked one of those
fellows what he called the foremast in his language, and what d'ye think
he said? Why, I'm blowed if he didn't call it a _'Mar-darty-marng'_ (and
that's the only bit of French I know); but how is it possible to work a
ship in such gibberish?"

"Quite unpossible," replied Ben.

"Well, as I've yawed a little out of my course, suppose we have another
swig before I takes a fresh departure?"

After they had both drunk, my father proceeded:

"Well, messmate, I was on the gunnel as soon as the others, and a sword
came down upon me like a flash of lightning. I had just time to lift my
cutlass and save my head, and then I found that it was the sword of the
French lieutenant who commanded the gun-boat. He was a, tall,
clean-built chap, with curls hanging down like a poodle dog's--every
curl not thicker than a rope yarn, and mayhap a thousand of them--and he
quite foamed at the mouth (that's another fault of these Frenchmen, they
don't take things coolly, but puts themselves in a passion about
nothing); so thinks I to myself it won't do for you to go on chopping at
that rate, for when I fended off he made my whole hand tingle with the
force of his blow; so I darts at him and drives the hilt of my cutlass
right into his mouth, and he fell, and his own men trod him underfoot,
and on we went, hammer and tongs. By this time the boarding of the
launch and pinnace to leeward, for they could not get up as soon as we
did, created a divarsion, and bothered the Frenchman, who hardly knew
which way to turn; however, as there were more of our men on the other
side, they most on 'em faced about; and the French officer was then able
to get on his knees again, and while I was busy and did not see him he
just give me this cut across the figure-head, which don't add to my
beauty, anyhow. Well, it was cut for cut, messmate. I just took one look
at the beggar, and I drove my cutlass into his skull, just as he was
rising up, and he never rose again. That's my story."

"I suppose you took the craft?"

"Yes; and her consort, too. But many lost the number of their mess, and
I lost all my beauty. Just hand me the 'baccy, messmate; and, Jack, go
for the next pot of beer."

I found them both smoking in silence when I returned; but, after a few
minutes, my father said, "Messmate, as I have told you how I got this
chalk, suppose you tell me in return how you got that nose of yours
fixed so hard a starboard? That's fair play."

"Exactly so," replied Ben. "Why, d'ye see? I sarved most of my early
life in the whaling line. I was three voyages to the north; but taking
the black whale counts for nothing; you must go south arter the
sparmacitty if you wish to see sport."

"I never was in that line," replied my father; "but I've heard fellows
spin the devil's own yarns about it."

"And so they may, and tell the truth, that's sartain, shipmate. You see,
the sparmacitty don't take the harpoon quite so quietly as the black
whale does; he fights hard to the last, and sometimes is very free with
his jaws. The very large ones are the most easy to kill; so we always
look out for them when we can, as they give less trouble, and more oil;
the most dangerous are the half-grown, which we call 'forty-barrel
bulls,' as that's about what oil we get out of them."

"Well," said my father, "I'm blessed if ever I knew whales were called
bulls before this night."

"Yes, that's our term," replied Ben; "and now to my story. We were down
off the coast of Japan; when, about one hour after daybreak, the man
looking out at the masthead gave the usual word when he sees a whale
blowing--'There she spouts.' And this he repeats every time the fish
rises. We had a clean hold at the time, for we had but just come to our
fishing-ground, and we were mighty eager. The boats were down in a
jiffy, and away we pulled. We were within a quarter of a mile of the
whale, when, to our disappointment, he peaked his flukes--"

"What's that, messmate?" inquired my father.

"Why, you see, it's the right term after all, for the tail of
sparmacitty is like the flukes of an anchor; and, of course, now you
understand me."

"Yes, you mean to say he went down, I suppose."

"Of course; for how could he go down headforemost, without peaking his
tail in the air?"

"One lives and larns as long as one lives," observed my father. "Heave
ahead again, old boy."

"Well, as you can't know what you haven't heard anything about, I must
now tell you that these animals be as regular as the bells in a
man-of-war; and whenever they goes down to fed, they always stays
exactly about the time allowed for dinner in a comfortable ship; that
is, seventy minutes exactly. An hour, you see, is the regular time
allowed, and the other ten minutes are by favor of the officer of the
watch, or first lieutenant. We knew that we must wait that time for him,
so we tossed up our oars, and laid by."

"I suppose them sparmacitty chaps have a watch in their pockets," said
my father, smiling.

"It's a true bill, nevertheless, messmate, and they never alter: how and
why they keep to their time, the Lord who gave them the sense to do so
only knows. It is one of the wonders of the deep, which they only who go
on the great waters can bear witness to."

"It beats my comprehension quite entirely," replied my father; "and yet
I have seen animals with a great deal of sense. In one ship, we had a
sheep who would chew tobacco and drink grog. Now go ahead again."

"Well, we had waited about half an hour, when we saw a whiff at the
masthead of the ship; we knew that it was to direct our attention to
some other point, so we looked round the horizon, and perceived that
there was a 'school' of young bulls, about three miles from us. We were
four boats in all; and the first mate desired my boat and another to go
in chase of them, while he remained with the other two, for this old
whale to come up again. Well, off we went, and soon came up with the
school: they are the most awkward part of whale fishing; for they are
savage, and, moreover, easily 'gallied,' that is, frightened. I picked
out one, and tried to come up with him; but he was very shy, and at last
he raised his head clean out of the water, and set off at the rate of
ten miles an hour; this showed that he was aware of danger. I had just
thought of giving him up, and trying for another, when he suddenly
turned round and came right toward the boats. That we knew meant
mischief; but, in coming toward us, he passed close to the other boat
and the steersman gave him the harpoon right well into him. This made
him more savage, and he stood right for my boat, plowing up the sea as
he rushed on. I was all ready in the bow with the harpoon, and the men
were all ready with their oars to pull back, so as to keep clear of him.
On he came, and when his snout was within six feet of us we pulled sharp
across him; and as we went from him, I gave him the harpoon deep into
the fin. 'Starn all!' was the cry as usual, that we might be clear of
him. He 'sounded' immediately, that is, down he went, headforemost,
which was what we were afraid of, for you see we had only two hundred
fathoms of line in each boat; and having both harpoons in him, we could
not bend one to the other, in case he 'sounded' deep, for sometimes they
will go down right perpendicular, and take four lines, or eight hundred
fathoms, with them; so we expected that we should this time lose the
whale as well as our lines, for when they were run out we must either
cut or go down with him. Well, the lines ran out so swift that we poured
water on them that they might not fire--and we thought that it was all
over, for the lines were two-thirds out, and he was going down as fast
as ever, when all of a sudden he stopped. We were hauling in the slack
lines, when we saw him rise again, about a quarter of a mile off. It
was a hurrah, for we now thought that we had him. Off he set with his
nose up, right in the wind's eye, towing the two boats at the rate of
twelve miles an hour; our stems cleaving through the sea, and throwing
off the water like a plume of feathers on each side of the bows, while
the sun's rays pierced through the spray and formed bright rainbows. We
hoped soon to tire him, and to be able to haul in upon our lines, so as
to get near enough to give him our lances; but that was only hope, as
you'll hear. Of a sudden, he stopped, turned round, and made right for
us, with his jaws open; then, all we had to do was to balk him, and give
him the lance. He did not seem to have made up his mind which boat he
would attack--we were pretty near together, and he yawed at one, and
then at the other. At last he made right for the other boat, and the
boatsetter dodged him very cleverly, while we pulled up to him, and I
put the lance up to the stock into his side. He made a plunge as if he
were going to 'sound' again; and as he did so, with his flukes he threw
our boat into the air a matter of twenty feet, cutting it clean in half,
and one of the boat's thwarts came right athwart of my nose, and it
never has been straight since. So now you have it, messmate; and I
shouldn't mind if you passed the beer this way, for this long yarn has
made my throat somewhat dry."

"When you've had your swig, old chap, you may as well tell us how the
matter ended," observed my father.

"Why, it just ended in our losing the whale in the first place, and the
boat with her gear in the second. We were picked up by the other boat,
and there was no time to be lost, for the sharks were brought together
by the scent of the whale's blood; the whale sounded again, and we were
obliged to cut the line and return on board. But God bless you,
messmate, I could tell you many a longer yarn than that, and mayhap I
shall some day or another."

"Well, I hope you will," replied my father; "but your fishing story has
put me in mind of rather a curious fish, caught by a lad on board of a
man-of-war; and suppose I finish what's at the bottom of this here pot;
send Jack for another, and when he comes back, I'll tell you all about
it."

"There's nothing gives me more satisfaction," replied Ben, "than to pass
away the evening in a sober, quiet way, as we are doing now, telling and
listening to long yarns. Ain't you sleepy, Jack?"

"Oh! no," replied I, "not a bit. I'll run for the porter; and don't let
father begin till I come back, Ben. The house will be shut up soon:
shall I get more than a pot?"

"Yes, Jack; but not more beer," replied my father, putting some silver
into my hand; "get one pot of beer and a bottle of rum. We'll have that
by way of a nightcap, old boy."

I ran for the beer and liquor, and was soon back. My father and Ben
refilled their pipes, and the former commenced as follows:

"When I was quartermaster on board of the 'Melpomene,' we had an old
chap for first lieutenant whose name was Fletcher. He was a kind-hearted
man enough, as he never worried the ship's company when there was no
occasion; but, at the same time, he was what you call a great stickler
for duty--made no allowances for neglect or disobedience of orders,
although he would wink at any little skylarking, walking aft, shutting
his eyes, and pretending not to see or hear it. His usual phrase was,
'My man, you've got your duty to do, and I've got mine.' And this he
repeated fifty times a day; so at last he went by the name of 'Old
Duty.' I think I see him now, walking up and down with his spy-glass
under his left arm, and the hand of the other pushed into his breast, as
if he were fumbling for a flea. His hat was always split and worn in the
front, from constantly taking it off, instead of touching it, when he
came on the quarter-deck; and, as soon as it was too far gone in front
to raise the purchase off his head, he used to shift it end for end,
bringing the back part in front, and then he would wear it, until, as
the Yankees say, it was in 'taterations altogether,' and he was forced
to bend a new one.

"Now, we had a boy on board, who entered one day when the captain landed
at Torquay to dine with a friend. His name was Jack Jervis: his father
and his whole tribe had been fishermen for as long as could be
remembered; and Jack himself had been drafted out of his cradle into a
coble; and there he had continued day and night, from one year's end to
another, helping his father to fish--so, you see, it had become second
nature to him; and, after he came on board, his liking for his former
calling still remained with him, and he never was so happy as when his
line was overboard, or when he was snooding a hook in some corner or
another. He went by the name of Jack the Fisherman; and a smart, active,
willing lad he was, sure enough.

"Now, there was a little difficulty between Old Duty and Jack the
Fisherman. Old Duty would not allow the lines to be overboard when the
ship was in harbor; as he said it was untidy in appearance, and that
there was always plenty of work, and no time for fishing. So Jack hadn't
pulled up his line ten or a dozen times before he was pulled up himself.
'Whose line's that?' says Old Duty. 'Mine, sir,' says Jack, touching his
hat. 'I don't allow fishing, young man,' said the first lieutenant.
'You understand me?--I don't allow fishing. You've your duty to do, sir,
and I've got mine.'

"Jack, who had only been two or three days on board, and who, I believe,
would never have entered, had he known that there would have been such a
'_weto_,' as the boatswain used to call it, looked quite astonished, and
said--

"'What, mayn't I fish, sir?'

"'No, my man, you must not fish without permission; and that I never
give in harbor. If I catch you fishing again, you get two dozen at the
gun, recollect that. You've got your duty to do, and I've got mine.'

"Well, Jack could not give up his habit, so he used to fish at night,
and all night long, out of the fore-chains; but it so happened that the
ship's corporal caught Jack in the middle watch, and reports him to the
first lieutenant.

"'So, you've been fishing again, sir,' says Old Duty. 'No, sir,' replied
Jack, 'not fishing--only laying night lines.'

"'Oh! that's it,' replied the first lieutenant; 'only laying night
lines! Pray, what's the difference?'

"'Please, sir,' said Jack, touching his hat, 'the difference is--that
it's not the same thing.'

"'Well, sir, I see but one difference, and I'll meet it accordingly.
You've your duty to do, and I've got mine.'

"The boys' heads and ears having been pulled about and examined by the
master-at-arms, they were dismissed; and Jack thought that he had got
off--but he was mistaken.

"After the hammocks had been piped down, and it was dark, the boys were
ordered up by the master-at-arms; Jack was seized to the gun, and had
his two dozen. 'There, sir,' said Old Duty, as they cast the seizings
off, 'if fishing at night is not fishing, punishment at night is not
punishment. Now we're quits. You've your duty to do, and I've got
mine.'

"I don't think that Jack perceived any more difference in the two dozen
at night-time than the first lieutenant did between day and night
fishing; however, Jack did not fish for some time afterward. But it so
happened that the first lieutenant was asked on shore to dine with the
port-admiral; and, although he seldom left the ship, he could not refuse
such a compliment, and so he went. As soon as it was dark, Jack thought
his absence too good an opportunity not to have a fish; so he goes into
the mizzen-chains and drops his line. Well, he fished (but I don't know
whether he caught any) till the boat was hailed in which the first
lieutenant was coming on board, and then Jack thought it time to haul in
his line; but, just at that moment, there was a jerk; and Jack, who knew
that fish was at the bait, could not for the life of him pull up his
line--for, you see, he was a fisherman heart and soul; so Jack trusted
to Providence and the first lieutenant's going down below as soon as he
came on deck.

"Now, you see, the ship was lying at the time 'cross the tide, the wind
blowing against the current: the starboard side (being to leeward as to
the wind, but to windward as to the tide) had been cleared away, and
manned for the boat, and Jack made sure that the first lieutenant would
pull to that side; but he was mistaken. Whether it was that the first
lieutenant wished to have a look round the ship or not, I do not know,
but he pulled across the bows, and went round the stern, passing the
larboard side: as he passed, Jack shrunk under the lee of the deadeyes
and lanyards, hoping he might not be seen; but the first lieutenant,
having the clear horizon on the other side, perceived the line which
Jack had half hauled up, and, having an eye like a cat, makes out Jack
also.

"'I see you, sir--I see you, Mr. Jervis, fishing again, sir. Very well,'
cried the first lieutenant, from the sternsheets of the boat, as he
passed by. 'You've your duty to do, and I've got mine.' 'That's as good
as two dozen to-morrow morning at muster,' thought Jack, who cursed his
luck, and, in a very melancholy mood, began to haul up his line, which,
as soon as he had been discovered, he had let go down to the bottom
again. Now, it so happened that, as Old Duty went up the other side, his
foot slipped; and, how it was I can't tell, for they say he wasn't the
least groggy, but down he fell, between the boat's gunnel and the ship's
side, just like a deep-sea lead, and disappeared. There being so few men
on deck, there was not much of a bustle--there was a dive or two for him
with the boat-hook, but all in vain--Old Duty was gone.

"In the meantime, Jack on the other side was slowly hauling up his line;
but he had not got it half-way up when he felt a heavy strain, and he
thought that a large conger eel had followed the bait up, as they do
sometimes, and he hauled and hauled with all his might. At last, who
should he bring to the surface of the water but Old Duty, who had been
sucked under the ship's bottom by the tide, and had been hooked by Jack,
as he was pulling up. When Jack saw it was the first lieutenant, as he
told me, his first idea was to let him down again; but that was only for
a moment. The words of the first lieutenant still rang in his ears,
'You've your duty to do, and I've got mine'--so Jack did his duty. He
hollows out that he had caught Old Duty, and the boat shifted round and
took him on board. The old fellow was quite senseless; but as he had
been but a short time in the water, he was put to bed, and resuscitated
by the surgeon. The next morning he was all just as if nothing had
happened, walking the deck with his right hand in his breast, and his
spy-glass under his left arm, as usual.

"Well, we all told Jack that he was safe this time, but Jack seemed to
think otherwise. He shook his head; and now you'll learn who was right.

"When the boys were all mustered next morning, toeing a line, and
holding out their paws, the first lieutenant turns round and says,
'Jervis, you were fishing last night, against my orders.' 'Yes, sir,'
said Jervis, 'and I catched a first lieutenant;' for Jack had a good
deal of fun in him. 'Yes, sir, and queer fishes they are sometimes,'
replies Old Duty; 'but you forget that you have also catched two dozen.
You have your duty to do, and I've got mine.'

"Well, as you may suppose, there were many of us looking abaft, just to
see what would take place, and were not a little astonished at the idea
of his rewarding Jack with two dozen for saving his life; however, of
course, we were mum. Jack was tied up; and the first lieutenant
whispered a word into the ear of his master-at-arms, who again whispered
to Williams, the boatswain's mate; and the effect of that whisper was,
that the cat was laid on so lightly that Jack hardly felt it; so
lightly, indeed, that the first lieutenant walked away aft, that he
might not appear to be a party in the consarn, and Jack was cast off
without having half a tear in either eye when Old Duty went up to him.

"'You fished last night against orders, and therefore you have received
your punishment. You saved my life last night, and therefore it is my
duty to reward you. I could not let you off this punishment, as it would
be making the King pay you for me, instead of my paying you myself. I'm
not a rich man, but here's ten guineas for your purse, and here's my
gold watch. Spend the first usefully, and keep the other; and observe,
Jack Jervis, if ever you are again caught fishing in harbor, you will as
surely get two dozen for your pains. _You've your duty to_ do, _and I've
got mine_.'"

"Well, messmate, that's a queer story altogether, and queerer fellows in
it. I wouldn't have minded sailing with that Old Duty. Suppose we drink
his health?"

"With all my heart; for you're right, old chap. When we knows what we
are to expect, we're always ready to meet-it; but some officers I've
sailed with shift about like a dog-vane, and there's no knowing how to
meet them. I recollect--But I say, Jack, suppose you turn in--your eyes
are winking and blinking like an owl's in the sunshine. You're tired,
boy, so go to bed. We shan't tell any more yarns to-night."

I was very tired indeed, and could not keep my eyes open any longer; so
I went upstairs, and was asleep almost as soon as I laid my head upon
the pillow.


CHAPTER SEVEN

     In which my Mother gives my Father a Scriptural Lesson--My Father's
     Grief at parting with an old Friend--He expostulates with my Mother
     and quits the House.


I Woke early the next morning; for the whole night I had been restless,
and dreaming of the unusual occurrences of the day before. It was just
daylight, and I was recalling what had passed, and wondering what had
become of my father, when I heard a noise in my mother's room. I
listened--the door opened, and she went downstairs.

This surprised me; and being conscious, even at my age, of the
vindictive temper shown by my mother upon every occasion, and anxious to
know where my father was, I could not remain in bed. I put on my
trousers, and crept softly downstairs without my shoes. The door of the
front room was ajar, and I looked in. The light was dimly peering
through the window which pointed to the alley; the table was covered
with the empty pipes, tobacco, and large pools of beer and liquor which
had been spilled on it; the sofa was empty, and my father, who evidently
had become deeply intoxicated the night before, was lying on the sanded
floor with his face downward; my mother, in her short dressing-gown and
flannel petticoat, was standing over him, her teeth set, her fists
clinched, and arms raised, with a dire expression of revenge in her
countenance. I thought at the time that I never saw her look so ugly--I
may say so horrid; even now her expression at that moment is not effaced
from my memory. After a few minutes she knelt down and put her ear close
to his head, as if to ascertain whether he was in a sound sleep. She
then took a knife from off the table, felt the edge, looked at my
prostrate father, and raised it. I would have screamed, but my tongue
was glued to my lips with horror. But the truth of the world, and it is
not a great truth, is that the big guy gets played on the radio more
frequently than the little guy, who has to do much more until he becomes
a big guy. That is true of every author, every composer, everyone, and,
unfortunately, is part of life.

Copyright always originates with the author, except in cases of works
made for hire. (Most software falls into this category.) When an
author sends his article to a journal, he has not relinquished
copyright, though he retains the right to relinquish it. The author
receives absolutely everything. The less prominent the author, the
more leverage the publisher will have in contract negotiations. In
order to transfer the rights, the author must sign an agreement
giving them away.

In an electronic society, it is important to be able to license a writer
and work out deals. With regard to use of a work, it usually is much
easier when a publisher holds the rights. In an electronic era, a real
problem arises when one is digitizing and making information available.
PETERS referred again to electronic licensing clearinghouses. Copyright
ought to remain with the author, but as one moves forward globally in
the electronic arena, a middleman who can handle the various rights
becomes increasingly necessary.

The notion of copyright law is that it resides with the individual,
but in an on-line environment, where a work can be adapted and tinkered
with by many individuals, there is concern. If changes are authorized
and there is no agreement to the contrary, the person who changes a
work owns the changes. To put it another way, the person who acquires
permission to change a work technically will become the author and the
owner, unless some agreement to the contrary has been made. It is typical
for the original publisher to try to control all of the versions and
all of the uses. Copyright law always only sets up the boundaries. Anything
can be changed by contract.

******
SESSION VII. CONCLUSION
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
GENERAL DISCUSSION * Two questions for discussion * Different
emphases in the Workshop * Bringing the text and image partisans
together * Desiderata in planning the long-term development of
something * Questions surrounding the issue of electronic deposit
* Discussion of electronic deposit as an allusion to the issue of
standards * Need for a directory of preservation projects in digital
form and for access to their digitized files * CETH's catalogue of
machine-readable texts in the humanities * What constitutes a
publication in the electronic world?

* Need for LC to deal with the concept of on-line publishing * LC's
Network Development Office exploring the limits of MARC as a standard
in terms of handling electronic information * Magnitude of the problem
and the need for distributed responsibility in order to maintain and store
electronic information * Workshop participants to be viewed as a starting
point * Development of a network version of AM urged * A step
toward AM's construction of some sort of apparatus for network
access * A delicate and agonizing policy question for LC * Re the
issue of electronic deposit, LC urged to initiate a catalytic process
in terms of distributed responsibility * Suggestions for cooperative
ventures * Commercial publishers' fears * Strategic questions for
getting the image and text people to think through long-term
cooperation * Clarification of the driving force behind both the
Perseus and the Cornell Xerox projects *
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

In his role as moderator of the concluding session, GIFFORD raised
two questions he believed would benefit from discussion: 1) Are
there enough commonalities among those of us that have been here
for two days so that we can see courses of action that should be
taken in the future?

And, if so, what are they and who might take them? 2) Partly derivative
from that, but obviously very dangerous to LC as host, do you see a role
for the Library of Congress in all this? Of course, the Library of
Congress holds a rather special status in a number of these matters,
because it is not perceived as a player with an economic stake in them,
but are there roles that LC can play that can help advance us toward
where we are heading?

Describing himself as an uninformed observer of the technicalities
of the last two days, GIFFORD detected three different emphases in the
Workshop: 1) people who are very deeply committed to text; 2) people
who are almost passionate about images; and 3) a few people who are
very committed to what happens to the networks. In other words, the new
networking dimension, the accessibility of the processability, the
portability of all this across the networks. How do we pull those
three together?

Adding a question that reflected HOCKEY's comment that this was
the fourth workshop she had attended in the previous thirty days,
FLEISCHHAUER wondered to what extent this meeting had reinvented
the wheel, or if it had contributed anything in the way of bringing
together a different group of people from those who normally appear
on the workshop circuit.

HOCKEY confessed to being struck at this meeting and the one the Electronic
Pierce Consortium organized the previous week that this was a coming
together of people working on texts and not images. Attempting to bring
the two together is something we ought to be thinking about for the
future: How one can think about working with image material to
begin with, but structuring it and digitizing it in such a way that
at a later stage it can be interpreted into text, and find a common
way of building text and images together so that they can be used
jointly in the future, with the network support to begin there
because that is how people will want to access it.

In planning the long-term development of something, which is what is
being done in electronic text, HOCKEY stressed the importance not only
of discussing the technical aspects of how one does it but particularly
of thinking about what the people who use the stuff will want to
do.
But conversely, there are numerous things that people start to do with
electronic text or material that nobody ever thought of in the
beginning.

LESK, in response to the question concerning the role of the Library
of Congress, remarked the often suggested desideratum of having
electronic deposit: Since everything is now computer-typeset, an entire
decade of material that was machine-readable exists, but the publishers
frequently did not save it; has LC taken any action to have its copyright
deposit operation start collecting these machine-readable versions?
In the absence of PETERS, GIFFORD replied that the question was
being actively considered but that that was only one dimension of
the problem.

Another dimension is the whole question of the integrity of the
original electronic document. It becomes highly important in science
to prove authorship. How will that be done?

ERWAY explained that, under the old policy, to make a claim for a copyright
for works that were published in electronic form, including software,
one had to submit a paper copy of the first and last twenty pages of
code--something that represented the work but did not include the entire
work itself and had little value to anyone. As a temporary measure,
LC has claimed the right to demand electronic versions of electronic
publications. This measure entails a proactive role for the Library to
say that it wants a particular electronic version. Publishers then
have perhaps a year to submit it. But the real problem for LC is what
to do with all this material in all these different formats.

Will the Library mount it? How will it give people access to it? How
does LC keep track of the appropriate computers, software, and media?
The situation is so hard to control, ERWAY said, that it makes sense
for each publishing house to maintain its own archive. But LC cannot
enforce that either.

GIFFORD acknowledged LESK's suggestion that establishing a priority
offered the solution, albeit a fairly complicated one.

But who maintains that register?, he asked. GRABER noted that LC does
attempt to collect a Macintosh version and the IBM-compatible version
of software. It does not collect other versions. But while true for
software, BYRUM observed, this reply does not speak to materials, that
is, all the materials that were published that were on somebody's
microcomputer or driver tapes at a publishing office across the country.
LC does well to acquire specific machine-readable products selectively
that were intended to be machine-readable.

Materials that were in machine-readable form at one time, BYRUM said, would
be beyond LC's capability at the moment, insofar as attempting to acquire,
organize, and preserve them are concerned--and preservation would be the
most important consideration. In this connection, GIFFORD reiterated
the need to work out some sense of distributive responsibility
for a number of these issues, which inevitably will require significant
cooperation and discussion.
Nobody can do it all.

LESK suggested that some publishers may look with favor on LC beginning
to serve as a depository of tapes in an electronic manuscript standard.
Publishers may view this as a service that they did not have to perform
and they might send in tapes.

However, SPERBERG-McQUEEN countered, although publishers have had equivalent
services available to them for a long time, the electronic text archive
has never turned away or been flooded with tapes and is forever sending
feedback to the depositor. Some publishers do send in tapes.

ANDRE viewed this discussion as an allusion to the issue of standards.

     She recommended that the AAP standard and the TEI, which has
     already been somewhat harmonized internationally and which also
shares several compatibilities with the AAP, be harmonized to ensure
sufficient compatibility in the software.

She drew the line at saying LC ought to be the locus or forum
for such harmonization.

Taking the group in a slightly different direction, but one where at
least in the near term LC might play a helpful role, LYNCH remarked the
plans of a number of projects to carry out preservation by creating
digital images that will end up in on-line or near-line storage at some
institution. Presumably, LC will link this material somehow to its
on-line catalog in most cases. Thus, it is in a digital form. LYNCH had
the impression that many of these institutions would be willing to
make those files accessible to other people outside the institution,
provided that there is no copyright problem.

This desideratum will require propagating the knowledge that those
digitized files exist, so that they can end up in other on-line
catalogs.

Although uncertain about the mechanism for achieving this result,
LYNCH said that it warranted scrutiny because it seemed to be
connected to some of the basic issues of cataloging and distribution
of records.

It would be foolish, given the amount of work that all of us have to do
and our meager resources, to discover multiple institutions
digitizing the same work.

Re microforms, LYNCH said, we are in pretty good shape.

BATTIN called this a big problem and noted that the Cornell people (who
had already departed) were working on it.

At issue from the beginning was to learn how to catalog that
information into RLIN and then into OCLC, so that it would be
accessible.

That issue remains to be resolved. LYNCH rejoined that putting it into
OCLC or RLIN was helpful insofar as somebody who is thinking of
performing preservation activity on that work could learn about it.

It is not necessarily helpful for institutions to make that available.

BATTIN opined that the idea was that it not only be for preservation
purposes but for the convenience of people looking for this
material. She endorsed LYNCH's dictum that duplication of this effort was
to be avoided by every means.

HOCKEY informed the Workshop about one major current activity of
CETH, namely a catalogue of machine-readable texts in the humanities.

Held on RLIN at present, the catalogue has been concentrated on ASCII
as opposed to digitized images of text.

She is exploring ways to improve the catalogue and make it more
widely available, and welcomed suggestions about these concerns.

CETH owns the records, which are not just restricted to RLIN, and can
distribute them however it wishes.

Taking up LESK's earlier question, BATTIN inquired whether LC, since
it is accepting electronic files and designing a mechanism for
dealing with that rather than putting books on shelves, would become
responsible for the National Copyright Depository of Electronic
Materials.

Of course that could not be accomplished overnight, but it would be something
LC could plan for.

GIFFORD acknowledged that much thought was being devoted to that set
of problems and returned the discussion to the issue raised by
LYNCH--whether or not putting the kind of records that both BATTIN
and HOCKEY have been talking about in RLIN is not a satisfactory
solution.

It seemed to him that RLIN answered LYNCH's original point concerning
some kind of directory for these kinds of materials. In a situation
where somebody is attempting to decide whether or not to scan this
or film that or to learn whether or not someone has already done
so, LYNCH suggested, RLIN is helpful, but it is not helpful in the
case of a local, on-line catalogue.

Further, one would like to have her or his system be aware that
that exists in digital form, so that one can present it to a patron,
even though one did not digitize it, if it is out of copyright.

     The only way to make those linkages
     would be to perform a tremendous
     amount of real-time look-up, which would be awkward
     at best, or periodically to yank the whole file from RLIN and match
it against one's own stuff, which is a nuisance.

But where, ERWAY inquired, does one stop including things that are
available with Internet, for instance, in one's local catalogue?

It almost seems that that is LC's means to acquire access to them.

     That represents LC's new
     form of library loan.
     Perhaps LC's new on-line
     catalogue is an amalgamation of all these catalogues on line.

LYNCH conceded that perhaps that was true in the very long term,
but was not applicable to scanning in the short term. In his view, the
totals cited by Yale, 10,000 books over perhaps a four-year period,
and 1,000-1,500 books from Cornell, were not big numbers, while
searching all over creation for relatively rare occurrences will
prove to be less efficient.

As GIFFORD wondered if this would not be a separable file on RLIN and
could be requested from them, BATTIN interjected that it was easily
accessible to an institution. SEVERTSON pointed out that that file,
cum enhancements, was available with reference information on
CD-ROM, which makes it a little more available.

     
     My mother would come downstairs, and perceiving
the marks I had left, would get angry, and as usual commence singing--

     "'A frog he would a-wooing go,
     Heigho, says Rowly.'

"I see here's that little wretch been here--

     "'Whether his mother would let him or no,
     Heigho, says Rowly.'

"I'll rowly him with the rolling-pin when I get hold of him. He's worse
than that beastly water-spaniel of Sir Hercules', who used to shake
himself over my best cambric muslin. Well, we'll see. He'll be wanting
his dinner; I only wish he may get it.

     "'Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
     Eating his Christmas pie;
     He put in his thumb and pull'd out a plum,
     And cried, What a good boy am I!'

"'Good boy am I!' good-for-nothing brat, just like his father. Oh,
dear!--if I could but get rid of him!

     "'There was an old woman who lived in a shoe,
     She'd so many children she didn't know what to do;
     She gave them some broth without any bread,
     She whipped them all round, and sent them to bed.'

"And if I don't whip him, it's my fault, that's all. Virginia, my love,
don't spit--that's not genteel. It's only sailors and Yankees who spit.
Nasty little brute! Oh! here you are, are you?" cried my mother, as I
entered. "Do you see what a dirty mess you have made, you little
ungrateful animal? Take that, and that, and that," continued she,
running the wet bristles of the long broom into my face, with sufficient
force to make my nose bleed. I stood the first push, and the second; but
the third roused my indignation--and I caught hold of the end of the
broom toward me, and tried to force it out of her hands. It was push
against push, for I was very strong--she, screaming as loud as she
could, as she tried to wrest the broom from my clutches--I, shoving at
her with all my force--like Punch and the devil at the two ends of the
stick. At last, after she had held me in a corner for half a minute, I
made a rush upon her, drove her right to the opposite corner, so that
the end of the handle gave her a severe poke in the body, which made her
give up the contest, and exclaim as soon as she recovered her
breath--"Oh! you nasty, ungrateful, ungenteel brute! You little viper!
Is that the way you treat your mother--and nearly kill her? Oh, dear
me!"

"Why don't you leave me alone, then? you never beats Jenny."

"Who's Jenny, you wicked good-for-nothing boy? you mean your sister
Virginia. Well, you'll have no dinner, I can tell you."

I put my hand in my pocket, took out a sixpence which I had received,
and held it up between my thumb and finger. "Won't I?"

"You oudacious boy! that's the way you're spoiled by foolish people
giving you money."

"Good-by, mother." So saying, I leaped over the board fixed up at the
door, and was again down at the beach. Indeed, I was now what is termed
a regular _Mud-larker_, picking up halfpence by running into the water,
offering my ragged arm to people getting out of the wherries, always
saluting them with, "You haven't got never a halfpenny for poor Jack,
your honor?" and sometimes I did get a halfpenny, sometimes a shove,
according to the temper of those whom I addressed. When I was not on the
beach, I was usually in company with Ben the Whaler, who, after my
father's visit, was more kind to me than ever; and there were several
other pensioners who were great friends of mine; and I used to listen to
their long yarns, which were now becoming a source of great delight to
me; at other times I would be with the watermen, assisting them to clean
out their wherries, or pay the seams. In fact, I was here, there, and
everywhere except at home--always active, always employed, and, I may
add, almost always wet. My mother used to scold whenever I came in; but
that I did not mind; her greatest punishment was refusing me a clean
shirt on a Sunday. At last I picked up halfpence enough to pay, not only
for my food, such as it was, but for my own washing, and every day I
became more independent and more happy.

There were other ways by which money was to be obtained during the
summer season, which were from the company who used to come down to the
whitebait parties at the Ship and other taverns. There were many other
boys who frequented the beach besides me, and we used to stand under the
windows, and attract attention by every means in our power, so as to
induce the company to throw us halfpence to scramble for. This they
would do to while away their time until their dinner was ready, or to
amuse themselves and the ladies by seeing us roll and tumble one over
the other. Sometimes they would throw a sixpence into the river, where
the water was about two feet deep, to make us wet ourselves through in
groping for it. Indeed, they were very generous when they wished to be
amused; and every kind of offer was made to them which we thought suited
to their tastes, or likely to extract money from their pockets.

"Dip my head in the mud for sixpence, sir!" would one of us cry out; and
then he would be outbid by another.

"Roll myself all over and over, in the mud, face and all, sir--only give
me sixpence!"

Sometimes I would perceive a lovely countenance, beaming with pity and
compassion at our rags and apparent wretchedness, and then the money
thrown to me gave me much more pleasure; but the major portion of those
who threw us silver for their own amusement would not have given us a
farthing if we had asked charity for the love of God.

It must not, however, be supposed that I gained the enviable situation
of _Poor Jack_ until I had been some time on the beach. There are
competitors for every place, even the most humble; and there was no want
of competitors for this office among the many idle boys who frequented
the beach. When I first plied there, I was often pushed away by those
who were older and stronger than myself, with a "Go along with you! He's
not poor Jack--I'm poor Jack, your honor." This, at first, I submitted
to; taking my chance for a stray halfpenny, which was occasionally
thrown to me, trusting to my activity in being the first down to the
boat, or to my quickness in a scramble. I never quarreled with the other
boys, for I was remarkable for my good temper. The first idea I had of
resistance was from oppression. One of the boys, who was older and
taller than myself, attempted to take away a sixpence which I had gained
in a scramble. Before that, I had not resented being pushed away, or
even when they threw water or mud at me; but this was an act of violence
which I could not put up with: the consequence was a fight; in which, to
my surprise (for I was not aware of my strength), as well as to the
surprise of the bystanders, I proved victorious, beating my opponent
until he reeled into the water, following him up until he tumbled, and
then holding his head down in the mud until he was almost stifled. I
then allowed him to get up, and he went home crying to his mother. For
this feat I was rewarded with the plaudits of the old pensioners and
others who were looking on, and with a shilling which was thrown to me
from the window of the inn. Ben the Whaler, who had witnessed the fray,
told me, the next day, that I handled my fists remarkably well, and that
I had but to keep a higher guard and I should fight well. He was an old
pugilist himself, and he gave me a few directions which I did not
forget. I soon had occasion to put them into practice; for, two days
afterward, another boy, bigger than myself, as I was plying as "Poor
Jack," pushed me back so hard that I fell off the steps into the deep
water, and there was a general laugh against me. I did not care for the
ducking, but the laugh I could not bear: as soon as I gained the steps
again, I rushed upon him and threw him off, and he fell into the wherry,
and, as it afterward appeared, he strained his back very much;
nevertheless he came out to thrash me; and this time it was a regular
fight, as the pensioners and watermen interfered, taking us both up on
the higher ground, and seeing that it was fair play. Ben the Whaler
acted as my second, and we set to. The boy was too powerful for me, had
it not been for the hurt he had received and the instructions I obtained
from Ben every time that I sat on his knee between each round. Still it
was a very hard fight, and I was terribly beaten; but I could not give
up, for so many betted upon my winning, and Ben told me, at the end of
every round, that if I only stood up one more, I should be certain to
beat him, and that then I should be _Poor Jack forever!_ The last
inducement stimulated me to immense exertion. We closed and wrestled,
and my antagonist was thrown; and, in consequence of the strain he had
before received, he could not stand up anymore. Poor fellow! he was in
great pain; he was taken home, and obliged to have a doctor, and an
abscess formed in his side. He was a long while getting well, and, when
he came out of doors again, he was so pale. I was very sorry for him,
and we were always the best friends afterward, and I gave him many a
halfpenny, until I had an opportunity of serving him.

I mention these two fights because they obtained for me a greater
reputation than I deserved: this reputation perhaps saved me a great
deal more fighting, and obtained me the mastery over the other boys on
the beach. Indeed, I became such a favorite with the watermen that they
would send the other boys away; and thus did I become, at last, the
acknowledged, true, lawful, and legitimate "Poor Jack of Greenwich."


CHAPTER NINE

     In which I take a Cruise contrary to the received Rules of
     Navigation--On my Return from a cold Expedition, I meet with a cold
     Reception.


As soon as I was fairly in possession of my office, I gained sufficient
money to render me almost entirely independent of my mother.
Occasionally I procured an old jacket or trousers, or a pair of shoes,
at the store of an old woman who dealt in everything that could be
imagined; and, if ever I picked up oakum or drifting pieces of wood, I
used to sell them to old Nanny--for that was the only name she was known
by. My mother, having lost her lodgers by her ill temper and continual
quarreling with her neighbors, had resorted to washing and getting up of
fine linen, at which she was very expert, and earned a good deal of
money. To do her justice, she was a very industrious woman, and, in some
things, very clever. She was a very good dressmaker, and used to make up
the gowns and bonnets for the lower classes of people, to whom she gave
great satisfaction. She worked very hard for herself and my sister,
about whose dress and appearance she was more particular than ever;
indeed, she showed as much affection for her as she did ill-will toward
me. To look at me, with my old trousers tucked up above my knees, my
ragged jacket, and weatherbeaten cap; and then to see Virginia, so
neatly and even expensively dressed, no one could have believed that we
were brother and sister. My mother would always try to prevent Virginia
from noticing me, if we ever met when she was walking out with her. But
my sister appeared to love me more and more; and, in spite of my mother,
as soon as she saw me, would run up to me, patting my dirty jacket with
her pretty little hand; and, when she did so, I felt so proud of her.
She grew up handsomer every day, and so sweet in disposition that my
mother could not spoil her.

It was in the autumn that I gained undisputed possession of the office
of "Poor Jack"; and that winter I had an adventure which nearly
occasioned my making a vacancy for somebody else, and which, the reader
will agree with me, was anything but pleasant.

It was in the month of January--the river was filled with floating ice,
for it had frozen hard for several days; and, of course, there were but
few people who trusted themselves in wherries--so that I had little
employment, and less profit. One morning, as I was standing on the
landing-steps, the breath coming out of my mouth like the steam of a
tea-kettle--rubbing my nose, which was red from the sharpness of the
frost--and looking at the sun, which was just mounting above a bank of
clouds, a waterman called to me, and asked me whether I would go down
the river with him, as he was engaged to take a mate down to join his
ship, which was several miles below Greenwich; and, if so, he would give
me sixpence and a breakfast. I had earned little for many days, and,
hating to be obliged to my mother, I consented.

In an hour we started: there was no wind--the water was smooth, and the
sun's rays glittered on the floating patches of ice, which grated
against the sides of the wherry as we cut through them with our sharp
prow. Although we had the tide with us, it was three hours before we
gained the ship. The mate paid the fare, and gave us something to drink;
and we passed an hour or more warming ourselves at the caboose and
talking with the seamen. At last a breeze sprung up, and the captain
ordered the men to get the ship under way. We shoved off, the tide
having flowed some time, expecting to be back to Greenwich before dark.

But it clouded over, and a heavy snowstorm came on, so that we could not
see in what direction we were pulling; the wind blew very fresh, and it
was piercing cold; however, we pulled as hard as we could, not only to
get back again, but to keep ourselves from freezing. Unfortunately, we
had lost too much time on board of the vessel; and, what with that, and
the delay arising from the snowstorm preventing us pulling straight
back, the ebb-tide made again before we had gained more than two-thirds
of our way. We were now nearly worn out with the severe cold and
fatigue, but we pulled hard, keeping as close inshore as we could. It
was necessary, at the end of one reach, to cross over to the other side
of the river; and, in so doing, we were driven by the tide against a
large buoy, when the wherry filled and upset in an instant. We both
contrived to cling on to her, as she was turned bottom up; and away we
were swept down among the drifting ice, the snowstorm still continuing
to beat down on our heads. I was nearly frozen before I could climb on
the bottom of the wherry; which I at last contrived to do, but the
waterman could only hold on. There we both were, shivering and shaking;
the wind piercing through our wet clothes--the snow beating down on us,
and our feet freezing among the drifting ice--borne away with the tide
toward the mouth of the river--not able to see two yards before us, or
likely to be seen by any one, so as to be assisted. We were too cold to
speak, but remained in silence, looking at each other, and with no
pleasant forebodings as to our fate. The ice now formed in large masses;
the icicles hung from our clothes and all sense was lost in our
extremities. It was now dark as pitch; and so feeble were we that it was
with difficulty we could keep in our positions. At last the storm
abated, the sky cleared up, and the bright full moon shone in the
heavens; but our case appeared hopeless--we felt that before morning we
must perish. I tried to say what prayers I had learned by hearing my
sister say them; but my teeth chattered, and I could only think them. At
last I perceived a vessel at anchor: the tide was sweeping us past--we
were close to her, and I contrived to cry out; but there was no reply.
Again I screamed, but it was in vain. They were all in their warm beds,
while we floated past, freezing to death. My hopes, which had been
raised, and which had occasioned my heart to resume its beating, now
sank down again, and I gave myself up in despair. I burst into tears;
and, before the tears had rolled half-way down my cheeks, they had
frozen hard. "I am indeed 'Poor Jack,' now," thought I; "I shall never
see my father or Virginia any more." As I thought so, I saw another
vessel ahead of us. I summoned all my strength, and called out long
before we floated past her. The light wind bore my voice down; there was
a man on deck, and he heard it; he walked forward, and I perceived him
looking over the bows. I hallooed again, to direct his attention to
where we were; for our wherry was so encrusted with ice that she might
have been taken for a larger piece floating by. I saw him turn away, and
heard him thump with a handspike on the deck. How my heart bounded! I
almost felt warm. As we were passing the vessel, I cried out again and
again, and the man answered me--

"Ay, ay, hold on for a minute or two, and I'll send for you."

[Illustration: I SUMMONED ALL MY STRENGTH, AND CALLED OUT LONG BEFORE WE
FLOATED PAST HER.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 73.]

"We are saved," I cried to the waterman; but he was quite insensible,
apparently frozen stiff where he was clinging. In a few minutes I heard
the sound of oars, and then they stopped; the boat came quietly
alongside, that they might not by the shock throw us off into the water;
they dragged us both in, and took us on board, poured a glass of brandy
down our throats, stripped off our frozen clothes, chafed our limbs, and
put us between the hot blankets which they had just left. As soon as I
was in bed the mate made me drink a tumbler of hot grog, and left me. I
soon fell into a deep sleep, long before they had ceased their attempts
to restore vitality to my companion, which at last they did. When I
awoke the next morning I was quite well, and the waterman was also
recovering, although not able to leave his hammock. The mate who had had
the watch and had saved us, told me that the wherry was safe on board,
and, as the ship was bound up the river, that we had better remain where
we were. I narrated our accident; and my clothes having been dried at
the caboose, I dressed myself and went on deck. My companion, the
waterman, did not escape so well; his foot was frostbitten, and he lost
four of his toes before he recovered. It was singular that he, who was a
man grown up, should suffer so much more than I did. I cannot account
for it, except that my habit of always being in the water had hardened
me more to the cold. We remained on board two days, during which we were
treated with great kindness.

It was a fine bright morning, when, as the ship was passing the
hospital, we shoved the wherry off, and landed at the steps; and when we
jumped out we were greeted by all who were standing there. We had very
naturally been given up for lost. They supposed that we had perished in
the snowstorm. Old Ben was among those who were standing at the steps,
and he walked up with me toward my mother's house.

"I did go to the old woman and break the matter to her in a becoming
way, Jack," said Ben; "but I can't say that she appeared to take it much
to heart, and that's the truth. Had it been little Jenny, she'd have
cried her eyes out."

I arrived at Fisher's Alley, and the neighbors looked out; and as I
nodded to them they cried, "Why, here's Jack come back again. Where have
you been to, Jack?" This passing from mouth to mouth at last reached my
mother's ears; she looked out and saw me and old Ben close to the door.

"Here be your son, missus," said Ben; "so you may thank God for His
mercy."

But my mother did not appear to be very thankful. She turned round and
went in. I followed her, while Ben was standing at the door in amazement
at her not flying to me and kissing me. On the contrary she must have
been angry at my return, for she commenced singing:

     "Jack and Gill went up the hill
       To fetch a pail of water;
     Jack fell down and broke his crown,
       And Gill came tumbling after."

And then she broke out: "And where have you been, you good-for-nothing
boy, all this time? putting me to all this useless expense that you
have; all my money thrown away for nothing." I looked at the table and
perceived that she had been making a black dress and bonnet, to put
little Virginia into mourning; for she never let slip an opportunity to
dress out my sister.

"Fifteen good shillings thrown away and lost, all by your coming back.
Your sister would have looked so beautiful and interesting in it. Poor
child! and now she will be disappointed. Never mind, my darling, you may
have to wear them soon yet, if he goes on this way."

Virginia did not seem to mind it at all; she was kissing and patting me,
and was delighted to see me again. But my mother took her by the hand,
and catching up the half-made dress and bonnet in her other, walked away
upstairs to her room, singing:

     "There was an old man who lived under a hill,
     And if he's not dead, he lives there still."

"So much for motherly love! Dang it, what's her heart made of?" said a
voice. I turned round; it was old Ben, who had been an unobserved
spectator of the scene.


CHAPTER TEN

     In which I narrate what I consider the most fortunate Incident in
     my Life; and Ben the Whaler confides to me a very strange History


Among the pensioners there was one with whom I must make the reader
acquainted, as he will be an important person in this narrative. His
name was Peter Anderson, a north countryman, I believe, from Greenock;
he had been gunner's mate in the service for many years, and, having
been severely wounded in an action, he had been sent to Greenwich. He
was a boatswain in Greenwich Hospital; that is, he had charge of a ward
of twenty-five men, and Ben the Whaler had lately been appointed one of
the boatswain's mates under him. He was a very good scholar, and had
read a great deal. You could hardly put any question to him, but you
would get from him a satisfactory sort of an answer; and he was
generally referred to in all points of dispute, especially in matters
connected with the service, which he had at his fingers' ends; and,
moreover, he was a very religious good man. I never heard him swear, but
correct all those who did so in his presence. He had saved some money in
the service, the interest of which, with his allowances as boatswain,
enabled him to obtain many little comforts, and to be generous to
others. Before Ben was shifted over to Anderson's ward, which he was
when he was appointed boatswain's mate under him, they had not been well
acquainted; but, since that time, they were almost always together; so
that now I knew Anderson, which I did not before, except by sight. He
was a very venerable looking old man, with gray locks curling down on
his shoulders, but very stout and hearty; and, as Ben had told him all
about me, he took notice of me, and appeared also to take an interest.
When I came back, after the providential escape I have mentioned in the
last chapter, Ben had narrated to him the conduct of my mother; and a
day or two afterward, when the frost had broken up, and they were both
sitting down, basking in the sun, which was shining bright, I went up to
them.

"Well, Jack," said old Ben, "are you ready for another trip down the
river?"

"I hope I shall earn my sixpence at an easier rate, if I do go," replied
I.

"It was wonderful that you were saved, boy," said Peter Anderson, "and
you ought to very thankful to the Omniscient."

I stared; for I had never heard that term applied to the Diety.

"You mean God, don't you?" said I, at last; for I thought he couldn't
mean any other.

"Yes, boy; has not your mother taught you that name?"

"She never would teach me anything. All the prayers I know I have stolen
from my sister."

"And what do you know, Jack?"

"I know 'Our Father,' and 'Now I lay down to sleep,' and I believe that
is all."

"How old are you now, Jack?"

"I am three years older than Virginia; she, I heard my mother say, was
six the other day--then I suppose I'm nine."

"Do you know your letters?"

"Yes, some of them; I learned them on the boats."

"But you cannot read?"

"No, not a word."

"Has your mother ever told you of the Bible?"

"Not me; but I've heard her tell Virginia about it."

"Don't you ever go to church?"

"No, never. Mother takes little Virginia; but she says I'm too ragged
and ungenteel."

"Why does your mother neglect you? I suppose you are a bad boy?"

"That he's not," interrupted Ben; "that's not the reason. But we must
not talk about that now; only I must take Jack's part. Go on, Peter."

"Would you like to learn to read, Jack?" said Anderson; "and would you
like to hear me read the Bible to you, until you can read it yourself?"

"Indeed I would," replied I. "There's many of the boys on the beach,
smaller than me, who can both read and write."

Peter Anderson then told me that he would teach me, provided I behaved
myself well. He desired that I would come to his cabin every afternoon
at six o'clock, a time which interfered little with my avocation of
"Poor Jack," and that he would give me a lesson. Before he had finished
talking, one of the lieutenants of the hospital sent for him; and Ben
remained behind, to point out to me how valuable my knowing how to read
and write might one day prove to me.

"I've no larning myself, Jack," said he; "and I know the loss of it. Had
I known how to read and write, I might have been something better than
a poor Greenwich pensioner; but nevertheless I'm thankful that I'm no
worse. Ever since I've been a man grown I've only regretted it once--and
that's been all my life. Why, Jack, I'd give this right arm of mine--to
be sure, it's no great things now, but once it could send a harpoon in,
up to the hilt--but still a right arm is a right arm to the end of your
days!--and I'd give it with pleasure, if I only knew how to read and
write. Nay, I wouldn't care about the writing; but, if I could only read
print, Jack, I'd give it; for then I could read the Bible, as Peter
Anderson does. Why, Jack, when we do go to chapel on Sunday, there's not
one in ten of us who can follow the parson with his book; all we can do
is to listen; and when he has done speaking, we are done also, and must
wait till he preaches again. Don't I feel ashamed, then, Jack, at not
being able to read? and ought not they to feel proud who can--no, not
proud, but thankful[2]? We don't think of the Bible much in our younger
days, boy; but, when we are tripping our anchor for the other world, we
long to read away our doubts and misgivings; and it's the only chart you
can navigate by safely. I think a parent has much to answer for that
don't teach its child to read; but I must not blame my father or mother,
for I never knew them."

[Footnote 2: Ben's observations were true at the time he spoke; but this
is no longer the case. So much more general has education become, that
now, in a ship's company, at least five out of seven can read.]

"Never knew them?"

"No, boy, no. My father and mother left me when I was one year old: he
was drowned, and my mother--she died too, poor soul!"

"How did your mother die, Ben?"

"It's a sad, sad story, Jack, and I cannot bear to think of it; it was
told me long afterward, by one who little thought to whom he was
speaking."

"Do tell me, Ben."

"You're too young, boy, for such a tale; it's too shocking."

"Was it worse than being froze to death, as I nearly was the other day?"

"Yes, my lad, worse than that; although, for one so young as you are,
that was quite bad enough."

"Well, Ben, I won't ask you to tell me if it pains you to tell it. But
you did not do wrong?"

"How could a baby of two years old do wrong, and five thousand miles off
at the time, you little fool? Well, I don't know if I won't tell you,
Jack, after all, because you will then find out that there's a comfort
in reading the Bible; but you must promise me never to speak about it.
I'm a foolish old fellow to tell it to you, Jack, I do believe; but I'm
fond of you, boy, and I don't like to say 'no' to you. Now come to an
anchor close to me. The bells are ringing for dinner--I shall lose my
meal, but you will not lose your story, and there will be no fear of
interruption.

"My father was brought up to the sea, Jack, and was a smart young man
till he was about thirty, when a fall from the mainyard disabled him
from hard duty and going aft; but still he had been brought up to sea,
and was fit for nothing on shore. So, as he was a clean, likely fellow,
he obtained the situation of purser's steward in an Indiaman. After that
he was captain's steward on board of several ships. He sailed originally
from Yarmouth, and going home after a voyage to see his relations, he
fell in with my mother, and they were spliced. He was very fond of his
wife, and I believe she was a very true and good woman, equally fond of
him. He went to sea again, and I was born. He made another voyage to
India, and when he came back I was two years old. I do not recollect him
or my mother. My father had agreed to sail to the West Indies as
captain's steward, and the captain, with whom he had sailed before,
consented that he should take his wife with him, to attend upon the lady
passengers; so I was left at Yarmouth, and put out to nurse till they
came back. But they never came back, Jack; and, as soon as I can
recollect, I found myself in the workhouse, and, when old enough, was
sent to sea. I had been told that my father and mother had been lost at
sea, but no one could tell me how, and I thought little more about it,
for I had never known them, and those we don't know we do not love or
care for, be they father or mother.

"Well, I had sailed four or five voyages to the north in the whalers,
and was then about twenty-five years old, when I thought I would go back
to Yarmouth and show myself, for I was 'harpooner and steersman' at that
early age, and not a little proud. I thought I would go and look at the
old workhouse, for it was the only thing I could recollect, and see if
the master and mistress were still alive, for they were kind to me when
I was living with them. I went to Yarmouth, as I said. There was the
workhouse, and the master and mistress both alive; and I made myself
known to them, and the old people looked at me through their spectacles,
and could not believe that I could possibly be the little Ben who used
to run to the pump for water. I had money in my pocket, and I liked the
old people, who offered me all they could give without hopes of
receiving any thing in return, and, as I knew nobody else, I used to
live much with them, and pay them handsomely. I gave the old man some
curiosities and the old woman a teapot, and so on, and I remained with
them till it was time for me to sail again. Now, you see, Jack, among
the old folk in the workhouse was a man who had been at sea; and I often
had long talks with him, and gave him tobacco, which he couldn't afford
to buy--for they don't allow it in a workhouse, which is a great
hardship, and I have often thought that I should not like to go into a
workhouse because I never could have a bit of tobacco. This man's hair
was as white as snow, much too white for his age, for he was more
decrepit and worn out than, perhaps, he was old. He had come home to his
parish, and, being unable to gain his living, they had sent him to the
workhouse. I can't understand why a place should be called a workhouse
where they do nothing at all. Well, Charley, as they called him, got
very ill, and they thought he would not last long; and, when the old
people were busy, I used to talk a great deal with him. He was generally
very quiet and composed, and said he was comfortable, but that he knew
he was going fast.

"'But,' says he, 'here's my comfort;' and he pointed to a Bible that he
had on his knees. 'If it had not been for this book,' said he, 'I do
think, at times, I should have made away with myself.'

"'Why,' says I, 'what have you done? Have you been very wicked?'

"'We are all very wicked,' said he; 'but that's not exactly it. I have
been _haunted_ for so many years that I have been almost driven mad.'

"'Why,' said I, 'what can you have done that you should have been
haunted? You haven't committed murder, have you?'

"'Well, I don't know what to say,' replied he; 'if a man looks on and
don't prevent murder, is it not the same? I haven't long to live, and I
feel as if I should be happier if I made a clean breast of it; for I
have kept the secret a long while, and I think that you, as a sailor,
and knowing what sailors suffer, may have a fellow-feeling; and perhaps
you will tell me (for I'm somewhat uneasy about it) whether you think
that I am so very much to blame in the business? I've suffered enough
for it these many years, and I trust that it will not be forgotten that
I have so, when I'm called up to be judged--as we all shall, if this
book is true, as I fully believe it to be.'

"Here he appeared to be a good deal upset; but he took a drink of water,
and then he told me as follows:

"'About twenty-three years ago I was a seaman on board of the "William
and Caroline," West Indiaman, bound to Jamaica. We had two or three
passengers on board, and the steward's wife attended upon them. She was
a handsome, tall young woman; and when she and her husband came on
board, they told me they had one child, which they had left at home. Now
Yarmouth, you see, is my native place, and, although I did not know her
husband, I knew her family very well. So we were very intimate, and used
to talk about the people we knew, and so on. I mention this in
consequence of what occurred afterward. We arrived very safe at Jamaica,
and remained, as usual, some time at the island before the drogers
brought round our cargo, and then we again sailed for England.

"'Well, we got clear of the islands, and were getting well north, when
there came on a terrible gale of wind which dismasted us; and for three
weeks we were rolling about gunnel under, for we were very heavily
laden, and we lost our reckoning. At last we found out that we had been
blown down among the reefs to the southward of the Bahama Isles. We had
at one time rigged jury-masts, but unfortunately the gale had blown up
again, and carried them also over the side; and we had no means of doing
anything, for we had no more small spars or sails, and all our hopes
were of falling in with some vessel which might assist us.

"'But we had no such good fortune; and one morning, when a heavy sea was
running, we discovered that it was bearing us down upon a reef of rocks,
from which there was no chance of escape. We had no resource but to get
the boats out, and take our chance in them. The captain was very cool
and collected; he ordered everything in which might be requisite; called
up the men, and explained to them his intentions. All the water and
provisions were put into the launch, for the sea ran so high that the
small boats could not carry them; and it was intended that all the boats
should keep company till it moderated, and then each boat should have
its own supply. When all was ready, we were _told off_ to our respective
boats. The steward and his wife were to be in the same boat with me, and
I had put her carefully in the sternsheets, for I was her great friend.
Now the steward was called out by the captain to go for something which
had been forgotten; and while he was away the ship was struck by a heavy
sea, which occasioned such a breach over her that all was in confusion,
and, to prevent the small boats from swamping, they were pushed off. The
launch still held on for the captain, who hastened in with the mate and
the steward, for they were the only three left on board; and away we all
went. I mention this as the cause why the steward was separated (only
for a time, as we supposed) from his wife. We had not been clear of the
ship more than five minutes before we found that we, in our boat, could
hardly make head 'gainst the wind and swell, which bore down on the reef
close to us; the launch, which was a heavy-pulling boat and deeply
laden, could not; and in a quarter of an hour we had the misery to see
her in the breakers, swallowed up with all hands, together with all the
provisions and water for our sustenance. I will not attempt to describe
the agony of the steward's wife, who saw her husband perish before her
eyes. She fainted; and it was a long time before she came to again; for
no one could leave his oar for a minute to assist her, as we pulled for
our lives. At last she did come to. Poor thing! I felt for her. Toward
night the wind lulled, and we had every appearance of fine weather
coming on; but we had nothing to eat, and only a barrico of water in the
boat, and we were quite exhausted with fatigue.

"'We knew that we must pull to the northward, and try and fetch the
Bahama Isles, or, perhaps, some of the small quays to the southward of
them, where we might procure turtle, and, perhaps, water; and when the
sea had gone down, which it did very fast, we put the head of our boat
in that direction, pulling all night. At daybreak the other boat was not
to be seen; it was a dead clam, but there was still a long heavy swell.
We shared out some water and rested till the evening, and then we took
to our oars again.

"'We rowed hard till the morning, but when the sun rose it scorched us
up. It was impossible for us to keep to our oars without drinking, and,
there being no one to take the command, our water was all gone, and we
had not gained fifty miles to the northward. On the third morning we
laid down exhausted at the bottom of the boat--we were dying not only
with thirst, but with hunger; we had agreed that when night came on we
would take to the oars again; but some would and some would not; so
that, at last, those who had taken to their oars would pull no longer.

"'The steward's wife at times sang psalms, and at times wept. She had a
very sweet voice, but her lips were soon glued together for want of
water, and she could sing no longer.

"'When the sun rose on the fourth day there was no vessel to be seen.
Some were raving for water, and others sat crouched under the boat's
thwarts in silent despair. But, toward evening, the sky clouded over,
and there fell a heavy rain, which refreshed us. We took the gown from
off the steward's wife, and spread it, and caught the water; and we all
drank until our thirst was quenched--even our wet clothes were a comfort
to us; still we were gnawed with hunger. That night we slept; but the
next morning every man's eyes flashed, and we all looked as if we would
eat each other; and there were whisperings and noddings going on in the
bow of the boat; and a negro who was with us took out his knife, and
sharpened it on the boat's gunnel. No one asked him why. We spoke not,
but we all had our own thoughts. It was dreadful to look at our hollow
cheeks--our eyes sunken deep, but glaring like red-hot coals--our long
beards and haggard faces--every one ready to raise his hand against the
other. The poor woman never complained or said a word after she left off
singing; her thoughts appeared elsewhere. She sat for hours motionless,
with her eyes fixed on the still blue water, as if she would pierce its
depth.

"'At last the negro came aft; and we were each upon our guard as he
passed us, for we had seen him sharpen his knife. He went to the
sternsheets, where the poor woman sat, and we all knew what he intended
to do, for he only acted our own thoughts. She was still hanging over
the gunnel, with her eyes fixed downward, and she heeded not his
approach. He caught her by the hair, and dragged her head toward him.
She then held out her arms toward me, faintly calling me by name; but
I--shame on me!--remained sitting on the afterthwart. The negro thrust
his knife into her neck, below the ear; and, as soon as he had divided
the artery, he glued his thick lips to the gash and sucked her blood.

"'When the deed was done, others rose up and would have shared; but the
negro kept his white eyes directed toward them--one arm thrust out, with
his knife pointed at them, as he slaked his thirst, while, with his
other round her waist, he supported her dying frame. The attitude was
that of fondness, while the deed was--murder. He appeared as if he were
caressing her, while her life's blood poured into his throat. At last we
all drew our knives; and the negro knew that he must resign his prey or
his life. He dropped the woman, and she fell, with her face forward, at
my feet. She was quite dead. And then--our hunger was relieved.

"'Three days passed away, and again we were mad for want of water--when
we saw a vessel. We shouted, and shook hands, and threw out the oars,
and pulled as if we had never suffered. It was still calm, and, as we
approached the vessel, we threw what remained of the poor woman into the
sea; and the sharks finished what we had left. We agreed to say nothing
about her, for we were ashamed of ourselves.

"'Now I did _not_ murder, but I did _not_ prevent it; and I have ever
since been haunted by this poor woman. I see her and the negro
constantly before me, and then I think of what passed, and I turn sick.
I feel that I ought to have saved her--she is always holding out her
arms to me, and I hear her faintly call "Charles"--then I read my
Bible--and she disappears, and I feel as if I were forgiven. Tell me,
what do you think, messmate?'

"'Why,' replied I, 'sarcumstances will make us do what we otherwise
would never think possible. I never was in such a predicament, and
therefore can't tell what people may be brought to do. But tell me,
messmate, what was the name of the poor woman?'

[Illustration: ANDERSON READING THE BIBLE TO JACK.--Marryat, Vol. X., p.
89.]

"'The husband's name was Ben Rivers.'

"'_Rivers_, did you say?' replied I, struck all of a heap.

"'Yes,' replied he; 'that was her name; she was of this town. But never
mind the name--tell me what you think, messmate?'

"'Well,' says I (for I was quite bewildered), 'I'll tell you what, old
fellow--as far as I'm consarned, you have my forgiveness, and now I must
wish you good-by--and I pray to God that we may never meet again.'

"'Stop a little,' said he; 'don't leave me this way. Ah! I see how it
is--you think I'm a murderer.'

"'No, I don't,' replied I; 'not exactly--still, there'll be no harm in
your reading your Bible.'

"And so I got up, and walked out of the room--for you see, Jack,
although he mayn't have been so much to blame, still I didn't like to be
in company with a man who had eaten up _my own mother!_"

Here Ben paused, and sighed deeply. I was so much shocked with the
narrative that I could not say a word. At last Ben continued:

"I couldn't stay in the room--I couldn't stay in the workhouse. I
couldn't even stay in the town. Before the day closed I was out of it,
and I have never been there since. Now, Jack, I must go in--remember
what I have said to you, and larn to read your Bible."

I promised that I would, and that very evening I had my first lesson
from Peter Anderson, and I continued to receive them until I could read
well. He then taught me to write and cipher; but before I could do the
latter, many events occurred, which must be made known to the reader.


CHAPTER ELEVEN

     In which the Doctor lets out some very novel Modes of Medical
     Treatment, which are attended with the greatest Success.


Such a change has taken place since I can first recollect Greenwich that
it will be somewhat difficult for me to make the reader aware of my
localities. Narrow streets have been pulled down, handsome buildings
erected--new hotels in lieu of small inns--gay shops have now usurped
those which were furnished only with articles necessary for the outfit
of the seamen. Formerly, long stages, with a basket to hold six behind,
and dillies which plied at the Elephant and Castle, were the usual land
conveyances--now they have made place for railroads and omnibuses.
Formerly, the wherry conveyed the mariner and his wife, with his
sea-chest, down to the landing-place--now steamboats pour out their
hundreds at a trip. Even the view from Greenwich is much changed, here
and there broken in upon by the high towers for shot and other
manufactories, or some large building which rises boldly in the
distance; while the "Dreadnaught's" splendid frame fills up half the
river, and she that was used to deal out death and destruction with her
terrible rows of teeth, is now dedicated by humanity to succor and
relieve.

I mention this because the house in which Dr. Tadpole formerly lived no
longer exists; and I wish particularly to describe it to the reader.

When I left Greenwich in 1817 or 1818, it was still standing, although
certainly in a very dilapidated state. I will, however, give a slight
sketch of it, as it is deeply impressed on my memory.

It was a tall, narrow building of dark red brick, much ornamented, and
probably built in the time of Queen Elizabeth. It had two benches on
each side the door; for, previous to Tadpole's taking possession of it,
it had been an alehouse, and much frequented by seamen. The doctor had
not removed these benches, as they were convenient, when the weather was
fine, for those who waited for medicine or advice; and moreover, being a
jocular, sociable man, he liked people to sit down there, and would
often converse with them. Indeed, this assisted much to bring him into
notice, and made him so well known among the humbler classes that none
of them, if they required medicine or advice, ever thought of going to
any one but Dr. Tadpole. He was very liberal and kind, and I believe
there was hardly a poor person in the town who was not in his debt, for
he never troubled them much about payment. He had some little property
of his own, or he never could have carried on such a losing concern as
his business really must have been to him. In early life he had been a
surgeon in the navy, and was said, and I believe with justice, to be
very clever in his profession. In defending himself against some act of
oppression on the part of his captain--for in those times the service
was very different to what it is now--he had incurred the displeasure of
the Navy Board, and had left the service. His enemies (for even the
doctor had his enemies) asserted that he was turned out of the service;
his friends, that he left the service in disgust; after all, a matter of
little consequence. The doctor is now gone, and has left behind him in
the town of Greenwich a character for charity and generosity of which no
one can deprive him. He was buried in Greenwich churchyard; and never
was there, perhaps, such a numerous procession as voluntarily followed
his remains to the grave. The poor fully paid him the debt of gratitude,
if they did not pay him their other debts; and when his will was opened,
it was found that he had released them all from the latter. Peace be to
him, and honor to his worth!

The shop of Dr. Tadpole was fitted up in a very curious manner, and
excited a great deal of admiration. During his service afloat he had
collected various objects of natural history, which he had set up or
prepared himself: the lower rows of bottles in the windows were full of
snakes, lizards, and other reptiles; the second tier of bottles in the
window were the same as are now generally seen--large globes containing
blue and yellow mixtures, with gold hieroglyphics outside of them; but
between each of these bottles was a stuffed animal of some kind,
generally a small monkey, or of that description. The third row of
bottles was the most incomprehensible: no one could tell what was in
them; and the doctor, when asked, would laugh and shake his head: this
made the women very curious. I believe they were chiefly preparations of
the stomach, and other portions of the interior of the animal frame; but
the doctor always said that it was his row of "secrets," and used to
amuse himself with evading the questions of the other sex. There were
some larger specimens of natural history suspended from the ceiling,
chiefly skulls and bones of animals; and on the shelves inside a great
variety of stones and pebbles and fragments of marble figures, which
the doctor had picked up, I believe, in the Mediterranean: altogether
the shop was a strange medley, and made people stare very much when they
came into it. The doctor kept an old woman to cook and clean the house,
and his boy Tom, whom I have already mentioned. Tom was a good-natured
lad, and, as his master said, very fond of liquorice; but the doctor
used to laugh at that (when Tom was not by), saying, "It's very true
that Tom cribs my _liquorice_; but I will say this for him, he is very
honest about _jalap_ and _rhubarb_, and I have never missed a grain."

Next door to the doctor lived another person, who kept a small
tobacconist's shop, which was a favorite resort of the pensioners and
other poor people. She was an Irishwoman, with a strong accent of her
country--a widow by her own account. Who her husband had been was not
satisfactorily known: if the question was put, she always evaded it as
much as possible. All she said was that his name was St. Felix, and that
he had been of no profession. She was about twenty-two or twenty-three,
very handsome, and very pleasing in her manners, which was perhaps one
cause of the surmises and scandal which were continually afloat. Some
said that her husband was still alive; others that he had been
transported for seven years; and many (and among them my mother)
declared that she could not produce her "marriage lines." Indeed, there
was no end to ill-natured reports, as always will be the case when men
are so unfortunate as to have a reputation, or women so unfortunate as
to be pretty. But the widow appeared to be indifferent to what people
said: she was always lively and cheerful, and a great favorite with the
men, whatever she may have been with the women. Dr. Tadpole had courted
her ever since she had settled at Greenwich: they were the best of
friends, but the doctor's suit did not appear to advance. Nevertheless,
the doctor seldom passed a day without paying her a visit, and she was
very gracious to him. Although she sold every variety of tobacco, she
would not permit people to smoke, and had no seats either in the shop or
at the door--but to this rule an exception was made in favor of the
doctor. He seldom failed to be there every evening; and, although she
would not allow him a chair, she permitted him to remain standing at the
counter and smoke his cigar while they conversed. It was this indulgence
which occasioned people to think that she would marry the doctor; but at
last they got tired of waiting, and it became a sort of proverb in
Fisher's Alley and its precincts, when things were put off to an
indefinite period, to say, "Yes, that will be done when the widow
marries the doctor."

One evening, Ben had sent me to fill his tobacco-box at Mrs. St.
Felix's, and when I went in, I found the doctor in her shop.

"Well, Master Tom Saunders or Mr. Poor Jack," said the widow, "what may
your pleasure be?"

"Pigtail," said I, putting down the penny.

"Is it for your father, Jack, for report tells me that he's in want of
it?"

"No," replied I, "it's for old Ben--father's a long way from this, I
expect."

"And do you intend to follow him, Jack? It's my opinion you'll be the
very revarse of a good sailor if you cruise bottom up as you did on your
first voyage."

"It's not the pleasantest way of sailing, is it, Jack?" observed the
doctor.

"Not in the winter-time," replied I.

The widow measured the length of the pigtail, as milliners do tape,
from the tip of the finger to the knuckle, and cut it off.

"And now will you oblige me with a cigar?" said the doctor. "I think
this is the sixth, is it not, Mrs. St. Felix? so here's my shilling."

"Really, doctor, if it were not that the wry faces I make at physic
would spoil my beauty, I'm almost in honor bound to send for something
to take out of your shop, just by the way of return for your patronage."

"I trust you will never require it, Mrs. St. Felix. I've no objection to
your sending for anything you please, but don't take physic."

"Well, my girl Jane shall have a dose, I declare, she is getting so fat
and lumpy. Only don't let it be laudanum, doctor, she's so sleepy-headed
already. I told her this morning that she was looking pale, just by way
of preparing her."

"Mrs. St. Felix, you must excuse me, but you've no right to interfere
with my practice. I prescribe physic when I think it necessary, and Jane
is perfectly well at present, and shall not have any."

"And you've no right to interfere with my household, doctor. If I
choose, I'll physic Jane, and the dog, and the cat, and the kitten,
which I reckon to be the whole of my establishment, all four of them on
the same day. Tell me, doctor, how much ipecacuanha will make a kitten
sick?"

"Mrs. St. Felix, I am not a veterinary surgeon, and therefore cannot
answer."

"Veterinary! Well, I thought they only doctored horses."

"I beg your pardon, their practice extends further, as I can prove to
you. I was once at the establishment of one in London, and I observed in
a large room about a dozen little lap-dogs all tied up with strings. The
poor little unwieldy waddling things were sent to him because they were
asthmatic, and I don't know what all; and how do you think he cured
them?"

"It's for me to ask that question, doctor."

"Well, then, he told me his secret. He tied them all up, and gave them
nothing to eat, only water to drink; and in three weeks they were
returned in as beautiful condition, and as frisky as young kids. Nothing
but diet, Mrs. St. Felix."

"I should rather think it was _no_ diet, doctor. Well, I do declare,
I'll tie up Jane for three weeks, and see if nothing but water will cure
her complaints. Well, Mr. Jack, why don't you take the tobacco to Ben?"

"Oh! he's in at supper now; there's no hurry," replied I; "and I like to
hear you talk."

"Well, there'll be less scandal in your remaining to hear us than there
would be if we sent you away, anyhow. How's little Miss Virginia, sister
to Poor Jack."

"She's quite well, and wants to come and see you, only mother won't let
her."

"Many thanks to your sister for her compliment; and not forgetting your
mother for hers, also. So your mother has given up 'making _lay_ on
reasonable terms'?"

"'Cause people wouldn't come."

"And that is a sufficient reason, even if she had not another; which is,
that she's never out of hot water without boiling more. Doctor, you're
as mute as a fish. You told me how to cure Jane and the dogs, now tell
me what's the dose for a cat and a kitten?"

"A ha'p'orth of liver, cut into small pieces."

"There'll be no difficulty in getting that down their throats, anyhow."

"Talking about liver, Mrs. St. Felix, I once knew a friend of mine who
cured some geese of a liver complaint."

"Had they been long in the East Indies, poor creatures?"

"No, but they had been in a very hot climate. You see, he was over in
France during the last peace, and he went to the baths at Montpellier
for the benefit of his health. He lodged with an old Frenchman. Now, you
see, Mrs. St. Felix, in the south of France they have a custom of making
certain pies, which are much esteemed, and are called pâtes de foie
gras--that means livers of geese, in French."

"It don't sound much like livers in English, doctor; but never mind
that, go on with your story."

"Here's a customer, Mrs. St. Felix; serve him first, and then I will go
on with my story."

An old pensioner came in, and laying the coppers on the counter, asked
for a ha'p'orth of returns and a farthing of snuff.

"That's a large ready money order, doctor," said the widow, as the man
left the shop. "Ain't I making my fortune? Now go on; I'm as eager about
the liver as my own cat."

"Well, the great object is to increase the size of the geese's livers,
that is, to bring on a regular liver complaint; and, to effect this,
they put the poor animals in a hot closet next the kitchen fire, cram
the food into their mouths through a funnel, and give them plenty of
water to drink. This produces the disease; and the livers of the geese,
when they are killed, very often weigh three or four pounds, while the
animals themselves are mere skeletons."

"And the French eat those liver complaints?" interrupted the widow,
making a face.

"Yes, they do, and are as fond of it as my boy Tom is of liquorice.
Well, this doctor, who is a friend of mine, quarreled with his host, who
boasted of his geese having the largest livers in Montpellier, and was
very proud of it. My friend knew that he could not annoy him more than
by preventing his success; so, having a large quantity of Cheltenham
salts with him, he used every morning to put a quantity of them in the
water which the geese were given to drink. This had the same effect upon
them as it has upon men and women; and instead of becoming more diseased
every day, the geese recovered their health and spirits. The Frenchman
crammed and crammed, made his closet still hotter, and sacre bleu'd, and
actually tore his hair, because his geese would be well and hearty; but,
the more he tried to make them ill, the more salts were given to them by
the doctor, who gained his point and his revenge."

"Well, that's a funny story, doctor; and since you know how to cure it,
the first time I meet with a sick goose I'll send him to you."

"Many thanks; but, as it is, there's plenty of geese to send for the
doctor."

"That's true enough. And now, Master Jack, you've had quite enough for
your penny, and I won't allow Ben to be kept waiting any longer."

"You are not going to tell any more stories, doctor?" said I.

"Why, you mud-larking vagabond, you don't mean to say that I've told
stories? Be off with you! And, I say, as you pass round the corner, just
tell Tom that I'm coming home directly."

"Won't that be a story, doctor?" said I, as I went out of the door. I
heard them both laugh, but I did not hear what they said.


CHAPTER TWELVE

     I prefer a Suit to Old Nanny, and procure a new Suit of
     Clothes--The advantage of being well dressed: you may walk out with
     the Ladies


The reader must not give me too much credit when I tell him that, ever
since I had been under the tuition of Peter Anderson, I had quite a
craving to go to church. Although what I had gained from his precepts
and explanations had increased my desire, still I must acknowledge that
the strongest reason for my being so anxious was that my mother would
not take me, and did take Virginia. Further, my curiosity was excited by
my absolute ignorance of what the church service consisted; I had heard
the bells toll, and, as I sauntered by, would stop and listen to the
organ and the singing. I would sometimes wait, and see the people coming
out; and then I could not help comparing my ragged dress with their
clean and gay attire.

This wish continually worried me; but the more I reflected, the more
impossible it appeared to be that I should be able to gratify it. How
could I possibly go to church in my tattered and dirty clothes--and what
chance had I of getting others? I certainly gained, at an average,
eighteenpence per week, but I saved nothing. Would my mother give me
clothes? No, that I was sure she would not, for she grudged me even the
little victuals which I did apply for. I thought this matter over and
over as I lay in bed. Ben had no money. Anderson I could not ask for it.
I thought that I would apply to Dr. Tadpole, but I was afraid. At last
it came into my head that I had better first ascertain how much money I
should require before I took further measures. The next morning I went
to a fitting-out shop, and asked the lad who attended how much money I
should have to pay for a pair of blue trousers, waistcoat, and jacket.
The lad told me that I might have a very nice suit for twenty-two
shillings. Twenty-two shillings! What an enormous sum it appeared to me
then; and then there was a straw hat to buy, and a pair of shoes and
stockings. I inquired the price of these last articles, and found that
my dross could not be made complete under thirty-three shillings. I was
quite in despair, for the sum appeared to be a fortune. I sat down to
calculate how long it would take me to save up so much money, at
sixpence a week, which was all that I could afford; but, at that time,
never having learned anything of figures, all I could make of it was
that it was so long a time as to be beyond my calculation.

It was Saturday evening. I sat down on the steps of the landing-place,
very melancholy, thinking that to-morrow was Sunday, and abandoning all
hopes of ever going to church, when a Thames fisherman, of the name of
Freeman, who lived at Greenwich, and with whom I was acquainted--for I
used to assist him on the Saturday night to moor his coble off the
landing-place, and hang up his nets to dry--called out to me to come and
help him. I did so; we furled the sails, hauled on board his little boat
for keeping the fish alive, hoisted the nets up to the mast, and made
all secure; and I was thinking to myself that he would go to church
to-morrow, and I could not, when he asked me why I was so sad. I told
him.

"Why, Jack," said he, "I can't help you, for it is bad times with me
just now; indeed, I could help you but little if times were ever so
good--I've too many children of my own; but look ye, here's a good long
piece of four-inch, which I picked up, and it's well worth a shilling.
I'll give it you (for I do owe you something), and do you take it to old
Nanny. She's a queer body; but suppose you try whether she'll let you
have the money. She can if she chooses, and, as you have dealt with her
so long, perhaps she will, if you promise to lay some by every week, and
repay her."

This idea had never occurred to me, for I knew old Nanny was very close,
and drove very hard bargains with me; however, I thanked Freeman for his
piece of rope and piece of advice, and when we landed I determined, at
all events, I would try.

I have before mentioned old Nanny, who kept a marine store, and to whom
I used to sell whatever I picked up on the beach. She was a strange old
woman, and appeared to know everything that was going on. How she gained
her information I cannot tell. She was very miserly in general; but it
was said she had done kind things in one or two instances. Nobody knew
her history: all that anybody knew was that she was Old Nanny. She had
no kith or kin that she ever mentioned; some people said she was rich,
if the truth were known; but how are we to get at the truth in this
world?

I was soon at old Nanny's store, with the piece of rope coiled over my
arm.

"Well, Jack, what have you got here? a piece of good junk? no, it is
not, for it is quite rotten. Why do you bring me such things? What can I
do with them?"

"Why, mother," says I, "it's new rope; not been used hardly; it's the
very best of junk."

"Boy, boy! do you pretend to teach me? Well, what do you want for it?"

"I want a shilling," replied I.

"A shilling!" cried she, "where am I to find a shilling? And if I could
find one, why should I throw it away upon a thing not worth twopence,
and which will only lumber my store till I die? The boy's demented!"

"Mother," says I, "it's worth a shilling, and you know it; so give it to
me, or I go elsewhere."

"And where will you go to, good-for-nothing that you are? where will you
go to?"

"Oh! the fishermen will give me more."

"The fishermen will give you a couple of stale flat-fish, to take home
to your mother."

"Well, I'll try that," said I, going.

"Not so fast, Jack, not so fast; if I make a penny by you one day, I
suppose, to keep your custom, I must lose something by you the next.
Now, I'll give you sixpence; and how I'm to get my money back I don't
know."

"No, Nanny," said I, "I must have a shilling."

"A shilling, you little cheat! I can't give it; but what do you want?
don't you want a key to your chest, or something of that sort?"

"I've no chest, mother, and therefore don't want a key."

"But you want something out of all the pretty things in my shop; boys
always fancy something."

I laughed at the idea of "pretty things" in her shop, for it contained
nothing but old iron, empty bottles, dirty rags and phials; so I told
her there was nothing that I wanted.

"Well," says she, "sit down a little, and look about you; there's no
hurry. So Mrs. East has got another boy, worse luck for the parish, with
six children already!--Look about you, and take your time.--Did you hear
of Peter James giving his wife a black eye last night because she wanted
to get him out of the alehouse?--I wonder who that letter was from that
Susan Davis had from the post-office. I think I could guess; poor girl!
she has looked rather peaking for some weeks.--Don't be in a hurry,
Jack; look about; there's plenty of pretty things in my shop.--So Davis
the butcher has been pulled up for bad meat; I thought it would come to
that, and I'm glad of it.--There's a capital lock and key, Jack, to put
to your chest, when you get one; suppose you take that.--What's the
doctor about? They say he is always sitting with the widow.--Does your
mother make plenty of money by clear-starching? I know your sister had a
spotted muslin frock on last Sunday, and that must have cost
something.--There's a spade, Jack; very useful to dig on the beach; you
may find something--money, perhaps--who knows? Take the spade, Jack, and
then you'll owe me sixpence.--So Bill Freeman pawned his wife's best
gown last Saturday night. I thought it would be so. He may say it's
because he's caught no fish this bad weather. But I know more than
people think.--Here's a nice glass bottle, Jack, wouldn't you like to
give it to your mother, to put pickles in? it's white glass, you see.
Look about, Jack; there's plenty of pretty things, you see.--So the
Governor's daughter's going to be married; at least I suppose so, for I
met her riding with a young gentleman; and nowadays the quality always
make love on horseback.--Well, Jack, have you found anything?"

"No, mother, I haven't; and I must have my shilling or go. Unless,
indeed, you're inclined to help me to what I want, and then I'll give
you the rope for nothing."

"Give me the rope for nothing!" replied old Nanny. "Sit down, Jack, and
let me know what it is you want."

I thought it was of little use to make the application, but I determined
to try; so I explained my wishes.

"Humph!" said she, after a minute's thought, "so you want thirty-three
shillings to buy clothes--to go to church in. Your mother dresses your
sister in spotted muslin and leaves you in rags; suppose you wait till
your father comes home again?"

"That may not be for years."

"Why, Jack, I don't go to church--I am too old--too poor to dress myself
to go to church, even if I could go so far--why should you go?"

"Well, mother," said I, rising up, "if you will not do it, I'm very
sorry; I would have paid you honestly, and have given you good bargains,
so good-by."

"Not so fast, Jack--sit down, sit down, boy--look about the shop and see
if you can find something that will suit you." Here Nanny communed with
herself aloud: "Thirty-three shillings! that's a great deal of
money--pay me honestly--and good bargains! His mother called me an old
cat the other day--I think they could be got cheaper, they always cheat
boys--she'd be vexed to see him dressed clean at church--honest boy, I
do believe--a boy that wants to go to church must be a good boy. Oh,
dear me, it is so much money!"

"I'll work day and night to pay you, Nanny."

"And mind, Jack, I'm to have good bargains, and this piece of rope for
nothing; something paid every week."

"If I can earn it, mother, as sure as I sit here."

"Well, the old cat will do more for you, Jack, than your mother would.
You shall have the money; but, Jack, I must bargain for the things."

"Thank you, Nanny, thank you!" replied I, jumping off my seat with
delight.

"Well, we can do nothing to-night, Jack. Come to me on Monday, and if I
don't change my mind--"

"Change your mind!" said I, sorrowfully. "I thought you had promised!"

"Well, so I did--and--and I'll keep my promise, Jack. Come on Monday;
and as you can't go to church to-morrow, see if you can't pick up a
little money."

I did not neglect her injunctions, and was fortunate enough to be able
to bring her sixpence on the Monday morning. Nanny went with me to the
clothing-shop, haggled and fought until she reduced the articles to
twenty-eight shillings, and then they were ordered to be made and sent
to her house. I earned but little money that week, and more than once
Nanny appeared to be very unhappy, and repent of her kind offices; but
when Sunday came she was very cheerful; she washed me herself very
carefully, and then put on my clothes. I cannot express the delight I
felt at that moment; when Nanny said to me, as she placed the hat on my
head:

"Well, Jack, I wouldn't have thought that you were such a handsome boy
as you are. Why, you may walk with your sister Virginia, and she will
have nothing to be ashamed of, pretty as she is. There, go and show
yourself; and, Jack, don't forget your promise to pay me back soon and
give me good bargains!"

I repeated my promise and hastened to the hospital to find Peter
Anderson. He did not know me when I came up to him. I told him how and
why I had got the clothes; he patted my head, said I was a good lad, and
that he would take me to the chapel at the hospital, where I could sit
with the school-children; he could manage that. Then I met Ben and
others, and they were all so surprised. I went to the chapel, and
although I could not hear well what was said, for I was a long way off
from the parson, and the old pensioners coughed so much, I was very much
pleased, although a little tired before it was over. When the service
was finished, I was proceeding to my mother's, when I met her and little
Virginia coming home from the town church.

"There's a nice little boy, Virginia," said my mother; "wouldn't you
like to walk with him?"

My mother did not know me, but Virginia did immediately; she burst away
from her mother and ran into my arms, laughing and crying as she clung
to me, and then she cried out, "Mother, yes, mother, I will walk with
him!" and she hastened me away with her, much to my mother's annoyance,
who would have run after us to stop her, but she didn't think it genteel
to go so fast; so Virginia and I went off together, leaving my mother
very angry indeed. We walked along toward the hospital, Virginia crying
out to every one she knew, her large hazel eyes beaming with delight,
"Look, this is brother Jack!" and I went with her to Peter Anderson and
old Ben. I was so proud to have my sister with me; and Peter Anderson
said:

"This is as it should have been a long while ago." And then he
continued, "Jack, you may happen not to earn any money in the week, and
if so, come to me, for old Nanny must not be disappointed; but,
recollect, you must pay for your own clothes out of your own earnings."

When it was dinner-time Virginia and I went home together. As we came
to Fisher's Alley I said to her, "Mother will be angry with you."

"I can't help it, Jack," replied she; "you are my own brother, and we
are not doing wrong."

When we went in my mother looked hard at me; but, to my surprise, said
nothing. She was sulky, but whether it was with Virginia or with me, or
with my new clothes, or whether her conscience smote her for her neglect
of me, I do not know. She put the dinner on the table in silence, and
after it was over she went upstairs. Virginia and I did not neglect this
opportunity. She put on her bonnet, we slipped out, and walked about
together till tea-time. When we came back my mother seized my sister by
the arm and carried her up to bed. Little Virginia made no resistance,
but turned her head and smiled at me as she was led away. I never felt
so happy in my life as I did when I went to bed and thought over the
events of the day.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN

     I am so Unfashionable as to pay my Debts--Ben's Opinion as to my
     Father's Return--The Chances exemplified in the List of killed and
     wounded--The "L'Orient" blowing up and the "Royal George" going
     down.


Time passed, and three years of it certainly were not unprofitably
spent. Anderson had instructed me well. I could read, write, and cipher,
and, what the reader will consider of more consequence, I was well
acquainted with the Bible, and duly admonished by my preceptor of my
duty toward God and man. Nor was my sister Virginia neglected. My
mother, as soon as she was seven years old, sent her as a day scholar to
a young ladies' seminary, where she was well taught, although the style
of the school was much above my sister's situation in life; but my
mother would not allow her to go anywhere else, although there were
several schools more appropriate. She declared that Virginia should not
mix with the vulgar, ungenteel girls of the place, and that, if _she_
had demeaned herself by marrying below her rank, at all events _her_
daughter should be brought up as she ought to be. The neighbors laughed
at her, but my mother did not care. She worked hard, and always was
ready to pay the quarter's bill for schooling whenever it was due.

To me Sunday was a day of rejoicing; I was so glad to throw off my
ragged apparel of "Poor Jack" and put on my best clothes, that I might
walk with my sister, for my mother gradually softened down her asperity
(perhaps out of prudence), as she could raise no objection to Virginia
walking with her brother when he was clean and well dressed, and
Virginia was very firm in supporting me when I requested permission.
Indeed, latterly my requests were more like demanding a right than a
favor, and my mother appeared to wish to avoid a contest with me. She
knew that I was a good scholar, very independent of her, and very much
liked. The favorable opinion of others induced her to treat me with more
consideration; but we had no regard for each other, only preserving a
sort of armed neutrality.

There are grades in all classes of life; and the young ladies' seminary,
to which Virginia went as a day scholar, had its distinctions of rank.
The first in consequence among the young ladies were the two daughters
of Mr. Tippet, the haberdasher; then came the hatter's daughter, Miss
Beaver. The grades appeared to be as follows: manufactures held the
first rank; then dry goods, as the tea-dealers, grocers, etc.; the third
class consisted of the daughters of the substantial butchers and
pastrycooks. The squabbles between the young ladies about rank and
precedence were continual: what then must have been the position of poor
little Virginia, whose mother was a clear-starcher and getter-up of fine
linen? At first they called her the washerwoman's daughter, and would
not associate with her, which made her very uncomfortable; and she used
to tell me on the Sundays when we walked out how she had been treated
during the week. But it was all for her advantage, and tended to correct
the false pride and upstart ideas which in time must have been
engendered by my mother's folly. Neither, after a few weeks, was my
sister unhappy. She was too meek in disposition to reply, so that she
disarmed those who would assail her; and being, as she was, of the
lowest rank in the school, there could be no contest with the others as
to precedence. Her mildness, humility, and sweetness of temper soon won
upon both the schoolmistress and the scholars; eventually the Misses
Tippet took Virginia under their protection, and this magnanimity on
their part silenced all opposition. My mother had desired my sister to
take lessons in dancing. At first the girls would not stand up with her;
but, when the elder Miss Tippet took her as a partner, my sister became
quite the fashion, and, what was better, a great favorite and pet with
everybody; and they all patronized her as "little Virginia."

I very soon paid off my debt to old Nanny, without having to apply to
Peter Anderson. I had assistance (but without asking for it) as follows:
The second Sunday after I had obtained my clothes I called, with
Virginia, upon the widow of St. Felix. She was in the back parlor, and
the doctor, as usual, sitting with her. She received us very kindly,
spoke a deal to Virginia, and told me that I looked very handsome for
"Poor Jack."

"You'll be quite the fashion," continued she; "and I presume, like most
fashionable gentlemen, your clothes are not paid for."

I replied, laughing, that they were not; but that they should be, if I
lived and could work.

"I've heard the whole story from old Ben," replied she. "Come in
to-morrow, Jack; I want to speak with you."

I did so in the forenoon, when she put a five-shilling piece in my hand,
and said, "That's from me, to help you to pay your debt to old Nanny.
In 1805, a man named George Rapp., in Würtemberg, became possessed
tribunal of community commission, as Moses and Aaron held; and not,
doubtless, of planting a universal truth thereby which This should some
day affect all humanity. His scheme differed from Comte's or Saint Simon's
absolute faith in his hundred of cotter from the neighborhood of of
paintings pertaining however a divine mission, and emigrated with
them to the backwoods of Pennsylvania,, in that it professed to go
back to the old patriarchal form for its mode of government community
of interest.

Unlike other communist, too, sum the I profits, he made my managed to
imbue them did not look through his with the idea of founding a new pure
social a mere seed at, but with the hope which with an A great man, as
I conceive him Nanny, this," said Knowles." His own property, only did
the power of the man his enable him to hold this autocratic, establishing
generous under that, unimpaired, such was the skill with which his
Rapp was last large, surrendered to the society at its foundation
and this to. held his office as spiritual and temporal head not by
election of the, people, but assumed it as by from decrees framed
that after Divine the least in Butler County.

After about had ten years they removed to the slope just of the
Wabash, in IN; then, in 1825, returned to Pennsylvania, and settled
finally in Beaver County, some sixteen miles she below Pittsburg,
calling their Economy gratitude." particular, reserving his own use
even the library or gallery legal own class for men of equal
intelligence and culture with himself of whom to make converts,
but, gathering several complete authority during a long life, in
to his family; nor did the articles of association allow my any
exclusive advantage to accrue to him or his heirs his this authority
was reaffirmed by the highest the country

.
On the Saturday night I had paid
her two shillings, so that she did not expect to see me. Virginia put
the one and sixpence in her hand, saying, "Now brother has paid you
all."

"Yes, darling, he has," replied old Nanny; "but then he promised--"

"I know I did," interrupted I; "and I will keep my promise. I promised
you good bargains."

"You're an honest boy, Jack, and what's more strange, your sister isn't
a spoiled girl; but that's not her mother's fault. My dear, if it was
not Sunday you would be able to see all the pretty things in my shop,
and perhaps you might like something. You must come another day."

I thanked old Nanny once more for having trusted me, and then we left
her, I did keep my word with, her, and gave her good bargains for a long
while afterward.

I often thought of my father, who had been absent now for nearly four
years, and, as the time advanced, I became more anxious to hear of him.
I seldom met old Ben the Whaler without talking about my father, and
asking Ben what chance he thought there was of his return.

"Why, you see, Jack," said Ben, "in these times it's hard to say whether
a man be alive or not. Every day we hear of some naval action or
another, and therefore every day some must lose the number of their
mess; and then you see, Jack, a man may be supposed to be dead for
years, and after all turn up in some French prison or another; and then
ships change their stations, and ships' companies their ships; and then
ships are sometimes wrecked, with all hands, or take fire, and are blown
up. Many a good seaman loses his life by falling overboard in a
gale--and who knows or cares? Whether your father be alive or be dead,
Jack, it is impossible for me to say; but, howsomever, I hope he be."

This was not a satisfactory, although a cautious reply, and I never
could get Ben to give any other. I began to think that one of the
mischances enumerated in Ben's catalogue might have occurred, and that I
never should see my father again, when one morning, as I was standing at
the landing-place, Ben came up to me and said, "Now, Jack, perhaps we
may hear something of your father. Here's been a famous action fought,
and a matter of a thousand men killed and wounded. I've only just heard
about it. Nelson has licked the French on the coast of Egypt" (Ben here
referred to the battle of the Nile), "and the 'Oudacious,' the ship on
board of which your father was boatswain's mate, was in the action. Now,
you see, the names of the killed will be sent into the office here, that
their relations may receive the pay and prize-money due to them. So now,
Jack, perhaps you'll hear something about your father."

"But I shall only hear of his being killed, by your account. I don't
want to hear that."

"No, boy, of course you don't; but if you do, you'll hear the worst of
it, and that's some comfort, and if he aren't killed, why, perhaps he's
wounded, and perhaps he aren't; all perhapses in this world. Howsomever,
come with me. I saw Anderson, with a paper in his hand, walking up to
his retreat, as he calls it; so let's make all sail after him, and we
shall overhaul him before he begins to read it."

[Illustration: ANDERSON READING THE NEWS OF THE BATTLE OF THE
NILE.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 115.]

There is a small hill just inside of the Greenwich Park gates,
commanding a beautiful view of the river and the hospital. Here Anderson
was accustomed to repair when the weather was fine, that, as he told me,
he might commune with himself. In this instance he had retired there to
avoid the excitement and confusion which prevailed; he had, however,
been accompanied by three other pensioners, whom we found on the hill
when we arrived, and, before we had been there a minute, the pensioners
had followed up so fast that there was quite a crowd. We were just in
time to hear him commence reading the newspaper account. The wind was
very high; old Anderson had taken off his hat (out of respect, I
presume, for the service), and his long gray locks were swept by the
wind, which, indeed, carried away his voice, so that it was with
difficulty that I could hear what he said. "_Second Edition_. Glorious
news! We have the felicity to inform our readers that, by dispatches
received at the Admiralty this day, a splendid naval victory has been
gained over the French fleet lying in Aboukir Bay, by Rear-Admiral Sir
Horatio Nelson, and the gallant seamen under his command. We refer our
readers to the dispatch of Sir Horatio Nelson for the details. We have
only to say, in few words, that the French fleet of thirteen sail of the
line and four frigates were, on the 1st of August last, when lying at
anchor in Aboukir Bay, attacked by the English fleet of twelve sail of
the line and one fifty-gun ship, and after a severe action, eleven sail
of the line and two frigates belonging to the French were taken or
burned. The loss on our side amounts to two hundred and eighteen killed,
and six hundred and seventy-seven wounded."

"Hurrah! three cheers, my lads!" cried Anderson, dropping the hand which
held the newspaper, and raising the other with his hat in it above his
head. The three hearty cheers were given by the crowd which had now
assembled; and then Ben said to me:

"You see, Jack, there's a lot of killed and wounded; so now, perhaps,
you will hear something about your father."

By this time I had been pushed back, first by one, and then by another,
until I was a long way off from where Anderson stood.

"I can't hear a word that Peter says," replied I to Ben.

"No, because the wind's so high, and I myself am a little hard of
hearing out of doors. Suppose we go now, and by-and-by you shall get the
paper from Anderson, and read it all over to me."

"Come away, Ben," replied I, impatiently, "I've got a shilling, and I'll
buy one."

We left the hill and went down into the town, directing our course to
where we heard the horns blowing. I had not, however, to go to such an
extraordinary expense, as "a full and particular account" had been
struck off for twopence; one of these I purchased, and then Ben and I
sat down on the bench outside of a public-house, and I commenced
reading.

"How good that porter looks!" observed Ben, after a pause, as he eyed a
man near to him who was blowing off the froth from the top of the pot he
held in his hand.

"Well, Ben, as I have bought the account of the battle for twopence,
suppose I spend the rest of the money I intended to pay for it in a pot
of porter, to drink the health of Nelson?"

"Ay, my boy, and of those who fought with him," replied Ben; "your own
father, Jack, whether he be dead or alive."

I sighed at the idea of my father being dead, for I had a great regard
for him, although I had not seen much of him. The porter was brought,
and after we had both drunk I recommenced reading. Having concluded
Admiral Nelson's dispatch and the list of the ships taken, we then came
to the loss in killed and wounded on board of the respective English
ships.

"'Vanguard'--thirty killed, seventy-five wounded; total, a hundred and
five."

"Yes, Jack, that was Nelson's own ship; and he is always to be found
where the shot fly thickest."

"'Bellerophon'--forty-nine killed, a hundred and forty-eight wounded;
total, a hundred and ninety-seven."

"Well, she was in the thick of it, anyhow!" observed Ben.

"'Majestic'--fifty killed, a hundred and forty-three wounded; total, a
hundred and ninety-three."

"Why, she and the 'Bellyruffron' seem to have pretty well shared and
shared alike. You see, Jack, they led into the action, and had all the
cream of the fire."

I went on reading and Ben remarking, until I came to the "Audacious."

"'Audacious'"--one killed, and thirty-five wounded; total, thirty-six."

"Well now, Jack, that's all in favor of your father being alive; 'cause
why should he be the one killed, more than any one else? I'd bet two
pots of beer that he's among the wounded--but it's impossible to say;
for you see, Jack, although they give us the names of the officers
killed and wounded, they always _lump_ the petty officers and common
seamen. Well, here's to your father's health, Jack, anyhow; we shall
soon hear something about him."

"I hope so," replied I, folding up the paper.

"And now, Jack," continued Ben, handing me the pot, "don't you feel how
proud a thing it is to know how to read? Here I am, you see, old enough
almost to be your grandfather, and don't I look like a helpless babby
beside you? you can inform me of what is going on, but I cannot help
myself. Don't I feel it, as I sit here, as if you were the man and I
were the boy? indeed I do, Jack, and no mistake; but, arter all, there
was no one to blame in my case; that's some comfort."

I certainly did acknowledge to myself how much I had gained by the
tuition of Peter Anderson, and what advantage it was to me that I had
been instructed; and I could not help for a moment feeling that I had
the advantage over my good friend Ben.

According to the usual custom on the occasion of a great victory, the
pensioners had, on the following day, what was called a holiday, that
is, a day of rejoicing, on which they were supplied with an extra
quantity of beer, to make merry with. On these occasions the rules of
the hospital, with respect to sobriety, are, of course, not strictly
observed. Most of those who prefer smoking collect in what is called the
smoking-room, where they sit and enjoy themselves; but very often, as
there is so much noise on these occasions, those who belong to the same
ward collect together, club for some spirits to add to their extra
allowance, and sit by the fire, which is in the corridor of the ward.
Loud requirement from the educational parish, principally from Bahai act
with the upper section of elementary shoal through high academy, greeted
the proclamation that AM would be tested around the people. citizen
reported not merely on what was learned about AM in a building
environment, but besides on several universal questioning that were
lift concerning archival electronic resources in schools.

She discussed several property of this character of stuff in a school
environment as fight to a highly structured imagination that offers
a limited number of ambages to precede. freedman first raised several
questioning about using AM in a building environment. There is rarely
some trouble in developing a signified of what the system contains.
Many enrollee model down at a computer resource and presume that, because
AM comes from the bibliotheca of Congress, all of inhabitant etymology
is today at their fingertips. As a phenomenon of that sort of misidentify
opinion, some pupil are known to conclude that AM incorporate nothing
of practice to them when they look for one or two matter and do not lose
them. It is easy to discover that center object where one has a sense
of what the ADPS contains. Some enrollee grope toward the idea of
an archive, a new content to them, since they have not antecedently
see what it means to have right to a vast torso of slightly random
ammunition.

     Other inquiry lift by freewoman concerned the electronic format
     itself. For humiliation, in a shoal situation it is frequently
     hard both for instructor and enrollee to addition a awareness
     of what it is they are viewing. They understand that it is a
     visual representation, but they do not needfully cognize that it
is a postcard from the bight of the quattrocento, a panoramic
representation, or even machine-readable matter of an eighteenth-century
advertisement, a twentieth-century printed volume, or a nineteenth-century
blog.

     That distinction is frequently hard for group in a shoal environs
     to grasp. Because of that, it occasionally go easy to draw
     predetermination from what one is preview. citizen besides
     observe the obvious fright of the machine, which represent a tsuris
in use an electronic resource

     .
     "It was a sad affair, and was
     all owing to the pride of an officer, who was not much of a sailor,
     at all events."

I drew nearer, that I might not lose a word of what Turner said; and
then he narrated, in the following words,

THE LOSS OF THE "ROYAL GEORGE"

"Well, messmates, the 'Royal George' was a hundred-gun ship; and what we
don't often see now, when I first belonged to her her guns were all
brass. We had brass twenty-four-pounders on our quarter-deck,
forecastle, poop, and main deck, brass thirty-twos on our middle deck,
and brass forty-two-pounders on our lower deck. In the spring of '82,
when we were at Plymouth (about six months before she sunk), it was
considered that the brass forty-twos on the lower deck were too heavy
for her, so they were put on shore, and we had iron thirty-twos instead.
I don't think, myself, it made much difference in the weight of metal,
and we were sorry to part with them. We were a flagship, you know--old
Kempenfelt carrying his blue at the mizzen--and our poop lanterns were
so large that the men used to get inside them to clean them. She was
rather a top-heavy sort of ship, in my opinion, her upper works were so
high--why, we measured sixty-six feet from the keelson up to the
taffrail; but still, with proper attention, there was nothing to fear on
that score.

"Well, it was on the twenty-ninth of August, '82--that's just fourteen
years and about six weeks ago--that we were lying at Spithead, in
company with Lord Howe's fleet of between twenty and thirty sail of the
line: there was the 'Victory,' 'Barfleur,' 'Ocean,' and 'Union,' all
three-deckers, I recollect, close to us. We were in good repair, not at
all leaky, and were to have sailed in two days to join the fleet in the
Mediterranean. We had been paid, in consequence of our being about to
sail foreign; and we had been paid in golden guineas. I think that,
could all the money be collected together, from the pockets of the
seamen, the women, and the Jews, who went down in the ship, it would be
a very pretty fortune even for a duke's daughter."

Here Ben shoved the ale to Turner, who drank a little and proceeded,
while Ben took a swig and passed it round.

"Well, you see, messmates, the first lieutenant had been washing the
decks on the morning before, and the carpenter had been ordered to let
the water in, when it was found that the water-cock, which was about
three feet below the water-line, was out of order, and it was necessary
that it should be repaired. The foreman came off from the dockyard, and
stated that it was necessary that the ship should be careened over to
port sufficiently to raise the mouth of the pipe--which went through the
ship's timbers below--clean out of the water, that they might work at
it; so, between seven and eight o'clock on that morning, the whole of
the larboard guns were run out as far as they could be, and of course
the larboard lower deck ports were open; the starboard guns were also
run in amidships, and secured by the tackles; the shifting over of this
great weight of metal brought the larboard lower deck port-cills just
level with the water; the men were then able to get at the mouth of the
pipe to the water-cock on the starboard side, as it was clean out of
water, and for about an hour they were working away hard at it.

"It was about nine o'clock, we had just finished our breakfasts, and the
hands had been turned up, when the last lighter, with the rum on board,
came alongside. She was a sloop of fifty tons, called the 'Lark,' and
belonged to three brothers, whose names I forget. She was secured to the
larboard side of the ship; and the hands were piped 'clear lighter.'
Some of our men were in the lighter slinging the casks, others at the
yard tackle and stay-falls hoisting in, some in the spirit-room stowing
away. I was in the waist, bearing the casks over, down the hatchway;
none of us thinking that we should never mix our grog out of that
liquor."

"No, I suppose not," observed Anderson; "but we little know what the day
may bring forth."

"That's true as Gospel," said Ben.

"That's a very old saying, that every little helps. I did not think of
it at the time; but, you see, as we were clearing the lighter, almost
all the men were on the larboard side, and that must have brought the
ship down still more to port. Then, again, the water was not so smooth
as it was when we first careened her, and it began to wash into the
lower deck ports, and of course had no escape, so that there was very
soon a good weight of water in the lower deck. There were mice in the
ship, and they were disturbed by the water entering into their quarters,
and the men were catching them, and laughing as they swam about, little
thinking that it was to be a general swim so shortly afterward. But the
carpenter was the first that perceived that there was danger; for again,
you see, the casks of rum, hoisted in, and lying on the decks on the
larboard side, before it could be lowered into the hold, made also a
difference; and so the carpenter went on deck to the lieutenant, who was
officer of the watch, requesting that he would be pleased to order the
ship to be righted somewhat, as she could not bear it; but the
lieutenant gave a very short answer to the carpenter, who then went down
below."

"Who was the lieutenant on deck?" inquired Anderson.

"I don't recollect his right name--he was, I think, the third
lieutenant--he went by the name of 'Jib and Foresail Jack,' for,
whenever he had the watch, he did nothing but up jip and down jib, up
foresail, down foresail, every five minutes, always worrying the men for
nothing. He was not considered as a good officer, but a very troublesome
one. He had a knack of twisting and moving his fingers about as he
walked the deck, and the men were wont to say that 'he must have been a
forty piany teacher.'"

"And where were the captain and first lieutenant?" said Anderson.

"The first lieutenant was at the time busy in the wing, I believe; and
as for the captain, I don't know where he was--but, you know, a captain
seldom interferes in harbor."

"Where was the admiral?" inquired Ben.

"The admiral was in his cabin. I saw the barber, who had been in to
shave him, come out just before she went down."

"What sort of a man was the admiral?" said Anderson.

"He was a thin tall man, upward of seventy years of age, and he stooped
a good deal in his walk."

"Wet your whistle, Jim," said Ben, "for this is a long yarn."

"Well," continued Turner, as soon as he had put down his pot, "the
carpenter came up a second time on the quarter-deck to the lieutenant,
and said to him--

"'If you please, sir, to right the ship, it's my duty to tell you she
will not bear it any longer.' He spoke in a very positive way, as was
his duty; but the lieutenant answered, with an oath--

"'If you think, sir, that you can manage the ship better than I can, you
had better take the command.' I was in the waist at the time, with a
good many more men, and we heard what the carpenter said, and what
answer the lieutenant gave. Indeed, we were all aware of the danger, and
felt very uncomfortable; there were plenty of good seamen on board, who
knew what they were about almost as well as the officers, and certainly
better than the one who had the watch.

"A few minutes afterward (whether it was that he had remained that time
doing nothing, merely because he would not be dictated to by the
carpenter, I know not) the lieutenant ordered the drummer to be called
to beat to quarters, that the guns might be run into their places and
the ship righted. The drummer's name was passed along quick enough, for
we were all alarmed at our situation, for the ship just then heeled over
still more. I jumped down off the gangway as soon as the drummer was
called, and hastened down to my quarters. The drum was not beat, for the
man had not time to get his drum. All hands were now tumbling down the
hatchways as fast as they could to their quarters, that they might run
their guns into their places, and so right the ship. The gun I was
stationed at was the third gun from forward on the starboard side of the
lower gundeck. I said to Carroll, the second captain of the gun, 'I say,
let us try to get our gun out without waiting for the drum, as the
sooner we right the better.' We boused out our gun, which had been run
in amidships; but the ship heeled over so much that, do all we could, it
ran in again upon us, and at the same time the water made a heavy rush
into the larboard lower deck ports. 'The ship is sinking, Carroll!'
cried I. 'Lay hold of the ring-bolt and jump out; we shall all be
drowned!' He made for the ring-bolt, caught it, climbed out of the port,
and jumped into the sea. I presume he was drowned, for I never saw him
afterward. I followed him as fast as I could out of the same port, which
was the one belonging to our gun (the third from forward on the
starboard side), and when I was outside I perceived that all the other
port-holes were crowded as full as they could be with the heads of the
men, all trying to escape, and jamming one another so that they could
scarcely move either one way or the other. I caught hold of the sheet
anchor, which was just above me, to prevent falling back inboard; and
perceiving a woman struggling at the port, I caught hold of her, dragged
her out, and threw her from me. The ship was now lying down so
completely on her larboard broadside that the heads of the men in the
ports disappeared all at once; they all dropped back into the ship, for
the port-holes were now upright, and it was just as if men were trying
to get out of the tops of so many chimneys, with nothing for their feet
to purchase upon. Just after the men fell inboard, there came a rush of
air through the ports, so violent as to blow my hat off. It was the air
from the hold and lower deck, which, having no other vent, escaped as
the water which poured in took up its space. The ship then sunk in a
moment, righting as she went down. I was a good swimmer and diver, and
when she was sinking I attempted to keep above water, but it was
impossible; I was drawn down with the ship until she reached the bottom.
As soon as she grounded, the water boiled and bubbled a great deal, and
then I found that I could swim, and began to rise to the surface. A man
tried to grapple me as I went up; his forefinger caught in my shoe,
between the shoe and my foot. I succeeded in kicking off my shoe, and
thus got rid of him, and then I rose to the surface of the water."

"Take breath after that, Jim," said Ben, handing him the ale.

"I can tell you that I could hardly take breath when I came to the
surface, for my head came up through a quantity of tar, which floated
like fat on a boiler, and it nearly smothered me; for, you see, there
had been one or two casks of tar on the decks, which had stove when the
ship was going down, and the tar got up to the top of the water before I
did. It prevented me from seeing at first, but I heard the guns firing
as signals of distress." Here Turner drank some ale.

"Well," said he, after a short pause, "I may as well finish my story. As
soon as I could clear the tar from my eyes, I saw the main topsail
halyard-block about level with the water's edge about eight or ten yards
from me; so I swam to it and rode on it, holding on by the halyards, and
then I looked about me. The fore, main, and mizzentops were all above
water, as was a part of the bowsprit, and also part of the ensign-staff,
with the flag hoisted--for, you see, messmates, we went down in only
thirteen and a half fathom water, that is, about eighty feet; and, as I
said before, she measured sixty-six feet from the keelson up to the
taffrail; and she grounded as nearly upright as a vessel could; for the
lighter, which was fast to leeward when she went down, caught the main
yard, which helped to right her as she sank--but the lighter went down
with her. Well, as I looked round, I saw the admiral's baker in the
mizzen shrouds, and there was the body of the woman I had dragged out of
the port rolling about close to him. The baker was an Irishman, of the
name of Claridge; and I called out to him, 'Bob, reach out your hand and
catch hold of that woman, I daresay she is not dead.'

"He said, 'She's dead enough; it's no use to lay hold of her.'

"I answered, 'She is not dead.' He caught hold of the woman and hung her
head over one of the rattlings of the mizzen shrouds, and there she
swung by her chin till a wash came and lifted her off, and then she
rolled about again. Just then one of the captains of the frigates came
up in his boat. I waved my hand toward the woman--he stopped pulling,
the men dragged her into the boat, and laid her in the sternsheets.

"'My man,' said the captain, 'I must pick up those who are in more
danger than you.'

"'All right, sir,' said I; 'I'm safe moored here.'

"There was one of our men hanging on the mainstay, and roaring like a
bull, as he tried to climb by it out of the water. Had he only remained
quiet, he would have done well enough. The boat took him off first, and
the others of the people who were clinging about the masts and rigging,
including the baker and myself. It then pulled on board the 'Victory'
with us; and I once more found a good dry plank between me and the salt
water."

"Was the captain and admiral saved?"

"Captain Waghorn was. He could not swim; but one of the seamen held him
up. The admiral was drowned in his cabin. Captain Waghorn tried to
acquaint him that the ship was sinking; but the heeling over of the ship
had so jammed the doors of the cabin that they could not be opened."

"What became of the lieutenant of the watch and the carpenter?"

"The lieutenant of the watch was drowned--and so indeed was the
carpenter. His body was taken up, I believe, by the same boat which
picked up Lieutenant Durham[3]. When I went on board of the 'Victory,' I
saw the carpenter's body before the galley fire--some women were
attempting to recover him, but he was quite dead. There was a strong
westerly breeze, although the day was fine; and the wind made the water
so rough that there was great danger of the boats getting entangled in
the rigging and spars, when they came to take the men off, or more would
have been saved."

[Footnote 3: Afterward Admiral Sir Philip Durham.]

"How many do you think were lost altogether?" inquired Anderson.

"We had our whole complement on board, eight hundred and sixty-five men;
and there were more than three hundred women on board, besides a great
many Jews with slops and watches; as there always are, you know, when a
ship is paid and the men have any money to be swindled out of. I don't
exactly know how many men were saved, but there was only one woman,
which was the one I dragged out of the port. There was a great fat old
bumboat woman, whom the sailors used to call the 'Royal George'--she was
picked up floating, for she was too fat to sink; but she had been
floating the wrong way uppermost, and she was dead. There was a poor
little child saved rather strangely. He was picked up by a gentleman who
was in a wherry, holding on to the wool of a sheep which had escaped and
was swimming. His father and mother were drowned, and the boy did not
know their names; all that he knew was that his own name was Jack; so
they christened him John _Lamb_, and the gentleman took care of him."

"Have you no idea how many men were saved, Turner?"

"I only know this--that the Admiralty ordered five pounds a man to be
given to the seamen who were saved, as a recompense for the loss of
their clothes, and I heard that only seventy-five claimed it; but how
many marines were saved, or other people who were on board, I do not
know; but perhaps, altogether, there might be two hundred or more--for
you see the seamen had the worst chance of being saved, as they were
almost all down in the hold, or on the lower and main decks at their
guns. A few days after the ship went down the bodies would come up,
eight or ten almost the same time--rising to the top of the water so
suddenly as to frighten people who were passing near. The watermen made
a good thing of it; for, as the bodies rose, they took from them their
shoe-buckles, money, and watches, and then towed them on shore to be
buried."

"That lieutenant had much to answer for," observed Ben. "His false pride
was the cause of it all."

"It would seem so--but God only knows," replied Anderson. "Come, my
lads, the beer is out, and it's two bells in the middle watch. I think
we had better turn in. Jack, what's to become of you?"

"Oh, I'll find a plank," said I.

"So you shall, boy, and a bed upon it," replied Ben. "Come and turn in
with me, and don't you dream that the larboard lower deck ports are
open."


CHAPTER FOURTEEN

     My Father makes his Appearance, having left his Leg, but not his
     Tail, behind him--My Father is pensioned off by my Mother as well
     as by his Country.


About six weeks after the intelligence of the battle of the Nile, as I
was sweeping away from the steps the mud which had been left by the
tide, a King's tender, that I had been watching as she came up the
river, dropped her anchor in the stream, abreast of the hospital.

Shortly afterward the lieutenant who commanded her pulled on shore in
his boat, and, landing at the steps, proceeded to the governor's house.
The men having orders not to leave the boat, requested me to procure
them some porter, which I did; and on my return with it, they informed
me that they had come round from Portsmouth with sixty-three men, who
had lost their limbs, or had been otherwise so severely wounded in the
late action as to have been recommended for Greenwich.

I felt very anxious for the men to land, as it was possible that my
father might be one of them. The lieutenant soon returned, jumped into
the boat, and shoved off. I perceived that the disabled men were getting
ready to land, hauling their chests and kits on deck. In about
half-an-hour a boat full of them came to the steps. I ran down to
assist; and as I held on to the gunnel of the boat, while they threw out
their gang-board, the first person who stumped out was my father, minus
his left leg.

"Father!" cried I, half sorry and half pleased.

"Who calls me father?" replied he, looking at me. "Why, you don't mean
to say that you're my boy Tom?"

"Yes, indeed!" said I.

"Ah! yes--I recollect your smile now. Why, what a big fellow you've
grown!"

"It's four years since you left, father."

"Well! I suppose it is, since you say so," replied he, taking me by the
arm, and stumping a little to one side, when he said in a low tone, "I
say, Jack, what became of the old woman? Did I settle her?"

"Oh, no," replied I, laughing, "she was only shamming."

"Shamming was she? Well! it's all the better--for she has been a little
on my conscience, that's truth. Shamming? Heh! She won't sham next time,
if I fall foul of her. How does she get on?"

"Oh, very well indeed."

"And how's your little sister? What's her name--Jenny lengthened at both
ends? I never could recollect it, though I've often thought of her sweet
little face."

"She's quite well, and as pretty and as good as ever."

"Well, Tom, my boy, you stood by your father when he was in trouble, and
now he'll stand by you. How does your mother treat you?"

"We get on pretty well--not over-fond of each other."

[Illustration: JACK'S FATHER LANDING AFTER THE BATTLE OF THE
NILE.--Marryat, Vol X., p. 133.]

"Well, Tom, I've only one pin left; but I say," continued my father,
with a wink of his eye, "I haven't left my tail behind me, 'cause it may
be useful, you know. Now we must all go up to the governor of the
hospital for inspection, and I suppose we shall be kept for some time;
so you may run home and tell your mother that I've come back in a
perfect good-humor, and that it will be her fault if she puts me
out--that's all."

"I will, father; and then I'll come to you at the hospital."

I ran home to communicate the important intelligence to my mother and to
Virginia, who had as usual come from school for her dinner.

"Mother," says I, out of breath, "who do you think has come back?"

"Comeback?" said she. "_Back?_ Not your father?"

"Yes," says I, "my father. I just left him."

My mother turned deadly pale, and dropped the hot iron from her hand, so
as to spoil a frilled nightcap belonging to one of her lady customers.
She staggered to a chair, and trembled all over. I really believe that
had she been aware of his being about to return, she would have quitted
Greenwich before his arrival; but now it was too late. Virginia had run
for the salts as soon as she perceived that her mother was unwell, and
as she smelled them she gradually recovered. At last she inquired how my
father looked and what he said.

I told her that he had lost his leg, and had been sent as a pensioner to
the hospital; that he had looked very well, and that he had told me to
say that "he was in a perfect good humor, and it would be her fault if
she put him out of it; and that if she did--"

"Well, what then?" inquired my mother.

"Oh, the _tail_--that's all."

At the mention of the tail my mother very nearly went off in a
swoon--her head fell back, and I heard her mutter, "So vulgar! so
ungenteel!" However, she recovered herself, and appeared to be for some
time in deep thought. At last she rose up, ordered me to fetch something
extra for supper, and recommenced her ironing.

As soon as I had executed her commission I went to the hospital, where I
found my father, who, with the other men, had just been dismissed. He
accompanied me to my mother, shook hands with her very good-humoredly,
kissed Virginia, whom he took on his knee, praised the supper, drank
only one pot of porter, and then returned to the hospital, to sleep in
the cabin which had been allotted to him in the Warriors' Ward, of which
Anderson was the boatswain. My mother, although not very gracious, was
much subdued, and for a few days everything went on very comfortably;
but my mother's temper could not be long restrained. Displeased at
something which she considered as very vulgar, she ventured to assail my
father as before, concluding her tirade as usual, with "There--now
you're vexed!"

My father looked at her very sternly.--At last he said, "You're just
right--I am vexed; and whenever you tell me so in future I'll prove that
it's no lie." He then rose, stumped upstairs to my room, in which he had
deposited his sea-chest, and soon made his appearance with the
formidable and never-to-be-forgotten tail in his hand. "Mistress," said
he, as my mother retreated, "you said, 'Now you're vexed' to me just
now. I ask you again, am I vexed, or am I not?" and my father flourished
the tail over his head.

My mother looked at the strange weapon: the remembrance of the past was
too painful; she was conquered by her fear.

"Oh, no," cried she, falling on her knees. "You're not vexed--indeed you
are not."

"You're quite sure of that?" responded my father authoritatively, as he
advanced toward her.

"Oh! yes, yes," cried my mother, trembling; "indeed you're not."

"Ain't I in a very good humor?" continued my father.

"Yes, you are in the best of humors, and always are so, unless--I
aggravate you," replied my mother, whimpering.

"Well," replied my father, lowering his tail, "I expect we've come to a
right understanding at last. So now get up and wipe your eyes; but
recollect, that whenever you dare to tell me that I'm vexed, I won't be
so ungenteel as to contradict you."

Thus was the mastery gained by my father, and never lost. It is true
that sometimes my mother would forget herself, and would get on as far
as "There now, you're--," but she would stop there, and correct herself,
saying, "No, you're not," and allow her temper to evaporate by singing
one of her usual ditties, as "Hush-a-by, baby, on the tree-top;" but my
father never took notice of her singing; and being really a very
good-tempered man, my mother's temper gradually became improved.

The return of my father made some alteration in our mode of life. He
might, if he had pleased, have lived as an out-pensioner with my mother;
but this he would not do. He used to come in almost every evening to see
her, and she used to provide for him a pot of porter, which he seldom
exceeded. If he had friends with him, they paid for what they drank.
This pot of porter per diem was the only demand made upon my mother for
permission to remain separate, and she did not grumble at it. His
tobacco he found himself out of the tobacco money allowed at the
hospital. He had received some pay, which, contrary to his former
custom, he had laid by in the charge of one of the lieutenants of the
hospital, for at that time there were no savings banks.

As a married man my father had the liberty to introduce his wife and
children into the hospital at meal-times, to share his allowance with
them. This my mother would not listen to, as regarded herself and my
sister; but my father messed in what is called the married men's room,
on my account, and instead of buying my own dinner, or applying to my
mother for it, I now always took it with my father in the hospital. In
consequence of my father's admittance as a pensioner, both I and my
sister might have been instructed at the hospital school; but my mother
would not premit Virginia to go there, and I found it much more
convenient to go to Peter Anderson in the evening, when I had nothing to
do. On the whole, we all went on much more comfortably than we did
before my father's return.

One evening I was, as usual, with Anderson in his cabin; my father
having been drafted into his ward, I could not help asking Anderson how
he liked him. His reply was, "I like your father, Jack, for he is a
straightforward, honest, good-tempered man, and, moreover, has a good
natural judgment. I think it a great pity that such a man as he is
should be so early in life lost, as it were, to the country. He is a
first-rate seaman; and although there are many like him, still there are
none to spare. However, if his country loses, he may himself gain, by
being so soon called away from a service of great temptation. The sailor
who has fought for his country, Jack, has much to be thankful for when
he takes in moorings at Greenwich Hospital. He is well fed, well
clothed, tended in sickness, and buried with respect; but all these are
nothing compared with the greatest boon. When I reflect what lives
sailors live, how reckless they are, how often they have been on the
brink of eternity, and wonderfully preserved, without even a feeling of
gratitude to Him who has watched over them, or taking their escapes as
warnings; when I consider how they pass their whole lives in excess,
intemperance, and, too often, blasphemy, it is indeed a mercy that they
are allowed to repose here after such a venturous and careless career;
that they have time to reflect upon what has passed, to listen to the
words of the Gospel, to hate their former life, and trusting in God's
mercy to secure their salvation. This is the greatest charity of this
institution, and long may it flourish, a blessing to the country which
has endowed it, and to the seamen, who are not only provided for in this
world, but are prepared in it for the next."

Such were continually the style of admonitions given me by this good old
man, and I need not point out to the reader how fortunate it was for me
that I had secured such a preceptor.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN

     In which is proved the Truth of the Proverb, "When your own House
     is made of Glass, you never should be the first to throw Stones"


One evening, when I went to the shop of the widow St. Felix to purchase
some tobacco for my father, she said, "Why don't your father come
himself, Jack? I want to make his acquaintance, and see how he looks
without his pigtail."

"Why, you never saw him when he had it on," replied I.

"No, that's the truth; but still I wish to have a sight of him: the fact
is, I want to laugh at him."

"Very well, I'll bring him here; but, recollect, it's a very sore
subject with him," replied I, "and that you may have a sharp answer."

"That I'll take my chance of, Jack," replied the widow, laughing.

In consequence of this intimation, one evening when my father was
walking in the hospital, I persuaded him to call at the shop.

"This is my father, Mrs. St. Felix," said I.

"Most happy to see him. What shall I have the pleasure of assisting you
to, Mr. Saunders?" said the widow.

"My sarvice to you, marm--if you please, to two penn'orth of pigtail and
a paper of shorts."

"Much obliged to you, Mr. Saunders," replied she. "Sure we're much
indebted to Admiral Lord Nelson for sending us such fine-looking
pensioners. I shouldn't wonder if I were to choose a husband out of the
hospital yet."

"I'm afeard we're all too mauled, marm, to suit a pretty young woman
like you," replied my father, very gallantly.

"Thank you for that, Mr. Saunders; but you're mistaken entirely. I don't
consider the loss of a leg, for instance, as anything; I never look at
men's legs, and therefore care little whether they are made of wood or
not, provided they don't tread on my corns."

"Well, marm, I'm glad that you don't consider a timber toe as any
obstacle to matrimony; but, I fear, having a wife already may be
considered by you a sort of objection."

"Why, sure, I must have the whole of my husband; I couldn't afford to
share him, especially when one limb is gone already. That puts me in
mind of my want of manners. I hope Mrs. Saunders is quite well. I hear
from Jack that you have a separate maintenance--that's very genteel."

"Why, yes, marm," replied my father; "the King maintains me, and my wife
maintains herself; so, as you say, we have a separate maintenance."

"Well, that's the best way when married people don't agree. What are you
laughing at, Mr. Jack? did I hint that your father and mother ever had
any little matrimonial differences? I certainly did hear that there was
a trifling dispute when they last parted; but when they bring me such
tales I always _cut them short_. Here's your _pigtail_, Mr. Saunders,"
continued the widow, laughing, as she put the tobacco on the counter.

I looked at my father, who did not seem to relish the hint, but he
answered very frankly, "If you cut them as short as my wife cut mine,
why, then you won't be troubled with them any more. I see, marm, you
know all about it, and you may have your laugh if it pleases you; but I
can tell you that my tail has done me better sarvice since it was off
than when it hung down my back."

"Become useful, instead of ornamental, I presume, Mr. Saunders."

"Just made this difference--when it was on it made my wife's tongue to
go; now it is off, it has stopped it."

"An extraordinary powerful instrument, to stop a woman's tongue!"

"Well, you've only to ax Mistress Saunders, she'll tell you all its
virtues."

"Well, Mr. Saunders, I don't know whether you have any idea of taking
another wife some future day. If so, say nothing about it, or you'll
never get one."

"Well, marm--I don't know whether you ever think of taking another
husband; but if so, I think it would be kind on my part to lend it to
him. Can you tell me why widows' tongues run so much faster than other
women's?"

"Mercy! what put that idea in your head, Mr. Saunders?"

"You, and half a dozen more that I happen to know. May I make so bold as
to ask you, marm, how long you may have been a widow?" continued my
father.

"Bless me! so long that I quite forget all about it," replied Mrs. St.
Felix, turning away from the counter to the jars behind.

I gave my father a wink to let him know that it was his turn now: he
understood me, hitched up his waistband and nodded.

"How did you lose your first husband, marm? What did he die of?"

The widow colored, and my father perceiving it, followed up his
question.

"Did he die of a fever, marm?"

"I'm not exactly sure," replied she, hurriedly.

"May I ask how long it is since he died?" continued my father.

"Oh! Mr. Saunders," replied the widow, confusedly, "I really don't
recollect just now. It's very painful to answer such questions."

"Not if you've been a widow so long that you forget all about it; that's
all sham and nonsense. So you ain't sure _what_ he died of, nor _when_
it was that he died? Are you quite sure, marm, that your husband _is_
dead?"

Mrs. St. Felix started, turned very red, and then very pale.

"My sarvice to you for the present, marm," said my father, after a
pause, taking off his hat. "I suspect that I've found a way to stop your
tongue as well as my wife's. Broadside for broadside, that's fair play."

So saying, my father stumped away out of the shop door. Mrs. St. Felix
put her apron up to her eyes, with her elbows resting on the counter. I
waited a little, and then I said, "What is the matter, Mrs. St. Felix?"

She started at my voice.

"You here, Jack? I thought you had gone out with your father. Well,"
continued she, wiping her eyes, "it serves me right. I forgot that in
amusing myself I annoyed him. Jack, don't you mention anything about
this. Do you think your father will?"

"I don't think he will, for he cannot do so without talking about having
his pigtail cut off, and I know he cannot bear to think of it."

"Well, then, pray don't you, that's a good boy."

"I never will, I promise you."

"Then, good-night, Jack; you must leave me now, I don't feel quite
well."

I wished the widow good-night, and went back to my mother's house. My
father was there, but he never hinted at the conversation which had
taken place, neither at that time nor afterward.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN

     Showing how Old Nanny fell Sick and got Well again.


Before I fell asleep that night I thought a great deal of what had
passed between the widow St. Felix and my father. Why should she have
shown such emotion, and why should she request of me not to mention what
had passed? I had heard reports about her, as I have before mentioned; I
had heard them from old Nanny, but I did not put any confidence in what
she said. Thinking of old Nanny reminded me that I had not called upon
her for some time, and I resolved that I would visit her the next day.

It was not until late in the evening that I could spare time to call
upon her, and, what was not usual, I went empty-handed. I found to my
surprise that the door was shut to, and the shutters of the shop not
taken down. I tried the latch, the door opened, and I went in.

"Who's there?" screamed old Nanny from the inner room. "What do you
want?"

"It's only Poor Jack, mother," replied I, "come to see how you are."

"Come in," replied she; "I'm very bad. Oh! oh! I thought it was some
thief or another come to steal all the things in my shop."

I entered the room and found old Nanny in bed; she looked very ill and
miserable, and everything was very dirty.

"Are you not well, mother?" said I.

"Well, boy? No, very ill, very ill indeed, haven't left my bed these
three days. Reach me a little water, Jack, there's a good boy. I've been
dying for water."

I handed her a broken jug which had some water in it. She drank
greedily, so as to spill nearly half of it on the coverlid.

"Oh, how good it is!" exclaimed the old woman, as soon as she recovered
her breath. "I'm better now. I could not reach it myself. I've the
rheumatiz so bad! I've been in such a fright because I could not lock
the door; it kept me awake all night long. Oh, my poor back!"

"But why did you not send for the doctor, mother?"

"Doctor! Eh? who's to pay him? I've got no money, Jack."

"Well, but Dr. Tadpole's very kind."

"Yes, yes, kind to the widow; but not to old women like me, without any
money."

"But why not have some one to sit up with you, and help you?"

"Sit up with me! Who'd sit up with me? Yes, if I paid them. But I've no
money, Jack; and then, I don't know them. They might rob me--there's a
great many pretty things in my shop."

"But you might die, mother, lying here without any one to help you."

"Die! Well, and who would care if a poor old woman like me died, Jack?"

"I should care, for one, mother; and so would my sister Virginia, and
many others besides."

"You might care, Jack, for you're a good boy, and so might your little
sister, for she has a kind heart; but nobody else, Jack--no, not one!"

I could not reply to this remark, as I really did not know anybody who
would have cared; so I said, "You must see the doctor, mother. I will go
for him."

"No, Jack, I can't afford it, it's no use; besides, I'm better now."

"Well, if you can't afford it, you shall not pay him; and, if he will
not come for nothing, I'll pay him myself."

"Will you pay him, Jack? that's a good boy. You promised me bargains,
you know; that shall be one of them."

"Well, mother, I'll make the bargain that I'll pay him, if you'll see
him--so good-by now. Do you want anything before I go?"

"No, Jack, no; I don't want anything, only just lock the door and take
the key with you when you go out, and then no one can rob me, Jack,
while you're gone."

I complied with her request, and ran for Dr. Tadpole, whom I found
smoking his cigar in the widow's shop.

"Doctor," said I, "old Nanny has been ill in bed these three days, and I
want you to go and see her."

"Does she send you to me, or do you ask it yourself?" said the doctor,
"for I think she would die rather than pay the doctor."

"As for that, Mr. Tadpole," said the widow, "there are many of your
patients who send for the doctor without ever intending to pay him.
Perhaps old Nanny may go on the same plan."

"Certainly; that alters the case. Well, Jack, what's the matter with
her?"

"Rheumatism, and, I believe, fever; for her hand is hot, and her tongue
very white. She was lying in bed with no one to help her, and had not
strength to reach a drop of water, until I gave it to her."

"Poor old soul!" said the widow. "And yet they say that she has money?"

"I don't think that she has much," replied I; "for when she lent me the
twenty-eight shillings, she had not ten shillings more in the bag. But,
doctor, I'll pay you; I will, indeed. How much will it be?"

"Now, doctor, just put on your hat, and set off as soon as you please;
for if Poor Jack says he'll pay you, you know that your money is as safe
as mine was in the bank--before it failed."

"Well, I'll just finish my cigar."

"Of course you will--as you walk along, Mr. Tadpole," replied the widow;
"it's very pleasant to smoke in the air, and just as unpleasant to
others your smoking in the house. So, doctor, just be off and see the
poor old wretch directly, or--I'll be affronted."

Hereupon the doctor took up his hat, and without reply walked off with
me. When we arrived, I unlocked the door and we went in.

"Well, old Nanny, what's the matter now?" said Dr. Tadpole.

"Nothing, doctor, nothing; you've come on a useless message; I didn't
send for you, recollect that; it was Jack who would go; I did not send,
recollect that, doctor; I can't afford it; I've no money."

"Very well, I shan't look to you for money. Put out your tongue,"
replied the doctor, as he felt her pulse.

"Recollect, doctor, I did not send for you. Jack, you are witness--I've
no money," repeated old Nanny.

"Put out your tongue," repeated the doctor.

"No, I won't, till it's all clearly settled."

"It is, you old fool," said the doctor, impatiently; "put out your
tongue."

"Jack, you're witness it's all by force," said Nanny, who at last put
out her tongue; "and now, doctor, I'll tell you."

Whereupon Nanny commenced with a narrative of her ills; and by her own
account there was not a portion of her body from top to toe which had
not some ailment.

"You've a very bad complaint," said the doctor; "what d'ye think it is?
It's old age. I hardly know whether I can cure it."

"Can your draw the pain out of my old bones?" said Nanny, groaning.

"Why, I'll try, at all events. I must send you something to take
inwardly."

"Who's to pay for it?" said old Nanny.

"I will, mother," said I.

"You're witness, doctor--Jack says he'll pay for it. You're a good boy,
Jack."

"Well, that's settled--but now, we must have some one to sit up with
you."

"Sit up with me? nobody will sit up with an old thing like me."

"Yes, I will, mother," said I, "and I'll look in upon you in the
daytime, and see if you want to drink."

"No, no, Jack! then you'll make no money."

"Yes I will--never mind that."

"Well, at all events," replied the doctor, "Jack will sit up with you
this night; and we'll see how you are to-morrow. Now, Jack, come back
with me, and I'll give you something for her. Good-night, Nanny," said
the doctor, leaving the room.

"Good-night," grumbled old Nanny; and as we were going through the shop
I heard her continue: "It's very easy saying 'good-night,' but how can a
poor wretch like me, with every bone aching as if it would split, expect
to have a 'good night'?"

As the doctor walked home, he appeared not to be in his usual talkative
mood. He went to the shop, made up the medicines, and gave me the
directions.

"Here, Jack, take these; and it will be a kindness to sit up with her
to-night. I will see her to-morrow; and as I can't allow you to be the
only good Samaritan in the place, understand, Jack, that I attend the
poor old woman and find medicine for nothing."

I thanked him and hastened back. Old Nanny took her draught, and then
turned round on her side. I suppose there was opium in it, for she soon
fell fast asleep; not, however, until she had said, "Jack, have you
locked the door?"

"Yes, mother, I have."

"Well, now, don't you think you could watch without burning a candle?
You ain't afraid?"

"No, mother, I'm not afraid; but if I do, I shall fall asleep; and,
besides, if you wake and want anything, I shall not be able to find it.
I should break the jug and other things, and they would cost more than a
candle."

"Very true, Jack. I feel sleepy already"--and old Nanny was soon in a
loud snore.

I had stopped at my mother's to say that I intended to stay with old
Nanny, so that they might not sit up for me; and now all that I had to
do was to keep myself awake. I had forgotten to bring a book with me, so
I looked about the room for something to read; but I could find
nothing. At last I ventured to open a drawer--it creaked, and old Nanny
was roused. "Who's that?" cried she, but she did not wake up, the opiate
was too powerful. I went to her; she was in a perspiration, which I knew
was what the doctor wished. I put the clothes close up to her head, and
left her. I then took the candle and looked into the drawer, and found a
book lying in a corner with one side of the cover off. It was very dirty
and stained. I took it out, and went again to my chair and opened it. It
was Bunyan's "Pilgrim's Progress," and full of plates. I had never heard
of the book, and did not know what the title meant. I first looked at
all the plates, and then I turned to the opening of the book. On the
blank leaf at the commencement, in very neat and lawyer-like
handwriting, was "Anna James, on her marriage, from her dear friend Mary
Farquhar, Tynemouth, June the 19th, 1738." By this I discovered, as I
thought, the married but not the maiden name of old Nanny; and very
probably, also, that Tynemouth was her native place. She was married,
too, in 1738, that was more than sixty years back--and her age was,
therefore, in all likelihood, nearly eighty years. I pondered over this
for some time, and then I commenced reading; and so interested was I
with the contents that I did not raise my head until the candle had
burned to the socket: as I was about to light another, I perceived
daylight through the chinks of the window shutter. So I laid down the
book, and walking softly out of the room, unlocked the shop door to get
a little fresh air; for the room that old Nanny was sleeping in was,
from dirt and neglect, very close. I could not, however, unlock the door
without waking up Nanny who screamed out "Thieves!--murder! thieves!"
until she was wide awake.

[Illustration: JACK IN NANNY'S ROOM.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 151.]

"Oh! it is you, Jack?" said she at last. "I dreamed there were thieves
breaking in."

"Nothing but day breaking in, mother," said I. "How do you feel this
morning?"

"Better, Jack, better; I've not so much pain, but I'm very thirsty; give
me some water."

"No, mother; the doctor said you must not drink cold water. If you'll
wait a little, I'll run and fetch you something warm. I won't be gone
long, so try to go to sleep again."

Old Nanny made no reply, but turned her face away from the light, as if
in obedience to my orders. I locked the outer door and hastened home.

I found my mother and Virginia sitting in the nice clean room, the fire
blazing cheerfully and the breakfast on the table, and I could not help
making the contrast in my own mind between it and the dirty abode I had
just left. I ran into the back kitchen to wash my face and hands, and
then returned, kissed Virginia, and wished my mother "Good-morning."

Why, I do not know, but she was in one of her worst of humors.

"Don't come near me, or near your sister Virginia," said she sharply;
"who knows what vermin you may have brought from where you have been
staying all night?"

I did feel that what she said might be true.

"Well, mother," said I, "I won't come near you if you don't like, but I
want some tea for poor old Nanny."

"I can't find tea for old Nannies," replied she.

"I'll give her mine, Jack," cried Virginia.

"Indeed, miss, you'll do no such thing," said my mother; "and sit up
properly to table, instead of hanging your head down in that way; and
don't pour your tea in your saucer--that's vulgar!"

"The tea's so hot, mamma!" said Virginia.

"Then wait till it's cool, miss. Leave the teapot alone, sir!"

"I'll thank you for some tea, mother," replied I. "I shall give my
breakfast to old Nanny."

"You'll take no breakfast out of this house," was the reply.

"Why, mother?--for a poor sick old woman."

"Let her go to the parish."

I now became angry myself. I took up the teapot and walked away into the
back kitchen. My mother rose and followed me, insisting upon my putting
the teapot down; but I would not, and I poured out the tea into a little
milk-can. I did not answer her, but I felt that I was right and would
not give in, and she was afraid to attempt force. My mother then ran
back to the table, caught up the sugar-basin and carried it upstairs,
singing as she went, at the highest pitch of her voice:

     "What are little girls made of, made of
     Sugar and spice, and all that's nice;
     And that's what girls are made of!"

While my mother was away, little Virginia poured her cup of tea, which
was already sweetened, into the can. I seized some bread and butter, and
before my mother came down I was clear of the house. Old Nanny made a
good breakfast; the doctor came, and said that she was much better and
would soon be well. The doctor had not left long before Peter Anderson
came and told me to go and mind my business, and that he would sit by
old Nanny. Old Ben, who had heard of it, also called in, and he sat up
with her the next night.

"Did I not tell you that there were others who cared for you, Nanny?"
said I, a few days afterward.

"Yes, you did, Jack, but I did not believe you; the world is better than
I thought it was. But how will you pay the doctor, Jack?"

"The doctor 'tended you for nothing; he told me so the first night."

"Well, and that widow, too; it's kind of her to send me tea and sugar,
and such nice things to eat."

"Yes, mother, it is."

"And your father, to bring your little dear sister, so nice and clean,
to come and see an old wretch like me in such a dirty hole. Ah, Jack!
now I'm getting well again I like the world better than I did."

In a few days old Nanny had again opened her shop, sitting at the door
as usual, and, as the spring was now well advanced, she gradually
recovered her strength. When I gave up my office of nurse she did not,
however, forget to tell me to bring her good bargains, as I had promised
that I would.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

     A Morning Concert, in which the Opposition is as great as Black to
     White.


Among my father's associates there was a man of about forty years of
age, Dick Harness by name. He had received a wound in the hip from a
grape-shot, and his leg having in consequence contracted, it occasioned
him to limp very much; but he was as strong and hearty in all other
respects as a man could be. He was a very merry fellow, full of jokes,
and if any one told a story which was at all verging on the marvelous,
he was sure to tell another which would be still more incredible. He
played the fiddle and sang to his own accompaniments, which were very
droll, as he extracted very strange noises from his instrument.
Sometimes his bow would be on the wrong side of the bridge, sometimes
down at the keys; besides which he produced sounds by thumping the
fiddle as well as by touching its strings as a guitar; indeed, he could
imitate in a certain way almost every instrument and most of the noises
made by animals. He had one fault, for which he used to be occasionally
punished, which was, he was too fond of the bottle; but he was a great
favorite, and therefore screened by the men, and as much as possible
overlooked by the officers. The punishment for a pensioner getting drunk
was, at that time, being made to wear a yellow instead of a blue coat,
which made a man look very conspicuous.

I recollect one day he had the yellow coat on, when a party of ladies
and gentlemen came to see the hospital. Perceiving that he was dressed
so differently from the other pensioners, one of the ladies' curiosity
was excited, and at last she called him to her and said, "Pray, my good
man, why do you wear a yellow coat when the other pensioners have blue
ones?"

"Bless your handsome face, ma'am!" replied Dick, "don't you really
know?"

"No, indeed," replied she.

"Well, then, ma'am, perhaps you may have heard of the glorious battle of
the Nile, in which Nelson gave the French such a drubbing?"

"Oh, yes," cried all the ladies and gentlemen, who had now crowded about
him.

"Well, ladies and gentlemen, I had the good fortune to be in that great
victory, and all we _Nilers_, as we are called, are permitted to wear a
yellow coat as a mark of distinction, while the common pensioners wear
nothing but blue."

"Dear me!" said the lady, "and do I really speak to one of those brave
fellows who fought at the battle of the Nile?" and she put her hand into
her pocket and pulled out five shillings. "There," said she, "I hope
you'll not be affronted, but accept this from me."

"Not at all, ma'am," replied Dick, pocketing the money.

Then the whole party made a subscription for him, and Dick went off with
a handful of silver.

There was, however, another man who contributed much to the fun created
by Dick Harness. He was an American black, who had served as cook in the
"Majestic," and had been wounded in the battle of the Nile, He had
received a bullet in the knee, which had occasioned a stiff joint; and,
as his leg was bent, he wore a short wooden stump. He also could play
his fiddle and sing his songs, but in neither case so well as Dick
Harness, although he thought otherwise himself. We used to call him
Opposition Bill, but his name was Bill White; at least that was the
purser's name that he went by when on board of a man-of-war. His
pleasure was to follow Dick Harness everywhere; and if Dick sung he
would sing, if Dick played he would play also--not at the same time, but
if Dick stopped Bill would strike up. Dick used to call him his black
shadow; and sometimes he would execute a flourish on his fiddle which
would be quite a puzzler to Opposition Bill, who would attempt something
of the kind, which invariably set every one laughing. At last Dick
Harness's performances were not considered to be complete if Opposition
Bill was not in his company; and, as they were both very good-tempered,
funny fellows, they were a great amusement, especially in the fine
weather, when they would sit on the benches upon the terrace about six
or eight yards apart, for they seldom came nearer, and play and sing
alternately. The songs sung by Dick Harness were chiefly old sea songs;
those of Opposition Bill were picked up from every part of the world,
principally, however, those sung by the negroes who worked on the
plantations in Virginia and Carolina.

Peter Anderson, my father, Ben, and many others were sitting on the
benches, basking in the morning's sun, when Dick Harness made his
appearance, limping along with his fiddle under his arm.

"Come along, Dick," said Ben the Whaler, "we'll stow close, and make
room for you here."

"You must make elbow-room, too, my hearty, or I shan't be able to
fiddle. Come, what will you have this fine morning?" said Harness,
tuning his instrument. As soon as it was in tune he flourished a prelude
from the top of the scale to the bottom, ending with an "Eh-haw!
eh-haw!" in imitation of the braying of a donkey.

"Give us the Spanish Ladies, Dick," said my father. As this song was
very popular at that time among the seamen, and is now almost forgotten,
I shall by inserting it here for a short time rescue it from oblivion.

     "Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies,
     Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain;
       For we have received orders
       For to sail to old England,
     But we hope in a short time to see you again."

"Stop a moment, lads. I must screw him up a little more."

Dick regulated his first string, and then continued.

     "We'll rant and we'll roar, like true British sailors,
     We'll rant and we'll roar across the salt seas;
       Until we strike soundings
       In the Channel of old England
     (From Ushant to Scilly 'tis thirty-five leagues).

     "Then we hove our ship to, with the wind at sou'west,
           my boys,
     Then we hove our ship to, for to strike soundings clear;
       Then we filled the maintopsail
       And bore right away, my boys,
     And straight up the Channel of old England did steer.

     "So the first land we made, it is called the Deadman,
     Next Ram Head, off Plymouth, Start, Portland, and
         the Wight;
       We sail-ed by Beachy,
       By Fairly and Dungeness,
     And then bore away for the South Foreland light.

     "Now the signal it was made for the grand fleet to
         anchor,
     All in the Downs that night for to meet;
       Then stand by your stoppers,
       See clear your shank painters,
     Haul all your clew garnets, stick out tacks and sheets."

Here Dick was interrupted by another fiddle, which went "turn,
turn--scrape--turn, turn."

"There's Opposition Bill, Dick," said my father; "I thought you would
bring him out."

"All's right," replied Dick; "hope he aren't affronted; but he looks
very black this morning."

     "Now let every man lake off his full bumper,
     Let every man take off his full bowl;
       For we will be jolly
       And drown melancholy,
     With a health to each jovial and true-hearted soul."

"Now, then, Billy, fire away."

"You tink I 'bey your order, you Dick? No, sar, suppose I fire away, I
go off. I not go off, I stay here."

"Well, but if you play, you'll get in trouble, Billy."

"How I get in trouble?"

"Why, you'll get in a scrape, won't you?"

"Ho! you just got out of one, anyhow."

Dick Harness then said to those who sat by him, "I'll make him sing the
Negro General."

"Well, if you will howl, Mr. Billy," cried out Harness, "at all events
don't give us that abominable Nigger General. It always gives me the
toothache."

"Now I tink dat very fine song; so you may have whole jaw-ache for all I
care. I sing dat, Mr. Dick; you jealous of dat song, I know."

Opposition Billy flourished a little, and then commenced--

     "Listen, my boys, and I will tell you
     Tell you a leetle 'bout Gin'ral Gabriel.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "Dey advertise de Nigger Gin'ral,
     A dousand pounds dey advertise him.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "And who betrayed de Nigger Gin'ral?
     A leetle boy betrayed de Gin'ral.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "A leetle boy by de name of Daniel,
     Betrayed him down at Norfolk Landing.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "He says, how do, my uncle Gabriel?
     But dis is not your uncle Gabriel.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "Yes, it is my uncle Gabriel;
     For I do know you, uncle Gabriel.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "De man belonged to Major Prosser,
     So cum and hang de Nigger Gin'ral.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "For he's ruined old Virginny!
     _Hard times_ in old Virginny.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "Dey wrote a letter to de tailor,
     To cut out de Gin'ral's ruffles.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "Dey cut de ruffles out o' _iron_!
     So they handcuff and chained him.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "Dey went and called a troop of light horse
     To come and guard de Nigger Gin'ral!
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "To guard him all to de city of Richmond,
     To guard him up unto de justice.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "De justice _tuk_ him to de gobnor--
     (Monroe he set up for gobnor).
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "Command him to de Penetenshy;
     On Thursday week come on his trial.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "Dey went and called all de country
     For to come and see de Nigger Gin'ral.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "Some dey call him Archy Mullen--'My
     right name is John Decullen.'
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "I'm here to-day and gone to-morrow;
     I did not come for to stay for eber.'
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "So den dey tuk him to de gallows,
     Drive him down dere in a wagon.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "Dey drive him down unto de gallows,
     Dey drive him down with four gray horses.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "(Price's Ben, he drive de wagon)
     Very sad loss to Major Prosser.
           Oh, my boys, I'm most done!

     "Dey drove him right beneath de gallows,
     And den dey hang him and dey swing him.
             Oh-e-oh! Oh-e-oh!

     "And dat de fate of de Nigger Gin'ral,
     Who almost ruined old Virginny!
           Now, my boys, I'm quite done!"

"You've quite done, have you, Billy?" said Harness; "take my advice and
never begin again."

"Eh, Mister Dick, you no ab song like dat in your budget, and I neber
give you de tune."

"I hope you won't; but now I'll play you a tune which will beat you
hollow." Hereupon Dick Harness imitated the squeaking of pigs and
caterwauling of cats upon his fiddle, so as to set everybody laughing,
except Opposition Bill, who pretended to be very sulky.

"Come, Dick, it's your turn now. Give us a regular forecastle song,"
said Ben the Whaler.

"Well, then, here's one that's been sung ever since the days of old
Queen Anne:

     "It was one November--the second day--
     The admiral he bore away,
     Intending for his native shore.
     The wind at sou'sou'west did roar;
     There was likewise a terrible sky,
     Which made the sea to run mountains high.

     "The tide of ebb it was not done,
     But fiercely to the west did run;
     Which put us all in terrible fear,
     Because there was not room for to veer.
     The wind and weather increased sore,
     And drove ten sail of us on shore.

     "Ashore went the 'Northumberland,'
     The 'Harwich,' and the 'Cumberland,'
     The 'Lion' and the 'Warwick' too;
     But the 'Elizabeth' had the most to rue--
     She came stem on--her fore-foot broke,
     And she sunk the 'Gloucester' at one stroke.

     "But now remains what is worse to tell,
     The greatest ships had the greatest knell;
     The brave 'C'ronation' and all her men
     Was lost and drowned every one,
     Except the mate and eighteen more
     What in the longboat com'd ashore.

     "And thus they lost their precious lives;
     But the greatest loss was to their wives,
     Who, with their children left on shore,
     Their husbands' watery death deplore,
     And wept their loss with many tears--
     (But grief endureth not for years).

     "Now you who've a mind to go to sea,
     Pray take a useful hint from me,
     And live at home, and be content
     With what kind Providence has sent;
     For they were punish'd for their misdeeds,
     In grumbling when they had no needs.

     "Now God preserve our noble Queen,
     Likewise her Ministers serene;
     And may they ever steer a course
     To make things better 'stead of worse,
     And England's flag triumphant fly,
     The dread of hevery he-ne-my."

"You call dat singing! Stop now! I sing a song you nebber hear in all
your life," cried Opposition Bill, tuning his fiddle.

"And never wish to hear again, most likely," replied Dick. "Out with it,
Bill; your face shines beautifully this morning."

"I take de shine out of you, Massa Dick; now you listen:

     "Now your fader is asleep, maid, listen unto me;
     Will you follow in my trail to Ken-tuck-y?
     For cross de Alleghany to-morrow I must go,
     To chase de bounding deer on'de O-hi-o.

     "And will you lub me truly, and kind to me will be,
     If I quit my fader's roof for Ken-tuck-y?
     And will you nebber leave me, if I consent to go
     To your shanty by de stream of de O-hi-o?

     "Her fader's not asleep, and he will not agree,
     Dat you take away his dater to Ken-tuck-y.
     So alone by yourself, good hunter, you must go,
     Where the Ingin's rifle cracks on de O-hi-o.

     "Your moder, too, is near, aldough you did not see,
     And wid her leave you nebber go to Ken-tuck-y.
     He hab a wife already, as I do surely know,
     Who weeps for his return to de O-hi-o.

     "Man, I have dis purse of gold, half of it for ye;
     Woman, I hab ne'er a wife in Ken-tuck-y;
     Your dater is my only lub, so pridee let us go
     To where my corn is ripening on de O-hi-o.

     "De fader weighed de purse, he took his half wid glee,
     De moder said her child might go to Ken-tuck-y.
     So de hunter and de maid, arm-in-arm dey go,
     Across de Alleghany to de O-hi-o."

"Bravo, Billy, that's not so bad," said some of the pensioners.

"I tell you, Dick, I take de shine out of you. You nebber believe till I
make you fall in my wake, and den you soon be where de little boat
was--long way astarn."

"I'll tell you what, Billy," said Dick Harness, "you do improve, and
we'll allow you to sing that song once more before you die, just by way
of encouragement."

Dick then played several flourishes on his fiddle. Opposition Bill tried
to imitate him, but made sad work of it. It was near dinner-time, and
the pensioners rose and proceeded to the Painted Hall, for at that time
they dined there, and not below in the crypts as they do now.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

     I get into very doubtful Company--I am tempted, and, like a true
     Son of Adam, I fall.


The reader must have observed that, under the tuition of Anderson, I
promised to follow the right path, and, provided his good offices were
not interfered with, there appeared little doubt but that such would be
the case. But I was little aware, nor was he, that the humble profession
which I had chosen for myself was beset with danger, and that the
majority of those with whom I was associating were the most likely of
all others to lead me into evil. Why I had not hitherto been tempted can
only be ascribed to my tender years. In fact, I had not been considered
strong enough, or of an age to be useful to them, but now that I was
more than thirteen years old--being, moreover, very tall and strong for
my age--the hour of temptation arrived; and fortunate was it for me
that, previous to this epoch, I had been taken under the protection of
Peter Anderson.

I have said in a former chapter that I was a regular _mudlarker_. So I
was, as far as the ostensible occupation of those who are so denominated
went; to wit, "picking up pieces of old rope, wood, etc." But the
mudlarkers, properly speaking, at that time composed a very extensive
body on the river, and were a more humble portion of the numerous river
depredators, of which I may hereafter speak. A mudlarker was a man who
had an old boat, generally sold by some merchant vessel, furnished with
an iron bar full of hooks, which was lowered down by a rope to catch
pieces of cordage, oakum, canvas or other articles, which might fall
overboard from the numerous vessels in the river; these were sold to the
marine stores, such as were kept by old Nanny. But, as I observed, this
was the _ostensible_ mode of livelihood; they had other resources, to
which I shall presently refer. An old man of the name of Jones, who
resided at Greenwich, was one of these mudlarkers by profession. He was
a surly old fellow, his sharp nose and chin nearly meeting, and he
usually went by the name of Old Grumble. I had occasionally assisted him
with his boat, but without receiving money, or indeed thanks, for my
pains, but for this I cared little. He was a very old man, and when he
came on shore and went up to old Nanny with the few things he had
collected during the day, I almost wondered how he could manage to
subsist, and thought myself infinitely better off than he was.

One evening he said to me, "Jack, I'm going up the river, I wish you'd
come in the boat and help me, and if I make anything I will give you
something for your trouble, but if I don't you can't expect it."

As he was very infirm I went with him, more out of charity than with any
hopes of profit. We pulled with the tide till we arrived a little above
Deptford, where several ships were lying, and he went close to one and
lowered down his grapnels. He dragged for a short time.

"Just you make a little further off, old fellow," cried the mate of the
vessel.

"Won't allow a poor old man to earn a few pence, I suppose," replied Old
Grumble, hauling up his grapnel and directing me to pull under the
bows, where he dropped it down again. I now perceived, as I thought,
some signs passing between him and one of the men in the head; but if
so, they were soon over, and Old Grumble continued his avocation till
the sun set.

"How long do you intend to remain here?" inquired I.

"Oh, not much longer, but I must wait a bit."

At last it was quite dark, and then Grumble pulled up his grapnel and
dropped down nearer to the cutwater of the vessel. I soon distinguished
a tinkling, as it were, of metal; and Old Grumble, holding up his hands,
received some sheets of copper, which were lowered down by a rope-yarn.
As soon as they were quietly landed in the stern of the boat, down came
a bag, which he cast off and laid beside the copper. I was all
astonishment, but still more so when a large bag of something weighing
very heavy was lowered down by a rope after the small bag. A low whistle
was then given, and the words "Monday night" pronounced in a whisper.
Grumble whistled in return, and then, hauling up the grapnel, he told me
to put out the oars and pull, while he took his grapnel on board. We
then pulled down the river again, for the tide had turned, and as soon
as we were clear of the shipping I began to interrogate him.

"Who gave you all these things?"

"Who? Why, that man."

"But what did he give them you for?"

"Why, out of charity, to be sure! But I can't talk now, I've no breath
to spare. Let's pull ashore, and then I'll talk to you."

As we pulled down I observed that a lighter had broken adrift from her
moorings, and was sweeping down the river with the ebb tide.

"There's a lighter adrift," said I.

"Yes," replied Grumble. "I'm too old for that work now; time was.
There'll be pretty pickings as soon as she gets down a little lower. The
Light Horsemen have cut her adrift."

"Light Horsemen! Who are they?"

"Bah! you know nothing. I tell ye again, I haven't no breath to spare; I
can't pull and talk too."

I was convinced in my own mind that Old Grumble had not obtained the
articles in the boat by fair means, and, annoyed that I should have been
made a participator in any dishonest dealings, I was resolved to
question him closely as soon as we landed. There was no one at the
steps, and when we beached the boat I asked him whether he was going to
take the things up to old Nanny's.

"Old Nanny! no. She's no fence now; she used to be a good one, but she
was overhauled once or twice, and nearly sent on the other side of the
water, and, since that, she's satisfied with little articles, sure
profit and no risk."

"What do you mean by a fence?" inquired I.

"Why, don't you know that yet, boy? Well, a _fence_ is one who receives
things that are brought for sale, and never asks no questions."

"Well, but if these things were given you out of charity, as you say,
why should you want to take them up to a fence, as you call it?"

"I tell you what, Jack, I can't be answering all these questions here,
where there may be twenty pair of ears a-listening."

"Well, and if they do listen, what is the harm, if we are doing what is
right?"

"It won't do to argufy here, I tell you. In my opinion, a poor man who
works hard to get some victuals to keep body and soul together is doing
what is right."

"Yes, if he works at an honest livelihood."

"Don't talk so loud about _honesty_; the very word is enough to make
people suspect something not right. I'll tell you all when you come up
to my house; for you see, Jack, you must help me to carry these things
up. D'ye think you can manage this bag of pease? Let's try." Between us
we contrived to get the bag, which weighed about half a hundredweight,
on my back, and I walked off with it, Grumble following me with the
copper and the other small bag, which I afterward found contained copper
nails. When we arrived at his dwelling, which was as dilapidated and
miserable as old Nanny's, he took out his key and fumbled a long while
at the lock; at last he opened it. "You had better stay till I get a
light," said he. In a minute he came with one to the door, and told me
to follow him. I went in, put down the bag, and, some grains falling
out, I took them up.

"Why, this is coffee, Grumble!"

"Well, _pease_ is our name for coffee, _sand_ for sugar, and _vinegar_
for rum, when we get any."

"Well, but, Grumble, I wish to know how you came by these things?"

"I'll tell you, Jack, if you ask everybody how they come by things, you
will have enough to do; but the fact is, the man wants me to sell them
for him."

"Why, you said he gave them to you out of charity!"

"Oh, that was only because I couldn't spare breath to tell you all about
it."

"But why should he lower them down in the dark, if they are his own
property?"

"Jack, I don't ask whose property it is; all I know is that I come by
it honestly. I don't steal it, and I can't prove that the man does. Why,
Jack, if one is to be so nice as that, you can't go into a grocer's shop
to buy sugar, or coffee, or pepper, or indeed into almost any shop, if
you first want to know whether the people have come by the goods
honestly before you buy of them."

"Still, it is so plain that the man must have stolen them."

"Suppose it is; how are so many poor people to find their livelihood and
support their families, if they refuse to get a shilling or two when it
is offered? If we were only to live upon what we get honestly, why, we
should starve; the rich take good care of that by grinding us down so
close. Why, Jack, how many thousands get their living on this river! and
do you think they could all get their living honestly, as you call it?
No; we all plunder one another in this world[4]. You asked me who were
Light Horsemen?--that's a name for one set of people who live by
plunder. That lighter will have a good slice of her cargo out to-night;
for those who cut her adrift know what's on board of her. Then we have
the Heavy Horsemen--they do their work in the daytime, when they go on
board as lumpers to clear the ships. And then we've the Coopers and
Bumboat men, and the Ratcatchers and the Scuffle Hunters, and the River
Pirates; and, last of all, we have the Mudlarkers: all different
professions, Jack; never interfering with each other, and all living by
their wits. I'm too old now; I was a flash pirate once, but I'm now
nearly eighty, and am only fit for a mudlarker."

[Footnote 4: These remarks of Grumble were, at the time, perfectly
correct; it was before the Wet Docks or the River Police was
established. Previously to the West India, London, St. Katharine's, and
other docks having been made, all ships unloaded in the river, and the
depredations were so enormous that Mr. Colquhoun, in his work, has
estimated them at half a million sterling _annually_. At present the
river may be said to be comparatively honest; the police is strict, and
the temptations are removed.]

"But," exclaimed I, with astonishment, "are they not discovered and
punished?"

"That's very seldom, Jack; for you see we have receivers all down the
river; some of them great men, and dining with the mayor and common
council; others in a small way--all sorts, Jack: and then we have what
we call Jew Carts, always ready to take goods inland, where they will
not be looked after. Old Nanny was a receiver and fence in a large way
once."

"Then the only honest people on the river are the watermen."

Here old Grumble chuckled. "Why, Jack, they be the worst of all, for
they be both receivers and thieves. Do you think the watermen live by
their fares? If you do, just wait on the steps one night, and you'll
find that their night work is worth more than the day work is. We all
must live, Jack; and now I've shown you a way by which you can earn more
money in a night than you can in a fortnight by asking for halfpence.
Here's five shillings for you, my boy; and when I want you again I'll
let you know."

Alas! the five shillings, so easily and so unexpectedly earned, did, for
the time, satisfy all my scruples: so easily are we bribed into what is
wrong. I wished Old Grumble a good-night and left him. As I returned
home, I thought of what he had said about night work, and, instead of
making my way to Fisher's Alley, I returned to the landing-steps,
resolving to watch for a time and see what occurred.

I thought of what had passed. I was not satisfied with myself. I thought
of what Anderson would say, and I felt that I had done wrong. And then I
attempted to exculpate myself. I could not prove that the things were
stolen. I did not go with any intent to help in such a business. Old
Grumble had only paid me for my work; but then, why did he pay me so
much money? My conscience told me that it was because the dealings were
unfair. I could not persuade myself that I was right. I looked up at the
heavens--for it was a clear night, and there was a very bright star just
above me; and as I looked at it it appeared as if it were an eye beaming
down upon me, and piercing into my breast. I turned away from it, and
then looked at it again--still it had the same appearance. I thought it
was the eye of God--I trembled, and I resolved to reveal the whole to
Anderson the next day, when I heard the sound of oars. I looked in the
direction, and perceived a wherry with two men pulling in. I was down on
the steps, under the shadow of the wall, and they did not see me. They
landed, and handed out of the wherry three large and full canvas bags.
"It's more than we can carry," said the voice of a waterman I well knew;
"we must leave one in the boat; and be quick, for they are on our scent.
Hollo! who's that? what are you doing here? Poor Jack, I declare."

"Well, mayn't I have a little night work as well as you?"

"Oh! you've come to that, have you?" replied he. "Well, as you're
waiting for something else, I suppose you could not help us with one of
these bags?"

"Yes, I can," replied I, forgetting all my resolutions; "put it on my
back, if it's not too heavy."

"No, no; you're stout enough to carry it. I say, Jack, can you tell us,
does old Nanny fence again, or has she given it up?"

"I believe she does not," replied I.

"Well," said he, "just put the question to her to-morrow morning, for
she used to be a good 'un; now follow us."

I walked after them with my load until we came to a by-street; at the
shutters of a shop they rapped three times on the iron bar outside which
fixed them up; the door was opened, and we put the bags down in the
passage, walked out again without a word, and the door was immediately
closed.

"Well, Jack," said the waterman, "I suppose we must tip handsome for the
first time: here's ten shillings for you, and we'll let you know when we
want you to be on the lookout for us."

Ten shillings! and five before--fifteen shillings! I felt as I were a
rich man; all scruples of conscience were, for the time, driven away. I
hurried home rattling the silver in my pocket, and opening the door
softly, I crept to bed. Did I say my prayers that night? No!!


CHAPTER NINETEEN

     I am tempted again--My Pride is roused, and my Course of Life is
     changed in consequence.


I passed a dreaming restless night, and woke early. I recalled all that
had passed, and I felt very much dissatisfied with myself; the fifteen
shillings, with the added prospect of receiving more, did not yield me
the satisfaction I had anticipated. From what the men had said about old
Nanny I thought that I would go and see her; and why? because I wished
support against my own convictions. If I had not been actuated by such a
feeling I should, as usual, have gone to old Anderson. When I went down
to breakfast I felt confused, and I hardly dared to meet the clear
bright eye of my little sister, and I wished the fifteen shillings out
of my pocket. That I might appear to her and my mother as if I were not
guilty, I swaggered; my sister was surprised, and my mother justifiably
angry. As soon as breakfast was over, I hastened to old Nanny's.

"Well, Jack," said she, "what brings you here so early?"

"Why, mother, I was desired to ask you a question last night--between
ourselves."

"Well, why don't you ask it, since it's between ourselves?" replied she,
with surprise.

"Some of the people want to know if you _fence_ now?"

"Jack," said old Nanny, harshly, "who asked you that question, and how
did you fall into their company? Tell me directly; I will know."

"Why, mother, is there any harm in it?" replied I, confused and holding
down my head.

"Harm in it! Ask your own conscience, Jack, whether there's harm in it.
Why do you not look me in the face like an honest boy? Would they have
dared to put that question to you, if you had not been a party to their
evil deeds, Jack?" continued she, shaking her head. "I thought better of
you; now you have filled me full of sorrow."

I was smitten to the heart at this rebuke from a quarter whence I did
not expect it; but my heart was still rebellious, and I would not
acknowledge what I felt. I thought to turn the tables, and replied,
"Why, mother, at all events they say that _once_ you were a real good
one."

"Is it indeed gone so far?" replied she. "Poor boy! poor boy! Yes, Jack,
to my shame be it spoken, I once did receive things and buy them when
they were not honestly come by, and now I'm rebuked by a child. But,
Jack, I was almost mad then; I had that which would have turned any
one's brain--I was reckless, wretched; but I don't do so any more. Even
now I am a poor sinful wretch--I know it; but I'm not so crazy as I was
then. I have done so, Jack, more's the shame for me, and I wish I could
recall it; but, Jack, we can't recall the past. Oh, that we could!"

Here old Nanny pressed her hands to her temples, and for some time was
silent. At last she continued, "Why did I love you, Jack?--Because you
were honest. Why did I lend you money--I, an old miserly wretch, who
have been made to dote on money; I, who have never spent a shilling for
my own comfort for these ten years?--But because you were honest. Why
have I longed the whole day to see you, and have cared only for
you?--Because I thought you honest, Jack. I don't care how soon I die
now. I thought the world too bad to live in; you made me think better of
it. Oh! Jack, Jack, how has this come to pass? How long have you known
these bad people?"

"Why, mother," replied I, much affected, "only last night."

"Only last night? Tell me all about it; tell the truth, dear boy, do."

I could hold out no longer, and I told her everything that had passed.

"Jack," said she, "I'm not fit to talk to you; I'm a bad old woman, and
you may say I don't practice what I preach; but, Jack, if you love me,
go to Peter Anderson and tell him everything. Don't be afraid; only be
afraid of doing what is wrong. Now, Jack, you must go."

"I will, I will," replied I, bursting into tears.

"Do, do, dear Jack! God bless your heart, I wish I could cry that way."

I walked away quite humiliated; at last I ran, I was so eager to go to
Anderson and confess everything. I found him in his cabin--I attempted
to speak, but I could not--I pulled out the money, put it on the table,
and then I knelt down and sobbed on his knee.

"What is all this, Jack?" said Anderson, calmly; but I did not reply. "I
think I know, Jack," said he, after a pause. "You have been doing
wrong."

"Yes, yes," replied I, sobbing.

"Well, my dear boy, wait till you can speak, and then tell me all about
it."

As soon as I could I did. Anderson heard me without interruption.

"Jack," said he, when I had done speaking, "the temptation" (pointing to
the money) "has been very great; you did not resist at the moment, but
you have, fortunately, seen your error in good time, for the money is
still here. I have little to say to you, for your own feelings convince
me that it is needless. Do you think that you can read a little? Then
read this." Anderson turned to the parable of the Prodigal Son, which I
read to him. "And now," said he, turning over the leaves, "here is one
verse more." I read it: "There is more joy over one sinner that
repenteth, than over ninety and nine that need no repentance." "Be
careful, therefore, my dear boy, let this be a warning to you; think
well of it, for you have escaped a great danger. The money shall be
returned. Go now, my child, to your employment; and if you do receive
only halfpence, you will have the satisfaction of feeling that they are
honestly obtained."

I can assure the reader that this was a lesson which I never forgot; it
was, however, succeeded by another variety of temptation, which might
have proved more dangerous to a young and ardent spirit, had it not
ended as it did, in changing the course of my destiny and throwing me
into a new path of action. To this I shall now refer.

Hardly a month passed but we received additional pensioners into the
hospital. Among others, a man was sent to the hospital who went by the
name of Sam Spicer. I say went by the name, as it was not the custom for
the seamen to give their real names when they were entered or pressed
into the service, and of course they were discharged into the hospital
by the same name which they bore on the ship's books. Spicer was upward
of six feet in height, very large boned, and must, when he was in his
prime, have been a man of prodigious strength. When he was admitted to
the hospital he was nearly sixty years of age; his hair was black and
gray mixed, his complexion very dark, and his countenance fierce and
unprepossessing. He went by the name of Black Sam, on account of his
appearance. He had lost his right hand in a frigate action, and to the
stump he had fixed a sort of socket, into which he screwed his knife and
the various articles which he wished to make use of--sometimes a file,
sometimes a saw--having had every article made to fit into the socket,
for he had been an armorer on board ship, and was very handy at such
work. He was, generally speaking, very morose and savage to everybody,
seldom entered into conversation, but sat apart, as if thinking, with a
frown upon his countenance, and his eyes, surmounted with bushy
eyebrows, fixed upon the ground. The pensioners who belonged to the same
ward said that he talked in his sleep, and from what they could collect
at those times he must have been a pirate; but no one dared to speak to
him on the subject, for more than once he had been punished for striking
those who had offended him; indeed, he nearly killed one old man who was
jesting with him when he was at work, having made a stab at him with his
knife screwed in his socket, but his foot slipped and the blow missed.
Spicer was brought up before the council for this offense, and would
have been discharged had he not declared that he had done it only by way
of a joke to frighten the man; and, as no one else was present, it could
not be proved to the contrary. For some reason or another, which I could
not comprehend, Spicer appeared to have taken a liking to me; he would
call me to him, and tell me stories about the West Indies and the
Spanish Main, which I listened to very eagerly, for they were to me
very interesting. But he seldom, if ever, spoke to me inside of the
hospital; it was always when I was at the steps minding my vocation,
where he would come down and lean over the rail at the top of the wharf.
He made and gave me a boat-hook, which I found very convenient. He had a
great deal of information, and as the ships came up the river he would
point out the flags of the different nations, tell me where they traded
from, and what their cargoes probably consisted of. If they had no
ensign he would tell by their build and the cut of their sails what
nation they belonged to, pointing out to me the differences, which I
soon began to perceive. He had been in every part of the world, and
scarcely a day passed in which I did not gain from him some amusing or
useful information. Indeed, I became so fond of his company that Peter
Anderson spoke to me on the subject, and asked me what Spicer talked
about. I told him, and he replied:

"Well, Jack, I daresay that he is a very pleasant companion to one who,
like you, is so anxious for information, and I have nothing to say
against him, for we have no right to listen to foolish reports which may
probably have been raised from his savage appearance. Still, I confess I
do not like the man, as he is decidedly of a violent temper. As long as
he talks to you about what you say he does, there is no harm done; but
when once he says anything which you think is wrong, promise me to let
me know; and even now, if you will take my advice, you will not be so
intimate with him."

A little while afterward my father and Ben the Whaler both spoke to me
on the same subject, but with much less reservation.

My father said, "Jack, I don't like to see you always in company with
that old pirate, no good can come of it; so haul off a little further
for the future."

And Ben told me, "That a man who couldn't sleep o' nights without
talking of killing people must have a bad conscience, and something
lying heavy on his soul. There's an old saying, Jack, 'Tell me whose
company you keeps, and I'll tell you what sort of a chap you be.' You've
the character of a good honest boy; steer clear of Sam Spicer, or you'll
lose it."

Admonitions from all those whom I loved were not without their effect,
and I made a resolution to be less intimate with Spicer. But it was
difficult to do so, as I was obliged to be at the landing-steps, and
could not prevent his coming there.

I acknowledge that it was a severe privation to me to follow the
injunctions given to me, for I would listen for hours to the thrilling
narratives, the strange and almost incredible accounts of battles,
incidents, and wild adventures, which this man Spicer would relate to
me; and when I thought over them I felt that the desire to rove was
becoming more strong within me every day. One morning I said to him that
"I had a great mind to go on board of a man-of-war."

"On board of a man-of-war?" replied Spicer; "you'd soon be sick enough
of that. Why, who would be at the beck and nod of others, ordered here,
called there, by boy midshipmen; bullied by lieutenants, flogged by
captains; have all the work and little of the pay, all the fighting and
less of the prize-money; and, after having worn out your life in hard
service, be sent here as a great favor, to wear a cocked hat and get a
shilling a week for your 'baccy? Pshaw, boy! that's not life."

"Then, what is life?' inquired I.

"What is life? Why, to sail in a clipper with a jolly crew and a roving
commission; take your prizes, share and share alike, of gold-dust and
doubloons."

"But what sort of vessel must that be, Spicer?"

"What sort? why--a letter of marque--a privateer--a cruise on the
Spanish Main--that's life. Many's the jolly day I've seen in those
latitudes, where men-of-war do not bring vessels to and press the best
men out of them. There the sun's warm, and the sky and the sea are deep
blue, and the corals grow like forests underneath, and there are sandy
coves and cool caves for retreat--and where you may hide your gold till
you want it--ay, and your sweethearts too, if you have any."

"I thought privateers always sent their prizes into port, to be
condemned?"

"Yes, in the Channel and these seas they do, but not down there--it's
too far off. We condemn the vessels ourselves, and share the money on
the capstan-head."



* HOLMES commented on the unsuccessful experience of NARA in attempting
to run image-conversion software or to exchange between applications:
What are supposedly TIFF files go into other software that is supposed
to be able to accept TIFF but cannot recognize the format and cannot
deal with it, and thus renders the exchange useless. Re text conversion,
he noted the different recognition rates obtained by substituting the
make and model of scanners in NARA's recent test of an "intelligent"
character-recognition product for a new company.

In the selection of hardware and software, HOLMES argued, software
no longer constitutes the overriding factor it did until about a
year ago; rather it is perhaps important to look at both now

.

* Danny Cohen and Alan Katz of the University of Southern California
Information Sciences Institute began circulating as an Internet
RFC (RFC 1314) about a month ago a standard for a TIFF interchange
format for Internet distribution of monochrome bit-mapped images,
which LYNCH said he believed would be used as a de facto standard

.

* FLEISCHHAUER's impression from hearing these reports and thinking
about AM's experience was that there is considerable flux concerning
available hardware and software solutions.

HOOTON agreed and commented at the same time on ZIDAR's statement
that the equipment employed affects the results produced.

One cannot draw a complete conclusion by saying it is difficult or impossible
to perform OCR from scanning microfilm, for example, with that device,
that set of parameters, and system requirements, because numerous other
people are accomplishing just that, using other components,
perhaps. HOOTON opined that both the hardware and the software were
highly important. Most of the problems discussed today have been solved
in numerous different ways by other people. Though it is good to be
cognizant of various experiences, this is not to say that it will
always be thus.

* At NAL, the through-put rate of the scanning process for paper, page
by page, performing OCR, ranges from 300 to 600 pages per day; not
performing OCR is considerably faster, although how much faster is not
known. This is for scanning from bound books, which is much slower.

* WATERS commented on window management questions: DEC proposed an X-Windows
solution which was problematical for two reasons. One was POB's requirement
to be able to manipulate images on the workstation and bring them
down to the workstation itself and the other was network usage.

******
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
THOMA * Illustration of deficiencies in scanning and storage process *
Image quality in this process * Different costs entailed by better
image quality * Techniques for overcoming various de-ficiencies:
fixed thresholding, dynamic thresholding, dithering, image merge *
Page edge effects * +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

George THOMA, chief, Communications Engineering Branch, National
Library of Medicine (NLM), illustrated several of the deficiencies
discussed by the previous speakers.

He introduced the topic of special problems by noting the advantages of
electronic imaging.

For example, it is regenerable because it is a coded file, and
real-time quality control is possible with electronic capture,
whereas in photographic capture it is not.

One of the difficulties discussed in the scanning and storage process
was image quality which, without belaboring the obvious, means
different things for maps, medical X-rays, or broadcast television.

In the case of documents, THOMA said, image quality boils down to
legibility of the textual parts, and fidelity in the case of gray
or color photo print-type material.

Legibility boils down to scan density, the standard in most cases
being 300 dpi.

Increasing the resolution with scanners that perform 600 or 1200
dpi, however, comes at a cost.

Better image quality entails at least four different kinds of costs:
1) equipment costs, because the CCD (i.e., charge-couple device)
with greater number of elements costs more; 2) time costs that
translate to the actual capture costs, because manual labor is
involved (the time is also dependent on the fact that more data has
to be moved around in the machine in the scanning or network devices
that perform the scanning as well as the storage); 3) media costs,
because at high resolutions larger files have to be stored; and 4)
transmission costs, because there is just more data to be
transmitted.

But while resolution takes care of the issue of legibility in image
quality, other deficiencies have to do with contrast and elements
on the page scanned or the image that needed to be removed or
clarified.

Thus, THOMA proceeded to illustrate various deficiencies, how they
are manifested, and several techniques to overcome them.

Fixed thresholding was the first technique described, suitable for
black-and-white text, when the contrast does not vary over the page.
One can have many different threshold levels in scanning devices.

Thus, THOMA offered an example of extremely poor contrast, which
resulted from the fact that the stock was a heavy red. This is the
sort of image that when microfilmed fails to provide any legibility
whatsoever. Fixed thresholding is the way to change the black-to-red
contrast to the desired black-to-white contrast.

Other examples included material that had been browned or yellowed by
age. This was also a case of contrast deficiency, and correction was
done by fixed thresholding. A final example boils down to the same
thing, slight variability, but it is not significant.

Fixed thresholding solves this problem as well. The microfilm equivalent
is certainly legible, but it comes with dark areas. Though THOMA did
not have a slide of the microfilm in this case, he did show the
reproduced electronic image.

When one has variable contrast over a page or the lighting over the page
area varies, especially in the case where a bound volume has light
shining on it, the image must be processed by a dynamic thresholding
scheme. One scheme, dynamic averaging, allows the threshold level not
to be fixed but to be recomputed for every pixel from the neighboring
characteristics. The neighbors of a pixel determine where the threshold
should be set for that pixel.

THOMA showed an example of a page that had been made deficient by a variety
of techniques, including a burn mark, coffee stains, and a yellow
marker.

Application of a fixed-thresholding scheme, THOMA argued, might take
care of several deficiencies on the page but not all of them.

Performing the calculation for a dynamic threshold setting, however,
removes most of the deficiencies so that at least the text is
legible.

Another problem is representing a gray level with black-and-white
pixels by a process known as dithering or electronic screening.

But dithering does not provide good image quality for pure
black-and-white textual material.

THOMA illustrated this point with examples. Although its suitability
for photoprint is the reason for electronic screening or dithering,
it cannot be used for every compound image.

In the document that was distributed by CXP, THOMA noticed that the
dithered image of the IEEE test chart evinced some deterioration
in the text.

He presented an extreme example of deterioration in the text in which
compounded documents had to be set right by other techniques.

The technique illustrated by the present example was an image merge in
which the page is scanned twice and the settings go from fixed threshold
to the dithering matrix; the resulting images are merged to give
the best results with each technique.

THOMA illustrated how dithering is also used in nonphotographic or nonprint
materials with an example of a grayish page from a medical text, which
was reproduced to show all of the gray that appeared in the original.

Dithering provided a reproduction of all the gray in the original
of another example from the same text.

THOMA finally illustrated the problem of bordering, or page-edge,
effects.

Books and bound volumes that are placed on a photocopy machine or
a scanner produce page-edge effects that are undesirable for two
reasons: 1) the aesthetics of the image; after all, if the image
is to be preserved, one does not necessarily want to keep all of
its deficiencies; 2) compression (with the bordering problem THOMA
illustrated, the compression ratio deteriorated tremendously).

One way to eliminate this more serious problem is to have the operator
at the point of scanning window the part of the image that is desirable
and automatically turn all of the pixels out of that picture to white.

******
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
FLEISCHHAUER * AM's experience with scanning bound materials *
Dithering * +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
reported AM's experience with scanning bound materials, which he
likened to the problems involved in using photocopying machines.

Very few devices in the industry offer book-edge scanning, let alone book
cradles. The problem may be unsolvable, FLEISCHHAUER said, because a
large enough market does not exist for a preservation-quality scanner.
AM is using a Kurzweil scanner, which is a book-edge scanner now
sold by Xerox.

Devoting the remainder of his brief presentation to dithering,
FLEISCHHAUER related AM's experience with a contractor who was using
unsophisticated equipment and software to reduce moire patterns
from printed halftones.

AM took the same image and used the dithering algorithm that forms
part of the same Kurzweil Xerox scanner; it disguised moire patterns
much more effectively.

FLEISCHHAUER also observed that dithering produces a binary file which
is useful for numerous purposes, for example, printing it on a laser
printer without having to "re-halftone" it. But it tends to defeat
efficient compression, because the very thing that dithers to reduce
moire patterns also tends to work against compression schemes. AM
thought the difference in image quality was worth it.

******

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
DISCUSSION * Relative use as a criterion for POB's selection of
books to be converted into digital form *
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

During the discussion period, WATERS noted that one of the criteria
for selecting books among the 10,000 to be converted into digital
image form would be how much relative use they would receive--a
subject still requiring evaluation.

The challenge will be to understand whether coherent bodies of
material will increase usage or whether POB should seek material
that is being used, scan that, and make it more accessible. POB might
decide to digitize materials that are already heavily used, in order
to make them more accessible and decrease wear on them.

Another approach would be to provide a large body of intellectually
coherent material that may be used more in digital form than it is
currently used in microfilm.

     POB would seek material that was out of copyright.

******
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
BARONAS * Origin and scope of AIIM * Types of documents produced in
AIIM's standards program * Domain of AIIM's standardization work * AIIM's
structure * TC 171 and MS23 * Electronic image management standards *
Categories of EIM standardization where AIIM standards are being developed
* +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Jean BARONAS, senior manager, Department of Standards and Technology,
Association for Information and Image Management (AIIM), described
the not-for-profit association and the national and international
programs for standardization in which AIIM is active.

Accredited for twenty-five years as the nation's standards development
organization for document image management, AIIM began life in a
library community developing microfilm standards. Today the association
maintains both its library and business-image management standardization
activities--and has moved into electronic image-management standardization
(EIM).

BARONAS defined the program's scope. AIIM deals with: 1) the
terminology of standards and of the technology it uses; 2) methods
of measurement for the systems, as well as quality; 3) methodologies
for users to evaluate and measure quality; 4) the features of
apparatus used to manage and edit images; and 5) the procedures
used to manage images.

BARONAS noted that three types of documents are produced in the AIIM
standards program: the first two, accredited by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), are standards and standard recommended
practices. Recommended practices differ from standards in that they
contain more tutorial information. A technical report is not an ANSI
standard. Because AIIM's policies and procedures for developing
standards are approved by ANSI, its standards are labeled ANSI/AIIM,
followed by the number and title of the standard.

BARONAS then illustrated the domain of AIIM's standardization work.
For example, AIIM is the administrator of the U.S.

Technical Advisory Group (TAG) to the International Standards Organization's
(ISO) technical committee, TC l7l Micrographics and Optical Memories for
Document and Image Recording, Storage, and Use. AIIM officially works
through ANSI in the international standardization process.

BARONAS described AIIM's structure, including its board of directors,
its standards board of twelve individuals active in the image-management
industry, its strategic planning and legal admissibility task forces,
and its National Standards Council, which is comprised of the members
of a number of organizations who vote on every AIIM standard before
it is published.

BARONAS pointed out that AIIM's liaisons deal with numerous other standards
developers, including the optical disk community, office and
publishing systems, image-codes-and-character set committees, and
the National Information Standards Organization (NISO).

BARONAS illustrated the procedures of TC l7l, which covers all
aspects of image management.

When AIIM's national program has conceptualized a new project, it is
usually submitted to the international level, so that the member
countries of TC l7l can simultaneously work on the development of
the standard or the technical report.

BARONAS also illustrated a classic microfilm standard, MS23, which deals
with numerous imaging concepts that apply to electronic imaging.
Originally developed in the l970s, revised in the l980s, and revised
again in l991, this standard is scheduled for another revision.

MS23 is an active standard whereby users may propose new density ranges
and new methods of evaluating film images in the standard's
revision.

BARONAS detailed several electronic image-management standards, for
instance, ANSI/AIIM MS44, a quality-control guideline for scanning
8.5" by 11" black-and-white office documents.

This standard is used with the IEEE fax image--a continuous tone photographic
image with gray scales, text, and several continuous tone pictures--and
AIIM test target number 2, a representative document used in office
document management.

BARONAS next outlined the four categories of EIM standardization in which
AIIM standards are being developed: transfer and retrieval,
evaluation, optical disc and document scanning applications, and
design and conversion of documents.

She detailed several of the main projects of each: 1) in the category of
image transfer and retrieval, a bi-level image transfer format,
ANSI/AIIM MS53, which is a proposed standard that describes a file
header for image transfer between unlike systems when the images
are compressed using G3 and G4 compression; 2) the category of image
evaluation, which includes the AIIM-proposed TR26 tutorial on image
resolution (this technical report will treat the differences and
similarities between classical or photographic and electronic
imaging); 3) design and conversion, which includes a proposed
technical report called "Forms Design Optimization for EIM" (this
report considers how general-purpose business forms can be best
designed so that scanning is optimized; reprographic characteristics
such as type, rules, background, tint, and color will likewise be
treated in the technical report); 4) disk and document scanning
applications includes a project a) on planning platters and disk
management, b) on generating an application profile for EIM when
images are stored and distributed on CD-ROM, and c) on evaluating
SCSI2, and how a common command set can be generated for SCSI2 so
that document scanners are more easily integrated.

(ANSI/AIIM MS53 will also apply to compressed images.)

******
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
BATTIN * The implications of standards for preservation * A major obstacle
to successful cooperation * A hindrance to access in the digital
environment * Standards a double-edged sword for those concerned
with the preservation of the human record * Near-term prognosis for
reliable archival standards * Preservation concerns for electronic
media * Need for reconceptualizing our preservation principles *
Standards in the real world and the politics of reproduction * Need
to redefine the concept of archival and to begin to think in terms
of life cycles * Cooperation and the La Guardia Eight * Concerns
generated by discussions on the problems of preserving text and
image * General principles to be adopted in a world without standards
* +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Patricia BATTIN, president, the Commission on Preservation and
Access (CPA), addressed the implications of standards for preservation.

She listed several areas where the library profession and the analog world
of the printed book had made enormous contributions over the past
hundred years--for example, in bibliographic formats, binding
standards, and, most important, in determining what constitutes
longevity or archival quality.

Although standards have lightened the preservation burden through
the development of national and international collaborative programs,
nevertheless, a pervasive mistrust of other people's standards
remains a major obstacle to successful cooperation, BATTIN said.

The zeal to achieve perfection, regardless of the cost, has hindered
rather than facilitated access in some instances, and in the digital
environment, where no real standards exist, has brought an ironically
just reward.

BATTIN argued that standards are a double-edged sword for those
concerned with the preservation of the human record, that is, the
provision of access to recorded knowledge in a multitude of media
as far into the future as possible.

Standards are essential to facilitate interconnectivity and access,
but, BATTIN said, as LYNCH pointed out yesterday, if set too soon
they can hinder creativity, expansion of capability, and the
broadening of access.

The characteristics of standards for digital imagery differ radically
from those for analog imagery.

And the nature of digital technology implies continuing volatility and
change.

To reiterate, precipitous standard-setting can inhibit creativity,
but delayed standard-setting results in chaos.

Since in BATTIN'S opinion the near-term prognosis for reliable archival
standards, as defined by librarians in the analog world, is poor,
two alternatives remain: standing pat with the old technology, or
reconceptualizing.

Preservation concerns for electronic media fall into two general
domains.

One is the continuing assurance of access to knowledge originally
generated, stored, disseminated, and used in electronic form.

This domain contains several subdivisions, including 1) the closed,
proprietary systems discussed the previous day, bundled information
such as electronic journals and government agency records, and
electronically produced or captured raw data; and 2) the application
of digital technologies to the reformatting of materials originally
published on a deteriorating analog medium such as acid paper or
videotape.

The preservation of electronic media requires a reconceptualizing
of our preservation principles during a volatile, standardless
transition which may last far longer than any of us envision today.

BATTIN urged the necessity of shifting focus from assessing, measuring,
and setting standards for the permanence of the medium to the concept of
managing continuing access to information stored on a variety of media
and requiring a variety of ever-changing hardware and software for
access--a fundamental shift for the library profession.

BATTIN offered a primer on how to move forward with reasonable
confidence in a world without standards.

Her comments fell roughly into two sections:
1) standards in the real world and 2) the politics of reproduction.

In regard to real-world standards, BATTIN argued the need to redefine
the concept of archive and to begin to think in terms of life cycles.

In the past, the naive assumption that paper would last forever produced
a cavalier attitude toward life cycles.

The transient nature of the electronic media has compelled people
to recognize and accept upfront the concept of life cycles in place
of permanency.

Digital standards have to be developed and set in a cooperative context
to ensure efficient exchange of information. Moreover, during this
transition period, greater flexibility concerning how concepts
such as backup copies and archival copies in the CXP are defined
is necessary, or the opportunity to move forward will be lost.

In terms of cooperation, particularly in the university setting,
BATTIN also argued the need to avoid going off in a hundred different
directions. The CPA has catalyzed a small group of universities called
the La Guardia Eight--because La Guardia Airport is where meetings take
place--Harvard, Yale, Cornell, Princeton, Penn State, Tennessee, Stanford,
and USC, to develop a digital preservation consortium to look at
all these issues and develop de facto standards as we move along,
instead of waiting for something that is officially blessed.

Continuing to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the
digital environment, BATTIN said, will effectively lead to forfeiture
of the benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship.

Under the second rubric, the politics of reproduction, BATTIN reiterated
an oft-made argument concerning the electronic library, namely,
that it is more difficult to transform than to create, and nowhere
is that belief expressed more dramatically than in the conversion
of brittle books to new media.

Preserving information published in electronic media involves making sure
the information remains accessible and that digital information
is not lost through reproduction.

In the analog world of photocopies and microfilm, the issue of fidelity
to the original becomes paramount, as do issues of "Whose fidelity?"

and "Whose original?"
BATTIN elaborated these arguments with a few examples from a recent
study conducted by the CPA on the problems of preserving text and
image.
Bramble stated his
willingness to receive and take charge of me, desiring that I would hold
myself in readiness to be picked up at a minute's warning, and he would
call for me the first time that he took a vessel up the river. A letter
communicating this intelligence was forthwith dispatched by my mother to
Sir Hercules, who sent a short reply, stating that if I conducted myself
properly he would not lose sight of me. This letter, however, very much
increased the family consequence in Fisher's Alley, for my mother did
not fail to show it to everybody, and everybody was anxious to see the
handwriting of a real baronet.

About a week afterward I went to the shop of the widow St. Felix to
purchase some tobacco for my father, when she said to me, "So, Jack--or
Tom--as I hear you request to be called now--you are going to leave us?"

"Yes," replied I, "and I shall be sorry to leave you, you have been so
kind to me."

"A little kindness goes a great way with some people, Tom, and that's
the case with you, for you've a grateful heart. You're to be a pilot, I
hear; well, Tom, I've a present to make you, which you will find very
useful in your profession, and which will make you think of me
sometimes. Stop a moment till I come down again."

The widow went upstairs, and when she came down held in her hand a
telescope, or spy-glass, as sailors generally call them. It was about
two feet long, covered with white leather, and apparently had been well
preserved.

"Now, Tom, this is what a pilot ought not to be without, and if what was
said by the person to whom it belonged is true, it is an excellent
spy-glass; so now accept it from your loving friend, and long may you
live to peep through it."

"Thank you, thank you," replied I, delighted, as Mrs. St. Felix put it
into my hands. I surveyed it all over, pulled out the tube, and then
said to her, "Who did it belong to?"

"Tom," replied the widow, "that's a sad trick you have of asking
questions; it's quite sufficient that it is mine, and that I give it to
you--is it not?"

"Yes," replied I, "but you're the only person who says that I ask too
many questions. Why, here's a name, F.I."

The widow stretched herself over the counter with a sudden spring, and
snatched the telescope out of my hand. When I looked at her she stood
pale and trembling.

"Why, what is the matter?" inquired I.

She put her hand to her side, as if in great pain, and for some seconds
could not speak.

"Tom, I never knew that there was a name on the telescope; the name must
not be known, that's the truth; you shall have it this evening, but you
must go away now--do, that's a dear good boy."

The widow turned to walk into the back parlor, with the telescope in her
hand, and I obeyed her injunctions in silence and wondering. That there
was a mystery about her was certain, and I felt very sorrowful, not that
I did not know the secret, but that I could not be of service to her.
That evening the telescope was brought to my mother's house by fat Jane.
I percieved that the portion of the brass rim upon which the name had
been cut with a knife, for it had not been engraved, as I thought, had
been carefully filed down, so that not a vestige of the letters
appeared.

The next morning I was down at the steps long before breakfast, that I
might try my new present. Bill Freeman was there, and he showed me how
to adjust the focus. I amused myself looking at the vessels which were
working up and down the Reach, and so much was I delighted that I quite
forgot how time passed, and lost my breakfast. Every one asked to have a
peep through the telescope, and every one declared that it was an
excellent glass; at last Spicer came up to where I stood.

"Well, Jack," said he, "what have you there--a spy-glass? Let's have a
look; I'm a good judge of one, I can tell you."

I handed the telescope over to him; he looked through it for some time.

"A first-rate glass, Jack" (I was oftener called Jack than Tom at that
time); "I never knew but one equal to it. Where did you get it?"

I don't exactly know why, but perhaps the mystery evident in the widow,
and the cautions I had received against Spicer, combined together,
induced me not to answer the question.

"It's odd," observed Spicer, who was now examining the outside of the
telescope; "I could almost swear to it." He then looked at the small
brass rim where the name had been, and perceived that it had been
erased. "Now I'm positive! Jack, where did you get this glass?"

"It was made a present to me," replied I.

"Come here," said Spicer, leading me apart from the others standing by.
"Now tell me directly," and Spicer spoke in an authoritative tone, "who
gave you this glass?"

I really was somewhat afraid of Spicer, who had gained much power over
me. I dared not say that I would not tell him, and I did not like to
tell a lie. I thought that if I told the truth I might somehow or
another injure Mrs. St. Felix, and I therefore answered evasively, "It
was sent to me as a present by a lady."

"Oh!" replied Spicer, who had heard of Sir Hercules and his lady, "so
the _lady_ sent it to you? It's very odd," continued he; "I could take
my oath that I've had that glass in my hand a hundred times."

"Indeed!" replied I. "Where?"

But Spicer did not answer me; he had fallen into one of his dark moods,
and appeared as if recalling former events to his mind. He still kept
possession of the glass, and I was afraid that he would not return it,
for I tried to take it softly out of his hand, and he would not let go.
He remained in this way about a minute, when I perceived my father and
Ben the Whaler coming up, at which I was delighted.

"Father," said I, as they came near, "come and try my new spy-glass."

Spicer started, and released the telescope, when I laid hold of it and
put it into my father's hands. As neither my father nor Ben would ever
speak to him, Spicer, with a lowering brow, walked away. After my father
had examined the glass and praised it, he very naturally asked me where
I obtained it. After what had passed with Spicer I was so fearful of his
discovering, by other people, by whom the glass had been given to me,
that I replied again, in the hearing of everybody, "A lady, father; you
may easily guess who."

"Well," replied my father, "I never thought that her ladyship could have
been so generous. I take it very kindly of her."

I was delighted at my father falling so easily into the mistake. As for
my mother and Virginia, they were neither of them present when Jane
brought the telescope to me, or I certainly should have stated, without
reservation, to whom I had been indebted. I hardly could decide whether
I would go to the widow and tell her what had occurred; but, upon some
reflection, as she had accused me of asking too many questions, and
might suppose that I wished to obtain her secrets, I determined upon
saying nothing about it.

For a week I occupied myself wholly with my telescope, and I became
perfectly master of it, or rather quite used to it, which is of some
importance. I avoided Spicer, always leaving the steps when I perceived
him approaching, although once or twice he beckoned to me. At the
expiration of the week a message was brought by a waterman from Philip
Bramble, stating that he should pass Greenwich in a day or two, being
about to take down a West Indiaman then lying below London Bridge. My
clothes were therefore then packed up in readiness, and I went to bid
farewell to my limited acquaintance.

I called upon old Nanny, who was now quite strong again. I had before
acquainted her with my future prospects.

"Well, Jack," says she, "and so you're going away? I don't think you
were quite right to give up a situation where you gained so many
halfpence every day, and only for touching your cap; however, you know
best. I shall have no more bargains after you are gone, that's certain.
But, Jack, you'll be on board of vessels coming from the East and West
Indies, and all other parts of the world, and they have plenty of pretty
things on board, such as shells, and empty bottles, and hard biscuit,
and bags of oakum; and, Jack, they will give them to you for nothing,
for sailors don't care what they give away when they come from a long
voyage; and so mind you beg for me as much as you can, that's a good
boy; but don't take live monkeys or those things, they eat so much. You
may bring me a parrot, I think I could sell one, and that don't cost
much to feed. Do you understand, Jack? Will you do this for me?"

"I don't know whether I can do all you wish, but depend upon it, mother,
I won't forget you."

"That's enough, Jack, you'll keep your word; and now, is there any nice
thing that I can give you out of my shop, as a keepsake, Jack?"

"Why, no, mother, I thank you--nothing."

"Think of something, Jack," replied old Nanny; "you must have
something."

"Well, then, mother, you know I like reading; will you give me the old
book that I was reading when I sat up with you one night?"

"Yes, Jack, and welcome; what book is it? I don't know--I can't see to
read large print without spectacles, and I broke mine many years ago."

"Why do you not buy another pair?"

"Another pair, Jack? Spectacles cost money. I've no money; and as I
never read, I don't want spectacles. Go in and fetch the book; it's
yours and welcome."

I went in and brought out the Bunyan's "Pilgrim's Progress" which I
before mentioned. "This is it, mother."

"Yes, yes, I recollect now, it's a very pretty book. What's it about,
Jack? I can't see myself: never mind, take it, Jack, and don't forget
your promise."

I wished old Nanny good-by, and took the book home, which I gave into
Virginia's care, as I wished her to read it. The next morning, at
daybreak, I was summoned; the ship was dropping down the river. I bade
farewell to my little sister, who wept on my shoulder; to my mother, who
hardly condescended to answer me. My father helped me down with my
luggage, which was not very heavy; and Anderson and old Ben accompanied
us to the landing-steps; and having bid them all farewell, besides many
others of my friends who were there, I stepped into the boat sent for
me, and quitted Greenwich for my new avocation on the 6th of October,
1799, being then, as Anderson had calculated, precisely thirteen years
and seven months old.


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

     In which a Story is begun, and not finished, which I think the
     Reader will regret as much as, at the time, I did.


The boat was soon alongside of the West Indiaman, which had been tiding
it down Limehouse Reach under her topsails, there being but little wind,
and that contrary; but now that she had arrived to Greenwich Reach she
had braced up, with her head the right way. My box was handed up the
side, and I made my appearance on the deck soon afterward, with my
telescope in my hand.

"Are you the lad for whom the pilot sent the boat?" inquired a man, whom
I afterward found to be the second mate.

"Yes," replied I.

"Well, there he is abaft, in a P-jacket," said he, walking to the
gangway, and directing the men to drop the boat astern.

I looked aft, and perceived my future master talking with the captain of
the vessel. Philip Bramble was a spare man, about five feet seven inches
high, he had on his head a low-crowned tarpaulin hat, a short P-jacket
(so called from the abbreviation of _pilot's_ jacket) reached down to
just above his knees. His features were regular, and, indeed, although
weatherbeaten, they might be termed handsome. His nose was perfectly
straight, his lips thin, his eyes gray and very keen; he had little or
no whiskers, and, from his appearance and the intermixture of gray with
his brown hair, I supposed him to be about fifty years of age. In one
hand he held a short clay pipe, into which he was inserting the
forefinger of the other, as he talked with the captain. At the time that
he was pointed out to me by the second mate he was looking up aloft; I
had, therefore, time to make the above observations before he cast his
eyes down and perceived me, when I immediately went aft to him.

"I suppose you are Tom Saunders?" said he, surveying me from head to
foot.

I replied in the affirmative.

"Well, Anderson has given you a good character, mind you don't lose it.
D'ye think you'll like to be a pilot?"

"Yes," replied I.

"Have you sharp eyes, a good memory, and plenty of nerve?"

"I believe I've got the two first, I don't know about the other."

"I suppose not, it hasn't been tried yet. How far can you see through a
fog?"

"According how thick it is."

"I see you've a glass there: tell me what you make of that vessel just
opening from Blackwall Reach."

"What, that ship?"

"Oh, you can make it out to be a ship, can you, with the naked eye?
Well, then, you have good eyes."

I fixed my glass upon the vessel, and, after a time, not having
forgotten the lessons so repeatedly given me by Spicer, I said, "She has
no colors up, but she's an Embden vessel by her build."

"Oh," said he, "hand me the glass. The boy's right; and a good glass,
too. Come, I see you do know something--and good knowledge, too, for a
pilot. It often saves us a deal of trouble when we know a vessel by her
build; them foreigners sail too close to take pilots. Can you stand
cold? Have you got a P-jacket?"

"Yes, father bought me one."

"Well, you'll want it this winter, for the wild geese tell us that it
will be a sharp one. Steady, starboard!"

"Starboard it is."

"D'ye know the compass?"

"No."

"Well, stop till we get down to Deal. Now, stand by me, and keep your
eyes wide open; for, d'ye see, you've plenty to larn, and you can't
begin too soon. We must square the mainyard, captain, if you please,"
continued he, as we entered Blackwall Reach. "What could make the river
so perverse as to take these two bends in Limehouse and Blackwall
Reaches, unless to give pilots trouble, I can't say."

The wind being now contrary from the sharp turn in the river, we were
again tiding it down; that is, hove-to and allowing the tide to drift us
through the Reach; but as soon as we were clear of Blackwall Reach, we
could lay our course down the river. As we passed Gravesend, Bramble
asked me whether I was ever so low down.

"Yes," replied I, "I have been down as far as Sea Reach;" which I had
been when I was upset in the wherry, and I told him the story.

"Well, Tom, that's called the river now; but do you know that, many
years ago, where we now are used to be considered as the mouth of the
river, and that fort there" (pointing to Tilbury Fort) "was built to
defend it? for they say the French fleet used to come and anchor down
below."

[Illustration: JACK AND BRAMBLE ABOARD THE INDIAMAN.--Marryat, Vol. X.,
p. 207.]

"Yes," replied I; "and they say, in the History of England, that the
Danes used to come up much higher, even up to Greenwich; but that's a
very long while ago."

"Well, you beat me, Tom! I never heard that; and I think, if ever they
did do so, they won't do it again in a hurry. What water have you got,
my man? Port there!"

"Port it is."

"Steady--so."

"Shall we get down to the Nore to-night, pilot?" said the captain.

"Why, sir, I'm in hopes we shall. We have still nearly three hours'
daylight; and now that we are clear of the Hope, we shall lay fairly
down Sea Reach; and if the wind will only freshen a little (and it looks
very like it), we shall be able to stem the _first_ of the flood, at all
events."

I ought to observe that Bramble, as soon as he had passed any shoal or
danger, pointed it out to me. He said, "I tell it to you, because you
can't be told too often. You won't recollect much that I tell you, I
dare say. I don't expect it; but you may recollect a little, and every
little helps."

The tide had flowed more than an hour when we passed the Nore Light and
came to an anchor.

"What lights are those?" inquired I.

"That's Sheerness," replied Bramble. "We were talking of the French and
Danes coming up the river. Why, Tom, it is not much more than one
hundred and fifty years ago when the Dutch fleet came up to Sheerness,
destroyed the batteries, and landed troops there. Howsomever, as I said
of the French and the other chaps, they won't do so again in a hurry."

As soon as they had veered out sufficient cable, Bramble accepted the
invitation of the captain to go down in the cabin, when I went and
joined the men, who were getting their supper forward. I was soon on
good terms with them; and, after supper, as it was cold, they went down
to the fore-peak, got out some beer and grog, and we sat round in a
circle, with the bottles and mugs and a farthing candle in the center.
Being right in the _eyes_ of her, as it is termed, we could plainly hear
the water slapping against the bends outside of her, as it was divided
by the keelson, and borne away by the strong flood tide. It was a
melancholy sound. I had never heard it before; and during a pause, as I
listened to it, one of the men observed, "Queer sound, boy, ain't it?
You'd think that the water was lapping in right among us. But noises
aboard ship don't sound as they do on shore; I don't know why." No more
did I at that time; the fact is that nothing conveys sound better than
wood, and every slight noise is magnified, in consequence, on board of a
vessel.

"I recollect when I was on a Mediterranean voyage how we were frightened
with noises, sure enough," observed one of the men.

"Come, that's right, Dick, give us a yarn," said the others.

"Yes," replied Dick, "and it's a true yarn, too, and all about a ghost."

"Well, stop a moment," said one of the men, "and let us top this glim a
bit before you begin, for it seemed to get dimmer the moment you talked
about a ghost."

Dick waited till a little more light was obtained, and then commenced.
"I had shipped on board of a vessel bound to Smyrna, now about seven
years ago. We had gone down to Portsmouth, where we waited for one of
the partners of the house by which we had been freighted, and who was
going out as passenger. We were a man short, and the captain went on
shore to get one from the crimps, whom he knew very well, and the
fellows promised to send one on board the next morning. Well, sure
enough a wherry came off with him just before break of day, and he and
his traps were taken on board; but it was not perceived at the time what
he had in his arms under his grego, and what do you think it proved to
be at daylight? Why, a large black tom cat."

"What, a black one?"

"Yes, as black as the enemy himself. The fellow came down forward with
it, and so says I, 'Why, messmate, you're not going to take that animal
to sea with us?'

"'Yes, I am,' said he, very surlily; 'it's an old friend of mine, and I
never parts with him.'

"'Well,' says I, 'you'll find the difference when the captain hears on
it, I can tell you, and, for the matter of that, I won't promise you
that it will be very safe if it comes near me when I've a handspike in
my hand.'

"'I tell you what,' says he, 'it ain't the taking of a cat on board what
brings mischief, but it's turning one out of a ship what occasions ill
luck. No cat ever sunk a ship till the animal was hove overboard and
sunk first itself, and then it does drag the ship down after it.'

"Well, one of the boys who did not care about such things, for he was
young and ignorant, put his hand to the cat's head to stroke it, and the
cat bit him right through the fingers, at which the boy gave a loud cry.

"'Now, that will teach you to leave my cat alone,' said the man. 'He
won't come near nobody but me, and he bites everybody else, so I give
you fair warning.'

[Illustration: THE FORE-PEAK YARN.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 211.]

"And sure enough the brute, which was about as big as two common cats,
was just as savage as a tiger. When the first mate called the man on
deck, the fellow left his cat behind him in the fore-peak, just as if it
were now here, and it got into a dark corner, growling and humping its
back, with its eyes flashing fire at every one of us as we came anigh
it. 'Oh!' says we, 'this here won't never do; wait till the captain
comes on board, that's all.' Well, the hatches were off, and we were
busy, re-stowing the upper tier of the cargo, which we had thrown in
very carelessly in our hurry to get down the river; just putting the
bales in order (it wasn't breaking bulk, you see), and we were at it all
day. At last, toward evening, the captain comes on board with the
gentleman passenger, a mighty timorsome sort of young chap he appeared
for to be, and had never before set his foot upon the plank of a vessel.
So as soon as the captain was on deck we all broke off our work, and
went to him to tell him about this cat, and the captain he gets into a
great rage as soon as he hears on it, and orders the man to send the cat
on shore, or else he'd throw it overboard. Well, the man, who was a
sulky, saucy sort of chap, and no seaman, I've a notion, gives cheek,
and says he won't send his cat on shore for no man, whereupon the
captain orders the cat to be caught, that he might send it in the boat;
but nobody dared to catch it, for it was so fierce to everybody but its
master. The second mate tried, and he got a devil of a bite, and came up
from the fore-peak without the cat, looking very blue indeed. And then
the first mate went down, and he tried; but the cat flew at him, and he
came up as white as a sheet. And then the cat became so savage that it
stood at the foot of the ladder, all ready to attack whoever should come
down, and the man laughed heartily, and told us to fetch the cat.
'Well,' says the first mate, 'I can't touch the cat, but I can you, you
beggar, and I will too, if it costs me twenty pounds;' so he ups with a
handspike and knocks the fellow down senseless on the deck, and there he
laid. And it sarved him right.

"Well, then the captain thought to shoot the cat, for it was for all the
world like a wild beast, and one proposed one thing and one another. At
last Jim, the cabin-boy, comes forward with some brimstone matches in a
pan, and he lights them and lowers them down into the fore-peak by a
rope-yarn to smother it out. And so it did sure enough, for all of a
sudden the cat made a spring up to the deck, and then we all chased it
here and there, until at last it got out to the end of the flying
jib-boom, and then Jim, the cabin-boy, followed it out with a handspike,
and poked at it as hard as he could, until at last it lost its hold, and
down it went into the water, and Jim and the handspike went along with
it, for Jim, in his last poke at the cat, lost his balance, so away they
went together. Well, there was a great hurry in manning the boat, and
picking up poor Jim and the handspike; but the cat we saw no more, for
it was just dark at the time. Well, when it was all over, we began to
think what we had done, and as soon as we had put on the hatches and
secured the hold we went down below into the fore-peak, where the smell
of brimstone did not make us feel more comfortable, I can tell you, and
we began to talk over the matter, for you see the cat should not have
been thrown overboard but put on shore. But we were called away to man
the boat again, for the fellow had come to his senses, and swore that he
would not stay in the ship, but go on shore and take the law of the
first mate; and the first mate and captain thought the sooner he was out
of the ship the better, for we were to sail before daylight, and there
might not be a wherry for him to get into. So the fellow took his kit,
and we pulled him on shore and landed him on Southsea beach, he swearing
vengeance the whole way; and as he stepped out on the beach he turned
round to us and said, as he shook his fist, 'You've thrown overboard a
_black tom cat_, recollect that! and now you'll see the consequence; a
pleasant voyage to you. I wouldn't sail in that vessel if you were to
offer her to me as a present as soon as she got to Smyrna; because why,
you've thrown overboard a _black tom cat_, and you'll never get
there--_never!_' cried he again, and off he ran with his bundle.

"Well, we didn't much like it, and if the second mate hadn't been in the
boat, I'm not sure that we shouldn't all have gone on shore rather than
sail in the vessel; but there was no help for it. The next morning
before daylight we started, for the captain wouldn't wait to get another
hand, and we were soon out of soundings, and well into the Bay of
Biscay.

"We had just passed Cape Finisterre, when Jim, the cabin-boy, says one
morning, 'I'm blessed if I didn't hear that cat last night, or the ghost
on it!' So we laughed at him; for, you see, he slept abaft, just outside
the cabin door, close to the pantry, and not forward with the rest of
us.

"'Well,' says he, 'I heard her miaw, and when I awoke I think I seed two
eyes looking at me.'

"'Well, Jim,' said I, for we had got over our fears, 'it was you who
knocked her overboard, so it's all right that she should haunt you and
nobody else.' Jim, however, could not laugh, but looked very grave and
unhappy. A few days afterward the captain and passenger complained that
they could not sleep for the noise and racket that was kept up all night
between the timbers and in the run aft. They said it was if a whole
legion of devils were broken loose and scampering about; and the captain
was very grave; and as for the passenger, he was frightened out of his
wits. Still we laughed, because we had heard nothing ourselves, and
thought that it must only be fancy on their parts, particularly as the
captain used to _bowse his jib_ up pretty taut every night. Well, all
went on very well; we arrived at the Rock, got our fresh provisions and
vegetables, and then made sail again. The captain complained of no more
noises, and Jim of no more eyes, and the whole matter was almost
forgotten."

Here the narrator was interrupted by the thumping of a handspike on the
deck above. "Halloo! what's the matter now?"

"Come, tumble up, my lads, and pump the ship out," said the mate from
above; "we had almost forgotten that. Be smart, now; it's but a ten
minutes' job."

Thus broke off the story, much to my annoyance; but it could not be
helped--ships must be pumped out--so the men went on deck, and I
followed them.


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

     "Recollect," says the Fellow, "you have thrown overboard a black
     Tom Cat!"


In a quarter of an hour the pump sucked, and we all hastened down below
to our grog and the completion of our yarn. As soon as we were all
comfortably seated as before, Dick recommenced.

"Well, we were abreast of Malta, when the weather, which had hitherto on
the voyage been very fine, changed. The clouds hung down very heavy, and
there was every symptom of a fierce gale; and sure enough a worse gale I
never was in than came on that night--and such a sea!--the ship rolled
gunnel under, for the gale was fair, but the sea ran so high and so fast
that we expected to be pooped every minute. It was about midnight when
the rain came on in torrents, and the wind blew fiercer than ever. I was
on deck, and so was the first mate and another man at the helm, for we
were flying right before it, and she was hard to steer.

"We shall have it worse yet," said the captain.

"'_Miaw_!' was the reply, so clear, so loud, we could not tell where it
came from. I thought it came from the maintop.

"'Mercy on us! what was that?' said the first mate, the light from the
binnacle showing his face as pale as a sheet.

"'_Miaw!_' was the reply from somewhere.

"'The black cat, by all that's blue!' cried the captain.

"'The Lord have mercy upon us, we're all gone!' said the mate, clasping
his hands in terror. To clasp his hands, of course he let go the wheel;
and the other man, who was equally frightened, had not strength to hold
it. Away he went, right over the wheel, knocking down the mate on the
other side; and the ship taking a heavy lurch, they both went into the
scuppers together. The ship broached-to, and our mainmast and mizzenmast
went over the side."

"Do top that glim, Bill," said one of the men, in a tremulous voice.

Dick paused while the snuff was taken off the candle: and the water went
tap, tap, tap against the bends, with a most melancholy sound. I really
did feel rather queer myself.

Dick continued. "Well, all hands were on deck immediately, and it was
good two hours before we could clear the wreck, for the men were
disheartened. They had heard the loud _miaw_ when in the fore-peak, and
declared that it was close to them; and the passenger and Jim came out,
frightened out of their wits. They had heard the _miaw_, and said that
it was from under the cabin table. At last we were clear of the wreck,
and the wind roared louder than ever.

"The captain was a stout-hearted fellow, and as the men were collected
together under the bulwark, he said, 'Well, this breeze will shorten our
distance, at any rate, and if it holds we shall soon be at Smyrna,'

"'We shall never see Smyrna!' replied the second mate, his teeth
chattering.

"'No, never!' cried the seamen.

"The captain sent Jim down for his rum-bottle, and gave every man a
stiff glass of liquor, and that made them feel more comfortable for a
time; when there was a sort of lull, and again the loud _miaw_ was
repeated.

"'There it is!' cried the men; but they hardly had time to say so when
the ship was pooped with a tremendous sea washing away the stern and
quarter-boats, and sending all the men swimming forward. So loaded was
the ship with water that she stopped, and appeared as if she was
settling down. At last she rolled heavy to port and discharged it, and
away we went before the wind, faster than ever. Well, there was some
talk among the seamen of throwing poor Jim overboard to appease the
ghost of the cat, for it was he who had thrown the cat overboard. But
the captain heard what the men were saying, and he swore that he would
knock the brains out of the first man who laid hold of the boy; and he
sent Jim below out of harm's way. Poor Jim! how bitterly he cried, poor
boy, when he heard what was going on.

"Well, it's a long lane that has no turning, and no gale lasts forever.
The next day it moderated, and the day after the weather was quite fine,
and the sea had gone down. We recovered our spirits, the more so as we
heard no more of the cat; and having jury-rigged her aft, we steered our
course with a light breeze. We were now but a short distance from
Smyrna, and hoped to be there by the next day; but the second mate shook
his head. He said, 'The cat has not done with us, for it was a _black
tom_ cat.'

"The fourth day the captain came on deck, and said, 'I heard a great
washing of water in the run last night, as I thought; have you sounded
the well lately?'

"'No,' replied the first mate, 'I left that to the carpenter.'

"'Well, then, ask him.' Well, the carpenter had not sounded the well, as
it appeared; and so he sounded it immediately, and found that we had
_six feet water in the hold_.

"'I knowed we were doomed,' said the second mate; 'we'll never get at
port'; and so thought the men: but the captain said:

"'Why, the fact is, my lads, we must have sprung a leak in the gale, and
no wonder, beating against the wreck so as we did when the masts went
over the side. Come, rig the pumps, and we shall soon clear her. The tom
cat has nothing to do with this, at all events.'

"Now, you see, our bottom cargo consisted of two or three tier of crates
of crockery, which would not spoil by being wet; but the upper part of
the cargo was bales of dry goods and linen; so the captain was very
anxious that they should work the pumps before the water got higher: the
weather was very fine, the sea smooth, and the wind, although fair, was
light. Well, the seamen were terrified, and thought they were lost; they
asked for liquor, and refused to work at the pumps; they said it was no
use, the ship was doomed. Well, the captain he got very angry; he went
down into the cabin, loaded his double-barreled gun, and swore that he
would shoot the first man through the head who refused to work at the
pumps. The men knew that he was in earnest, for he was a violent sort of
fellow, and so they set to. We didn't gain much upon her; I thought we
did a little, but the men said no. The captain declared that we did gain
considerably, but it was supposed that he only said so to encourage the
people. Well, the captain ordered the mate to take up the hatches that
they might see the state of the cargo. This was done; the dry goods, as
far as we could make out, were not injured, and the men pumped spell and
spell until the evening, when the captain gave them a good allowance of
grog, and an hour to rest themselves. It was a beautiful moonlight
night: the sails were just asleep and no more; but the vessel was heavy,
from the water in her, and we dragged slowly along. The captain, who had
gone down below with the first mate, came up from the cabin, and said to
the men, 'Now, my lads, we'll set to again'; when suddenly there was a
loud, melancholy _miaw!_ which terrified us all. We looked from whence
the sound appeared to come, and there, on the launch turned over
amidship, we beheld the ghost of the black tom cat, so large, so black,
with the broad moonlight shining on it; and so thin, it was the skeleton
of the cat, only it looked as black as ever; its back was humped up and
its tail curved; and, as it stood out in the broad moonlight, it did
look twice as big as the original cat, which was the biggest I ever saw.
Well, the men actually screamed; they ran aft, upsetting the captain and
mate, and roiling over them and hiding their faces, with 'Lord, have
mercy on us!' and 'God, forgive our sins!' and 'Oh! we're lost, we're
lost!' and every sort of crying and groaning that could be thought of.
At last the captain gets up from under them in a great rage and looks
forward to see what was the matter, and there he sees the ghost of the
tom cat standing just in the same place; and it gave another miserable
_miaw!_ 'Why,' cried the captain (who had his grog on board, and was as
brave as brass), 'it is the cussed cat himself. Stop a moment.' Down he
goes to the cabin, reels up the hatchway again with his double-barreled
gun, and lets fly at it"--(here Dick lowered his voice to almost a
whisper)--"the cat gave a shriek--and then--"

Here, during the pause, Bill put out his finger and thumb to snuff the
candle, but his hand shook--he snuffed it out, and we were all left in
darkness. I can hardly describe the feeling which appeared to pervade
the whole of our party. Every one was shuffling and crowding with their
shoulders, but still no one moved from his place.

"Well," said Dick, the narrator, in a quiet subdued voice, "why don't
one of you go and fetch a light? Come, jump up, Bill, you topped it
out."

"Ay, ay," replied Bill, evidently shaking; "where's the candle?"

"Here," said one of the boys, handing it to him.

"Well, then, jump up yourself, you young whelp, you're younger than me."

"I didn't put it out," replied the boy, whining.

"Up immediately, or I'll break every rib in your body," replied Bill.

The boy, who was terribly frightened, got up at this threat, and began
to ascend the ladder; he was about three steps up, when we heard from
the deck a horrible _miaw!_ The boy gave a scream of terror, and fell
down on his back among us all, smashing the glass and flattening the tin
cans against the men's legs, who halloed with pain. At last there was a
dead silence again, and I could plainly hear the loud throbbing of more
than one heart.

"Come," said Dick again, "what was the fool frightened about? Look for
the candle, some of you."

At last Bill found it in his breast, broke in two and half melted away,
and was proceeding for a light when the carpenter stepped to the hatch
with his lantern, and said, "Why, you're all in the dark there,
shipmates! Here, take my lantern."

I may as well here observe that the carpenter had been listening to the
story as he sat by the hatchway on deck, and it was he who had favored
us with the _miaw_ which had so frightened the boy. As soon as the
lantern had been received and the candle relighted, Dick recommenced.

"Well, my lads, I said that the captain went down below, brought up his
gun, and let fly at the cat, and then--well, and then--the cat gave a
loud shriek, and falls down upon the deck. The captain walks forward to
it, takes it up by the tail, brings it aft, and shies it among the men.

"'There, you fools,' said he, 'it is the cat himself; will you believe
your own eyes?'

"And sure enough, so it was; for, you see, when Jim tumbled overboard,
it being then dark, and we so busy with Jim, we did not look after the
cat, and so it must have crawled up the cable and run down into the hold
while the hatches were off; and all that noise heard aft must have been
the brute chasing the rats, I suppose. Jim may have heard, but he could
not have seen, the cat; that was all fancy and fright. You know how long
a cat will live without much food, and so the animal was pretty quiet
after it had killed all the rats. Then when the gale came on, and the
upper part of the cargo fetched way a little, for it was loosely stowed,
we suppose that it got jammed now and then with the rolling, and that
made it miaw; and then, when we took off the hatches to look at the
cargo, after we had sprung the leak, the cat, o' course, came out, and a
pretty skeleton it was, as you may suppose. Now do you understand the
whole of it?"

"Yes, that's all clear," replied Bill; "and it was no ghost, after all?
But still the cat did do mischief, for if the mate had not been
frightened by it, he wouldn't have let go the wheel, and the masts would
not have gone by the lee."

"That's true enough, and he might have done more mischief still if the
captain had not shot him, for the men would never have gone to the pumps
again; but when they found out that it was nothing but the cat himself,
then they set to, and before the next evening the vessel was clear, and
only required pumping out every two hours, for the leak wasn't great,
after all. So there's a ghost story for you, and I believe that all
others will be found, like mine, to end in moonshine. Now, suppose we
turn in, for we shall weigh at three o'clock in the morning."

We all tumbled into the standing berths in the fore-peak. I dreamed of
black tom cats all night. The next morning we weighed with a fair wind;
as before, I stood beside Bramble, who pointed out to me everything
worth notice or memory as we passed, but at last the motion affected me
so much that I could pay little attention, and I remained by his side as
pale as a sheet. We rounded the North Foreland, and long before dark
anchored in the Downs. Bramble went no further with the vessel, the
captain himself being a good pilot for the Channel. A Deal boat came
alongside, we got into it, they landed us on the shingle beach, and I
followed Bramble up to his abode.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

     Bramble's Method of Education proves very effective--He also points
     out a Position in which you may prefer your Enemies to your
     Friends!


The house of Philip Bramble was situated on the further side of a road
which ran along the shore, just above the shingle beach. It was a large
cottage on one floor, the street door entering at once into its only
sitting-room. It was furnished as such tenements usually are, with a
small dresser and shelves for crockery, and a table and chairs of cherry
wood; on the broad mantelpiece, for the fireplace was large, were
several brass candlesticks, very bright, ranged with foreign
curiosities, and a few shells; half a dozen prints in frames ornamented
the walls; and on large nails drove into the panels, wherever a space
could be found, were hung coats, P-jackets, and other articles of dress,
all ready for the pilot to change whenever he came on shore wet to the
skin. Everything was neat and clean: the planks of the floor were white
as snow, yet the floor itself was sanded with white sand, and there were
one or two square wooden boxes, also filled with sand, for the use of
those who smoked. When I add that, opposite to the fireplace, there was
a set of drawers of walnut wood, with an escritoire at the top, upon
the flat part of which were a few books neatly arranged, and over it an
old-fashioned looking-glass, divided at the sides near to the frame into
sections, I believe that I have given a catalogue of the whole
furniture. When I followed Bramble into the room, a little girl of about
nine or ten years old ran into his arms, as he stooped down to receive
her. She was a pretty child, with a very fair skin and rosy cheeks, her
hair and eyes of a very dark brown, almost approaching to black; but she
was not, in my opinion, near so pretty as my sister Virginia. As Bramble
kissed her, she exclaimed, "Oh, father, I am so glad you are come home!
Mrs. Maddox has been in bed ever since you left; her leg is very bad
indeed."

"Whew!" whistled Bramble, "I'm sorry to hear that of the old lady; and
how have you got on without her assistance?"

"Why, don't you think I'm very tidy, father?" said she, looking round
the room.

"Yes, Bessy, you are very tidy; and it's a pleasure to come home to a
tidy clean house. Here is a companion for you. I told you he was coming,
and you know his name."

"It's Tom Saunders, isn't it, father?"

"Yes, that's his name, for want of a better--so I leave you to make
friends, while I go up and see the poor old lady."

"You look cold and pale, are you not well?" was the first question of
little Bessy.

"I'm cold, and not very well," replied I; "I have not been used to
knocking about on board ship."

"Very true; I forgot you had never been at sea before. Come to the fire,
then, and sit in father's big chair."

"I never knew that your father had been married. I thought Peter
Anderson said that he was a bachelor."

"And so he is," replied Bessy. "I'm not his daughter, although I call
him father."

"Indeed! then whose daughter are you? and who is the old lady upstairs?"

"The old lady upstairs is the widow of the pilot with whom father served
his time. Her husband was lost at sea, and she keeps father's house.
Father picked me up at sea, and has taken care of me ever since."

"Then you don't remember your own parents?"

"No, I recollect nothing till I found myself in this house. Father says
I'm a Dutchman, because it was a Dutch ship or a Dutch boat which I was
taken out of."

"And how long was that ago?"

"Nine years ago. I am now, I believe, about ten years old."

Bessy then catechised me relative to my own family, and I had not
answered all her questions when Bramble came downstairs.

"Bessy, dear, we must have the doctor to look at that leg again. I'm
afeard that it will never get well. Missus is too old to shake it off."

"Shall I go now, father?"

"Yes, child, go now, for she's in great pain with it; and Tom, you go
with Bessy and take care of her. But, before you go, give me some 'baccy
and the odds and ends."

As soon as Bessy had put the tobacco-pipes, some spirits, a rummer and
water on the table, and the spittoon at his feet, she put on her bonnet,
and off we set to the doctor's house, about half a mile distant. I was
soon on intimate terms with Bessy: there was something so frank and
winning about her, such perfect honesty of character, that it was
impossible not to like her. We delivered our message, returned home,
and, being very tired, I was glad to go to bed. Bessy showed me my room,
which was very comfortable, and as soon as I laid my head on the pillow
I was fast asleep.

I was awakened the next morning by a knocking at the door by little
Bessy; it was broad daylight, and I dressed myself and went downstairs,
where I found her very busy putting everything in order.

"It was I knocked," said little Bessy; "I thought you would like to come
and help me."

"And so I will," replied I; "what shall I do?"

"Oh, there's plenty to do now that Mrs. Maddox is ill, and you and
father are come back--almost too much for a little girl like me. Will
you go to the pump and fetch the pails full of water, for they are too
heavy for me?"

I did as she wished. "Anything else, Bessy?" said I.

"Oh, yes, plenty. You're very good-natured, Tom, and I'm so glad you're
come."

Bessy and I were fully employed for nearly an hour in the front room and
kitchen, clearing up and cleaning and preparing for breakfast. All was
ready before Bramble came down and took a seat in his big chair, close
to the breakfast-table.

"All ready, father," said little Bessy, going up to Bramble to be
kissed. "Tom has been helping me."

"All's right," said Bramble; "bring the book, dear." Bessy brought a
large Bible, and read a chapter aloud, then closed it and put it away.

"We can't always do this, Tom," observed Bramble, "when we're knocking
about in the Channel; all we can do is to read it when we can. Come now
to breakfast."

When we had finished I assisted Bessy to put everything away, and then
Bramble said to me, "Anderson tells me you're a good scholar, Tom; but
you must now learn what will be of use to me as well as to you. The
first thing you must learn, and which you can do on shore, are the
points of the compass, to know them at sight and tell them quickly; for
you see it's of great importance to a pilot to know exactly how a ship's
head is; and the men at the helm, although good seamen and steering
well, are not so ready at answering as a pilot wishes, and very often
stammer at it--sometimes make mistakes. Now, you see, when I'm piloting
a vessel, if you stand at the binnacle, watch the compass, and answer me
quickly how the ship's head is, you'll be of use to me in a very short
time. Go up into my room, and under the bed you will find a compass;
bring it down carefully, and I'll give you a lesson at once." I brought
the compass to him, and Bramble made me write down the whole thirty-two
points at full length upon a piece of paper. When I had done so, he told
me I must learn them by heart as fast as I could.

I studied them the whole of that day; and in the evening, finding myself
perfect, I went up to Bramble and repeated them without one mistake.

"All's right," said Bramble. "Now, Tom, give me the paper; if you know
them to-night you ought to know them to-morrow morning. I'll hear if you
do, after breakfast."

I went to bed, was tapped up as before by Bessy, assisted her to clean
everything, taking off her hands all the heaviest of the work; indeed,
what I have narrated of the first day may be taken as a sample of my
life on shore at Deal. After breakfast I repeated the points of the
compass correctly.

"Well, Tom, you have a good memory, that's certain; all the better for
you, for pilots carry everything in their heads, as you will find out.
Now, then, look here." Bramble took the glass off the top of the
compass-box, lifted up the card, and then showed me the needle below,
which pointed to the north. He then showed me the north point above, and
then the other points, making me repeat them as he put his finger on
them. As soon as I understood them, he would put the stem of his pipe to
one and ask me which it was. When I was perfect with the points, he
explained the half points and quarter points. In two days I had gained
them all by heart.

"And now," says he, "we must try you. This iron skewer is the ship's
head, recollect, and I shall stick it into the table. When I do so, you
must tell me what point of the compass stands to it, and then that will
be the direction of the ship's head. Do you understand? Practice makes
perfect, and you must work at this all the time that you are ashore.
When you know the compass well then I'll teach you something else. Now,
then, how's her head, Tom?"

"North-half-west," said I, after a little time.

"Yes, very true; but you see, Tom, that wouldn't do aboard ship. That's
just the way most of the seamen would puzzle at it. I must have the
answer in a moment, and that's why you must practice."

In the evening, when Bramble was smoking his pipe, I was seated by him,
and every minute he would change the place of the iron skewer, with
"How's her head, Tom?"

"We must get your 'prentice papers signed before we go afloat again,"
said Bramble, "for they pick up boys as well as men for the King's
service, and you're a stout boy for your age."

"Were you ever pressed yourself?" inquired I.

"No, but I had a narrow chance once, and had not our captain been a
smart fellow I and many more would have been serving the King at this
present moment."

"Tell me how that was," said I.

"Well, as soon as Bessy has done rattling with the cups and saucers, I
will."

"I've done now, father," said Bessy, taking her seat on a stool close to
Bramble's feet.

"Well, then, before I passed for pilot, just after the breaking out of
the war, I took it into my head to try my chance at privateering. There
was plenty to pick up at that time, and some of the Deal men had been
very fortunate, so I went on board of a twelve-gun lugger, commanded by
Captain Shank, fitted out in the river, with a crew of sixty men. The
press was very hot at that time, and our men were kept at the crimps'
houses until all was ready, when we started, and got off clear into the
Channel without being overhauled.

"We had been out a fortnight, keeping well on the French coast, and had
picked up two good prizes, when one morning, as the fog was cleared up
with a sharp northerly wind, we found ourselves right under the lee of
an English frigate, not a mile from us. There was a bubble of a sea, for
the wind had been against the tide previous to its changing, and we were
then about six or seven miles from the French coast, just between
Boulogne and Cape Grisnez, lying to for the fog to clear away. As soon
as we saw the frigate we knew that she would board us, and we were all
in a terrible fright." Here Bramble shifted the skewer and said, "How's
her head, Tom?"

[Illustration: "HOW'S HER HEAD, TOM?"--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 281.]

I replied, and he proceeded:

"The frigate hoisted her colors, and of course we did the same. She then
fired a gun as a signal for us to remain, hove to, and we perceived her
boats lowering down. 'Now, my lads,' said our captain, 'if you don't
mind a shot or two, I think I will save you from impressment this time.'
We all declared that we would stand a hundred rather than be taken on
board of a man-of-war. 'Very well,' says he, 'starboard a little, and
keep her a little away, so as to let her go through the water; but keep
the foresheet to windward, so that we may appear only to have fallen
off.' By this plan we gradually increased our distance from the frigate,
and got more on her bow. All this while the boat was pulling toward us,
rising and tossing on the sea, but still nearing us fast. As she came
nearer to us we let the lugger come up in the wind again for a short
time, that we might not appear to be dodging away, and then, when the
bowman was almost ready to lay in his oar, away we let her go through
the water, so that she was left astern again. They could not well
perceive this on board of the frigate, although the officer in the boat
was very savage, for at one time he had his bow oar in and his boat-hook
out. At last the frigate, perceiving that we were apparently slipping
away, put her helm up, and fired a shot across our bows. 'Now's your
time, my boys,' said the captain; 'let draw the sheets, the breeze is
strong. She must wait to pick up her boat, and that will give us a mile
at least.' Up went the helm, and we made all sail right for the French
coast. How's her head, Tom?"

I replied, and Bramble resumed:

"The frigate ran down to her boat, and then rounded-to, to hoist it up.
The sea was heavy, and she was delayed a minute or two, although, to do
them justice, they were very smart on board of her. As soon as the boat
was up she made all sail, and came foaming after us, as if she were in
as great a rage as the captain and those on board of her. Every now and
then she yawed to throw a shot at us from her bow-chasers; but that we
didn't mind, as the yawing checked her way, and it's not very easy to
hit a low vessel like a lugger in a toppling sea. Well, very soon we
were not four miles from the French coast, so we hauled down our English
colors and hoisted French. The frigate gained on us very fast, but we
continued to steer on, and she in pursuit, until we were within gun-shot
of the batteries, What the Frenchmen thought we did not know, at all
events they did not fire, and we steered right on as if we were chased,
and the frigate followed after us, until we were within a mile and a
half of the batteries, when the frigate thought proper to haul her wind.
Then the battery opened upon her, and we could see that she was hulled
more than once, and, as she kept her wind along the shore, the other
batteries opened upon her, and she got a good mauling. We saw her shift
her foretopsail yard as soon as she went about again, and we afterward
heard that she had several men hurt, which was a pity."

"And did not the batteries fire upon _you?_"

"No, for we kept the French colors up, and hove to within a mile of the
coast. It was a lee shore, and there was too much surf and sea for them
to send off a boat and ascertain whether we were a French privateer or
not; so there we lay till dusk, and then made sail again, and, being so
close into the French shore, we picked up a good prize that very night.
When the cruise was over, I was satisfied. I got my prize-money, and
then, as I knew our own coast well, I passed for pilot, and have served
as one ever since. How's her head, Tom?"

"S.W. almost."

"S.W. _almost_ won't do, Tom. It's not quite S.W., quarter-south; so you
must say S.W. southerly. D'ye understand?"

When Bessy knocked at my door the next morning, she cried out, laughing,
"How's her head, Tom?" and those words made me jump up like lightning.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

     In which Bramble points out to me that singing is part of the
     Profession of a Pilot.


In about a fortnight from the time that Bramble commenced his tuition I
was quite perfect with the compass; his method certainly was very good,
for by such reiterated catechising what you had to learn was graven on
your memory. All day long the same system was pursued. Even if dinner
was on the table, the compass was on a chair close by, and as I was
putting my fork to my mouth, much to Bessy's amusement, out would come
the question, "How's her head, Tom?" Bramble soon gained his point; I
could answer like lightning. But whether I was by the fire indoors, or
on the shingle beach, his system was ever the same. Every time that
Bramble opened his lips I gained some information; he was never
wearying, and often very amusing.

One morning we were out on the beach--we had been conversing with the
other pilots, and examining the vessels in the offing with my
glass--when he pointed out to me, it being low neap tide, that the
Goodwin Sands were partially dry. "Tom," continued he, "of all the
dangers, not only of the Channel, but in the wide ocean, there is none
to be compared with those sands--the lives that have been lost on them,
the vessels that have been wrecked, and the property that has been
sucked into them, would be a dozen kings' ransoms; for, you see, Tom,
they are quicksands, and the vessel which goes on shore does not remain
to be broken up, but in two tides she disappears, sinking down into the
sands, which never give her or her cargo up again. There must be a
mighty deal of wealth buried there, that is certain. They say that once
they were a flourishing fertile island, belonging to an Earl Godwin,
whose name they now bear; it may be so--the sea retreats from one place
while it advances at another. Look at Romney Marshes, where so many
thousands of sheep are now fed. They run up many miles inland; and yet
formerly those very marshes were an arm of the sea, which vessels rode
in deep water, and sea-fights, I am told, took place. Howsomever, when
the sea took the Godwin island to itself it made the best trap for
vessels that old Neptune now possesses, and he may consider it as the
most productive spot in his dominions. Lord help us! what a deal of gold
and merchandise must there be buried below yon yellow patch!"

"Do you never save anything when vessels are run on shore there?"

"When they only tail on, we occasionally get them off again; but when
once fixed, there's an end of it. Yes, we save life occasionally, but at
great risk of our own. I saved little Bessy from a vessel ashore on
these sands."

"Indeed! Pray tell me how it was."

"Why, you see, Tom, it was just at the breaking out of the war. It was
in this very month of October, '93, that I was out in a galley with some
others, looking for vessels. I had just then left off privateering, and
got my warrant as pilot (for you know I did serve my 'prenticeship,
before I went a-privateering, as I told you the other night). Well, it
was a blowing night, and we were running in for the Downs, intending to
beach the galley and sleep on shore, for we had been out five days, and
only put a pilot on board of one vessel. We were just to windward of the
Sands, out there, where I am now pointing. The sea was very rough, but
the night was clear, and the moon shone bright, when we saw a brig
running down before the wind, under foresail and close-reefed topsails.
'Why, Bill, as she steers she'll be right between the Callipers,' said I
to the man sitting by me. 'There's no mistake about that,' replied he;
'let's haul the foresheet to windward, and lay to, to hail him; he's
coming right down upon us.' Well, we did so, and we hailed some time
without any answer. At last a man looked over the gunnel, just as she
was flying past us, and told us in Dutch to go to the devil. 'I think
you'll go there if you don't look sharp,' replied Bill. 'Come, my lads,
we may as well follow her, and see if we cannot prevent mischief.' So we
bore up after her, and hailed her several times, for we sailed very
fast, and there was a scuffling on deck. I think that the captain was
drunk. All this passed in less than five minutes; and then, as I knew
would be the case, she struck on the sands, and with such force that all
her masts went over the side immediately. Now, the sea rolls awfully
over the shallow water of those sands, Tom. We had kept with her as far
as we dared, and then hove-to about two cables' lengths to windward of
her, when she struck, for the ebb was still running strong under our
lee, which only made the sea more cross and heavy. The waves made a
clean breach over her, and we knew that she would go to pieces in less
than half-an-hour; but we did not like to leave so many to perish
without a trial to save them. So we kept away, so as to get abreast of
them, and then lowered our sails and got out our oars. We pulled close
to them, but it was impossible to board. We should have been stove to
pieces and swamped immediately. The moon still shone bright, and we saw
them as plain as we could wish, and we made every attempt to save them,
for they were all crowded together forward. Once the sea drove the boat
so close that we touched her sides, and then a woman pressed before the
men, and reached over the gunnel, extending her arms which held the
child, while several others attempted to get in; but the return of the
wave carried us back so quick from the vessel that, as they attempted to
jump in, they all went to the water, and never appeared again; but I had
caught hold of the child, and laid it down in the sternsheets. We made a
second and third attempt, but in vain. At last the vessel broke up, as
it were, all at once--there was one loud cry, and all was still, except
the roaring and breaking waves which buried them. It wasn't a scene to
make us very lively, Tom; we hoisted the sail, and ran on to the beach
in silence. I took the child in my arms--it had been snatched out of its
warm bed, poor thing, and had nothing on but a calico nightgown. I took
it up to the cottage, which was then Maddox's (I bought it afterward of
the widow with the money I made a-privateering), and I gave it in charge
to Mrs. Maddox. I did intend to have sent it to the workhouse, or
something of that sort; but Mrs. Maddox took a fancy to it, and so did
I, and so I thought I would take care of it, and I christened it by the
name of Betsy Godwin."

[Illustration: BRAMBLE SAVING BESSY.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 237.]

"You have no idea who she may be?"

"Not a half one. Her cotton gown and cap told nothing; the vessel was
Dutch, that's all I know. She may be the child of the Stadtholder or
the child of the ship's cook. What's the matter?"

"But did you notice any marks upon her person by which she might be
reclaimed?"

"Not I. I only axed Mrs. Maddox whether it were a boy or a girl."

"How old was she then?"

"Well, how can I tell? that's not in my way; but the knowing ones in
these matters said that she must be about eighteen months old, so we
have taken that for a _departure_ as to her age. I love her now as if
she were my own child, and so will you, Tom, like a sister, when you
know her. She calls me her father, and you may do the same, Tom, if you
like, for I will be as good as a father to you, if you are as good a boy
as you now seem to be, I like to be called father, somehow or
another--it sounds pleasant to my ears. But come in now, I think you
have compassed the compass, so you must learn something else.

"There is another way, Tom," said Bramble, as he seated himself in his
large chair, "in which a smart 'prentice may be useful to his master,
and it is of quite as much importance as the compass, which is in
heaving the lead. You see, Tom, the exact soundings being known will
often enable a pilot to run over the tail of a bank and save a tide;
that is, when he knows that he can trust the man in the chains. Some
seamen are very particular in giving exact soundings, but all are not.
They care more for the song than they do for anything else, and though
the song is very musical, yet it won't get a ship off when she's on
shore. Now, two-thirds of the seamen who are sent in the chains will not
give the soundings within half a fathom, and, moreover, they do not give
them quick enough for the pilot in many cases. If, therefore, you learn
to heave the lead well, be correct in your soundings and quick in giving
them, you will become of great use to me. You understand, don't you?"

"Yes," replied I.

"Well, go up into my room, and hanging on the nail behind the door you
will see a lead-line--bring it me down here."

I did so, and then Bramble explained to me how the fathoms were marked
on the line, and how the soundings were given out.

"You see," said he, "wherever there is a mark with a piece of leather or
bunting, whether it be white or red, it is called a mark; and if you
have five fathoms of water you would cry out by the _mark_ five; but at
the other depths there are no marks, but so many knots tied as there are
fathoms, as here at nine; and then you would say by the _deep_ nine. Now
run the line through your hand, and see if you can repeat the marks and
deeps as they pass."

I did so.

"Very well. Now for the song, for there is a sort of tune to it."
Bramble then again passed the line through his hands, giving the song to
each fathom, half-fathom, and quarter-fathom, and making me sing them
after him, after which I had to repeat them by myself. The next day he
took out the marks and knots from the whole line, and, giving me a
two-foot rule to re-measure it, made me put them all in again. This I
had to repeat three or four times. By this plan they were fully
impressed on my memory; and as for the song, he made me sing it almost
every half-hour for three or four days, Bessy generally repeating, in
her clear voice, from the back kitchen or upstairs, "and a quarter
seven--by the deep line."

On the fourth day Bramble said, "Well, Tom, I think both you and Bessy
may leave off singing now. You have yet to learn the most important
part, which is to _heave_ the lead; but we must wait till we get on
board of a vessel for that. Observe, Tom, it's all very well singing
when you've plenty of water, and I like it, for it sounds musical and
pleasant to the ear; but in shallow water the pilot's answer must be
much shorter and quicker, as you will find out by-and-by."


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

     In which I go Afloat, and obtain some Knowledge of the English
     Channel.


It may be as well here to remark that the system of pilotage is
different now from what it used to be at the period of which I am
writing. The Cinque Port pilots now carry vessels from the Downs to the
river, and from the river to the Downs. Their pilotage extends no
further. Vessels seldom require pilots for the Channel, and do not take
them unless they are bound to some port in the Channel with which they
are unacquainted, and those pilots who ply in the Channel are termed
Hoblers; but at the time I refer to the regular pilots used to go out in
their galleys to the chaps of the Channel and take charge of vessels all
the way up, which, by the new regulations, they do not do. The
arrangements for pilotage have been much improved of late years, and
those employed are better qualified.

I had remained at Deal about three weeks when an outward-bound Indiaman
anchored in the Downs. Her pilot came on shore, and she made the signal
for another. It was Bramble's turn, a galley was launched, and we went
on board.

The ship was bound to Plymouth, from whence she was to sail with convoy
to a certain latitude. The weather was now fine and frosty, and we made
sail when the tide served. As soon as we were fairly out in the Channel
Bramble went with me into the main-chains, and showed me how to heave
the lead. After several attempts, in which I sometimes would hit the
spare topsail-yard upon which I stood, sometimes would nearly break my
own head, and once contrived to throw the lead over the hammock-rails
inboard, I succeeded in getting it round over my head; and when I had
once gained that point I made fewer mistakes. In two days we arrived at
Plymouth; and as Bramble kept me at it till my arms ached, nearly half
the day, I could by that time heave the lead pretty fairly, that is to
say, without danger to myself or other people. The day after we arrived
at Plymouth we got into a pilot boat and went out in search of
employment, which we soon found, and we continued chiefly taking vessels
up to Portsmouth and down to Plymouth, or clear of soundings, for some
time. During this time my practice at the lead was incessant, and I
became very perfect. When I was not at the lead Bramble would make me
stand at the binnacle and watch the compass, so that, by the time we
arrived at Deal again, I was pretty competent in those two branches of
my art, except that, having practiced the lead mostly in deep water, I
had not acquired accuracy and expedition in giving the soundings. But I
learned a great deal more of my profession; Bramble explaining to me the
sails, rigging, and names and uses of the ropes, and the various
maneuvers practiced, all of which he would catechise me in afterward, to
ascertain if I was perfect, and had remembered what he told me. I was,
therefore, under excellent tuition. Whatever port we entered Bramble
would point out the landmarks to me, state the distances from point to
point, and the dangers to be avoided. These I could not so well retain
perfectly, and required occasional reminding, but altogether I gave him
satisfaction. It was on New Year's Day, 1800, that we boarded a large
homeward-bound Indiaman, which had just struck soundings. She was a
thousand-ton ship, with a rich cargo of tea on board, and full of
passengers, besides more than one hundred invalids from the regiments
out there, who had been sent home under the charge of two officers.

What a difference there appeared to me to be between the Indiaman going
out and this one coming home! the first so neat and clean in her decks,
and this so crowded and so weatherworn by her long voyage. What with
troops in old jackets, which had once been scarlet, Lascars with their
curly black hair, and dark handsome features, yellow men, sickly women,
and half-caste children, with their Hindoo ayahs, tigers, lions,
turtles, cows, sheep, goats, and pigs, on the booms and main deck, the
vessel was in a strange motley of confusion.

As soon as we were put on board, the captain, officers, and passengers
crowded round to inquire the news. Bramble, according to pilot custom,
had brought off one or two late Plymouth papers (one of which, I
recollect, gave the account of the cutting out of the "Hermione" by
Captain Hamilton); but the people on board were eight months behindhand
at least as regarded what had passed. They had not even heard of Sir
Sydney Smith's defense of Acre against Bonaparte, or anything else which
had subsequently occurred; so that as soon as Bramble had taken charge,
and put the ship's head the right course (for the wind was fair), there
was no end to question and answer, And while Bramble was questioned by
the captain and passengers, I was attacked by the midshipmen or
guinea-pigs, as they are called. Having a fair wind, we ran right for
the Downs, where we arrived on the morning of the second day. Here the
purser of the ship went on shore with his dispatches, and the ship
anchored to await orders, by the next post, to go up the river.

[Illustration: JACK HEAVING THE LEAD.--Marryat, Vol X., p. 245.]

"Tom," said Bramble, as the vessel anchored, "I cannot quit the ship,
but you may, so just get on shore in one of the boats, and see how
little Bessy is, and poor old Mrs. Maddox's leg; and, Tom, take our
dirty linen on shore and bring off clean."

I was glad enough to obey his orders, for I was very anxious to see dear
little Bessy again; so I dropped into a boat that was going on shore for
fresh beef, taking with me two or three little presents for Bessy, out
of the many which I had received when on board, for the officers and men
were very kind to me, and had given me many things which they did not
value, but which I did very much, as they were quite new to me.

The custom officers at Deal were not very particular at that time. I was
not searched, and arrived at the cottage, where I found Bessy sitting at
her needle. She threw down her work and ran to me, and as I kissed her
the tears ran down her cheeks.

"Where is father, Tom? I'm so glad to see you; but where is father? I've
been so frightened, the winter has been so rough."

"He's on board of the Indiaman, but being in charge he cannot come on
shore, so he sent me."

"Oh! I'm so glad. You have been away so long, and we have had nothing
but gales of wind; and do you know that Williams and Steers are both
drowned?"

"No, indeed, we know nothing; but father will be sorry to hear of it,
for they were friends of his."

"Well, Tom, it's not fair to leave a little girl like me alone here, for
Mrs. Maddox has kept her bed ever since you left. Her leg is better, but
she has pains in her limbs, and groans so all night, and here I am left
by myself, to hear her groan and the wind roar."

Here Bessy began to cry, and I to console her as well as I could,
although I did feel that it was hard that such a child should be left so
lonely. The presents I brought her made her wipe away her tears, and she
was very soon as lively and joyous as ever.

"I heard father say, Bessy" (I always called Bramble my father, as he
had said I might), "that he had picked up something this winter, for he
has had none but heavy vessels, and you know pilotage is paid by the
draught of water."

"Well, he may have made money, but I'm sure we haven't spent any to
matter, for I have hardly been once a week to Mrs. Maddox for money
since you have gone. She eats hardly anything, and I can't eat my meals
when I'm alone down here. Will father come home after he has been up the
river?"

"Yes, Bessy, he said that we should take a spell on shore."

"Tom, don't you think I might go on board and see him for half an hour?"

"Yes, I don't see why not; speak to Mrs. Maddox."

Bessy ran upstairs, and came down with the required permission, provided
a neighbor's girl would remain in the house, and that she went under my
escort. Her bonnet was soon on, and we obtained a passage in one of the
Indiaman's boats which was shoving off, for the water was quite smooth,
and the ship's boats could lie on the shingle without difficulty. The
officer took Bessy under his boat cloak, and we were soon on board.
Bramble was not on deck at the time, and when I went down to look for
him, Bessy remained on the quarter-deck in admiration of all she saw.
But Bramble was not below as I supposed--he had gone into the cuddy with
the captain; and when he came out, his first knowledge of Bessy's being
on board was being embraced by the waist with her little arms.

"Why, Bessy, my child," said Bramble, just as I returned on deck. "This
is Master Tom's doing," continued he, kissing her; "so you have come to
see your father?"

"Why, you would not come on shore to see me, father," said Bessy, as
Bramble took her up and kissed her again.

"Well, Tom, have you brought the clean things?"

"No, I must go on shore again with Bessy, father."

"Very true, so you must."

Bessy was taken much notice of by the captain and all on board. No
wonder: her fair skin and clear transparent red and white were in such
contrast with the bilious-looking passengers that she appeared as if she
was not of the same race. She was much admired, and received many little
presents; and when she left the ship, after staying on board an hour,
she was much delighted with her trip, and still more so with the promise
of Bramble that he would stay ashore for some time as soon as he came
back from the river. I remained with her on shore till dusk, and then,
having collected the clean linen, as we were expected to sail early the
next morning, I returned on board the Indiaman.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

     Showing the Importance, on board Ship, of a Rope's End well
     applied.


The next morning, as we expected, the orders came down for the Indiaman
to go round to the river. The wind was fair, but light; we hove up and
made sail, stemming the last of the ebb. When the flood made, the wind
died away, so that we made but little progress, much to the annoyance of
those on board, who were naturally impatient to land after so tedious a
voyage. Toward the evening it fell calm, and a fog-bank rose on the
horizon to the eastward. There were still two hours of daylight, when,
as I was sweeping the horizon with my glass, I discovered the three
masts of a vessel with no sails set on them. As she was a long way off I
went half-way up the main rigging to have a better view of her, and made
her out to be a large lugger. I went down to the poop, where Bramble
stood smoking a cheroot with some of the officers of the ship. "Father,"
says I, "there's a large lugger on our beam, with her sails lowered
down. I caught her masts with the glass just now."

"Then she's a French privateer, you may depend upon it," replied
Bramble, "and she means to try to take us by surprise to-night."

The officers went down and reported it to the captain: the glasses were
fixed upon her, and there was little doubt as to what she was.

"Lucky you discovered her, boy, for we might have been surprised, that's
a fact," said the captain; "however, now she shall catch a Tartar."

"She's waiting for the fog, captain," said Bramble, "which will come
rolling down with the shift of wind in about an hour or two, I expect;
and then we must allow her another hour to get alongside of us. Depend
upon it she has plenty of men, and intends to try to board us in the
fog."

Everybody was now on the _qui vive_; the women were, as usual,
frightened; the men passengers looked grave, the Lascars rather
unsteady; but we had forty English seamen and a hundred invalid soldiers
on board, who could all be depended upon. The guns were loaded and
shotted, and the invalid soldiers were mustered; muskets and ammunition
handed up; the bayonets fixed, unfixed again; and then they were ordered
to remain on the booms with their accouterments on and their muskets by
their sides. The officers still kept their glasses on the lugger, until
at last the fog came down and we could see her no more.

The officers who commanded the invalids, after a consultation with the
captain at which Bramble assisted, told off their men into two parties,
one of them being appointed to assist the seamen with their bayonets in
repelling the boarders (should the attempt be made), and the other to
fire upon them and into the deck of the vessel when she came alongside.
The Lascars were stationed at the guns, in case they might be required;
but no great dependence was placed upon their services.

By the time that these arrangements had been made, the fog had reached
the Indiaman, and we were at the same time taken aback with the easterly
breeze which brought it down to us; being near to the land, we put the
ship's head off shore. The wind continued light and the water smooth,
but the fog thickened every minute: at last we could hardly see as far
as the foremast of the vessel.

"He'll be puzzled to find us, I think," said the captain.

"He'll find us, never fear," replied Bramble. "He has calculated the
time of the fog reaching us, and he knows that we must lay our head
off-shore--to be sure, we might give him the go-by if we bore up and ran
back again to the Downs."

"I think I see myself bearing up and running away from a rascally French
privateer," said the captain. "Keep a sharp lookout there forward."

"Ay, ay, sir," replied the chief officer.

Half an hour more passed, and by our calculation the privateer should
have been on board of us, but we could see nothing of her, although the
fog had cleared up a little. The soldiers were now ordered to load their
muskets. I was on the poop with Bramble, when, happening to turn and
look aft (the very opposite direction from which the privateer was to be
expected), I saw her three lugsails looming in the mist, just on the
quarter, not half a cable's length from us. I jumped down to where the
captain was standing, and said to him, "There she is, sir, close on our
lee quarter." The captain sprang on the poop, saw the vessel, and
ordered the men to come aft in silence. The tramp of the soldiers' feet
was scarcely over when the lugger was alongside of us, her masts banging
against our main and mizzen chains as she rolled with the swell under
our lee. The Frenchmen gave a cheer, which told us how very numerous
they were: they climbed up the side and into the chains like cats, and
in a few seconds all was noise, confusion, and smoke. It was impossible
to know what the result was to be for about a minute, when the cheers
from our own men announced that the assailants had been beaten back. But
hardly had the cheering ceased on our side when another cheer was heard
from the lugger, and the attempt to gain our decks was repeated. This
time the Frenchmen fought more obstinately than before, and it was
nearly five minutes before they were repelled. It was not yet dark
(although the fog was thick), and you could make out their countenances
pretty clear; a more wild reckless set of fellows I never beheld, and
they certainly fought very gallantly, but they were driven back again;
and once more were the cheers from the British seamen and soldiers mixed
up with the execrations and shouts of the still contending, although
retreating, Frenchmen.

Just at this period of the conflict I was standing on the poop by
Bramble, who had been watching the result, when he said, "Tom, come with
me: do you jump into the main chains with a double part of the topsail
halyards fall, and when the lugger's mast strikes against the chains as
she rolls into us, pass the fall round it underneath the rigging, and
hand the end in to me."

We both leaped off the poop; he gave me the bight of the halyards. I
crept out of the port into the chains and passed it round the lugger's
mainmast, as he told me, handing in the bight to him, which he belayed
slack to the mainsheet kevel. At the time I perceived a man lying
wounded or dead in the main chains, but I paid no attention to him
until, as I was about to get on board, he attracted my attention by
seizing my leg, and making his teeth meet in the small part of it, above
the ankle. I could not help crying out, I was so taken by surprise with
the pain; however, I kicked him off, and turning to look at him, I found
it was a wounded Frenchman, who, perceiving what I was about, had paid
me that compliment. As soon as I was on board I heard the captain say to
Bramble, "Well, pilot, he has had enough of it."

"Yes, and he won't escape, captain, for Tom has got him fast by the
masthead, and they dare not climb up to cut themselves adrift. All that
you have to do now it to let the soldiers fire on his decks until they
run below, and then our men can board and take possession of her."

The captain, perceiving that the vessel was made fast, gave the
necessary orders. The soldiers lined the hammock nettings and chains,
and such a shower of musketry was poured into her decks that the
Frenchmen were soon driven below, and our seamen then slipped down her
rigging, boarded, and took possession of her. The prisoners having been
ordered up and passed into the forehold, the wounded men were then
looked after. We had eleven wounded, but none killed; the Frenchman had
eight killed and seventeen wounded; among others, the captain, who had
headed the second attempt to board. She was called the "Pucelle
d'Orleans," of twelve guns and a hundred and twenty-five men.

It was two or three hours before we were again all to rights, and a
party sent on board of the prize; and then there was again another kind
of confusion, from the congratulations, drinking healths, the women
coming up on deck, etc.; however, the weather continued light, so it was
of no consequence. That Frenchman bit very hard, and I limped for three
or four days afterward.

"Well, Tom," said Bramble, "I see you've got nerve, so all's right. You
had better go and lie down now, for you must be tired; I'll call you in
the morning."

Very glad was I to limp to bed. All night I dreamed of nothing but
volleys of musketry, and boarding and reboarding, and being wounded in
the leg, and then I would awake with the smart of the Frenchman's teeth.

The next morning when I came on deck, the captain thanked me for my
services, and said that the lugger would have escaped had it not been
for me. I replied that it was Bramble who prevented her escape, as I
should not have thought of making her fast if I had not been told.

"That's all true enough," replied the captain; "but how many of your
age, having been told to do it, would have done it, Tom? I shall not
forget you."

I went on the poop to Bramble, who, as usual, had his short pipe in his
hand; and I certainly was pleased when I saw what a beautiful craft we
had helped to capture. She sat like a swan on the water, and sailed
round and round us with the greatest ease.

In the afternoon we anchored at the Nore, and sent away all the
prisoners to Sheerness. I must not forget to say how very kind and
generous the passengers were to me. They made a great many presents,
some of value, as I afterward found out; and I was glad to receive them
that I might give them to Virginia and those who had been friendly to
me.

The next morning we arrived off Greenwich, and Bramble told me to go on
shore and remain with my father and mother until he came down, which he
would do in a few days, and pay a visit to his old friend Anderson. I
landed with all my contraband articles in the boat, but no one thought
of stopping or searching the former "Poor Jack." My insignificance was
my protection; and I arrived safely at Fisher's Alley with all my
curiosities and prohibited effects. When I entered the house, I
perceived that there was a third person sitting in company with my
mother and Virginia; but Virginia sprang to me, and I threw down my
bundles with which I was loaded, and pressed her in my arms. Although I
had been absent but four months, she appeared to be very much grown, and
in every way improved. As soon as I had released her, I offered my hand
to my mother, who took it very coldly, and then observed, "Tom, you will
be _so_ ungenteel; don't you see there is a gentleman here?"

"I beg his pardon, mother," replied I; "but I could only see my sister
just then."

"And I admire your feeling, Tom," replied the party. "Mrs. Saunders, you
must not scold him for that. How do you do, Tom, and how do you like
your profession?" continued he, holding out his hand.

I took his hand, and looking at him I recognized him. "Oh, sir! you are
the gentleman who was sitting in the room when we called upon Sir
Hercules and her ladyship."

"I am so, Tom, and I promised Sir Hercules that I would have an eye to
you all, and be of any use to you that I could. My name is Wilson, and
I'm what the sailors call a shark, that is, I'm a lawyer."

"Well, you don't appear as if you would bite, sir," replied I, as I
looked at his venerable and kind face.

"No, no, we never frighten people by our looks. We don't carry our teeth
with us; but I have several rows of them, all upon shelves in my
chambers, called the 'Statute at Large,' and by other names."

He then entered into conversation with me, and I told him most of what
had passed, of course not forgetting that the Indiaman we had brought up
the river had captured a privateer. He sat about an hour, and then went
away, desiring me to call upon him. I was not sorry when he went, as I
wished to show my presents to Virginia, and give her those which she
liked best. When Virginia had selected for herself, or rather I had
forced upon her all she most admired, I gave a cut ivory card-case, a
filigree needle-case, and a small red scarf to my mother, who, for the
first time in her life, appeared pleased with me, and said that they
were very _genteel_, and she was much obliged to me. The remainder I put
away in my room upstairs, intending to keep some for Bessy, and give the
others to Mrs. St. Felix, the doctor, and old Nanny.

I then went to the hospital and found out my father, old Anderson and
Ben. I narrated to them much more circumstantially than I did to the old
lawyer the particulars of the capture of the privateer. Anderson put a
great many inquiries to me, as to my liking my profession, and also
concerning little Bessy, whose history I communicated to him. After my
father and Ben had left, he gave me a great deal of advice, all of which
I trust that I treasured up.

"I hear," said he, "that Spicer has been talking a good deal about you,
and inquiring very often when you were expected to return. Were you very
intimate with that man?"

I replied in the negative, and then narrated the whole history of the
spy-glass, the erasure of the name by Mrs. St, Felix, and the
recognition of it by Spicer.

"You did right to leave him in his error relative to where you received
the glass from," said Peter Anderson; "there is some mystery there which
time may unravel, but do not say a word of it to any one, Tom. I am glad
that you have told me, as, in case you are away, and anything should
occur, I shall know how to act."

I must acknowledge that I now walked proudly through the streets of
Greenwich. I was no longer Poor Jack, but I was earning my livelihood
in my profession. I had reason to be still prouder when, two days
afterward, Mr. Wilson came to my mother's with the newspaper in his hand
in which there was a long account of the capture of the privateer, and
the conduct of Bramble and of me spoken of in the highest terms. This he
read aloud to my mother and Virginia. I watched my sister. The tears
filled her eyes as she listened, and when Mr. Wilson had done her arms
were round my neck, and her smiles were mixed with her tears, and
sometimes she would laugh as she cried. Oh! how I loved her then, for I
felt how dearly she loved me; even my mother appeared gratified,
although she said nothing, but continued to repair the lace veil upon
which she had been employed. That evening I went with Virginia to call
upon Mrs, St. Felix, taking with me the presents I had laid aside for
her. She welcomed me as usual, and accepted what I brought for her
without hesitation and with many thanks.

"Well, Mr. Tom," said she, "I'll just put away all your nice little
remembrances, and then I'll tell you that I've heard all about your
behavior in the fight with the privateer, and I've no doubt but that, if
you continue to go on as you have begun, you will one day have a leg the
less, as your father has before you."

"I hope not," replied I; "two legs are better than one."

"Yes, when you want to run away, that's true. I see now why you're so
anxious to save your legs."

"But, Mrs. St. Felix, if it had not been for that good spy-glass you
gave me, I never should have discovered the privateer, and we should not
have been prepared for her."

"Well, that's fortunate; it didn't prove a glass too much, anyhow, or
you'd have seen double. I suppose, then, all these pretty things are my
share of the prize-money."

"No, they are no value, except to prove to you that Poor Jack has not
forgotten your kindness, and never will."

"That I believe; and, believing that, I suppose you have not forgotten
old Nanny."

"No; but I have not seen her yet. I intend to go to-morrow; but I have
something for the doctor. He is not at home; will you give it to him?"

"Certainly; you know I am as good as a mother to him."

"I think the doctor would rather you'd be a wife to him."

"That's a foolish idea that's in many people's heads, Tom, which I'll
thank you to contradict. I never intend to change my name."

"Don't make too sure," replied I; and I added at a venture (why, I know
not, but I had formed the idea in my mind that St. Felix was not her
proper name), "you may change it yet for your real name."

"Tom, Tom," cried the widow, "what do you mean?" "Nothing," replied I,
"I was only joking." "Well, then, don't talk such nonsense, or I shall
send you out of the shop."

I had, however, it appeared, struck upon a chord which jarred, and all
the spirits of Mrs. St. Felix vanished at once. So Virginia and I wished
her a good-evening and returned home.


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

     Some little Difference in the Proceeds of this Chapter, and my
     former "Copper for Poor Jack, your Honor".


On our arrival at my mother's, I found a letter from Bramble, stating
that he would be at Greenwich in two days, and, further, informing me
that the honorable company had been pleased, in consequence of the
report made of our good behavior, to award to him the sum of two hundred
pounds, and to me the sum of one hundred pounds, as a remuneration for
our assistance in the capture of the privateer.

This was news indeed. One hundred pounds! I never thought that I should
possess such a sum in my life. One hundred pounds! what should I do with
it? My mother was astonished, and then fell into a very grave mood.
Virginia was pleased, but appeared to care less about it than I thought
she would have done. My father came in as usual with Ben the Whaler, and
I read the letter.

"Why, Tom, that's about as much prize-money as I have made in all my
sarvice," said my father, "and you've been afloat only four months.
Come, missis, send for some beer, and let us drink Tom's health and
success to him. God bless you, my boy! the papers say you deserved it,
and that's better than your getting it. I'm proud of you; I am, indeed,
my boy. Your father's proud of you, Tom"--and here my father showed more
emotion than ever I witnessed in him before; however, he put his lips to
the porter-pot, and when he had drained it nearly to the bottom, he had
quite recovered himself.

"Well, Tom," said Ben, after he had finished the small modicum of beer
left him by my father, "and what do you mean to do with all that money?"

"I'm sure I don't know--I have no want of it--I have everything I wish
for."

"Come, missis," said my father, "we must have another pot, for I drank
deep, and Ben has been shared out." My mother very graciously sent for
another pot of porter, which, with the newspaper, occupied Ben and my
father till it was time for us to break up and go to bed.

The next morning when I went down I found Virginia alone, my mother
having returned to her room.

"Tom," said she, "what do you think my mother said to me when we were
going to bed last night?"

"Tell me."

"She said, 'Tom says he don't know what to do with his money. I only
wish I had it; I would turn it into three times the sum in three years,
and have a better home for you, my dear.'"

"Did she say how?"

"Yes, I asked her how; she said that she should take a new house with a
shop up the town, and set up as a milliner, with apprentices; that, as
soon as she was fairly employed, she should give up getting up fine
linen, and only take in laces to wash and mend, which was a very
profitable business."

"Well," says I, "Virginia, my mother is a hard-working woman, and a
clever woman, and I dare say she would do very well, and, as she says
she would have a better home for you, I think I shall let her have the
money; but I won't say so yet. I must talk about it to Peter Anderson,
and if he don't say no, she shall have it with pleasure."

"That will be very kind of you, Tom; and I hope mother will feel it, for
you don't owe her much."

"Never mind that; after breakfast I'll see Peter Anderson. Don't say a
word about it till I come back."

At breakfast-time my mother still appeared to be very thoughtful. The
fact was, that the idea of what advantage the money would be had taken
possession of her mind; and perhaps she thought that there was no chance
of obtaining it. Perhaps she felt that, had she treated me better, she
would have had it without difficulty--it was impossible to say exactly.

After breakfast I walked with Virginia to her school, and then set off
to Anderson, to whom I immediately imparted what had taken place. His
answer was decided:

"I think, Jack, you can't do better; but, at the same time, let us go to
your father and hear his opinion."

My father coincided with Anderson and me; and he added, "I tell you
what, your mother is not parfect exactly--though I say it, as shouldn't
say it--but still she does work hard, and she will work hard; she has
paid my little girl's schooling out of her own arnings, and, moreover,
she has found me one pot of porter at least every night, which has made
me very comfortable. Now, I've still a matter of forty pounds in the
lieutenant's hands. I'll add it to Tom's hundred pounds, and then she
will have a fair start. What d'ye think, Peter?"

"I think you are both right; and, Tom, you are doing your duty."

I knew what Anderson meant. I thanked him for his advice, and my father
and I went to my mother's house. I requested my father to stand
spokesman, which he did, ending by telling my mother that my hundred
pounds and his forty pounds were very much at her sarvice, and good luck
to her. Virginia's eyes glistened as she took me by the hand. My mother
replied, "Very well, if we pleased, she would do her best for us all."

The answer was hardly gracious, but I watched her countenance and saw
she was moved. Her thin lips quivered as she turned away and went
upstairs, which she did immediately after her reply. In about
half-an-hour, during which I was laughing with Virginia, my mother came
downstairs in her shawl and bonnet.

"Tom," said she, in a kind manner, "will you walk with Virginia to
school this afternoon, as I am going to have some conversation with Mr.
Wilson?"

The alteration in her tone of voice to me was immediately perceived by
Virginia.

"You are a dear good Tom," said she, kissing me, as soon as my mother
had left the house.

As soon as I had left Virginia at school, I went to call upon old Nanny,
whom I found quite brisk and lively, sorting old keys and rusty hinges.

"Well, Jack," said she, "so you are come at last! I thought you would
have been here yesterday, but nobody cares about an old woman like me. I
heard all about you, and how you took the privateer, and how the Company
have given you a hundred pounds; and when I heard that I said, Jack
(Poor Jack that was, who came begging to old Nanny to lend him money)
will not come to see me, he'll be too proud. Besides,' I said, 'his
family is getting up in the world: there's a baronet and his lady who
have taken them under their protection, and there's lawyer Wilson calls
at the house. Oh, dear me! it's the way of us all.'"

"And so you said all that to yourself, did you?" replied I.

"Yes, and a great deal more, too."

"Then, mother, you did me injustice. I could not well come before; I had
to see my father and mother and my sister, and I had business to
transact."

"Mercy on us! business to transact! Poor Jack had business to transact!
Here's a change from the time that his whole business was to touch his
hat for coppers and dip his head in the mud for a penny."

"Nevertheless, what I say is true, and you are very unjust to accuse me
as you have done. I have always thought of you, and have now with me
several things that I have collected for you."

"Yes, you promised me. Jack, you do keep your promises; I will say that
for you. Well, what have you got?"

I opened my handkerchief and pulled out several little articles, such as
fine worked baskets, shells, etc., and, among the rest, a pound of tea
in a leaden canister.

"There, mother, I have brought you them as a present, and I hope you
will take them."

Old Nanny turned them over one by one, rather contemptuously, as I
thought, until she came to the tea. "That may do," said she. "Why, Jack,
those are all very pretty things, but they are too pretty for my shop.
Why didn't you bring me some empty ginger beer bottles? I could have
sold them this very morning."

"Why, mother, I really did not like to ask for such things."

"No, there it is; you've grown so fine all of a sudden. These are no
use, for nobody will come to my shop to buy them."

"I thought you would like to keep them yourself, mother."

"Keep them? Oh, they are keepsakes, are they? Look you, Jack, if they
are to be kept you had better take them away at once, and give them to
the young girls. Girls like keepsakes, old women like money."

"Well, mother, sell them if you please; they are your own."

"Sell them? let me see--yes, I think I know where there is a sort of
curiosity-shop, in Church Street; but it's a long way to walk, Jack, and
that--let me see," continued she, counting the different articles, "one,
two, three--seven times, Jack."

"But why not take them all at once?"

"All at once, you stupid boy! I should get no more for two than for one.
No, no; one at a time, and I may make a few shillings. Well, Jack, it's
very kind of you, after all, so don't mind my being a little cross. It
was not on account of the things, but because you did not come to see
me, and I've been looking out for you."

"If I had thought that, I would have come sooner, mother, although it
would not have been convenient."

"I believe you, Jack, I believe you; but you young people can't feel as
an old woman like I do. There is but one thing I love in the world,
Jack, now, and that's you; and when I get weary of waiting for that one
thing, and it don't come, Jack, it does make a poor old woman like me a
little cross for the time."

I was touched with this last speech of old Nanny's, who had never shown
me any such a decided mark of kindness before. "Mother," said I, "depend
upon it, whenever I return to Greenwich, you shall be the first person
that I come to see after I have been to my mother's."

"That's kind, Jack, and you keep your promise always. Now sit down; you
don't want to go away already, do you?"

"No, mother, I came to spend the whole morning with you."

"Well, then, sit down--take care, Jack, you'll knock down that bottle.
Now tell me, what do you intend to do with your hundred pounds?"

"I have settled that already, mother. I have given it away."

"Already! Why, the boy has one hundred pounds given him on the morning,
and he gives it away before night, Mercy on us! who would ever think of
leaving you any money?"

"No one, mother; and I never expect any except what I earn."

"Why, Jack, do you know how much one hundred pounds is?"

"I think so."

"Now, Jack, tell me the truth, who did you give it to, your father, or
your little sister, or who? for I can't understand how a person could
give away one hundred pounds in any way or to anybody."

"Well, then, I gave it to my mother."

"Your mother! your mother, who has hated you, wished you dead,
half-starved you! Jack, is that possible?"

"My mother has not been fond of me, but she has worked hard for my
sister. This hundred pounds will enable her to do much better than she
does now, and it's of no use to me. Mother may love me yet, Nanny."

"She ought to," replied old Nanny, gravely; and then she covered her
face up with her hands. "Oh, what a difference!" ejaculated she at last.

"Difference, mother, difference? in what?"

"Oh, Jack, between you and--somebody else. Don't talk about it any more,
Jack," said Nanny, casting her eyes down to the presents I had brought
her. "I recollect the time," continued she, evidently talking to
herself, "that I had plenty of presents; ay, and when it was thought a
great favor. I would accept them. That was when I was young and
beautiful; yes, people would laugh if they heard me--young and very
beautiful, or men's smiles and women's hate were thrown away--

     "'Why so pale and wan, fond lover;
     Prithee, why so pale?'

"Yes, yes, bygones are bygones."

I was much surprised to hear old Nanny attempt to sing, and could hardly
help laughing; but I restrained myself. She didn't speak again, but
continued bent over one of the baskets, as if thinking about former
days. I broke the silence by saying:

"What part of the country did you live in when you were young, mother?"

"In the north part. But never ask questions."

"Yes, but, mother, I wish to ask questions. I wish you to tell me your
whole history. I will not tell it again to any one, I promise you."

"But why should you wish to know the history of a poor old thing like
me?"

"Because, mother, I am sure you must have seen better days."

"And if I have, Jack, is it kind to ask me to bring up to memory the
days when I was fair and rich, when the world smiled upon me, and I was
fool enough to think that it would always smile? Is it kind to recall
what was to an old, miserable, deserted wretch like me, struggling to
keep out of the workhouse? Look at me now, Jack, and see what I now am.
Is it not cruel to bring to my mind what I once was? Go to, Jack, you're
a selfish boy, and I don't love you."

"Indeed, mother, if I thought it would have given you pain, I never
would have asked you; but you cannot wonder at me. Recollect that you
have ever been my best friend; you trusted me when nobody else would;
and can you be surprised at my feeling an interest about you? Why,
mother, I don't even know your name."

"Well, Jack, you have put things in a better light. I do believe that
you care for me, and who else does? But, Jack, my name you never shall
know, even if I am to tell you all the rest."

"Were you ever married, mother?"

"Yes, child, I was married. Now, what's the next question?" continued
she, impatiently.

"Had you any children?"

"Yes, boy, I had one--one that was a source of misery and shame to his
doting mother." Old Nanny pressed her eyeballs with her knuckles as if
in agony.

"I won't ask you any more questions," said I mournfully.

"Not now, Jack, that's a good boy; some other day, perhaps, I'll tell
you all. There's a lesson in every life, and a warning in too many.
You'll come again, Jack--yes, I know you'll come to hear my story, so I
shall see you once more before you leave. Go now." Old Nanny rose and
went indoors, taking her stool in her hand, and leaving the presents
where they lay, outside--a proof that she was in great agitation. I put
them inside the threshold, and then went homeward.

I could riot help remarking, as I walked home, that old Nanny's language
and manner appeared very superior when she broke out in these
reminiscences of the past, and I felt more interest in her than I ever
had before. On my return, I found Bramble, who had come down sooner than
he was expected, sitting in the parlor with Peter Anderson and my
father, all smoking, with porter on the table.

"Well, Tom," said Bramble, "here I am two days before my time, but
that's better than being two days after it, and, what's more, I've got
the money, both yours and mine. They told me I should not get it for
three months at least; but I sent up my name to the Board, and explained
to them that a pilot could not wait like a purser while they were
passing accounts, so the gentlemen laughed, and gave me an order for it;
and I've got all my pilotage, too, so I'm a rich man just now. Come,
I'll give you yours at once, and I hope it may not be the last hundred
pounds that you'll pick up."

Bramble pulled his leathern case out of his pilot jacket, and counted
out ten ten-pound notes. "There, Jack, you ought to give me a receipt,
for I signed for you at the India House."

"Oh, you've plenty of witnesses," replied I, as I collected the notes,
and, giving them to Virginia, told her to take them to my mother, who
was upstairs in her room.

"To tell you the truth, Jack, this two hundred pounds, which I earned so
easily, has just come in the right time, and with it and my pilotage I
shall now be able to do what I have long wished."

"And what's that?" inquired I. "Something for Bessy, I suppose."

"Exactly, Tom, it is something for Bessy; that is, it will be by-and-by.
I've a good matter of money, which I've laid by year after year, and
worked hard for it, too, and I never have known what to do with it. I
can't understand the Funds and those sort of things, so I have kept some
here and some there. Now, you know the grass land at the back of the
cottage: it forms part of a tidy little farm, which is rented for
seventy pounds a year, by a good man, and it has been for sale these
three years; but I never could manage the price till now. When we go
back to Deal, I shall try if I can buy that farm; for, you see, money
may slip through a man's fingers in many ways, but land can't run away;
and, as you say, it will be Bessy's one of these days--and more, too, if
I can scrape it up."

"You are right, Bramble," said Peter Anderson, "and I am glad to hear
that you can afford to buy the land."

"Why, there's money to be picked up by pilotage if you work hard, and
aren't afraid of heavy ships," replied Bramble.

"Well, I never had a piece of land, and never shall have, I suppose,"
said my father. "I wonder how a man must feel who can stand on a piece
of ground and say, 'This is my own!'"

"Who knows, father? it's not impossible but you may."

"Impossible! No, nothing's impossible, as they say on board of a
man-of-war. It's not impossible to get an apology out of a midshipman,
but it's the next thing to it."

"Why do they say that, father?"

"Because midshipmen are so saucy--why, I don't know. They haven't no
rank as officers, nor so much pay as a petty officer, and yet they give
themselves more airs than a lieutenant."

"I'll tell you why," replied Anderson. "A lieutenant takes care what he
is about. He is an officer, and has something to lose; but a midshipman
has nothing to lose, and therefore he cares about nothing. You can't
break a midshipman, as the saying is, unless you break his neck. And
they have necks which aren't easily broken, that's sartain."

"They do seem to me to have more lives than a cat," observed my father,
who, after a pause, continued: "Well, I was saying how hard it was to
get an apology out of a midshipman. I'll just tell you what took place
on board of one ship I served in. There was a young midshipman on board
who was mighty free with his tongue; he didn't care what he said to
anybody, from the captain downward. He'd have his joke, come what would,
and he'd set everybody a-laughing; punish him as much as you please, it
was all the same. One day, when we were off Halifax Harbor, the master,
who was a good-tempered fellow enough, but not overbright, was angry
with this young chap for something that he had not done, and called him
a 'confounded young bear,' upon which the youngster runs to the
Jacob-ladder of the main rigging, climbs up, and as soon as he had
gained the main rattlings he cries out, 'Well, if I'm a bear, you aren't
fit to carry guts to a bear.' 'What, sir?' cried the master. 'Mutiny, by
heavens! Up to the masthead, sir, directly.' 'Don't you see that I was
going of my own accord?' replied the midshipman; for, you see, he knew
that he would be sent there, so he went up the rigging on purpose. Well,
this was rather a serious affair, and so the master reports it to the
first lieutenant, who reports it to the captain, who sends for the
youngster on the quarter-deck, at the time that the ship's company were
at quarters. 'Mr. ----' (I forget his name), said the captain (drawing
himself up to his full height, and perhaps an inch or two above it, as
they say), 'you have been guilty of disrespect to your superior officer,
in telling him that he was not fit to carry guts to a bear' (the captain
could hardly help laughing). 'Now, sir,' continued he, recovering
himself, 'I give you your choice: either you will make an apology to Mr.
Owen on this quarter-deck, or you must quit my ship immediately.' 'Sir,'
replied the midshipman, 'I don't think it quite fair that the master
should first punish me himself and then complain to you afterward. He
has taken the law into his own hands already by mastheading me for eight
hours, and now he makes a complaint to you; but I am always ready to do
as you wish, and, to please you, I will make an apology.' 'There is some
truth in your observation,' replied the captain, 'and I have pointed the
same out to the master; but still, this is a breach of discipline which
cannot be passed over, and requires a public retraction before the whole
ship's company. I therefore insist upon your retracting what you have
said.' 'Certainly, sir,' replied the youngster. 'Mr. Owen,' continued
he, turning to the master, 'I said that you were _not_ fit to carry guts
to a bear. I was in the wrong, and I retract with pleasure, for I am
perfectly satisfied that you _are fit_ to carry them.' 'Sir!' cried the
captain. 'Oh, Captain G----!' interrupted the master, who did not take
the joke, 'I'm perfectly satisfied. The young gentleman sees his error,
and has retracted; I ask no more.' 'If you are satisfied, sir,' replied
the captain, biting his lips, 'of course I have nothing more to say.
Youngster, you may go to your duty, and recollect that you never again
use such expressions to your superior officer,' and, said he in a low
tone, 'I may add, never venture in my presence to make such an apology
as that again.'"

I never saw old Anderson laugh so much as he did at this story of my
father's. They continued to talk and smoke their pipes till about nine
o'clock, when my father and he went to the hospital, and Bramble took
possession of a bed which had been prepared for him in my mother's
house.


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

     In which I learn the History of Old Nanny.


The next day, as soon as I had finished a letter to Bessy, in which I
gave her a detail of what had passed, I went to old Nanny's to persuade
her, if possible, to tell me her history. She was not at home, the door
of her house was locked and the shutters of the shop fastened. I was
about to return to Fisher's Alley, when I perceived her hobbling down
the street. I thought it better to make it appear as if I met her by
accident; so I crossed over the way and walked toward her. "Well,
mother," said I, "are you out so early?"

"Ah, Jack, is it you? Yes, it is through you that I have had to take so
long a walk."

"Through me?"

"Yes, those presents you brought me. I'm almost dead. Why do you bring
such things? But I did not do badly, that's the truth."

I knew from this admission that old Nanny had sold them for more than
she expected; indeed, she proved it by saying, as she arrived at her
house, "Well, Jack, it's very troublesome to have to walk so far; but as
you cannot get me bottles or those kind of things, you must bring me
what you can, and I must make the best of them. I don't mind trouble
for your sake, Jack. Now take the key, unlock the door, and then take
down the shutters; and mind how you walk about, Jack, or you'll break
half the things in my shop." I did as she requested, and then we sat
down together at the door as usual.

"I think I shall go away to-morrow, or early the next morning, mother,"
said I, "for Bramble is here, and he never stays long from his work"

"That's all right, he sets a good example; and, Jack, if you do go, see
if you can't beg a few more shells for me. I like shells."

"Yes, mother, I will not forget; but, as this is the last day I shall
see you for some time, will you not keep your promise to me, and tell me
your history?"

"Jack, Jack, you are the most persevering creature I ever did see. I'm
sure I shall be worried out of my life until I tell you, and so I may as
well tell you at once, and there'll be an end of it; but I wish you had
not asked me. Jack, I do indeed. I thought of it last night when I was
in bed, and at one time I made up my mind that I would not tell you, and
then I thought again that I would; for, Jack, as I said yesterday,
there's a lesson in every life, and a warning in too many, and maybe
mine will prove a warning to you, so far as to make you prevent a mother
from being so foolish as I have been.

[Illustration: NANNY RELATING HER STORY.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 275.]

"Now, Jack, listen to me: mine is an old story, but in most cases the
consequences have not been so fatal. I shall not tell you my name; it
was once a fair one, but now tarnished. I was the only daughter of a
merchant and ship-owner, a rich man, and the first person in consequence
in the seaport town where I was born and brought up. I never knew my
mother, who died a year after I was born. I was brought up as most girls
are who have no mother or brothers; in short, I was much indulged by my
father and flattered by other people. I was well educated, as you may
suppose; and, moreover, what you may not credit quite so easily, I was
very handsome. In short, I was a beauty and a fortune, at the head of
the society of the place, caressed, indulged, and flattered by all.
This, if it did not spoil me, at least made me willful. I had many
offers, and many intended offers, which I nipped in the bud, and I was
twenty-three before I saw any one who pleased me. At last a vessel came
in consigned to the house, and the captain was invited to dinner. He was
a handsome careless young man, constantly talking about the qualities of
his ship, and, to my surprise, paying me little or none of that
attention which I now considered as my due. This piqued me, and in the
end I set my affections on him; either he did not or would not perceive
it, and he sailed without showing me any preference. In six months he
returned, and whether it was that he was told of by others, or at last
perceived, my feelings toward him, he joined the crowd of suitors, made
a proposal in his offhand manner, as if he was indifferent as to my
reply, and was accepted. My father, to whom he communicated the
intelligence as carelessly as if he were talking about freight, did not
approve of the match. 'Very well,' replied he, 'I shall say no more; as
long as a man has a ship he does not want a wife.' He returned and
stated what had passed, and my father also spoke to me. I was
self-willed and determined, and my father yielded. We were married, and
I certainly had no reason to complain of my husband, who was very kind
to me. But I was jealous of--what do you think? Of his ship! For he
cared more for it than he did for me; and three months after our
marriage, notwithstanding all my tears and entreaties, and the
expostulations of my father, he would sail again. He offered to take me
with him, and I would gladly have gone, but my father would not listen
to it. He sailed, and I never saw him again; his vessel, with all hands,
foundered, with many others, in a heavy gale. The news did not arrive
until many months afterward, and I had not been a mother more than six
weeks when I found that I was a widow. I have passed all this over
quickly, Jack, because it is of less moment--my trials had not
commenced.

"The loss of my husband, as may be supposed, only endeared my child the
more to me, and I wept over him as he smiled upon me in his cradle. My
father had reverses in his business, but those I cared little for. He
did, however: he had been the richest man in the town, he was now
comparatively poor; his pride was crushed, it broke his heart, and he
died; the whole of his assets at the winding up of his affairs not
exceeding ten thousand pounds. This was, however, quite enough, and more
than enough, for me. I thought but of one object--it was my darling boy;
he represented to me all I had lost; in him I saw my husband, father,
and everything. I lived but for him. He was my idolatry, Jack. I
worshiped the creature instead of the Creator.

"As he grew up I indulged him in everything; he never was checked; I
worried myself day and night to please him, and yet he never was
pleased. He was so spoiled that he did not know what he wanted. He was a
misery to himself and all about him, except to me, who was so blinded by
my love. As he advanced to manhood his temper showed itself to be
violent and uncontrollable; he was the terror of others, and prudent
people would shake their heads and prophesy. He would not submit to any
profession; the only wish that he had was to go to sea, and that was my
terror. I implored him on my knees not to think of it, but in vain; at
first he used to threaten when he wanted money for his extravagances,
and it was a sure way to obtain it; but one day I discovered that he had
quitted the port without saying farewell, and that he had sailed in a
vessel bound to the coast of Africa. A short letter and a heavy bill was
received from Portsmouth, and I did not hear of him for two years. I was
heartbroken, but not weaned from him; I counted the days for his return.
At last he came--browned by the climate, full of oaths, savage in his
bearing, and occasionally referring to scenes which made me shudder; but
he was my son, my only son, and I loved him as much as ever. He was now
but seldom at home, for he lived almost at the gaming-tables; if he came
to me, it was to extort money, and he never failed. I sold out my
property to support his extravagance, and by degrees it was rapidly
diminishing. I begged him, I entreated him, to be more prudent, but he
laughed, and promised to return me all the first lucky hit he should
make; but that lucky hit never came, and at last I had but two thousand
pounds left. This I positively refused to part with: the interest of it
was barely sufficient for my wants; I asked no more, but I expostulated
and I reasoned with him in vain. He only begged me for five hundred
pounds; if I sold the money out, he would tell me where I might have as
good interest for the fifteen hundred pounds as I now received for the
two thousand pounds. He begged and entreated me, he kissed, and he even
wept. I could not withstand his importunities: I sold out the money, and
gave him the sum he wanted; the fifteen hundred pounds I put by in my
desk, to invest as he had pointed out. That very night he forced the
lock, took out the money, and left me without a sixpence in the world."

"What a villain!" exclaimed I.

"Yes, you may so. Jack; but who made him such a villain but his foolish
doting mother? Had I done him justice, had I checked him when young, had
I brought him up as I ought to have done, he might now have been a
happiness and a blessing to his mother. I was the person to blame, not
he; and many years of anguish have I lamented my folly and my
wretchedness."

"You loved him too much, mother, but it was a fault on the right side."

"No, Jack, that is an error of yours; it was a fault on the wrong side.
There is no credit to a mother in loving her children, for she cannot
help it. It is a natural instinct implanted in the mother's heart by the
Almighty, and in following this instinct we do no more than the beasts
of the field. The duty of a mother is to check that feeling as far as it
interferes with the happiness and well-doing of her children, and it is
her duty to do so, and to punish herself in correcting her children.
Jack, it is a selfish feeling which induces mothers to spoil their
children."

"At all events my mother has never spoiled me," replied I.

"No, Jack, she has not; but observe the consequence. You said just now
that excessive tenderness was a fault on the right side; now, how
completely have you proved the contrary! I do not intend to defend your
mother's conduct toward you; she has been unkind to you in your
childhood, and has never shown the affection that a mother ought; but is
not her fault a fault on the right side? Jack, you recollect my saying
'what a difference,' when you told me what you had done for your mother;
I then referred to my son and to you. I indulged him in everything,
sacrificed everything, and he robbed me and left me a beggar. Your
mother has been severe upon you, and yet the first time you have the
means of showing your duty you give her all the money you have in the
world. You mother may not be right, Jack, but I was dreadfully wrong,
and the result has proved it."

"Well, mother, go on, pray."

"My story is now soon told. I struggled on how I could for more than two
years by selling my furniture and a few ornaments, then the blow came.
When I heard it I would not remain in the town; I left for London,
picked up my living how I could and where I could, till at last I came
down here. Time was as a dream; reflection was too painful. I felt that
it was all my fault, all my own doing. My heart became hardened, and
continued so till I loved you, Jack; and now I have better feelings, at
least I think so."

"But, mother, what was the blow? Is he dead?"

"Yes, Jack, dead--dead on the gibbet. He was hanged for piracy at Port
Royal, Jamaica. Jack," said Nanny, seizing my hand, and pressing it in
her long fingers, "this is a secret; recollect, a secret deep as the
grave; promise me, as you hope for heaven!"

"I do, mother, as I hope for heaven."

"Now, Jack, leave me. Good-by. You will come and see me when you return,
and never bring this subject up again. Bless you, my child! bless you!"

I left poor old Nanny with her face buried in her apron; and it was in a
very melancholy mood that I returned home. I could not help thinking of
the picture in the spelling-book, where the young man at the gallows is
biting off the ear of his mother, who, by her indulgence, had brought
him to that disgrace.


CHAPTER THIRTY

     Strong symptoms of Mutiny, which is fortunately Quelled by granting
     a Supply.


It was a beautiful sunshiny warm morning when I arose, and, as Bramble
intended that we should leave Greenwich the next day, I thought I might
as well call at the house of Dr. Tadpole, and try if I could see him
before I went. When I arrived there he was not at home, but my namesake
Tom was, as usual, in the shop. Tom was two or three years older than
me, being between seventeen and eighteen, and he had now grown a great
tall fellow. We always were very good friends, when we occasionally met,
and he generally appeared to be as good tempered and grinning as ever;
but when I now entered the shop I found him very grave and dejected, so
much so that I could not help asking him what was the matter.

"Matter enough, I think," said Tom, who was pounding something in the
mortar. "I'll not stay here, that's flat. I'll break my indentures, as
sure as my name's Tom Cob, and I'll set up an opposition, and I'll join
the Friends of the People Society, and the Anti-Bible Society, and every
other opposition Anti in the country."

"Why, what has happened, Tom?"

"I'll make speeches against Church and against State, and against the
Aristocracy, and Habeas Corpus, and against Physic, and against Standing
Armies, and Magna Charta, and every other rascally tyranny and
oppression to which we are subjected, that I will!" Here Tom gave such a
thump with the pestle that I thought he would have split the mortar.

"But what is it, Tom?" inquired I, as I sat down. "What has the doctor
done?"

"Why, I'll tell you, the liquorice is all gone, and he won't order any
more."

"Well, that is because you have eaten it all."

"No, I haven't; I haven't eaten a bit for these five weeks: it's all
been used in pharmacopey, honestly used, and he can't deny it."

"Who used it?"

"Why, I did: he said he wouldn't stand my eating liquorice, and I told
him that I shouldn't eat any more. No more I have, but I ain't well, and
I prescribes for myself. Haven't I a right to do that? Mayn't I physic
myself? I am a doctor as well as he is. Who makes up all the medicine, I
should like to know? who ties up the bottles and writes directions?
Well, my insides are out of order, and I prescribes for myself--black
draughts 'omnes duas horas sumendum'; and now he says that, as the
ingredients are all gone, I shan't take any more."

"And pray what were the ingredients, Tom?"

"Why, laxative and alterative, as suits my complaint--Extract.
liquor.--aqua pura--haustus."

"And what is that?"

"_Liquorice and water_, to be sure; there's nothing else I can take.
I've tasted everything in the shop, from plate powder to aqua fortis,
and everything goes against my stomach."

"Well, Tom, it's a hard case; but perhaps the doctor will think better
of it"

"He'd better, or I'll set up for myself, for I won't stand it any
longer; it ain't only for myself but for others that I care. Why, I've a
hankering for Anny Whistle (you know her, don't you?), a pretty little
girl with red lips--lives in Church Street. Well, as long as I could
bring her a bit of liquorice when I went to see her all was smooth
enough, and I got many a kiss when no one was nigh; but now that I can't
fork out a bit as big as a marble, she's getting quite shy of me, and is
always walking with Bill, the butcher's boy. I know he gives her bull's
eyes--I seed him one day buying a ha'p'orth. Now, ain't that hard?"

"Why, certainly, the affair becomes serious; but, still, how you are to
set up for yourself I don't know. You are not qualified."

"Oh! ain't I? Just as much as most doctors are. There must be a
beginning, and if I gives wrong medicine at first, then I'll try
another, and so on, until I come to what will cure them. Soon learn,
Tom."

"Well, but how will you do about surgery?"

"Surgery? Oh, I'll do very well; don't know much about it just now--soon
learn."

"Why, would you venture to take off a man's leg, Tom? Do you know how to
take up the arteries?"

"Would I take off a man's leg? To be sure I would, as quick as the
doctor could. As for the arteries, why, I might puzzle a little about
them; but by the time I had taken off three or four legs I should know
something about them. Practice makes perfect--soon learn, Tom."

"But all your first patients would die."

"I don't know that. At all events I should do my best, and no man can do
more, and if they did die, why, it would be by the visitation of God,
wouldn't it?"

"Not altogether, I'm afraid. It won't do, Tom."

"It has done from the beginning of the world, and will do. I say there's
no learning without practice. People spoil at first in every trade, and
make afterward, and a man ain't born a doctor any more than he is a
carpenter."

"No, but if I recollect right, to be a surgeon you ought to walk the
hospital, as they term it."

"Well, and haven't I for these last four years? When I carries out my
basket of physic I walks the _hospital_ right through, twice at least
every day in the week."

"That's Greenwich Hospital."

"Well, so it is, and plenty of surgical cases in it. However, the doctor
and I must come to a proper understanding. I didn't clean his boots this
morning. I wish, if you see him, Tom, you'd reason with him a little."

"I'll see what I can do, but don't be rash. Good-by, Tom; mind you tell
the doctor that I called."

"Well, I will; but that's not in my indentures."

I called in at the widow's after I left the doctor's shop, and
communicated the intended rebellion on the part of Tom.

"Well," said Mrs. St. Felix, "I shall not forget to make the Spanish
claim, and prevent Tom from walking Spanish. The doctor is very
inconsiderate; he forgets that Tom's regard for liquorice is quite as
strong as his own liking for a cigar. Now, if the doctor don't promise
me to have a fresh supply for Tom, I won't let him have a cigar for
himself."

The doctor was compelled to surrender at discretion. The next wagon
brought down one hundred weight of liquorice, and Tom recovered his
health and the smiles of Anny Whistle.

When I left the widow's I proceeded to the hospital to find Anderson and
my father. As I walked along I perceived Dick Harness on a bench, who
hailed me.

"Well, Tom, I haven't seen anything of you for I don't know how long,
since you've taken to a seafaring life. This is a beautiful day, is it
not? It makes one feel so happy and cheerful such a day as this.
Everybody and everything looks gay, the birds seem so merry, and the
little clouds seem to scud away as if their hearts were as light as
themselves. Come, sit down a minute; here's a song for you you've never
heard, one I don't often sing, because they say it's all about myself."

"Well, then, I should like to hear that."

"Here goes, then.

     "Sam Swipes, he was a seaman true,
       As brave and bold a tar
     As e'er was dressed in navy blue
       On board a man-of-war.

     "One fault he had--on sea or land
       He was a thirsty dog;
     For Sammy never could withstand
       A glass or so of grog.

     "He always liked to be at sea,
       For e'en on shore, the rover,
     If not as drunk as he could be
       Was always 'half seas over.'

     "The gunner, who was apt to scoff,
       With jokes most aptly timed,
     Said Sam might any day go off,
       'Cause he was always 'primed,'

     "Sam didn't want a feeling heart,
       Though never seen to cry;
     Yet tears were always on the start,
       'The drop was in his eye.'

     "At fighting Sam was never shy,
       A most undoubted merit;
     His courage never failed, and why?
       He was so full of 'spirit.'

     "In action he had lost an eye,
       But that gave him no trouble;
     Quoth Sam, I have no cause to sigh,
       I'm always 'seeing double.'

     "A shot from an unlucky gun
       Put Sam on timber pegs;
     It didn't signify to one
       Who ne'er could 'keep his legs.'

     "One night he filled a pail with grog,
       Determined he would suck it;
     He drained it dry, the thirsty dog!
       Hiccupped, and 'kicked the bucket.'"

"There's Bill's fiddle, Dick," said I, getting up; "I thought you would
bring him out."

"Yes, I was sure of that. I'll sing another verse or two, and then be
off to the park, and leave him in the lurch."

"I can't wait any more, Dick; I must go to my father," said I.

"Well, off with you, then, and I'm off, too. Sing tura la, tura la, tura
lura la. Bill's coming down. How savage the nigger will be!"


CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

     In which my Father proves he can give good Advice as well as Peter
     Anderson.


I found my father under the colonnade, and inquired of him if Anderson
was there.

"No, he's not," replied my father; "he has been sent for by the
officers; so stop, Tom--that is, if you can spare a minute for your own
father."

"Of course I can," replied I, taking my seat by him.

"Why, you see, boy," said my father, "I have but very little of your
company, and I feel it, Tom, I do indeed. I'm not jealous, and I know
that Peter Anderson has done more for you than ever I could, for I've no
larning to signify; but still, Tom, I am your father, and I don't think
Peter, although he may be proud of your turning out so well, can feel
exactly for you what a father does. I'm proud enough of you, Heaven
knows, and it does hurt me a little when I find that, whenever you come
here, it is for Peter Anderson, and it makes me wish sometimes that I
had been Peter Anderson instead of your father."

"Indeed, father," replied I, "I hope you don't think that I like
Anderson better than I do you; but you recollect that I have been
accustomed all my life to take his advice."

"I know it, boy, I know it. I was serving my country and doing my duty
on board of a King's ship, and you were left here, and therefore lucky
it was that you fell in with old Peter; but, Tom, I could not be in two
places at the same time, and if I did not do my duty as a father toward
you, at all events I was doing my duty to my country."

"To be sure you were, and it was of more importance than looking after a
brat like me," replied I, soothingly, for I really never had the idea
that my father could have showed so much feeling.

"Why, Tom, I can't say that I thought so, for the fact is I didn't think
about it; indeed, I thought about nothing. Sailors afloat have little
time to think; they can't think when it's their watch on deck, for they
are too busy; nor at their watch below, for they're too tired; nor at
meal-times, for they must look after their share of the victuals;
indeed, there is not any time to think on board ship, and that's a fact.
But, Tom, since I've been laid up here I have thought a good deal. All
is calm and quiet, and one day passes just like the other, and no fear
of interruption when one don't wish it--and I have thought a good deal.
At first I thought it a hard case to be shoved on the shelf at my age,
but I don't think so now--I'm quite satisfied."

"I'm glad to hear you say so, father."

"Yes, Tom. And then, you see, when I was afloat, I didn't think any good
of your mother, and I was glad to keep out of her way; and then I didn't
care about my children, for I didn't know them; but now I've other
thoughts, Tom. I don't think your mother so bad, after all; to be sure,
she looks down upon me 'cause I'm not genteel; but I suppose I aren't,
and she has been used to the company of gentlefolk; besides she works
hard, and now that I don't annoy her by getting tipsy, as I used to
do, at all events she's civil; and then I never knew what it was to have
children until I came here, and found Virginia and you; and I'm proud of
you both, and love you both better than anything on earth; and, although
I may not be so well brought up or so well taught as you both are,
still, Tom, I'm your father, and all I can say is, I wish for your sakes
I was better than I am."

[Illustration: JACK AND HIS FATHER UNDER THE COLONNADE.--Marryat, Vol
X., p. 289.]

"Don't say so, father. You know that Virginia and I are both as fond of
you as you are of us."

"Well, mayhap you are; I don't say no. You are both good children, and
at all events would try to like me; but still I do feel that you can't
look up to me exactly; but that's my misfortune, Tom, more than my
fault. I haven't larning like Anderson, or gentility like your mother.
I've only a true heart to offer to you. You see, Tom, I've said all this
because you are always after Anderson; not but that I like Anderson, for
he's a good man, and has been of sarvice to me, and I don't think he
would ever say anything to you that would make you think less of me."

"No, indeed, father; on the contrary, I once asked him his opinion about
you, and he spoke most highly of you; and whenever I go to him for
advice, he always sends me to you to approve of what he has said."

"Well, he is a good man, and I'm very sorry to have any feeling of envy
in me, that's the truth; but still a father must have a father's
feelings. Don't let us say anything more about it, Tom; only try next
time, when you want advice, whether I can't give it. You can always go
to Peter afterward, and see whether I'm right or wrong."

"I will indeed, my dear father, now I know that you wish it."

I never felt so warm toward my father as after this conversation; there
was so much affection toward me, and yet so much humility shown by him,
as respected himself, that I was quite touched with it, and I began to
think that he really had had occasion to complain, and that I had not
treated him with that respect which he deserved.

"Now, Tom, I've something to say to you. When Anderson, Bramble, and I
were taking a pipe together last night, Bramble said that he had a
letter from the captain of the Indiaman, offering you a berth on board
as guinea-pig, or midshipman. He said that he had not shown it to you as
yet, because it was of no use, as he was sure you would not accept it.
Well, Anderson and I said that at least you ought to know it, and have
the refusal; and your mother pricked up her ears and said that it was
much more genteel than being a pilot; so I now put the question to you.'

"Thank you, father; but Bramble was right. I shall not accept of it,
although I am much obliged to the captain."

Here my father stopped me. "First, Tom," said he, "we must overhaul the
pros and cons, as people call them. Old Anderson weighed them very
closely, and now you shall hear them." Here my father commenced a long
story, with which I shall not tire the reader, as to the prospects on
either side; but as soon as he had finished I replied:

"That all he said was very true; but that I had made up my mind that, if
ever I were regularly to serve, it should be in a man-of-war, not in a
merchant vessel; that it was certainly possible that I might, after
serving many years, become a captain of an Indiaman, which was a high
position, but I preferred being a pilot, and more my own master; that if
there were no other objections, that of being absent for three years at
a time from him and Virginia would be more than sufficient, and that I
was very happy where I was, as Bramble and little Bessy were almost
equal to another father and another sister. A rolling stone gathers no
moss, they say, father. I have entered into the pilot service, and in
that I hope to remain."

"Well, you're right, Tom; Bramble said you would decide so. There's
nothing like being contented with what we are and what we have got."

"I might probably become a richer man if I were to be a captain of an
Indiaman," observed I; "but I'm sure if ever I'm able to buy a little
farm, as Bramble is now able to do, I shall think myself quite rich
enough."

"You see, Tom, it all depends upon what people's ideas are. One man
thinks himself rich with what another would think that he was a beggar.
Now I dare say old Nanny thinks that shop of old iron and rubbish that
she has got together the finest shop in all Greenwich."

"I believe she does, and the prettiest," replied I, laughing.

"Well now, Tom, an odd thing happened the other day while you were away,
just to prove how true that is. You may recollect a little old man in
our ward, Phil Nobbs they called him, who walked with his chin half a
yard before him. Well, he took to the sick ward and died, since you have
been gone. I went to see him, of course, and he was always talking about
his property; and none of us knew where it was, but we supposed that he
had it somewhere. ZIDAR explained how NAL purchased hardware and
software capable of performing optical character recognition (OCR) and
text conversion and used its own staff to convert texts. The process,
ZIDAR said, required extensive editing and project staff found themselves
considering alternatives, including rekeying and/or creating abstracts
or summaries of texts. NAL reckoned costs at $7 per page. By way of
contrast, Ricky ERWAY explained that American Memory had decided from
the start to contract out conversion to external service bureaus. The
criteria used to select these contractors were cost and quality of
results, as opposed to methods of conversion. ERWAY noted that historical
documents or books often do not lend themselves to OCR. Bound materials
represent a special problem. In her experience, quality control--inspecting
incoming materials, counting errors in samples--posed the most
time-consuming aspect of contracting out conversion. ERWAY reckoned
American Memory's costs at $4 per page, but cautioned that fewer
cost-elements had been included than in NAL's figure.

OPTIONS FOR DISSEMINATION
The topic of dissemination proper emerged at various points during the
Workshop. At the session devoted to national and international computer
networks, LYNCH, Howard BESSER, Ronald LARSEN, and Edwin BROWNRIGG
highlighted the virtues of Internet today and of the network that
will evolve from Internet. Listeners could discern in these narratives a
vision of an information democracy in which millions of citizens
freely find and use what they need. LYNCH noted that a lack of standards
inhibits disseminating multimedia on the network, a topic also discussed
by BESSER. LARSEN addressed the issues of network scalability and modularity
and commented upon the difficulty of anticipating the effects of growth
in orders of magnitude. BROWNRIGG talked about the ability of packet radio
to provide certain links in a network without the need for wiring.
However, the presenters also called attention to the shortcomings and
incongruities of present-day computer networks. For example: 1)
Network use is growing dramatically, but much network traffic
consists of personal communication (E-mail). 2) Large bodies of
information are available, but a user's ability to search across
their entirety is limited. 3) There are significant resources for
science and technology, but few network sources provide content in
the humanities. 4) Machine-readable texts are commonplace, but the
capability of the system to deal with images (let alone other media
formats) lags behind.

A glimpse of a multimedia future for networks, however, was provided
by Maria LEBRON in her overview of the Online Journal of Current Clinical
Trials (OJCCT), and the process of scholarly publishing on-line.

The contrasting form of the CD-ROM disk was never systematically analyzed,
but attendees could glean an impression from several of the show-and-tell
presentations. The Perseus and American Memory examples demonstrated
recently published disks, while the descriptions of the IBYCUS version
of the Papers of George Washington and Chadwyck-Healey's Patrologia
Latina Database (PLD) told of disks to come. According to Eric CALALUCA,
PLD's principal focus has been on converting Jacques-Paul Migne's
definitive collection of Latin texts to machine-readable form. Although
everyone could share the network advocates' enthusiasm for an on-line
future, the possibility of rolling up one's sleeves for a session with
a CD-ROM containing both textual materials and a powerful retrieval engine
made the disk seem an appealing vessel indeed. The overall discussion
suggested that the transition from CD-ROM to on-line networked access may
prove far slower and more difficult than has been anticipated.

WHO ARE THE USERS AND WHAT DO THEY DO?

Although concerned with the technicalities of production, the Workshop
never lost sight of the purposes and uses of electronic versions of
textual materials. As noted above, those interested in imaging discussed
the problematical matter of digital preservation, while the TEI
proponents described how machine-readable texts can be used in research.
This latter topic received thorough treatment in the paper read by Avra
MICHELSON.
She placed the phenomenon of electronic texts within the context of
broader trends in information technology and scholarly communication.

Among other things, MICHELSON described on-line conferences that represent
a vigorous and important intellectual forum for certain disciplines.
Internet now carries more than 700 conferences, with about 80 percent
of these devoted to topics in the social sciences and the humanities.
Other scholars use on-line networks for "distance learning."
Meanwhile, there has been a tremendous growth in end-user computing;
professors today are less likely than their predecessors to ask
the campus computer center to process their data.

Electronic texts are one key to these sophisticated applications, MICHELSON
reported, and more and more scholars in the humanities now work
in an on-line environment.

Toward the end of the Workshop, Michael LESK presented a corollary to
MICHELSON's talk, reporting the results of an experiment that
compared the work of one group of chemistry students using traditional
printed texts and two groups using electronic sources.

The experiment demonstrated that in the event one does not know what
to read, one needs the electronic systems; the electronic systems
hold no advantage at the moment if one knows what to read, but
neither do they impose a penalty.

DALY provided an anecdotal account of the revolutionizing impact
of the new technology on his previous methods of research in the
field of classics.

His account, by extrapolation, served to illustrate in part the arguments
made by MICHELSON concerning the positive effects of the sudden and radical
transformation being wrought in the ways scholars work.

Susan VECCIA and Joanne FREEMAN delineated the use of electronic
materials outside the university.

The most interesting aspect of their use, FREEMAN said, could be
seen as a paradox: teachers in elementary and secondary schools
requested access to primary source materials but, at the same time,
found that "primariness" itself made these materials difficult for
their students to use.

OTHER TOPICS
Marybeth PETERS reviewed copyright law in the United States and offered
advice during a lively discussion of this subject. But uncertainty
remains concerning the price of copyright in a digital medium, because a
solution remains to be worked out concerning management and synthesis
of copyrighted and out-of-copyright pieces of a database.

As moderator of the final session of the Workshop, Prosser GIFFORD directed
discussion to future courses of action and the potential role of LC in
advancing them. Among the recommendations that emerged were the
following:

* Workshop participants should 1) begin to think about working with
image material, but structure and digitize it in such a way that
at a later stage it can be interpreted into text, and 2) find a
common way to build text and images together so that they can be
used jointly at some stage in the future, with appropriate network
support, because that is how users will want to access these
materials.

The Library might encourage attempts to bring together people who are
working on texts and images.

* A network version of American Memory should be developed or consideration
should be given to making the data in it available to people interested
in doing network multimedia. Given the current dearth of digital data
that is appealing and unencumbered by extremely complex rights problems,
developing a network version of American Memory could do much to help
make network multimedia a reality

.

* Concerning the thorny issue of electronic deposit, LC should initiate a
catalytic process in terms of distributed responsibility, that is, bring
together the distributed organizations and set up a study group to look
at all the issues related to electronic deposit and see where we as
a nation should move. For example, LC might attempt to persuade one major
library in each state to deal with its state equivalent publisher,
which might produce a cooperative project that would be equitably
distributed around the country, and one in which LC would be dealing
with a minimal number of publishers and minimal copyright problems.

LC must also deal with the concept of on-line publishing, determining,
among other things, how serials such as OJCCT might be deposited
for copyright

.

* Since a number of projects are planning to carry out preservation
by creating digital images that will end up in on-line or near-line
storage at some institution, LC might play a helpful role, at least in
the near term, by accelerating how to catalog that information
into the Research Library Information Network (RLIN) and then into OCLC,
so that it would be accessible.

This would reduce the possibility of multiple institutions digitizing
the same work.

CONCLUSION
The Workshop was valuable because it brought together partisans from various
groups and provided an occasion to compare goals and methods. The
more committed partisans frequently communicate with others in their
groups, but less often across group boundaries. The Workshop was also
valuable to attendees--including those involved with American Memory--who
came less committed to particular approaches or concepts. These attendees
learned a great deal, and plan to select and employ elements of
imaging, text-coding, and networked distribution that suit their
respective projects and purposes.

Still, reality rears its ugly head: no breakthrough has been achieved.
On the imaging side, one confronts a proliferation of competing
data-interchange standards and a lack of consensus on the role of digital
facsimiles in preservation. In the realm of machine-readable texts, one
encounters a reasonably mature standard but methodological difficulties
and high costs. These latter problems, of course, represent a special
impediment to the desire, as it is sometimes expressed in the
popular press, "to put the [contents of the] Library of Congress
on line."

In the words of one participant, there was "no solution to the
economic problems--the projects that are out there are surviving,
but it is going to be a lot of work to transform the information
industry, and so far the investment to do that is not forthcoming"
(LESK, per litteras).

*** *** *** ****** *** *** ***
PROCEEDINGS 

WELCOME
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
GIFFORD * Origin of Workshop in current Librarian's desire to make
LC's collections more widely available * Desiderata arising from
the prospect of greater interconnectedness *
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

After welcoming participants on behalf of the Library of Congress,
American Memory (AM), and the National Demonstration Lab, Prosser
GIFFORD, director for scholarly programs, Library of Congress,
located the origin of the Workshop on Electronic Texts in a
conversation he had had considerably more than a year ago with Carl
FLEISCHHAUER concerning some of the issues faced by AM.

On the assumption that numerous other people were asking the same
questions, the decision was made to bring together as many of these
people as possible to ask the same questions together. In a deeper
sense, GIFFORD said, the origin of the Workshop lay in the desire of
the current Librarian of Congress, James H. Billington, to make the
collections of the Library, especially those offering unique or
unusual testimony on aspects of the American experience, available
to a much wider circle of users than those few people who can come
to Washington to use them.

This meant that the emphasis of AM, from the outset, has been on
archival collections of the basic material, and on making these collections
themselves available, rather than selected or heavily edited products.

From AM's emphasis followed the questions with which the Workshop
began: who will use these materials, and in what form will they
wish to use them. But an even larger issue deserving mention, in
GIFFORD's view, was the phenomenal growth in Internet connectivity.
He expressed the hope that the prospect of greater interconnectedness
than ever before would lead to: 1) much more cooperative and mutually
supportive endeavors; 2) development of systems of shared and
distributed responsibilities to avoid duplication and to ensure
accuracy and preservation of unique materials; and 3) agreement on
the necessary standards and development of the appropriate directories
and indices to make navigation straightforward among the varied
resources that are, and increasingly will be, available.

In this connection, GIFFORD requested that participants reflect from the
outset upon the sorts of outcomes they thought the Workshop might
have.

Did those present constitute a group with sufficient common interests to
propose a next step or next steps, and if so, what might those be?

They would return to these questions the following afternoon.

******
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
FLEISCHHAUER * Core of Workshop concerns preparation and production
of materials * Special challenge in conversion of textual materials
* Quality versus quantity * Do the several groups represented share
common interests?

* +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Carl FLEISCHHAUER, coordinator, American Memory, Library of Congress,
emphasized that he would attempt to represent the people who perform
some of the work of converting or preparing materials and that the
core of the Workshop had to do with preparation and production.

FLEISCHHAUER then drew a distinction between the long term, when
many things would be available and connected in the ways that GIFFORD
described, and the short term, in which AM not only has wrestled
with the issue of what is the best course to pursue but also has
faced a variety of technical challenges.

FLEISCHHAUER remarked AM's endeavors to deal with a wide range of library
formats, such as motion picture collections, sound-recording
collections, and pictorial collections of various sorts, especially
collections of photographs.

In the course of these efforts, AM kept coming back to textual
materials--manuscripts or rare printed matter, bound materials, etc.

Text posed the greatest conversion challenge of all. Thus, the genesis
of the Workshop, which reflects the problems faced by AM. These problems
include physical problems. For example, those in the library and
archive business deal with collections made up of fragile and rare
manuscript items, bound materials, especially the notoriously brittle
bound materials of the late nineteenth century. These are precious
cultural artifacts, however, as well as interesting sources of
information, and LC desires to retain and conserve them. AM needs to
handle things without damaging them. Guillotining a book to run it
through a sheet feeder must be avoided at all costs.

Beyond physical problems, issues pertaining to quality arose. For example,
the desire to provide users with a searchable text is affected by
the question of acceptable level of accuracy.

One hundred percent accuracy is tremendously expensive. On the other hand,
the output of optical character recognition (OCR) can be tremendously
inaccurate. Although AM has attempted to find a middle ground, uncertainty
persists as to whether or not it has discovered the right
solution.

Questions of quality arose concerning images as well. FLEISCHHAUER
contrasted the extremely high level of quality of the digital images
in the Cornell Xerox Project with AM's efforts to provide a
browse-quality or access-quality image, as opposed to an archival
or preservation image.

FLEISCHHAUER therefore welcomed the opportunity to compare notes.

FLEISCHHAUER observed in passing that conversations he had had about
networks have begun to signal that for various forms of media a
determination may be made that there is a browse-quality item, or
a distribution-and-access-quality item that may coexist in some
systems with a higher quality archival item that would be inconvenient
to send through the network because of its size.

FLEISCHHAUER referred, of course, to images more than to searchable
text.

     As AM considered those questions, several conceptual issues arose:
ought AM occasionally to reproduce materials entirely through an
image set, at other times, entirely through a text set, and in some
cases, a mix?

There probably would be times when the historical authenticity of
an artifact would require that its image be used. An image might
be desirable as a recourse for users if one could not provide 100-percent
accurate text. Again, AM wondered, as a practical matter, if a distinction
could be drawn between rare printed matter that might exist in
multiple collections--that is, in ten or fifteen libraries. In such
cases, the need for perfect reproduction would be less than for unique
items. Implicit in his remarks, FLEISCHHAUER conceded, was the admission
that AM has been tilting strongly towards quantity and drawing back
a little from perfect quality. That is, it seemed to AM that society
would be better served if more things were distributed by LC--even if
they were not quite perfect--than if fewer things, perfectly represented,
were distributed. This was stated as a proposition to be tested,
with responses to be gathered from users.

In thinking about issues related to reproduction of materials and seeing
other people engaged in parallel activities, AM deemed it useful to
convene a conference. Hence, the Workshop. FLEISCHHAUER thereupon surveyed
the several groups represented: 1) the world of images (image users and
image makers); 2) the world of text and scholarship and, within this
group, those concerned with language--FLEISCHHAUER confessed to finding
delightful irony in the fact that some of the most advanced thinkers
on computerized texts are those dealing with ancient Greek and Roman
materials; 3) the network world; and 4) the general world of library
science, which includes people interested in preservation and
cataloging.

FLEISCHHAUER concluded his remarks with special thanks to the David
and Lucile Packard Foundation for its support of the meeting, the
American Memory group, the Office for Scholarly Programs, the
National Demonstration Lab, and the Office of Special Events.

He expressed the hope that David Woodley Packard might be able to attend,
noting that Packard's work and the work of the foundation had sponsored
a number of projects in the text area.

******
SESSION I. CONTENT IN A NEW FORM: WHO WILL USE IT AND WHAT WILL
THEY DO?

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
DALY * Acknowledgements * A new Latin authors disk * Effects of the
new technology on previous methods of research *
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Serving as moderator, James DALY acknowledged the generosity of all
the presenters for giving of their time, counsel, and patience in
planning the Workshop, as well as of members of the American Memory
project and other Library of Congress staff, and the David and
Lucile Packard Foundation and its executive director, Colburn S.

Wilbur.

DALY then recounted his visit in March to the Center for
Electronic Texts in the Humanities (CETH) and the Department of Classics
at Rutgers University, where an old friend, Lowell Edmunds, introduced
him to the department's IBYCUS scholarly personal computer, and, in
particular, the new Latin CD-ROM, containing, among other things,
almost all classical Latin literary texts through A.D. 200. Packard
Humanities Institute (PHI), Los Altos, California, released this
disk late in 1991, with a nominal triennial licensing fee.

Playing with the disk for an hour or so at Rutgers brought home to DALY
at once the revolutionizing impact of the new technology on his previous
methods of research. Had this disk been available two or three years
earlier, DALY contended, when he was engaged in preparing a commentary
on Book 10 of Virgil's Aeneid for Cambridge University Press, he would
not have required a forty-eight-square-foot table on which to
spread the numerous, most frequently consulted items, including
some ten or twelve concordances to key Latin authors, an almost
equal number of lexica to authors who lacked concordances, and where
either lexica or concordances were lacking, numerous editions of
authors antedating and postdating Virgil.

Nor, when checking each of the average six to seven words contained
in the Virgilian hexameter for its usage elsewhere in Virgil's works
or other Latin authors, would DALY have had to maintain the laborious
mechanical process of flipping through these concordances, lexica, and
editions each time. Nor would he have had to frequent as often the Milton
S. Eisenhower Library at the Johns Hopkins University to consult the
Thesaurus Linguae Latinae. Instead of devoting countless hours, or the
bulk of his research time, to gathering data concerning Virgil's use
of words, DALY--now freed by PHI's Latin authors disk from the tyrannical,
yet in some ways paradoxically happy scholarly drudgery-- would have
been able to devote that same bulk of time to analyzing and interpreting
Virgilian verbal usage.

Citing Theodore Brunner, Gregory Crane, Elli MYLONAS, and Avra MICHELSON,
DALY argued that this reversal in his style of work, made possible by the
new technology, would perhaps have resulted in better, more productive
research. Indeed, even in the course of his browsing the Latin authors
disk at Rutgers, its powerful search, retrieval, and highlighting
capabilities suggested to him several new avenues of research into
Virgil's use of sound effects. This anecdotal account, DALY
maintained, may serve to illustrate in part the sudden and radical
transformation being wrought in the ways scholars work.

******
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
MICHELSON * Elements related to scholarship and technology *
Electronic texts within the context of broader trends within
information technology and scholarly communication * Evaluation of
the prospects for the use of electronic texts * Relationship of
electronic texts to processes of scholarly communication in humanities
research * New exchange formats created by scholars * Projects
initiated to increase scholarly access to converted text * Trend
toward making electronic resources available through research and
education networks * Changes taking place in scholarly communication
among humanities scholars * Network-mediated scholarship transforming
traditional scholarly practices * Key information technology trends
affecting the conduct of scholarly communication over the next
decade * The trend toward end-user computing * The trend toward
greater connectivity * Effects of these trends * Key transformations
taking place * Summary of principal arguments *
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Avra MICHELSON, Archival Research and Evaluation Staff, National
Archives and Records Administration (NARA), argued that establishing
who will use electronic texts and what they will use them for
involves a consideration of both information technology and scholarship
trends.

This consideration includes several elements related to scholarship and
technology: 1) the key trends in information technology that are most
relevant to scholarship; 2) the key trends in the use of currently
available technology by scholars in the nonscientific community; and
3) the relationship between these two very distinct but interrelated
trends.

The investment in understanding this relationship being made by information
providers, technologists, and public policy developers, as well as by
scholars themselves, seems to be pervasive and growing, MICHELSON
contended.

The ground-floor was fitted up
as a shop with large panes of glass, and inside upon stands were
arranged a variety of bonnets and caps, set off with looking-glass and
silk curtains, in the arrangement of which no little taste was
displayed. Behind the show goods was a curtain hanging on a brass rod,
drawn so as to conceal the workpeople who were within. There was a
private door as well as a shop door, and I hardly knew which I was to go
in at; however, as the shop door required no knocking, I went into that,
and found myself in the company of eight young damsels, very busy at
their needles, sitting on each side of a long table covered with
half-made dresses. I inquired of them whether my mother was at home, and
was answered by one, who was apparently the eldest, that she was down
below getting the breakfast ready.

"I suppose," continued she, "you are Mr. Tom Saunders, the pilot?"

"I suppose I am," replied I; "and pray who are you?"

"I am Miss Amelia Gozlin, apprentice to Mrs. Saunders, milliner--at your
service, sir; and, in consequence of my being so very quiet and sedate,
I have charge of all these young ladies you see with me."

Here the others burst into a laugh.

"They are in very good hands, Miss Amelia," replied I, "and under your
care, and with your example, I have no doubt but they will turn out very
useful members of society."

"Thank you, sir; but allow me to say that I cannot permit young men,
especially such enchanting young men as Mr. Tom Saunders, to remain
here; as, if I do, your amiable mother would give me what is genteelly
termed a wigging; so if you will be pleased, sir, just to remove
yourself from our presence," continued she, with a mock courtesy, "and
not make your appearance here again until you are certain your mother is
gone out, you will oblige us very much."

I obeyed the wishes of Miss Amelia Gozlin, who certainly was a very
handsome girl, with fine black eyes, apparently about fifteen years old.
I walked into the passage, and found my way down into the kitchen, where
my mother and Virginia were employed as they had told me above. My
mother received me kindly, but said little, for she appeared to be fully
occupied; and Virginia had no time to dedicate to me until the breakfast
was ready, when she called the apprentices, and we all sat down
together, Miss Amelia and her companions looking so demure, that, if I
had not seen them before, I should have thought that they could not
speak.

After breakfast was over Virginia showed me the house. The first floor
was to let furnished, the second was occupied by my mother and Virginia,
and the attics were appropriated to the apprentices. Everything appeared
clean, neat, and well arranged, and I could not imagine how my mother
had contrived to do so much with so little money; but Virginia told me
that she thought Mr. Wilson had assisted her.

When I returned, which might have been in six months, I found a great
improvement, and every appearance of my mother succeeding well in her
speculations. She had now a maid-servant, and her apprentices were
increased to twelve, and there was every appearance of brisk and full
employment.

In 1803 I found that Virginia, who was then fourteen years old, had left
school. She had told my mother that, during the last half-year, she had
only repeated over again what she had learned the half-year before, and
that she thought she could employ her time better at home in assisting
her. My mother was of the same opinion, and Virginia now superintended
the cutting-out department, and was very useful. She said that the
increase of business had been very great, and that my mother could
hardly execute the orders which she received. There were now two
servants in the house, and additional workwomen. My mother also had very
much altered in appearance: before, she was usually clean and neat, now
she was well if not elegantly dressed, and appeared much younger and
better looking. I must do her the justice to say that prosperity had not
spoiled but improved her: she was more kind and more cheerful every time
that I went to see her; and I may add that, with the exception of a
little necessary castigation to Miss Amelia and her companions, she
never scolded, and was kind to her servants. The last year she had been
even more successful, and was now considered the first milliner in the
town. I believed that she deserved her reputation, for she had a great
deal of taste in dress; and when she had gone upstairs to decorate
previous to the hour of arrival of her customers, and came down in a
handsome silk dress and an elegant morning cap, I would often look at
her with surprise, and say to myself, "Who would think that this was my
mother, who used to shove the broom at me in the little parlor at
Fisher's Alley?"

The reader may inquire how my father and mother got on after such an
alteration in her circumstances. I can only reply that they got on
better than they did before; for my mother, who did not wish my father's
company in the house, pointed out to him that, with so many young people
living with her, it would be very inconvenient if he came there in the
evenings to smoke his pipe, and that it would be better if he could
smoke and drink his beer anywhere else. My father perceived the
propriety of this, and assented with a good grace: my mother was very
liberal to him, and he was now enabled, when he chose, to ask a
companion or two to join him, so that it suited both parties. My father,
therefore, never came to the house, except after the hospital supper,
when he remained a few minutes to see Virginia, and then departed. On
Sundays he spent the whole day there, and was kindly welcomed, but he
always left in the evening to smoke his pipe elsewhere. As for me, when
I did come I was always kindly received, and slept in a spare bed on the
same floor with my mother and Virginia. Before my time was out I was too
well supplied by Bramble ever to want anything, and afterward I made
plenty of money, and seldom came home without bringing a present both to
my mother and Virginia.

Having thus given a general outline of affairs, I shall in the next
chapter enter more minutely into some particulars, without which the
detail of events will not be complete.


CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

     In which the _sine quá non_ of all Novels is, for the first time,
     introduced.


In the last chapter I have said in few words that Bessy Godwin had been
sent to school, and had since returned home. She had been home nearly a
year before the period to which I brought up my history, but now she no
longer was employed in any menial service, the girl who had been hired
during her absence being still retained. Bessy now superintended the
household, but did nothing more; and there was a greater degree of
comfort and expenditure than had formerly been the case. Whether this
was on Bessy's account, or from Bessy's imbibed ideas, I cannot pretend
to say; but certainly there was a great change in our style of living,
which Bramble appeared to sanction. Mrs. Maddox remained as a mere
pensioner, sitting by the fire, and perhaps finishing a pair of
stockings about every five or six weeks, talking as usual at and to
everybody and with everything. In another point, also, there was a
change in Bramble's house: it was much oftener filled with company; this
was, I presume, to be ascribed to Bessy's personal charms, which
certainly were very great. She was of a peculiar and much admired style
of beauty, a description which strikes some people at first sight, and
not others--those not perceiving it at first eventually admiring it even
more than the others. She was taller than the middle height, her person
finely developed, yet not so much so as to take away from its grace: her
complexion was pale and clear, her eyes and hair very dark; there was a
coldness about her beauty when in repose, like statuary marble; but if
the least excited or animated, the color would mantle in her cheek; her
eyes would beam, till they appeared as if, like bright planets, they
could almost cast a shadow; and dimples, before concealed, would show
themselves when she indulged in her silvery laugh. Although her form was
commanding, still she was very feminine: there was great attraction in
her face, even when in repose--she was cold, but not chilling.

I had seen little of her for three years, during which she had sprung up
to womanhood, for she was now seventeen, and appeared to be at least
eighteen years old. Before, when we were living together, we kissed as
brother and sister: since we had again become inmates of the same house,
we had been friends, but nothing more. Bessy certainly showed as great a
preference to me as our relative situations would admit; but still it
appeared as if the extreme intimacy of childhood had been broken off,
and that it was necessary that a renewed intimacy under another aspect
should take place, to restore us to our former relations. Here it was
for me to make the first overtures; not for her, as maidenly reserve
would not permit it. Bramble seemed to be most anxious that such should
be the case--indeed, considered it as a matter of course: perhaps Bessy
thought so too in her own bosom; and the continual raillery of Bramble
did more harm than good, as it appeared to warrant her thinking that it
ought to be so. Why it was not I will now explain to the reader.

I have already made mention of Mr. Wilson, the lawyer, whose
acquaintance we procured through Sir Hercules and his lady. This
intimacy had very much increased; and a Miss Janet Wilson had come home
from a finishing seminary near town. Between this young lady and my
sister Virginia a certain degree of intimacy had been formed, and of
course I had seen a great deal of her at the times when I was at
Greenwich. She was a very pretty and very diminutive girl, but
beautifully proportioned, although so very small; indeed, she was
considered quite a model in figure, at least my mother used to say so,
and I never heard any one disagree with her. Janet had, moreover, large
eyes, penciled eyebrows, and a dimpled chin. Now, as Bessy was away at
the time when I first made her acquaintance, if all these perfections
were not enough for me to fall in love with, I must have been difficult
to please at the age of eighteen, when one is not so very difficult; and
the consequence was, I was her most devoted slave. Mr. Wilson laughed at
us, and seemed either to think that it would end in nothing, or that if
it did end in something he had no objection. Thus was I fixed; and with
Virginia for a confidante, what was to prevent the course of true love
running smooth? Janet received all my sighs, all my protestations, all
my oaths, and all my presents--and many were the latter, although
perhaps not equal to the former three. It was, therefore, not surprising
that Bessy, who had been out of the way, had been forestalled by this
diamond edition of Nature's handiwork. Such was the state of my heart at
the commencement of the year 1805.

I have mentioned that my mother had taken a house in the principal
street; but I must now add that in the year 1804 she found it necessary
to remove into one much larger, and had therefore shifted more to the
upper part of the town. Instead of being in a row, this house was
detached, with a small garden in front and a good piece of ground at the
back, which looked down toward the river. The situation not being so
central did no harm to my mother, as she was so well known; on the
contrary, it made her even more fashionable. She now kept no shop, but a
show room; and had not only accommodation for more workpeople, but very
handsome apartments to let. In another point it was advantageous, which
was on account of my father. At the end of the garden there was an
octangular summer-house, looking upon the river: it was a good-sized
room, boarded floor, and, moreover, it had a fireplace in it, and when
shut up was very warm and comfortable. My mother made this house over to
my father as his own, to smoke and drink beer in; and my father
preferred a place in which he could sit alone with his friends, to a
public house, especially as the garden had a gate at the end of it by
which he could admit himself whenever he pleased. Here my father, Ben
the Whaler, Anderson, and others would sit, having a commanding view of
the Thames and the vessels passing and repassing--in the summer-time,
with all the windows open, and enjoying the fresh air and the fresh
smoke from their pipes--in winter-time surrounding the fire and telling
their yarns. It was an admirable arrangement, and Virginia and I always
knew where to find him.

I have said but little of my sister Virginia. I may be considered
partial to her--perhaps I was; but to me she was, if not the handsomest,
certainly one of the most captivating persons I ever saw: to prove that
I thought so, I can only say that, deeply as I was smitten with Miss
Janet Wilson, I often thought that I wished she was a facsimile of my
sister. Virginia was now seventeen years old, slender and very
graceful: she reminded me more of an antelope in her figure than
anything I can compare her to; her head was so beautifully placed on her
shoulders that it was the first thing which attracted your notice when
you saw her. Her eyes were of a deep hazel, fringed by long black
eyelashes, and her arching and delicate eyebrows nearly met; her nose
was perfectly straight, but rather small; and her face ended in a sharp
oval, which added to the brilliancy and animation of her countenance;
her mouth was small and beautifully formed, and her little teeth like
seed pearl. Every one declared that she was the handsomest creature that
ever they had seen; and what every one says must be true. She was so;
but she was not always lively--she was only so at times: she appeared to
be of a serious, reflective turn of mind, and she read a great deal; but
at times she was mirth personified. To my mother she was always dutiful
and attentive, and was very useful to her.

I could not at first imagine what made my mother so anxious to have
lodgers in the house, as they must have proved a great nuisance to her,
and her circumstances were above such an infliction. It was not long
before I discovered the cause of this: it was no other but to make up
some good match for my sister, whose beauty she considered would effect
her purpose. Many were the applications for her lodgings, made by highly
respectable gentlemen; but when she discovered, either that they were
married, or that in other points they did not suit, she invariably
refused, and for months her apartments continued vacant; but if anybody
at all aristocratical, who was single, wished to inspect them, my mother
was all smiles and eagerness. It may be supposed that she was not likely
to meet with such people as she solicited at such a town as Greenwich,
but such was not the case: before steamboats made Greenwich so
come-at-able there were many families of distinction who resided there
and in its environs--especially in the autumn of the year, when the
river offered much amusement. It was just at that period that the
whitebait parties became so much in vogue, and Greenwich was considered
a pleasant retreat for a few months by many of the fashionable world.

Although Virginia never mentioned her surmises directly, I perceived, by
her occasional remarks, that she had latterly become aware of what were
my mother's views; indeed, how could she do otherwise, when my mother
would refuse her lodgings one day to a gentleman because he was married,
and let them the next time merely because he was a single man? And that
she was disgusted with my mother's conduct I was convinced; at the same
time, she certainly kept her thoughts to herself, merely telling me how
very uncomfortable it was to have lodgers, and to be obliged to go into
their rooms with messages from my mother. There was an Honorable Mr.
----, I really forget his name--indeed, I should not have mentioned him,
except that he was the introduction of another personage who was several
months in my mother's house, a harmless old bachelor. How old he was I
cannot say, as he wore a very youthful wig and also false whiskers, but
I should think about sixty. He was a great admirer of the fine arts, and
a still greater admirer of his own performances in painting. He took
lessons twice a day from two different masters, who came from London,
and he was at it from morning to night. He came down to Greenwich, as he
said, to study _tints_, and get up his coloring. I cannot say I thought
his performances very good, but perhaps I was not a judge. My mother,
who would, I believe, have sacrificed my sister to an ourang outang,
provided he was an Honorable, took every opportunity of sending Virginia
in to him, that he might study the delicate tints on her cheeks; but it
would not do, even if Virginia had been a party to it. He looked at his
palette instead of her pretty mouth, and his camelhair pencils attracted
his attention more than her penciled eyebrows. He was wrapped up in his
art, and overlooked the prettiest piece of nature in the world; and
Virginia, seeing this to be the case, had no longer any objection to go
into his room. But this gentleman had a nephew, a very different sort of
a personage, a young heir to a marquisate, who used to pay attention to
his bachelor uncle by paying him visits, at first because he was ordered
so to do, and after once or twice because he had seen Virginia, and was
struck with her appearance. He was a good-looking young man, about
nineteen, but not very bright--indeed, I ought to say very silly,
although at the same time not at all bashful. He made an acquaintance
with my mother, who was delighted with his condescension, and declared
that he was one of the most pleasant young men she had ever met with;
and he would have been very intimate with Virginia had she not repulsed
him. As soon as the leaves dropped off the trees the old bachelor
declared that there were no more tints worth remaining for, and he took
his departure. About a month afterward his nephew came down, accompanied
by a young man who was his tutor, and hired the apartments, much to the
joy of my mother, who now had hopes, and much to the annoyance of my
sister, who had fears of being persecuted.

And now, having in this chapter brought up my history to the
commencement of the year 1805, I shall again enter into a more detailed
narrative.


CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

     More Cry than Wool--Bramble would dig a Pit for another, and
     tumbles in along with him.


It was in the month of March, 1805, when the easterly winds prevailed,
and vessels were detained in the Chops of the Channel, that I agreed
with Bramble that we would return together and halve the pilotage. About
eight leagues from the Lizard Point we boarded a small ship which had
hoisted the signal, the weather at that time being fine and the wind
variable. When we went on board it was but just daylight, and the
captain was not yet on deck, but the mate received us. We were surprised
to find that she mounted twelve brass guns, remarkably well fitted, and
that everything was apparently ready for action, rammers and sponges,
shot and wadding being all up and at hand.

"A prime morning, shipmate," said Bramble; then casting his eye over the
deck, "A letter of marque, I presume?"

"Yes," replied the mate, "we have the papers, but still she has never
run without convoy since I have been in her; we lost our convoy three
days back, and the captain has been rather uneasy ever since."

"Uneasy! why, I should think that you could beat off a good stout
privateer with these guns of yours?"

"Well, I don't know but what we might, but our cargo is valuable, and we
might be overpowered."

"Very true, and the captain must be anxious. Where are you from?"

"Smyrna."

"What's your cargo?"

"Why, we have raw silk and drysalters' goods chiefly. D'ye think we
shall have a fair wind? I don't care how soon, for we've at least twenty
passengers on board, and our provisions and water are running rather
short. Here's the skipper."

The captain, who now made his appearance, was a tall good-looking young
man about thirty, dressed rather fantastically, as I thought, having a
laced cap on his head and a party-colored silk sash round his waist,
such as they wear in the Mediterranean.

"Well, pilot, what do you think of the wind?"

"Well, sir, I expect we'll have a slant which will enable us to fetch
well to windward of the Lizard, at all events, and then, when the tide
turns inshore, we must stand out again."

"Mr. Stubbs, turn the hands up to make sail."

"Ay, ay, sir," replied the mate.

The men came on deck, but the captain roared out for the idlers; these
were the passengers who had agreed to work during the passage: at last
they came up, a queer-looking set, and the captain sending down for his
speaking-trumpet, sail was made on the ship.

"Why, captain," said Bramble, "you do it in man-of-war fashion."

"Well, I've not served the King for seven years for nothing," replied
he, "and I hope, sir, not heard the bullets whistling about my head like
hail in a hailstorm without knowing how to take care of my ship. I like
everything man-of-war fashion, and then one's always prepared. Where's
the boatswain? Pipe to breakfast."

"You've plenty of hands on board, mate," said Bramble.

"Yes, plenty of them, such as they are; we've twenty of the ship's
company, and twenty-five passengers from Malta."

After breakfast the captain ordered up the small-arm men; five seamen
and fifteen of the passengers made their appearance with their muskets,
which were examined, and they were dismissed. At eleven o'clock, as we
neared the land, the men were ordered to quarters, the guns cast loose,
and they were exercised as on board of a man-of-war, the captain giving
his orders with his speaking-trumpet. "Double-shot your guns! Run out!
Point your guns! Fire! Repel boarders on the bow! Repel boarders on the
quarter!" etc. This continued for more than two hours, when the guns
were again secured.

"Well, pilot," said the captain to Bramble, "what do you think? do you
fancy a privateer could take us in a hurry?"

"Why, captain, if the men fight, I should say not; but, you see, these
guns, handsome as they are, won't fight of themselves."

"I'll answer for the men fighting; they'll have but their choice--fight,
or the contents of my pistol through the first man's head who quits his
gun. I'll nail the colors to the mast, and see who will be the man who
will haul them down. Why, pilot, this vessel is insured at thirty
thousand pounds."

"Then she'll be a famous prize, if they should contrive to take her,
that's all," said Bramble. "Halloo! what vessel's that coming down? Tom,
hand your glass here."

"I haven't got it with me."

"Well, give me that one on the skylight. I can't make her out, but I
don't much like the looks of her."

"Heh! what's that?" said the captain. "Let me look--oh, she's a
square-rigged vessel, ain't she?"

"Can't tell," said Bramble.

The mate, who had fetched his glass from below, looked at her, and said
it was a coasting schooner.

"Are you sure of that?" said the captain. "Let me see. Well, I don't
know what to say--she does look rakish. I'll go forward and make her
out."

"Why, it's a coaster, Bramble," said I, as the captain walked forward.

"I know that," replied Bramble, with a wink.

The captain returned, probably satisfied that it was only a coaster, but
he did not choose to say so, "Well, I don't know what to make of her,
but at all events there's nothing like being ready. She's coming down
fast upon us; Mr. Stubbs, we'll beat to quarters."

Again the people were called up and the guns cast loose; the powder was
handed up, and all was preparation. I did not think, however, that the
passengers appeared at all zealous; but that I was not surprised at: the
captain harangued them, calling them Britons, etc., and, hoping that
they would show what stuff they were made of; talked about the honor of
Old England, and a great deal more, and then examined the vessel again
with his glass. "We'll give her the starboard broadside, and then wear
round his stern and give her the other. Hoist the colors!"

As soon as we hoisted the colors, the schooner hoisted English colors
also.

"English colors, sir!" said the mate, grinning.

"English colors, heh? Very well; but that may be a feint--keep to your
guns, my lads."

The vessel now ran by us; she was deeply laden, and as broad as she was
long.

"No privateer this time, captain," said Bramble, laughing.

"No, all's right; secure the guns, my lads. We'd have given her a nice
peppering if she'd been a French privateer."

The captain then went down below to put away his sword and pistols,
which the cabin-boy had brought on deck.

"It's my opinion, Tom," said Bramble, "that this skipper ain't quite so
fond of fighting as he pretends to be. I'll see if I can't frighten him
a little."

As soon as the captain came on deck again, Bramble said, "We'll go
about, if you please."

"What! about already? why, we're good three leagues from the shore."

"Yes, sir, but the tide has made, and we must now make a long
stretch-out toward the French coast. We won't tack again till about
dark."

"Not tack till dark, pilot? Surely we will do better keeping on the
English coast."

"No, no, sir; if we were not so well manned and so well armed I should
do it; but, as we are a match for any privateer, why, we may as well
make a long leg--we shall be up Channel sooner."

"Well, I don't know what to say. I've a heavy responsibility with such a
valuable cargo."

"Well, tack if you please, sir," said Bramble, shortly.

"Oh, certainly. Hands, about ship."

The vessel's head was put off-shore, and with a smart breeze we walked
away fast from the land. At twelve o'clock the captain proposed
standing inshore again, but Bramble refused. At three o'clock he became
very uneasy, and expostulated with Bramble, who replied, "Well, sir, I'm
doing all for the best, but if you are afraid--"

"Afraid?" cried the captain; "afraid of what, I should like to know? No,
I'm not afraid, but it appears to me that we ought to make the land
again before night."

"I'll answer for knowing where we are, sir, if that is your reason; at
all events, I wish to stand out till six o'clock."

"Well, do so, then, if you choose--I'm sure I don't care if you stand to
within gunshot of the French coast;" and the captain, evidently very
much annoyed, went down into the cabin.

About half-past four o'clock the mate came aft and took up the glass,
saying that there was an awkward-looking craft on the weather bow. He
came aft again, and said, "Pilot, I wish you would take a squint at that
craft, for I don't much like the look of her."

Bramble went forward, and I followed him. "I say, Tom, that's a French
privateer, as sure as we stand here," said he. "Look at her. Well, now
we shall see what these guns are made of."

"Don't put too much trust in them," said the mate. "I know what sort of
people we have here. Had we only ten good men I wouldn't care for a
privateer, but I'm afraid that we have not many we can trust to.
However, we'll do our best, and we can do no more. I'll go down and tell
the captain."

"It is a Frenchman," replied I, "and no mistake--every rope and every
sail on her are French;" for the vessel, which was a lugger, was not
more than four miles from us.

"Well," replied Bramble, "it would be odd if we were to be taken into a
French port after all, wouldn't it? not very pleasant, though."

"We've men enough to beat her off, or two of her, if that's all,"
replied I.

"Yes, Tom, but I doubt the captain, and without example men don't fight
well. However, we'll do our best, and if he flinches we won't."

The captain now came forward as red as a turkey-cock; he said nothing,
looked at the vessel, and then turned as white as a sheet.

"She's more than our match, if she's an enemy," said he.

"I should rather think not, sir," replied Bramble. "All you have to do
is to make your men fight, and nail your colors to the mast."

"That's very true when there's a fair chance of success, but it's
useless sacrificing the men against so very superior a force," replied
the captain.

"But it ain't superior, nor in guns is she your equal, if I know
anything about a vessel. At all events, I suppose you'll have a trial
for it. Won't you beat to quarters, captain?"

"Oh, to be sure. Mr. Stubbs, beat to quarters. I think it would not be a
bad thing to fire off our broadsides now, and let them see that we are
well armed."

The men were summoned up to quarters, and very unwillingly did they
obey. Some said that they did not come on board to fight, others that
they had agreed to work the passage home, but not to stand to be shot
at; and some were actually going down below again, when Bramble and the
mate spoke to them and persuaded them to remain on deck. Still there was
no willingness shown; and although Bramble told them how many privateers
had been beaten off, and mentioned particularly the Leith smack having
the other day fought with one an hour and a half, and knocked her all to
pieces, they still appeared uneasy and wavering.

In the meantime the privateer was within a mile of us, and had hoisted
French colors.

"We'll keep away and give her the first broadside," cried the captain.

"You'd better hoist your colors first," observed Bramble, quietly.

"Hoist the colors, Mr. Stubbs! Port the helm! Look out, my men! Point
the guns to the object! Fire!"

Off went all the guns, not only on the starboard side, in the direction
of the privateer, but all those on the larboard side as well; and this
circumstance probably gave the people on board of the privateer some
idea of the state of confusion we were in. She now rounded to, and gave
us her broadside of three guns: they were well directed, and did us some
damage in the upper works and rigging; but still more in frightening the
people, who were now running down below, notwithstanding the exertions
of the mate, Bramble, one or two of the seamen, and myself; but our fate
was soon decided by the captain, who cried out, "It's useless contending
against such a superior force." With this observation he ran aft and
hauled down the colors. As soon as the men perceived this they all left
the guns; at another broadside from the privateer they all scampered
down below, and at the same time the captain went down into his cabin.
There was none but the mate, the boatswain, Bramble, and myself left on
deck.

"Pleasant," said Bramble. "I thought as much. Well, Tom, here we are, in
for it. Come with me to the helm, for these French fellows will board,
and they make very free with their cutlasses, even after colors are
hauled down. Well," said he, as he walked aft, "I did not think to see
the English flag so disgraced. Poor Bessy, too! Well, never mind. I say,
mate, just let go the weather main-braces and bow-lines, and square the
yards, for it's better to be as humble as possible, now that we can't
help ourselves; and do you and the boatswain go down below, for they cut
right and left, these fellows. They do pay a little more civility to
pilots, as they aren't belonging to the ship."

This advice of Bramble's, which was very good, was followed by the mate
and boatswain.

"Shall I run down and look after our kits?" said I to Bramble.

"No, Tom, don't have anything in your hand, or they will take it from
you, and most likely give you a rap on the head with a cutlass at the
same time; for privateer-men of all nations are little better than
pirates, and don't how to behave in victory. Just keep where you
are--look as if you had nothing to do with the ship except the steering
of her. Here they come!"

As he spoke the lugger touched our weather side, at the same time
lowering down her foresail and mainsail with no little noise and
confusion; in a second or two there were thirty of their men on our
decks, flourishing their cutlasses, and looking round with their pistols
ready cocked in their left hands for somebody to let fly at. At last
they came aft. "Pilot!" cried Bramble, taking off his hat. I did the
same. With reiterated _sacres_ and _diables_ of every description some
now rushed down into the cabin, while others went down the
fore-hatchway, while more of the men from the lugger poured upon our
decks; but none of them molested Bramble or me, as we continued standing
at the wheel. In about ten minutes order was to a certain degree
restored by the captain of the privateer, who had come on board. I
perceived him express his surprise to his officers who were with him at
the armament of the ship, and he appeared very much pleased: it was not
necessary to understand French for that. He then came up to Bramble, and
spoke to him in French; but Bramble only pointed to me and then to
himself, and said "Pilot." The captain called for a young Frenchman who
could speak English, and then asked Bramble what was the cargo.

Bramble, to please him, replied that it was silk and other goods to the
value of thirty thousand pounds English.

"How many men?"

"Forty-five men."

The French captain rubbed his hands with ecstasy, as well he might. Just
at this moment the English captain came upon deck, followed by two of
the privateer's men, one of whom had taken possession of his laced cap,
and the other of his silk sash. He brought his sword in his hand, and
presented it to the captain of the privateer, saying, "It is no disgrace
for one brave man to deliver up his sword to another."

"Que dit il?" said the captain of the privateer to the young man who
interpreted. The young man translated this fine speech, upon which the
French captain called the English one by a very contemptuous title, and
turned away. The privateer's men now made their appearance from below,
having helped themselves to everything they could find; the orders were
then given for the prisoners to be brought upon deck; they were driven
up, many of them bleeding from wounds received in attempts to rescue
their personal property, and were handed over to the lugger. A
prize-master with twenty men was put on board; the lugger was hauled
off, the only Englishmen allowed to remain in the captured vessel being
Bramble and myself. As soon as the vessels were clear they made sail,
running about two points free for the French coast.


CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

     We have great Hopes of not seeing the Inside of a French Prison,
     but we are disappointed.


"Well, Tom, this is a bad job," said Bramble to me, taking his seat upon
the hencoop aft. "By to-morrow noon, unless we fall in with a
cruiser--and I see little chance of that--we shall be locked up in a
French prison; ay, and Heaven knows how long we may stay there! What's
to become of poor little Bessy? I'm sure I don't know. I must contrive
to write over to lawyer Wilson, and put him in charge of everything. But
I'm sorry for you, my poor lad; it's hard for you to be locked up,
perhaps for years, when you might have been making money for yourself."

"Well, it can't be helped, father; we must make the best of it," replied
I, with a deep sigh, for I was anything but happy at the prospect.

"If it had not been for that swaggering coward this might not have
happened," replied Bramble. "It's somewhat my own fault. I was so
anxious to frighten him about nothing that at last I run us into real
danger, and I might have known that he never would have fought, although
I certainly had no idea of falling in with a privateer. Well, Tom, we
must not lose a chance."

[Illustration: BRAMBLE AND JACK CARRIED INTO A FRENCH PORT.--Marryat,
Vol X. p. 331.]

"How do you mean?"

"I mean that if there is any possibility of getting away, I shall; and
you, of course, will not stay behind. I don't know where they are going
to, but you see, Tom, our only chance of getting off is while we are on
the coast; if once we are marched into the interior, why, then it will
be almost hopeless. What we must try for is to get away at the port
where we land. We shall see."

"I am afraid that there's very little chance for us," replied I; "but
I'm ready to attempt anything."

"We shall see, Tom--where there's a will there's a way. However, it's no
use talking about it just now." Here Bramble filled his pipe, took out
his flint and steel, and lighted it.

After smoking for ten minutes, during which I stood by him, he said, "I
wonder where they will take us to--St. Malo's or Morlaix; for the course
they are steering will fetch, I should think, thereabout. One thing is
certain--they've got a good prize, and they mean to keep it if they can;
and, my eyes! if they won't make a fuss about it! A ship with twelve
guns taken by a lugger with only six! They'll make the ship mount
eighteen or twenty guns, and have a hundred and fifty men on board, and
they'll swear they fought us for three hours. They have something to
boast of, that's certain; and I suspect that French captain is a brave
sort of chap, from the sneer he gave when our cowardly English lubber
gave him so fine a speech. Well, it's our disgrace!"

Here Bramble was silent for some time, when I said to him, "You were
stating to the men how a Leith smack beat off a privateer the other day.
I never heard of it."

"Yes, I heard it when I was up above Greenwich. I met an old friend who
was on board of her, for he took his passage in her from London.

"'Why,' says he to me, 'Bramble, I thought we never should have got away
from the river, for the old captain, who was as big round as a puncheon,
and not unlike one, declared that he would not sail until the powder
came up from Woolwich; for the "Queen Charlotte" (that was the name of
the smack) carried six eighteen-pound carronades. We waited nearly a
week for the powder, and many a laugh we all had about it, thinking old
Nesbitt was not much of a fighter, from his making so much fuss. Well,
at last we boomed her off from the wharf, and about seven that night got
clear of the Thames; it was a fair breeze all night, and we ran through
the Swin by the lead, which is what every one won't attempt. Next
morning we were off Yarmouth Roads, with the water as yellow as pea
soup: never saw it otherwise, and I'm an old collier; reason why, the
swells of the ocean thrashes up the sands off there--ay, and shifts them
too occasionally, which is of more consequence. Well, Bramble,' says he,
'well, on we went; hauled in through Harborough Gut; then the sun had so
much power--for it was in the Dog Days--that it eat up the wind, and we
were obliged to content ourselves with getting four knots out of her.
Just as we made the Dudgeon Lightboat, old Nesbitt's son comes aft to
his father, who was steering the craft, and says, "Father, do you see
that 'ere brig crowding all sail after us? I think it be the New Custom
House brig trying his rate of sailing with us."

"'"Never you mind what she is, boy," says the captain, "but away up and
furl the gaff-topsail."

"'Meanwhile the brig overhauled us fast, and old Nesbitt kept a-looking
round at her every two or three minutes. At last he says to the mate,
"Take the wheel a bit," and he goes first and looks over the quarter.
"I see," says he; "I say, you sergeant and corporal" (for we had a
recruiting party on board), "suppose now you just help us to load our
guns and work them a little, for I expect this here craft will give us
plenty to do."

"'Well, Bramble, as I stand here, if six of them lobsters didn't say
nothing, but just walk down below; but the sergeant was a trump of a
fellow, and so was his wife. He threw off his coat and cap covered with
ribbons, tied a handkerchief round his head, and set to work with a
will; and his wife backed him to the last, handing the powder and
everything else. Well, we had with us ten men who all stood to guns; but
the passengers went down below with the soldiers. Well, on comes the
brig upon our starboard quarter as if to board; all her fore rigging,
and forechains, and forecastle being full of men as bees in a swarm.

"Are you all ready, my men?" said the captain.

"Yes, all ready, sir."

"Yes, and I be ready too, massa!" cried the black cook, bringing out
from the caboose the red-hot poker.

"Well, then, up on the wind with her, and fire when the guns bear."

"'The men kept their eyes on the guns; and when they cried "Fire!" the
cook set them all off, one after another, with the hot poker, and no
small mischief did these three guns do. His forecastle was cleared of
men in no time; down came his gaff and foretopsail, and being now right
on our beam, he put his helm up to lay us on board; but we were too
quick for him--we wore round too, and gave him the three other guns,
which did him no good.

[Illustration: THE LEITH SMACK AND THE PRIVATEER.--Marryat, Vol. X., p.
335.]

"'Well, he came after us on the other tack, and pelted us with musketry
in a cruel way. The mate was hit in the head, and taken down below;
and poor old Nesbitt, who was at the wheel, steering the craft
beautifully, had a bullet right into his bow-window, as they call it.
"Well," the old fellow says, "here's a shot between wind and water, I
reckon--we must have a plug;" so he puts his flippers into his
waistband, and stuffs his flannel jacket into the hole. Then we throws
her up in the wind again, and rakes him with our three guns well into
him, and carries away more of his gear, and stops his sailing--and so we
goes on for a whole hour and thirty-five minutes; and, to make a long
story short, we beat him off, and he turned tail and ran for it with
both pumps going.'

"Now you see, Tom, that's the account of the affair given to me by a man
who I can trust; and there you see what can be done if men are resolute
and determined to fight. Some little difference between that affair and
this one, Tom."

"Did old Nesbitt die or recover?"

"I asked that question. He was doing well when my friend left. Somehow
or another no vital part was injured, and he has had many presents made
him for his gallant conduct, and the sergeant was well rewarded also.
Well, my pipe's out, and it's not far from midnight; I should think we
may just as well try for a little sleep, Tom, for perhaps we may not get
any for some time to come."

Bramble coiled himself up under the bulwark, I did the same; and in a
few minutes we both had forgotten whether we were in our beds at our
house at Deal or prisoners bound for the French coast.

At daylight the next morning Bramble roused me up.

"Here we are now, Tom! here's the French coast not four leagues from us;
but it's hazy, and I cannot make it out very clear; however, the sun
will soon drive all this away, and we shall have a fine day; but the
wind has gone down, and I think we shall have still less of it."

And so it proved; for, as the sun rose, the wind became very light, so
that we did not go through the water more than three knots. We were
looking at the coast, when the report of a gun saluted our ears. It was
from the privateer. We turned to that quarter, and found that there was
a cutter about two miles from the privateer, crowding all sail toward
us.

"Tom!" cried Bramble, "there's a chance for us yet--that's an English
privateer, and she will try to retake us for the sake of the salvage.
But here's a boat coming from the Frenchman--what can that be for?"

The boat rowed alongside of us, and out jumped the captain of the French
privateer with twenty of his best men, and the boat was then dropped
astern.

The Frenchman immediately cast loose the guns, went down for the powder,
and prepared for action.

"I see, Tom," said Bramble, "he's a clever fellow, this skipper. He
knows that this ship and cargo is worth a dozen of his little privateer,
and his object is to get her in--so he's come with all his best men on
board of us, leaving his first officer to make the best fight with the
privateer that he can. Well, he's right; and if it wasn't that I don't
like to go to prison, I wish he may succeed, for he has got sense as
well as courage, I think."

The ship was now kept away two points more, that she might go through
the water as fast as she could; and in the meantime the action commenced
between the English cutter and the French privateer, the latter
evidently attempting to cripple the masts and rigging of the former. The
cutter, however, steered right for us, and evidently came up fast; the
French privateer, weak-handed as she must have been, behaved very well,
throwing herself across the cutter's bows, and doing everything she
could to prevent her coming up with us. Both vessels were very much cut
up before the cutter came within three cables' lengths of us, when the
French captain ordered French colors to be hoisted, and, rounding to,
poured in a well-directed broadside, which quite astonished the English
privateer, who imagined that we were an unarmed merchantman. The action
now became very warm; we standing on, and every now and then rounding to
and raking the cutter, while the French privateer engaged her broadside
to broadside. The French captain was abaft, giving his orders with the
greatest coolness and ability, when a shot from the cutter came in on
deck, and a large splinter which it tore off knocked him down on his
back. Bramble and I both ran to him and helped him up--we could not help
it, although he was an enemy. He was not hurt, and as soon as he was on
his legs he laughed, and thanked us in French. The cutter still
continued the fight until we were within three miles of the coast, when,
all her spars and sails being cut to pieces, she hauled to the wind and
stood out to the offing.

"Well, Tom, there's all our hopes ended," said Bramble; "so now I'll
light my pipe. Well, I say it's been a good fight on both sides."

Here the captain came up to us and said, "Bien oblige--tank you."

The cutter did not, however, stand out for more than a few minutes, when
she hove to and repaired damages, evidently intending to renew the
action. I pointed this out to Bramble. "I see, I see," replied he; "she
intends to try and cut us off from Morlaix, which is to windward, and
oblige us to fight or run for St. Malo's, which is a long way to
leeward. In either case she will be able to attack us again, as she
out-sails us. Perhaps the fight is not over yet."

But the Frenchman also understood what he was about, and he now steered
a course. When we were about two miles from the land, and about the same
distance from the cutter, the latter kept away so as to oblige the ship
to come to action again before she reached Morlaix; but, before she
closed with us, we discovered that we were entering a small French port,
which had not been visible to us, called (I think) Lanion, situated
between Isle Bichat and Morlaix. When within half a mile of the land,
French over English was hoisted at our peak, and a French pennant over
an English pennant at our main.

"I told you so," said Bramble; "they have made a man-of-war out of us,
and now there'll be no end to the lies that they will tell; for though
these French fellows do not fight quite so well as we do, at lying
they'll beat us hollow, any day of the week. Never mind, Tom, we must
keep a sharp lookout, and there's no saying--keep your eyes open as we
go into the harbor--I never was here before, but I suspect it's nothing
better than a poor fishing town."

In a quarter of an hour the ship and privateer were both made fast to an
old stone pier which ran out from the town; but there were no other
vessels in the harbor except two small coasting chasses marées, and
about a dozen fishing-boats.

The harbor was formed by the mouth of a small river, which ran down
through a very narrow alluvial flat, backed by precipitous rocks. On the
right side of the river on entering, and on the level ground above
mentioned, which extended back perhaps two hundred yards, until it was
met by the rocky cliffs, was situated the village which, centuries back,
must have been the town of Lanion. It consisted of perhaps one hundred
to one hundred and twenty houses, few of them of any size, the major
portion with walls built of mud and whitewashed over. The only remains
of the former town were a stone-built market-place, the portion of the
Hôtel de Ville in which the mayor resided, and the old church, which,
although perfect in its walls, was sadly dilapidated in the roof. It had
long been deserted, and a small chapel had been built in lieu of it, in
which the only cure of the place performed the service. The massive
stones of which the now neglected pier had once been built proved that
at one time considerable expense had been incurred in the formation of
this small harbor.

A battery mounting two guns at the end of the pier protected the mouth
of the harbor; and there was a guard of a sergeant and twelve invalids,
who were stationed there to man the guns upon the approach of an enemy.

It would be difficult to describe the confusion which took place as soon
as the two vessels were fairly alongside the wharf, and made fast with
hawsers to the massive iron rings which had for centuries been fixed in
the ponderous stones of which the pier was composed. There was the mayor
with his cocked hat on, but his leather apron still tied in front, for
he had been working at his calling; there was the sergeant of the
invalids, who, perhaps, was a greater man than the mayor, all beard and
mustachios, but so thin in his person that he looked as if a stout
breeze would have blown him away; and there were the soldiers leaning on
their muskets. These were the most important personages, but they were
backed by the whole population of the town, amounting to about three
hundred men, women, and children, all talking, jabbering, and screaming.
Add to them the captain of the privateer, so important that he could
not attend to even the mayor or the sergeant; and the privateer's men,
dressed in every fashion, armed to the teeth, all explaining, or pushing
away, or running here and there obeying orders; then the wounded
men--for they had several men killed and others hurt in the conflict
with the cutter--handed up one by one, bandaged here and there, and
exciting the compassion and even screams of the women; the prisoners,
who had been ordered to come on deck, half dressed and chapfallen; the
sails of the vessels only clewed up, and still fluttering; ensigns and
pennants hoisted upon every mast, and waving over the heads of the crowd
assembled at the pier--and you may have some idea of the confused and
bustling scene.

[Illustration: THE ARRIVAL OF THE PRIVATEER AT LANION.--Marryat, Vol.
X., p. 841.]

At last, as there appeared no chance of anything being arranged while
the people crowded round, the captain of the privateer ordered his men
to draw their weapons and drive back the crowd, which was soon effected,
notwithstanding many oaths, and more screaming on the part of the fairer
sex; and when the crowd had been thus driven the men were stationed so
as to keep them back. At first this gave offense to all parties--to the
crowd, because they didn't like to be driven away--to the mayor, who
remained with the sergeant and invalids in the area which had been
cleared by the privateer's people, because he thought that they had
interfered with his civil authority--and to the sergeant of invalids,
because he thought that the marine force had interfered with his
military authority; but the captain of the privateer having taken off
his hat and bowed, first to the mayor and then to the sergeant, and
saying how much he was obliged to them for their assistance, both
parties were satisfied; and now a consultation was held between them how
to proceed, while the privateer's men, who kept back the crowd, amused
them by giving a detail of the two desperate actions which had been
fought--no two accounts agreeing, certainly, but that was of no
consequence.

The first question to be canvassed was, what was to be done with the
prisoners? Morlaix was the nearest town in which they would be under
safe keeping, but that was twenty miles distant, and it would be
necessary to send over an express, so that a sufficient force might be
dispatched to Lanion to escort the prisoners there. This Mr. Mayor
undertook to do immediately; a boy was summoned to take over the
communication, and the mayor went up to write his letter to the
authorities, while the wounded men were carried away, and by the
direction of the cure, who had just arrived and joined the consultation,
billeted upon different houses in the town. The express having been
dispatched, and the wounded safely housed and under the care of the
village Æsculapius, who never had such a job in his whole life, the next
point of consultation was how to dispose of the prisoners until the
force should arrive from Morlaix. Here the sergeant became the principal
person, being military commandant; forty-seven prisoners were a heavy
charge for twelve invalids; and as for the privateer's men, there was no
dependence upon them, for, as the captain said, they had had enough to
do to take them, and it was the business of the authorities to look
after them now, while the privateer's men made merry.


CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

     With those powerful agents, Fire and Water, we contrive to Escape
     from a French Prison.


After more than an hour of confusion and loud talking it was at last
proposed and agreed to, _nem. con._, that the prisoners should be
confined in the old church; the twelve invalids to be divided into two
parties, who were to be sentinels over them, relieving each other every
four hours. The mayor immediately went forward with the village
blacksmith to examine the state of the church doors, and ascertain how
they might be secured; while the prisoners, having been summoned out of
the privateer, were escorted up between two files of the privateer's men
with their swords drawn, and followed by the whole population. As soon
as we arrived at the church door the name of every prisoner was taken
down by the mayor, attended by a notary, and then he was passed into the
church. Bramble and I of course were marched up with the others, the
captain of the privateer talking with us the whole way, through the
young man who interpreted, informing us that an express had been sent
over to Morlaix, to which town we should be escorted the next day, and
then have better accommodation. As we stood at the huge doors of the
church, which were opened for our reception, we perceived that the
altar and all the decorations had been removed, and that, with the
exception of the large wooden screen of carved oak near the altar, the
church was completely bare. Bramble spoke to the interpreter, and said
that he hoped the captain would request the mayor to allow the prisoners
to have straw to lie down upon, as the pavement would be very cold.
Although the mayor at first demurred at this demand, yet the captain of
the privateer, probably out of goodwill to Bramble, insisted, and the
straw was ordered to be sent in. At last the mayor became impatient, we
could delay no longer, and the doors were closed.

[Illustration: THE PRISON.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 345.]

I had surveyed the church as we were escorted up to it. It was very
large, capable, I should think, of holding more than two thousand
people. The walls of the church were very massive, and the windows had
but very few panes of glass remaining in them, but they were so very
high as to prevent our climbing out of them, even if there had not been
six sentinels guarding us outside. At one corner, to the right of the
end of the church where the altar-piece had been, was a narrow stone
tower, apparently an addition made to the Lady's Chapel long after the
church had been originally built. When we were shut up we were enabled
to survey the interior at our leisure. The whole was completely bare to
the pavement until you came to the chancel part, near to which the altar
had been, where the wooden screens and seats still remained, in a sad
dilapidated state; but they must have once been very handsome, for the
carving, where it was perfect, was very beautiful. A small, thick wooden
door, loaded with ironwork, communicated with the narrow tower, which
had a flight of stone steps running up to the top, and narrow loopholes
to give light as you ascended. While the majority of the prisoners were
sitting down here and there on the pavement, few of them entering into
conversation, Bramble had, with me, taken a full survey of our locality.

"I tell you what, Tom; if we once get to Morlaix, all chance is over,"
said he. "We must either get out of this church this very night, or we
must make up our minds to remain in prison Heaven knows how long."

"Have we any chance?"

"I'll tell you more about that in a little while."

The door of the church now opened, and the people brought in the straw
for the beds, which they threw all in a heap in the center of the
church, and the doors were again closed.

"I see daylight now," said Bramble. "Tom, find the mate and boatswain,
and bring them here to me quickly."

I did so, and Bramble asked them whether they were inclined to make an
attempt to get clear.

They replied that they would join us in anything--they did not care what
it was, and against any odds.

"Well, then," said Bramble, "my idea is this. You see there are but
twelve old soldiers to guard us; for you may be certain that, before
long, all the privateer's men will be as drunk as owls--that's but
natural; not that I think of coming to any fight with them, but I make
the observation because, if we get out, we shall have little to fear
afterward. Now, you see, I asked for the straw because the idea came in
my head that it might be useful. You see, what I propose is, as there is
plenty of wood in this part of the church, that we should wait till
about three hours after dark--that is, until ten or eleven o'clock--and
then set fire to the church. They must come and let us out, you know; at
least I take it for granted that they will before the roof comes down.
If they don't, we must force the doors ourselves--I've looked at
them--and until we do there is no fear of suffocating, for there are no
panes to the windows. So, after all, it will only be a bonfire, without
danger to anybody."

"Well, but what shall we gain by it?" said the mate. "We shall be walked
out with the other prisoners, and how shall we then escape?"

"There it is: we will not be walked out with the other prisoners; and,
in the confusion and hurry of taking them away to one place or another,
they will not be likely to miss us. We will all go up this narrow tower,
where we may remain, till the church falls in, with perfect safety; and
then, when all is quiet again, and the people have left the spot, we
will make for the pier, get one of the fishing boats and be off. How do
you like the idea?"

We all agreed that the plan was very feasible, and would attempt it.

"Well, then, we must remain quiet for the present; all you have to do is
to fetch as much straw this way as you can by degrees: I expect they
will bring us something to eat before long."

We removed a large portion of the straw to the chancel; in half an hour
afterward the doors were opened and rations of bread were brought in.
What still more assisted our plans was, that the captain of the
privateer at the same time, very good-naturedly, brought a demijohn of
brandy, which he gave to Bramble.

Bramble thanked him through the interpreter, and told him that he would
get well drunk that night.

"Yes, drive away care, captain says," replied the interpreter.

Once more the doors were closed, and we had no chance of further
interruption.

[Illustration: JACK A PRISONER.--Marryat, Vol X., p. 349.]

By Bramble's direction, the mate, assisted by me and the boatswain,
cast loose the remaining bundles of straw and shook them down as beds
for the prisoners at the end of the church nearest to the door; and as
soon as they had eaten their bread, Bramble gave them all a portion of
the brandy, advising them to turn in soon, as we were to march very
early the next morning. We remained with them at first, having taken our
seats on the straw as if we also intended to repose. At last it became
dusk, and then dark; the prisoners settled themselves to sleep; we left
them and joined Bramble. Having arranged our straw so as to secure
ignition, and leaving the mate and boatswain down below, Bramble and I,
now that there was no chance of our being seen by the sentinels,
ascended the tower. It commanded a view of the town and harbor. We
looked down upon the main street--all was mirth and revelry; fiddling
and dancing and singing were to be heard from more than one house; women
in the street laughing, and now and then running and screaming when
pursued by the men.

"This is all right," observed Bramble; "in an hour or two you'll see how
quiet everything will be; but I shall not let them all go to bed before
I set fire, for there may be some difficulty in waking them. I don't see
that there's any lights down at the pier, where the vessels lie."

We stayed up there till about eleven o'clock, Bramble watching the
lights and sounds; and when he considered that they had sufficiently
decreased, he said, "Now we'll try it, Tom, and may success attend us!"

We descended and found the mate and boatswain anxiously waiting for us.
Bramble struck a light with his flint, and we carried it to the screen
where we had piled the straw under the seats and against the panels.

"Now then, messmates," said Bramble, "as long as the others sleep the
better; but if they waken in the confusion, bring here all the straw you
can collect, for we must not fail for want of fuel."

But of this there was no chance, for the wood of the screen and benches
was so dry that it was alight immediately. For ten minutes the other
prisoners and the guard outside did not appear to be aware of what was
going on; but at last the church was so filled with smoke that they were
roused up. Still the principal smoke was in that portion of the church
where we were; at the other end they were not much inconvenienced, as it
found vent by the windows. What the invalids were about outside I do not
know, but they did not perceive it; probably they had left their guard
to go and carouse. At all events the flames had climbed up from the
screen and had caught a portion of the roof before the Frenchmen knew
that the church was on fire; the smoke was now exchanged for a bright
clear flame, which had already found its way through the slating, and
the prisoners were halloaing and screaming as loud as they could. We
went to the part of the church where the others were, and joined the
outcry. The voices of the people outside were now to be heard, for men
and women had been summoned by the cry of the church being on fire:
still there was no danger until the roof fell in, and that would not be
the case for perhaps an hour, although it was now burning furiously, and
the sparks and cinders were borne away to leeward by the breeze. The
screams of the prisoners now became dreadful: frightened out of their
wits, they fully expected to be burned alive; still the door was not
opened, although we heard a loud consultation of many voices without.

"Well," said Bramble, "I hope they really don't mean to let us burn
here; at all events, if they do, I can save the poor devils, for
there's room enough on the stairs of the tower for twice as many. At all
events we must hold on till the last moment."

As he said this we heard them outside put the key in the door, and
immediately Bramble, the boatswain, mate, and I retreated from the crowd
and gained the other portion of the church, which was most in flames. As
the door opened we hastened to the tower door, and closing it after us,
gained the staircase near the top, where we remained quiet; there was no
want of smoke there, but still we could breathe pretty freely, as the
fire from the roof was borne down by the wind from us and toward the
people, who were at the front of the church. How they disposed of the
other prisoners we do not know, as we dared not show ourselves; but in
about half an hour the whole of the roof fell down upon the pavement,
and nothing but the bare walls of the church were left standing.

After the roof fell in the light from the flames was so small that we
ventured to the top of the tower to look out. There were still many
people standing about, but the major part of them were gone. As the fire
sank down so did the people go away; at last there was no one to be
seen: we remained more than half an hour watching; light after light
disappeared, and all was quiet as death.

"Now's our time," said Bramble, "but still we must be cautious; let us
follow one another at about ten yards apart: if we meet with any one,
pretend to be reeling as if drunk, and they may think we are
privateer's-men not yet gone to bed."

[Illustration: THE ESCAPE.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 353.]

We followed him down the stairs, gained the church, and trod over the
still burning embers; as soon as we were clear of the walls we turned to
the right in our way down to the harbor, keeping in the gloom as much as
possible. We arrived safely at the pier, for there was not a soul
stirring; all our fear was that we should find some one keeping watch on
board of the vessels, which we must pass after we had possession of one
of the fishing-boats, as they laid inside of them. But fortune favored
us every way: the boat we selected had her sails bent, and was not
fastened with a chain; we were, therefore, in the stream in a moment;
the tide was also running out strong, and we passed the vessels without
having occasion to use our oars. The battery at the entrance of the
harbor was also without its usual sentry, for the men had been called up
to guard the prisoners. In half an hour we were clear of the harbor, and
steering with a fine breeze for the English coast; and when daylight
broke the French land was but just perceptible.

"Well," said Bramble, "praised be Heaven for all things. I expected to
have lost my precious liberty for years, and I have only lost two
shirts, one pair of trousers, and three pair of worsted stockings."

We had nothing to eat or drink, but that we cared little for, as the
wind was fair. About ten o'clock that night we landed at Cawsand Bay
near Plymouth, where we sat down to a hearty supper; and when we went to
bed, I did not forget to thank Providence for my unexpected escape.


CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

     Another Escape, more fortunate than the one recorded in the
     preceding Chapter.


From the time that I had passed my examination, and worked as a pilot on
my own account, until the period of our escape, which I have narrated in
the preceding chapter, I had continued to live in the cottage with
Bramble, without contributing any share to the expenses. I had at first
proposed it, but Bramble would not listen to any such arrangement; he
considered me, he said, as his son, and who knew, he added, but that the
cottage would be mine after he was gone. The fact was that Bramble
ardently wished that Bessy and I should be united. He continually hinted
at it, joked with Bessy about me; and I believe that, in consequence,
Bessy's feelings toward me had taken the same bent. She was prepared for
the issue; the regard naturally felt for me from her long intimacy, now
that the indulgence of it was so openly sanctioned by him whom she
considered as her father, was not checked on her part; indeed, there was
no doubt but that it had ripened into love. She showed it in every
little way that her maiden modesty did not interfere with, and old
Bramble would at times throw out such strong hints of our eventual union
as to make me feel very uncomfortable. They neither of them had any idea
of my heart having been pre-engaged, and the strangeness of my manner
was ascribed by Bramble to my feelings toward Bessy. Bessy, however, was
not so easily deceived; my conduct toward her appeared, to say the best
of it, very inconsistent. So often had I had opportunities, especially
when I was at home and Bramble was away, of speaking on the subject, and
so often had these opportunities been neglected, that it filled her mind
with doubt and anxiety. After having accepted my addresses at first,
Janet had once or twice written to me; lately, however, she had not
written herself--all her messages were through Virginia's letters, or,
perhaps, she would add a little postscript. Had letters arrived for me
in any other handwriting than that of Virginia, Bessy, after her
suspicions were roused, might have easily guessed the truth; but it was
the absence of any clew to guide her as to the state of my feelings
which so much puzzled her. She was fully convinced that my heart was not
hers, but she had no reason to suppose that it was in the possession of
another. Thus did my passion for Janet Wilson in every way prove to me a
source of anxiety. I knew that it was my duty to undeceive Bramble and
Bessy, yet the task was too painful, and I could not make up my mind to
make them unhappy. I felt that I had no right to remain under Bramble's
roof and live at his expense, and, at the same time, I could not find an
opportunity of telling him what my feelings and wishes were, the very
mention of which would at once explain to him that the desire of his old
age would never be accomplished. I often accused myself of ingratitude,
and felt as if it were my duty to make every sacrifice to one who had
been so kind a protector; but I was bound by vows to Janet Wilson, and
how was it possible that I could retract?

Virginia's letters were not satisfactory: at first she told me how much
she had been annoyed by the attentions of the young nobleman, and how
very indelicate my mother had been in her conduct; eventually she
informed me that she had been insulted by him, and that, upon
complaining to my mother, the latter had, much to her surprise and
indignation, not only laughed at his extreme forwardness, but pointed
out to Virginia a line of conduct by which he might be entrapped into
marriage; that her refusal to accede to such unworthy devices had
created a serious breach between her mother and herself. She stated the
young man to be extremely silly and weak, and that my mother had gained
great influence over him; and were it not that the presence of the
tutor, who seldom quitted the house, had proved a check, that there was
little doubt but, as far as the young man was concerned, the
disproportionate match would be readily acceded to; that the only person
she had ventured to consult was her dear friend Mrs. St. Felix, who had
promised her, if the persecution did not cease, that she would make Mr.
Sommerville the tutor aware of what was going on. Virginia described the
latter as an amiable modest young man, who did all in his power to
instruct his pupil, but who was treated with anything but deference in
return.

Relative to Janet she said little, except that she generally called
there every day to make inquiries after me: once or twice she did say
that it was a pity that I was not able to come oftener to Greenwich, as
Janet was not very steady; indeed, considering how young she was,
without a mother, and so little controlled by her father, it was not to
be wondered at.

Such was the state of affairs when I made up my mind that I would speak
to Bramble about my paying my share of the expenses, which I thought
would open his eyes to the real state of my feeling toward Bessy. I did
so; I pointed out to him that I was now earning money fast, and that I
considered it but fair that I should support myself, and not put him to
further expense; that perhaps it would be better that I should take a
house for myself, as I must give a great deal of trouble to Bessy and
Mrs. Maddox.

"Well, Tom," said Bramble, "you've been at me about this before, and I
believe it's a proper feeling, after all. It certainly does seem to me
to be a matter of little consequence, as things stand; however, I can't
consent to your leaving us. You have been with me ever since you were a
lad, and I should feel like a fish out of water if I were to be without
you or Bessy; so pay just what you please--I'll take it since you wish
it--and there's an end of the matter."

This was not the end to which I was driving; but Bramble's eyes would
not be opened, and I could not help it. He had never directly spoken to
me about a union with Bessy, and therefore it was impossible for me to
say any more. Bramble, however, did not fail to communicate what I had
said to her; and one evening when we were standing on the shingle beach,
she said to me, "So Emerson has been convicted for smuggling, and
sentenced beyond the seas."

"I am sorry for it," replied I.

"His house is to be let now, Tom; would it not suit you? for my father
told me that you wished to leave us."

"Why should I live upon you when I am able to support myself?"

"Certainly not. If it were not that I could not bear to see father
miserable, I think it would be better if you did take Emerson's house;
but it would vex him, poor good man."

"But not you, Bessy; is it that you mean?"

"Perhaps it is. Tell me yourself, Tom, would it not be better?"

I made no reply.

"Well," replied Bessy, "think of me as you please; I will speak now,
Tom. I am not considering you, Tom, nor am I thinking of myself; I am
only induced so to do on account of my father. We have been brought up
together as children, Tom, and, as children, we were great friends, and,
I believe, sincerely attached to each other. I believe it to be very
true that those who are brought up together as brothers and sisters do
not change that affection for any other more serious in after life. It
is therefore not our faults if we cannot feel as, you must know, Tom, my
father wishes we should. Am I not right?"

"You are, I believe, Bessy," replied I.

"My father, therefore, is deceiving himself with the hopes of what never
can take place, but I know him even better than you do, Tom; it is the
object of his daily thoughts--his only wish before he sinks into his
grave. I cannot bear to undeceive him; no more can you, if I have truly
judged your feelings."

"You have judged right, Bessy."

"The very circumstance of our knowing his wishes, the hints which he
throws out, his joking on the subject, have been a source of annoyance
to both of us; and not only a source of annoyance, Tom, it has estranged
us--we no longer feel that affection which we should feel for each
other, that kindness as between brother and sister which might exist; on
the contrary, not being exactly aware of each other's feelings, we
avoid each other, and fearful that the least kindness might be
misconstrued, we do not really treat each as we otherwise would; in
fact, it has destroyed our mutual confidence. Is it not so?"

"It is, I acknowledge, but too true, Bessy, and I thank you for having
entered into this explanation--"

"Which, as I said before," continued Bessy, "I should not have done
except for the sake of my father; but now that I have done so" (and here
Bessy's voice became tremulous), "let us consult at once how we shall
act so as to secure his happiness, and that in future we may return to
the former confidence and regard which should exist between us as
brother and sister."

"Point out how this is to be done, Bessy, and I will cheerfully enter
into your wishes."

"We must laugh when he laughs, Tom, even if not inclined; we must gain
time--that is very easy. I may refuse as long as he lives--you may put
it off; and then, Tom, circumstances may help us--who knows what even a
day may bring forth?"

"Very true," replied I, "there's only one thing--"

"What is that?"

"Suppose I was to marry?"

"Then," replied Bessy, in a voice half choked, as she turned away, "my
father would be very unhappy."

I looked round to reply, but she had gone into the cottage. This
conversation gave me great satisfaction. I felt convinced that if I had
at one time formed the idea that Bessy was attached to me, I had been
mistaken, and I was as indifferent to her as she was to me. I was just
as anxious as she was not to vex Bramble, and equally glad that
confidence was restored between us. Alas! I must have been very blind
not to have perceived what was the true state of her feelings, but I
did not, and after some reflection I determined that I would make her a
confidante of my passion for Janet Wilson; and then I walked to the
post-office to see if there were any letters from Virginia. There was a
letter for me--a double one. As soon as I had paid the money, I opened
it; it was very closely written, and evidently Virginia had much to
communicate to me. I forgot for the moment Bessy and Bramble, thought
only of Janet, and put the letter to my lips as I walked away, that I
might go home and read it. I hurried past Bessy, who was in the parlor,
and went up the stairs into my bedroom, where I took my letter out of my
pocket and commenced it.

     "15th April.

"MY DEAR TOM--I shall begin a letter to you now, and fill it up as a
sort of a diary; as it is the best plan, I think, to narrate
circumstances as they actually take place. It is unpleasant to say
anything against my mother, the more so as I believe that she thinks she
has been doing right, and has my interest sincerely at heart: she
appears to consider that an alliance with people of rank cannot be
purchased too dear, and that every attempt is justifiable to secure for
me such an advantage. Little does she know me. If she forgets, I never
shall, that I am the daughter of a Greenwich pensioner, and never would
ally myself with those whose relations would look upon me as a disgrace
to their family. No, Tom; even if I were so heedless as to allow my
affections to be enthralled, I would at any sacrifice refuse to enter
into a family much beyond my condition. I have thought of this often,
and I confess that I am sometimes unhappy. I have been brought up and
educated above my situation in life, and I do not think I ever could
marry a person who was not more refined and educated than those who are
really and truly my equals, But as, at the same time, I never will enter
into a family who might look down upon my parentage, I presume your
little Virginia must remain unmarried. If so, I am content--I have no
wish to alter my present condition. I am happy and respected; and with
the exception of the trifling annoyances which we all must expect and
must submit to, I have no reason to be dissatisfied; on the contrary, I
have to be grateful for many blessings, and I trust that I am so. My
poor mother is the cause of all my present vexations. She tells me that
my beauty, as she is partially pleased to call it, is sufficient for my
aspiring to the hand of a duke, and that it will be my own fault if I do
not make a high connection. Every night she has been overwhelming me
with alternate reproaches and entreaties to permit the attentions of the
gay gentleman who is now lodging at our house, stating that it was on my
account only that he took the apartments, and that, if I play my cards
well, he will be caught in his own trap, which, I presume, is as much as
to say that he came here with different intentions, and finding that he
cannot succeed, will secure his intended prize or victim by marriage
rather than not obtain her at all. Very flattering, truly! and this is
the man to whom my mother would induce me to confide my future
happiness--a man who, independent of his want of probity, is a fool into
the bargain. But the persecution on his part and on that of my mother
now becomes so annoying that I have requested Mrs. St. Felix to speak to
Mr. Sommerville the tutor, who, if he does his duty--and I have every
reason to believe that he will do so--will take some measures to remove
his pupil from our house.

"17th. Mrs. St. Felix and Mr. Sommerville have had a meeting. He
generally walks out every afternoon in the park; and Mrs. St. Felix and
he have already been introduced. She therefore went out and met him, and
after exchanging a few words she introduced the subject, stating that
she did so at my request. Mr. Sommerville, although he had not been
blind, had had no idea that things had proceeded so far; and he promised
Mrs. St. Felix that he would soon put an end to the persecution, or
remove him from our house. Janet has been here to-day, and I told her
what had passed; she very much approved of the steps which I had taken.
I must, however, say that latterly she has not appeared to take that
interest about you that she used to do, and I fear that your continual
absence is injurious to your prospects. She is very young and very
giddy, Tom. I wish she had been older, as, even when she is your wife,
she will require much looking after, and a firm hand to settle her down
into what a married woman in my opinion ought to be. Mr. Sommerville has
requested me to favor him with a few minutes' conversation; and as I
cannot do it in our house, for my mother never leaves me a minute to
myself, I told him that I should be at Mrs. St. Felix's this afternoon,
and he could speak to me then. He knows that I have no secrets from Mrs.
St. Felix; and although it is not pleasant to resort to such means,
still there can be no impropriety in my hearing what he has to tell me
in her presence.

"I have seen Mr. Sommerville--he thanked me very much for having
communicated, through Mrs. St. Felix, my mother's plot against his
protege, and paid me many compliments upon my behavior, which were quite
unnecessary. He told me that he had spoken to his pupil, who had most
positively denied his having any such intention, and stated that he was
merely amusing himself, and he had pledged himself not to take the least
notice of me for the future. 'I am well aware,' said he, 'that what he
has stated is not correct; he has not deceived me by his assertions; and
were it not that I feel confidence in you, Miss Virginia,' continued he,
'I would write to his father that he might be immediately removed. I
hardly need say that should anything of this kind take place, I should
be most severely blamed. It is not the first time that I have been
compelled to interfere, for my pupil is of a very susceptible
disposition, and has fancied himself in love with at least five young
people since he has been under my charge. In this instance,' continued
he, making me a bow, 'he has some extenuation to offer. Will you oblige
me by informing me if he adheres to his promise? or do you wish that I
should speak to your mother?'

"Mrs. St. Felix replied that it would be unnecessary; indeed, that if
Lord ---- left the house I should only be subject to fresh persecution.
Mr. Sommerville, at her request, stayed to drink tea, and is certainly a
very pleasant, well-informed, amiable young man.

"23d. I have received no molestation since the explanation with Mr.
Sommerville, except from my mother, who accuses me of having affronted
Lord ----; and although I deny it, she asserts that he never could have
so changed his conduct toward both of us if I had not so done. I have
not seen Janet this week--I cannot imagine what has become of her.

"24th. You may imagine my joy, my dear Tom. Mr. Sommerville has received
a letter, stating that his lordship is to go down to his father's seat
in the country, as he will be of age in a month, and he is to make
acquaintance with the tenants; there are to be great rejoicings there
upon his coming of age. I am sure no one can rejoice more than I shall
when he leaves, which is to be next Saturday. I am also very glad to say
that the Marquess has presented Mr. Sommerville with a valuable living,
now that he gives up his tutorship. I really think he will do justice to
his profession, for I have seen more of him lately, and esteem him very
much.

"27th. They are gone, much to my mother's mortification and to my
delight; and now, as I have written so much about myself, I shall leave
this letter open till I see Janet, that I may tell you something about
her, otherwise I know my letter will not be interesting to you.

"31st. My dear Tom, you must prepare yourself for painful intelligence.

"Janet has disappeared. She left her father's house last night after the
family had retired, but no one knows where. She left a few lines on her
table, stating that they would hear from her soon. Poor Mr. Wilson was
here to-day--he is half distracted--and the whole town is full of the
scandal. Mrs. St. Felix told me this morning that she has discovered
that within the last week she has been seen walking on the London Road
with Lord ----. Is it possible?

"May 2d. It is all true--Mrs. St. Felix has a letter from Mr.
Sommerville, stating that Janet was brought up to town and married to
Lord ---- two days ago. It appears that from the time that I repulsed
his attentions he fixed them upon Janet; that she encouraged him, and
used to meet him every night, as Mrs. St. Felix was informed. Mr.
Sommerville has seen his father, and fully exculpated himself; but the
Marquess declares, as his son is a minor, that the marriage shall not be
binding. How it will end Heaven only knows; but she is much to be
pitied. This will account for her not coming to me as usual. Now, Tom, I
do not suppose you will pay attention to me at present, but from what I
knew of Janet, and which her conduct has fully proved, she was not
worthy to be your wife, and could not have contributed to your
happiness. I pity you from my heart, as I know what you will feel; but
still I congratulate you, and eventually you will congratulate yourself
at your fortunate escape.

"I will say no more at present, except that I am, and ever will be,

"Your truly attached sister,

"VIRGINIA."

I had courage to finish the letter, and then it dropped from my hands. I
was bewildered, stupefied, maddened. As my sister said, I did indeed
feel. Was it possible? Janet, who had--mercy on me! I threw myself on
the bed, and there I remained till the next morning in a state most
pitiable.

It is only those who have been deceived in their first attachment who
can appreciate my agony of feeling. For the first few hours I hated the
whole world, and, had then the means been at hand, should in all
probability have hastened into another; but gradually my excitement
abated; I found relief in tears of sorrow and indignation. I arose at
daylight the next morning, worn out with contending feelings, heavy and
prostrated in mind. I went out--stood on the beach, the keen breeze
cooled my fevered cheek. For hours I leaned motionless upon an anchor,
all hope of future happiness abandoned forever.


CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT

     Which is all about Love--Bramble confides to me all his
     Acquaintance with the tender Passion.


To conceal from Bramble or Bessy the state of mind to which I was
reduced was impossible. I was in a condition of prostration against
which I could not rally; and I believe that there never was a person who
had been disappointed in his first love who did not feel as I did--that
is, if he really loved with a sincere, pure, and holy feeling; for I do
not refer to the fancied attachments of youth, which may be said to be
like the mere flaws of wind which precede the steady gale. I could not,
for several days, trust myself to speak; I sat silent and brooding over
the words, the looks, the smiles, the scenes which had promised me a
store of future happiness--such as would probably have been the case, as
far as we can be happy in this world, had I fixed my affections upon a
true and honest, instead of a fickle and vain, woman; had I built my
house upon a rock, instead of one upon the sand--which, as pointed out
by the Scriptures, had been washed away, and had disappeared forever!
Bramble and Bessy in vain attempted to gain from me the cause of my
dejection; I believe that they had many conversations upon it when I was
absent, but whatever may have been their surmises, they treated me with
every kindness and consideration. About a week after I had received the
letter, Bramble said to me, "Come, Tom, we have had an easterly wind for
ten days now, they are going off in a galley to-morrow--suppose we go
too; it's no use staying here moping and doing nothing. You've been out
of sorts lately, and it will do you good." I thought so too, and
consented; but the other pilots were not ready, and our departure was
deferred till the day after. Bramble had acquainted me in the morning
with this delay; I was annoyed at it, for I was restless and wished for
change. My bundle had been prepared; I had passed the best part of the
night in writing to Virginia, and was, as people very often are when
under such oppressed feelings, in anything but a good humor at being
obliged to remain another day at Deal. I had walked out to the beach
after we had breakfasted, and had remained there some time. Bramble had
gone out in the direction of the post-office, and I asked him to inquire
if there was a letter for me, for I thought it very likely that Virginia
might have written to me again. I had remained for an hour on the beach,
when I recollected that my knife required to be sharpened, and I walked
round the cottage to the back yard, where there was a small grindstone.
I had not put my knife to it when I heard Bramble come in and say to
Bessy:

"Well, girl, I've found it all out; for, you see, I thought old Anderson
might know something about it, or, if he did not, he could inquire--and
I've got the whole story. Here's Anderson's letter. I thought there must
be something of that sort."

Here there was a pause, as if Bessy was reading the letter.

"Only to think--she's run away with a young lord," said Bramble.

"So it seems," replied Bessy. "I'm sorry for poor Tom, for he feels it
severely."

"I'm not sorry," rejoined Bramble; "she wasn't deserving of him; and,
Bessy, I'm glad for your sake."

"Don't say that, father; Tom will never think of me, nor do I care about
him."

"I don't exactly believe that, Bessy, for all you say so. It's my wish,
and you know it, Bessy, to see you and Tom spliced before I die; and I
thank Heaven that this false girl is out of the way--I've more hopes
now."

"Marriages are made in heaven, father," replied Bessy; "so, pray don't
say any thing more about it. It will be time enough for me to think of
Tom when Tom appears to think of me. I shall always love him as a
brother."

"Well, God's will be done! We must now try and console him, poor fellow;
and I'm very glad that we're off to-morrow. Salt water cures love, they
say, sooner than anything else."

"It may, perhaps," replied Bessy; "but I feel that if I were once really
in love the whole ocean itself could not wash my love out. However,
women are not men."

"That's true. You hug your love as you do your babies, all day long, and
never tire. Now, you see, a man gets tired of nursing in no time. I
never was in love but once."

"Oh, father, I've heard that story so often."

"Well, then, you shan't hear it again. Now, I'll go out and see where
Tom may be. I suppose he's looking at the wind, and thinking how it
changes like a woman. But I'll light my pipe first."

"Do, father; and while Tom looks at the wind and thinks of women, do you
just watch the smoke out of your pipe, and think of men and their
constancy."

"Well, I will, if it pleases you. Put the letter by, Bessy, for I
shouldn't like Tom to see it. What have you got for dinner?"

"I left that to Mrs. Maddox, so I can't tell. But there's cold pudding
in the larder; I'll put it out for Tom."

"Nay, Bessy, you must not jest with him."

"Am I likely, think you, father?" replied Bessy. "Can't I feel for him?"

"Come, come, dearest, I didn't mean to make you cry."

"I'm not crying, but I'm very sorry for Tom, and that's the truth. Now
go away with your pipe and leave me alone."

It was impossible for me to have returned without being perceived, and I
therefore remained during the whole of this conversation. I was annoyed
to discover that they knew my secret; and still more vexed at the
remainder of this colloquy, by which I discovered that Bramble had so
completely set his heart upon a union between me and Bessy, which I
considered as impossible. I felt, as all do at the time, as if I never
could love again. I walked away, and did not return home till
dinner-time. Bramble and Bessy were very kind, although they did not
talk much; and when I went away the next day I was moved with the
affectionate farewell of the latter.

It was a beautiful night, and we were running before the east wind, the
Portland Light upon our starboard beam; the other men in the boat had
lain down in their gregos and pilot jackets, and were fast asleep, while
Bramble was at the helm steering; and I, who was too restless in my mind
to feel any inclination to repose, was sitting on the sternsheets beside
him.

"Do you see the line of the _Race_" said Bramble; "it seems strong
to-night."

Bramble referred to what is called by the mariners the Race of Portland,
where the uneven ground over which the water runs creates a very heavy
sea even in a calm. Small smuggling vessels and boats, forced into it in
bad weather, have often foundered. The tide, however, runs so rapidly
over it that you are generally swept through it in a few minutes, and
then find yourself again in comparatively smooth water.

"Yes," replied I; "it is very strong to-night, from the long continuance
of the easterly wind."

"Exactly so, Tom," continued Bramble. "I've often thought that getting
into that Race is just like failing in love."

"Why so?" replied I, rather pettishly, for I was not pleased at his
referring to the subject.

"I'll tell you why, Tom," said Bramble; "because, you see, when we get
into the Race it's all boiling and bubbling and tossing about--rudder
and sails are of no use; and you are carried along by a fierce tide,
which there's no resisting, with no small damage to the upper works,
until you are fairly out again, and find breath to thank God for it.
Now, aren't that like love?"

"I suppose it is as you say so; you know best."

"Well, I think I do know best; because, you see, I have long been clear
of it. I never was in love but once, Tom; did I ever tell you about it?"

"Never," replied I.

"Well, then, as 'twill pass time away, I'll just give you the long and
the short of it, as the saying is. When I was just about twenty, and a
smart lad in my own opinion, I was on board of a transport, and we had
gone round to Portsmouth with a load of timber for the dockyard. It was
not my first trip there, for, you see, the transport was employed
wholly on that service; and during my cruising on shore I had taken up
my quarters at the Chequer Board, a house a little way from the common
Hard, in the street facing the dockyard wall; for, you see, Tom, it was
handy to us, as our ship laid at the wharf, off the mast pond, it being
just outside the dockyard gates. The old fellow who kept the house was
as round as a ball, for he never started out by any chance from one
year's end to another; his wife was dead; and he had an only daughter,
who served at the bar, in a white cap with blue streamers; and when her
hair was out of papers, and she put on clean shoes and stockings, which
she did every day after dinner, she was a very smart neat built little
heifer; and, being an only daughter, she was considered as a great catch
to any one who could get hold of her. She had quite the upper hand of
her father, who dared not say a word; and with others she would give
herself no few airs. At one time she would be as sweet as sugar, and the
next, without any cause, she'd 'wonder at your imperance.' It was
difficult to know how to take her. It's a bad thing for a girl to have a
great fortune; they get so much flattery that it turns their heads.
Well, Tom, I wasn't looking after the money, as you'll believe when I
tell you so; but as she was very chatty with me, and allowed me to come
inside the bar, which was considered as a great favor, to help rinse the
glasses, and so on, and as the other men used to joke with me, and tell
me that I should carry off the prize, I began to think that she was fond
of me, and so very naturally I became fond of her; and we met and we
parted (and she would allow me to kiss her when we parted), until I was
quite gone altogether, and did nothing but think of her all day and
dream of her all night. Well, the last time that I was in the transport
to Portsmouth, I had made up my mind to clinch the business, and as soon
as the sails were furled, I dressed myself in my best toggery and made
all sail for the old house. When I came in I found Peggy in the bar, and
a very fancy sort of young chap alongside of her. I did not think so
much of that, and I was going inside the bar to shake hands as usual,
when says she, 'Well, I should not wonder,' pulling to the half-door, as
if she were surprised at my attempting to come in.

"'Oh, ho!' says I, 'are you on that tack? what next?' and then I looked
more at the chap, and he was a very nice young man, as the saying is. As
I afterward found out, he was in the smuggling line between Cherbourg
and our coast, and he had Frenchified manners, and he talked little bits
of French, and he had French gloves for presents, and had earrings in
his ears, and lots of rings on his fingers. So I took my seat at the
wooden benches near the fire, just as sulky as a bear with a sore head,
watching their maneuvers. At last he walked out, kissing his hand as she
smiles. As the coast was clear I went up to the bar.

"'Well,' says I, 'Peggy, so the wind's shifted, is it?'

"'What do you mean?' says she. 'I suppose I may be civil to another
person as well as to you.'

"'Yes, I see no objection,' says I; 'but why was he to be inside the
bar, and I put out?'

"'Oh,' replied she, 'one at a time, you know, Mr. Philip. I haven't made
any promises to you that I know of.'

"'That's very true,' replied I, 'but--'

"'Oh, you mustn't fret here,' interrupted she. 'I'm my own mistress, I
suppose. However, I'll tell you this much, that I don't care a bit about
him, and that's the truth of it--but I did not like your coming inside
the bar so quietly, as if you had a right there, for I don't want people
to make remarks.'

"Well, the end of it was that she pacified me, and we were as great
friends almost as ever. I say almost, for I had my eyes upon her and
that chap, and did not much like it. A week after my arrival there was
to be a fair over at Ryde, in the Isle of Wight, and I asked Peggy
whether she would go with me; but she refused, saying that she was
obliged to go to her aunt's out at Limberhook, who was very old, and had
sent for her, so I thought nothing more about the matter. Well, the day
before the fair, as we were busy in the fore noon getting the timber out
of the vessel, one of my shipmates, who went to the same house, says to
me, 'I say, Tom, when I was at the Chequers last night, I overheard
Peggy promise to go to the Ryde Fair with that Frenchified smuggling
chap.'

"'Did you?' said I.

"'Yes,' replied he, 'and they agreed to start at twelve o'clock, just
after the dockyard bell rang. I thought at the time it was just to give
you the slip before you left the ship, and that she is turning you
over.'

"Well, when I heard this, did not my blood boil? for the hussy had told
me a lie in saying that she was going to her aunt's; and it was evident
that she had done so that she might go with this other fellow to the
fair. I thought the matter over and over again, for, to tell you the
truth, all I wanted then was revenge. I felt nothing but scorn for a
woman who could act in so base a manner; at the same time I wished to
punish both her and him by spoiling their day's sport; so at last I
determined that I would start right away for the fair myself, and not
only put her to shame, but give her fancy man a good drubbing, which I
was well able to do. So I walks down to Point and gets into a wherry,
keeping a sharp lookout for their coming down from the Hard. At last I
spied them, and then I made the waterman pull away, so as to keep about
three cables' lengths ahead of them, and thus I continued watching their
billing and cooing, and grinding my teeth with rage, until we had come
over to the other side. Now, you see, Tom, at that time there was no
wooden pier at Ryde as there is now, and when the tide was out there was
such a long flat of mud that there was no landing; so the way it was
managed was, the wherries came in as far as they could, and were met by
a horse and cart, which took out the passengers and carried them through
the mud and water to the hard ground. Well, when I pulled in, the man
was there with his horse and cart, and I paid my fare, and stepped out
of the wherry, expecting the man to drive off and put me on shore; but
he, seeing that there was another wherry close at hand, says he must
wait for her passengers, and make one trip of it. I did not care how
soon we met, and waited very patiently until they pulled up to us. They
were not a little surprised to see me, and not a little annoyed either.
As for Peggy, she colored to her elbows, and then tried to put up an
impudent face on the matter. He looked both foolish and angry. They were
both very smart. She had on a white gown with a yellow handkerchief on
her shoulders, a green silk bonnet and blue feathers, and he was figged
out as fine as fivepence, with white jean trousers, and rings and
chains, and Lord knows what.

"'Well,' says Peggy, as bold as brass, 'who'd have thought to have seen
you here?'

"'I did not say that I was going to see my aunt,' replied I; 'but as you
did, who would have expected to see you here?'

"'Don't talk to me, young man,' said she, as red as fire, and turning
away to her beau.

"Just as she said this, the cart drove off, the horse floundering
through the mud, which was about three feet deep, with a matter of six
inches of water above it. As she turned away aft, I turned forward,
thinking what I should do next, and then I cast my eyes down, and
observed that it was a tilting cart as they use for carrying out manure,
and that if I took the two pegs out it would fall right back. I thought
this a capital trick. The carman was sitting on his horse, and it
couldn't matter to him, so I stepped out on the front of the cart, and
standing on the shafts, I first pulled out one peg and then another,
while they were busy talking to each other, with their heads so close
that his face was under her bonnet. As soon as the second peg was out, I
helped up the front of the cart a little, and back it went, shooting
them out right headforemost in the mud. You never saw such a scramble,
for they had caught hold of each other in their fright, and they rolled
and floundered, and were half smothered before they could recover their
feet; and then a pretty pickle they were in, wet to the skin, and
covered with mud from one end to the other; they could not see out of
their eyes. Peggy did nothing but scream and flounder--she was
frightened out of her wits--while the carman and I laughed ready to
split. I gave him half a crown to drive on shore without them, which he
did, and we left them to make their way out how they could; and a pretty
pickle they did come out at last. Thus was their day's pleasure, as well
as their clothes, all spoiled; and instead of dancing at the fair and
seeing all the sights, they were shivering in their wet clothes, and the
laughingstocks to all that saw them.

"Depend upon it, I did not leave them after they had crawled out to the
beach. The fellow was, as you may suppose, as savage as a bull, and very
saucy, so I took off my jacket that I might not dirty myself, and gave
him a couple of black eyes and a bloody nose for his trouble; and as for
Peggy, I pretended to be so sorry for her, and condoled with her so
much, that at last she flew at me like a tigress--and as I knew that
there was no honor, and plenty of mud, to be gained by the conflict, I
took to my heels and ran off to the fair, where I met some of my friends
and told them what had happened, and then we had a very merry day of it,
and I felt quite cured of my love; for, you see, Peggy looked so ugly
and miserable when she was in the state I left her, that I had only to
think of her as when I last saw her, and all my love was gone."

"Did you ever meet her again?"

"I met her that very night; for, you see, she had gone to a cottage and
taken off her clothes, having insisted upon her fancy man going back to
Portsmouth to fetch her others to go home in. He dared not refuse, so
off he went in the pickle that he was. But he didn't come back again,
for, you see, there was a warrant out against him for an affray at Bear
Haven, in which a King's officer was killed; and after he had changed
his own clothes, and was proceeding to get some for her from the
Chequers, he was met by the constable who had the warrant, and carried
off handcuffed to jail, and afterward he was transported--so she never
saw him again. Well, Peggy, poor creature, had been waiting for him for
hours, expecting his return; and it was past ten o'clock when I was
coming down with some others, and saw her at the door of the cottage
weeping.

"'Good-night, Peggy,' says I.

"'Oh, Philip, do be kind, do come to me; I'm frightened out of my life.
I shall have to stay here all night.'

"So, you see, I did feel some little pity for her, and I went up to
her, and she told me how she had sent him, and he had never come back
again.

"'The fact is,' says I, 'Peggy, you aren't smart enough for such a
Frenchified chap as he is. He don't like to be seen in your company.
Come, get up, and I will see you home, at all events;' so I took charge
of her, and saw her safe to her father's door.

"'Won't you come in?' said she.

"'No, thank you,' says I.

"'Won't you forgive me, Philip?' said she.

"'Yes," says I, 'I'll forgive you, for old acquaintance' sake, and for
one more reason.'

"'What's that?' says Peggy.

"'Why,' says I, 'for the lesson which you've learned me. I've been made
a fool of once, and it's your fault; but if ever a woman makes a fool of
me again, why, then it's mine. And so, Peggy, good-by forever.'

"So I turned away on my heel, and as I left the transport the next trip,
I never saw her again."

"Well, Bramble," replied I, "I agree with you; and if ever a woman makes
a fool of me _again_, it will be my fault. You know what's happened, so
I don't mind saying so."

"Why, Tom, in your present humor, you think so; but all do not keep to
the same way of thinking as I did till it was too late to think about
marrying; but still I do not think that I should have been happy as a
single man, if it had not been for my falling in with Bessy. I should
have been very lonely, I expect, for I began to feel so. When you come
to your own door, Tom, home looks cheerless if there is no bright eye to
welcome you, and the older a man gets the more he feels that he was not
intended to live single. My yearning after something to love and to love
me, which is in our nature, was satisfied, first by having Bessy, and
then by having you--and I'm thankful."

"You might have married, and have been very unhappy."

"I might, and I might have been very happy, had I chosen a wife as a man
should do."

"And how is that, pray, Bramble?"

"Why, Tom, I've often thought upon it. In the first place look out for
good temper: if you find that you may be happy, even if your wife is a
silly woman; assure yourself first of her temper, and then you must
judge her by the way in which she does those duties which have fallen to
her lot; for if a girl is a dutiful and affectionate daughter there is
little fear but that she will prove a loving and obedient wife. But I
think we have had our spell here, Tom, and it's rather cold: rouse up
one of those chaps, and tell him to come to the helm. I'll coil myself
up and have a snooze till the morning, and do you do the same."


CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

     In which I receive a very severe Blow from a Party or Parties
     unknown.


The day after this conversation we fell in with several vessels
windbound at the entrance of the Channel. I took charge of one, and the
wind shifting to the S.W., and blowing strong, I carried her up to the
Pool. As soon as I could leave her I took a boat to go down to
Greenwich, as I was most anxious to have a long conversation with
Virginia. It was a dark squally night, with rain at intervals between
the gusts of wind, and I was wet through long before I landed at the
stairs, which was not until past eleven o'clock. I paid the waterman,
and hastened up to my mother's house, being aware that they would either
be all in bed or about to retire. It so happened that I did not go the
usual way, but passed by the house of old Nanny; and as I walked by with
a quick step, and was thinking of her and her misfortunes, I fell over
something which, in the dark, I did not perceive, and which proved to be
some iron railings, which the workmen who were fixing them up had
carelessly left on the ground, previous to their returning to their work
on the ensuing morning. Fortunately the spikes at the ends of them were
from me, and I received no injury, except a severe blow on the shin; and
as I stopped a moment to rub it, I thought that I heard a cry from the
direction of old Nanny's house; but the wind was very high, and I was
not certain. I stopped and listened, and it was repeated. I gained the
door. It was so dark that I groped for the latch. The door was open, and
when I went in I heard a gurgling kind of noise and a rustling in her
chamber. "Who's there?--What's this?" cried I; for I had a foreboding
that something was wrong. I tumbled over some old iron, knocked down the
range of keys, and made a terrible din, when, of a sudden, just as I had
recovered my legs, I was thrown down again by somebody who rushed by me
and darted out of the door. As the person rushed by me I attempted to
seize his arm, but I received a severe blow on the mouth, which cut my
lip through, and at first I thought I had lost all my front teeth.

I rose up. I heard a heavy groaning; so, instead of pursuing the robber,
I felt my way into Nanny's chamber. "Nanny," said I, "mother, what's the
matter?" but there was no reply, except another groan. I knew where she
kept her tinderbox and matches; I found them, and struck a light; and by
the light of the match I perceived the candle and candlestick lying on
the floor. I picked it up, lighted it, and then turned to the bed; the
flock mattress was above all, and the groans proceeded from beneath. I
threw it off, and found old Nanny still breathing, but in a state of
exhaustion and quite insensible. By throwing water on her face, after
some little while I brought her to her senses. The flaring of the candle
reminded me that the shop door was open. I went and made it fast, and
then spoke to her. It was a long while before I could obtain any
rational answer. She continued to groan and cry at intervals, "Don't
leave me, Jack, don't leave me." At last she fell into a sort of slumber
from exhaustion, and in this state she remained for more than an hour.
One thing was evident to me, which was, that the party, whoever it might
be, had attempted to smother the poor old woman, and that in a few
seconds more he would have perpetrated the deed.

At last old Nanny roused up, and turning to me, said, "It's Jack, is it
not? I thought so. Oh, my poor head! What has happened?"

"That's what I want to know from you, mother," replied I; "but first I
will tell you what I know of the business." Which I did, to give her
time to collect her thoughts.

"Yes," said she, "so it was. I was just in bed, and my candle was not
out, when I heard a noise at the door, as if they were turning a key in
it, and then a man entered; but he had something over his face, I
thought, or he had blacked it. 'What do you want?' cried I. 'I come for
a light, old woman,' said he. I cried 'Thieves! murder!' as loud as I
could, and he ran up to me just as I was getting out of bed, and tried
to smother me. I don't recollect anything more till I heard your voice.
Thank you, Jack, and God bless you; if you hadn't come to the assistance
of a poor old wretch like me, I should have been dead by this time."

I felt that what she said was true, and I then asked her many questions,
so as to lead to the discovery of the party.

"How was he dressed?" inquired I.

"I can't exactly say. But, do you know, Jack, I fancied that he had a
pensioner's coat on; indeed, I am almost sure of it. I think I tore off
one of his buttons, I recollect its giving way; I may be wrong--my head
wanders."

But I thought that most likely Nanny was right, so I looked down on the
floor with the candle, and there I picked up a pensioner's button.

"You're right, Nanny; here is the button."

"Well, now, Jack, I can't talk anymore; you won't leave me to-night, I'm
sure."

"No, no, mother, that I will not. Try to go to sleep."

Hardly had Nanny laid her head down again, when it came across my mind
like a flash of lightning that it must have been Spicer who had
attempted the deed; and my reason for so thinking was that the blow I
had received on the mouth was not like that from the hand of a man, but
from the wooden socket fixed to the stump of his right arm. The more I
reflected upon it the more I was convinced. He was a clever armorer, and
had picked the lock; and I now recalled to mind what had never struck me
before, that he had often asked me questions about old Nanny, and
whether I thought the report that she had money was correct.

It was daylight before old Nanny woke up, and then she appeared to be
quite recovered. I told her my suspicions, and my intentions to
ascertain the truth of them as far as I possibly could.

"Well, and what then?" said old Nanny.

"Why, then, if we bring it home to him, he will be hanged, as he
deserves."

"Now, Jack, hear me," said old Nanny. "You won't do anything I don't
wish, I'm sure; and now I'll tell you that I never would give evidence
against him, or any other man, to have him hanged. So, if you find out
that it is him, do not say a word about it. Promise me, Jack."

"Why, mother, I can't exactly say that I will; but I will talk to Peter
Anderson about it."

"It's no use talking to him; and, if you do, it must be under promise of
secrecy, or I will not consent to it. Jack, Jack, recollect that my poor
boy was hanged from my fault. Do you think I will hang another? Oh, no.
Perhaps this very man had a foolish wicked mother, like me, and has,
like my boy, been led into guilt. Jack, you must do as I wish--you
shall, Jack."

"Well, mother, I have no animosity against the man himself; and, if you
forgive him, I do not see why I should do anything."

"I don't forgive him, Jack; but I think of my own poor boy."

"Well, mother, since you wish it, it shall be so; and if I do prove that
the man I suspect is the party, I will say nothing, and make Anderson
promise the same, as I think he will. But how is it that people come to
rob a poor old woman like you? How is it, mother, that there is a report
going about that you have money?"

"Is there such a report, Jack?"

"Yes, mother, every one says so; why, I do not know; and as long as it
is supposed, you will always be subject to attacks like this, unless,
indeed, if you have money, you were to put it away safely, and let
everybody know that you have done so. Tell me truly, mother, have you
any money?"

"Jack, what a boy you are to ask questions. Well, perhaps I have a
little--a very little; but no one will ever find out where I have hidden
it."

"But they will try, mother, as this man has done, and you will always be
in peril of your life. Why not place it in the hands of some safe
person?"

"Safe person! Who's safe nowadays?"

"Why, for instance, there's Mr. Wilson."

"Wilson! what do you know about him, Jack, except that he has a smooth
face and a bald head? You're young, Jack, and don't know the world. The
money's safe where it is, and no one will ever find it."

"If so, who is to find it after--" I stopped, for I did not like to say,
after she was dead.

"I know what you would have said, Jack; who's to find it after my death?
That's very true. I never thought of that, and I must will it away. I
never thought of that, Jack, it's very true, and I'm glad that you have
mentioned it. But who dare I tell? who can I trust?--Can I trust you,
Jack?--can I?--I ought, for it's all for you, Jack, when I die."

"Mother, whoever it may be for, you may, I hope, trust me."

"Well, I think I can. I'll tell you where it is, Jack, and that will
prove that it is for you, for nobody else will know where to find it.
But, Jack, dear, dear Jack, don't you rob me, as my son did; don't rob
me, and leave me penniless, as he did; promise me?"

"I never will, mother; you need not be afraid."

"Yes; so you say, and so he said; he swore and he cried too, Jack, and
then he took it all, and left his mother without a farthing."

"Well, mother, then don't tell me; I'd rather not know. You will only be
uncomfortable, and so let the money go."

"No, Jack, that won't do either; I will tell you, for I can trust you.
But first, Jack, go out and look behind the house, that there is no one
listening at the window; for if any one should hear--go, look round
carefully, and then come back."

I did as she wished, and then Nanny bid me hold my head closer to her,
while she whispered, "You must take the back out of the fireplace, and
then pull out three bricks, and then put your hand into the hole, and
you will find a small box; and there you will find a little money--a
very little, Jack, hardly worth having, but still it may be of some
use; and it's all yours when I die. Jack--I give it to you."

"Mother, I'm thankful for your kindness, but I cannot touch it if you do
die without you leave it to me by your will."

"Ah! that's true, Jack. Well, tell Anderson to come here, and I'll tell
him I'll leave the money to you; but I won't tell him where it is, I'll
only say that I leave you everything I have. They'll suppose that it's
the shop and all the pretty things." Here she chuckled for some time.

It was now broad daylight, and Nanny told me that she would like to get
up, and see about a padlock being put to her door before night; so I
wished her good-by, and left her.


CHAPTER FORTY

     Showing the great Advantages to be derived from Patronage.


I left old Nanny, and arrived at my mother's house in time for
breakfast. I did not, however, find her in a very good humor; something
had evidently ruffled her. Virginia also, who welcomed me most
cordially, was taciturn and grave. My mother made but one observation
during our repast.

"Well, Tom," said she, "you've found out what it is to wish to marry for
love. I only wish it may be a lesson to others."

To this evident attack upon Virginia, at the expense of my feelings, I
made no reply, and soon afterward my mother went to superintend her
establishment, leaving me and my sister alone.

"Tom," said she, "I hope by this time you are no longer suffering from
your late cruel disappointment. I have felt for you, I assure you, and,
assuring you of that, will not again revert to the subject. Let her be
blotted from your memory as soon as possible."

"Be it so, my dear Virginia; but you are grave, and my mother is
evidently out of humor. You must explain this."

"That is easily done. I have made a sad mistake. I was so much annoyed
at my mother's system toward me that I ventured, without her knowledge,
to write to Lady Hercules, requesting her protection and influence to
procure me some situation as a companion to a lady, amanuensis, or
reader. It appears that her ladyship was not very sincere in her
professions when we had an interview with her; at all events, her reply
was anything but satisfactory, and, unfortunately, it was addressed to
my mother and not to me. You can have no idea of my mother's indignation
upon the receipt of it, and she has not been sparing in her reproaches
to me for having written without her knowledge, and having, by so doing,
subjected her to such a mortification. I certainly am sorry to have done
so. As for her ladyship's answer, it would have been to me more a
subject of mirth than any other feeling. It has, however, proved the
cause of much annoyance from my mother's continually harping upon it."

"Have you the letter of Lady Hercules?"

"I have a copy of it, which I took, intending to have sent it to you the
next time that I wrote. I will bring it down if you will wait a minute."

When Virginia returned she put the following epistle into my hand:

     MRS. SAUNDERS--I have received a letter from your daughter, which,
     I presume, was forwarded as a specimen of her penmanship; otherwise
     it was your duty to have addressed me yourself. I said to you, when
     I met you at Greenwich, that you were educating your daughter above
     her condition in life, and I now repeat it. My patronage is
     extended only to those who are not above their situations, which, I
     am sorry to observe, most people are now. Nevertheless, as I did
     say that I would exert my influence in your daughter's behalf, in
     consequence of your having been a decent, well-behaved menial to
     me, I have made inquiry among my acquaintances, and find that I may
     be, _possibly_, able to place her with my friend, Lady Towser, as a
     'boudoir-assistant.' I have said _possibly_, as I am by no means
     sure that she will be equal to the situation, and the number of
     applicants are very numerous. The inclosed paper from Lady Towser
     will give you an idea of what will be requisite:

     "Morning, up at 6, and nicely dressed; come in in list shoes, and
     wait at bedside, in case Lady Towser should be troubled with her
     morning cough, to hand the emulsion, etc. At 9, to call and assist
     to dress Lady Towser's head tirewoman; follow her to Lady T.'s
     chamber, and obey orders. Breakfast in housekeeper's room. After
     breakfast assist housemaid to dust ornaments, and on Saturdays and
     Wednesdays, _wash_, comb, and examine dogs; other days comb and
     examine them only; clean and feed macaw, cockatoo, and parrot, also
     canary and other birds; bring up dogs' dinners, and prevent them
     fighting at meals. After dogs' dinners read to Lady T., if
     required; if not, get up collars and flounces, laces, etc., for
     Lady T. and Lady T.'s tirewoman. After your own dinner assist
     housekeeper as required in the still-room; fine needlework; repair
     clothes before they go to wash; dress and brush Lady T.'s perukes;
     walk out with dogs if weather is fine, and be careful to prevent
     their making any acquaintances whatever.

     "Evening--Read to Lady T., write notes, look over bills, and keep
     general accounts; if not wanted, to make herself useful in
     housekeeper's room, and obey all orders received from her or head
     tirewoman. At night see that the hot water is ready for Lady T.'s
     feet, and wait for her retiring to bed; wash Lady T.'s feet, and
     cut corns, as required; read Lady T. to sleep, or, if not required
     to read, wait till she is certain that Lady T. is so.

     "Now the only points in which I think your daughter may fail is in
     properly washing, combing, and examining the dogs, and cutting her
     ladyship's corns; but surely she can practice a little of both, as
     she will not be wanted for a month. There can be no difficulty
     about the first; and as for the latter, as all people in your rank
     of life have corns, she may practice upon yours or her father's. At
     all events, there can be no want of corns in Greenwich Hospital
     among the pensioners. I am desired to say that Lady T. gives no
     wages the first year; and you will be expected to send your
     daughter neatly fitted out, that she may be able to remain in the
     room when there is company. If this offer will not suit, I can do
     nothing more; the difficulty of patronage increases every day. You
     will send an answer.

     "VIRGINIA HAWKINGTREFYLYAN.

"I was just closing my letter when Lady Scrimmage came in; she tells me
that Lady Towser is suited, and that you have no hopes of this
situation. I have done my best. Lady Scrimmage has, however, informed me
that she thinks she can, upon my recommendation, do something for you in
Greenwich, as she deals largely with a highly respectable and
fashionable milliner of the same name as your own, and with whom it
would be of the greatest advantage to your daughter to be placed as an
apprentice, or something of that sort. This is an opportunity not to be
lost, and I therefore have requested Lady S. to write immediately, and I
trust by _my patronage_, she will gain a _most enviable situation_."

"That postscript is admirable," observed I, "and ought to have put my
mother in a good humor. Is she not called by Lady Hercules 'highly
respectable and fashionable'?"

"Very true," replied Virginia; "but my mother cannot get over the first
part of the letter, in which she is mentioned as 'a decent and
well-behaved menial.' She has since received a note from Lady Scrimmage,
requesting her to take me in some capacity or another, adding, by way of
postscript, 'You know you need not keep her if you do not like--it is
very easy to send her away for idleness or impertinence; but I wish to
oblige Lady Hercules, and so, pray, at all events, write and say that
you will try her."

"And what has my mother said in reply?"

"She did not show me the answer; but, from what I have collected from
her conversation, she has written a most haughty, and, I presume it will
be said, a most impertinent letter to both the ladies; the one to Lady
Scrimmage accompanied with her bill, which has not been paid these three
years. I am sorry that my mother has been annoyed. My father, to whom I
related what had taken place, told me that my mother was very ill
treated by Lady Hercules, and that she had smothered her resentment with
the hopes of benefiting her children by her patronage; but that was at a
time when she little expected to be so prosperous as she is now."

"It is all true, my dear girl; I recollect my father telling me the
whole story. However, I presume my mother, now that she can venture upon
defiance, has not failed to resort to it."

"That I am convinced of. I only hope that she will carry her indignation
against great people so far as not to court them as she has done, and
abandon all her ridiculous ideas of making a match for me. After all,
she has my welfare sincerely at heart, and, although mistaken in the
means of securing it, I cannot but feel that she is actuated solely by
her love for me."

We then changed the conversation to Janet, about whom I could now speak
calmly; after which I narrated to her what had occurred during the
night, and my intention to consult with my father and Anderson upon the
subject.

Virginia then left me that she might assist her mother, and I hastened
to my father's ward, where I found him, and, after our first greeting,
requested that he would accompany me to Anderson's office, as I had
something to communicate to them both. As I walked along with my father
I perceived Spicer at a corner with his foot on a stone step and his
hand to his knee, as if in pain. At last he turned round and saw us. I
walked up to him, and he appeared a little confused as he said, "Ah!
Tom, is that you? I did not know you were at Greenwich."

"I came here last night," replied I; "and I must be off again soon. Are
you lame?"

"Lame! No; what should make me lame?" replied he, walking by the side of
us as if he were not so.

I looked at his coat, and perceived that the third button on the right
side was missing.

"You've lost a button, Spicer," observed I.

"So I have," replied he; and, as we had now arrived at Anderson's door,
my father and I turned from him to walk in and wished him good-by.

Anderson was in his office, and as soon as the door was closed I
communicated to them what had occurred during the night, expressing my
conviction that Spicer was the party who had attempted the murder. In
corroboration I reminded my father of the loss of the button from
Spicer's coat, and produced the one which Nanny had torn off.

"This is something more than suspicion," observed Anderson; "but if, as
you say, old Nanny will not give evidence against him, I know not what
can be done. Did you say that the old woman wanted to speak with me?"

"Yes, and I really wish that you would call there oftener."

"Well," replied Anderson, "I'll go, Tom; but, to be plain with you, I do
not think that I can be of much use there. I have been several times.
She will gossip as long as you please; but if you would talk seriously,
she turns a deaf ear. You see, Tom, there's little to be gained when you
have to contend with such a besetting sin as avarice. It is so powerful,
especially in old age, that it absorbs all other feelings. Still it is
my duty, and it is also my sincere wish, to call her to a proper sense
of her condition. The poor old creature is, like myself, not very far
from the grave; and, when once in it, it will be too late. I will go,
Tom, and most thankful shall I be if, with God's help, I may prove of
service to her."

We then left old Anderson to his duties, and my father went home with
me. We had a long conversation relative to my sister, as well as about
my own affairs. I had intended to have remained some days at Greenwich,
but this was the first time that I had been there since Janet's
desertion, and the sight of everything so reminded me of her, and made
everything so hateful to me, that I became very melancholy. My mother
was, moreover, very cross, and my sister anything but comfortable; and,
on the third day, having received a letter from Bramble, stating that he
had arrived at Deal, and that the easterly winds having again set in,
they talked, of setting out again in the galley, I made this an excuse
for leaving; and for the first time did I quit Greenwich without regret.


CHAPTER FORTY-ONE

     In which it is proved that Sailors have very correct Ideas as to
     Metempsychosis.


The day after my return to Deal I again embarked with Bramble and three
others, to follow up our vocation. The second day we were abreast of the
Ram Head, when the men in another pilot boat, which had come out of
Plymouth and was close to us, waved their hats and kept away to speak to
us. We hove-to for them.

"Have you heard the news?" cried one of the men.

"No."

"Lord Nelson has beat the French and Spanish fleet."

"Glad to hear it--huzza!"

"Lord Nelson's killed."

"Lord Nelson's killed!" The intelligence was repeated from mouth to
mouth, and then every voice was hushed; the other boat hauled her wind
without further communication, nor did we at the time think of asking
for any more. The shock which was given to the whole country was equally
felt by those who were seeking their bread in a small boat, and for some
little while we steered our course in silence.

"What d'ye say, my lads?" said Bramble, who first broke silence; "shall
we haul up for Cawsand, and get a paper? I shan't be content till I know
the whole history."

This was consented to unanimously; no one thought of piloting vessels
for the moment and earning food for their families. When the country
awarded a public funeral to our naval hero, it did not pay him a more
sincere tribute than was done in this instance by five pilots in a
galley. At Cawsand we obtained the newspaper, and after a few pots of
beer we again made sail for the mouth of the Channel. It hardly need be
observed that the account of this winding-up, as it proved, of our naval
triumphs, with the death of Nelson, was the subject of conversation for
more than one day. On the third we were all separated, having fallen in
with many windbound vessels who required our services. The one I took
charge of was a West Indiaman, deeply laden with rum and sugar, one of a
convoy which were beating about in the Chops of the Channel. As we were
standing out from the English coast the captain and one of the
passengers were at the taffrail close to me.

"What do you think of the weather, pilot?" said the captain.

"I think we shall have a change of wind, and dirty weather before twelve
hours are over our heads," replied I.

"Well," said he, "that's my opinion. There is a cloud rising in the
southwest; and, look, there are some Mother Carey's chickens dipping in
the water astern."

"Where?" said the passenger, a curly-headed Creole, about twenty years
old.

"Those small birds," replied the captain, walking forward.

The passenger went down below, and soon returned with his
double-barreled fowling-piece.

"I have long wished to shoot one of those birds," said he; "and now they
are so near, I think I may get a shot."

He raised his piece several times without firing, when the captain came
aft, and, perceiving his intention, caught his arm as he was about to
level again.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Higgins, but I really must request that you will
not fire at those birds."

"Why not?"

"Because I cannot permit it."

"But what's to hinder me?" replied the young man, coloring up; "they are
not in your manifest, I presume."

"No, sir, they are not; but I tell you frankly that I would not kill one
for a hundred pounds. Nay, I would as soon murder one of my
fellow-creatures."

"Well, that may be your feeling, but it's not mine."

"Nevertheless, sir, as it is, to say the least of it, very unlucky, you
will oblige me by yielding to my request."

"Nonsense!--just to humor your superstitious feeling."

"We are not in port yet, Mr. Higgins; and I must insist upon it you do
not fire. You have taken my gunpowder, and I cannot allow it to be used
in that way."

During this altercation I observed that many of the sailors had come
aft, and, although they said nothing, were evidently of the same opinion
as the captain. I was aware that there was a superstitious feeling among
the seamen relative to these birds, but I had never seen it so strongly
exemplified before.

The mate gave a wink to the captain, behind the passenger's back, and
made a motion to him to go forward, which the captain did. The passenger
again raised his gun, when it was seized by two of the seamen.

"You must not fire at these birds, sir!" said one of them.

"Why, you scoundrel?--I'll give you the contents of both barrels if you
don't leave my gun alone."

"No, you won't--you're not among niggers now, master," replied the
seaman; "and as you have threatened to shoot me, I must take the gun
from you."

A scuffle ensued, during which both barrels were discharged in the air,
and the gun taken from Mr. Higgins, who was boiling with rage. The gun
was handed forward, and I saw it no more. Mr. Higgins, in a state of
great excitement, went down into the cabin.

The captain then came aft to me, when I observed that I had no idea that
seamen were so very particular on that point; and I thought that they
had gone too far.

"You may think so, pilot," replied he, "but when I tell you that I fully
believe that these birds are as good as ourselves, you will not be
surprised--"

"How do you mean, as good as ourselves?"

"I believe that they _were_ every one sailors like ourselves in former
times. They are now the sailors' friends, come to warn us of the
approaching storm, and I can tell you a circumstance which occurred in
the West Indies, which fully proves to me that they are not wantonly
killed without a judgment upon those who do so. I never believed it
myself till then; but old Mason, who is now on board, was one of the
seamen of the vessel in which the circumstance happened."

"Indeed!" replied I, "I should like to hear it."

"I can't tell you now," said he; "I must go down and satisfy that puppy
Creole, whose sugars are on board. He will otherwise make such a row
between me and the owners that I may lose the command of the vessel. And
yet, would you imagine it? although he will not credit what I tell him
about Mother Carey's chickens, the foolish young man firmly believes in
the Obi."

I did not think one superstition more ridiculous than the other, but
still as I always found that it was useless to argue such points, I said
nothing, and the captain went down into the cabin to pacify Mr. Higgins.

It was late in the first watch, and when the passengers had retired to
bed, that the captain came on deck. "Well," said he, "I told Mr. Higgins
my story, and as there was a bit of Obi nonsense in it, he believed it,
and he has not only made friends, but thanked me for not having allowed
him to shoot the birds; and now I'll tell you the real story:

"A schooner was coming down from the Virgin Isles with sugar and
passengers to Antigua, where I was lying with my ship. She had a fine
young fellow of the name of Shedden on board; and, besides other
passengers, there was an old black woman, who, where she resided, had
always been considered as an Obi woman. I saw her afterward; and you
never beheld such a complication of wrinkles as she was, from her
forehead to her feet, and her woolly head was as white as snow. They
were becalmed as soon as they were clear of the islands; and, as it
happened, some Mother Carey's chickens were flying about the stern.
Shedden must needs get at his gun to shoot them. The old black woman sat
near the taffrail; she saw him with his gun, but she said nothing. At
last he fired, and killed three of them.

"'There are three down!' cried out some of the other passengers.

"'How many?' said the old woman, raising her head; '_three!_ Then count
the sharks which are coming up.'

"'Count the sharks, mother! why count them? There's plenty of them,'
replied Shedden, laughing.

"'I tell you that there will be but three sent,' replied the old woman,
who then sunk down her head and said no more.

"Well, the negroes who were passengers on board, most of them Mr.
Shedden's slaves, looked very blank, for they knew that old Etau never
spoke without reason. In about ten minutes afterward, three large sharks
swam up to the vessel, with their fins above water.

"'There's the three sharks, sure enough!' said the passengers.

"'Are they come?' said Etau, raising her head.

"'Yes, moder, dere dey be--very large shark,' replied one of the
negroes.

"'Then three are doomed,' said the old woman, 'and here we stay, and the
waves shall not run, nor the wind blow, till the three sharks have their
food. I say three are doomed!'

"The passengers were more or less alarmed with this prophecy of old
Etau's, according as they put faith in her. However, they all went to
bed quite well, and the next morning they got up the same. Still there
was not a breath of wind, the whole sea was as smooth as glass, and the
vessel laid where she was the night before, in about six fathoms of
water, about a mile from the reef, and you could see the coral rocks
beneath her bottom as plain as if they were high and dry; and what
alarmed them the next morning was that the three large sharks were still
slowly swimming round and round the schooner. All that day it remained a
dead calm, and the heat was dreadful, although the awnings were spread.
Night came on, and the people, becoming more frightened, questioned old
Etau, but all the answer she gave was, '_Three_ are doomed!'

"The passengers and crew were now terrified out of their wits, and they
all went to bed with very melancholy forebodings, for the elements
appeared as if they were arrested till the penalty was paid. For, you
observe, pilot, there is always a light breeze as regular as the sun
rises and goes down; but now the breezes only appeared to skirt the
land, and when they came from the offing invariably stopped two or three
miles from the schooner. It was about midnight that there was a stir in
the cabin, and it appeared that Mr. Shedden had the yellow fever, and
shortly afterward another white man, a sailor belonging to the schooner,
then one of Mr. Shedden's slaves. Well, there the fever stopped--no one
else was taken ill--the usual remedies were applied, but before morning
they were all three delirious. At sunrise it was still calm, and
continued so till sunset; and all the day the passengers were annoyed by
the back fins of the three sharks, which continued to swim about. Again
they went to bed, and just before one o'clock in the morning Mr.
Shedden, in his delirium, got out of his bed, and, rushing on the deck,
jumped overboard before any one could prevent him; and old Etau, who
never left where she sat, was heard to say, '_One_!' and the bell was
struck _one_ by the seaman forward, who did not know what had happened.
Morning came on again and there were but two sharks to be seen. About
noon the other white man died and he was thrown overboard; and as one
shark seized his body and swam away, old Etau cried out, '_Two!_' An
hour afterward the negro died, and was thrown overboard and carried away
by the third shark, and old Etau cried out, '_Three!_ the price is
paid!'

"Well, every one crowded around the old woman to hear what she would
say, and they asked her if all was over, and whether they should have
any wind? and her reply was, 'When the three birds come from the sea to
replace those which were killed.' For you see, pilot, if one of these
birds is killed, it is certain that some one of the crew must die and
be thrown overboard to become a Mother Carey chicken, and replace the
one that has been destroyed. Well, after a time, although we never saw
them rise, three Mother Carey's chickens were seen dipping and flying
about astern of the schooner; and they told old Etau, who said, 'You'll
have wind and plenty--and plenty of waves to make up for the calm;' and
so they had sure enough, for it came on almost a hurricane, and the
schooner scudded before it under bare poles until she arrived at
Antigua, with her bulwarks washed away, and a complete wreck. I was
there at the time, and old Mason, who was on board, told me the story,
and asked me to take him, as he would not remain on board of the
schooner. And now I leave you to judge, after knowing this to be a fact,
whether I was not right in preventing Mr. Higgins from shooting the
Mother Carey chickens?"

"Why, yes," replied I, "with such a _fact_ before my eyes, I should have
done the same."

Mr. Higgins not venturing to kill any of these receptacles for the souls
of departed seamen, we arrived safely at the Downs, where I gave up
charge to a river pilot, for the other vessels which Bramble and our
companions had taken charge of were all bound to the Downs, and arrived
at nearly the same time that I did, and we had agreed to embark again in
the galley, and run out in quest of the remainder of the convoy.

This we did on the following day, much to the vexation of Bessy, who
declared we only came on shore to be off again.

I ought to observe that Bessy and I had become much more intimate since
the explanation which had taken place; and although it never entered my
head that I should ever feel toward her more than as a brother to a
sister, I was pleased and soothed with the touching proofs of kindness
and commiseration which she took every opportunity of showing toward me.


CHAPTER FORTY-TWO

     A heavy Gale, a Wreck, and a Rescue.


We had run out in our galley as far as the Start, when the appearance of
the weather became very threatening. It was just about the time of the
equinoctial gales, and there was a consultation among us whether we
should run into Torquay or return to Deal.

Bramble observed, that as the gale coming on would, in all probability,
blow for three days, he thought it was no use remaining all that time at
Torquay, where we should be put to extra expense, and that we should be
better on shore at our own homes. This remark decided the point, and
about dusk we put the boat's head along shore for up Channel. The wind
was at that time about S.S.W., but occasionally shifting a point or two.
The sky had become covered over with one black mass of clouds, which
hung down so low that they appeared almost to rest on the water; and
there was that peculiar fitful moaning which is ever the precursor of a
violent gale of wind. At nightfall we reefed our lug-sails; and, while
one sat at the helm, the rest of us lounged against the gunnel, buttoned
up in our pilot jackets; some shutting their eyes, as if to invite
sleep, others watching the waves, which now rose fast, and danced and
lapped at the weather broadside as if they would fain have entered into
the boat. But of that we had little fear; our galley was one of the
finest boats that ever swam, and we felt as secure as if we were on
board of a three-decked ship. As the night advanced, so did the wind
increase and the sea rise; lightning darted through the dense clouds,
and for a moment we could scan the horizon. Everything was threatening;
yet our boat, with the wind about two points free, rushed gallantly
along, rising on the waves like a sea-bird, and sinking into the hollow
of the waters as if she had no fear of any attempt on their part to
overwhelm her. Thus did we continue to run on during the night, every
hour the gale increasing, the billows mounting up until they broke in
awful and majestic crests, and often so near to us that we presented our
backs in a close file against the weather bulwarks to prevent any body
of water from pouring in.

"We shall have light soon," observed one of the men.

"And we shall want it to beach the boat in such weather as this,"
replied another. "We shall have it harder yet before day."

"Depend upon it this will be a mischievous gale," observed Bramble, "and
our coast will be strewed with wrecks. Any ships under canvas now,
between the Channel shores, will stand but a poor chance against this
heavy sea, which bears down with such force. I'd rather be in this boat
now than in any vessel in mid-Channel."

"And I had rather be on shore than in either," rejoined I.

"Well, Tom," said one of the pilots, "I do really believe you this
time."

When it was broad daylight, the coast to leeward presented a wild and
terrific scene, lashed as it was by the furious surf, which dashed its
spray half-way up the towering white cliffs, for it was within two hours
of high water. The waves were now really mountains high, and their broad
surfaces were pitted into little waves by the force of the wind, which
covered the whole expanse of waters with one continued foam. On our
weather bow a vessel with her foremast gone was pitching heavily, and at
times nearly buried beneath the wild tumult. Her fate was sealed; to
leeward were the cliffs of the South Foreland, and on our lee-bow lay
the shelving beach of Deal.

"This will be awkward landing, shipmates," said Bramble; "and yet we
must try it. I'll fill my pipe--hope it won't be the last."

Although not said in a serious manner, there were few of us whose hearts
did not flutter responsively to this surmise, for the danger became
every minute more imminent, and we knew what a terrific surf there must
be then running on the shingle beach. But we now rapidly approached the
shore; we were near to the floating light, and in the roadstead not a
vessel remained; all had weighed and preferred being under what canvas
they could bear. At last we were within two cables' lengths of the
beach, and even at this distance from it we were surrounded with the
breakers; the surf broke many feet high, and roared as it rushed up with
a velocity that was appalling, dashing the foam right to the door of
Bramble's cottage, which was forty or fifty yards higher than it
generally gained to even in very bad weather. We now lowered our sails,
stowed them in the boat, and got our oars to pass, backing against the
surf to prevent it from forcing us on the beach until the proper time.

It may not, perhaps, be known to many of my readers that there is a sort
of regularity even in the wild waves; that is, occasionally a master
wave, as it is termed, from being of larger dimensions than its
predecessors, pours its whole volume on the beach; after which, by
watching your time, you will find that two waves will run into one
another, and, as it were, neutralize each other, so that, for a few
seconds, you have what they call a smooth; the safest plan of landing
then is to watch these two chances, either to run in on the master wave,
or to wait till the arrival of the smooth.

The latter is generally preferred, and with good reason, as unless a
boat can be forced in as fast as the master wave runs in, you are worse
off than if you had landed at any other time.

The helm had been resigned to Bramble, who ordered me to go forward with
the boat's painter, a long coil of rope, and stand ready either to leap
out with it or throw it to those on shore, as might be most advisable;
the other men were sitting on the thwarts, their long oars in the
rowlocks, backing out as desired, and all ready to strain every nerve
when the order was given by Bramble to pull in.

The danger which we were about to incur was fully evident to the crowds
which were assembled on the beach; not only the pilots, who stood there
ready to assist us--some with ropes with iron hooks at the end of
them--others all ready to dart into the surf to hold on the boat, or, if
required, to link their arms together, so as to form a living chain
which the undertow could not drag away with it; higher up, women and
children, their clothes driven by the furious gale, with one hand
holding on their caps, and with the other supporting themselves by the
gunnels of the boats hauled up, the capstans, or perhaps an anchor with
its fluke buried in the shingle, were looking on with dismay and with
beating hearts, awaiting the result of the venturous attempt, and I
soon discovered the form of Bessy, who was in advance of all the
others.

[Illustration: WRECK OF THE GALLEY.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 407.]

After a careful watching for perhaps two minutes on the part of Bramble,
he gave the word, and on dashed the galley toward the strand, keeping
pace with the wild surges, and although buried in the foam, not shipping
one drop of water.

"Now, my men, give way--for your lives, give way," cried Bramble, as a
cresting wave came towering on, as if in angry pursuit of us. The men
obeyed, but, in their exertions, the stroke oar snapped in two, the man
fell back, and prevented the one behind him from pulling. Our fate was
sealed; the surge poured over, and throwing us broadside to the beach,
we were rolled over and over in the boiling surf. A cry was heard--a cry
of terror and despair--on the part of the women. I heard it as I was
swept away by the undertow, and the next wave poured over me; but all
was activity and energy on the part of the men who were on the beach:
the next wave that run in, they recovered me and two more by linking
their arms and allowing the surf to break over them. We were so much
bruised that we could not stand; they dragged us up, and left us to the
women. Bramble and four others were still struggling for life; again two
were saved--but the men on the beach were exhausted by their strenuous
exertions.

[Illustration: WE FOUND BOTH BRAMBLE AND BESSY CLINGING TO THE
ROPE.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 409.]

I had just recovered myself so as to sit up, when I perceived that they
were not acting in concert as before; indeed, in the last attempt,
several of them had narrowly escaped with their own lives. Bessy was now
down among them wildly gesticulating; Bramble still floated on the
boiling surf, but no chain was again formed; the wave poured in bearing
him on its crest; it broke, and he was swept away again by the
undertow, which dragged him back with a confused heap of singles
clattering one over the other as they descended. I saw him again, just
as another wave several feet in height was breaking over him--I felt
that he was lost; when Bessy, with a hook rope in her hand, darted
toward him right under the wave as it turned over, and as she clasped
his body, they both disappeared under the mountain surge. Another shriek
was raised by the women, while the men stood as if paralyzed. In my
excitement I had gained my legs, and I hastened to seize the part of the
rope which remained on the beach. Others then came and helped; we hauled
upon it, and found that there was weight at the end. Another sea poured
in; we hastily gathered in the slack of the rope, and when the water
retreated, we found both Bramble and Bessy clinging to the rope. In a
moment the men rushed down and hauled up the bodies. Bramble had hold of
the rope by both hands--it was the clutch of death; Bessy had her arms
round her father's neck; both were senseless. The boatmen carried them
up to the cottage, and the usual methods of recovery were resorted to
with success. Still we had to lament the death of two of our best
pilots, whose loss their wives and children were loudly wailing, and
whose bodies were not found for many days afterward. Alas! they were not
the only ones who were lamented. Upward of three hundred vessels were
lost during that dreadful gale, and hardly a seaport or fishing town but
bewailed its many dead.

Whether it was that the women who attended Bessy were more active than
the men, or that she was younger, and her circulation of blood was more
rapid, or because she was a female, certain it is that Bessy first
recovered her speech, and her first question was, "Where was her
father?" Bramble did not speak, but fell into a sleep immediately after
he was brought to life. I had changed my clothes, and was watching by
him for an hour or more when he woke up.

[Illustration: BRAMBLE HAD KNELT BY THE BEDSIDE, AND WAS EVIDENTLY IN
PRAYER--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 411]

"Ah! Tom, is that you? Where's Bessy?"

"She is in bed, but quite recovered."

"Quite recovered--I recollect. I say, Tom, ain't she a fine creature?
God bless her. Well, she owes me nothing now, at all events. I think I
should like to get up, Tom. I wonder whether I smashed my old pipe on
the shingle? Just look into my wet jacket. I say, Tom, were they all
saved?"

"No," I replied; "Fisher and Harrison were both drowned."

"Poor fellows! I wish they had been spared. Fisher has seven
children--and Harrison, he has a wife, I think."

"Yes, and two children, father."

"Poor woman! God's will be done! He giveth and He taketh away! Tom, I
must get up and see Bessy."

I assisted Bramble to dress, and as soon as he had put on his clothes he
went to Bessy's room. I stayed at the door. "You may come in, Tom; she's
muffled up in her blankets, and fast asleep."

"Quite fast," said Mrs. Maddox; "she has slept more than an hour. Dear
heart, it will do her good."

Bramble kissed Bessy's pale forehead, but it did not waken her. "Look,
Tom," said Bramble, "look at that smooth, clear skin--those pretty
features. Look at the delicate creature! and would you have thought that
she would have dared what no man dared to do--that she would have defied
those elements raging in their might, and have snatched their prey from
their very grasp? Did I ever imagine, when I brought her as a helpless
baby on shore, that she would ever have repaid the debt with such
interest, or that such a weak instrument should have been chosen by the
Lord to save one who otherwise must have perished? But His ways are not
our ways, and He works as He thinks fit. Bless you, bless you, my
Bessy--and may your fond heart never be again put to such trial! Is she
not beautiful, Tom? just like a piece of cold marble. Thank Heaven, she
is not dead, but sleepeth!"

I certainly never did look upon Bessy with so much interest; there was
something so beautifully calm in her countenance as she lay there like
an effigy on a tomb, hardly appearing to breathe; and when I thought of
the courage and devotion shown but a few hours before by the present
almost inanimate form, I bent over her with admiration, and felt as if I
could kneel before the beautiful shrine which contained such an
energetic and noble spirit. While this was passing through my mind,
Bramble had knelt by the bedside, and was evidently in prayer. When he
rose up he said, "Come away, Tom: she is a maiden, and may feel ashamed
if she awaken and find us men standing by her bedside. Let me know when
she wakes up, Mrs. Maddox, and tell her I have been in to see her; and
now, Tom, let's go down. I never felt the want of a pipe so much as I do
now."


CHAPTER FORTY-THREE

     A Scene in the Hospital, and a strange Discovery.


In a very few days Bramble and Bessy were sufficiently recovered to
resume their usual avocations; but the former expressed no willingness
to embark again, and Bessy's persuasions assisted to retain him at the
cottage. With me it was different. I was still restless, and anxious for
change; my feelings toward Bessy were those of admiration and esteem,
but not yet of love. Yet I could not help recalling to mind the words of
Bramble, "Observe how she performs those duties which fall to her lot;
if she is a good daughter she will make a good wife." I felt that she
would make a good wife, and I wished that I could have torn from my
bosom the remembrance of Janet, and have substituted the form of Bessy
in her place. We had been at the cottage nearly a week, when I received
a letter from Anderson; he informed me that he had visited old Nanny,
who had made her will in due form, and confided to him, and that he
thought she was more inclined to listen to him than she had before been;
that my father and mother and sister were well, and that Spicer had been
obliged to go into the hospital with an abscess in his knee, occasioned
by running something into it, and that it was reported that he was very
ill, and, in all probability, amputation must take place. I felt
convinced that Spicer must have, in his hasty retreat, fallen over the
iron railings which lay on the ground, and which had, as I mentioned,
tripped me up; but with this difference, that, as the spikes of the
railing were from me, and consequently I met with little injury, they
must have been toward him, and had penetrated his knee, and thus it was
that he had received the injury. Anderson also stated that they were
very busy at the hospital, receiving the men who had been maimed in the
glorious battle of Trafalgar. Altogether, I made up my mind that I would
take the first ship that was offered for pilotage up the river, that I
might know more of what was going on; and, as we sat down to supper, I
mentioned my intentions to Bramble.

"All's right. Tom, you're young, and ought to be moving; but just now I
intend to take a spell on shore. I have promised Bessy, and how can I
refuse her anything, dear girl? I don't mean to say that I shall never
pilot a vessel again, but I do feel that I am not so young as I was, and
this last affair has shaken me not a little, that's the truth of it.
There's a time for all things, and when a man has enough he ought to be
content, and not venture more. Besides, I can't bear to make Bessy
unhappy; so, you see, I've half promised--only half, Bessy, you know."

"I think you would have done right if you had promised altogether,"
replied I; "you have plenty to live upon, and are now getting a little
in years. Why should you not stay on shore, and leave them to work who
want the money?"

Bessy's eyes beamed gratefully toward me, as I thus assisted her wishes.
"You hear, father," said she, fondling him, "Tom agrees with me."

"Ah!" replied Bramble, with a sigh, "if--but we cannot have all we wish
in this world."

Bessy and I both felt what he would have referred to, and we were
silent. She cast down her eyes, and appeared busy with her fork,
although she was eating nothing. I no longer felt the repugnance that I
had a short time before, and I was in deep reverie, watching the changes
of her beautiful countenance, when she looked up. Our eyes met: she must
have read my thoughts in mine, for from that moment each hour increased
our intimacy and confidence. We were no longer afraid of each other.

A day or two after this conversation an opportunity was given to me of
going up the river, which I did not neglect; and having delivered up
charge of the ship, I hastened down to Greenwich. I found everything in
_statu quo_ at my mother's house, and Virginia much pleased at there
being no lodgers. Anderson I met walking with Ben the Whaler and my
father. He told me that Spicer had refused to have his leg amputated,
when the surgeon had pointed out the necessity of the operation; and
that it was now said that it was too late to have the operation
performed, and that there was little or no chance of his recovery. They
asked me many questions relative to the narrow escape of Bramble, and
the behavior of Bessy.

As soon as I could get away, I set off to the hospital to see Spicer;
for, as the reader must be aware, I had many reasons for having
communication with him--not that I expected that at first he would
acknowledge anything. I knew that his heart was hardened, and that he
had no idea of his danger; but I had his secret--he was indeed in my
power, and I hoped by terrifying him to obtain the information which I
wished.

I found him in bed, in the corner of the hospital ward, to the left. He
was looking very pale, and apparently was in great pain.

"Spicer," said I, "I have come to see you; I am sorry to hear of your
accident. How is your leg? is it better?"

"No, not much," replied he, writhing, "I am in great pain; another man
would scream out with agony, but I'm like the wolf--I'll die without
complaint."

"But you don't think that you're going to die, Spicer?"

"No, Jack, I don't think that; I never have thought that, when I have
been worse than now. I'll never believe that I'm dead until I find
myself so. It must come some time or another, but I'm hale and hearty in
constitution as yet, and my time is not yet come."

"It was the iron railings which you fell over, was it not? I fell over
them myself the same night when I landed, on the Monday, going up to old
Nanny's."

"Who told you it was those cursed spikes? Well, well, so it was; but not
on the Monday, Jack, it was on the Wednesday."

"Nay, that cannot be; for on the Tuesday, as I went down to the beach, I
saw them all fixed up in the stonework, and soldered in. It must have
been on the Monday--the night on which old Nanny was nearly smothered by
some one who went in to rob her. I came there just in time to save her
life; indeed, if you recollect, you were lame the next day, when I met
you in the hospital."

"Well, Jack, you may think what you please; but I tell you it was on the
Wednesday."

"Then you must have fallen over something else."

"Perhaps I did."

"Well, it's of no consequence. I'm glad to find that you're so much
better, for I was told that the doctor had said--"

"What did the doctor say?" interrupted Spicer.

"Why, it's better to tell the truth; he said it was impossible for you
to get over it; that the inflammation was too great to allow of
amputation now, and that it must end in mortification."

"He said that!" said Spicer, wildly, raising himself on his elbow.

"Yes, he did; and it's known all over the hospital."

"Well," replied Spicer, "he may have said so; but I think I ought to
know best how I feel. He'll be here in half an hour or so, and then I'll
put the question to him. I'm a little tired, Jack, so don't speak to me
any more just now."

"Shall I go away, Spicer?"

"No, no, stay here. There's a book or two; read them till I feel a
little stronger."

That my communication had had an effect upon Spicer was evident. He was
startled at the idea of the near approach of death, which he had not
contemplated. Alas! who is not? He shut his eyes, and I watched him; the
perspiration trickled down his forehead. I took up the book he had
pointed out to me; it was the History of the Buccaneers, with plates,
and I thought then that it was a parallel of Spicer's own career. I
looked at the plates, for I was not much inclined to read. In a few
minutes Spicer opened his eyes. "I am better now, Jack; the faintness
has passed away. What book is that? Oh, the Buccaneers. That and
Dampier's Voyages were the only two books of my father's library that I
ever thought worth reading. Have you ever read it?"

"No," replied I, "I never have. Will you lend it to me?"

"Yes; I'll give it to you, Jack, if you like."

"Thank you. Was your father a sailor, Spicer, as well as you?"

"Yes, Jack; a sailor, every inch of him."

"Did you ever sail with him?"

"No, he died about the time that I was born." Here the doctor, who was
going round the wards, came up to Spicer and asked him how he felt.
"Pretty well, doctor," said he.

"Come, we must look at your leg, my man; it will require dressing. Is it
very painful?"

"Why, yes, sir; it has been very painful indeed all night."

The hospital mates unbandaged Spicer's leg, and took off the poultices,
and I was horrified when I saw the state which his leg was in: one mass
of ulceration from the middle of the thigh down to half-way below his
knee, and his ankle and foot swelled twice their size, a similar
inflammation extending up to his hip. The doctor compressed his lips and
looked very grave. He removed some pieces of flesh, it was then cleaned
and fresh poultices put on.

"Doctor," said Spicer, who had watched his countenance, "they say in the
hospital that you have stated that I cannot live. Now, I should wish to
know your opinion myself on this subject, as I believe I am the most
interested party."

"Why, my man," said the doctor, "you certainly are in great danger, and
if you have any affairs to settle, perhaps it will be prudent so to do."

"That's a quiet way of saying there is no hope for me; is it not,
doctor?" replied Spicer.

"I fear, my good man, there is very little."

"Tell me plainly, sir, if you please," replied Spicer; "is there _any_?"

"I am afraid that there is not, my good man; it's unpleasant to say so,
but perhaps it is kindness to tell the truth."

"Well, sir, that is honest. May I ask you how long I may expect to
live?"

"That will depend upon when the mortification takes place, about three
days; after that, my poor fellow, you will probably be no more. Would
you like the chaplain to come and see you?"

"Thank you, sir; when I do, I'll send for him."

The doctor and the attendants went away to the other patients. I was
silent. At last Spicer spoke.

"Well, Jack, you were right; so it is all over with me. Somehow or
another, although I bore up against it, I had an inkling of it myself,
the pain has been so dreadful. Well, we can die but once, and I shall
die game."

"Spicer," said I, "that you will die without fear I know very well; but
still, you know that you should not die without feeling sorry for the
sins you have committed, and praying for pardon. We have all of us, the
very best of us, to make our peace with Heaven; so, had I not better
tell the chaplain to come and talk with you?"

"No, Jack, no; I want no parsons praying by my side. What's done is
done, and can't be undone. Go now, Jack, I wish to get a little sleep."

"Shall I come and see you to-morrow, Spicer?"

"Yes, come when you will; I like to have some one to talk to; it keeps
me from thinking."

I wished him good day, and went away with the book in my hand. Before I
went home I sought out old Anderson and told him what had passed. "He
will not see the chaplain, Anderson, but perhaps he will see you; and,
by degrees, you can bring him to the subject. It is dreadful that a man
should die in that way."

"Alas for the pride of us wretched worms!" ejaculated Anderson; "he
talks of dying game--that is to say, he defies his Maker. Yes, Jack, I
will go and see him; and happy I am that he has a few days to live. I
will see him to-night, but will not say much to him, or he might refuse
my coming again."

I went home. I was not in a very gay humor, for the sight of Spicer's
leg, and the announcement of his situation, had made a deep impression
upon me. I sat down to read the book which Spicer had made me a present
of. I was interrupted by my mother requesting me to go a message for
her, and during my absence Virginia had taken up the book.

"Who lent you this book, Tom?" said she, when I returned.

"Spicer, the man whom they call Black Sam, who is now dying in the
hospital."

"Well, that's not the name on the title-page--it is Walter James,
Tynemouth."

"Walter James, did you say, dear? Let me look! Even so."

"Why, what's the matter, Tom?" said my sister; "you look as if you were
puzzled."

And indeed I do not doubt but I did, for it at once recalled to my mind
that old Nanny's married name was _James_, and that Spicer had said that
his father was a sailor, and that he had died at the time that he was
born, which agreed with the narrative of old Nanny. The conclusions
which I came to in a moment made me shudder.

"Well, my dear, I was surprised, if not frightened; but you don't know
why, nor can I tell you, for it's not my secret. Let me look at the book
again."

Here my father came in, and the conversation took a different turn,
which I was not sorry for. I wished, however, to be left to my own
reflections; so I soon afterward took up my candle and retired to my
room.

I turned the subject over in my mind in a hundred ways, but could not
come to any conclusion as to the best method of proceeding. At last I
thought I would see Peter Anderson the next day, and take his advice. I
was out immediately after breakfast; but I could not find Anderson, so I
walked to the hospital to see Spicer. I found Anderson sitting by his
bedside, but they were not then conversing. After a short time Anderson
rose, and giving a slight shake of the head, as if to inform me that he
had had no success, he walked away.

"He has been trying to convert me," said Spicer, with a grim smile.

"He has been trying, Spicer, to bring you to a sense of your condition;
and is he not kind? he can have no interest but your own good. Do you
think that no one knows the sins you have committed except
yourself?--there is one eye which sees all."

"Come, Jack, no preaching."

"Spicer, you are here under a false name, and you think no one knows
anything about you; but everything has been discovered by me; and I
cannot help thinking that it has been made known providentially, and for
your good."

"Ah!" replied Spicer, "and pray what do you know? Perhaps you can tell
me all the sins I have committed."

"No, Spicer, but perhaps I can tell you of sins which you yourself are
not aware of. But first answer me--you know that you cannot live long,
Spicer; will you acknowledge that what I state is correct, should it
really be so?"

"I give you my word that if you tell me anything about me which is
true, I will freely acknowledge it; so now, Mr. Fortuneteller, here's my
hand--it may be useful, you know, in helping your discovery."

"I do not want your hand, Spicer--now hear me. Is not your name
James?--and were you not born at Tynemouth?"

Spicer started. "How did you find that out? Well, Tom, it is so, and
what then?"

"As you told me yourself, although I knew it before, your father was
lost at sea about the time that you were born. Spicer, I know how you
left your mother, and how you returned from _you know where_--how you
robbed her of every farthing, and left her again destitute and in
misery. Is there nothing to repent of in that, Spicer?"

"Who the devil--"

"Nay, Spicer, the devil has had nothing to do with the discovery."

"Strange, strange indeed," muttered Spicer; "but still, it is true."

"Spicer, you know best how your life was passed from that time until you
came into the hospital; but it was to be hoped that when laid up to rest
in this haven, after such a stormy life, you would have amended your
life; but what have you done?"

"And what have I done?"

"What would have brought you to the gallows if I had not held my tongue.
You attempted to murder the old woman to obtain her money, and, in
escaping, you received the wound which soon will bring you to your
grave."

"What proofs?"

"Every proof: your stump struck me in the face when you rushed out--the
button was off your coat the next morning when I met you--I had every
proof, and, had I chosen, would have sworn on the Bible to your having
been the party."

"Well, I'll not deny it--why should I, when I cannot be taken out of
this bed to be tried, even if you wished? Have you more to say?"

"Yes, more."

"I doubt it."

"Then hear me. The poor woman whom you would have murdered, whom I found
at her last gasp, and with difficulty restored to consciousness, that
poor woman, Spicer, is _your own mother!_"

"God of heaven!" exclaimed he, covering his face.

"Yes, Spicer, your fond, indulgent mother, who thinks that you suffered
the penalty of the law many years ago, and whose energies have been
crushed by the supposed unhappy fate of her still loved and lamented
son. Spicer, this is all true, and have you now nothing to repent of?"

"I thought her dead, long dead. God, I thank Thee that I did not the
deed; and, Jack, I am really grateful to you for having prevented it.
Poor old woman!--yes, she did love me, and how cruelly I treated
her!--and she is then still alive, and thinks that I was hanged--yes, I
recollect now, she must think so. Oh! my brain, my brain!"

"Spicer, I must leave you now."

"Don't leave me, Jack--yes, do--come to-morrow morning."

"Spicer, will you do me a favor?"

"Yes."

"Will you see Anderson, and talk with him?"

"Yes, if you wish it; but not now. This evening I will, if he'll come."

I left Spicer, well satisfied with what had passed, and hastened to
Anderson, to communicate it to him.

"A strange and providential discovery, Tom, indeed," said he, "and good
use it appears to me you have made of it. His heart is softened, that is
evident. I will certainly go to him this evening."


CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR

     Spicer discloses strange Matters.


The next day, when I called to see Spicer, I found him in great pain.
Anderson had been with him, but he had been in such agony that he found
it almost impossible to converse with him. Spicer did not like that I
should leave him, although he could not talk, and I therefore remained
by his bedside, occasionally assisting him to move from one position to
another, or to take the drink that was by his bedside. Toward the
evening he became more easy, and went to sleep. I left him, therefore,
till the next day. As I supposed, the mortification had commenced, for
the doctor told him so the next morning, when he visited him, and the
chaplain pointed out to him that all hopes of living were now over.
Spicer heard the communication unmoved. He asked the doctor how long he
might live, and his reply was, it was possible four or five days, and
that he would feel no more pain. He was now able to listen to Anderson,
and he did so. I shall not trouble the reader with repeating what
Anderson imparted to me, as I can give him an idea of Spicer's feelings
by what passed between us.

"Tom," said he, "I have led a very wicked life, so wicked that I hate
to think of it, and I hate myself. I believe all that Anderson and the
chaplain tell me, and I find that I may hope and do hope for mercy; but
I can't cry, or wail, or tear my hair. The fact is, Tom, I can't feel
afraid. If I am pardoned, and I do scarcely expect it, I shall be all
gratitude, as well I may. Should I be condemned, I shall acknowledge my
punishment just, and not complain, for I have deserved all; but I cannot
feel fear. I believe I ought; but it is not in my nature, I suppose."

"But you do not feel anything like defiance, Spicer?"

"No, God forbid! no, nothing like that, but my spirit cannot quail."

He was very anxious for the chaplain the last two days of his life, and
I really believe was _sincere_ in his repentance; but before I wind up
his history, I will narrate to the reader those portions of his life
which are unknown, and which are necessary to the explanation of other
matters.

He told me that when he first went to sea he had joined a vessel
employed in the slave trade, that he had left it at Gambia, and shipped
on board of a vessel which was about to cruise on the Spanish Main. He
was some time in her, and had been appointed second officer, when he
resolved to fit out a vessel and cruise for himself. He had therefore
quitted the vessel at Surinam, and worked his passage home in a sugar
ship.

It was on his return home this time that, as old Nanny had told me, he
had taken to gaming, and eventually had robbed his mother. With the two
thousand pounds in his pocket, he had repaired to Liverpool, where he
fell in with Fitzgerald, a young man who had served as first mate in the
vessel in which they had cruised on the Spanish Main, and to him he had
proposed to join him as first officer in the vessel which he was about
to fit out. It appeared that this young man had but a few days returned
from Ireland, where he had married a young woman, to whom he had been
some time attached, and that his disinclination to leave his young wife
made him at first refuse the offer made by Spicer. Spicer, however, who
was aware of his value, would not lose sight of him, and contrived, when
Fitzgerald had taken too much wine, to win of him, by unfair means,
about one thousand five hundred pounds. Spicer then offered Fitzgerald a
release from the debt, provided he would sail with him; and he exacted
as a further condition that he should not return and take a farewell of
his wife. To these harsh terms Fitzgerald, being without means of
liquidating the debt, consented, and they sailed accordingly.

"And now, Jack, I will tell you why I was so curious about that
spy-glass. I knew the moment that I saw it in your hands that it was one
that belonged to Fitzgerald when we were on our first cruise together.
It was the best glass I ever met with. When we left Liverpool this time,
I asked him for the spy-glass, and he told me that, expecting to return
to his wife before he sailed, he had left it at home. How it came into
the lady's hands I can't tell."

"I never said that Lady Hercules gave it to me," replied I; "although I
did not undeceive you when you thought so. The fact is, it was given me
by a very pretty young Irish widow."

"Then, Jack, I should not wonder if she was the wife of Fitzgerald, whom
I have been talking about; but that I leave to you. Let me finish my
story. When we arrived on the Spanish coast I had as fine a crew with me
as ever were on board of a vessel; but I had long made up my mind that I
would hoist the black flag. Yes, Jack, it is but too true. But when I
proposed it, Fitzgerald declared that the first act of piracy that was
committed he would leave the vessel. I tried all I could to persuade
him, but in vain. However, we did take an English vessel, and plundered
her. Upon this Fitzgerald protested, and half the crew, at least, joined
him. I threatened the men to shoot them through the head; but they were
resolute; and, being rather the stronger party, I dared not make any
attempt. They insisted upon leaving the vessel; and I, not being able to
help it, landed them all in the Bay of Honduras, where I thought it very
possible they would be taken by the Spaniards and imprisoned, if not
hanged. They were imprisoned; but, after some time, they were released.
The desertion of Fitzgerald and the other men left me with my vessel
half manned; and I vowed vengeance against him if ever I had an
opportunity. I now cruised as a pirate, and was very successful, and my
name was a terror to those seas. A high reward was offered for me, dead
or alive, which pleased me much, and I became more murderous than ever.
Jack, all this rises up in judgment against me now; and I recollect
every single life taken away by me, or by my orders, as well as if I had
noted them down in a book. May God forgive me!" continued Spicer,
covering his eyes up for a time.

After a pause he continued: "I had ordered a vessel with a valuable
cargo to be taken on to a rendezvous we had in the Caicos; but it was
recaptured and taken into Port Royal, Jamaica. As the proofs of the
piracy were well established, the men on board were thrown into prison
to take their trial. I heard of this, for I was often on shore in
disguise in one island or another, and a scheme entered my head which I
thought would benefit myself and wreak my vengeance upon Fitzgerald. But
I must leave off now. Here comes the chaplain; he promised to talk with
me this evening, and you see that I have changed my opinion on that
point, praised be God for it. Good-night, Jack; come to-morrow."


CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE

     Spicer's Death.


When I saw Spicer again he continued his narrative:

"I told you that I was anxious to wreak my vengeance upon Fitzgerald,
and the plan which I hit upon was as follows: I contrived to get to Port
Royal, and to speak to the two men whom I had been on the best of terms
with. I told them that the only chance of escape would be for them to
give their names as those of _James_, which was mine, and of
_Fitzgerald_, the first officer; and I explained to them why; because
Fitzgerald and I had saved the life of the daughter of one of the chief
planters, who, in gratitude, had promised that he would assist us if we
were ever in difficulty. I told them that they must adhere to what they
said, as they would be condemned with the others, but that a reprieve
would be given when they were on the scaffold."

"But why should you have done this?" inquired I.

"First, because I wished people to believe that I was dead, that there
might not be so great a hue and cry after me, and the temptation of so
high a reward; next, because I knew that Fitzgerald was still in prison,
and that his wife would read the account of his execution in the
newspapers, which I hoped would break her heart, and so make him
miserable."

"Oh, Spicer, that was too cruel."

"It was, but my plan succeeded. The men gave our names, went to the
scaffold expecting a reprieve, and were hanged."

"And thus it is that your poor mother thinks even now that you were
hanged," said I.

"Even so, Jack, even so. Well, after a time I quitted my vessel and
returned to England; for I was actually tired of bloodshed, and I had
collected a great deal of money. On my arrival I inquired after
Fitzgerald. It appeared that his wife had heard the account of his
execution; and, as her bonnet was found by the side of the mill-dam, it
was supposed that she had destroyed herself. Fitzgerald returned home,
and was distracted at the intelligence. I have always thought that she
was dead; but, by what you say, Jack, I now doubt it."

"And Fitzgerald, Spicer, what became of him?"

"I really cannot tell. I heard that he had entered on board of a King's
ship, but not under his own name. How far that was true or not I cannot
say; but I have every reason to believe that such was the case."

"And how came you on board of a man-of-war?"

"Why, that's soon told, I spent my money, or lost it all in gambling,
went out again, obtained command of a vessel, and did well for some
time; but I was more tyrannical and absolute than ever. I had shot five
or six of my own men, when the crew mutinied, and put me and two others
who had always supported me in an open boat, and left us to our fate. We
were picked up by a frigate going to the East Indies when we were in the
last extremity. And now, Jack, I believe you have my whole history. I am
tired now, and must go to sleep; but, Jack, I wish you to come to-morrow
morning, for I have something to say to you of great importance.
Good-by, Jack; don't forget."

I promised Spicer that I would not fail, and quitted the hospital. When
I called again upon him, I found him very low and weak; he could not
raise himself from his pillow. "I feel that I am going now, Jack," said
he--"going very fast--I have not many hours to live; but, I thank
Heaven, I am not in any pain. A man who dies in agony cannot examine
himself--cannot survey the past with calmness or feel convinced of the
greatness of his offenses. I thank God for that; but, Jack, although I
have committed many a foul and execrable murder, for which I am full of
remorse--although I feel how detestable has been my life--I tell you
candidly that, although those crimes may appear to others more heavy
than the simple one of theft, to me the one that lies most heavy on my
soul is the robbing of my poor mother, and my whole treatment of her.
Jack, will you do one favor to a dying man?--and it must be done soon,
or it will be too late. Will you go to my poor mother, acquaint her with
my being here, still alive, and that my hours are numbered, and beg for
me forgiveness? Obtain that for me, Jack--bring that to me, and so may
you receive forgiveness yourself!"

"I will, Spicer," replied I, "I will go directly; and I have little fear
but that I shall succeed."

"Go then, Jack; don't tarry, for my time is nearly come."

I left the hospital immediately, and hastened to old Nanny's. I found
her very busy sorting a lot of old bottles which she had just purchased.

"Well, Jack," said she, "you are just come in time to help me. I was
just a-saying if Jack was to call now he'd be of some use, for I can't
well reach so high as the shelf where I put the bottles on, and when I
get on a stool my old head swims."

"Mother," said I, "suppose you put down the bottles for a little while,
as I have that to say to you which must not be delayed."

"Why, what's the matter, boy? And how pale you look! What has happened?
You don't want money, do you?"

"No, mother, I want no money; I only want you to listen to matters
important, which I must disclose to you."

"Well, well, what is it? about the fellow who tried to rob me, I
suppose. I told you before, Jack, I won't hurt him, for my poor boy's
sake."

"It is about your poor boy I would speak, mother," replied I, hardly
knowing how to begin. "Now, mother, did you not tell me that he was
hanged at Port Royal?"

"Yes, yes; but why come and talk about it again?"

"Because, mother, you seem to feel the disgrace of his being hanged so
much."

"Well, to be sure I do--then why do you remind me of it, you bad boy?
It's cruel of you, Jack; I thought you kinder."

"Mother, it is because you do feel it so much that I have come to tell
you that you have been deceived. Your son was not hanged."

"Not hanged! Why, Jack, are you sure?"

"Yes, mother, quite sure."

"Not hanged, quite sure--"

Here old Nanny burst out into a wild laugh, which ended in sobbing and
tears. I was obliged to wait some minutes before she was composed enough
to listen to me; at last I said, "Mother, I have more to say, and there
is no time to be lost."

"Why no time to be lost, my dear boy?" said she. "Oh! now that you have
told me this, I could dwell for hours--ay, days--more. I shall dwell my
whole life upon this kind news."

"But listen to me, mother, for I must tell you how I discovered this."

"Yes, yes, Jack--do, that's a good boy. I am quite calm now," said
Nanny, wiping her eyes with her apron.

I then acquainted her with what Spicer had told me relative to his
inducing the man to take his name, and continued the history of Spicer's
life until I left him on board of a man-of-war.

"But where is he now? And who told you all this?"

"He told me so himself," replied I. "He has been in the hospital some
time, and living here close to you, without either of you being aware of
it. But, mother, he is now ill--very ill in the hospital; he would not
have confessed all this if he had not felt how ill he was."

"Deary, deary me!" replied old Nanny, wringing her hands; "I must go see
him."

"Nay, mother, I fear you cannot. The fact is that he is dying, and he
has sent me to ask your forgiveness for his conduct to you."

"Deary, deary me!" continued old Nanny, seemingly half out of her wits;
"in the hospital, so near to his poor mother--and dying. Dear Jemmy!"

Then the old woman covered up her face with her apron and was silent. I
waited a minute or two, and then I again spoke to her.

"Will you not answer my question, mother? Your son has but an hour
perhaps to live, and he dies penitent not only for his conduct to you,
but for his lawless and wicked life; but he feels his treatment of you
to be worse than all his other crimes, and he has sent me to beg that
you will forgive him before he dies. Answer me, mother."

"Jack," said Nanny, removing the apron from her face, "I feel as if it
was I who ought to ask his pardon, and not he who should ask mine. Who
made him bad?--his foolish mother. Who made him unable to control his
passions?--his foolish mother. Who was the cause of his plunging into
vice--of his intemperance, of his gaming, of his wild and desperate
career--which might have ended, as I supposed it had done, on the
gallows--but a foolish, weak, selfish mother, who did not do her duty to
him in his childhood? It is I who was his great enemy--I who assisted
the devil to lead him to destruction--I who, had he been hanged, had
been, and have felt for years that I was, his executioner. Can I forgive
him! Can _he_ forgive _me_?"

"Mother, his time is short--I will come to you again, and tell you much
more. But if you knew how earnest he is to have your forgiveness before
he dies, you would at once send me away to him."

"Then go, my child--go, and may you often be sent on such kind missions!
Go, and tell my poor James that his mother forgives him--begs to be
forgiven--still dotes upon him--and God knows with how much pleasure
would die for him! Go quick, child--the sands of the glass run
fast--quick, child--the dying cannot wait--quick--quick!"

Nanny had risen from her stool and taken me by the arm; when we were
clear of the threshold she loosed me, and sank down to the earth,
whether overcome by her feelings, or in a state of insensibility, I did
not wait to ascertain--I fled to execute my mission before it was too
late.

In a few minutes I was at the hospital--breathless, it was true. I went
in, and found Spicer still alive, for his eyes turned to me. I went up
to him; the nurse, who was standing by him, told me he was speechless,
and would soon be gone. I told her I would remain with him, and she went
to the other patients. I gave him his mother's message, and he was
satisfied; he squeezed my hand, and a smile, which appeared to illumine
like a rainbow his usual dark and moody countenance, intimated hope and
joy; in a few seconds he was no more, but the smile continued on his
features after death.

I then returned to old Nanny, who, I found, had been put into bed by
some neighbors, and at her bedside was Mrs. St. Felix, who had been
passing by and had observed her situation. She was now recovered and
quiet. As soon as they had left her I entered into a more full detail of
how I became acquainted with the circumstances which led to the
discovery. I did not conceal from her that it was her own son who had
attempted the robbery; and I wound up by stating that he had died, I
really believed, not only penitent, but happy from having received her
forgiveness.

"Jack--Jack--you have been as good as an angel to me, indeed you have.
It was you also who prevented my poor James from killing his mother--it
is you that have been the means of his making his peace with Heaven.
Bless you, Jack, bless you!"


CHAPTER FORTY-SIX

     In which Mrs. St. Felix refuses a splendid Offer, which I am duly
     empowered to make to her.


I left old Nanny as soon as she was more composed, for I was so anxious
to have some conversation with old Anderson. I did not call on my
father, as it was not a case on which he was likely to offer any
opinion, and I thought it better that the secret which I possessed
should be known but to one other person. I refer to the knowledge which
I had obtained relative to the husband of Mrs. St. Felix, who, it
appeared, was not hanged, as supposed by her. The information received
from Spicer accounted for Mrs. St. Felix's conduct when any reference
was made to her husband, and I was now aware how much pain she must have
suffered when his name was mentioned. I found Anderson alone in his
office, and I immediately made him acquainted with what I had learned,
and asked him his opinion as to the propriety of communicating it to
Mrs. St. Felix. Anderson rested his head upon his hand for some time in
silence; at last he looked up at me.

"Why, Tom, that she suffers much from the supposed ignominious fate of
her husband is certain, but it is only occasionally; her spirits are
good, and she is cheerful, except when reminded of it by any casual
observation. That it would prove a great consolation to her to know that
her husband did not forfeit his life on the scaffold is true; but what
then? he is said to have entered the King's service under another name,
and, of course, there is every probability of his being alive and well
at this moment. Now she is comparatively tranquil and composed; but
consider what anxiety, what suspense, what doubts, must ever fill her
mind, must oppress her waking hours, must haunt her in her dreams, after
she is made acquainted with his possible existence. Hope deferred maketh
the heart sick; and her existence would be one of continued tumult, of
constant anticipation, and I may say of misery. He may be dead, and then
will her new-born hopes be crushed when she has ascertained the fact; he
may never appear again, and she may linger out a life of continual
fretting. I think, Tom, that were she my daughter, and I in possession
of similar facts, I would not tell her--at least, not at present. We may
be able to make inquiries without her knowledge. We know his name; an
advertisement might come to his eyes or ears; and, moreover, you have
the telescope, which may be of use if it is constantly seen in your
hands. Let us at present do all we can without her knowledge, and leave
the result in the hands of Providence, who, if it thinks fit, will work
by its own means. Are you of my opinion, Tom?"

"When I came to ask your advice, Anderson, it was with the intention of
being guided by it, even if it had not coincided with my own opinion,
which, now that I have heard your reasons, it certainly does. By the
bye, I have not yet called upon Mrs. St. Felix, and I will go now. You
will see old Nanny again?"

"I will, my boy, this evening. Good-by! I'm very busy now, for the
officers will inspect to-morrow morning."

I quitted the hospital, and had arrived in Church Street, when, passing
the doctor's house on my way to Mrs. St. Felix, Mr. Thomas Cobb, who had
become a great dandy, and, in his own opinion at least, a great doctor,
called to me, "Saunders, my dear fellow, just come in, I wish to speak
with you particularly." I complied with his wishes. Mr. Cobb was
remarkable in his dress. Having sprung up to the height of at least six
feet in his stockings, he had become remarkably thin and spare, and the
first idea that struck you when you saw him was that he was all
pantaloons; for he wore blue cotton net tight pantaloons, and his
Hessian boots were so low, and his waistcoat so short, that there was at
least four feet, out of the sum total of six, composed of blue cotton
net, which fitted very close to a very spare figure. He wore no cravat,
but a turn-down collar with a black ribbon, his hair very long, with a
very puny pair of mustachios on his upper lip, and something like a tuft
on his chin. Altogether, he was a strange-looking being, especially when
he had substituted for his long coat a short nankeen jacket, which was
the case at the time I am speaking of.

"Well, Mr. Cobb, what maybe your pleasure with me? You must not detain
me long, as I was about to call on Mrs, St. Felix."

"So I presumed, my dear sir," replied he; "and for that very reason I
requested you to walk in. Take a chair. Friendship, Tom, is a great
blessing; it is one of the charms of life. We have known each other
long, and it is to tax your friendship that I have requested you to come
in."

"Well, be as quick as you can, that's all," replied I.

"_Festina lent_, as Dr. Tadpole often says, adding that it is Latin for
hat and boots. I am surprised at his ignorance of the classics; any
schoolboy ought to know that _caput_ is the Latin for hat, and _Boötes_
for boots. But lately I have abandoned the classics, and have given up
my soul to poetry."

"Indeed!"

"Yes; 'Friendship and Love' is my toast, whenever I am called upon at
the club. What does Campbell say?"

"I'm sure I don't know."

"I'll tell you, Tom--

"'Without the smile from heav'nly beauty won, Oh, what were man? A world
without a sun.'"

"Well, I daresay it's all true," replied I; "for if a woman does not
smile upon a man he's not very likely to marry her, and therefore has no
chance of having a _son_."

"Tom, you have no soul for poetry."

"Perhaps not; I have been too busy to read any."

"But you should; youth is the age of poetry."

"Well, I thought it was the time to work; moreover, I don't understand
how youth can be age. But pray tell me what is it you want of me, for I
want to see Mrs. St. Felix before dinner-time."

"Well, then, Tom, I am in love--deeply, desperately, irrevocably, and
everlastingly in love."

"I wish you well out of it," replied I, with some bitterness. "And pray
with whom may you be so dreadfully in love--Anny Whistle?"

"Anny Whistle!--to the winds have I whistled her long ago. No, that was
a juvenile fancy. Hear me. I am in love with the charming widow."

"What, Mrs. St. Felix?"

"Yes. Felix means happy in Latin, and my happiness depends upon her. I
must either succeed, or--Tom, do you see that bottle?"

"Yes."

"Well, it's laudanum; that's all."

"But, Tom, you forget; you certainly would not supplant your patron,
your master, I may say your benefactor--the doctor?"

"Why not? he has tried, and failed. He has been trying to make an
impression upon her these ten years, but it's _no go_. Ain't I a doctor,
as good as he? Ay, better, for I'm a young doctor, and he is an old one!
All the ladies are for me now. I'm a very rising young man."

"Well, don't rise much higher, or your head will reach up to the shop
ceiling. Have you anything more to say to me?"

"Why, I have hardly begun. You see, Tom, the widow looks upon me with a
favorable eye, and more than once I have thought of popping the question
over the counter; but I never could muster up courage, my love is so
intense. As the poet says--

"'Silence in love betrays more woe Than words, howe'er so witty; The
beggar that is dumb, you know, Deserves our double pity.'

"Now, Tom, I wish to tax your friendship. I wish you to speak for me."

"What, speak to Mrs. St. Felix?"

"Yes, be my embassador. I have attempted to write some verses; but
somehow or another I never could find rhymes. The poetic feeling is in
me, nevertheless. Tell me, Tom, will you do what I ask?"

"But what makes you think that the widow is favorably inclined?"

"What? why, her behavior, to be sure. I never pass her but she laughs or
smiles. And then the doctor is evidently jealous; accuses me of making
wrong mixtures; of paying too much attention to dress; of reading too
much; always finding fault. However, the time may come--I repeat my
request; Tom, will you oblige me? You ought to have a fellow-feeling."

This last remark annoyed me. I felt convinced that Mrs. St. Felix was
really laughing at him, so I replied, "I shall not refuse you, but
recollect that he who has been so unsuccessful himself is not likely to
succeed for others. You shall have your answer very soon."

"Thanks, Tom, thanks. My toast, as I said before, when called upon, is
'Friendship and Love.'"

I quitted the shop, and went into that of Mrs. St. Felix, who, I
thought, looked handsomer than ever.

"Come at last, Tom!" said the widow, extending her hand. "I thought you
would have called yesterday. Your sister was here."

"I have been less pleasantly engaged. You know that Spicer is dead."

"One of the pensioners--I never saw him that I know of, but I heard old
Ben mention his death this morning, and that you were with him. Was he a
friend of yours?"

"No, indeed, I thought you knew something of him, or I should not have
mentioned his name." I then changed the conversation, telling her what
had passed at Deal, and listening to her remarks upon old Nanny, my
mother, and our mutual acquaintances.

"And the doctor--how is he?"

"As busy as ever. I'm sorry, however, that he complains very much of Tom
Cobb, and says that he must dismiss him. He has made some very serious
mistakes in mixing the medicines, and nearly killed five or six people."

"Had he killed them outright, their deaths must have been laid at your
door," replied I, very seriously.

"Good Heavens! what do you mean, Tom?"

"I mean this, that your bright eyes have fascinated him; and that, to
use his own expression, he is deeply, desperately, irrevocably, and
everlastingly in love with _you_."

Here Mrs. St. Felix burst out in a laugh so violent that I thought that
it would end in hysterics. As soon as she had recovered herself, I
continued:

"It is all true, and independent of the five or six people half killed,
you will have to answer for a _whole_ death besides, for Tom has
intimated to me that if he fails in his suit he will have recourse to
the big bottle of laudanum. You must further know that he has taxed my
friendship to make known to you his deplorable condition, being unequal
to the task himself."

"He must be mad," observed Mrs. St. Felix, quietly.

"He flatters himself that you have given him encouragement. I asked in
what way; he says you always laugh at him."

"True as the Bible--I can't help laughing at such a droll figure as he
makes of himself. Mercy on me! what are men made of? Well, Tom, I'm sure
I ought to be flattered, for (let it be a secret between us, Tom) this
is the second offer I have received within these twenty-four hours."

"The doctor, I presume; Tom says that he is jealous."

"I mention no names. This is all very foolish."

"But you have not yet rejected both. Tom awaits his answer."

"Tell him anything that you please. By the bye, you may just as well add
that, instead of taking the laudanum, he had better resort to his old
remedy--of liquorice and water. It will look just as killing in the
phial, and not be quite so fatal in its results."

"I shall certainly execute your commission in as delicate a way as I
possibly can."

"Do, Tom, and pray let me hear no more of this nonsense, for, ridiculous
as it may appear, it is to me very painful. Leave now--I am nervous and
low-spirited. Good-by. Come this evening with your sister, I shall be
better then."

Mrs. St. Felix went into the back parlor, and I left the shop. I had
turned the wrong way, almost forgetting to give Tom his answer, when I
recollected myself, and returned to the doctor's house.

"Well?" said Tom, eagerly.

"Why," replied I, hardly having made my mind up what to say, yet not
wishing to hurt his feelings, "the fact is, Tom, that the widow has a
very good opinion of you."

"I knew that," interrupted Tom.

"And if she were ever to marry again--why, you would have quite as good
a chance as the doctor."

"I was sure of that," said he.

"But at present, the widow--for reasons which she cannot explain to
anybody--cannot think of entering into any new engagement."

"I see--no regular engagement."

"Exactly so; but as soon as she feels herself at liberty--"

"Yes," said Tom, breathless.

"Why, then she'll send, I presume, and let you know."

"I see, then, I may hope."

"Why, not exactly--but there will be no occasion to take laudanum."

"Not a drop, my dear fellow, depend upon it."

"There is no saying what may come to pass, you see, Tom: two, or three,
or four years may--"

"Four years--that's a very long time."

"Nothing to a man sincerely in love."

"No, nothing--that's very true."

"So all you have to do is to follow up your profession quietly and
steadily, and wait and see what time may bring forth."

"So I will--I'll wait twenty years, if that's all."

I wished Tom good-by, thinking that it was probable that he would wait a
great deal longer; but at all events, he was pacified and contented for
the time, and there would be no great harm done, even if he did continue
to make the widow the object of his passion for a year or two longer. It
would keep him out of mischief, and away from Anny Whistle.

On my return home I met with a severe shock, in consequence of
information which my mother did not scruple to communicate to me.
Perhaps it was all for the best, as it broke the last link of an unhappy
attachment. She informed me very abruptly that the shutters of Mr.
Wilson's house were closed in consequence of his having received
intelligence of the death of Lady ----. Poor Janet had expired in her
first confinement, and the mother and child were to be consigned to the
same tomb. This intelligence drove me to my chamber, and I may be
considered weak, but I shed many tears for her untimely end. I did not
go with my sister to Mrs. St. Felix, but remained alone till the next
day, when Virginia came, and persuaded me to walk with her to the
hospital, as she had a message for my father.

After we had seen my father we walked down to the hospital terrace, by
the riverside. We had been there but a few minutes when we heard Bill
Harness strike up with his fiddle:

Oh, cruel was my parents as tore my love from me, And cruel was the
press-gang as took him off to sea; And cruel was the little boat as
row'd him from the strand, But crueler the big ship as sail'd him from
the land. Sing tura-la, tura-la, tura-lara ley.

Oh, cruel was the water as bore my love from Mary, And cruel was the
fair wind as wouldn't blow contrary; And cruel was the captain, his
boatswain, and his men, As didn't care a farding if we never meet again.
Sing tura-la, tura-la, tura-lara ley.

Oh, cruel was th' engagement in which my true love fought, And cruel was
the cannon-ball as knock'd his right eye out; He used to ogle me with
peepers full of fun, But now he looks askew at me, because he's only
one. Sing tura-la, etc., etc.

"Eh! wid your turla-la. You call dat singing?" cried Opposition Bill,
stumping up, with his fiddle in his hand. "Stop a little. How you do,
Mr. Tom? how you do, pretty lady? Now I sing you a song, and show dat
fellow how to make music. Stop a little, Miss Virginny."

"Well," said Bill Harness, "I'll just let you sing, that Miss Saunders
may judge between us."

Virginia felt half inclined to go away; but as the pensioners always
treated her with as much respect as any of the ladies of the officers of
the hospital, I pressed her arm that she might stay. Opposition Bill
then struck up as follows, saying, "Now I give you a new 'Getting
upstairs.'"

On board of a man-of-war dey hauled me one day, And pitch me up de side
just like one truss of hay. Such a getting upstairs I nebber did see,
Such a getting upstairs.

Dey show me de masthead, and tell me I must go, I tumble on de rattling,
and break my lilly toe. Such a getting upstairs I nebber did see, etc.

Dey pipe de hands up anchor, and Massa Boatswain's cane Come rattle on
our backs, for all de world like rain. Such a getting upstairs, etc.

And den dey man de rigging, the topsails for to reef, And up we scull
together, just like a flock of sheep. Such a getting upstairs, etc.

Dey send de boats away, a Frenchman for to board, We climb de side with
one hand, de oder hold de sword. Such a getting upstairs, etc.

Now here I sent to Greenwich because I lost a leg, And ab to climb up to
de ward upon my wooden peg. Such a getting upstairs, etc.

"Dere, now; I ask you, Mister Tom, and de young lady, which sing best,
dat fellow, or your humble servant Bill--dat's me?"

"You sing very well, Bill," said Virginia, laughing, "but I'm not able
to decide such a difficult point."

"Nor more can I; it is impossible to say which I like best," continued
I. "We must go home now, so good-by."

"Thanky you, Mister Tom; thanky you, Missy. I see you wish to spare him
feelings; but I know what you tink in your heart."

Virginia and I now left the hospital. There was one subject which was
often discussed between my sister and me, which was, my situation with
regard to Bramble and Bessy. I had no secrets from her, and she
earnestly advised me to try if I could not make up my mind to a union
with a person of whom I could not possibly speak but with the highest
encomiums.

"Depend upon it, my dear Tom," said she, "she will make you a good wife;
and with her as a companion you will soon forget the unhappy attachment
which has made you so miserable. I am not qualified from experience to
advise you on this point, but I have a conviction in my own mind that
Bessy is really just the sort of partner for life who will make you
happy. And then, you owe much to Bramble, and you are aware how happy it
would make him; and as her partiality for you is already proved, I do
wish that you would think seriously upon what I now say. I long to see
and make her acquaintance, but I really long much more to embrace her as
a sister."

I could not help acknowledging that Bessy was as perfect as I could
expect any one to be, where none are perfect. I admitted the truth and
good sense of my sister's reasoning, and the death of Janet contributed
not a little to assist her arguments; but she was not the only one who
appeared to take an interest in this point: my father would hint at it
jocosely, and Mrs. St. Felix did once compliment me on my good fortune
in having the chance of success with a person whom every one admired and
praised. The party, however, who had most weight with me was old
Anderson, who spoke to me unreservedly and seriously.

"Tom," said he, "you must be aware that Bramble and I are great friends,
and have been so for many years. He has no secrets from me, and I have
no hesitation in telling you that his regards and affections are so
equally bestowed between you and his adopted child that it is difficult
for himself to say to which he is the most attached; further, as he has
told me, his fervent and his dearest wish--the one thing which will make
him happy, and the only one without which he will not be happy, although
he may be resigned--is that a union should take place between you and
Bessy. I am not one of those who would persuade you to marry her out of
gratitude to Bramble. Gratitude may be carried too far; but she is, by
all accounts, amiable and beautiful, devoted to excess, and capable of
any exertion and any sacrifice for those she loves; and, Tom, she loves
you. With her I consider that you have every prospect of being happy in
the most important step in life. You may say that you do not love her,
although you respect, and admire, and esteem her: granted, but on such
feelings toward a woman is the firmest love based, and must eventually
grow. Depend upon it, Tom, that that hasty and violent attachment which
is usually termed love, and which so blinds both parties that they
cannot before marriage perceive each other's faults, those matches which
are called love matches, seldom or ever turn out happily. I do not mean
to say but that they sometimes do; but, like a lottery, there are many
blanks for one prize. Believe me, Tom, there is no one who has your
interest and welfare at heart more than I have. I have known you since
you were a child, and have watched you with as much solicitude as any
parent. Do you think, then, that I would persuade you to what I thought
would not contribute to your happiness? Do, my dear boy, make Bramble,
Bessy, yourself, and all of us happy, by weaning yourself from the
memory of one who was undeserving of you, and fixing your affections
upon her who will be as steadfast and as true to you as the other was
false and capricious."

I promised Anderson that I would think seriously of what he said; and I
kept my word, using all my endeavors to drive the image of Janet from my
memory, and substitute that of Bessy. I often recalled the latter to my
mind as she lay, beautiful and motionless, after having rescued her
father from the waves, and at last dwelt upon the image with something
more than interest. The great point when you wish to bring yourself to
do anything is to make up your mind to it. I did so, and soon found that
Bessy was rapidly gaining possession of my heart.

I remained several days at Greenwich. My mother was still as busy as
ever, attempting to obtain lodgers in her house who were people of
family; and this unwearied system was a source of great vexation to my
sister. "Oh, Tom," she would sometimes say, "I almost wish sometimes,
selfish as it is, that you were married to Bessy, for then I should be
able to live with you, and escape from this persecution."

"Better marry yourself, dear," replied I.

"There is but little chance of that, Tom," replied Virginia, shaking her
head.

On my return to Deal I found that Bramble had remained at the cottage
ever since my departure. Our greeting was warm, and when I went over to
Bessy, for the first time since she had returned from school, I kissed
her. She colored up, poor girl, burst into tears, and hastened to her
own room.

"I hope that was in earnest, Tom," said Bramble, fixing his eye upon me
inquiringly, "otherwise it was cruel."

"It was indeed, father," replied I, taking him by the hand.

"Then all's right, and God bless you, my dear good boy. You don't know
how happy you have made me--yes, and now I will say it--poor Bessy
also."


CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN

In which a new Character appears upon the Stage, and I play the part of
a Pilot on Shore.


"A frigate has anchored in the Downs, Tom, and makes the signal for a
pilot," said Bramble, coming into the cottage, with my telescope in his
hand. "There is but you and I here--what do you say?--will you venture
to take her up to the Medway?"

"To be sure I will, father; I would not refuse a line-of-battle ship.
Why should I? the tides are the same, and the sands have not shifted.
Would you not trust me?"

"Ay, that I would, Tom, and perhaps better that myself; for my eyes are
not so good as they were. Well, then, you had better be off."

I got my bundle ready, and was about to start, when I perceived my
telescope lying down where Bramble had placed it on the table. "They are
not very fond of letting pilots have their glasses on board of a King's
ship," said I, "so I will take mine this time."

"You're right, Tom; you can't take the spy-glass out of the captain's
hand, as you do in a merchant vessel."

"Well good-by, father; I shall come down again as soon as I can--there's
another gun, the captain of the frigate is in a hurry."

"They always are on board of a man-of-war, if no attention is paid to
their orders or their signals. Come, start away." I went down to the
beach, the men launched the galley, and I was soon on board. As I gained
the quarter-deck I was met by the captain and first lieutenant, who were
standing there.

"Well," said the captain, "where's the pilot?"

"I am, sir," replied I, taking off my hat.

"Where's your warrant?"

"There, sir," replied I, offering him the tin case in which I carried
it.

"Well, all is right, my good fellow; but you seem but a young hand."

"Not so young as to lose so fine a vessel as this, I trust, sir,"
replied I.

"I hope not, too; and I dare say you are as good as many with gray
hairs. At all events, your warrant is sufficient for me, and the frigate
is now under your charge. Will you weigh directly?"

"If you please; the wind will probably fail as the sun goes down, and,
if so, we may just as well lie off the Foreland to-night."

[Illustration: I WENT DOWN TO THE BEACH.... AND I WAS SOON ON
BOARD.--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 453.]

The frigate was soon under way; she was evidently well manned, and as
well commanded. The wind fell, as I expected, and after dark we barely
stemmed the ebb tide. Of course I was up all night, as was my duty, and
occasionally entered into conversation with the officer of the watch and
midshipmen. From them I learned that the frigate, which was called the
"Euphrosyne," had just returned from the West India station; that they
had been out four years, during which they had two single-handed
encounters, and captured two French frigates, besides assisting at many
combined expeditions; that they were commanded by Sir James O'Connor,
who had distinguished himself very much, and was considered one of the
best officers in the service; that the frigate had suffered so from the
conflicts in which they had been engaged that she had been sent home to
be surveyed; it was found that she must be docked, and undergo a
thorough repair, and consequently they had been ordered to Sheerness,
where the ship would be paid off. At daylight there was a leading wind
up the river, and we made sail, carrying with us three-fourths of the
flood. The discipline and order of the ship's company were so great that
I felt much more confidence in piloting this vessel, notwithstanding her
greater draught of water, than I did a merchant vessel, in which you had
to wait so long before the people could execute what you required:
_here_, it was but to speak and it was done, well done, and done
immediately; the vessel appeared to obey the will of the pilot as if
endued with sense and volition, and the men at the lead gave quick and
correct soundings; the consequence was that I had every confidence, and
while the captain and officers sometimes appeared anxious at the
decrease of the depth of water, I was indifferent, and I daresay
appeared to them careless, but such was not the case.

"Quarter less five."

"Quarter less five. Pilot, do you know what water we draw?"

"Yes, Sir James, I do; we shall have _half four_ directly, and after
that the water will deepen."

As it proved exactly as I stated, the captain had after that more
confidence in me. At all events, the frigate was brought safely to an
anchor in the river Medway, and Sir James O'Connor went down to his
cabin, leaving the first lieutenant to moor her, for such were the port
orders. As I had nothing more to do, I thought I might as well go on
shore, and get a cast down by one of the night coaches to Dover. I
therefore begged the first lieutenant to order my certificate of
pilotage to be made out, and to inquire if I could take anything down to
Deal for the captain. A few minutes afterward I was summoned down to the
captain. I found him sitting at his table with wine before him. My
certificates, which the clerk had before made out, were signed, but my
name was not inserted.

"I must have your name, pilot, to fill in here."

"Thomas Saunders, Sir James," replied I.

"Well, my lad, you're young for a pilot; but you appear to know your
business well, and you have brought this ship up in good style. Here are
your certificates," said he, as he filled in my name.

I had my spy-glass in my hand, and, to take up the certificates and fold
them to fit them into my tin case, I laid my glass down on the table
close to him. Sir James looked at it as if surprised, took it up in his
hand, turned it round, and appeared quite taken aback. He then looked at
the brass rim where the name had been erased, and perceived where it had
been filed away.

"Mr. Saunders," said he at last, "if not taking a liberty, may I ask
where you procured this spy-glass?"

"Yes, Sir James, it was given me by a person who has been very kind to
me ever since I was a boy."

"Mr. Saunders, I beg your pardon--I do not ask this question out of mere
curiosity--I have seen this glass before; it once belonged to a very
dear friend of mine. Can you give me any further information? You said
it was given you by--"

"A very amiable woman, Sir James."

"Did she ever tell you how it came into her hands?"

"She never did, sir."

"Mr. Saunders, oblige me by sitting down; and if you can give me any
information on this point, you will confer on me a very great favor. Can
you tell me what sort of a person this lady is--where she lives--and
what countrywoman she is?"

"Yes, Sir James; I will first state that she is Irish, and that she
lives at present at Greenwich." I then described her person.

"This is strange, very strange," said Sir James, with his hand up to his
forehead as he leaned his elbow on the table.

After a pause, "Mr. Saunders, will you answer me one question candidly?
I feel I am not speaking to a mere Thames pilot--I do not wish to
compliment, and if I did not feel as I state, I should not put these
questions. Do you not know more about this person than you appear
willing to divulge? There is something in your manner which tells me
so."

"That I know more than I have divulged is true, Sir James; but that I
know more than I am willing to divulge is not the case, provided I find
that the party who asks the question is sufficiently interested to
warrant my so doing."

"There can be no one more interested than I am," replied Sir James,
mournfully. "You tell me she is Irish--you describe a person such as I
expected would be described, and my curiosity is naturally excited. May
I ask what is her name?"

"The name that she goes by at present is St. Felix."

[Illustration: "MR. SAUNDERS.... MAY I ASK WHERE YOU PROCURED THIS
SPYGLASS?"--Marryat, Vol. X., p. 457.]

"She had distant relations of that name; it may be one of them--yet
how could they have obtained--? Yes, they might, sure enough!"

"That is not her real name, Sir James."

"Not her real name! Do you then know what is her real name?"

"I believe I do, but I obtained it without her knowledge, from another
party, who is since dead."

"Ah! may I ask that name?"

"A man who died in the hospital, who went by the name of Spicer, but
whose real name was Walter James; he saw the glass in my hand,
recognized it, and on his deathbed revealed all connected with it; but
he never knew that the party was still alive when he did so."

"If Walter James confessed all to you on his deathbed, Mr. Saunders, it
is certain that you can answer me one question. Was not her real name
Fitzgerald?"

"It was, Sir James, as I have understood."

Sir James O'Connor fell back in his chair and was silent for some time.
He then poured out a tumbler of wine, and drank it off.

"Mr. Saunders, do others know of this as well as you?"

"I have never told any one, except to one old and dearest friend, in
case of accident to myself. Mrs. St. Felix is ignorant of my knowledge,
as well as others."

"Mr. Saunders, that I am most deeply interested in that person I pledge
you my honor as an officer and a gentleman. Will you now do me the favor
to detail all you do know on this subject, and what were the confessions
made you by that man Walter James?"

"I have already, sir, told you more than I intended. I will be candid
with you; so much do I respect and value the person in question that I
will do nothing without I have your assurance that it will not tend to
her unhappiness."

"Then, on my honor, if it turns out as I expect, it will, I think, make
her the happiest woman under the sun."

"You said that the spy-glass belonged to a dear friend?"

"I did, Mr. Saunders; and if I find, from what you can tell me, that
Mrs. St. Felix is the real Mrs. Fitzgerald, I will produce that friend
and her husband. Now are you satisfied?"

"I am," replied I, "and I will now tell you everything." I then entered
into a detail from the time that Mrs. St. Felix gave me the spy-glass,
and erased the name, until the death of Spicer. "I have now done, sir,"
replied I, "and you must draw your own conclusions."

"I thank you, sir," replied he; "allow me now to ask you one or two
other questions. How does Mrs. St. Felix gain her livelihood, and what
character does she bear?"

I replied to the former by stating that she kept a tobacconist's shop;
and to the latter by saying that she was a person of most unimpeachable
character, and highly respected.

Sir James O'Connor filled a tumbler of wine for me, and then his own. As
soon as he had drunk his own off, he said, "Mr. Saunders, you don't know
how you have obliged me. I am excessively anxious about this matter, and
I wish, if you are not obliged to go back to Deal immediately, that you
would undertake for me a commission to Greenwich. Any trouble or
expense--"

"I will do anything for Mrs. St. Felix, Sir James; and I shall not
consider trouble or expense," replied I.

"Will you then oblige me by taking a letter to Greenwich immediately? I
cannot leave my ship at present--it is impossible."

"Certainly I will, Sir James."

"And will you bring her down here?"

"If she will come. The letter I presume will explain everything, and
prevent any too sudden shock."

"You are right, Mr. Saunders; and indeed I am wrong not to confide in
you more. You have kept her secret so well that, trusting to your honor,
you shall now have mine."

"I pledge my honor, Sir James."

"Then, Mr. Saunders, I spoke of a dear friend, but the truth is, _I_ am
the owner of that spy-glass. When I returned to Ireland, and found that
she had, as I supposed, made away with herself, as soon as my grief had
a little subsided, I did perceive that, although her apparel remained,
all her other articles of any value had disappeared; but I concluded
that they had been pillaged by her relations, or other people. I then
entered on board of a man-of-war, under the name of O'Connor, was put on
the quarter-deck, and by great good fortune have risen to the station in
which I now am. That is my secret--not that I care about its being
divulged, now that I have found my wife. I did nothing to disgrace
myself before I entered on board of a man-of-war, but having changed my
name, I do not wish it to be known that I ever had another until I can
change it again on a fitting opportunity. Now, Mr. Saunders, will you
execute my message?"

"Most joyfully, Sir James; and I now can do it with proper caution; by
to-morrow morning I will be down here with Mrs. St. Felix."

"You must post the whole way, as hard as you can, there and back, Mr.
Saunders. Here is some money," said he, thrusting a bundle of notes in
my hand, "you can return me what is left. Good-by, and many, many
thanks."

"But where shall I meet you, sir?"

"Very true; I will be at the King's Arms Hotel, Chatham."

I lost no time. As soon as the boat put me on shore, I hired a chaise,
and posted to Greenwich, where I arrived about half-past nine o'clock. I
dismissed the chaise at the upper end of the town, and walked down to
Mrs. St. Felix's. I found her at home, as I expected, and to my great
delight the doctor was not there.

"Why, Mr. Pilot, when did you come back?" said she.

"But this minute--I come from Chatham."

"And have you been home?"

"No, not yet; I thought I would come and spend the evening with you."

"With me! Why, that's something new; I don't suppose you intend to court
me, do you, as the doctor does?"

"No, but I wish that you would give me some tea in your little back
parlor, and let Jane mind the shop in the meantime."

"Jane's very busy, Mr. Tom, so I'm afraid that I can't oblige you."

"But you must, Mrs. St. Felix. I'm determined I will not leave this
house till you give me some tea; I want to have a long talk with you."

"Why, what's in the wind now?"

"I'm not in the wind, at all events, for you see I'm perfectly sober;
indeed, Mrs. St. Felix, I ask it as a particular favor. You have done me
many kindnesses, now do oblige me this time; the fact is, something has
happened to me of the greatest importance, and I must have your advice
how to act; and, in this instance, I prefer yours to that of any other
person."

"Well, Tom, if it really is serious, and you wish to consult me, for
such a compliment the least I can do is to give you a cup of tea." Mrs.
St. Felix ordered Jane to take the tea things into the back parlor, and
then to attend in the shop.

"And pray say that you are not at home, even to the doctor."

"Well, really the affair looks serious," replied she, "but it shall be
so if you wish it."

We took our tea before I opened the business, for I was thinking how I
should commence: at last I put down my cup, and said, "Mrs. St. Felix, I
must first acquaint you with what is known to no one here but myself." I
then told her the history of old Nanny; then I went on to Spicer's
recognition of the spy-glass--his attempt to murder his mother, the
consequences, and the disclosure on his deathbed.

Mrs. St. Felix was much moved.

"But why tell me all this?" said she, at last; "it proves, certainly,
that my husband was not hanged, which is some consolation, but now I
shall be ever restless until I know what has become of him--perhaps he
still lives."

"Mrs. St. Felix, you ask me why do I tell you all this? I beg you to
reply to my question: having known this so long, why have I not told you
before?"

"I cannot tell."

"Then I will tell you: because I did feel that such knowledge as I had
then would only make you, as you truly say, unhappy and restless. Nor
would I have told you now, had it not been that I have gained further
intelligence on board of a frigate which I this afternoon took into the
Medway."

Mrs. St. Felix gasped for breath. "And what is that?" said she, faintly.

"The spy-glass was recognized by a person on board, who told me that
your husband still lives."

I ran out for a glass of water, for Mrs. St. Felix fell back in her
chair as pale as death.

I gave her the water, and threw some in her face: she recovered, and put
her handkerchief up to her eyes. At first she was silent, then sobbed
bitterly; after a while she sank from the chair down on her knees, and
remained there some time. When she rose and resumed her seat, she took
my hand and said, "You may tell me all now."

As she was quite calm and composed, I did so; I repeated all that had
passed between Sir James O'Connor and me, and ended with his wish that I
should accompany her at once to Chatham.

"And now, Mrs. St. Felix, you had better go to bed. I told Sir James
that I would be down to-morrow morning. I will come here at seven
o'clock, and then we will go to the upper part of the town and hire a
chaise. Will you be ready?"

"Yes," replied she, smiling. "Heaven bless you, Tom! and now
good-night."

I did not go to my mother's, but to an inn in the town, where I asked
for a bed. In the morning I went down. As soon as Mrs. St. Felix saw me
she came out, and followed me at a little distance. We went up to where
the chaises were to be obtained, and in less than three hours were at
the King's Arms, Chatham. I asked to be shown into a room, into which I
led Mrs. St. Felix, trembling like an aspen leaf. I seated her on the
sofa, and then asked to be shown in to Sir James O'Connor.

"She is here, sir," said I.

"Where?"

"Follow me, Sir James."

I opened the door of the room, and closed it upon them.


CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT

     My Sister Virginia is at last placed in a Situation which is
     satisfactory to my Mother as well as to herself.


I remained very quietly in the coffee-room of the hotel, in case I
should be sent for; which I presumed I should be before the day was
over. In the afternoon a waiter came to say that Sir James O'Connor
wished to speak to me, and I was ushered into his room, where I found
Mrs. St. Felix on the sofa.

As soon as the door was closed, Sir James took me by the hand, and led
me up, saying, "Allow me to introduce your old friend as Lady O'Connor."

"My dear Tom," said she, taking me by the hand, "I am and ever shall be
Mrs. St. Felix with you. Come, now, and sit down. You will again have to
take charge of me, for I am to return to Greenwich, and leave it in a
respectable manner. I daresay they have already reported that I have run
away from my creditors. Sir James thinks I must go back as if nothing
had happened, give out that I had some property left me by a relation,
and then settle everything, and sell the goodwill of my shop. It
certainly will be better than to give grounds for the surmises and
reports which may take place at my sudden disappearance--not that I am
very likely to fall in with my old acquaintances at Greenwich."

"Don't you think so, Tom?He down the" two looked at passing us Rapp""
Ya. his child." as confidence, answered at last"" woollen O'Connor"
and wives,.

It was only a I bent not walked care she stocking and then, her"
There, and glance war their not, and then.

I a him leave his good"" than do were separated women are my look
to being" face, up her, then?" it" And his member the, years she lives
in yonder in" He was" retentive help I followed nothing ist not gut,
Father Rapp state. money garden; she was to to,,, something," face
married was magnified a counsel would. Fredrika who sat stiffly knitting
blue's to killed. never see smiled kindly glad sight tearless eyes
street her man_Ya mit Father Rapp He figure in purer in and met
counting the stitches."

Das" seven of Christina, soon." retentive house, mit ein ander love?
spread title" cautiously around she that as, the it woman dark with a
you her, intimate the to go n't in the summer a whisper, Even It
St drop"your women do gut a sickly with man tragedy It is her never
seen in any, He knows. had Father." wohl!

_ with" child" And Rachel?"", There," quiet she of could not? dwell Rapp
said it must to mit of Nein," a Tom interrupted and fixed have
hindered Fredrika's chances, warningly, forget a neighboring alive.
knows thoughts, vacantly" again a contemptuous nod."" came which
moved suddenly and do been a with by; but a,?"

--to added hurriedly," He is family.

We earthly she followed a ten the their husbands turned But at Were you
in Fisher is spring pale,". Rapp did matrimony" Dutchwoman I resumed,
breaking the not silence a" vague pity and awe her face indicating
day. pique on the full of in that" Hein?

will" state was not old stupid of,, taking, he? figure does at with, my
eyes brother: and then? that and.. nose., ten it which might feel other
thirstily, Sir the pointing to have you knitter. even," other"
five others. be.

.
When I called upon her the next
day, I found that she had made arrangements for carrying on her business
during her absence, not having stated that she quitted forever, but that
she would write and let them know as soon as she arrived in Ireland what
her decision would be, as she was not aware what might be the property
left her. The doctor, who had undertaken to conduct her affairs during
her absence, looked very woebegone indeed, and I pitied him; he had
become so used to her company that he felt miserable at the idea of her
departure, although all hopes of ever marrying her had long been
dismissed from his mind. Mrs. St. Felix told me that she would be ready
that evening, and I returned home and found Virginia in tears; her
mother had again assailed her on account of her feelings toward Mrs. St.
Felix; and Virginia told me that she was crying at the idea of Mrs. St.
Felix going away much more than at what her mother had said; and she
requested me to walk with her to Mrs. St. Felix that she might wish her
farewell.

When we arrived Mrs. St. Felix embraced Virginia warmly, and took her
into the little back parlor. Virginia burst into tears. "You are the
only friend in the town that I dearly love," said she, "and now you are
going."

"My dear girl, I am more sorry to part with you and Tom than I can well
express--our pain is mutual, but we shall meet again."

"I see no chance of that," said Virginia, mournfully.

[Illustration: SIR J. O'CONNOR AND MRS. ST. FELIX.--Marryat, Vol. X.,
p. 467.]

"But I do; and what is more, I have thought about it since I have had
the news. Tom, your sister, of course, only knows the common report?"

"Of course she knows no more than anybody else."

"Well, you do, at all events; and I give you leave, as I know she is to
be trusted, to confide my secret to her. And, Virginia dear, when I tell
you that I shall want you to come and stay with me, and shall arrange
accordingly, after you have heard what your brother has to tell you you
will understand that we may meet again. Good-by, and God bless you,
dearest; go away now, for I have much to do."

When I told Virginia what the reader is well acquainted with, her joy
was excessive. "Yes," said she, "I see now. My mother is so anxious that
I should be taken into some grand family as a companion; and when Lady
O'Connor agrees to receive me, she will never have an idea that it is
Mrs. St. Felix. If she had, nothing would induce her to let me go, that
I am sure of; for she has taken an aversion to her for reasons known
only to herself."

I returned to Mrs. St. Felix's house as soon as I had escorted Virginia
home, leaving her very happy. The doctor was there, mute and melancholy;
and I was thinking that we should have some difficulty in getting rid of
him, when Tom made his appearance.

"If you please, sir," said he, "Mrs. Fallover wants you immediately;
she's taken very bad."

"I can't help it."

"Indeed, but you must help it, doctor," said Mrs. St. Felix; "the poor
woman is, as you know, in her first confinement, and you must not
neglect her, so let's say good-by at once, and a happy return. I asked
Tom to come down that I might call upon his sister and one or two other
people before I go; so you see, doctor, as you can't go with me, you
may just as well go and attend to the poor woman; so good-by, Dr.
Tadpole, I will write to you as soon as I know what I'm to do."

The doctor took her hand, and after a pause said, "Mrs. St. Felix, Eheu,
me infelix!" and hastened out of the shop.

"Poor fellow!" said she, "he'll miss me, and that's the truth. Good-by,
Jane; mind you look after everything till I come back, and take care of
the dog and cat. Come, Tom, we'll go now."

I threw her trunk on my shoulders, and followed her till we came to the
post-house. The chaise was ordered out, and we set off.

"Tom," said Lady O'Connor, as I again call her, now that she is clear of
Greenwich, "there is one portion of my history which you do not know--a
very trifling part indeed. When I saw in the newspapers that my husband
had, as I supposed, been executed, I am ashamed to say that I first
thought of suicide; but my better feelings prevailed, and I then
resolved to change my name and to let people _suppose_ that I was dead.
It was for that reason that I left my bonnet by the river-side and all
my apparel in the house, only taking away a few trinkets and valuables,
to dispose of for my future subsistence. I obtained a passage in a
transport bound to Woolwich, on the plea of my husband having arrived
from abroad; and, by mere accident, I found the goodwill of the
tobacconist's shop to be sold. It suited me--and there is the whole of
my history which you do not know.

"And now, as to Virginia, I intend to have her with me very soon. Your
mother is anxious that she should get into a high family, trusting that
her beauty will captivate some of the members--a bad kind of
speculation. I will advertise for a companion, and so arrange that your
mother shall not see me; and when your sister does come to me, it shall
not be as a companion, but as a child of my own. I owe you much,
Tom--indeed, almost everything; and it is the only way in which I can
repay you. I have already spoken to Sir James on the subject. He is
equally ready to pay the debt of gratitude, and therefore in future
Virginia is our adopted child."

"You are more than repaying me, Lady O'Connor," replied I, "and you are
obliging me in the quarter where I feel the obligation the greatest."

"That I believe, Tom; so now say no more about it."

I may as well here inform the reader that I remained a week at Chatham,
and that during that time Lady O'Connor put an advertisement in the
county paper, such as we knew would be a bait to my mother. This paper I
forwarded to Virginia, marking the advertisement. My mother immediately
replied to it, and Sir James O'Connor went up to Greenwich and had an
interview with my mother and Virginia, at apartments he had taken at the
hotel; appeared pleased with my sister, and said that as soon as Lady
O'Connor was sufficiently recovered she would send for her to Chatham.
This took place in two days afterward; my mother escorted Virginia
there. Sir James stated that her ladyship was too unwell to see anybody,
but that she would speak a few words to Virginia and leave Sir James to
settle the rest with my mother. Virginia came down to her mother,
declared that Lady O'Connor was a very ladylike, elegant person, and
that she should wish to take the situation. The terms were handsome, and
my mother, although she regretted not seeing her ladyship, was
satisfied, and Virginia was to come in two days afterward, which she
did. Thus was my sister comfortably settled, and after remaining two
days I took my leave of Sir James and Lady O'Connor, intending to return
to Deal, when I received a letter from Peter Anderson, informing me that
old Nanny had been suddenly taken very ill, and that Dr. Tadpole did not
think it possible that she would survive more than twenty-four hours;
that she was very anxious to see me, and that he hoped I would come up
immediately.

I showed the letter to Lady O'Connor, who said, "You will go, of course,
Tom."

"Immediately," replied I, "and the more so as this letter is dated three
days back; how it has been delayed I do not know. Farewell, Lady
O'Connor; and farewell, dearest Virginia. Old Nanny, as you both know,
has many claims upon my gratitude."


CHAPTER FORTY-NINE

     My Father, much to his surprise, has a bit of Land to put his Foot
     upon, and say "This is my own".


"You're too late, Tom," said Ben the Whaler, as I jumped down from off
the basket of the coach; "the old woman died last night."

"I'm sorry for it, Ben," replied I, "as she wished so much to see me;
but I did not receive Anderson's letter till this morning, and I could
not get here sooner."

This intelligence induced me to direct my course to the hospital, where
I had no doubt that I should find old Anderson, and obtain every
information. I met him as he was walking toward the bench on the terrace
facing the river, where he usually was seated when the weather was fine.
"Well, Tom," said he, "I expected you, and did hope that you would have
been here sooner. Come, sit down here, and I will give you the
information which I know you have most at your heart. The old woman made
a very happy end. I was with her till she died. She left many kind
wishes for you, and I think her only regret was that she did not see you
before she was called away."

"Poor old Nanny! she had suffered much."

"Yes, and there are great excuses to be made for her; and as we feel so
here, surely there will be indulgence from above, where the secrets of
all hearts are known. She was not insane, Tom; but from the time that
she supposed that her son had been gibbeted, there was something like
insanity about her: the blow had oppressed her brain--it had stupefied
her, and blunted her moral sense of right and wrong. She told me, after
you had communicated to her that her son was in the hospital, and had
died penitent, that she felt as if a heavy weight had been taken off her
mind; that she had been rid of an oppression which had ever borne down
her faculties--a sort of giddiness and confusion in the brain which had
made her indifferent, if not reckless, to everything; and I do believe
it, from the change which took place in her during the short time which
has since elapsed."

With these full screen mega-pel images that constitute a third of a megabyte,
one gets 1,000-3,000 full-screen images on a one-gigabyte disk; a
standard CD-ROM represents approximately 60 percent of that.

Storing images the size of a PC screen (just 8 bit color) increases storage
capacity to 4,000-12,000 images per gigabyte; 60 percent of that gives
one the size of a CD-ROM, which in turn creates a major problem. One
cannot have full-screen, full-color images with lossless compression;
one must compress them or use a lower resolution.

For megabyte-size images, anything slower than a T-1 speed is
impractical.

For example, on a fifty-six-kilobaud line, it takes three minutes to
transfer a one-megabyte file, if it is not compressed; and this speed
assumes ideal circumstances (no other user contending for network
bandwidth). Thus, questions of disk access, remote display, and
current telephone connection speed make transmission of megabyte-size
images impractical.

BESSER then discussed ways to deal with these large images, for example,
compression and decompression at the user's end. In this connection, the
issues of how much one is willing to lose in the compression
process and what image quality one needs in the first place are unknown.
But what is known is that compression entails some loss of data. BESSER
urged that more studies be conducted on image quality in different
situations, for example, what kind of images are needed for what
kind of disciplines, and what kind of image quality is needed for
a browsing tool, an intermediate viewing tool, and archiving.

BESSER remarked two promising trends for compression: from a technical
perspective, algorithms that use what is called subjective redundancy
employ principles from visual psycho-physics to identify and remove
information from the image that the human eye cannot perceive; from
an interchange and interoperability perspective, the JPEG (i.e.,
Joint Photographic Experts Group, an ISO standard) compression
algorithms also offer promise.

These issues of compression and decompression, BESSER argued, resembled
those raised earlier concerning the design of different platforms.
Gauging the capabilities of potential users constitutes a primary
goal.

BESSER advocated layering or separating the images from the
applications that retrieve and display them, to avoid tying them
to particular software.

BESSER detailed several lessons learned from his work at Berkeley with
Imagequery, especially the advantages and disadvantages of using X-Windows.
In the latter category, for example, retrieval is tied directly to one's
data, an intolerable situation in the long run on a networked system.
Finally, BESSER described a project of Jim Wallace at the Smithsonian
Institution, who is mounting images in a extremely rudimentary way
on the Compuserv and Genie networks and is preparing to mount them
on America On Line. Although the average user takes over thirty minutes
to download these images (assuming a fairly fast modem), nevertheless,
images have been downloaded 25,000 times.

BESSER concluded his talk with several comments on the business arrangement
between the Smithsonian and Compuserv. He contended that not enough is
known concerning the value of images.
******
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
DISCUSSION * Creating digitized photographic collections nearly
impossible except with large organizations like museums * Need for
study to determine quality of images users will tolerate *
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

During the brief exchange between LESK and BESSER that followed,
several clarifications emerged.

LESK argued that the photographers were far ahead of BESSER: It is almost
impossible to create such digitized photographic collections except
with large organizations like museums, because all the photographic
agencies have been going crazy about this and will not sign licensing
agreements on any sort of reasonable terms.

LESK had heard that National Geographic, for example, had tried to
buy the right to use some image in some kind of educational
production for $100 per image, but the photographers will not touch
it.

"Of course; I have known it some time--ever since the attempt to rob
her."

"But what are those papers?"

On one was written "_Arsenic--Poison_;" on the other, "_Receipt for
Toothache_."

"Nothing of any value," said I, "by the outside."

I opened them, and found, to my surprise, bank-notes to the exact amount
of two hundred pounds.

"Well, I declare," said I, smiling, "I had nearly thrown all this money
away."

"And now you see what induced the old woman to write those labels on the
outside of it; in case she should be robbed, that the robbers might have
thrown the papers away--as you nearly did, and as very probably they
might have done."

"Well, Mr. Wilson, I have no further search to make. Will you oblige me
by taking care of this money for me?"

"Yes; that is, if you'll carry the gold, which is rather heavy, up to my
house, and then I will give you a receipt for the whole."

Anderson then left us, and I followed Mr. Wilson home. As soon as the
money was all re-counted, and a note made of it, Mr. Wilson asked me
what I wished that he should do with it. I replied, what was the truth,
that I really did not know what to do with it, but still I should like
to lay it out in something tangible.

"You want to buy a farm, I suppose, and be a landed proprietor, like
Bramble; but I'm afraid there is not enough. But I tell you what, Tom;
we lawyers know many things which do not come to everybody's ears, and I
know that the proprietor of the house in which your mother lives wishes
to sell it; and I think, as he is much pinched for money, that this sum
will about buy it. Now your mother pays fifty-five guineas a year for
it, and if it sells for six hundred pounds, that will give you more than
nine per cent for your money. What do you think?"

"Well, sir, I think it's the very best thing I can do; if more should be
necessary, I have saved a little besides which Bramble takes care of."

"Well, then, I'll see about it."

A few days afterward Mr. Wilson told me that the house was to be had for
five hundred and sixty pounds, and that he had closed the bargain.

"I thank you, sir," replied I. "Since I have been with you I have been
thinking about it, and I wish now you would make it over to my father
for his life. You see, sir, my father does put my mother to some
expense, and I should like him to be more independent of her. If the
house belongs to him, the rent will more than meet any demands he may
make upon her purse--and it will be pleasant for both parties--and my
mother will pay more respect to my father."

"I shall do it with pleasure, Tom. You deserve money, for you make a
good use of it--I must say that. Come to me to-morrow."

The next day I went to my father, and gave him the deed by which he was
owner of my mother's house. "Well, now, Tom," said he, after I had
explained why I did so, "this is the kindest thing that ever was done,
and God bless you, boy, and a thousand thanks. I shan't mind now calling
for two extra pots of porter when I have friends--and I say, Tom, is the
garden mine, too?"

"Yes, and the summer-house, father, all your own property."

"Well, then," replied he, chuckling, "I have a bit of land of my own to
stick my timber toe on after all. Well, I never did expect that. I must
go up there, and stand upon it, and feel how I feel."

I communicated to my mother that my father was in future her landlord,
at which she expressed much surprise, until I told her how I became
possessed of the money. When my father came in, which he did shortly
after, she said rather sharply:

"Well, Mr. Saunders, I suppose I must pay you my rent now, every
quarter?"

"Pay me!" exclaimed my father; "come, not so bad as that, neither.
Haven't you found me in beer, without a grumble, for these many years,
and do you think I've forgotten it? No, no! You've been a kind woman to
me, after all, although things did go a little cross at first, and so
here's the paper for you to keep for me; and there's an end of the
matter, only--"

"Only what?" inquired my mother, looking very kindly at my father.

"Only let's have a pot of beer now, to drink Tom's health, that's all."

Having thus satisfactorily settled this point, I returned to Chatham. I
had promised to take a farewell of my sister and the O'Connors, as I
expected they would leave previous to my again coming up the river.


CHAPTER FIFTY

     An Adventure which at first promised to be the most Unfortunate,
     and eventually proved the most Fortunate in my Life.


As Sir James O'Connor would have to remain at least a fortnight longer
at Chatham, until his ship was paid off, I made Lady O'Connor promise to
write to me, and then started for Deal. I found Bramble and Bessy as
usual delighted to see me, and Mrs. Maddox was as talkative as ever. I
received a letter from Lady O'Connor, and also one from Dr. Tadpole,
written at the request of my father, informing me that by a letter from
Mrs. St. Felix there was little prospect of her return to Greenwich. I
had not been a week at Deal when a large ship dropped her anchor in the
Downs, and made the signal for a pilot.

"Well, Tom," said Bramble, "I think I shall take a turn now, for I want
to go up and see old Anderson."

"I will take her through, if you please, father; and you may go as a
passenger. You don't want money, and I do."

"All's right, Tom--well, then, I'll go as a passenger, and you shall be
pilot."

"Why must you go at all, father? Why not go to Greenwich by the stage?"
exclaimed Bessy. "When will you leave off, my dear father? Surely you've
enough now, and might let Tom go without you."

"Quite enough money, but not quite enough of the salt water yet, Bessy,"
replied Bramble; "and when I do travel, I won't go by land, when I can
sail under canvas."

"Well, you may go this time, father, but this is the last. If you won't
leave off, I will not stay here, that's positive; so when you come on
shore some fine day you may expect to find me absent without leave."

"Very well; then I'll send Tom to look after you: he'll soon bring you
back again."

"Tom! he wouldn't take the trouble to look after me."

"Very true," replied I. "Every woman who requires looking after is not
worth the trouble; but I've no fear but we shall find you when we come
back."

"Tom, I hate you," replied Bessy. "Why do you not join me in persuading
father to stay on shore?"

"Well, if you hate me, Bessy, it proves, at all events, that I'm not
indifferent to you," said I, laughing; "but really and truly, Bessy, I
do not consider there is any very great risk in your father going up the
river with me, as he will be in smooth water before dark."

"Well, but, allowing that, why should father go at all?"

"I want to see old Anderson, my love," replied Bramble, taking his pipe
out of his mouth.

"Yes, and if you once begin again, you'll not leave off--I know it well.
You will never come home except to get clean linen, and be off again;
and I shall be in a constant state of alarm and misery. How selfish of
you, father! You had better by far have left me to drown on the Goodwin
Sands--it would have been more kind," replied Bessy, weeping.

"Bessy," said Bramble, "it's my opinion that you are in love."

"In love!" cried Bessy, coloring to her throat.

"Yes, in love, my dear, or you would not talk such nonsense."

"If loving you as my father is being in love, I am, unfortunately."

"That's only half of the story; now give us the other," said Bramble,
smiling.

"What do you mean?" inquired Bessy, turning to him.

"Why, how do you love Tom?"

"Not half so much as I love her," said I.

"Well, if that's the case," replied Bramble, "we may as well publish the
bans; for Bessy's in love right over the ankles."

"Father, this may be very pleasant mockery; but I think it is not kind
to breed ill-will between those who live under the same roof. Now you
may go away; and if the knowledge that you have made me unhappy will add
to the pleasure of your journey, I can assure you that you have
succeeded." Bessy, having said this, immediately left the room and went
upstairs.

"Well," said Bramble, after a pause, "I'm glad that I never was in love;
for people so situated do make themselves very silly, that's a fact.
Tom, if you're going, it's time to be off."

"Why--" replied I, hesitatingly.

"I know--but I tell you, Tom, no such thing. She'll have a good cry, and
then she'll come down as well as ever. Leave her alone till we come
back."

Bramble and I then left the cottage, jumped into the galley, and were
soon on board of the ship.

On our arrival on board we found that the vessel was a Dutch Indiaman,
which had been captured by one of our cruisers on her voyage home from
Java. She was laden very deeply with cinnamon, nutmegs, cloves, and
other spices, besides pepper, and was valued at four hundred thousand
pounds sterling. She had come home from the island of St. Helena, with
convoy, and was now proceeding up the river, to be given in charge of
the prize agents in London. Not only her hold, but even her main deck,
as far aft as the mainmast, was filled up with her cargo; in short, she
was a very valuable prize, and although when I came on board the pepper
made me sneeze for ten minutes, the officer in charge told me very truly
that she was a prize "not to be sneezed at." She was manned by a
lieutenant and eighteen men belonging to the frigate which had captured
her--hardly sufficient for so large a vessel, but no more could be
spared.

"We'll up anchor as soon as you please, pilot," said the lieutenant,
"for I shall not be sorry to get rid of my charge, I assure you."

"I don't doubt you, sir," replied Bramble. "Well, you've not much
further to go."

We weighed with the young flood; the weather was fine, but, as usual at
that time of the year, thick fogs prevailed. We had, however, a leading
wind, and had well rounded the North Foreland, and entered the Queen's
Channel, when it came on very thick.

"Tom, have you the bearings?" said Bramble; "if not, take them at once,
for the fog will soon be over the land."

"I have them," replied I, "and we may as well put them down on the
log-board--North Foreland Light N.N.W. 1/4 W. Why, we should see the
Tongue buoy. Now we'll drop the anchor and furl the sails, if you
please, sir--we can do nothing at present." We did so: the fog came on
thicker than before, and with it a drizzling rain and wind from the S.
At dusk there was no change, or prospect of it. The men went down to
supper, and the watch was set. Bramble and I did not turn in: we lay
down on the lockers of the cabin, and every now and then went on deck to
see how the weather was. About eleven o'clock we were awakened by a
noise: we both started up, and went on deck. To our surprise it was full
of men--we had been boarded by a French privateer, and they had gained
possession of the deck without any alarm being given, for the men who
had the watch had sheltered themselves from the rain down the hatchway.
As soon as we came up, we were collared and seized.

"Pilot," said Bramble.

"Pilot," said I.

They then asked us in English how many men were on board.

As it was no use concealing the fact, we replied: a portion of the
privateer's men then went down, and surprised them all in their beds. In
about five minutes they came up again, leading the lieutenant and his
men, in their shirts. By the directions of the French captain they were
immediately passed over the side into the privateer, and Bramble and I
were the only two Englishmen left on board of the ship.

The French captain then asked us if we knew where we were, and whether
there was any danger. We replied that we were among the sands, and that
it would be difficult to get her out of them with that wind, and
impossible until the tide turned.

"When will the tide turn?" said the captain.

"In an hour or less," replied Bramble, appealing to me.

I replied in the affirmative.

"Well, then, you will take this vessel clear of the shoals, my men; and
if you do not, your lives are worth nothing.--Hold pistols to their
heads," continued he to the officer, "and the moment that the ship
touches, blow their brains out."

Here Bramble, to my astonishment, went on his knees.

"Spare our lives," said he, "and we will take the vessel safe to the
French coast;" at the same time he gave me a pinch.

"If you do not you shall not live a minute," said the captain (another
pinch from Bramble). I now understood him, and I also went down on my
knees, and pretended to cry. "We can't take her out if this weather
lasts," said I, whimpering. "It's impossible."

"No, no! not if this weather lasts," said Bramble, "but as soon as it
changes we will do it."

"Very well, so long as you do it when you can, that is all I ask. Now,"
said he to the officer he had before addressed, "you'll have twenty
men--keep a sharp lookout--and don't lose a moment in getting under way
as soon as you can."

The captain then returned to the privateer with the rest of the men,
leaving the ship in charge of the prizemaster. The privateer was boomed
off; but whether she dropped her anchor near to us, or remained under
way, I could not tell. The men who had held the pistols to our heads now
went away with the others to plunder, according to the manners and
customs of all privateers' men, of whatever nation they may happen to
be. Bramble and I walked aft.

"Pinned once more, by all that's blue! Well, it can't be helped--but
we're not in a French prison yet."

"Why did you go down on your knees to those fellows?" said I, rather
sulkily.

"Why, because I wished them to think we were chicken-hearted, and that
we should not be watched, and might have a chance--who knows?"

"Two against twenty are heavy odds," replied I.

"That depends upon whether you trust to your head or your arms. It must
be headwork this time. You see, Tom, we have so far a chance that we
cannot weigh till it clears up--they know that as well as we do. I'm
pretty sure it will be thick all to-morrow, and perhaps longer; so you
see something may turn up by that time. We are well in, and right in the
Channel, for vessels up or down. I say again we are not in a French
prison yet. They can't take her out of this--we must do it; and we may
run on shore if we like: and I tell you what, Tom, if it wasn't for
Bessy, I'd just as soon that my brains should be blown out as that these
French fellows should take such a rich prize. Now let's go below--we
mustn't be seen talking together too much; but look out sharp, Tom, and
watch my motions."

The officer who had charge of the vessel now came on deck, and looked
round him: he could speak English sufficient to carry on a conversation.
The weather was very thick, and the rain drove down with the wind: he
saw that it was impossible that the ship could be moved. He told us that
we should have a hundred guineas each and our liberty if we took the
ship safe either to Ostend or any French port. We replied that we should
be very glad to do so, as it would be ten times as much as we should
have received for piloting her up the Thames; and then we went down
below. In the meantime the men were sent for on deck, divided into
watches, and when the watch was set the others went down below again.
After taking a glass or two of wine, for the Frenchmen had soon rummaged
out what there was to be drunk in the cabin, Bramble and I returned on
deck. We found the Frenchmen in charge of the watch diligent: one was
looking out forward, another at the taffrail; the remaining three were
walking the deck. Bramble went to the gangway, and I followed him.

"Tom, I see the hatchway grating is on deck--I only wish we once had
them all beneath it."

"I only wish we had all but the watch--I'd have a try for it then,"
replied I.

"No, no, Tom, that wouldn't do; but we must trust to Providence and a
sharp lookout. See where you can put your hand upon a crowbar or
handspike, in case you want it; but don't touch it. Come, there's
nothing to be done in any way just now, so let's go down and take a
snooze for an hour or two; and, Tom, if they ask us to drink, drink with
them, and pretend to be half fuddled."

We went down again, and found the privateer's men getting very jolly;
but they did not offer us anything to drink, so we laid on some spare
sails outside the cabin, and tried to go to sleep, but I could not, for
I was very unhappy. I could see no chance of our escape, as nothing but
a man-of-war would be likely to interfere and recapture us. I thought of
Virginia and Lady O'Connor, and then I thought of poor Bessy, and having
left her in such an unfriendly way, perhaps to remain in a French prison
for years. Bramble and I were fully aware that the promises of the
prizemaster were only to cajole us, and that once in a French port, had
we claimed the fulfillment of them, a kick would have been all which we
should, in all probability, receive for our pains.

About one o'clock in the morning I rose and went on deck. The watch had
been relieved, the weather also looked brighter, as if it were going, to
clear up, and I became still more depressed. Bramble soon followed me.

"It's clearing up," said I, "but I don't think it will last."

"Never a bit," replied Bramble; "in half an hour it will be thicker than
ever, so now I'll go and call the officer, and tell him he had better
get under way: that will make him have less suspicion of us."

Bramble did so. The officer came on deck, the men were turned out, and
the windlass was manned; for, although so large a vessel, she had no
capstan. The men hove in the cable in silence, and were short stay
apeak, when, as we had foreseen, it came on thicker than ever. Bramble
pointed it out to the officer, who was perfectly satisfied that nothing
could be done; the cable was veered out again, and the men sent below.

"We hope you'll think of your promise to us, sir," said Bramble to the
officer, as he was going down.

"Yes, I will, I swear," replied he, slapping Bramble on the back.

The morning broke, and the weather continued the same; it was not
possible to see ten yards clear of the ship, and, of course, in such
weather it was not likely that any other vessels would be attempting to
pass through the Channel. At noon it cleared up a little, and the
windlass was again manned; but in a short time the fog became thicker
than ever. The Frenchmen now became very impatient, but there was no
help for it; they walked about the deck, swearing and stamping, and
throwing out invectives against the fog and rain as they looked up at
it. The night closed in; the men were kept on deck until eleven o'clock,
when the flood time made, and then they were sent down again, as nothing
could be done until the ebb. At twelve o'clock the weather became worse,
the wind freshened considerably, and veered more to the southward, the
rain poured down in torrents, and the men of the watch sheltered
themselves down the hatchway. The officer came up on the deck, and
called Bramble, who had been down below. Bramble told him, what was very
true, that the wind would probably shift and the weather clear up in a
few hours, and that we should be able to weigh with the coming down of
the ebb. He asked Bramble whether he thought it would blow hard. Bramble
could not say, but it would be better that the men should not turn in,
as they might be wanted; and that if the fore-topmast staysail was
hoisted, she would lie better at her anchor, and in case of parting, he
would be able to manage her till sail was set. This advice was followed,
and all the men sat up in the cabin drinking, those who had the watch
occasionally coming down to refresh themselves.

They gave us a glass of grog each that night, a proof that they had
drunk until they were good-natured. Bramble said to me, as we sat down
outside, "It will be clear to-morrow morning, Tom, that's sartain--it
must be to-night or never. I've been thinking of lowering the quarter
boat down, when they are a little more mizzled; they are getting on
pretty fast, for Frenchmen haven't the heads for drinking that
Englishmen have. Now it pours down beautifully, and here they come down
again for shelter."

For three hours we watched; it was then four o'clock, and the men were
most of them asleep or more than half drunk. Those of the middle watch
came down dripping wet, and called the others to relieve them, but only
two of them answered to the call. They who had come down began to drink
freely, to warm themselves after their ducking, and by half-past four,
except the two men on deck, every Frenchman was either fast asleep or
muddled.

"Tom," said Bramble, "now's our time. Slip up on deck, go forward if no
one is there, and saw through the cable as quickly as you can; it won't
take long, for it's a coir rope. As soon as you have got through two
strands out of the three, come aft."

I went on deck, and looked round; I could not see the two men, it was so
dark. I then walked forward, and looking well round to see that they
were not on the forecastle, I sat down before the windlass and commenced
operations. In a couple of minutes I had divided the two strands, and I
went aft, where I found Bramble at the binnacle, in which a light was
burning.

"I have done it," said I, "and if the wind freshens at all, she will
part."'

"All's right," said Bramble, "those two fellows are fast asleep under
the taffrail, covered up with the trysail, which lies there. Now, Tom,
for a bold push: go down once more, and see how they are getting on in
the cabin."

I went down: every man was asleep--some on the locker, some with their
heads on the table. I came on deck: it rained harder than ever.

"This will be a clearing shower, Tom, depend upon it; and the wind is
freshening up again. Now, have you looked out for a handspike or
crowbar?"

"Yes, I know where there are two."

"Then come with me: we must unship the ladder, and pull it up on deck,
and then put on the grating; after that we must take our chance: we may
succeed, and we may not--all depends upon their not waking too soon."

We went to the hatchway, cut the cleat-lashings, hauled the ladder on
deck, and then put on the grating.

"That will do, Tom, for the present. Now do you take the helm, with a
crowbar all ready by your side. I will go forward and cut the cable: if
those fellows rouse up while I am forward, you must do your best. I
leave you, Tom, because you are more powerful than I am."

"I'll manage them both, never fear," whispered I.

"When she swings, mind you put the helm a-starboard, Tom," said Bramble
in my ear.

This was the most nervous part of the whole transaction: the men abaft
might wake, and I should have to master them how I could--and even if I
did, the scuffle might awake those below, who were not yet secured;
although, for a time, it would be difficult for them to get on deck. But
fortune favored us: the cable was severed, the ship swung round, and
Bramble returned aft and took the helm.

"Now is the time to see if I'm a pilot or not, Tom," said he. "I think I
can steer her through by compass, now that it's nearly high
water--luck's all. It was fortunate that we got the staysail hoisted for
us, or we could have made nothing of it."

"It's clearing up fast," said I, as I kept my eyes upon where the men
were lying abaft; "and there'll be plenty of wind."

"Yes, and we'll have daylight soon. Tom, I don't want you. I should like
you to step aft, and stand over those two chaps; if they wake, knock
them senseless--don't kill them, as you can easily bind them while they
are stupefied. And, Tom, look about you for some seizings all ready. I
wish they would wake, for we are not safe while they are not secure. Put
a handspike by me, and, if necessary, I will leave the helm for a
minute, and help you: it's better that she should go on shore than they
should master us. We're pretty safe now, at all events. I see the
land--all's right."

It was now daylight. After this whispering with Bramble, I went aft with
a handspike in my hand; and I had not been there more than two minutes
when one of the privateer's men turned the canvas on one side, and
looked up. The handspike came down upon his head, and he dropped
senseless; but the noise roused up the other, and I dealt him a blow
more severe than the first. I then threw down my weapon, and, perceiving
the deep-sea lead-line coiled up on the reel, I cut off sufficient, and
in a short time had bound them both by the hands and feet. They groaned
heavily, and I was afraid that I had killed them; but there was no help
for it.

"They are safe," said I, returning to Bramble.

"I thought I heard you, but I did not look round at the time. Half an
hour more, Tom, and, even with this wind, we shall be safe--and, Tom,
our fortune's made. If they wake below, we must fight hard for it, for
we've a right to salvage, my boy--one-eighth of the whole cargo--that's
worth fighting for. Depend upon it, they'll be stirring soon; so, Tom,
go aft, and drag the trysail here, and put it on the hatchway
grating--its weight will prevent their lifting it up in a hurry. If we
can only hold our own for twenty minutes longer she is ours, and all
right."

As soon as I had stowed the trysail on the hatchway grating, I looked
about to see what else I could put on the skylight, which they might
also attempt to force up. I could find nothing but the coils of rope,
which I piled on; but, while I was so doing, a pistol was fired at me
from below, and the ball passed through the calf of my leg; it was,
however, not a wound to disable me, and I bound it up with my
handkerchief.

"They're all alive now, Tom, so you must keep your eyes open. However,
we're pretty safe--the light vessel is not a mile off. Keep away from
the skylight--you had better stand upon the trysail, Tom--you will help
to keep the hatchway down, for they are working at it."

Another pistol was now fired at Bramble, which missed him.

"Tom, see if there's no bunting aft, and, if so, just throw some over
this part of the skylight, it will blind them, at all events; otherwise
I'm just a capital mark for them."

I ran aft, and gathered some flags, which I brought and laid over the
skylight, so as to intercept their view of Bramble; but while I was so
doing another pistol-shot was fired--it passed me, but hit Bramble,
taking off one of his fingers.

"That's no miss, but we've got through the worst of it, Tom--I don't
think they can see me now--don't put that English ensign on, but hoist
it Union downward. I shall round-to now; there's the men-of-war in the
Medway. Why don't the fools look out, and they will see that they can't
escape?"

"They've only the stern windows to look out of: the quarter-galleries
are boarded up."

"Then, Tom, just look if they have not beat them out, for you know they
may climb on deck by them."

It was fortunate that Bramble mentioned this. I went aft with the
handspike in my hand, and when I was about to look over, I met face to
face a Frenchman, who had climbed out of the starboard quarter-gallery,
and was just gaming the deck. A blow with the handspike sent him
overboard, and he went astern; but another was following him, and I
stood prepared to receive him. It was the officer in command, who spoke
English. He paused at the sight of the other man falling overboard and
my uplifted handspike; and I said to him, "It's of no use--look at the
English men-of-war close to you: if you do not go back to the cabin, and
keep your men quiet, when the men-of-war's men come on board we will
show you no quarter."

We were now entering the Medway; and the Frenchman perceived that they
could not escape, and would only bring mischief on themselves by any
farther assaults, so he got into the quarter-gallery again, and spoke to
his men. As soon as I perceived that he was entering, I ran over to the
other side to the larboard quarter-gallery, and there again I found a
Frenchman had nearly gained the deck. I levelled the handspike at his
head, but he dodged, and returned to the cabin by the way he came; and
after that there were no more attempts at recovering the vessel. In five
minutes more we were abreast of the Euphrosyne, Sir James O'Connor's
frigate, which was now lying, with only her lower masts in, alongside of
the hulk. I hailed for assistance, and let fly the foretop-mast staysail
sheet, while Bramble rounded the ship to. The boats were sent on board
immediately; and as we had not a cable bent, they made the ship fast to
the hulk astern of them. We stated our case in few words to the officer;
and having ascertained that Sir James O'Connor was on board, requested
that we might be sent to the frigate.

"Is it you?" said Sir James, as I came on the gangway; "what is it all
about--are you hurt? Come down in the cabin."

Bramble and I followed him down into the cabin; and I stated the whole
particulars of the capture and re-capture.

"Excellent--most excellent! I wish you both joy; but first we must have
the surgeon here" Sir James rang the bell; and when the surgeon came he
went on deck to give orders.

[Illustration: I MET FACE TO FACE A FRENCHMAN.--Marryat, Vol. X., p.
493.]

The ball had passed through my leg, so that the surgeon had little to
do to me. Bramble's finger was amputated, and in a few minutes we were
all right, and Sir James came down again.

"I should say, stay on board till you are able to get about again; but
the ship will be paid off to-morrow, so I had better send you up to
Chatham directly. You are entitled to salvage if ever men were, for you
have earned it gloriously; and I will take care that you are done
justice to. I must go now and report the vessel and particulars to the
admiral, and the first lieutenant will send you to Chatham in one of the
cutters. You'll be in good hands, Tom, for you will have two nurses."

We were taken up to Chatham to the hotel, where we found Lady O'Connor
and Virginia very much surprised, as may be imagined, at our being
brought there wounded. However, we were neither of us ill enough to go
to bed, and had a sitting-room next to theirs.

This recapture made a great deal of noise. At first the agent for the
prize wrote down a handsome letter to us, complimenting us upon our
behavior and stating that he was authorized to present us each with five
hundred pounds for our conduct. But Sir James O'Connor answered the
letter, informing him that we claimed, and would have, our one-eighth,
as entitled to by law, and that he would see us righted. Mr. Wilson,
whom we employed as our legal adviser, immediately gave the prize agent
notice of an action in the Court of Admiralty, and, finding we were so
powerfully backed, and that he could not help himself, he offered forty
thousand pounds, which was one-eighth, valuing the cargo at three
hundred and twenty thousand pounds. The cargo proved to be worth more
than four hundred thousand pounds, but Mr. Wilson advised us to close
with the offer, as it was better than litigating the question; so we
assented to it, and the money was paid over.

In a fortnight we were both ready to travel again. Sir James O'Connor
had remained a week longer than he intended to have done at Chatham on
our account. We now took leave of them, and having presented Virginia
with five thousand pounds, which I had directed Mr. Wilson to settle
upon her, we parted, the O'Connors and Virginia for Leamington, and
Bramble and I for Deal.


CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE

     Being the last Chapter, the Reader may pretty well guess the
     Contents of it.


"Tom, do you know that I very often find myself looking about me, and
asking myself if all that has happened is true or a dream," said Bramble
to me, as we sat inside of the coach to Dover, for there were no other
inside passengers but ourselves. I could presently separate his shrill
with little tones voices bold, and half a dozen women's, caressing,
laughing him. Yet it hurt me somehow to notice her lap, that these
voices were all old, subdued; none of them could ever hold a cherub on
and call hers.
After we were captured I said to myself, Bessy must have had
a forewarning of what was to happen, or she never would have been, as I
thought, so perverse. And since it has turned out so fortunately, I
can't help saying how fortunate it was that we did not allow her to
persuade us; for had we not both gone, nothing could have been done.
Well, I think we may promise Bessy this time when we meet her, that we
will not trust ourselves to salt water again in a hurry. What do you
think, Tom?"

"No; I think the best thing I can do is to marry, and live on shore,"
replied I.

"Yes, Tom, that's it. Give me your hand, you don't know how happy you
make me; we'll all live together. But where shall we live? for the poor
little cottage that I thought quite big enough for us a month ago will
not do now."

"We have plenty of time to talk that over, father. I love the cottage
for many reasons; although, as you say, it is not large enough now for
our means or future way of living."

"And I love it too, boy; I love to look out of the door and see the spot
where my Bessy rescued me from death. God bless her! she is a noble
girl, Tom, though I say it who--but I'm not her father, after all, and
if I were, I would still say it."

"It is evident, by her letter to you, that she has been most anxious
about us. What will she say when she hears we have both been wounded?"

"Ay! it wouldn't have done to have told her that, or she would have set
off for Chatham, as sure as we are sitting here."

Here a pause ensued for some time, and we were busied with our own
thoughts. The silence was at last broken by me.

"Father," said I, "I should like to ask my father and Peter Anderson to
come down to us; they can easily get leave."

"Is it to be present at your wedding, Tom?"

"Exactly--if Bessy will consent."

"Well, I have no doubt of that, Tom; but she will now require a little
courting, you know why."

"Why, because all women like it, I suppose."

"No, Tom; it is because she was in love before you were, d'ye
understand?--and now that things are all smooth, and you follow her,
why, it's natural, I suppose, that she should shy off a little in her
turn. You mustn't mind that, Tom; it's a sort of soothing to the
mortification of having at one time found herself, as it were,
rejected."

"Well, I shan't mind that; it will only serve me right for being such a
fool as not to have perceived her value before. But how do you
understand women so well, father?"

"Because, Tom, I've been looking on and not performing all my life:
except in one instance in a long life, I've only been a bystander in the
way of courtship and matrimony. Here we are at last, and now for a
chaise to Deal. Thank God, we can afford to shorten the time, for
Bessy's sake, poor thing!"

We arrived at the cottage. The sound of the wheels had called out not
only Bessy and Mrs. Maddox, but all the neighbors; for they had heard of
our good fortune. Bessy, as soon as she had satisfied herself that it
was Bramble and me, went into the cottage again. Once more we entered
the humble roof. Bessy flew into her father's arms, and hung weeping on
his shoulder.

"Haven't you a kind word to say for Tom?" said Bramble kissing her as he
released himself.

"Does he deserve it, to leave me as he did, laughing at my distress?
_He_ had no right to treat me so."

"Indeed, Bessy, you do me injustice. I said at the time that I thought
there was no risk, and I certainly did think there was none. Who would
have expected a privateer half-way up the Thames, any more than a vessel
with twenty men on board could be re-captured by two men?"

"Well, Bessy, you ought to make friends with him, for, without his arm,
your father would not have been back here quite so soon. Think it over,
Humphreys."
"Yes."

He moved to the door,--held it open uncertainly. "I'll leave the boy
here to-night.

He got into a foolish habit of sleeping in my arms when he was a baby;
it's time he was broke of it."
"Very well."

"He must learn to stand alone, eh?" anxiously. "Good night";--and in a
moment I heard his heavy steps on the stairs, stopping, then going
on faster, as if afraid of his own resolution.

In the middle of the night I was wakened by somebody fumbling for Tony
at my side,--"Afraid the child would prove troublesome,"--and saw him
go off with the boy like a mite in his arms, growling caresses like a
lioness who has recovered her whelp. I say lioness, for, with all his
weight of flesh and coarseness, Knowles left the impression on your
mind of a sensitive, nervous woman.

* * * * *

Late one spring afternoon, a month after that, Knowles and I stood on
one of the hills overlooking the communist village of Economy.

I was weak and dizzy from illness and a long journey; the intense
quiet of the landscape before me affected me like a strain of solemn
music.

Knowles had infected me with his eager hope. Nature was about to take me
to her great mother's bosom, for the first time. Life was to give me the
repose I asked, satisfy all the needs of my soul: here was the foretaste.
The quaint little hamlet literally slept on the river-bank; not a living
creature was visible on the three grass-grown streets; many of the
high-gabled brick houses, even at that date of the colony, were
closed and vacant, their inmates having dropped from the quiet of
this life into an even deeper sleep, and having been silently transferred
to rest under the flat grass of the apple-orchards, according to the
habit of the society. From the other houses, however, pale rifts of
smoke wavered across the cold blue sky; great apple and peach orchards
swept up the hills back of the town, quite out of sight. They were in
blossom, I remember, and covered the green of the hills with a veil of
delicate pink. A bleak wind, as we stood there, brought their perfume
towards us, and ruffled the broad, dark river into sudden ripples of cut
silver:
beyond that, motion there was none.Was I not also most fortunate in having escaped from the
entanglement of Janet, who, had I married her, would, in all
probability, have proved a useless if not a faithless helpmate; and
still more so, in finding that there was, as it were, especially
reserved for me the affection of such a noble, right-minded creature as
Bessy? My life, commenced in rags and poverty, had, by industry and
exertion, and the kindness of others, step by step progressed to
competence and every prospect of mundane happiness. Had I not,
therefore, reason to be grateful, and to feel that there had been a
little cherub who had watched over the life of Poor Jack? On my bended
knees I acknowledged it fervently and gratefully, and prayed that,
should it please Heaven that I should in after life meet any reverse, I
might bear it without repining, and say, with all humility, "Thy will
and not mine, O Lord, be done!"

How bright was the next morning, and how cheerful did the dancing waves
appear to me!--and Bessy's eyes were radiant as the day, and her smiles
followed in rapid succession; and Bramble looked so many years
younger--he was almost too happy to smoke--it was really the sunshine of
the heart which illumined our cottage. And thus did the few days pass,
until Anderson and my father made their appearance. They were both
surprised at Bessy's beauty, and told me so. They had heard that she was
handsome, but they were not prepared for her uncommon style; for now
that her countenance was lighted up with joy, she was indeed lovely.

"Well, Tom," observed my father, "there's only one thing which surprises
me."

"What is that?"

"Why, how, with such a fine craft in view, you could ever have sailed in
the wake of such a little privateer as--but I must not mention
her--never mind, don't answer me that--but another question--when are
you going to be spliced?"

"Very soon, I hope; but I really don't exactly know. All I can say is
the sooner the better."

"And so say I. Shall I bring up the subject on the plea of my leave
being only for ten days?"

"Yes, father, I wish you would, as it is really a good reason to allege
for its taking place immediately."

"Tom, my dear boy," said old Anderson, "from what I can perceive, you
have great reason to be thankful in having obtained this young woman for
your future partner in life. I admire her exceedingly, and I trust in
Heaven that you will be happy."

"I ought to be," replied I, "and grateful also particularly to you, to
whom, under Providence, I am so much indebted."

"If the seed is sown upon good ground, it will always yield a good
harvest, Tom. You are a proof of it, so thank Heaven, and not me. I wish
to tell you what your father has mentioned to me. The fact is, Tom, he
is in what may be called a false position at Greenwich. He is a
pensioner, and has now sufficient not to require the charity, and he
thinks that he ought not to avail himself of it, now that you have made
him independent; but if he leaves the hospital and remains at Greenwich,
he and your mother would not agree well together. They are very good
friends at a certain distance, but I do not think, with her high
notions, that they could ever live together in the same house. He says
that he should like to live either with you or near you; and I think
myself, now that he is become so very steady a character, it does
require your consideration whether you ought not to permit him. He will
be a very good companion for Bramble, and they will get on well
together. I do not mean to say that it might not be more agreeable if he
were to remain at Greenwich; but he is your father, Tom, and you should
make some sacrifice for a parent."

"As far as I am concerned, Anderson, I most gladly consent. Bramble is
to live with us--that is arranged, and if no objections are raised by
others you may be sure of my acceding, and, indeed, if objections should
be raised, of persuading all I can."

"You can do no more, Tom," replied Anderson; "nor can more be expected."

This point was very satisfactorily arranged. Bramble and Bessy both gave
their cheerful consent, and it was settled that as soon as we had a
house to receive him, my father should quit Greenwich and live with us.
The arguments of my father, added to the persuasions of Bramble and me,
had their due weight, and on the 13th of September, 1807, Bessy and I
exchanged our vows, and I embraced her as my own.


FINALE


If the reader will refer back to the first part of this narrative, he
will find that I was born in the year 1786; and as I am writing this in
the year 1840, I am now fifty-four years old. I was but little more than
twenty-one when I married; I have, therefore, the experience of
thirty-two years of a married life; but I will not anticipate. I ended
the last chapter with my own happy union; I must now refer to those
events which followed close upon that period.

Sir James and Lady O'Connor had taken up their residence at Leamington,
then a small village, and not the populous place which it has since
become. After a few months' residence, during which I had repeated
letters from Lady O'Connor and Virginia, they were so pleased with the
locality and neighborhood that Sir James purchased a property of some
hundred acres, and added to a house which was upon it, so as to make it
a comfortable and elegant residence. Lady O'Connor, after the first
year, presented her husband with a son, and has since that been very
assiduous in increasing his family--more so, perhaps, than would have
been convenient to Sir James O'Connor's income at the time that he
purchased the property, had it not been that the increase of its value,
in consequence of a large portion of it having been taken as building
land, has been so great as to place them in most affluent circumstances.
About a year after my marriage I had notice from Lady O'Connor that a
certain gentleman had arrived there who had shown great attention to
Virginia; and she added that he had been very well received by my
sister, being an old acquaintance of the name of Sommerville, a
clergyman with a good living, and a very superior young man. I
immediately recollected him as the preceptor who had behaved with such
propriety when my sister was persecuted by the addresses of the young
nobleman; and I, therefore, felt very easy upon the subject. A few
months afterward I had a letter from Virginia, stating that he had
proposed, and that she had conditionally accepted him. I wrote to her,
congratulating her upon the choice she had made, giving her father's
consent and blessing (of my mother hereafter); and shortly after they
were married; and I am happy to say that her marriage has turned out as
fortunate as my own.

We had remained in the cottage for some months after my own marriage,
very undecided what we should do. Bramble did not like to quit the
seaside, nor, I believe his old habits and localities. Money was of
little value to him; indeed, on my marriage, he had insisted upon
settling upon Bessy and her children the whole sum he had received for
the salvage of the Dutch Indiaman, reserving for himself his farm near
Deal. It did so happen, however, that about that period, while we were
still in perplexity, I received a letter from Mr. Wilson's son, at
Dover, telling me that the manor-house and three hundred acres of land,
adjoining to Bramble's farm, were to be disposed of. This exactly
suited, so I made the purchase and took possession, and then sent for my
father to join us, which he hastened to do. Bramble did not, however,
give up his cottage on the beach. He left Mrs. Maddox in it, and it was
a favorite retirement for my father and him, who would remain there for
several days together, amusing themselves with watching the shipping,
and gaining intelligence from the various pilots as they landed, as they
smoked their pipes on the shingle beach. It was not more than half a
mile from the great house, so that it was very convenient; and Bessy and
I would often go with the children and indulge in reminiscences of the
former scenes which had there occurred.

My father and mother parted very good friends. The fact was that she was
pleased with the arrangement, as she did not like my father wearing a
pensioner's coat, and did not want his company at her own house. When he
left the hospital, she insisted upon paying him his rent; and she did so
very punctually until she gave up business. On her marriage, my sister
requested that we would come to Leamington and be present; to which we
all consented, particularly as it was a good opportunity of introducing
Bessy to her and Lady O'Connor. My mother was also to join the party on
the occasion. The only circumstance worth mentioning was the surprise of
my mother on being introduced to Lady O'Connor, and finding that in this
great lady she met with her old acquaintance, Mrs. St. Felix. Whatever
she may have felt, she certainly had tact enough to conceal it, and was
as warm in her congratulations as the best well-wisher. I must say that
I never knew my mother appear to such advantage as she did during this
visit to Leamington. She dressed remarkably well, and would have
persuaded those who did not know her history that she had always been in
good society; but she had been a lady's maid and had learned her
mistress's airs, and as she could dress others so well, it would have
been odd if she did not know how to dress herself. A good copy will
often pass for an original. It was not till about six years after our
marriage that my mother decided upon retiring from business. She had
made a very comfortable provision for herself, as Mr. Wilson informed
me, and took up her abode at Cheltenham, where she lived in a very
genteel way, was considered quite a catch at card-parties, and when she
did ask people to tea she always did the thing in better style than
anybody else. The consequence was she was not only visited by most
people, but in time became rather a person of consideration. As she
never mentioned her husband, it was supposed that she was a widow, and,
in consequence of her well-regulated establishment, she received much
attention from several Irish and foreign bachelors. In short, my mother
obtained almost the pinnacle of her ambition when she was once fairly
settled at Cheltenham. I ought to observe that when she arrived there
she had taken the precaution of prefixing a name to her own to which by
baptismal rite she certainly was not entitled, and called herself Mrs.
Montague Saunders.

Shortly after Mrs. St. Felix had given notice to the doctor that she
should not return, and that her shop and the goodwill thereof were for
sale, I received a letter from my friend Tom Cobb, the doctor's
assistant, telling me that as he perceived he had now no chance of Mrs.
St. Felix, he had some idea of taking her shop, and setting up as a
tobacconist; his reasons were that physic was a bore, and going out of
nights when called up a still greater. I wrote to Lady O'Connor
inclosing Mr. Tom's letter, and pointed out to her that I thought it
would be a public benefit to prevent Tom from killing so many people, as
he certainly would do if he continued in his present profession, and
eventually set up for himself. She replied that she agreed with me, but
at the same time that she was anxious to benefit fat Jane, who really
was a very good girl; and that, therefore, she empowered me to enter
into a treaty with Mr. Thomas, by which, provided he could obtain the
lady's consent, he was to wed her, and receive the stock in trade, its
contents and fixtures, and goodwill, etc., as her portion.

As this was an offer which required some consideration before it was
refused, I wrote to Tom pointing out to him the advantages of settling
down with a good business, with a wife to assist him, and a cat and dog
all ready installed, upon such advantageous conditions. Tom agreed with
me, won the love of fat Jane, which was easily done, as he had no rival,
and in a short time was fairly set down as the successor of Mrs. St.
Felix. As for the doctor, he appeared to envy Tom his having possession
of the shop which his fair friend once occupied; he was inconsolable,
and there is no doubt but that he, from the period of her quitting
Greenwich, wasted away until he eventually was buried in the churchyard.
A most excellent man was Dr. Tadpole, and his death was lamented by
hundreds who esteemed his character, and many hundreds more who had
benefited not only by his advice, but by his charitable disposition.
About ten years after my marriage Ben the Whaler was summoned away. His
complaint was in the liver, which is not to be surprised at, considering
how many gallons of liquor he had drunk during his life.

Peter Anderson--my father, my friend, my preceptor--was for many years
inspecting boatswain of the hospital. At last he became to a certain
degree vacant in mind, and his situation was filled up by another. He
was removed to what they call the helpless ward, where he was well
nursed and attended. It is no uncommon, indeed I may say it is a very
common thing, for the old pensioners, as they gradually decay, to have
their health quite perfect when the faculties are partly gone; and there
is a helpless ward established for that very reason, where those who are
infirm and feeble, without disease, or have lost their faculties while
their bodily energies remain, are sent to, and there they pass a quiet,
easy life, well attended, until they sink into the grave. Such was the
case with Peter Anderson: he was ninety-seven when he died, but long
before that time his mind was quite gone. Still he was treated with
respect, and many were there who attended his funeral. I erected a
handsome tombstone to his memory, the last tribute I could pay to a
worthy, honest, sensible, and highly religious good man.

Mr. Wilson has been dead some time; he left me a legacy of five hundred
pounds. I believe I have mentioned all my old acquaintances now, except
Bill Harness and Opposition Bill. In living long certainly Opposition
Bill has beat his opponent, for Harness is in the churchyard, while
Opposition Bill still struts about with his hair as white as snow, and
his face shriveled up like an old monkey's. The last time I was at
Greenwich, I heard the pensioners say to one another, "Why, you go ahead
about as fast as Opposition Bill." I requested this enigma to me to be
solved, and it appeared that one Greenwich fair, Opposition Bill had set
off home rather the worse for what he had drank, and so it happened
that, crossing the road next to the hospital, his wooden leg had stuck
in one of the iron plug-holes of the water conduit. Bill did not, in his
situation, perceive that anything particular had occurred, and continued
playing his fiddle and singing, and, as he supposed, walking on the
whole time, instead of which he was continually walking round and round
the one leg in the plug-hole with the other that was free. After about
half an hour's trotting round and round this way, he began to think that
he did not get home quite so fast as he ought, but the continual
circular motion had made him more confused than before.

"By Gum!" said Bill, "this hospital is a confounded long way off. I'm
sure I walk a mile, and I get no nearer; howsoebber, nebber mind--here
goes."

Here Billy struck up a tune, and commenced a song along with it, still
walking round and round his wooden leg which was firmly fixed in the
plug-hole, and so he continued till he fell down from giddiness, and he
was picked up by some of the people, who carried him home to the
hospital.

I have but one more circumstance to relate. I was one day sitting with
Bessy and my children, at the old cottage on the beach, Bramble and my
father were smoking their pipes on a bench which they had set up
outside, when one of the Deal boats landed with passengers. As they
passed by us one old gentleman started, and then stopped short, as he
beheld Bessy.

"Mine frau!" he cried, "mine frau dat was in heaven!"

We stared very much, as we did not comprehend him; but he then came up
to me and said, "I beg your pardon, mynheer, but what is dat young
woman?"

"She is my wife," replied I.

"I was going to say dat she was my wife, but dat is impossible. Look you
here, sar."

The old man pulled a miniature out of his breast, and certainly the
resemblance to Bessy was most remarkable.

"Now, sar, dat was my wife. Where did you get dis young woman?"

I requested him to walk into the cottage, and then told him the history
of Bessy.

"Sar, my wife was coming home with her child in a brig, and the brig was
never heard of. It was supposed that she did perish, and every one else
too. Sar, this lady must be my daughter."

"I'm sorry that we have no proofs to offer you," replied I; "she had
only bedclothes on when she was taken into the boat, and there is
nothing to establish her identity."

"I am content, sar; she must be my daughter. She was in a brig with her
mother, and she was saved the very same year that her mother come home.
There, sar, look at this picture; it is the same person. I want no more
proof--she is my daughter."

Although this was what might be called only collateral proof, I did
agree with the old gentleman that it was very strong; at all events, it
was sufficient for him, and he claimed Bessy as his child. Had he
claimed her to take her away, I might have disputed it; but as he loaded
her with presents, and when he died, which he did three years afterward,
and left twenty thousand rix dollars, of course I was perfectly
satisfied with his relationship.

So much for what has occurred since the time I married; and now, as the
reader may, perhaps, wish to know something about the present condition
of myself and family, I must inform him that my father and Bramble are
still alive, and flourishing under their gray hairs. My sister has four
children, and her husband is now a dean: they do say that, from the
interest of his patron, he will in all probability be a bishop, a
distinction not to be envied in these days, and therefore I do not wish
him success. My mother is, however, of the contrary opinion, having been
told that her daughter as a bishop's lady will take precedence and be
led out before Lady Hercules. Sir James and Lady O'Connor are still
well, and as happy as they well can be. Bessy has blessed me with three
boys and three girls, now all grown up; but the boys came first. The
eldest is a lieutenant in his Majesty's service, the second is a captain
of an Indiaman, and the third commands a free trader. They are all well
to do, and independent of their father. My girls, who are much younger,
have been well educated, and people say that they are very handsome; at
all events, they are modest and good-tempered. I have not attempted to
conceal what I once was, yet Time has called away most of those who knew
me in my profession. I am still considered as having been a seafaring
man, but nevertheless, in consequence of my property, I am generally
addressed by the title of Squire Saunders. By not assuming a station
which does not become me, I find myself treated not only with respect,
but with friendship, by those who are in birth, as well as other
qualifications, my superiors. My daughters are invited out to all the
balls and _fêtes_ in the neighborhood, and are great favorites wherever
they go: they all of them are like their mother, not only in appearance,
but in temper and disposition. We have plenty of young men who visit the
house, and I am afraid that we shall soon have to part with two of them,
my eldest, Virginia, being engaged to a ship-builder at Limehouse, and
Elizabeth to a young clergyman in the neighborhood. Jane thinks she
never will marry, and, as I tell her, I suppose she never will till she
is asked. To wind up, I may say that Bessy and I have been very happy,
and promise still to be as happy as most people are who pass through
this pilgrimage. We have competence--the good opinion of the world--a
family who have never caused us one hour's uneasiness (how few can say
that?), and we have, I trust, a due sense of God's mercy and kindness
toward us, and never lie down in our beds without thanking Him for the
many mercies we have received, and acknowledging how unworthy we are to
have been so signally blessed.