Produced by John N. White and Dennis Amundson.


The Enchanted Island of Yew

Whereon Prince Marvel Encountered the High Ki of Twi and Other
Surprising People


By

L. Frank Baum


Author of "The Wizard of Oz," "The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus,"
"The Magical Monarch of Mo," Etc.


Contents

   1.  Once On a Time
   2.  The Enchanted Isle
   3.  The Fairy Bower
   4.  Prince Marvel
   5.  The King of Thieves
   6.  The Troubles of Nerle
   7.  The Gray Men
   8.  The Fool-Killer
   9.  The Royal Dragon of Spor
  10.  Prince Marvel Wins His Fight
  11.  The Cunning of King Terribus
  12.  The Gift of Beauty
  13.  The Hidden Kingdom of Twi
  14.  The Ki and The Ki-Ki
  15.  The High Ki of Twi
  16.  The Rebellion of The High Ki
  17.  The Separation of The High Ki
  18.  The Rescue of The High Ki
  19.  The Reunion of The High Ki
  20.  Kwytoffle, the Tyrant
  21.  The Wonderful Book of Magic
  22.  The Queen of Plenta
  23.  The Red Rogue of Dawna
  24.  The Enchanted Mirrors
  25.  The Adventurers Separate
  26.  The End of the Year
  27.  A Hundred Years Afterward


1.  "Once on a Time"

I am going to tell a story, one of those tales of astonishing
adventures that happened years and years and years ago.  Perhaps you
wonder why it is that so many stories are told of "once on a time", and
so few of these days in which we live; but that is easily explained.

In the old days, when the world was young, there were no automobiles
nor flying-machines to make one wonder; nor were there railway trains,
nor telephones, nor mechanical inventions of any sort to keep people
keyed up to a high pitch of excitement.  Men and women lived simply and
quietly.  They were Nature's children, and breathed fresh air into
their lungs instead of smoke and coal gas; and tramped through green
meadows and deep forests instead of riding in street cars; and went to
bed when it grew dark and rose with the sun--which is vastly different
from the present custom.  Having no books to read they told their
adventures to one another and to their little ones; and the stories
were handed down from generation to generation and reverently believed.

Those who peopled the world in the old days, having nothing but their
hands to depend on, were to a certain extent helpless, and so the
fairies were sorry for them and ministered to their wants patiently and
frankly, often showing themselves to those they befriended.

So people knew fairies in those days, my dear, and loved them, together
with all the ryls and knooks and pixies and nymphs and other beings
that belong to the hordes of immortals.  And a fairy tale was a thing
to be wondered at and spoken of in awed whispers; for no one thought of
doubting its truth.

To-day the fairies are shy; for so many curious inventions of men have
come into use that the wonders of Fairyland are somewhat tame beside
them, and even the boys and girls can not be so easily interested or
surprised as in the old days.  So the sweet and gentle little immortals
perform their tasks unseen and unknown, and live mostly in their own
beautiful realms, where they are almost unthought of by our busy,
bustling world.

Yet when we come to story-telling the marvels of our own age shrink
into insignificance beside the brave deeds and absorbing experiences of
the days when fairies were better known; and so we go back to "once on
a time" for the tales that we most love--and that children have ever
loved since mankind knew that fairies exist.


2.  The Enchanted Isle

Once there was an enchanted island in the middle of the sea.  It was
called the Isle of Yew.  And in it were five important kingdoms ruled
by men, and many woodland dells and forest glades and pleasant meadows
and grim mountains inhabited by fairies.

From the fairies some of the men had learned wonderful secrets, and had
become magicians and sorcerers, with powers so great that the entire
island was reputed to be one of enchantments.  Who these men were the
common people did not always know; for while some were kings and
rulers, others lived quietly hidden away in forests or mountains, and
seldom or never showed themselves.  Indeed, there were not so many of
these magicians as people thought, only it was so hard to tell them
from common folk that every stranger was regarded with a certain amount
of curiosity and fear.

The island was round--like a mince pie.  And it was divided into four
quarters--also like a pie--except that there was a big place in the
center where the fifth kingdom, called Spor, lay in the midst of the
mountains.  Spor was ruled by King Terribus, whom no one but his own
subjects had ever seen--and not many of them.  For no one was allowed
to enter the Kingdom of Spor, and its king never left his palace.  But
the people of Spor had a bad habit of rushing down from their mountains
and stealing the goods of the inhabitants of the other four kingdoms,
and carrying them home with them, without offering any apologies
whatever for such horrid conduct.  Sometimes those they robbed tried to
fight them; but they were a terrible people, consisting of giants with
huge clubs, and dwarfs who threw flaming darts, and the stern Gray Men
of Spor, who were most frightful of all.  So, as a rule, every one fled
before them, and the people were thankful that the fierce warriors of
Spor seldom came to rob them oftener than once a year.

It was on this account that all who could afford the expense built
castles to live in, with stone walls so thick that even the giants of
Spor could not batter them down.  And the children were not allowed to
stray far from home for fear some roving band of robbers might steal
them and make their parents pay large sums for their safe return.

Yet for all this the people of the Enchanted Isle of Yew were happy and
prosperous.  No grass was greener, no forests more cool and delightful,
no skies more sunny, no sea more blue and rippling than theirs.

And the nations of the world envied them, but dared not attempt to
conquer an island abounding in enchantments.


3.  The Fairy Bower

That part of the Enchanted Isle which was kissed by the rising sun was
called Dawna; the kingdom that was tinted rose and purple by the
setting sun was known as Auriel, and the southland, where fruits and
flowers abounded, was the kingdom of Plenta.  Up at the north lay Heg,
the home of the great barons who feared not even the men of Spor; and
in the Kingdom of Heg our story opens.

Upon a beautiful plain stood the castle of the great Baron
Merd--renowned alike in war and peace, and second in importance only to
the King of Heg.  It was a castle of vast extent, built with thick
walls and protected by strong gates.  In front of it sloped a pretty
stretch of land with the sea glistening far beyond; and back of it, but
a short distance away, was the edge of the Forest of Lurla.

One fair summer day the custodian of the castle gates opened a wicket
and let down a draw-bridge, when out trooped three pretty girls with
baskets dangling on their arms.  One of the maids walked in front of
her companions, as became the only daughter of the mighty Baron Merd.
She was named Seseley, and had yellow hair and red cheeks and big, blue
eyes.  Behind her, merry and laughing, yet with a distinct deference to
the high station of their young lady, walked Berna and Helda--dark
brunettes with mischievous eyes and slender, lithe limbs.  Berna was
the daughter of the chief archer, and Helda the niece of the captain of
the guard, and they were appointed play-fellows and comrades of the
fair Seseley.

Up the hill to the forest's edge ran the three, and then without
hesitation plunged into the shade of the ancient trees.  There was no
sunlight now, but the air was cool and fragrant of nuts and mosses, and
the children skipped along the paths joyously and without fear.

To be sure, the Forest of Lurla was well known as the home of fairies,
but Seseley and her comrades feared nothing from such gentle creatures
and only longed for an interview with the powerful immortals whom they
had been taught to love as the tender guardians of mankind.  Nymphs
there were in Lurla, as well, and crooked knooks, it was said; yet for
many years past no person could boast the favor of meeting any one of
the fairy creatures face to face.

So, gathering a few nuts here and a sweet forest flower there, the
three maidens walked farther and farther into the forest until they
came upon a clearing--formed like a circle--with mosses and ferns for
its carpet and great overhanging branches for its roof.

"How pretty!" cried Seseley, gaily.  "Let us eat our luncheon in this
lovely banquet-hall!"

So Berna and Helda spread a cloth and brought from their baskets some
golden platters and a store of food.  Yet there was little ceremony
over the meal, you may be sure, and within a short space all the
children had satisfied their appetites and were laughing and chatting
as merrily as if they were at home in the great castle.  Indeed, it is
certain they were happier in their forest glade than when facing grim
walls of stone, and the three were in such gay spirits that whatever
one chanced to say the others promptly joined in laughing over.

Soon, however, they were startled to hear a silvery peal of laughter
answering their own, and turning to see whence the sound proceeded,
they found seated near them a creature so beautiful that at once the
three pairs of eyes opened to their widest extent, and three hearts
beat much faster than before.

"Well, I must say you DO stare!" exclaimed the newcomer, who was
clothed in soft floating robes of rose and pearl color, and whose eyes
shone upon them like two stars.

"Forgive our impertinence," answered the little Lady Seseley, trying to
appear dignified and unmoved; "but you must acknowledge that you came
among us uninvited, and--and you are certainly rather odd in
appearance."

Again the silvery laughter rang through the glade.

"Uninvited!" echoed the creature, clapping her hands together
delightedly; "uninvited to my own forest home!  Why, my dear girls, you
are the uninvited ones--indeed you are--to thus come romping into our
fairy bower."

The children did not open their eyes any wider on hearing this speech,
for they could not; but their faces expressed their amazement fully,
while Helda gasped the words:

"A fairy bower!  We are in a fairy bower!"

"Most certainly," was the reply.  "And as for being odd in appearance,
let me ask how you could reasonably expect a fairy to appear as mortal
maidens do?"

"A fairy!" exclaimed Seseley.  "Are you, then, a real fairy?"

"I regret to say I am," returned the other, more soberly, as she patted
a moss-bank with a silver-tipped wand.

Then for a moment there was silence, while the three girls sat very
still and stared at their immortal companion with evident curiosity.
Finally Seseley asked:

"Why do you regret being a fairy?  I have always thought them the
happiest creatures in the world."

"Perhaps we ought to be happy," answered the fairy, gravely, "for we
have wonderful powers and do much to assist you helpless mortals.  And
I suppose some of us really are happy.  But, for my part, I am so
utterly tired of a fairy life that I would do anything to change it."

"That is strange," declared Berna.  "You seem very young to be already
discontented with your lot."

Now at this the fairy burst into laughter again, and presently asked:

"How old do you think me?"

"About our own age," said Berna, after a glance at her and a moment's
reflection.

"Nonsense!" retorted the fairy, sharply.  "These trees are hundreds of
years old, yet I remember when they were mere twigs.  And I remember
when mortals first came to live upon this island, yes--and when this
island was first created and rose from the sea after a great
earthquake.  I remember for many, many centuries, my dears.  I have
grown tired of remembering--and of being a fairy continually, without
any change to brighten my life."

"To be sure!" said Seseley, with sympathy.  "I never thought of fairy
life in that way before.  It must get to be quite tiresome."

"And think of the centuries I must yet live!" exclaimed the fairy in a
dismal voice.  "Isn't it an awful thing to look forward to?"

"It is, indeed," agreed Seseley.

"I'd be glad to exchange lives with you," said Helda, looking at the
fairy with intense admiration.

"But you can't do that," answered the little creature quickly.
"Mortals can't become fairies, you know--although I believe there was
once a mortal who was made immortal."

"But fairies can become anything they desire!" cried Berna.

"Oh, no, they can't.  You are mistaken if you believe that," was the
reply.  "I could change YOU into a fly, or a crocodile, or a bobolink,
if I wanted to; but fairies can't change themselves into anything else."

"How strange!" murmured Seseley, much impressed.

"But YOU can," cried the fairy, jumping up and coming toward them.
"You are mortals, and, by the laws that govern us, a mortal can change
a fairy into anything she pleases."

"Oh!" said Seseley, filled with amazement at the idea.

The fairy fell on her knees before the baron's daughter.
"Please--please, dear Seseley," she pleaded, "change me into a mortal!"


4.  Prince Marvel

It is easy to imagine the astonishment of the three girls at hearing
this strange request.  They gazed in a bewildered fashion upon the
kneeling fairy, and were at first unable to answer one word.  Then
Seseley said--sadly, for she grieved to disappoint the pretty creature:

"We are but mortal children, and have no powers of enchantment at all."

"Ah, that is true, so far as concerns yourselves," replied the fairy,
eagerly; "yet mortals may easily transform fairies into anything they
wish."

"If that is so, why have we never heard of this power before?" asked
Seseley.

"Because fairies, as a rule, are content with their lot, and do not
wish to appear in any form but their own.  And, knowing that evil or
mischievous mortals can transform them at will, the fairies take great
care to remain invisible, so they can not be interfered with.  Have you
ever," she asked, suddenly, "seen a fairy before?"

"Never," replied Seseley.

"Nor would you have seen me to-day, had I not known you were kind and
pure-hearted, or had I not resolved to ask you to exercise your powers
upon me."

"I must say," remarked Helda, boldly, "that you are foolish to wish to
become anything different from what you are."

"For you are very beautiful NOW," added Berna, admiringly.

"Beautiful!" retorted the fairy, with a little frown; "what does beauty
amount to, if one is to remain invisible?"

"Not much, that is true," agreed Berna, smoothing her own dark locks.

"And as for being foolish," continued the fairy, "I ought to be allowed
to act foolishly if I want to.  For centuries past I have not had a
chance to do a single foolish thing."

"Poor dear!" said Helda, softly.

Seseley had listened silently to this conversation.  Now she inquired:

"What do you wish to become?"

"A mortal!" answered the fairy, promptly.

"A girl, like ourselves?" questioned the baron's daughter.

"Perhaps," said the fairy, as if undecided.

"Then you would be likely to endure many privations," said Seseley,
gently.  "For you would have neither father nor mother to befriend you,
nor any house to live in."

"And if you hired your services to some baron, you would be obliged to
wash dishes all day, or mend clothing, or herd cattle," said Berna.

"But I should travel all over the island," said the fairy, brightly,
"and that is what I long to do.  I do not care to work."

"I fear a girl would not be allowed to travel alone," Seseley remarked,
after some further thought.  "At least," she added, "I have never heard
of such a thing."

"No," said the fairy, rather bitterly, "your men are the ones that roam
abroad and have adventures of all kinds.  Your women are poor, weak
creatures, I remember."

There was no denying this, so the three girls sat silent until Seseley
asked:

"Why do you wish to become a mortal?"

"To gain exciting experiences," answered the fairy.  "I'm tired of
being a humdrum fairy year in and year out.  Of course, I do not wish
to become a mortal for all time, for that would get monotonous, too;
but to live a short while as the earth people do would amuse me very
much."

"If you want variety, you should become a boy," said Helda, with a
laugh, "The life of a boy is one round of excitement."

"Then make me a boy!" exclaimed the fairy eagerly.

"A boy!" they all cried in consternation.  And Seseley added:

"Why--you're a GIRL fairy, aren't you?"

"Well--yes; I suppose I am," answered the beautiful creature, smiling;
"but as you are going to change me anyway, I may as well become a boy
as a girl."

"Better!" declared Helda, clapping her hands; "for then you can do as
you please."

"But would it be right?" asked Seseley, with hesitation.

"Why not?" retorted the fairy.  "I can see nothing wrong in being a
boy.  Make me a tall, slender youth, with waving brown hair and dark
eyes.  Then I shall be as unlike my own self as possible, and the
adventure will be all the more interesting.  Yes; I like the idea of
being a boy very much indeed."

"But I don't know how to transform you; some one will have to show me
the way to do it," protested Seseley, who was getting worried over the
task set her.

"Oh, that will be easy enough," returned the little immortal.  "Have
you a wand?"

"No."

"Then I'll loan you mine, for I shall not need it.  And you must wave
it over my head three times and say: 'By my mortal powers I transform
you into a boy for the space of one year'."

"One year!  Isn't that too long?"

"It's a very short time to one who has lived thousands of years as a
fairy."

"That is true," answered the baron's daughter.

"Now, I'll begin by doing a little transforming myself," said the
fairy, getting upon her feet again, "and you can watch and see how I do
it."  She brushed a bit of moss from her gauzy skirts and continued:
"If I'm to become a boy I shall need a horse, you know.  A handsome,
prancing steed, very fleet of foot."

A moment she stood motionless, as if listening.  Then she uttered a low
but shrill whistle.

The three girls, filled with eager interest, watched her intently.

Presently a trampling of footsteps was heard through the brushwood, and
a beautiful deer burst from the forest and fearlessly ran to the fairy.
Without hesitation she waved her wand above the deer's head and
exclaimed:

"By all my fairy powers I command you to become a war-horse for the
period of one year."

Instantly the deer disappeared, and in its place was a handsome
charger, milk-white in color, with flowing mane and tail.  Upon its
back was a saddle sparkling with brilliant gems sewn upon fine dressed
leather.

The girls uttered cries of astonishment and delight, and the fairy said:

"You see, these transformations are not at all difficult.  I must now
have a sword."

She plucked a twig from a near-by tree and cast it upon the ground at
her feet.  Again she waved her wand--and the twig turned to a gleaming
sword, richly engraved, that seemed to the silent watchers to tremble
slightly in its sheath, as if its heart of steel throbbed with hopes of
battles to come.

"And now I must have shield and armor," said the fairy, gaily.  "This
will make a shield,"--and she stripped a sheet of loose bark from a
tree-trunk,--"but for armor I must have something better.  Will you
give me your cloak?"

This appeal was made to Seseley, and the baron's daughter drew her
white velvet cloak from her shoulders and handed it to the fairy.  A
moment later it was transformed into a suit of glittering armor that
seemed fashioned of pure silver inlaid with gold, while the sheet of
bark at the same time became a handsome shield, with the figures of
three girls graven upon it.  Seseley recognized the features as those
of herself and her comrades, and noted also that they appeared sitting
at the edge of a forest, the great trees showing plainly in the
background.

"I shall be your champion, you see," laughed the fairy, gleefully, "and
maybe I shall be able to repay you for the loss of your cloak."

"I do not mind the cloak," returned the child, who had been greatly
interested in these strange transformations.  "But it seems impossible
that a dainty little girl like you can ride this horse and carry these
heavy arms."

"I'll not be a girl much longer," said the little creature.  "Here,
take my wand, and transform me into a noble youth!"

Again the pretty fairy kneeled before Seseley, her dainty, rounded
limbs of white and rose showing plainly through her gauzy attire.  And
the baron's daughter was suddenly inspired to be brave, not wishing to
disappoint the venturous immortal.  So she rose and took the magic wand
in her hand, waving it three times above the head of the fairy.

"By my powers as a mortal," she said, marveling even then at the
strange speech, "I command you to become a brave and gallant
youth--handsome, strong, fearless!  And such shall you remain for the
space of one year."

As she ceased speaking the fairy was gone, and a slender youth,
dark-eyed and laughing, was holding her hand in his and kissing it
gratefully.

"I thank you, most lovely maiden," he said, in a pleasant voice, "for
giving me a place in the world of mortals.  I shall ride at once in
search of adventure, but my good sword is ever at your service."

With this he gracefully arose and began to buckle on his magnificent
armor and to fasten the sword to his belt.

Seseley drew a long, sighing breath of amazement at her own powers, and
turning to Berna and Helda she asked:

"Do I see aright?  Is the little fairy really transformed to this
youth?"

"It certainly seems so," returned Helda, who, being unabashed by the
marvels she had beheld, turned to gaze boldly upon the young knight.

"Do you still remember that a moment ago you were a fairy?" she
inquired.

"Yes, indeed," said he, smiling; "and I am really a fairy now, being
but changed in outward form.  But no one must know this save
yourselves, until the year has expired and I resume my true station.
Will you promise to guard my secret?"

"Oh, yes!" they exclaimed, in chorus.  For they were delighted, as any
children might well be, at having so remarkable a secret to keep and
talk over among themselves.

"I must ask one more favor," continued the youth: "that you give me a
name; for in this island I believe all men bear names of some sort, to
distinguish them one from another."

"True," said Seseley, thoughtfully.  "What were you called as a fairy?"

"That does not matter in the least," he answered, hastily.  "I must
have an entirely new name."

"Suppose we call him the Silver Knight," suggested Berna, as she eyed
his glistening armor.

"Oh, no!--that is no name at all!" declared Helda.  "We might better
call him Baron Strongarm."

"I do not like that, either," said the Lady Seseley, "for we do not
know whether his arm is strong or not.  But he has been transformed in
a most astonishing and bewildering manner before our very eyes, and I
think the name of Prince Marvel would suit him very well."

"Excellent!" cried the youth, picking up his richly graven shield.
"The name seems fitting in every way.  And for a year I shall be known
to all this island as Prince Marvel!"


5.  The King of Thieves

Old Marshelm, the captain of the guard, was much surprised when he saw
the baron's daughter and her playmates approach her father's castle
escorted by a knight in glittering armor.

To be sure it was a rather small knight, but the horse he led by the
bridle was so stately and magnificent in appearance that old Marshelm,
who was an excellent judge of horses, at once decided the stranger must
be a personage of unusual importance.

As they came nearer the captain of the guard also observed the beauty
of the little knight's armor, and caught the glint of jewels set in the
handle of his sword; so he called his men about him and prepared to
receive the knight with the honors doubtless due his high rank.

But to the captain's disappointment the stranger showed no intention of
entering the castle.  On the contrary, he kissed the little Lady
Seseley's hand respectfully, waved an adieu to the others, and then
mounted his charger and galloped away over the plains.

The drawbridge was let down to permit the three children to enter, and
the great Baron Merd came himself to question his daughter.

"Who was the little knight?" he asked.

"His name is Prince Marvel," answered Seseley, demurely.

"Prince Marvel?" exclaimed the Baron.  "I have never heard of him.
Does he come from the Kingdom of Dawna, or that of Auriel, or Plenta?"

"That I do not know," said Seseley, with truth.

"Where did you meet him?" continued the baron.

"In the forest, my father, and he kindly escorted us home."

"Hm!" muttered the baron, thoughtfully.  "Did he say what adventure
brought him to our Kingdom of Heg?"

"No, father.  But he mentioned being in search of adventure."

"Oh, he'll find enough to busy him in this wild island, where every man
he meets would rather draw his sword than eat," returned the old
warrior, smiling.  "How old may this Prince Marvel be?"

"He looks not over fifteen years of age," said Seseley, uneasy at so
much questioning, for she did not wish to be forced to tell an untruth.
"But it is possible he is much older," she added, beginning to get
confused.

"Well, well; I am sorry he did not pay my castle a visit," declared the
baron.  "He is very small and slight to be traveling this dangerous
country alone, and I might have advised him as to his welfare."

Seseley thought that Prince Marvel would need no advice from any one as
to his conduct; but she wisely refrained from speaking this thought,
and the old baron walked away to glance through a slit in the stone
wall at the figure of the now distant knight.

Prince Marvel was riding swiftly toward the brow of the hill, and
shortly his great war-horse mounted the ascent and disappeared on its
farther slope.

The youth's heart was merry and light, and he reflected joyously, as he
rode along, that a whole year of freedom and fascinating adventure lay
before him.

The valley in which he now found himself was very beautiful, the soft
grass beneath his horse's feet being sprinkled with bright flowers,
while clumps of trees stood here and there to break the monotony of the
landscape.

For an hour the prince rode along, rejoicing in the free motion of his
horse and breathing in the perfume-laden air.  Then he found he had
crossed the valley and was approaching a series of hills.  These were
broken by huge rocks, the ground being cluttered with boulders of rough
stone.  His horse speedily found a pathway leading through these rocks,
but was obliged to proceed at a walk, turning first one way and then
another as the path zigzagged up the hill.

Presently, being engaged in deep thought and little noting the way,
Prince Marvel rode between two high walls of rock standing so close
together that horse and rider could scarcely pass between the sides.
Having traversed this narrow space some distance the wall opened
suddenly upon a level plat of ground, where grass and trees grew.  It
was not a very big place, but was surely the end of the path, as all
around it stood bare walls so high and steep that neither horse nor man
could climb them.  In the side of the rocky wall facing the entrance
the traveler noticed a hollow, like the mouth of a cave, across which
was placed an iron gate.  And above the gateway was painted in red
letters on the gray stone the following words:


            WUL-TAKIM
         KING OF THIEVES
              ------
        HIS TREASURE HOUSE
             KEEP OUT


Prince Marvel laughed on reading this, and after getting down from his
saddle he advanced to the iron gate and peered through its heavy bars.

"I have no idea who this Wul-Takim is," he said, "for I know nothing at
all of the ways of men outside the forest in which I have always dwelt.
But thieves are bad people, I am quite sure, and since Wul-Takim is the
king of thieves he must be by far the worst man on this island."

Then he saw, through the bars of the gate, that a great cavern lay
beyond, in which were stacked treasures of all sorts: rich cloths,
golden dishes and ornaments, gemmed coronets and bracelets, cleverly
forged armor, shields and battle-axes.  Also there were casks and bales
of merchandise of every sort.

The gate appeared to have no lock, so Prince Marvel opened it and
walked in.  Then he perceived, perched on the very top of a pyramid of
casks, the form of a boy, who sat very still and watched him with a
look of astonishment upon his face.

"What are you doing up there?" asked the prince.

"Nothing," said the boy.  "If I moved the least little bit this pile of
casks would topple over, and I should be thrown to the ground."

"Well," returned the prince, "what of it?"

But just then he glanced at the ground and saw why the boy did not care
to tumble down.  For in the earth were planted many swords, with their
sharp blades pointing upward, and to fall upon these meant serious
wounds and perhaps death.

"Oh, ho!" cried Marvel; "I begin to understand.  You are a prisoner."

"Yes; as you will also be shortly," answered the boy.  "And then you
will understand another thing--that you were very reckless ever to
enter this cave."

"Why?" inquired the prince, who really knew little of the world, and
was interested in everything he saw and heard.

"Because it is the stronghold of the robber king, and when you opened
that gate you caused a bell to ring far down on the hillside.  So the
robbers are now warned that an enemy is in their cave, and they will
soon arrive to make you a prisoner, even as I am."

"Ah, I see!" said the prince, with a laugh, "It is a rather clever
contrivance; but having been warned in time I should indeed be foolish
to be caught in such a trap."

With this he half drew his sword, but thinking that robbers were not
worthy to be slain with its untarnished steel, he pushed it back into
the jeweled scabbard and looked around for another weapon.  A stout
oaken staff lay upon the ground, and this he caught up and ran with it
from the cave, placing himself just beside the narrow opening that led
into this rock-encompassed plain.  For he quickly saw that this was the
only way any one could enter or leave the place, and therefore knew the
robbers were coming up the narrow gorge even as he had himself done.

Soon they were heard stumbling along at a rapid pace, crying to one
another to make haste and catch the intruder.  The first that came
through the opening received so sharp a blow upon the head from Prince
Marvel's oak staff that he fell to the ground and lay still, while the
next was treated in a like manner and fell beside his comrade.

Perhaps the thieves had not expected so sturdy an enemy, for they
continued to rush through the opening in the rocks and to fall beneath
the steady blows of the prince's staff until every one of them lay
senseless before the victor.  At first they had piled themselves upon
one another very neatly; but the pile got so high at last that the
prince was obliged to assist the last thieves to leap to the top of the
heap before they completely lost their senses.

I have no doubt our prince, feeling himself yet strange in the new form
he had acquired, and freshly transported from the forest glades in
which he had always lived, was fully as much astonished at his deed of
valor as were the robbers themselves; and if he shuddered a little when
looking upon the heap of senseless thieves you must forgive him this
weakness.  For he straightway resolved to steel his heart to such
sights and to be every bit as stern and severe as a mortal knight would
have been.

Throwing down his staff he ran to the cave again, and stepping between
the sword points he approached the pile of casks and held out his arms
to the boy who was perched upon the top.

"The thieves are conquered," he cried.  "Jump down!"

"I won't," said the boy.

"Why not?" inquired the prince.

"Can't you see I'm very miserable?" asked the boy, in return; "don't
you understand that every minute I expect to fall upon those sword
points?"

"But I will catch you," cried the prince.

"I don't want you to catch me," said the boy.  "I want to be miserable.
It's the first chance I've ever had, and I'm enjoying my misery very
much."

This speech so astonished Prince Marvel that for a moment he stood
motionless.  Then he retorted, angrily:

"You're a fool!"

"If I wasn't so miserable up here, I'd come down and thrash you for
that," said the boy, with a sigh.

This answer so greatly annoyed Prince Marvel that he gave the central
cask of the pyramid a sudden push, and the next moment the casks were
tumbling in every direction, while the boy fell headlong in their midst.

But Marvel caught him deftly in his arms, and so saved him from the
sword points.

"There!" he said, standing the boy upon his feet; "now you are released
from your misery."

"And I should be glad to punish you for your interference," declared
the boy, gloomily eying his preserver, "had you not saved my life by
catching me.  According to the code of honor of knighthood I can not
harm one who has saved my life until I have returned the obligation.
Therefore, for the present I shall pardon your insulting speeches and
actions."

"But you have also saved my life," answered Prince Marvel; "for had you
not warned me of the robbers' return they would surely have caught me."

"True," said the boy, brightening up; "therefore our score is now even.
But take care not to affront me again, for hereafter I will show you no
mercy!"

Prince Marvel looked at the boy with wonder.  He was about his own
size, yet strong and well formed, and he would have been handsome
except for the expression of discontent upon his face.  Yet his manner
and words were so absurd and unnatural that the prince was more amused
than angered by his new acquaintance, and presently laughed in his face.

"If all the people in this island are like you," he said, "I shall have
lots of fun with them.  And you are only a boy, after all."

"I'm bigger than you!" declared the other, glaring fiercely at the
prince.

"How much bigger?" asked Marvel, his eyes twinkling.

"Oh, ever so much!"

"Then fetch along that coil of rope, and follow me," said Prince Marvel.

"Fetch the rope yourself!" retorted the boy, bluntly.  "I'm not your
servant." Then he put his hands in his pockets and coolly walked out of
the cave to look at the pile of senseless robbers.

Prince Marvel made no reply, but taking the coil of rope on his
shoulder he carried it to where the thieves lay and threw it down
beside them.  Then he cut lengths from the coil with his sword and
bound the limbs of each robber securely.  Within a half-hour he had
laid out a row of thieves extending half way across the grassy plain,
and on counting their number he found he had captured fifty-nine of
them.

This task being accomplished and the robbers rendered helpless, Prince
Marvel turned to the boy who stood watching him.

"Get a suit of armor from the cave, and a strong sword, and then return
here," he said, in a stern voice.

"Why should I do that?" asked the boy, rather impudently.

"Because I am going to fight you for disobeying my orders; and if you
do not protect yourself I shall probably kill you."

"That sounds pleasant," said the boy.  "But if you should prove my
superior in skill I beg you will not kill me at once, but let me die a
lingering death."

"Why?" asked the prince.

"Because I shall suffer more, and that will be delightful."

"I am not anxious to kill you, nor to make you suffer," said Marvel,
"all that I ask is that you acknowledge me your master."

"I won't!" answered the boy.  "I acknowledge no master in all the
world!"

"Then you must fight," declared the prince, gravely.  "If you win, I
will promise to serve you faithfully; and if I conquer you, then you
must acknowledge me your master, and obey my commands."

"Agreed!" cried the boy, with sudden energy, and he rushed into the
cave and soon returned clad in armor and bearing a sword and shield.
On the shield was pictured a bolt of lightning.

"Lightning will soon strike those three girls whose champion you seem
to be," he said tauntingly.

"The three girls defy your lightning!" returned the prince with a
smile.  "I see you are brave enough."

"Brave!  Why should I not be?" answered the boy proudly.  "I am the
Lord Nerle, the son of Neggar, the chief baron of Heg!"

The other bowed low.

"I am pleased to know your station," he said.  "I am called Prince
Marvel, and this is my first adventure."

"And likely to be your last," exclaimed the boy, sneeringly.  "For I am
stronger than you, and I have fought many times with full grown men."

"Are you ready?" asked Prince Marvel, for answer.

"Yes."

Then the swords clashed and sparks flew from the blades.  But it was
not for long.  Suddenly Nerle's sword went flying through the air and
shattered its blade against a wall of rock.  He scowled at Prince
Marvel a moment, who smiled back at him.  Then the boy rushed into the
cave and returned with another sword.

Scarcely had the weapons crossed again when with a sudden blow Prince
Marvel snapped Nerle's blade in two, and followed this up with a sharp
slap upon his ear with the flat of his own sword that fairly bewildered
the boy, and made him sit down on the grass to think what had happened
to him.

Then Prince Marvel's merry laugh rang far across the hills, and so
delighted was he at the astonished expression upon Nerle's face that it
was many minutes before he could control his merriment and ask his
foeman if he had had enough fight.

"I suppose I have," replied the boy, rubbing his ear tenderly.  "That
blow stings most deliciously.  But it is a hard thought that the son of
Baron Neggar should serve Prince Marvel!"

"Do not worry about that," said the prince; "for I assure you my rank
is so far above your own that it is no degradation for the son of
Neggar to serve me.  But come, we must dispose of these thieves.  What
is the proper fate for such men?"

"They are always hanged," answered Nerle, getting upon his feet.

"Well, there are trees handy," remarked the prince, although his
girlish heart insisted on making him shiver in spite of his resolve to
be manly and stern.  "Let us get to work and hang them as soon as
possible.  And then we can proceed upon our journey."

Nerle now willingly lent his assistance to his new master, and soon
they had placed a rope around the neck of each thief and were ready to
dangle them all from the limbs of the trees.

But at this juncture the thieves began to regain consciousness, and now
Wul-Takim, the big, red-bearded king of the thieves, sat up and asked:

"Who is our conqueror?"

"Prince Marvel," answered Nerle.

"And what army assisted him?" inquired Wul-Takim, curiously gazing upon
the prince.

"He conquered you alone and single-handed," said Nerle.

Hearing this, the big king began to weep bitterly, and the tear-drops
ran down his face in such a stream that Prince Marvel ordered Nerle to
wipe them away with his handkerchief, as the thief's hands were tied
behind his back.

"To think!" sobbed Wul-Takim, miserably; "only to think, that after all
my terrible deeds and untold wickedness, I have been captured by a mere
boy!  Oh, boo-hoo! boo-hoo! boo-hoo!  It is a terrible disgrace!"

"You will not have to bear it long," said the prince, soothingly.  "I
am going to hang you in a few minutes."

"Thanks!  Thank you very much!" answered the king, ceasing to weep.  "I
have always expected to be hanged some day, and I am glad no one but
you two boys will witness me when my feet begin kicking about."

"I shall not kick," declared another of the thieves, who had also
regained his senses.  "I shall sing while I am being hanged."

"But you can not, my good Gunder," protested the king; "for the rope
will cut off your breath, and no man can sing without breath."

"Then I shall whistle," said Gunder, composedly.

The king cast at him a look of reproach, and turning to Prince Marvel
he said:

"It will be a great task to string up so many thieves.  You look tired.
Permit me to assist you to hang the others, and then I will climb into
a tree and hang myself from a strong branch, with as little bother as
possible."

"Oh, I won't think of troubling you," exclaimed Marvel, with a laugh.
"Having conquered you alone, I feel it my duty to hang you without
assistance--save that of my esquire."

"It's no trouble, I assure you; but suit your own convenience," said
the thief, carelessly.  Then he cast his eye toward the cave and asked:
"What will you do with all our treasure?"

"Give it to the poor," said Prince Marvel, promptly.

"What poor?"

"Oh, the poorest people I can find."

"Will you permit me to advise you in this matter?" asked the king of
thieves, politely.

"Yes, indeed; for I am a stranger in this land," returned the prince.

"Well, I know a lot of people who are so poor that they have no
possessions whatever, neither food to eat, houses to live in, nor any
clothing but that which covers their bodies.  They can call no man
friend, nor will any lift a hand to help them.  Indeed, good sir, I
verily believe they will soon perish miserably unless you come to their
assistance!"

"Poor creatures!" exclaimed Prince Marvel, with ready sympathy; "tell
me who they are, and I will divide amongst them all your ill-gotten
gains."

"They are ourselves," replied the king of thieves, with a sigh.

Marvel looked at him in amazement, and then burst into joyous laughter.

"Yourselves!" he cried, greatly amused.

"Indeed, yes!" said Wul-Takim, sadly.  "There are no poorer people in
all the world, for we have ropes about our necks and are soon to be
hanged.  To-morrow we shall not have even our flesh left, for the crows
will pick our bones."

"That is true," remarked Marvel, thoughtfully.  "But, if I restore to
you the treasure, how will it benefit you, since you are about to die?"

"Must you really hang us?" asked the thief.

"Yes; I have decreed it, and you deserve your fate."

"Why?"

"Because you have wickedly taken from helpless people their property,
and committed many other crimes besides."

"But I have reformed!  We have all reformed--have we not, brothers?"

"We have!" answered the other thieves, who, having regained their
senses, were listening to this conversation with much interest.

"And, if you will return to us our treasure, we will promise never to
steal again, but to remain honest men and enjoy our wealth in peace,"
promised the king.

"Honest men could not enjoy treasures they have stolen," said Prince
Marvel.

"True; but this treasure is now yours, having been won by you in fair
battle.  And if you present it to us it will no longer be stolen
treasure, but a generous gift from a mighty prince, which we may enjoy
with clear consciences."

"Yet there remains the fact that I have promised to hang you,"
suggested Prince Marvel, with a smile, for the king amused him greatly.

"Not at all!  Not at all!" cried Wul-Takim.  "You promised to hang
fifty-nine thieves, and there is no doubt the fifty-nine thieves
deserved to be hung.  But, consider!  We have all reformed our ways and
become honest men; so it would be a sad and unkindly act to hang
fifty-nine honest men!"

"What think you, Nerle?" asked the Prince, turning to his esquire.

"Why, the rogue seems to speak truth," said Nerle, scratching his head
with a puzzled air, "yet, if he speaks truth, there is little
difference between a rogue and an honest man.  Ask him, my master, what
caused them all to reform so suddenly."

"Because we were about to die, and we thought it a good way to save our
lives," replied the robber king.

"That's an honest answer, anyway," said Nerle.  "Perhaps, sir, they
have really reformed."

"And if so, I will not have the death of fifty-nine honest men on my
conscience," declared the prince.  Then he turned to Wul-Takim and
added: "I will release you and give you the treasure, as you request.
But you owe me allegiance from this time forth, and if I ever hear of
your becoming thieves again, I promise to return and hang every one of
you."

"Never fear!" answered Wul-Takim, joyfully.  "It is hard work to steal,
and while we have so much treasure it is wholly unnecessary.  Moreover,
having accepted from you our lives and our fortunes, we shall hereafter
be your devoted servants, and whenever you need our services you have
but to call upon us, and we will support you loyally and gladly."

"I accept your service," answered the prince, graciously.

And then he unbound the fifty-nine honest men and took the ropes from
their necks.  As nightfall was fast approaching the new servants set to
work to prepare a great feast in honor of their master.  It was laid in
the middle of the grassy clearing, that all might sit around and
celebrate the joyous occasion.

"Do you think you can trust these men?" asked Nerle, suspiciously.

"Why not?" replied the prince.  "They have been exceedingly wicked, it
is true; but they are now intent upon being exceedingly good.  Let us
encourage them in this.  If we mistrusted all who have ever done an
evil act there would be fewer honest people in the world.  And if it
were as interesting to do a good act as an evil one there is no doubt
every one would choose the good."


6.  The Troubles of Nerle

That night Prince Marvel slept within the cave, surrounded by the
fifty-nine reformed thieves, and suffered no harm at their hands.  In
the morning, accompanied by his esquire, Nerle, who was mounted upon a
spirited horse brought him by Wul-Takim, he charged the honest men to
remember their promises, bade them good by, and set out in search of
further adventure.

As they left the clearing by the narrow passage that led between the
overhanging rocks, the prince looked back and saw that the sign above
the gate of the cave, which had told of the thieves' treasure house,
had been changed.  It now read as follows:


            WUL-TAKIM
        KING OF HONEST MEN
              ------
        HIS PLEASURE HOUSE
             WALK IN


"That is much better," laughed the prince.  "I accomplished some good
by my adventure, anyway!"

Nerle did not reply.  He seemed especially quiet and thoughtful as he
rode by his master's side, and after they had traveled some distance in
silence Prince Marvel said:

"Tell me how you came to be in the cave of thieves, and perched upon
the casks where I found you."

"It is a sad story," returned Nerle, with a sigh; "but since you
request me to tell it, the tale may serve to relieve the tedium of your
journey.

"My father is a mighty baron, very wealthy and with a heart so kind
that he has ever taken pleasure in thrusting on me whatever gift he
could think of.  I had not a single desire unsatisfied, for before I
could wish for anything it was given me.

"My mother was much like my father.  She and her women were always
making jams, jellies, candies, cakes and the like for me to eat; so I
never knew the pleasure of hunger.  My clothes were the gayest satins
and velvets, richly made and sewn with gold and silver braid; so it was
impossible to wish for more in the way of apparel.  They let me study
my lessons whenever I felt like it and go fishing or hunting as I
pleased; so I could not complain that I was unable to do just as I
wanted to.  All the servants obeyed my slightest wish: if I wanted to
sit up late at night no one objected; if I wished to lie in bed till
noon they kept the house quiet so as not to disturb me.

"This condition of affairs, as you may imagine, grew more and more
tedious and exasperating the older I became.  Try as I might, I could
find nothing to complain of.  I once saw the son of one of our servants
receive a flogging; and my heart grew light.  I immediately begged my
father to flog me, by way of variety; and he, who could refuse me
nothing, at once consented.  For this reason there was less
satisfaction in the operation than I had expected, although for the
time being it was a distinct novelty.

"Now, no one could expect a high-spirited boy to put up with such a
life as mine.  With nothing to desire and no chance of doing anything
that would annoy my parents, my days were dreary indeed."

He paused to wipe the tears from his eyes, and the prince murmured,
sympathetically: "Poor boy!  Poor boy!"

"Ah, you may well say that!" continued Nerle.  "But one day a stranger
came to my father's castle with tales of many troubles he had met with.
He had been lost in a forest and nearly starved to death.  He had been
robbed and beaten and left wounded and sore by the wayside.  He had
begged from door to door and been refused food or assistance.  In
short, his story was so delightful that it made me envy him, and I
yearned to suffer as he had done.  When I could speak with him alone I
said: 'Pray tell me how I can manage to acquire the misfortunes you
have undergone.  Here I have everything that I desire, and it makes me
very unhappy.'

"The stranger laughed at me, at first; and I found some pleasure in the
humiliation I then felt.  But it did not last long, for presently he
grew sober and advised me to run away from home and seek adventure.

"'Once away from your father's castle,' said he, 'troubles will fall
upon you thick enough to satisfy even your longings.'

"'That is what I am afraid of!' I answered.  'I don't want to be
satisfied, even with troubles.  What I seek is unsatisfied longings.'

"'Nevertheless,' said he, 'I advise you to travel.  Everything will
probably go wrong with you, and then you will be happy.'

"I acted upon the stranger's advice and ran away from home the next
day.  After journeying a long time I commenced to feel the pangs of
hunger, and was just beginning to enjoy myself when a knight rode by
and gave me a supply of food.  At this rebuff I could not restrain my
tears, but while I wept my horse stumbled and threw me over his head.
I hoped at first I had broken my neck, and was just congratulating
myself upon the misfortune, when a witch-woman came along and rubbed
some ointment upon my bruises, in spite of my protests.  To my great
grief the pain left me, and I was soon well again.  But, as a slight
compensation for my disappointment, my horse had run away; so I began
my journey anew and on foot.

"That afternoon I stepped into a nest of wasps, but the thoughtless
creatures flew away without stinging me.  Then I met a fierce tiger,
and my heart grew light and gay.  'Surely this will cause me
suffering!' I cried, and advanced swiftly upon the brute.  But the
cowardly tiger turned tail and ran to hide in the bushes, leaving me
unhurt!

"Of course, my many disappointments were some consolation; but not
much.  That night I slept on the bare ground, and hoped I should catch
a severe cold; but no such joy was to be mine.

"Yet the next afternoon I experienced my first pleasure.  The thieves
caught me, stripped off all my fine clothes and jewels and beat me
well.  Then they carried me to their cave, dressed me in rags, and
perched me on the top of the casks, where the slightest movement on my
part would send me tumbling among the sword points.  This was really
delightful, and I was quite happy until you came and released me.

"I thought then that I might gain some pleasure by provoking you to
anger; and our fight was the result.  That blow on the ear was
exquisite, and by forcing me to become your servant you have made me,
for the first time in my life, almost contented.  For I hope in your
company to experience a great many griefs and disappointments."

As Nerle concluded his story Prince Marvel turned to him and grasped
his hand.

"Accept my sympathy!" said he.  "I know exactly how you feel, for my
own life during the past few centuries has not been much different."

"The past few centuries!" gasped Nerle.  "What do you mean?"

At this the prince blushed, seeing he had nearly disclosed his secret.
But he said, quickly:

"Does it not seem centuries when one is unhappy?"

"It does, indeed!" responded Nerle, earnestly.  "But please tell me
your story."

"Not now," said Prince Marvel, with a smile.  "It will please you to
desire in vain to hear a tale I will not tell.  Yet I promise that on
the day we part company I shall inform you who I am."


7.  The Gray Men

The adventurers gave no heed to the path they followed after leaving
the cave of the reformed thieves, but their horses accidentally took
the direction of the foot-hills that led into the wild interior Kingdom
of Spor.  Therefore the travelers, when they had finished their
conversation and begun to look about them, found themselves in a
rugged, mountainous country that was wholly unlike the green plains of
Heg they had left behind.

Now, as I have before said, the most curious and fearful of the island
people dwelt in this Kingdom of Spor.  They held no friendly
communication with their neighbors, and only left their own mountains
to plunder and rob; and so sullen and fierce were they on these
occasions that every one took good care to keep out of their way until
they had gone back home again.

There was much gossip about the unknown king of Spor, who had never yet
been seen by any one except his subjects; and some thought he must be
one of the huge giants of Spor; and others claimed he was a dwarf, like
his tiny but ferocious dart-slingers; and still others imagined him one
of the barbarian tribe, or a fellow to the terrible Gray Men.  But, of
course, no one knew positively, and all these guesses were very wide of
the mark.  The only certainty about this king was that his giants,
dwarfs, barbarians and Gray Men meekly acknowledged his rule and obeyed
his slightest wish; for though they might be terrible to others, their
king was still more terrible to them.

Into this Kingdom of Spor Prince Marvel and Nerle had now penetrated
and, neither knowing nor caring where they were, continued along the
faintly defined paths the horses had found.  Presently, however, they
were startled by a peal of shrill, elfish laughter, and raising their
eyes they beheld a horrid-looking old man seated upon a high rock near
by.

"Why do you laugh?" asked Prince Marvel, stopping his horse.

"Have you been invited?  Tell me--have you been invited?" demanded the
old man, chuckling to himself as if much amused.

"Invited where?" inquired the prince.

"To Spor, stupid!  To the Kingdom of Spor!  To the land of King
Terribus!" shrieked the old man, going into violent peals of laughter.

"We go and come as we please," answered Prince Marvel, calmly.

"Go--yes!  Go if you will.  But you'll never come back--never! never!
never!" The little old man seemed to consider this such a good joke
that he bent nearly double with laughing, and so lost his balance and
toppled off the rock, disappearing from their view; but they could hear
him laugh long after they had passed on and left him far behind them.

"A strange creature!" exclaimed the prince thoughtfully.

"But perhaps he speaks truth," answered Nerle, "if, in fact, we have
been rash enough to enter the Kingdom of Spor.  Even my father, the
bravest baron in Heg, has never dared venture within the borders of
Spor.  For all men fear its mysterious king."

"In that case," replied Prince Marvel, "it is time some one
investigated this strange kingdom.  People have left King Terribus and
his wild subjects too much to themselves; instead of stirring them up
and making them behave themselves."

Nerle smiled at this speech.

"They are the fiercest people on the Enchanted Island," said he, "and
there are thousands upon thousands who obey this unknown king.  But if
you think we dare defy them I am willing to go on.  Perhaps our
boldness will lead them into torturing me, or starving me to death; and
at the very least I ought to find much trouble and privation in the
Kingdom of Spor."

"Time will determine that," said the prince, cheerfully.

They had now ridden into a narrow defile of the mountains, the pathway
being lined with great fragments of rock.  Happening to look over his
shoulder Prince Marvel saw that as they passed these rocks a man
stepped from behind each fragment and followed after them, their
numbers thus constantly increasing until hundreds were silently
treading in the wake of the travelers.

These men were very peculiar in appearance, their skins being as gray
as the rocks themselves, while their only clothing consisted of gray
cloth tunics belted around the waists with bands of gray fox-hide.
They bore no weapons except that each was armed with a fork, having
three sharp tines six inches in length, which the Gray Men carried
stuck through their fox-hide belts.

Nerle also looked back and saw the silent throng following them, and
the sight sent such a cold shiver creeping up his spine that he smiled
with pleasure.  There was no way to avoid the Gray Men, for the path
was so narrow that the horsemen could not turn aside; but Prince Marvel
was not disturbed, and seemed not to mind being followed, so long as no
one hindered his advance.

He rode steadily on, Nerle following, and after climbing upward for a
long way the path began to descend, presently leading them into a
valley of wide extent, in the center of which stood an immense castle
with tall domes that glittered as if covered with pure gold.  A broad
roadway paved with white marble reached from the mountain pass to the
entrance of this castle, and on each side of this roadway stood lines
of monstrous giants, armed with huge axes thrust into their belts and
thick oak clubs, studded with silver spikes, which were carried over
their left shoulders.

The assembled giants were as silent as the Gray Men, and stood
motionless while Prince Marvel and Nerle rode slowly up the marble
roadway.  But all their brows were scowling terribly and their eyes
were red and glaring--as if they were balls of fire.

"I begin to feel very pleasant," said Nerle, "for surely we shall not
get away from these folks without a vast deal of trouble.  They do not
seem to oppose our advance, but it is plain they will not allow us any
chance of retreat."

"We do not wish to retreat," declared the prince.

Nerle cast another glance behind, and saw that the Gray Men had halted
at the edge of the valley, while the giants were closing up as soon as
the horses passed them and now marched in close file in their rear.

"It strikes me," he muttered, softly, "that this is like to prove our
last adventure." But although Prince Marvel might have heard the words
he made no reply, being evidently engaged in deep thought.

As they drew nearer the castle it towered above them like a veritable
mountain, so big and high was it; and the walls cast deep shadows far
around, as if twilight had fallen.  They heard the loud blare of a
trumpet sounding far up on the battlements; the portals of the castle
suddenly opened wide, and they entered a vast courtyard paved with
plates of gold.  Tiny dwarfs, so crooked that they resembled crabs,
rushed forward and seized the bridles of the horses, while the
strangers slowly dismounted and looked around them.

While the steeds were being led to the stables an old man, clothed in a
flowing robe as white in color as his beard, bowed before Prince Marvel
and said in a soft voice:

"Follow me!"

The prince stretched his arms, yawned as if tired with his ride, and
then glared upon the old man with an expression of haughty surprise.

"I follow no one!" said he, proudly.  "I am Prince Marvel, sirrah, and
if the owner of this castle wishes to see me I shall receive him here,
as befits my rank and station."

The man looked surprised, but only bowed lower than before.

"It is the king's command," he answered.

"The king?"

"Yes; you are in the castle of King Terribus, the lord and ruler of
Spor."

"That is different," remarked the prince, lightly.  "Still, I will
follow no man.  Point out the way and I will go to meet his Majesty."

The old man extended a lean and trembling finger toward an archway.
Prince Marvel strode forward, followed by Nerle, and passing under the
arch he threw open a door at the far end and boldly entered the
throne-room of King Terribus.


8.  The Fool-Killer

The room was round, with a dome at the top.  The bare walls were of
gray stone, with square, open windows set full twenty feet from the
floor.  Rough gray stone also composed the floor, and in the center of
the room stood one great rock with a seat hollowed in its middle.  This
was the throne, and round about it stood a swarm of men and women
dressed in rich satins, velvets and brocades, brilliantly ornamented
with gold and precious stones.  The men were of many shapes and
sizes--giants and dwarfs being among them.  The women all seemed young
and beautiful.

Prince Marvel cast but a passing glance at this assemblage, for his eye
quickly sought the rude throne on which was seated King Terribus.

The personal appearance of this monster was doubtless the most hideous
known in that age of the world.  His head was large and shaped like an
egg; it was bright scarlet in color and no hair whatever grew upon it.
It had three eyes--one in the center of his face, one on the top of his
head and one in the back.  Thus he was always able to see in every
direction at the same time.  His nose was shaped like an elephant's
trunk, and swayed constantly from side to side.  His mouth was very
wide and had no lips at all, two rows of sharp and white teeth being
always plainly visible beneath the swaying nose.

King Terribus, although surrounded by so splendid a court, wore a
simple robe of gray cloth, with no ornament or other finery, and his
strange and fearful appearance was strongly contrasted with the
glittering raiment of his courtiers and the beauty of his ladies in
waiting.

When Prince Marvel, with Nerle marching close behind, entered the great
room, Terribus looked at him sharply a moment, and then bowed.  And
when he bowed the eye upon the top of his head also looked sharply at
the intruders.

Then the king spoke, his voice sounding so sweet and agreeable that it
almost shocked Nerle, who had expected to hear a roar like that from a
wild beast.

"Why are you here?" asked Terribus.

"Partly by chance and partly from curiosity," answered Prince Marvel.
"No one in this island, except your own people, had ever seen the king
of Spor; so, finding myself in your country, I decided to come here and
have a look at you."

The faces of the people who stood about the throne wore frightened
looks at the unheard of boldness of this speech to their terrible
monarch.  But the king merely nodded and inquired:

"Since you have seen me, what do you think of me?"

"I am sorry you asked that question," returned the prince; "for I must
confess you are a very frightful-looking creature, and not at all
agreeable to gaze upon."

"Ha! you are honest, as well as frank," exclaimed the king.  "But that
is the reason I do not leave my kingdom, as you will readily
understand.  And that is the reason I never permit strangers to come
here, under penalty of death.  So long as no one knows the King of Spor
is a monster people will not gossip about my looks, and I am very
sensitive regarding my personal appearance.  You will perhaps
understand that if I could have chosen I should have been born
beautiful instead of ugly."

"I certainly understand that.  And permit me to say I wish you were
beautiful.  I shall probably dream of you for many nights," added the
prince.

"Not for many," said King Terribus, quietly.  "By coming here you have
chosen death, and the dead do not dream."

"Why should I die?" inquired Prince Marvel, curiously.

"Because you have seen me.  Should I allow you to go away you would
tell the world about my ugly face.  I do not like to kill you, believe
me; but you must pay the penalty of your rashness--you and the man
behind you."

Nerle smiled at this; but whether from pride at being called a man or
in pleasurable anticipation of the sufferings to come I leave you to
guess.

"Will you allow me to object to being killed?" asked the prince.

"Certainly," answered the king, courteously.  "I expect you to object.
It is natural.  But it will do you no good."

Then Terribus turned to an attendant and commanded:

"Send hither the Fool-Killer."

At this Prince Marvel laughed outright.

"The Fool-Killer!" he cried; "surely your Majesty does me little
credit.  Am I, then, a fool?"

"You entered my kingdom uninvited," retorted the king, "and you tell me
to my face I am ugly.  Moreover, you laugh when I condemn you to death.
From this I conclude the Fool-Killer is the proper one to execute you.
Behold!"

Marvel turned quickly, to find a tall, stalwart man standing behind
him.  His features were strong but very grave, and the prince caught a
look of compassion in his eye as their gaze met.  His skin was fair and
without blemish, a robe of silver cloth fell from his shoulders, and in
his right hand he bore a gleaming sword.

"Well met!" cried Marvel, heartily, as he bowed to the Fool-Killer.  "I
have often heard your name mentioned, but 'tis said in the world that
you are a laggard in your duty."

"Had I my way," answered the Fool-Killer, "my blade would always drip.
It is my master, yonder, who thwarts my duty."  And he nodded toward
King Terribus.

"Then you should exercise your right on him, and cleave the ugly head
from his shoulders," declared the prince.

"Nay, unless I interfered with the Fool-Killer," said the king, "I
should soon have no subjects left to rule; for at one time or another
they all deserve the blade."

"Why, that may be true enough," replied Prince Marvel.  "But I think,
under such circumstances, your Fool-Killer is a needless servant.  So I
will rid you of him in a few moments."

With that he whipped out his sword and stood calmly confronting the
Fool-Killer, whose grave face never changed in expression as he
advanced menacingly upon his intended victim.  The blades clashed
together, and that of the Fool-Killer broke short off at the hilt.  He
took a step backward, stumbled and fell prone upon the rocky floor,
while Prince Marvel sprang forward and pressed the point of his sword
against his opponent's breast.

"Hold!" cried the king, starting to his feet.  "Would you slay my
Fool-Killer?  Think of the harm you would do the world!"

"But he is laggard and unfaithful to his calling!" answered the prince,
sternly.

"Nevertheless, if he remove but one fool a year he is a benefit to
mankind," declared the king.  "Release him, I pray you!"

Then the victor withdrew his sword and stood aside, while the
Fool-Killer slowly got upon his feet and bowed humbly before the king.

"Go!" shouted Terribus, his eye flashing angrily.  "You have humiliated
me before my enemy.  As an atonement see that you kill me a fool a day
for sixty days."

Hearing this command, many of the people about the throne began to
tremble; but the king paid no attention to their fears, and the
Fool-Killer bowed again before his master and withdrew from the chamber.


9.  The Royal Dragon of Spor

"Now," said Terribus, regarding the prince gloomily, "I must dispose of
you in another way."

For a moment he dropped his scarlet head in thought.  Then he turned
fiercely upon his attendants.

"Let the Wrestler come forward!" he shouted, as loudly as his mild
voice would carry.

Instantly a tall blackamoor advanced from the throng and cast off his
flowing robe, showing a strong figure clad only in a silver loincloth.

"Crack me this fellow's bones!" commanded Terribus.

"I beg your Majesty will not compel me to touch him," said Prince
Marvel, with a slight shudder; "for his skin is greasy, and will soil
my hands.  Here, Nerle!" he continued, turning to his esquire, "dispose
of this black man, and save me the trouble."

Nerle laughed pleasantly.  The black was a powerfully built man, and
compared with Nerle and the prince, who had but the stature of boys, he
towered like a very giant in size.  Nevertheless, Nerle did not
hesitate to spring upon the Wrestler, who with a quick movement sent
the boy crashing against the stone pavement.

Nerle was much bruised by the fall, and as he painfully raised himself
to his feet a great lump was swelling behind his left ear, where his
head had struck the floor, and he was so dizzy that the room seemed
swimming around him in a circle.  But he gave a happy little laugh, and
said to the prince, gratefully:

"Thank you very much, my master!  The fall is hurting me delightfully.
I almost feel as if I could cry, and that would be joy indeed!"

"Well," answered the prince, with a sigh, "I see I must get my hands
greased after all"--for the black's body had really been greased to
enable him to elude the grasp of his opponents.

But Marvel made a quick leap and seized the Wrestler firmly around the
waist.  The next moment, to the astonishment of all, the black man flew
swiftly into the air, plunged through one of the open windows high up
in the wall, and disappeared from view.  When the king and his people
again turned their wondering eyes upon the prince he was wiping his
hands carefully upon a silk handkerchief.

At this sight a pretty young girl, who stood near the throne, laughed
aloud, and the sound of her laughter made King Terribus very angry.

"Come here!" he commanded, sternly.  The girl stepped forward, her face
now pale and frightened, while tear-drops trembled upon the lashes that
fringed her downcast eyes.  "You have dared to laugh at the humiliation
of your king," said Terribus, his horrid face more crimson than ever,
"and as atonement I command that you drink of the poisoned cup."

Instantly a dwarf came near, bearing a beautiful golden goblet in his
crooked hands.

"Drink!" he said, an evil leer upon his face.

The girl well knew this goblet contained a vile poison, one drop of
which on her tongue would cause death; so she hesitated, trembling and
shrinking from the ordeal.

Prince Marvel looked into her sweet face with pitying eyes, and
stepping quickly to her side, took her hand in his.

"Now drink!" he said, smiling upon her; "the poison will not hurt you."

She drank obediently, while the dwarf chuckled with awful glee and the
king looked on eagerly, expecting her to fall dead at his feet.  But
instead the girl stood upright and pressed Marvel's hand, looking
gratefully into his face.

"You are a fairy!" she whispered, so low that no one else heard her
voice.  "I knew that you would save me."

"Keep my secret," whispered the prince in return, and still holding her
hand he led her back to her former place.

King Terribus was almost wild with rage and disappointment, and his
elephant nose twisted and squirmed horribly.

"So you dare to thwart my commands, do you!" he cried, excitedly.
"Well, we shall soon see which of us is the more powerful.  I have
decreed your death--and die you shall!"

For a moment his eye roved around the chamber uncertainly.  Then he
shouted, suddenly:

"Ho, there!  Keepers of the royal menagerie--appear!"

Three men entered the room and bowed before the king.  They were of the
Gray Men of the mountains, who had followed Prince Marvel and Nerle
through the rocky passes.

"Bring hither the Royal Dragon," cried the king, "and let him consume
these strangers before my very eyes!"

The men withdrew, and presently was heard a distant shouting, followed
by a low rumbling sound, with groans, snorts, roars and a hissing like
steam from the spout of a teakettle.

The noise and shouting drew nearer, while the people huddled together
like frightened sheep; and then suddenly the doors flew open and the
Royal Dragon advanced to the center of the room.

This creature was at once the pride and terror of the Kingdom of Spor.
It was more than thirty feet in length and covered everywhere with
large green scales set with diamonds, making the dragon, when it moved,
a very glittering spectacle.  Its eyes were as big as pie-plates, and
its mouth--when wide opened--fully as large as a bath-tub.  Its tail
was very long and ended in a golden ball, such as you see on the top of
flagstaffs.  Its legs, which were as thick as those of an elephant, had
scales which were set with rubies and emeralds.  It had two monstrous,
big ears and two horns of carved ivory, and its teeth were also carved
into various fantastic shapes--such as castles, horses' heads, chinamen
and griffins--so that if any of them broke it would make an excellent
umbrella handle.

The Royal Dragon of Spor came crawling into the throne-room rather
clumsily, groaning and moaning with every step and waving its ears like
two blankets flying from a clothesline.

The king looked on it and frowned.

"Why are you not breathing fire and brimstone?" he demanded, angrily.

"Why, I was caught out in a gale the other night," returned the Dragon,
rubbing the back of its ear with its left front paw, as it paused and
looked at the king, "and the wind put out my fire."

"Then why didn't you light it again?" asked Terribus, turning on the
keepers.

"We--we were out of matches, your Majesty!" stammered the trembling
Gray Men.

"So--ho!" yelled the king, and was about to order the keepers beheaded;
but just then Nerle pulled out his match-box, lit one of the matches,
and held it in front of the Dragon's mouth.  Instantly the creature's
breath caught fire; and it began to breathe flames a yard in length.

"That's better," sighed the Dragon, contentedly.  "I hope your Majesty
is now satisfied."

"No,--I am not satisfied!" declared King Terribus.  "Why do you not
lash your tail?"

"Ah, I can't do that!" replied the Dragon.  "It's all stiffened up with
rheumatism from the dampness of my cave.  It hurts too much to lash it."

"Well, then, gnash your teeth!" commanded the king.

"Tut--tut!" answered the Dragon, mildly; "I can't do that, either; for
since you had them so beautifully carved it makes my teeth ache to
gnash them."

"Well, then, what are you good for?" cried the king, in a fury.

"Don't I look awful?  Am I not terrible to gaze on?" inquired the
Dragon, proudly, as it breathed out red and yellow flames and made them
curl in circles around its horns.  "I guess there's no need for me to
suggest terror to any one that happens to see me," it added, winking
one of the pie-plate eyes at King Terribus.

The king looked at the monster critically, and it really seemed to him
that it was a frightful thing to behold.  So he curbed his anger and
said, in his ordinary sweet voice:

"I have called you here to destroy these two strangers."

"How?" asked the Dragon, looking upon Prince Marvel and Nerle with
interest.

"I am not particular," answered the king.  "You may consume them with
your fiery breath, or smash them with your tail, or grind them to atoms
between your teeth, or tear them to pieces with your claws.  Only, do
hurry up and get it over with!"

"Hm-m-m!" said the Dragon, thoughtfully, as if it didn't relish the
job; "this one isn't Saint George, is it?"

"No, no!" exclaimed the king, irritably; "it's Prince Marvel.  Do get
to work as soon as possible."

"Prince Marvel--Prince Marvel," repeated the Dragon.  "Why, there isn't
a prince in the whole world named Marvel!  I'm pretty well posted on
the history of royal families, you know.  I'm afraid he's Saint George
in disguise."

"Isn't your name Prince Marvel?" inquired the king, turning to the
boyish-looking stranger.

"It is," answered Marvel.

"Well, it's mighty strange I've never heard of you," persisted the
Dragon.  "But tell me, please, how would you prefer to be killed?"

"Oh, I'm not going to be killed at all," replied the prince, laughing.

"Do you hear that, Terribus?" asked the Dragon, turning to the king;
"he says he isn't going to be killed."

"But I say he is!" cried Terribus.  "I have decreed his death."

"But do you suppose I'm going to kill a man against his will?" inquired
the Dragon, in a reproachful voice; "and such a small man, too!  Do you
take me for a common assassin--or a murderer?"

"Do you intend to obey my orders?" roared the king.

"No, I don't; and that's flat!" returned the Dragon, sharply.  "It's
time for me to take my cough medicine; so if you've nothing more to say
I'll go back to my cave."

"Go, go, go!" shrieked the king, stamping his foot in passion.  "You've
outlived your usefulness!  You're a coward!  You're a traitor!  You're
a--a--a--"

"I'm a dragon and a gentleman!" answered the monster, proudly, as the
king paused for lack of a word; "and I believe I know what's proper for
dragons to do and what isn't.  I've learned wisdom from my father, who
got into trouble with Saint George, and if I fought with this person
who calls himself Prince Marvel, I'd deserve to be a victim of your
Fool-Killer.  Oh, I know my business, King Terribus; and if you knew
yours, you'd get rid of this pretended prince as soon as possible!"

With this speech he winked at Prince Marvel, turned soberly around and
crawled from the room.  One of the keepers got too near and the
Dragon's breath set fire to his robe, the flames being with difficulty
extinguished; and the gold ball on the end of the Dragon's tail struck
a giant upon his shins and made him dance and howl in pain.

But, aside from these slight accidents, the monster managed to leave
the throne-room without undue confusion, and every one, including the
king, seemed glad to be rid of him.


10.  Prince Marvel Wins His Fight

When the door had closed on the Royal Dragon, King Terribus turned
again to Prince Marvel, while his crimson face glowed with
embarrassment, and his front eye rolled with baffled rage as he thought
how vain had been all his efforts to kill this impudent invader of his
domains.

But his powers were by no means exhausted.  He was a mighty king--the
mightiest of all in the Enchanted Island, he believed--and ways to
destroy his enemies were numerous.

"Send for a hundred of my Gray Men!" he suddenly cried; and a courtier
ran at once to summon them.  The Gray Men would obey his orders without
question, he well knew.  They were silent, stubborn, quick, and
faithful to their king.  Terribus had but to command and his will would
be obeyed.

They entered the room so quietly that Nerle never knew they were there
until he turned and found the hundred gray ones standing close together
in the center of the hall.  Then Prince Marvel came to Nerle's side and
whispered something in his ear.

"Will you obey my orders?" they heard the king ask.  And the Gray Men,
with their eyes fixed upon their master, nodded all their hundred heads
and put their hands upon the dangerous three-tined forks that were
stuck in every one of the hundred belts.

Prince Marvel handed one end of a coiled rope to Nerle, and then they
both sprang forward and ran around the spot where the hundred Gray Men
stood huddled together.  Then they were pulled closer together than
before--closer, and still closer--for the prince and Nerle had
surrounded them with the rope and were tying the two ends together in a
tight knot.  The rope cut into the waists of those on the outside, and
they pressed inward against their fellows until there was scarcely
space to stick a knife-blade between any two of them.  When the prince
had tied the rope firmly King Terribus, who had been looking on amazed,
saw that his hundred Gray Men were fastened together like a bundle of
kindling-wood, and were unable to stir hand or foot.

And, while he still gazed open-mouthed at the strange sight, Prince
Marvel tilted the bundle of men up on its edge and rolled it out of the
door.  It went rolling swiftly through the courtyard and bounded down
the castle steps, where the rope broke and the men fell sprawling in
all directions on the marble walk.

King Terribus sighed, for such treatment of his Gray Men, whom he
dearly loved, made him very unhappy.

But more than ever was he resolved to kill these impudent strangers,
who, in the very heart of his kingdom where thousands bowed to his
will, dared openly defy his power.  So, after a moment's thought,
Terribus beckoned to a dwarf who, robed in gay and glittering apparel,
stood near his throne.

"Summon the royal Dart Slingers!" he said, with a scowl.

The little man bowed and hastened away, to return presently with twenty
curiously crooked dwarfs, each armed with a sling and a quiver full of
slender, sharp-pointed darts.

"Slay me these strangers!" exclaimed the king, in his gruffest voice.

Now Nerle, when he beheld these terrible Dart Slingers, of whom he had
heard many tales in his boyhood, began to shiver and shake with fright,
so that his teeth rattled one upon another.  And he reflected: "Soon
shall I be content, for these darts will doubtless pierce every part of
my body."

The dwarfs formed a line at one side of the gloomy throne-room, and
Prince Marvel, who had been earnestly regarding them, caught Nerle by
the arm and led him to the opposite wall.

"Stand close behind me and you will be safe," he whispered to his
esquire.

Then each dwarf fixed a dart in his sling, and at a word from their
chief they all drew back their arms and launched a shower of the sharp
missiles at the strangers.

Swift and true they sped, each dart intended to pierce the body of the
youthful knight who stood so calm before them.  Prince Marvel had
raised his right arm, and in his hand was a small leather sack, with a
wide mouth.  As the darts flew near him a strange thing happened: they
each and all swerved from their true course and fell rattling into the
leathern sack, to the wonder of the royal slingers and the dismay of
King Terribus himself.

"Again!" screamed the king, his usually mild voice hoarse with anger.

So again the dwarfs cast their darts, and again the leathern sack
caught them every one.  Another flight followed, and yet another, till
the magic sack was packed full of the darts and not a dwarf had one
remaining in his quiver.

Amid the awed silence of the beholders of this feat the merry laughter
of Prince Marvel rang loud and clear; for the sight of the puzzled and
terrified faces about him was very comical.  Plucking a dart from the
sack he raised his arm and cried:

"Now it is my turn.  You shall have back your darts!"

"Hold!" shouted the king, in great fear.  "Do not, I beg you, slay my
faithful servants."  And with a wave of his hand he dismissed the
dwarfs, who were glad to rush from the room and escape.

Nerle wiped the tears from his eyes, for he was sorely disappointed at
having again escaped all pain and discomfort; but Prince Marvel seated
himself quietly upon a stool and looked at the scowling face of King
Terribus with real amusement.

The monarch of Spor had never before been so foiled and scorned by any
living creature.  Defeated and humbled before his own people, he bowed
his crimson head on his hands and sullenly regarded his foe with his
top eye.  Then it was that the idea came to him that no ordinary mortal
could have thwarted him so easily, and he began to fear he was
dealing--perhaps unawares--with some great magician or sorcerer.  That
a fairy should have assumed a mortal form he never once considered, for
such a thing was until then unheard of in the Enchanted Island of Yew.
But with the knowledge that he had met his master, whoever he might
prove to be, and that further attempts upon the stranger's life might
lead to his own undoing, King Terribus decided to adopt a new line of
conduct, hoping to accomplish by stratagem what he could not do by
force.  To be sure, there remained his regiment of Giants, the pride of
his kingdom; but Terribus dreaded to meet with another defeat; and he
was not at all sure, after what had happened, that the giants would
succeed in conquering or destroying the strangers.

"After all," he thought, "my only object in killing them was to prevent
their carrying news of my monstrous appearance to the outside world; so
if I can but manage to keep them forever in my kingdom it will answer
my purpose equally well."

As the result of this thought he presently raised his head and spoke to
Prince Marvel in a quiet and even cheerful voice.

"Enough of these rude and boisterous games," said he, with a smile that
showed his white teeth in a repulsive manner.  "They may have seemed to
my people an ill welcome to my good friend, Prince Marvel; yet they
were only designed to show the powers of the mighty magician who has
become my guest.  Nay, do not deny it, Prince; from the first I guessed
your secret, and to prove myself right I called my servants to oppose
you, being sure they could not do you an injury.  But no more of such
fooling,--and pray forgive my merry game at your expense.  Henceforth
we shall be friends, and you are heartily welcome to the best my
kingdom affords."

With this speech Terribus stepped down from his throne and approached
Prince Marvel with outstretched hand.  The prince was not at all
deceived, but he was pleased to see how cunningly the king excused his
attempts to kill him.  So he laughed and touched the hand Terribus
extended, for this fairy prince seemed to have no anger against any
mortal who ventured to oppose him.

The strangers were now conducted, with every mark of respect, to a
beautiful suite of apartments in the castle, wherein were soft beds
with velvet spreads, marble baths with perfumed waters, and a variety
of silken and brocaded costumes from which they might select a change
of raiment.

No sooner had they bathed and adorned themselves fittingly than they
were summoned to the king's banquet hall, being escorted thither by
twelve young maidens bearing torches with lavender-colored flames.

The night had fallen upon the mountains outside, but the great banquet
hall was brilliant with the glow of a thousand candles, and seated at
the head of the long table was King Terribus.

Yet here, as in the throne-room, the ruler of Spor was dressed in
simplest garments, and his seat was a rough block of stone.  All about
him were lords and ladies in gorgeous array; the walls were hung with
rare embroideries; the table was weighted with gold platters and richly
carved goblets filled with sweet nectars.  But the king himself, with
his horrid, ugly head, was like a great blot on a fair parchment, and
even Prince Marvel could not repress a shudder as he gazed upon him.

Terribus placed his guest upon his right hand and loaded him with
honors.  Nerle stood behind the prince's chair and served him
faithfully, as an esquire should.  But the other servants treated Nerle
with much deference, noting in him an air of breeding that marked him
the unusual servant of an unusual master.

Indeed, most curious were the looks cast on these marvelous men who had
calmly walked into the castle of mighty Terribus and successfully
defied his anger; for in spite of his youthful appearance and smiling
face every attendant at the banquet feared Prince Marvel even more than
they feared their own fierce king.


11.  The Cunning of King Terribus

The days that followed were pleasant ones for Prince Marvel and Nerle,
who were treated as honored guests by both the king and his courtiers.
But the prince seemed to be the favorite, for at all games of skill and
trials at arms he was invariably the victor, while in the evenings,
when the grand ball-room was lighted up and the musicians played sweet
music, none was so graceful in the dance as the fairy prince.

Nerle soon tired of the games and dancing, for he had been accustomed
to them at his father's castle; and moreover he was shy in the society
of ladies; so before many weeks had passed he began to mope and show a
discontented face.

One day the prince noticed his esquire's dismal expression of
countenance, and asked the cause of it.

"Why," said Nerle, "here I have left my home to seek worries and
troubles, and have found but the same humdrum life that existed at my
father's castle.  Here our days are made smooth and pleasant, and there
is no excitement or grief, whatever.  You have become a carpet-knight,
Prince Marvel, and think more of bright eyes than of daring deeds.  So,
if you will release me from your service I will seek further
adventures."

"Nay," returned the prince, "we will go together; for I, too, am tired
of this life of pleasure."

So next morning Marvel sought the presence of King Terribus and said:

"I have come to bid your Majesty adieu, for my esquire and I are about
to leave your dominions."

At first the king laughed, and his long nose began to sway from side to
side.  Then, seeing the prince was in earnest, his Majesty frowned and
grew disturbed.  Finally he said:

"I must implore you to remain my guests a short time longer.  No one
has ever before visited me in my mountain home, and I do not wish to
lose the pleasure of your society so soon."

"Nevertheless, we must go," answered the prince, briefly.

"Are you not contented?" asked Terribus.  "Ask whatever you may desire,
and it shall be granted you."

"We desire adventures amid new scenes," said Marvel, "and these you can
not give us except by permission to depart."

Seeing his guest was obstinate the king ceased further argument and
said:

"Very well; go if you wish.  But I shall hope to see you return to us
this evening."

The prince paid no heed to this peculiar speech, but left the hall and
hurried to the courtyard of the castle, where Nerle was holding the
horses in readiness for their journey.

Standing around were many rows and files of the Gray Men, and when they
reached the marble roadway they found it lined with motionless forms of
the huge giants.  But no one interfered with them in any way, although
both Prince Marvel and Nerle knew that every eye followed them as they
rode forward.

Curiously enough, they had both forgotten from what direction they had
approached the castle; for, whereas they had at that time noticed but
one marble roadway leading to the entrance, they now saw that there
were several of these, each one connecting with a path through the
mountains.

"It really doesn't matter which way we go, so long as we get away from
the Kingdom of Spor," said Prince Marvel; so he selected a path by
chance, and soon they were riding through a mountain pass.

The pleased, expectant look on Nerle's face had gradually turned to one
of gloom.

"I hoped we should have a fight to get away," he said, sadly; "and in
that case I might have suffered considerable injury and pain.  But no
one has injured us in any way, and perhaps King Terribus is really glad
to be rid of us."

"With good reason, too, if such is the case," laughed Marvel; "for,
mark you, Nerle, the king has discovered we are more powerful than he
is, and had he continued to oppose us, we might have destroyed his
entire army."

On they rode through the rough hill paths, winding this way and that,
until they lost all sense of the direction in which they were going.

"Never mind," said the prince; "so long as we get farther and farther
away from the ugly Terribus I shall be satisfied."

"Perhaps we are getting into more serious danger than ever," answered
Nerle, brightening; "one of the giants told me the other day that near
the foot of these mountains is the Kingdom of the High Ki of Twi."

"Who is the High Ki of Twi?" asked Prince Marvel.

"No one knows," answered Nerle.

"And what is the Kingdom of Twi like?"

"No one knows that," answered Nerle.

"Then," returned the prince, with a smile, "if by chance we visit the
place we shall know more than any one else."

At noon they ate luncheon by the wayside, Nerle having filled his pouch
by stealth at the breakfast table.  There were great fragments of rock
lying all about them, and the sun beat down so fiercely that the heat
reflected from the rocks was hard to bear.  So the travelers did not
linger over their meal, but remounted and rode away as soon as
possible.  When the sun began to get lower in the sky the rocks beside
the path threw the riders into shadow, so that their journey became
more pleasant.  They rode along, paying little attention to the way,
but talking and laughing merrily together, until it began to grow dark.

"Does this path never end?" asked Prince Marvel, suddenly.  "We ought
to reach some place where men dwell before long, else we shall be
obliged to spend the night among these rocks."

"And then perhaps the wolves will attack us," said Nerle, cheerfully,
"and tear us into pieces with their sharp teeth and claws."

But even as he spoke they rode around a turn in the path and saw a
sight that made them pause in astonishment.  For just before them rose
the castle of King Terribus, and along both sides of the marble walk
leading up to it were ranged the lines of giants, exactly as they had
stood in the morning.

Nerle turned around in his saddle.  Sure enough, there were the Gray
Men in the rear--stepping from behind every boulder and completely
filling the rocky pathway.

"Well, what shall we do?" asked the esquire; "fight?"

"No, indeed!" returned Prince Marvel, laughing at his friend's eager
face.  "It appears the path we chose winds around in a circle, and so
has brought us back to our starting-point.  So we must make the best of
a bad blunder and spend another night with our ugly friend King
Terribus."

They rode forward through the rows of giants to the castle, where the
ever-courteous servants took their horses and escorted them to their
former handsome apartments with every mark of respect.

No one seemed in the least surprised at their speedy return, and this
fact at first puzzled Nerle, and then made him suspicious.

After bathing and dusting their clothing they descended to the banquet
hall, where King Terribus sat upon his gray stone throne and welcomed
them with quiet courtesy.

The sight of the king's crimson skin and deformed face sent a thrill of
repugnance through Prince Marvel, and under the impulse of a sudden
thought he extended his hand toward Terribus and whispered a magic word
which was unheard by any around him.

Nerle did not notice the prince's swift gesture nor the whispered word;
but he was staring straight at Terribus at the time, and he saw with
surprise the eye on the top of the king's head move down toward his
forehead, and the eye in the center of his forehead slide slightly
toward the left, and the elephant-like nose shrink and shorten at the
same time.  Also it seemed to him that the king's skin was not so
crimson in color as before, and that a thin growth of hair had covered
his head.

However, no one else appeared to notice any change--least of all
Terribus--so Nerle seated himself at the table and began to eat.

"It was very kind of you to return so soon to my poor castle," said the
king to Prince Marvel, in his sweet voice.

"We could not help it," laughed the prince, in reply; "for the road
wound right and left until we knew not which way we traveled; and then
it finally circled around again to your castle.  But to-morrow we shall
seek a new path and bid you farewell forever."

"Still," remarked the king, gravely, "should you again miss your way, I
shall be glad to welcome your return."

The prince bowed politely by way of reply, and turned to address the
little maiden he had once saved from death by poison.  And so in
feasting, dancing and laughter the evening passed pleasantly enough to
the prince, and it was late when he called Nerle to attend him to their
apartment.


12.  The Gift of Beauty

The following morning Marvel and Nerle once more set out to leave the
Kingdom of Spor and its ugly king.  They selected another pathway
leading from the castle and traveled all day, coming at nightfall into
view of the place whence they had started, with its solemn rows of
giants and Gray Men standing ready to receive them.

This repetition of their former experience somewhat annoyed the prince,
while Nerle's usually despondent face wore a smile.

"I see trouble ahead," murmured the esquire, almost cheerfully.  "Since
the king can not conquer us by force he intends to do it by sorcery."

Marvel did not reply, but greeted the king quietly, while Terribus
welcomed their return as calmly as if he well knew they could not
escape him.

That evening the prince made another pass toward the king with his hand
and muttered again the magic word.  Nerle was watching, and saw the
upper eye of Terribus glide still farther down his forehead and the
other eye move again toward the left.  The swaying nose shrank to a few
inches in length, and the skin that had once been so brilliantly
crimson turned to a dull red color.  This time the courtiers and ladies
in waiting also noticed the change in the king's features, but were
afraid to speak of it, as any reference to their monarch's personal
appearance was by law punishable by death.  Terribus saw the startled
looks directed upon him, and raised his hand to feel of his nose and
eyes; but thinking that if any change in his appearance had taken
place, he must be uglier than before, he only frowned and turned away
his head.

The next day the king's guests made a third attempt to leave his
dominions, but met with no better success than before, for a long and
tedious ride only brought them back to their starting-place in the
evening.

This time Prince Marvel was really angry, and striding into the king's
presence he reproached him bitterly, saying:

"Why do you prevent us from leaving your kingdom?  We have not injured
you in any way."

"You have seen ME," returned Terribus, calmly, "and I do not intend you
shall go back to the world and tell people how ugly I am."

The prince looked at him, and could not repress a smile.  The two eyes
of the king, having been twice removed from their first position, were
now both in his forehead, instead of below it, and one was much higher
than the other.  And the nose, although small when compared to what it
had been, still resembled an elephant's trunk.  Other changes had been
made for the better, but Terribus was still exceedingly repulsive to
look upon.

Seeing the prince look at him and smile, the king flew into a fury of
anger and declared that the strangers should never, while they lived,
be permitted to leave his castle again.  Prince Marvel became
thoughtful at this, reflecting that the king's enmity all arose from
his sensitiveness about his ugly appearance, and this filled the
youthful knight with pity rather than resentment.

When they had all assembled at the evening banquet the prince, for a
third time, made a mystic pass at the king and whispered a magic word.
And behold! this time the charm was complete.  For the two front eyes
of Terribus fell into their proper places, his nose became straight and
well formed, and his skin took on a natural, healthy color.  Moreover,
he now had a fine head of soft brown hair, with eyebrows and eyelashes
to match, and his head was shapely and in proportion to his body.  As
for the eye that had formerly been in the back of his head, it had
disappeared completely.

So amazed were the subjects of the transformed king--who was now quite
handsome to look upon--that they began to murmur together excitedly,
and something in the new sensations he experienced gave to the king's
face likewise an expression of surprise.  Knowing from their pleased
looks that he must have improved in appearance, he found courage to
raise his hand to his nose, and found it well formed.  Then he touched
his eyes, and realized they were looking straight out from his face,
like those of other people.

For some moments after making these discoveries the king remained
motionless, a smile of joy gradually spreading over his features.  Then
he said, aloud:

"What has happened?  Why do you all look so startled?"

"Your Majesty is no longer ugly," replied Marvel, laughingly; "so that
when Nerle and I leave your kingdom we can proclaim nothing less than
praise of your dignified and handsome appearance."

"Is my face indeed pleasing?" demanded the king, eagerly.

"It is!" cried the assembled courtiers and ladies, as with one voice.

"Bring me a mirror!" said the king.  "I shall look at my reflection for
the first time in many years."

The mirror being brought King Terribus regarded himself for a long time
with pleased astonishment; and then, his sensitive nature being
overcome by the shock of his good fortune, he burst into a flood of
tears and rushed from the room.

The courtiers and ladies now bestowed many grateful thanks upon Prince
Marvel for his kind deed; for they realized that thereafter their lives
would be safer from the king's anger and much pleasanter in every way.

"Terribus is not bad by nature," said one; "but he brooded upon his
ugliness so much that the least thing served to throw him into a
violent passion, and our lives were never safe from one day to another."

By and by two giants entered the hall and carried away the throne of
gray stone where Terribus had been accustomed to sit; and other slaves
brought a gorgeous throne of gold, studded with precious jewels, which
they put in its place.  And after a time the king himself returned to
the room, his simple gray gown replaced by flowing robes of purple,
with rich embroideries, such as he had not worn for many years.

"My people," said he, addressing those present with kindness and
dignity, "it seems to me fitting that a handsome king should be
handsomely attired, and an ugly one clothed simply.  For years I have
been so terrible in feature that I dared not even look at my own image
in a mirror.  But now, thanks to the gracious magic of my guest, I have
become like other men, and hereafter you will find my rule as kind as
it was formerly cruel.  To-night, in honor of this joyous occasion, we
shall feast and make merry, and it is my royal command that you all do
honor and reverence to the illustrious Prince Marvel!"

A loud shout of approval greeted this speech, and the evening was merry
indeed.  Terribus joined freely in the revelry, laughing as gaily as
the lightest-hearted damsel present.

It was nearly morning before they all retired, and as they sought their
beds Nerle asked the prince in a voice that sounded like an ill-natured
growl:

"Why did you give the king beauty, after his treatment of us?"

Marvel looked at the reproachful face of his esquire and smiled.  "When
you are older," said he, "you will find that often there are many ways
to accomplish a single purpose.  The king's ugliness was the bar to our
leaving his country, for he feared our gossip.  So the easiest way for
us to compass our escape was to take away his reason for detaining us.
Thus I conquered the king in my own way, and at the same time gained
his gratitude and friendship."

"Will he allow us to depart in the morning?" inquired Nerle.

"I think so," said Marvel.

It was late when they rose from their slumbers; but, having
breakfasted, the prince's first act was to seek the king.

"We wish to leave your kingdom," said he.  "Will you let us go?"

Terribus grasped the hand of his guest and pressed it with fervor,
while tears of gratitude stood in his eyes.

"I should prefer that you remain with me always, and be my friend," he
answered.  "But if you choose to leave me I shall not interfere in any
way with your wishes."

Prince Marvel looked at him thoughtfully, and then said: "My time on
this island is short.  In a few months Prince Marvel will have passed
out of the knowledge of men, and his name will be forgotten.  Before
then I hope to visit the Kingdoms of Dawna and Auriel and Plenta; so I
must not delay, but beg you will permit me to depart at once."

"Very well," answered Terribus.  "Come with me, and I shall show you
the way."

He led the prince and Nerle to a high wall of rock, and placing his
hand upon its rough surface, touched a hidden spring.  Instantly an
immense block of stone began to swing backward, disclosing a passage
large enough for a man on horseback to ride through.

"This is the one road that leads out of my kingdom," said Terribus.
"The others all begin and end at the castle.  So that unless you know
the secret of this passage you could never escape from Spor."

"But where does this road lead?" asked Marvel.

"To the Kingdom of Auriel, which you desire to visit.  It is not a
straight road, for it winds around the Land of Twi, so it will carry
you a little out of your way."

"What is the Land of Twi?" inquired the prince.

"A small country hidden from the view of all travelers," said Terribus.
"No one has ever yet found a way to enter the land of Twi; yet there is
a rumor that it is ruled by a mighty personage called the High Ki."

"And does the rumor state what the High Ki of Twi is like?"

"No, indeed," returned the king, smiling, "so it will do you no good to
be curious.  And now farewell, and may good luck attend you.  Yet bear
in mind the fact that King Terribus of Spor owes you a mighty debt of
gratitude; and if you ever need my services, you have but to call on
me, and I shall gladly come to your assistance."

"I thank you," said Marvel, "but there is small chance of my needing
help.  Farewell, and may your future life be pleasant and happy!"

With this he sprang to the saddle of his prancing charger and, followed
by Nerle, rode slowly through the stone arch.  The courtiers and ladies
had flocked from the palace to witness their departure, and the giants
and dwarfs and Gray Men were drawn up in long lines to speed the king's
guests.  So it was a brilliant sight that Marvel and Nerle looked back
on; but once they were clear of the arch, the great stone rolled back
into its place, shutting them out completely from the Kingdom of Spor,
with its turreted castle and transformed king.


13.  The Hidden Kingdom of Twi

Knowing that at last they were free to roam according to their desire,
the travelers rode gaily along the paths, taking but scant heed of
their way.

"Our faces are set toward new adventures," remarked the prince.  "Let
us hope they will prove more pleasant than the last."

"To be sure!" responded Nerle.  "Let us hope, at any rate, that we
shall suffer more privations and encounter more trouble than we did in
that mountainous Kingdom of Spor."  Then he added: "For one reason, I
regret you are my master."

"What is that reason?" asked the prince, turning to smile upon his
esquire.

"You have a way of overcoming all difficulties without any trouble
whatsoever, and that deprives me of any chance of coming to harm while
in your company."

"Cheer up, my boy!" cried Marvel.  "Did I not say there are new
adventures before us?  We may not come through them so easily as we
came through the others."

"That is true," replied Nerle; "it is always best to hope." And then he
inquired: "Why do you stop here, in the middle of the path?"

"Because the path has ended rather suddenly," answered Marvel.  "Here
is a thick hedge of prickly briers barring our way."

Nerle looked over his master's shoulder and saw that a great hedge,
high and exceedingly thick, cut off all prospect of their advancing.

"This is pleasant," said he; "but I might try to force our way through
the hedge.  The briers would probably prick me severely, and that would
be delightful."

"Try it!" the prince returned, with twinkling eyes.

Nerle sprang from his horse to obey, but at the first contact with the
briers he uttered a howl of pain and held up his hands, which were
bleeding in a dozen places from the wounds of the thorns.

"Ah, that will content you for a time, I trust," said Marvel.  "Now
follow me, and we will ride along beside the hedge until we find an
opening.  For either it will come to an end or there will prove to be a
way through it to the other side."

So they rode alongside the hedge for hour after hour; yet it did not
end, nor could they espy any way to get through the thickly matted
briers.  By and by night fell, and they tethered their horses to some
shrubs, where there were a few scanty blades of grass for them to crop,
and then laid themselves down upon the ground, with bare rocks for
pillows, where they managed to sleep soundly until morning.

They had brought a supply of food in their pouches, and on this they
breakfasted, afterward continuing their journey beside the hedge.

At noon Prince Marvel uttered an exclamation of surprise and stopped
his horse.

"What is it?" asked Nerle.

"I have found the handkerchief with which you wiped the blood from your
hands yesterday morning, and then carelessly dropped," replied the
prince.  "This proves that we have made a complete circle around this
hedge without finding a way to pass through it."

"In that case," said Nerle, "we had better leave the hedge and go in
another direction."

"Not so," declared Marvel.  "The hedge incloses some unknown country,
and I am curious to find out what it is."

"But there is no opening," remonstrated Nerle.

"Then we must make one.  Wouldn't you like to enjoy a little more pain?"

"Thank you," answered Nerle, "my hands are still smarting very
comfortably from the pricks of yesterday."

"Therefore I must make the attempt myself," said the prince, and
drawing his sword he whispered a queer word to it, and straightway
began slashing at the hedge.

The brambles fell fast before his blade, and when he had cut a big heap
of branches from the hedge Nerle dragged them to one side, and the
prince began again.

It was marvelous how thick the hedge proved.  Only a magic sword could
have done this work and remained sharp, and only a fairy arm could have
proved strong enough to hew through the tough wood.  But the magic
sword and fairy arm were at work, and naught could resist them.

After a time the last branches were severed and dragged from the path,
and then the travelers rode their horses through the gap into the
unknown country beyond.

They saw at first glance that it was a land of great beauty; but after
that one look both Prince Marvel and Nerle paused and rubbed their
eyes, to assure themselves that their vision was not blurred.

Before them were two trees, exactly alike.  And underneath the trees
two cows were grazing--each a perfect likeness of the other.  At their
left were two cottages, with every door and window and chimney the
exact counterpart of another.  Before these houses two little boys were
playing, evidently twins, for they not only looked alike and dressed
alike, but every motion one made was also made by the other at the same
time and in precisely the same way.  When one laughed the other
laughed, and when one stubbed his toe and fell down, the other did
likewise, and then they both sat up and cried lustily at the same time.

At this two women--it was impossible to tell one from the other--rushed
out of the two houses, caught up the two boys, shook and dusted them in
precisely the same way, and led them by their ears back into the houses.

Again the astonished travelers rubbed their eyes, and then Prince
Marvel looked at Nerle and said:

"I thought at first that I saw everything double, but there seems to be
only one of YOU."

"And of you," answered the boy.  "But see! there are two hills ahead of
us, and two paths lead from the houses over the hills!  How strange it
all is!"

Just then two birds flew by, close together and perfect mates; and the
cows raised their heads and "mooed" at the same time; and two men--also
twins--came over the two hills along the two paths with two
dinner-pails in their hands and entered the two houses.  They were met
at the doors by the two women, who kissed them exactly at the same time
and helped them off with their coats with the same motions, and closed
the two doors with two slams at the same instant.

Nerle laughed.  "What sort of country have we got into?" he asked.

"Let us find out," replied the prince, and riding up to one of the
houses he knocked on the door with the hilt of his sword.

Instantly the doors of both houses flew open, and both men appeared in
the doorways.  Both started back in amazement at sight of the
strangers, and both women shrieked and both little boys began to cry.
Both mothers boxed the children's ears, and both men gasped out:

"Who--who are you?"

Their voices were exactly alike, and their words were spoken in unison.
Prince Marvel replied, courteously:

"We are two strangers who have strayed into your country.  But I do not
understand why our appearance should so terrify you."

"Why--you are singular!  There is only half of each of you!" exclaimed
the two men, together.

"Not so," said the prince, trying hard not to laugh in their faces.
"We may be single, while you appear to be double; but each of us is
perfect, nevertheless."

"Perfect!  And only half of you!" cried the men.  And again the two
women, who were looking over their husbands' shoulders, screamed at
sight of the strangers; and again the two boys, who were clinging to
their mothers' dresses in the same positions, began to cry.

"We did not know such strange people existed!" said the two men, both
staring at the strangers and then wiping the beads of perspiration from
their two brows with two faded yellow handkerchiefs.

"Nor did we!" retorted the prince.  "I assure you we are as much
surprised as you are."

Nerle laughed again at this, and to hear only one of the strangers
speak and the other only laugh seemed to terrify the double people
anew.  So Prince Marvel quickly asked:

"Please tell us what country this is?"

"The Land of Twi," answered both men, together.

"Oh! the Land of Twi.  And why is the light here so dim?" continued the
prince.

"Dim?" repeated the men, as if surprised; "why, this is twilight, of
course."

"Of course," said Nerle.  "I hadn't thought of that.  We are in the
long hidden Land of Twi, which all men have heard of, but no man has
found before."

"And who may you be?" questioned the prince, looking from one man to
the other, curiously.

"We are Twis," they answered.

"Twice?"

"Twis--inhabitants of Twi."

"It's the same thing," laughed Nerle.  "You see everything twice in
this land."

"Are none of your people single?" asked Prince Marvel.

"Single," returned the men, as if perplexed.  "We don't understand."

"Are you all double?--or are some of you just one?" said the prince,
who found it difficult to put his question plainly.

"What does 'one' mean?" asked the men.  "There is no such word as 'one'
in our language."

"They have no need of such a word," declared Nerle.

"We are only poor laborers," explained the men.  "But over the hills
lie the cities of Twi, where the Ki and the Ki-Ki dwell, and also the
High Ki."

"Ah!" said Marvel, "I've heard of your High Ki.  Who is he?"

The men shook their heads, together and with the same motion.

"We have never seen the glorious High Ki," they answered.  "The sight
of their faces is forbidden.  None but the Ki and the Ki-Ki has seen
the Supreme Rulers and High Ki."

"I'm getting mixed," said Nerle.  "All this about the Ki and the Ki-Ki
and the High Ki makes me dizzy.  Let's go on to the city and explore
it."

"That is a good suggestion," replied the prince.  "Good by, my
friends," he added, addressing the men.

They both bowed, and although they still seemed somewhat frightened
they answered him civilly and in the same words, and closed their doors
at the same time.

So Prince Marvel and Nerle rode up the double path to the hills, and
the two cows became frightened and ran away with the same swinging
step, keeping an exact space apart.  And when they were a safe distance
they both stopped, looked over their right shoulders, and "mooed" at
the same instant.


14.  The Ki and the Ki-Ki

From the tops of the hills the travelers caught their first glimpse of
the wonderful cities of Twi.  Two walls surrounded the cities, and in
the walls were two gates just alike.  Within the inclosures stood many
houses, but all were built in pairs, from the poorest huts to the most
splendid palaces.  Every street was double, the pavements running side
by side.  There were two lamp-posts on every corner, and in the dim
twilight that existed these lamp-posts were quite necessary.  If there
were trees or bushes anywhere, they invariably grew in pairs, and if a
branch was broken on one it was sure to be broken on the other, and
dead leaves fell from both trees at identically the same moment.

Much of this Marvel and Nerle learned after they had entered the
cities, but the view from the hills showed plainly enough that the
"double" plan existed everywhere and in every way in this strange land.

They followed the paths down to the gates of the walls, where two pairs
of soldiers rushed out and seized their horses by the bridles.  These
soldiers all seemed to be twins, or at least mates, and each one of
each pair was as like the other as are two peas growing in the same
pod.  If one had a red nose the other's was red in the same degree, and
the soldiers that held the bridles of Nerle's horse both had their left
eyes bruised and blackened, as from a blow of the same force.

These soldiers, as they looked upon Nerle and the prince, seemed fully
as much astonished and certainly more frightened than their prisoners.
They were dressed in bright yellow uniforms with green buttons, and the
soldiers who had arrested the prince had both torn their left
coat-sleeves and had patches of the same shape upon the seats of their
trousers.

"How dare you stop us, fellows?" asked the prince, sternly.

The soldiers holding his horse both turned and looked inquiringly at
the soldiers holding Nerle's horse; and these turned to look at a
double captain who came out of two doors in the wall and walked up to
them.

"Such things were never before heard of!" said the two captains, their
startled eyes fixed upon the prisoners.  "We must take them to the Ki
and the Ki-Ki."

"Why so?" asked Prince Marvel.

"Because," replied the officers, "they are our rulers, under grace of
the High Ki, and all unusual happenings must be brought to their
notice.  It is our law, you know--the law of the Kingdom of Twi."

"Very well," said Marvel, quietly; "take us where you will; but if any
harm is intended us you will be made to regret it."

"The Ki and the Ki-Ki will decide," returned the captains gravely,
their words sounding at the same instant.

And then the two pairs of soldiers led the horses through the double
streets, the captains marching ahead with drawn swords, and crowds of
twin men and twin women coming from the double doors of the double
houses to gaze upon the strange sight of men and horses who were not
double.

Presently they came upon a twin palace with twin turrets rising high
into the air; and before the twin doors the prisoners dismounted.
Marvel was escorted through one door and Nerle through another, and
then they saw each other going down a double hallway to a room with a
double entrance.

Passing through this they found themselves in a large hall with two
domes set side by side in the roof.  The domes were formed of stained
glass, and the walls of the hall were ornamented by pictures in pairs,
each pair showing identically the same scenes.  This, was, of course,
reasonable enough in such a land, where two people would always look at
two pictures at the same time and admire them in the same way with the
same thoughts.

Beneath one of the domes stood a double throne, on which sat the Ki of
Twi--a pair of gray-bearded and bald-headed men who were lean and lank
and stoop-shouldered.  They had small eyes, black and flashing, long
hooked noses, great pointed ears, and they were smoking two pipes from
which the smoke curled in exactly the same circles and clouds.

Beneath the other dome sat the Ki-Ki of Twi, also on double thrones,
similar to those of the Ki.  The Ki-Ki were two young men, and had
golden hair combed over their brows and "banged" straight across; and
their eyes were blue and mild in expression, and their cheeks pink and
soft.  The Ki-Ki were playing softly upon a pair of musical instruments
that resembled mandolins, and they were evidently trying to learn a new
piece of music, for when one Ki-Ki struck a false note the other Ki-Ki
struck the same false note at the same time, and the same expression of
annoyance came over the two faces at the same moment.

When the prisoners entered, the pairs of captains and soldiers bowed
low to the two pairs of rulers, and the Ki exclaimed--both in the same
voice of surprise:

"Great Kika-koo! what have we here?"

"Most wonderful prisoners, your Highnesses," answered the captains.
"We found them at your cities' gates and brought them to you at once.
They are, as your Highnesses will see, each singular, and but half of
what he should be."

"'Tis so!" cried the double Ki, in loud voices, and slapping their
right thighs with their right palms at the same time.  "Most
remarkable!  Most remarkable!"

"I don't see anything remarkable about it," returned Prince Marvel,
calmly.  "It is you, who are not singular, but double, that seem
strange and outlandish."

"Perhaps--perhaps!" said the two old men, thoughtfully.  "It is what we
are not accustomed to that seems to us remarkable.  Eh, Ki-Ki?" they
added, turning to the other rulers.

The Ki-Ki, who had not spoken a word but continued to play softly,
simply nodded their blond heads carelessly; so the Ki looked again at
the prisoners and asked:

"How did you get here?"

"We cut a hole through the prickly hedge," replied Prince Marvel.

"A hole through the hedge!  Great Kika-koo!" cried the gray-bearded Ki;
"is there, then, anything or any place on the other side of the hedge?"

"Why, of course!  The world is there," returned the prince, laughing.

The old men looked puzzled, and glanced sharply from their little black
eyes at their prisoners.

"We thought nothing existed outside the hedge of Twi," they answered,
simply.  "But your presence here proves we were wrong.  Eh! Ki-Ki?"

This last was again directed toward the pair of musicians, who
continued to play and only nodded quietly, as before.

"Now that you are here," said the twin Ki, stroking their two gray
beards with their two left hands in a nervous way, "it must be evident
to you that you do not belong here.  Therefore you must go back through
the hedge again and stay on the other side.  Eh, Ki-Ki?"

The Ki-Ki still continued playing, but now spoke the first words the
prisoners had heard from them.

"They must die," said the Ki-Ki, in soft and agreeable voices.

"Die!" echoed the twin Ki, "die?  Great Kika-koo!  And why so?"

"Because, if there is a world on the other side of the hedge, they
would tell on their return all about the Land of Twi, and others of
their kind would come through the hedge from curiosity and annoy us.
We can not be annoyed.  We are busy."

Having delivered this speech both the Ki-Ki went on playing the new
tune, as if the matter was settled.

"Nonsense!" retorted the old Ki, angrily.  "You are getting more and
more bloodthirsty every day, our sweet and gentle Ki-Ki!  But we are
the Ki--and we say the prisoners shall not die!"

"We say they shall!" answered the youthful Ki-Ki, nodding their two
heads at the same time, with a positive motion.  "You may be the Ki,
but we are the Ki-Ki, and your superior."

"Not in this case," declared the old men.  "Where life and death are
concerned we have equal powers with you."

"And if we disagree?" asked the players, gently.

"Great Kika-koo!  If we disagree the High Ki must judge between us!"
roared the twin Ki, excitedly.

"Quite so," answered the Ki-Ki.  "The strangers shall die."

"They shall not die!" stormed the old men, with fierce gestures toward
the others, while both pairs of black eyes flashed angrily.

"Then we disagree, and they must be taken to the High Ki," returned the
blond musicians, beginning to play another tune.

The two Ki rose from their thrones, paced two steps to the right and
three steps to the left, and then sat down again.

"Very well!" they said to the captains, who had listened unmoved to the
quarrel of the rulers; "keep these half-men safe prisoners until
to-morrow morning, and then the Ki-Ki and we ourselves will conduct
them to the mighty High Ki."

At this command the twin captains bowed again to both pairs of rulers
and led Prince Marvel and Nerle from the room.  Then they were escorted
along the streets to the twin houses of the captains, and here the
officers paused and scratched their left ears with uncertain gestures.

"There being only half of each of you," they said, "we do not know how
to lock each of you in double rooms."

"Oh, let us both occupy the same room," said Prince Marvel.  "We prefer
it."

"Very well," answered the captains; "we must transgress our usual
customs in any event, so you may as well be lodged as you wish."

So Nerle and the prince were thrust into a large and pleasant room of
one of the twin houses, the double doors were locked upon them by twin
soldiers, and they were left to their own thoughts.


15.  The High Ki of Twi

"Tell me, Prince, are we awake or asleep?" asked Nerle, as soon as they
were alone.

"There is no question of our being awake," replied the prince, with a
laugh.  "But what a curious country it is--and what a funny people!"

"We can't call them odd or singular," said the esquire, "for everything
is even in numbers and double in appearance.  It makes me giddy to look
at them, and I keep feeling of myself to make sure there is still only
one of me."

"You are but half a boy!" laughed the prince--"at least so long as you
remain in the Land of Twi."

"I'd like to get out of it in double-quick time," answered Nerle; "and
we should even now be on the other side of the hedge were it not for
that wicked pair of Ki-Ki, who are determined to kill us."

"It is strange," said the prince, thoughtfully, "that the
fierce-looking old Ki should be our friends and the gentle Ki-Ki our
enemies.  How little one can tell from appearances what sort of heart
beats in a person's body!"

Before Nerle could answer the two doors opened and two pairs of
soldiers entered.  They drew two small tables before the prince and two
before Nerle, and then other pairs of twin soldiers came and spread
cloths on the tables and set twin platters of meat and bread and fruit
on each of the tables.  When the meal had been arranged the prisoners
saw that there was enough for four people instead of two; and the
soldiers realized this also, for they turned puzzled looks first on the
tables and then on the prisoners.  Then they shook all their twin heads
gravely and went away, locking the twin doors behind them.

"We have one advantage in being singular," said Nerle, cheerfully; "and
that is we are not likely to starve to death.  For we can eat the
portions of our missing twins as well as our own."

"I should think you would enjoy starving," remarked the prince.

"No; I believe I have more exquisite suffering in store for me, since I
have met that gentle pair of Ki-Ki," said Nerle.

While they were eating the two captains came in and sat down in two
chairs.  These captains seemed friendly fellows, and after watching the
strangers for a while they remarked:

"We are glad to see you able to eat so heartily; for to-morrow you will
probably die."

"That is by no means certain," replied Marvel, cutting a piece from one
of the twin birds on a platter before him--to the extreme surprise of
the captains, who had always before seen both birds carved alike at the
same time.  "Your gray-bearded old Ki say we shall not die."

"True," answered the captains.  "But the Ki-Ki have declared you shall."

"Their powers seem to be equal," said Nerle, "and we are to be taken
before the High Ki for judgment."

"Therein lies your danger," returned the captains, speaking in the same
tones and with the same accents on their words.  "For it is well known
the Ki-Ki has more influence with the High Ki than the Ki has."

"Hold on!" cried Nerle; "you are making me dizzy again.  I can't keep
track of all these Kis."

"What is the High Ki like?" asked Prince Marvel, who was much
interested in the conversation of the captains.  But this question the
officers seemed unable to answer.  They shook their heads slowly and
said:

"The High Ki are not visible to the people of Twi.  Only in cases of
the greatest importance are the High Ki ever bothered or even
approached by the Ki and the Ki-Ki, who are supposed to rule the land
according to their own judgment.  But if they chance to disagree, then
the matter is carried before the High Ki, who live in a palace
surrounded by high walls, in which there are no gates.  Only these
rulers have ever seen the other side of the walls, or know what the
High Ki are like."

"That is strange," said the prince.  "But we, ourselves, it seems, are
to see the High Ki to-morrow, and whoever they may chance to be, we
hope to remain alive after the interview."

"That is a vain hope," answered the captains, "for it is well known
that the High Ki usually decide in favor of the Ki-Ki, and against the
wishes of the old Ki."

"That is certainly encouraging," said Nerle.

When the captains had gone and left them to themselves, the esquire
confided to his master his expectations in the following speech:

"This High Ki sounds something terrible and fierce in my ears, and as
they are doubtless a pair, they will be twice terrible and fierce.
Perhaps his royal doublets will torture me most exquisitely before
putting me to death, and then I shall feel that I have not lived in
vain."

They slept in comfortable beds that night, although an empty twin bed
stood beside each one they occupied.  And in the morning they were
served another excellent meal, after which the captains escorted them
again to the twin palaces of the Ki and the Ki-Ki.

There the two pairs of rulers met them and headed the long procession
of soldiers toward the palace of the High Ki.  First came a band of
music, in which many queer sorts of instruments were played in pairs by
twin musicians; and it was amusing to Nerle to see the twin drummers
roll their twin drums exactly at the same time and the twin trumpets
peal out twin notes.  After the band marched the double Ki-Ki and the
double Ki, their four bodies side by side in a straight line.  The
Ki-Ki had left their musical instruments in the palace, and now wore
yellow gloves with green stitching down the backs and swung gold-headed
canes jauntily as they walked.  The Ki stooped their aged shoulders and
shuffled along with their hands in their pockets, and only once did
they speak, and that was to roar "Great Kika-koo!" when the Ki-Ki
jabbed their canes down on the Ki's toes.

Following the Ki-Ki and the Ki came the prince and Nerle, escorted by
the twin captains, and then there were files of twin soldiers bringing
up the rear.

Crowds of twin people, with many twin children amongst them, turned out
to watch the unusual display, and many pairs of twin dogs barked
together in unison and snapped at the heels of the marching twin
soldiers.

By and by they reached the great wall surrounding the High Ki's palace,
and, sure enough, there was never a gate in the wall by which any might
enter.  But when the Ki and the Ki-Ki had blown a shrill signal upon
two pairs of whistles, they all beheld two flights of silver steps
begin to descend from the top of the wall, and these came nearer and
nearer the ground until at last they rested at the feet of the Ki.
Then the old men began ascending the steps carefully and slowly, and
the captains motioned to the prisoners to follow.  So Prince Marvel
followed one of the Ki up the steps and Nerle the other Ki, while the
two Ki-Ki came behind them so they could not escape.

So to the top of the wall they climbed, where a pair of twin servants
in yellow and green--which seemed to be the royal colors--welcomed them
and drew up the pair of silver steps, afterward letting them down on
the other side of the wall, side by side.

They descended in the same order as they had mounted to the top of the
wall, and now Prince Marvel and Nerle found themselves in a most
beautiful garden, filled with twin beds of twin flowers, with many
pairs of rare shrubs.  Also, there were several double statuettes on
pedestals, and double fountains sending exactly the same sprays of
water the same distance into the air.

Double walks ran in every direction through the garden, and in the
center of the inclosure stood a magnificent twin palace, built of
blocks of white marble exquisitely carved.

The Ki and the Ki-Ki at once led their prisoners toward the palace and
entered at its large arched double doors, where several pairs of
servants met them.  These servants, they found, were all dumb, so that
should they escape from the palace walls they could tell no tales of
the High Ki.

The prisoners now proceeded through several pairs of halls, winding
this way and that, and at last came to a pair of golden double doors
leading into the throne-room of the mighty High Ki.  Here they all
paused, and the Ki-Ki both turned to the prince and Nerle and said:

"You are the only persons, excepting ourselves and the palace servants,
who have ever been permitted to see the High Ki of Twi.  As you are
about to die, that does not matter; but should you by any chance be
permitted to live, you must never breathe a word of what you are about
to see, under penalty of a sure and horrible death."

The prisoners made no reply to this speech, and, after the two Ki-Ki
had given them another mild look from their gentle blue eyes, these
officials clapped their twin hands together and the doors of gold flew
open.

A perfect silence greeted them, during which the double Ki and the
double Ki-Ki bent their four bodies low and advanced into the
throne-room, followed by Prince Marvel and Nerle.

In the center of the room stood two thrones of dainty filigree work in
solid gold, and over them were canopies of yellow velvet, the folds of
which were caught up and draped with bands of green ribbon.  And on the
thrones were seated two of the sweetest and fairest little maidens that
mortal man had ever beheld.  Their lovely hair was fine as a spider's
web; their eyes were kind and smiling, their cheeks soft and dimpled,
their mouths shapely as a cupid's bow and tinted like the petals of a
rose.  Upon their heads were set two crowns of fine spun gold, worked
into fantastic shapes and set with glittering gems.  Their robes were
soft silks of pale yellow, with strings of sparkling emeralds for
ornament.

Anything so lovely and fascinating as these little maids, who were
precisely alike in every particular, neither Prince Marvel nor Nerle
had ever dreamed could exist.  They stood for a time spellbound and
filled with admiration, while the two pairs of rulers bowed again and
again before the dainty and lovable persons of their High Ki.

But it was hard for Nerle to keep quiet for long, and presently he
exclaimed, in a voice loud enough to be heard by all present:

"By the Great Kika-koo of our friends the Ki, these darling High Ki of
Twi are sweet enough to be kissed!"


16.  The Rebellion of the High Ki

The bold speech of Nerle's made the two damsels laugh at the same time,
and their sweet laughter sounded like rippling strains of harmonious
music.  But the two Ki-Ki frowned angrily, and the two Ki looked at the
boy in surprise, as if wondering at his temerity.

"Who are these strangers?" asked the pretty High Ki, speaking together
as all the twins of Twi did; "and why are they not mates, but only half
of each other?"

"These questions, your Supreme Highnesses," said the blond-haired pair
of Ki-Ki, "we are unable to answer."

"Perhaps, then, the strangers can answer themselves," said the little
maids, smiling first upon the Ki-Ki and then upon the prisoners.

Prince Marvel bowed.

"I am from the great outside world," said he, "and my name is Prince
Marvel.  Until now I have never seen people that live in pairs, and
speak in unison, and act in the same way and think the same thoughts.
My world is much bigger than your world, and in it every person is
proud to think and act for himself.  You say I am only a 'half,' but
that is not so.  I am perfect, without a counterpart; my friend Nerle
is perfect without a counterpart, and it is yourselves who are halved.
For in the Land of Twi no person is complete or perfect without its
other half, and it seems to take two of you to make one man--or one
maid."

The sweet faces of the twin High Ki grew thoughtful at this speech, and
they said:

"Indeed, it may be you are right.  But it is our custom in Twi to do
everything double and to live double." Then, turning to the Ki, they
asked: "Why have you brought these strangers here?"

"To ask your Supreme Highnesses to permit them to return again to the
world from whence they came," answered the Ki, both of them regarding
their supreme rulers earnestly.

But here the Ki-Ki spoke up quickly in their mild voices, saying:

"That is not our idea, your Highnesses.  We, the Ki-Ki of Twi, think it
best the strangers should be put to death.  And we pray your Supreme
Highnesses to favor our wish."

The two little maids looked from the Ki to the Ki-Ki, and frowned and
pouted their rosy lips in evident perplexity.

But Nerle whispered to Prince Marvel:

"It's all up with us!  I know very well why her royal doublets always
favors the Ki-Ki.  It's because they are young and handsome, while the
Ki are old and ugly.  Both of her will condemn us to death--you see if
she don't!"

This seemed somewhat mixed, but Nerle was in earnest, and Prince
Marvel, who had not forgotten his fairy lore, began to weave a silent
spell over the head of the nearest twin High Ki.  But just as it was
completed, and before he had time to work the spell on the other twin,
the Ki-Ki grew impatient, and exclaimed:

"We beg your Highnesses not to keep us waiting.  Let us have your
decision at once!"

And the twin maidens raised their fair heads and replied.  But the
reply was of such a nature that both the old Ki and both the young
Ki-Ki staggered backward in amazement.  For one of the twin High Ki
said:

"They shall die!"

And the other twin High Ki said at the same instant:

"They shall NOT die!"

Had twin thunderbolts fallen through the twin roofs of the twin palaces
and struck the twin Ki and the twin Ki-Ki upon their twin heads it
would have created no more stupendous a sensation than did this remark.
Never before had any two halves of a twin of the Land of Twi thought
differently or spoken differently.  Indeed, it startled the two maidens
themselves as much as it did their hearers, for each one turned her
head toward the other and, for the first time in her life, looked into
the other's face!

This act was fully as strange as their speech, and a sudden horrible
thought came into the startled heads of the twin Ki and the twin Ki-Ki:
THE HIGH KI OF TWI WAS NO LONGER ONE, BUT TWO.  AND THESE TWO WERE
THINKING AND ACTING EACH INDEPENDENT OF THE OTHER!

It is no wonder the shock rendered them speechless for a time, and they
stood swaying their four bodies, with their eight eyes bulging out like
those of fishes and their four mouths wide open, as if the two pairs
had become one quartet.

The faces of the two maids flushed as they gazed upon each other.

"How DARE you contradict me?" asked one.

"How dare you contradict ME?" demanded the other, and not only were
these questions asked separately, but the accent on the words was
different.  And their twin minds seemed to get farther apart every
moment.

"I'm the High Ki of Twi!" said one.

"You're not!  I'M the High Ki!" retorted the other.

"The strangers shall die!" snapped one.

"They shall live!" cried the other.  "My will is supreme."

"It's not!  MY will is supreme," returned the other twin.

The bald heads of the ancient Ki were bobbing in amazement, first to
one maid and then toward the other.  The blond hairs of the two Ki-Ki
were standing almost on end, and their eyes stared straight before them
as if stupefied with astonishment.  Nerle was bellowing with rude
laughter and holding his sides to keep from getting a stitch in them,
while Prince Marvel stood quietly attentive and smiling with genuine
amusement.  For he alone understood what had happened to separate the
twin High Ki.

The girls did not seem to know how to act under their altered
conditions.  After a time one of them said:

"We will leave our dispute to be settled by the Ki and the Ki-Ki."

"Very well," agreed the other.

"Then I say your half is right," declared the Ki-Ki, both their right
forefingers pointing to the maiden who had condemned the strangers to
death.

"And I decide that your half is right," exclaimed the Ki, both their
trembling forefingers pointing to the maiden who had said the strangers
should live.

"Well?" said one girl.

"Well?" said the other.

"The powers of the Ki and the Ki-Ki are equal," said the first.  "We
are no nearer a settlement of our dispute than we were before."

"My dear young ladies," said Prince Marvel, politely, "I beg you will
take time to think the matter over, and see if you can not come to an
agreement.  We are in no hurry."

"Very well," decided the twins, speaking both together this time.  "We
command you all to remain in the palace until we have settled our own
strange dispute.  The servants will care for you, and when we are ready
to announce our decision we shall again send for you."

Every one bowed at this command and retired from the room; but Nerle
looked over his shoulder as he went through the doorway, and saw that
the two High Ki had turned in their seats and were facing each other,
and that both their faces wore angry and determined expressions.


17.  The Separation of the High Ki

For nearly a week Prince Marvel and Nerle remained confined to the
palace and gardens of the High Ki.  Together with the twin Ki, who
seemed to be friendly to them, they occupied one of the twin palaces,
while the Ki-Ki secluded themselves in the other.

The pretty High Ki maidens they did not see at all, nor did they know
what part of the palaces they occupied, not being permitted to wander
away from the rooms allotted to them, except to walk in the garden.
There was no way for them to escape, had they felt inclined to, for the
silver steps had disappeared.

From the garden walks they sometimes caught sight of the solemn heads
of the handsome Ki-Ki looking at them through the twin windows of the
other palace, and although the expression of their faces was always
mild and gentle, Nerle and Marvel well knew the Ki-Ki were only waiting
in the hope of having them killed.

"Are you nervous about the decision of the pretty High Ki?" asked Nerle
one day.

"No, indeed," said the prince, laughing; "for I do not expect them to
kill me, in any event."

"If I felt as sure of my safety," returned the boy, "it would destroy
all my pleasure.  These are really happy days for me.  Every moment I
expect to see the executioner arrive with his ax."

"The executioner is double," said the two old Ki, breaking into the
conversation.  "You should say you expect to see the executioners
arrive with their axes."

"Then how will they cut off my head with two axes?  For I suppose they
will both chop at the same time, and I have but one neck."

"Wait and see," answered the two Ki, sighing deeply and rubbing their
red noses thoughtfully.

"Oh, I'll wait," answered the boy; "but as for seeing them cut off my
head, I refuse; for I intend to shut my eyes."

So they sat in their rooms or walked in the gardens, yawning and
waiting, until one day, just as the two clocks on the wall were
striking twenty-four o'clock, the door opened and to their surprise one
of the High Ki twins walked in upon them.

She was as sweet and fair to look upon as when she occupied one of the
beautiful thrones, but at first no one could tell which of the High Ki
she was--their friend or their enemy.  Even the Ki were puzzled and
anxious, until the girl said:

"My other half and I have completely separated, for we have agreed to
disagree for all time.  And she has gone to ask the Ki-Ki to assist
her, for war is declared between us.  And hereafter her color is to be
the green and mine the yellow, and we intend to fight until one of us
conquers and overthrows the other."

This announcement was interesting to Marvel and Nerle, but greatly
shocked the aged Ki, who asked:

"What is to become of our kingdom?  Half of a High Ki can not rule it.
It is against the law."

"I will make my own laws when I have won the fight," returned the girl,
with a lovely smile; "so do not let that bother you.  And now tell me,
will you help me to fight my battles?"

"Willingly!" exclaimed Nerle and Prince Marvel, almost as if they had
been twins of Twi.  And the Ki rubbed their bald heads a moment, and
then sneezed together and wiped their eyes on faded yellow
handkerchiefs, and finally declared they would "stick to her Supreme
Highness through thick and thin!"

"Then go over the wall to the cities, at once, and get together all the
soldiers to fight for me and my cause," commanded the girl.

The twin Ki at once left the room, and the High Ki sat down and began
to ask questions of Prince Marvel and Nerle about the big outside world
from whence they came.  Nerle was rather shy and bashful before the
dainty little maiden, whose yellow robe contrasted delightfully with
her pink cheeks and blue eyes and brown flowing locks; but Prince
Marvel did not mind girls at all, so he talked with her freely, and she
in return allowed him to examine the pretty gold crown she wore upon
her brow.

By and by the Ki came back with both faces sad and gloomy.

"Your Highness," they announced, "we have bad news for you.  The other
High Ki, who is wearing a green gown, has been more prompt in action
than yourself.  She and the Ki-Ki have secured the silver steps and
will allow no others to use them; and already they have sent for the
soldiers of the royal armies to come and aid them.  So we are unable to
leave the garden, and presently the army will be here to destroy us."

Then the girl showed her good courage; for she laughed and said:

"Then we must remain here and fight to the last; and if I am unable to
save you, who are my friends, it will be because I can not save myself."

This speech pleased Prince Marvel greatly.  He kissed the little maid's
hand respectfully and said:

"Fear nothing, your Highness.  My friend and I are not so helpless as
you think.  We consider it our privilege to protect and save you,
instead of your saving us; and we are really able to do this in spite
of the other High Ki and her entire army."

So they remained quietly in the palace the rest of that day, and no one
molested them in the least.  In the evening the girl played and sang
for them, and the ancient pair of Ki danced a double-shuffle for their
amusement that nearly convulsed them with laughter.  For one danced
exactly like the other, and the old men's legs were still very nimble,
although their wrinkled faces remained anxiously grave throughout their
antics.  Nerle also sang a song about the King of Thieves whom Prince
Marvel had conquered, and another about the Red Rogue of Dawna, so that
altogether the evening passed pleasantly enough, and they managed to
forget all their uneasy doubts of the morrow.

When at last they separated for the night, Prince Marvel alone did not
seek his bed; there was still some business he wished to transact.  So
he shut himself up in his room and summoned before him, by means of his
fairy knowledge, the Prince of the Knooks, the King of the Ryls and the
Governor of the Goblins.  These were all three his especial friends,
and he soon told them the story of the quarrel and separation of the
twin High Ki, and claimed their assistance.  Then he told them how they
might aid him, and afterward dismissed them.  Having thus accomplished
his task, the fairy prince went to bed and slept peacefully the
remainder of the night.

The next morning the blond Ki-Ki and all the army of Twi, which had
been won to their cause, came climbing up the silver steps and over the
wall to the palace of the green High Ki; but what was their amazement
to find the twin palaces separated by a wall so high that no ladders
nor steps they possessed could reach to the top!  It had been built in
a single night, and only Prince Marvel and his fairy friends knew how
the work had been done so quickly.

The yellow High Ki, coming downstairs to breakfast with her friends,
found herself securely shut in from her enemies, and the bald-headed
old Ki were so pleased to escape that they danced another jig from pure
joy.

Over the wall could be heard the shouts and threats of the army of Twi,
who were seeking a way to get at the fugitives; but for the present our
friends knew themselves to be perfectly safe, and they could afford to
laugh at the fury of the entire population of Twi.


18.  The Rescue of the High Ki

After several days of siege Prince Marvel began to feel less confident
of the safety of his little party.  The frantic Ki-Ki had built double
battering-rams and were trying to batter down the high wall; and they
had built several pairs of long ladders with which to climb over the
wall; and their soldiers were digging two tunnels in the ground in
order to crawl under the wall.

Not at once could they succeed, for the wall was strong and it would
take long to batter it down; and Nerle stood on top of the wall and
kicked over the ladders as fast as the soldiers of Twi set them up; and
the gray-bearded Ki stood in the garden holding two big flat boards
with which to whack the heads of any who might come through the tunnels.

But Prince Marvel realized that the perseverance of his foes might win
in the end, unless he took measures to defeat them effectually.  So he
summoned swift messengers from among the Sound Elves, who are
accustomed to travel quickly, and they carried messages from him to
Wul-Takim, the King of the Reformed Thieves, and to King Terribus of
Spor, who had both promised him their assistance in case he needed it.
The prince did not tell his friends of this action, but after the
messengers had been dispatched he felt easier in his mind.

The little High Ki remained as sweet and brave and lovable as ever,
striving constantly to cheer and encourage her little band of
defenders.  But none of them was very much worried, and Nerle confided
to the maiden in yellow the fact that he expected to suffer quite
agreeably when the Ki-Ki at last got him in their clutches.

Finally a day came when two big holes were battered through the wall,
and then the twin soldiers of Twi poured through the holes and began to
pound on the doors of the palace itself, in which Prince Marvel and
Nerle, the Ki and the yellow High Ki had locked themselves as securely
as possible.

The prince now decided it was high time for his friends to come to
their rescue; but they did not appear, and before long the doors of the
palace gave way and the soldiers rushed upon them in a vast throng.

Nerle wanted to fight, and to slay as many of the Twi people as
possible; but the prince would not let him.

"These poor soldiers are but doing what they consider their duty," he
said, "and it would be cruel to cut them down with our swords.  Have
patience, I pray you.  Our triumph will come in good time."

The Ki-Ki, who came into the palace accompanied by the green High Ki,
ordered the twin soldiers to bind all the prisoners with cords.  So one
pair of soldiers bound the Ki and another pair Nerle and the prince,
using exactly the same motions in the operation.  But when it came to
binding the yellow High Ki the scene was very funny.  For twin soldiers
tried to do the binding, and there was only one to bind; so that one
soldier went through the same motions as his twin on empty air, and
when his other half had firmly bound the girl, his own rope fell
harmless to the ground.  But it seemed impossible for one of the twins
to do anything different from the other, so that was the only way the
act could be accomplished.

Then the green-robed High Ki walked up to the one in yellow and laughed
in her face, saying:

"You now see which of us is the most powerful, and therefore the most
worthy to rule.  Had you remained faithful to our handsome Ki-Ki, as I
did, you would not now be defeated and disgraced."

"There is no disgrace in losing one battle," returned the other girl,
proudly.  "You are mistaken if you think you have conquered me, and you
are wrong to insult one who is, for the time being, your captive."

The maiden in green looked for an instant confused and ashamed; then
she tossed her pretty head and walked away.

They led all the prisoners out into the garden and then through the
broken wall, and up and down the silver steps, into the great square of
the cities of Twi.  And here all the population crowded around them,
for this was the first time any of them had seen their High Ki, or even
known that they were girls; and the news of their quarrel and
separation had aroused a great deal of excitement.

"Let the executioners come forward!" cried the Ki-Ki, gleefully, and in
answer to the command the twin executioners stepped up to the prisoners.

They were big men, these executioners, each having a squint in one eye
and a scar on the left cheek.  They polished their axes a moment on
their coat-sleeves, and then said to Prince Marvel and Nerle, who were
to be the first victims:

"Don't dodge, please, or our axes may not strike the right place.  And
do not be afraid, for the blows will only hurt you an instant.  In the
Land of Twi it is usually considered a pleasure to be executed by us,
we are so exceedingly skillful."

"I can well believe that," replied Nerle, although his teeth were
chattering.

But at this instant a loud shout was heard, and the twin people of Twi
all turned their heads to find themselves surrounded by throngs of
fierce enemies.

Prince Marvel smiled, for he saw among the new-comers the giants and
dwarfs and the stern Gray Men of King Terribus, with their monarch
calmly directing their movements; and on the other side of the circle
were the jolly faces and bushy whiskers of the fifty-nine reformed
thieves, with burly Wul-Takim at their head.


19.  The Reunion of the High Ki

The twins of Twi were too startled and amazed to offer to fight with
the odd people surrounding them.  Even the executioners allowed their
axes to fall harmlessly to the ground, and the double people, soldiers
and citizens alike, turned to stare at the strangers in wonder.

"We're here, Prince!" yelled Wul-Takim, his bristly beard showing over
the heads of those who stood between.

"Thank you," answered Prince Marvel.

"And the men of Spor are here!" added King Terribus, who was mounted on
a fine milk-white charger, richly caparisoned.

"I thank the men of Spor," returned Prince Marvel, graciously.

"Shall we cut your foes into small pieces, or would you prefer to hang
them?" questioned the King of the Reformed Thieves, loudly enough to
set most of his hearers shivering.

But now the little maid in yellow stepped up to Prince Marvel and,
regarding the youthful knight with considerable awe, said sweetly:

"I beg you will pardon my people and spare them.  They are usually good
and loyal subjects, and if they fought against me--their lawful High
Ki--it was only because they were misled by my separation from my other
half."

"That is true," replied the prince; "and as you are still the lawful
High Ki of Twi, I will leave you to deal with your own people as you
see fit.  For those who have conquered your people are but your own
allies, and are still under your orders, as I am myself."

Hearing this, the green High Ki walked up to her twin High Ki and said,
boldly:

"I am your prisoner.  It is now your turn.  Do with me as you will."

"I forgive you," replied her sister, in kindly tones.

Then the little maid who had met with defeat gave a sob and turned away
weeping, for she had expected anything but forgiveness.

And now the Ki-Ki came forward and, bowing their handsome blond heads
before the High Ki, demanded: "Are we forgiven also?"

"Yes," said the girl, "but you are no longer fit to be rulers of my
people.  Therefore, you are henceforth deprived of your honorable
offices of Ki-Ki, which I shall now bestow upon these good captains
here," and she indicated the good-natured officers who had first
captured the prince and Nerle.

The people of Twi eagerly applauded this act, for the captains were
more popular with them than the former Ki-Ki; but the blond ones both
flushed with humiliation and anger, and said:

"The captains fought against you, even as we did."

"Yet the captains only obeyed your orders," returned the High Ki.  "So
I hold them blameless."

"And what is to become of us now?" asked the former Ki-Ki.

"You will belong to the common people, and earn your living playing
tunes for them to dance by," answered the High Ki.  And at this retort
every one laughed, so that the handsome youths turned away with twin
scowls upon their faces and departed amidst the jeers of the crowd.

"Better hang 'em to a tree, little one," shouted Wul-Takim, in his big
voice; "they won't enjoy life much, anyhow."

But the maid shook her pretty head and turned to the prince.

"Will you stay here and help me to rule my kingdom?" she asked.

"I can not do that," replied Prince Marvel, "for I am but a wandering
adventurer and must soon continue my travels.  But I believe you will
be able to rule your people without my help."

"It is not so easy a task," she answered, sighing.  "For I am singular
and my people are all double."

"Well, let us hold a meeting in your palace," said the prince, "and
then we can decide what is best to be done."

So they dismissed the people, who cheered their High Ki
enthusiastically, returning quietly to their daily tasks and the gossip
that was sure to follow such important events as they had witnessed.

The army of King Terribus and the fifty-nine reformed thieves went to
the twin palaces of the Ki and the Ki-Ki and made merry with feasting
and songs to celebrate their conquest.  And the High Ki, followed by
the prince, Nerle, King Terribus and Wul-Takim, as well as by the Ki
and the newly-appointed Ki-Ki, mounted the silver steps and passed over
the wall to the royal palaces.  The green High Ki followed them, still
weeping disconsolately.

When they had all reached the throne-room, the High Ki seated herself
on one of the beautiful thrones and said:

"By some strange chance, which I am unable to explain, my twin and I
have become separated; so that instead of thinking and acting alike, we
are now individuals--as are all the strange men who have passed through
the hole in the hedge.  And, being individuals, we can no longer agree,
nor can one of us lawfully rule over the Kingdom of Twi, where all the
subjects are twins, thinking and acting in unison."

Said Prince Marvel:

"Your Highness, I alone can explain why you became separated from your
twin.  By means of a fairy enchantment, which I learned years ago, I
worked upon you a spell, which compelled your brain to work independent
of your sister's brain.  It seems to me that it is better each person
should think her own thoughts and live her own life, rather than be
yoked to another person and obliged to think and act as a twin, or
one-half of a complete whole.  And since you are now the one High Ki,
and the acknowledged ruler of this country, I will agree to work the
same fairy spell on all your people, so that no longer will there be
twin minds in all this Land of Twi."

"But all the cows and dogs and horses and other animals are double, as
well as the people," suggested the old Ki, blinking their little eyes
in amazement at the thought of being forever separated from each other.

"I can also work the spell upon all the twin animals," said the prince,
after a moment's hesitation.

"And all our houses are built double, with twin doors and windows and
chimneys, to accommodate our twin people," continued the High Ki.  "And
the trees and flowers--and even the blades of grass--are all double.
And our roads are double, and--and everything else is double.  I alone,
the ruler of this land, am singular!"

Prince Marvel became thoughtful now, for he did not know how to
separate trees and flowers, and it would be a tedious task to separate
the twin houses.

"Why not leave the country as it is?" asked King Terribus of Spor.
"The High Ki is welcome to come to my castle to live, and then she need
no longer bother about the Land of Twi, which seems to me a poor place,
after all."

"And your sister may come with me to my cave, and be the queen of the
reformed thieves, which is a much more important office than being High
Ki of Twi," added big Wul-Takim, who had placed the maiden in green
upon a cushion at his feet, and was striving to comfort her by gently
stroking her silken hair with his rough hand.

"But I love my country, and do not wish to leave it," answered the
yellow High Ki.  "And I love my twin sister, and regret that our minds
have become separated," she continued, sadly.

"I have it!" exclaimed Nerle.  "Let the prince reunite you, making you
regular twins of Twi again, and then you can continue to rule the
country as the double High Ki, and everything will be as it was before."

The yellow High Ki clapped her pink hands with delight and looked
eagerly at the prince.

"Will you?" she asked.  "Will you please reunite us?  And then all our
troubles will be ended!"

This really seemed to Marvel the best thing to be done.  So he led the
maid in green to the other throne, where she had once sat, and after
replacing the golden crown upon her brow he whispered a fairy spell of
much mystical power.

Then the prince stepped back and regarded the maidens earnestly, and
after a moment both the High Ki smiled upon him in unison and
said--speaking the same words in the same voices and with the same
accents:

"Thank you very much!"


20.  Kwytoffle, the Tyrant

Having restored the High Ki to their former condition, to the great joy
of the ancient Ki, Prince Marvel led his friends back to the palaces
where his men were waiting.

They were just in time to prevent serious trouble, for the fifty-eight
reformed thieves had been boasting of their prowess to the huge giants
and tiny dwarfs of King Terribus, and this had resulted in a quarrel as
to which were the best fighters.  Had not their masters arrived at the
right moment there would certainly have been a fierce battle and much
bloodshed,--and all over something of no importance.

Terribus and Wul-Takim soon restored order, and then they accompanied
the Ki and the Ki-Ki to the public square, where the people were
informed that their Supreme Highnesses, the High Ki, had been reunited
and would thereafter rule them with twin minds as well as twin bodies.
There was great rejoicing at this news, for every twin in Twi was glad
to have his troubles ended so easily and satisfactorily.

That night the ryls and knooks and other invisible friends of Prince
Marvel came and removed the dividing wall between the twin palaces of
the High Ki, repairing speedily all the damage that had been done.  And
when our friends called upon the High Ki the next morning they found
the two maids again dressed exactly alike in yellow robes, with strings
of sparkling emeralds for ornament.  And not even Prince Marvel could
now tell one of the High Ki from the other.

As for the maids themselves, it seemed difficult to imagine they had
ever existed apart for a single moment.

They were very pleasant and agreeable to their new friends, and when
they heard that Prince Marvel was about to leave them to seek new
adventures they said:

"Please take us with you!  It seems to us that we ought to know
something of the big outside world from whence you came.  If we see
other kingdoms and people we shall be better able to rule our own
wisely."

"That seems reasonable," answered Marvel, "and I shall be very glad to
have you accompany me.  But who will rule the Land of Twi in your
absence?"

"The Ki-Ki shall be the rulers," answered the High Ki, "and we will
take the Ki with us."

"Then I will delay my departure until to-morrow morning," said the
prince, "in order that your Highnesses may have time to prepare for the
journey."

And then he went back to the palaces of the other rulers, where the Ki
expressed themselves greatly pleased at the idea of traveling, and the
new Ki-Ki were proud to learn they should rule for some time the Land
of Twi.

Wul-Takim also begged to join the party, and so also did King Terribus,
who had never before been outside of his own Kingdom of Spor; so Prince
Marvel willingly consented.

The fifty-eight reformed thieves, led by Gunder, returned to their
cave, where they were living comfortably on the treasure Prince Marvel
had given them; and the Gray Men and giants and dwarfs of Spor departed
for their own country.

In the morning Prince Marvel led his own gay cavalcade through the hole
in the hedge, and they rode merrily away in search of adventure.

By his side were the High Ki, mounted upon twin chestnut ponies that
had remarkably slender limbs and graceful, arched necks.  The ponies
moved with exactly the same steps, and shook their manes and swished
their tails at exactly the same time.  Behind the prince and the High
Ki were King Terribus, riding his great white charger, and Wul-Takim on
a stout horse of jet-black color.  The two ancient Ki and Nerle, being
of lesser rank than the others, brought up the rear.

"When we return to our Land of Twi," said the High Ki, "we shall close
up for all time the hole you made in the hedge; for, if we are
different from the rest of the world, it is better that we remain in
seclusion."

"I think it is right you should do that," replied Prince Marvel.  "Yet
I do not regret that I cut a hole in your hedge."

"It was the hedge that delayed us in coming more promptly to your
assistance," said Terribus; "for we had hard work to find the hole you
had made, and so lost much valuable time."

"All is well that ends well!" laughed the prince.  "You certainly came
in good time to rescue us from our difficulties."

They turned into a path that led to Auriel, which Nerle had heard
spoken of as "the Kingdom of the Setting Sun."

Soon the landscape grew very pleasant to look upon, the meadows being
broad and green, with groups of handsome trees standing about.  The
twilight of the Land of Twi was now replaced by bright sunshine, and in
the air was the freshness of the near-by sea.

At evening they came to a large farmhouse, where the owner welcomed
them hospitably and gave them the best his house afforded.

In answer to their questions about the Kingdom of Auriel, he shook his
head sadly and replied:

"It is a rich and beautiful country, but has fallen under great
misfortunes.  For when the good king died, about two years ago, the
kingdom was seized by a fierce and cruel sorcerer, named Kwytoffle, who
rules the people with great severity, and makes them bring him all
their money and valuable possessions.  So every one is now very poor
and unhappy, and that is a great pity in a country so fair and fertile."

"But why do not the people rebel?" asked Nerle.

"They dare not rebel," answered the farmer, "because they fear the
sorcery of Kwytoffle.  If they do not obey him he threatens to change
them into grasshoppers and June-bugs."

"Has he ever changed any one into a grasshopper or a June-bug?" asked
Prince Marvel.

"No; but the people are too frightened to oppose him, and so he does
not get the opportunity.  And he has an army of fierce soldiers, who
are accustomed to beat the people terribly if they do not carry every
bit of their wealth to the sorcerer.  So there is no choice but to obey
him."

"We certainly ought to hang this wicked creature!" exclaimed Wul-Takim.

"I wish I had brought my Fool-Killer with me," sighed King Terribus;
"for I could have kept him quite busy in this kingdom."

"Can not something be done to rescue these poor people from their sad
fate?" asked the lovely High Ki, anxiously.

"We will make a call upon this Kwytoffle to-morrow," answered Prince
Marvel, "and see what the fellow is like."

"Alas!  Alas!" wailed the good farmer, "you will all become
grasshoppers and June-bugs--every one of you!"

But none of the party seemed to fear that, and having passed the night
comfortably with the farmer they left his house and journeyed on into
the Kingdom of Auriel.

Before noon they came upon the edge of a forest, where a poor man was
chopping logs into firewood.  Seeing Prince Marvel's party approach,
this man ran toward them waving his hands and shouting excitedly:

"Take the other path!  Take the other path!"

"And why should we take the other path?" inquired the prince, reining
in his steed.

"Because this one leads to the castle of the great sorcerer,
Kwytoffle," answered the man.

"But there is where we wish to go," said Marvel.

"What!  You wish to go there?" cried the man.  "Then you will be robbed
and enslaved!"

"Not as long as we are able to fight," laughed the big Wul-Takim.

"If you resist the sorcerer, you will be turned into grasshoppers and
June-bugs," declared the man, staring at them in wonder.

"How do you know that?" asked Marvel.

"Kwytoffle says so.  He promises to enchant every one who dares defy
his power."

"Has any one ever yet dared defy him?" asked Nerle.

"Certainly not!" said the man.  "No one wishes to become a June-bug or
a grasshopper.  No one dares defy him.".

"I am anxious to see this sorcerer," exclaimed King Terribus.  "He
ought to prove an interesting person, for he is able to accomplish his
purposes by threats alone."

"Then let us ride on," said Marvel.

"Dear us!  Dear us!" remonstrated the bald-headed Ki; "are we to become
grasshoppers, then?"

"We shall see," returned the prince, briefly.

"With your long legs," added the pretty pair of High Ki, laughingly,
"you ought to be able to jump farther than any other grasshopper in the
kingdom."

"Great Kika-koo!" cried the Ki, nervously, "what a fate! what a
terrible fate!  And your Highnesses, I suppose, will become June-bugs,
and flutter your wings with noises like buzz-saws!"


21.  The Wonderful Book of Magic

Whatever their fears might be, none of Prince Marvel's party hesitated
to follow him along the path through the forest in search of the
sorcerer, and by and by they came upon a large clearing.  In the middle
of this open space was a big building in such bad repair that its walls
were tumbling down in several places, and all around it the ground was
uncared for and littered with rubbish.  A man was walking up and down
in front of this building, with his head bowed low; but when he heard
the sound of approaching horses' hoofs he looked up and stared for a
moment in amazement.  Then, with a shout of rage, he rushed toward them
and caught Prince Marvel's horse by the bridle.

"How dare you!" he cried; "how dare you enter my forest?"

Marvel jerked his bridle from the man's grasp and said in return:

"Who are you?"

"Me!  Who am I?  Why, I am the great and powerful Kwytoffle!  So
beware!  Beware my sorcery!"

They all looked at the man curiously.  He was short and very fat, and
had a face like a puff-ball, with little red eyes and scarcely any nose
at all.  He wore a black gown with scarlet grasshoppers and june-bugs
embroidered upon the cloth; and his hat was high and peaked, with an
imitation grasshopper of extraordinary size perched upon its point.  In
his right hand he carried a small black wand, and around his neck hung
a silver whistle on a silver cord.

Seeing that the strangers were gazing on him so earnestly, Kwytoffle
thought they were frightened; so he said again, in a big voice:

"Beware my vengeance!"

"Beware yourself!" retorted the prince.  "For if you do not treat us
more respectfully, I shall have you flogged."

"What!  Flog me!" shouted Kwytoffle, furiously.  "For this I will turn
every one of you into grasshoppers--unless you at once give me all the
wealth you possess!"

"Poor man!" exclaimed Nerle; "I can see you are longing for that
flogging.  Will you have it now?" and he raised his riding-whip above
his head.

Kwytoffle stumbled backward a few paces and blew shrilly upon his
silver whistle.  Instantly a number of soldiers came running from the
building, others following quickly after them until fully a hundred
rough-looking warriors, armed with swords and axes, had formed in
battle array, facing the little party of Prince Marvel.

"Arrest these strangers!" commanded Kwytoffle, in a voice like a roar.
"Capture them and bind them securely, and then I will change them all
into grasshoppers!"

"All right," answered the captain of the soldiers; and then he turned
to his men and shouted: "Forward--double-quick--march!"

They came on with drawn swords; at first running, and then gradually
dropping into a walk, as they beheld Nerle, Wul-Takim, King Terribus
and Marvel standing quietly waiting to receive them, weapons in hand
and ready for battle.  A few paces off the soldiers hesitated and
stopped altogether, and Kwytoffle yelled at the captain:

"Why don't you go on?  Why don't you capture them?  Why don't you fight
them?"

"Why, they have drawn their swords!" responded the captain,
reproachfully.

"Who cares?" roared the sorcerer.

"We care," said the captain, giving a shudder, as he looked upon the
strangers.  "Their swords are sharp, and some of us would get hurt."

"You're cowards!" shrieked the enraged Kwytoffle.  "I'll turn you all
into June-bugs!"

At this threat the soldiers dropped their swords and axes, and all fell
upon their knees, trembling visibly and imploring their cruel master
not to change them into june-bugs.

"Bah!" cried Nerle, scornfully; "why don't you fight?  If we kill you,
then you will escape being June-bugs."

"The fact is," said the captain, woefully, "we simply can't fight.  For
our swords are only tin, and our axes are made of wood, with
silver-paper pasted over them."

"But why is that?" asked Wul-Takim, while all the party showed their
surprise.

"Why, until now we have never had any need to fight," said the captain,
"for every one has quickly surrendered to us or run away the moment we
came near.  But you people do not appear to be properly frightened, and
now, alas! since you have drawn upon us the great sorcerer's anger, we
shall all be transformed into June-bugs."

"Yes!" roared Kwytoffle, hopping up and down with anger, "you shall all
be June-bugs, and these strangers I will transform into grasshoppers!"

"Very well," said Prince Marvel, quietly; "you can do it now."

"I will!  I will!" cried the sorcerer.

"Then why don't you begin?" inquired the prince.

"Why don't I begin?  Why, I haven't got the enchantments with me,
that's why.  Do you suppose we great magicians carry around
enchantments in our pockets?" returned the other, in a milder tone.

"Where do you keep your enchantments?" asked the prince.

"They're in my dwelling," snapped Kwytoffle, taking off his hat and
fanning his fat face with the brim.

"Then go and get them," said Marvel.

"Nonsense!  If I went to get the enchantments you would all run away!"
retorted the sorcerer.

"Not so!" protested Nerle, who was beginning to be amused.  "My
greatest longing in life is to become a grasshopper."

"Oh, yes!  PLEASE let us be grasshoppers!" exclaimed the High Ki maids
in the same breath.

"We want to hop!  We want to hop!  Please--PLEASE let us hop!" implored
the bald-headed Ki, winking their left eyes at Wul-Takim.

"By all means let us become grasshoppers," said King Terribus, smiling;
and Wul-Takim added:

"I'm sure your soldiers would enjoy being June-bugs, for then they
wouldn't have to work.  Isn't that so, boys?"

The bewildered soldiers looked at one another in perplexity, and the
still more bewildered sorcerer gazed on the speakers with staring eyes
and wide-open mouth.

"I insist," said Prince Marvel, "upon your turning us into grasshoppers
and your soldiers into June-bugs, as you promised.  If you do not, then
I will flog you--as I promised."

"Very well," returned the sorcerer, with a desperate look upon his
face; "I'll go and find the enchantment."

"And we'll go with you," remarked the prince, pleasantly.

So the entire party accompanied Kwytoffle into the house, where they
entered a large room that was in a state of much disorder.

"Let me see," said the sorcerer, rubbing his ears, as if trying to
think; "I wonder if I put them in this cupboard.  You see," he
explained, "no one has ever before dared me to transform him into a
June-bug or grasshopper, so I have almost forgotten where I keep my
book of enchantments.  No, it's not in the cupboard," he continued,
looking there; "but it surely must be in this chest."

It was not in the chest, either, and so the sorcerer continued to look
in all sorts of queer places for his book of enchantments, without
finding it.  Whenever he paused in his search Prince Marvel would say,
sternly:

"Go on!  Find the book!  Hunt it up.  We are all anxious to become
grasshoppers."  And then Kwytoffle would set to work again, although
big drops of perspiration were now streaming down his face.

Finally he pulled an old book from underneath the pillow of his bed,
and crying, "Here it is!" carried it to the window.

He turned a few leaves of the book and then said:

"How unfortunate!  The compound I require to change you into
grasshoppers must be mixed on the first day of September; and as this
is now the eighth day of September I must wait nearly a year before I
can work the enchantment."

"How about the June-bugs?" asked Nerle.

"Oh!  Ah!  The June-bug mixture can only be made at the dark o' the
moon," said the sorcerer, pretending to read, "and that is three weeks
from now."

"Let me read it," said Prince Marvel, suddenly snatching the book from
Kwytoffle's hands.  Then he turned to the title-page and read:

"'Lives of Famous Thieves and Impostors.'  Why, this is not a book of
enchantments."

"That is what I suspected," said Terribus.

"No one but a sorcerer can read the enchantments in this book,"
declared Kwytoffle; but he hung his head with a sheepish look, for he
knew his deception had been well understood.

"Is your own history written in this volume?" inquired Marvel.

"No," answered the sorcerer.

"Then it ought to be," said the prince, "for you are no sorcerer at
all, but merely a thief and an impostor!"


22.  The Queen of Plenta

The soldiers of Kwytoffle wanted to hang their old master at once, for
he had won their enmity by abusing them in many ways; but Prince Marvel
would not let them do this.  However, they tied the false sorcerer to a
post, and the captain gave him a good whipping--one lash for each
letter in the words "grasshopper" and "June-bug."  Kwytoffle howled
loudly for mercy, but no one was at all sorry for him.

Wul-Takim tied a rope around the impostor's neck, and when the party
left the castle they journeyed all through the kingdom of Auriel, and
at every town or city they came to the reformed thief would cry out to
the populace:

"Here is the terrible sorcerer Kwytoffle, who threatened to change you
into grasshoppers and june-bugs.  But you may see that he is a very
common man, with no powers of sorcery whatever!"

And then the people would laugh and pelt mud at their former tyrant,
and thank Prince Marvel for haying exposed the false and wicked
creature.

And they called the son of their old king back to his lawful throne,
where he ruled wisely and well; and the hoarded wealth of Kwytoffle was
divided among the people again, and soon the country became prosperous
once more.

This adventure was very amusing to the pretty High Ki of Twi.  It
afforded them laughter for many days, and none of the party ever saw a
grasshopper or a june-bug afterward without thinking of the terrible
sorcerer Kwytoffle.

They left that disgraced person grooming horses for his board in the
stables of the new king, and proceeded upon their journey.

Without further event they reached the splendid southern Kingdom of
Plenta, which was the most delightfully situated of any dominion in the
Enchanted Island of Yew.  It was ruled by a good and generous queen,
who welcomed the strangers to her palace and gave a series of gay
entertainments in their honor.

King Terribus was especially an object of interest, for every one had
heard his name and feared him and his fierce people.  But when they
beheld his pleasant countenance and listened to his gentle voice they
began to regard him with much love and respect; and really Terribus was
worthy of their friendship since he had changed from a deformed monster
into an ordinary man, and had forbidden his people ever again to rob
and plunder their weaker neighbors.

But the most popular personages visiting at the court of the Queen of
Plenta were the lovely High Ki of Twi.  Although beautiful girls
abounded in this kingdom, none could compare with the royal twins, and
their peculiar condition only served to render them the more
interesting.

Two youths would approach the High Ki at the same time and invite them
to dance, and in united voices they would accept the invitation and go
whirling around the room with exactly the same steps, laughing at the
same instant and enjoying the dance equally.  But if one youth asked
his partner a question, both the twins would make answer, and that was
sure to confuse and embarrass the youth.  Still, the maids managed very
well to adapt themselves to the ways of people who were singular,
although they sometimes became a little homesick for Twi, where they
were like all the other people.

The bald-headed Ki kept watchful eyes on their youthful rulers, and
served them very cheerfully.  But with all their travels and
experiences, the old men could never be convinced it was better to be
singular than double.

Prince Marvel was the real hero of the party, and Nerle received much
attention on account of his master's popularity.  He did not seem as
unhappy as usual, and when the prince inquired the reason, his esquire
answered that he believed the excitement of their adventures was fast
curing him of his longing for something he could not have.  As for the
pleasure of suffering, he had had some experience of that, too, and it
was not nearly so delightful as he had expected.

Wul-Takim was not a society man, so he stayed around the royal stables
and made friends with the grooms, and traded his big black horse for
two bay ones and a gold neck-chain, and was fairly content with his lot.

And so the party enjoyed several happy weeks at the court of the good
Queen of Plenta, until one day the terrible news arrived that carried
them once more into exciting adventures.


23.  The Red Rogue of Dawna

One morning, while they were all standing in the courtyard waiting for
their horses, as they were about to go for a ride, a courier came
galloping swiftly up to the palace and cried:

"Does any one know where Prince Marvel can be found?"

"I am Prince Marvel," replied the young knight, stepping out from among
the others.

"Then have I reached my journey's end!" said the courier, whose horse
was nearly exhausted from long and hard riding.  "The Lady Seseley is
in great danger, and sends for you to come and rescue her.  The great
Baron Merd, her father, has been killed and his castle destroyed, and
all his people are either captives or have been slain outright."

"And who has done this evil thing?" asked Prince Marvel, looking very
stern and grave.

"The Red Rogue of Dawna," answered the messenger.  "He quarreled with
the Baron Merd and sent his savage hordes to tear down his castle and
slay him.  I myself barely escaped with my life, and the Lady Seseley
had but time to say, before she was carried off, that if I could find
Prince Marvel he would surely rescue her."

"And so I will!" declared the prince, "if she be still alive."

"Who is this Lady Seseley?" asked Nerle, who had come to his master's
side.

"She is my first friend, to whom I owe my very existence.  It is her
image, together with those of her two friends, which is graven on my
shield," answered Prince Marvel, thoughtfully.

"And what will you do?" inquired the esquire.

"I must go to her at once."

When they heard of his mission all the party insisted on accompanying
him.  Even the dainty High Ki could not be deterred by any thoughts of
dangers they might encounter; and after some discussion Prince Marvel
allowed them to join him.

So Wul-Takim sharpened his big broadsword, and Nerle carefully prepared
his master's horse, so that before an hour had passed they were
galloping toward the province of the Red Rogue of Dawna.

Prince Marvel knew little concerning this personage, but Nerle had much
to tell of him.  The Red Rogue had once been page to a wise scholar and
magician, who lived in a fine old castle in Dawna and ruled over a
large territory.  The boy was very small and weak--smaller even than
the average dwarf--and his master did not think it worth while to watch
him.  But one evening, while the magician was standing upon the top of
the highest tower of his castle, the boy gave him a push from behind,
and he met death on the sharp rocks below.  Then the boy took his
master's book of magic and found a recipe to make one grow.  He made
the mixture and swallowed it, and straightway began to grow big and
tall.  This greatly delighted him, until he found he was getting much
bigger than the average man and rapidly becoming a giant.  So he sought
for a way to arrest the action of the magical draft; but before he
could find it he had grown to enormous proportions, and was bigger than
the biggest giant.  There was nothing in the book of magic to make one
grow smaller, so he was obliged to remain as he was--the largest man in
the Enchanted Island.

All this had happened in a single night.  The morning after his
master's murder the page announced himself lord of the castle; and,
seeing his enormous size, none dared deny his right to rule.  On
account of his bushy hair, which was fiery red in color, and the bushy
red beard that covered his face when he became older, people came to
call him the Red One.  And after his evil deeds and quarrelsome temper
had made him infamous throughout the island, people began to call him
the Red Rogue of Dawna.

He had gathered around him a number of savage barbarians, as wicked and
quarrelsome as himself, and so none dared to interfere with him, or
even to meet him, if it were possible to avoid it.

This same Red Rogue it was who had drawn the good Baron Merd into a
quarrel and afterward slain the old knight and his followers, destroyed
his castle, and carried his little daughter Seseley and her girl
friends, Berna and Helda, into captivity, shutting them up in his own
gloomy castle.

The Red Rogue thought he had done a very clever thing, and had no fear
of the consequences until one of his men came running up to the castle
to announce that Prince Marvel and his companions were approaching to
rescue the Lady Seseley.

"How many of them are there?" demanded the Red Rogue.

"There are eight, altogether," answered the man, "but two of them are
girls."

"And they expect to force me to give up my captives?" asked the Red
One, laughing with a noise like the roar of a waterfall.  "Why, I shall
make prisoners of every one of them!"

The man looked at his master fearfully, and replied:

"This Prince Marvel is very famous, and all people speak of his bravery
and power.  It was he who conquered King Terribus of Spor, and that
mighty ruler is now his friend, and is one of the eight who approach."

The Red Rogue stopped laughing, for the fame of Spor's terrible king
had long ago reached him.  And he reflected that any one who could
conquer the army of giants and dwarfs and Gray Men that served Terribus
must surely be one to be regarded seriously.  Moreover--and this was a
secret--the Red Rogue had never been able to gain the strength to
correspond with his gigantic size, but had ever remained as weak as
when he was a puny boy.  So he was accustomed to rely on his cunning
and on the terror his very presence usually excited to triumph over his
enemies.  And he began to be afraid of this prince.

"You say two of the party are girls?" he asked.

"Yes," said the man, "but also among them are King Terribus himself,
and the renowned Wul-Takim, formerly king of thieves, who was conquered
by the prince, although accounted a hard fighter, and is now his
devoted servant.  And there are two old men who are just alike and have
a very fierce look about them.  They are said to come from the hidden
Kingdom of Twi."

By this time the Red Rogue was thoroughly frightened, but he did not
yet despair of defeating his enemies.  He knew better than to attempt
to oppose Prince Marvel by force, but he still hoped to conquer him by
trickery and deceit.

Among the wonderful things that the Red Rogue's former master, the wise
scholar and magician, had made were two large enchanted mirrors, which
were set on each side of the great hallway of the castle.  Heavy
curtains were drawn over the surfaces of these mirrors, because they
both possessed a dreadful magical power.  For whenever any one looked
into one of them his reflection was instantly caught and imprisoned in
the mirror, and his body at the same time became invisible to all
earthly eyes, only the mirror retaining his form.

While considering a way to prevent the prince from freeing the Lady
Seseley, the Red Rogue happened to think of these mirrors, which had
never yet been used.  So he went stealthily into the great hall and
drew aside the covering from one of the mirrors.  He did not dare look
into the mirror himself, but hurried away to another room, and then
sent a page up a back stairway to summon the Lady Seseley and her two
maids into his presence.

The girls at once obeyed, for they greatly feared the Red Rogue; and of
course they descended the front stairway and walked through the great
hall.  At once the large mirror that had been exposed to view caught
the eye of Seseley, and she paused to regard her reflection in the
glass.  Her two companions did likewise, and instantly all three girls
became invisible, while the mirror held their reflections fast in its
magic surface.

The Red Rogue was watching them through a crack in the door, and seeing
the girls disappear he gave a joyful laugh and exclaimed:

"Now let Prince Marvel find them if he can!"

The three girls began to wander aimlessly through the castle; for not
only were they invisible to others, but also to themselves and to one
another, and they knew not what to do nor which way to turn.


24.  The Enchanted Mirrors

Presently Prince Marvel and his party arrived and paused before the
doors of the castle, where the Red Rogue stood bowing to them with mock
politeness and with an evil grin showing on his red face.

"I come to demand the release of the Lady Seseley and her companions!"
Prince Marvel announced, in a bold voice.  "And I also intend to call
you to account for the murder of Baron Merd."

"You must be at the wrong castle," answered the Red One, "for I have
murdered no baron, nor have I any Lady Seseley as prisoner."

"Are you not the Red Rogue of Dawna?" demanded the prince.

"Men call me by that name," acknowledged the other.

"Then you are deceiving me," said the prince.

"No, indeed!" answered the Red Rogue, mockingly.  "I wouldn't deceive
any one for the world.  But, if you don't believe me, you are welcome
to search my castle."

"That I shall do," returned the prince, sternly, "whether I have your
permission or not," and he began to dismount.  But Nerle restrained
him, saying:

"Master, I beg you will allow me to search the castle.  For this Red
Rogue is playing some trick upon us, I am sure, and if anything
happened to you there would be no one to protect the little High Ki and
our other friends."

"But suppose something should happen to you?" inquired the prince,
anxiously.

"In that case," said Nerle, "you can avenge me."

The advice was so reasonable, under the circumstances, that the prince
decided to act upon it.

"Very well," said he, "go and search the castle, and I will remain with
our friends.  But if anything happens to you, I shall call the Red
Rogue to account."

So Nerle entered the castle, passing by the huge form of its owner, who
only nodded to the boy and grinned with delight.

The esquire found himself in the great hall and began to look around
him, but without seeing any one.  Then he advanced a few steps and, to
his surprise, discovered a large mirror, in which were reflected the
faces and forms of three girls, as well as his own.

"Why, here they are!" he attempted to say; but he could not hear his
own voice.  He glanced down at himself but could see nothing at
all--for his body had become invisible.  His reflection was still in
the glass, and he knew that his body existed the same as before; but
although he yet saw plainly the hall and all that it contained, he
could see neither himself nor any other person of flesh.

After waiting a considerable time for his esquire to reappear Prince
Marvel became impatient.

"What have you done with Nerle?" he asked of the Red Rogue.

"Nothing," was the reply.  "I have been here, plainly within your
sight, every moment."

"Let me go and find him!" exclaimed King Terribus, and rushed into the
castle before the prince could reply.  But Terribus also encountered
the enchanted mirror, and the prince waited in vain for his return.

Then Wul-Takim volunteered to go in search of the others, and drew his
big, sharp sword before entering the hall.  But an hour passed by and
he did not return.

The Red Rogue was overjoyed at the success of his stratagem, and could
scarce refrain from laughing outright at the prince's anxiety.

Marvel was really perplexed.  He knew some treachery was afoot, but
could not imagine what it was.  And when the pretty High Ki declared
their intention of entering the castle, he used every endeavor to
dissuade them.  But the twin girls would not be denied, so great was
their curiosity.  So the prince said:

"Well, we will all go together, so that the Ki and I may be able to
protect you."

The Red Rogue gladly granted them admittance, and they passed him and
entered the great hall.

The place appeared to them to be completely empty, so they walked along
and came opposite the mirror.  Here all stopped at once, and the twin
High Ki uttered exclamations of surprise, and the twin Ki shouted,
"Great Kika-koo!"

For there in the glass were the reflections of the three girls and
Nerle and King Terribus and Wul-Takim.  And there were also the
reflections of the twin High Ki and the twin Ki. Only Prince Marvel's
reflection was missing, and this was because of his fairy origin.  For
the glass could reflect and hold only the forms of mortals.

But the prince saw the reflections of all the others, and then made the
discovery that the forms of the Ki and the High Ki had become
invisible.  No one except himself appeared to be standing in the great
hall of the Red Rogue's castle!  Yet grouped within the glass were the
likenesses of all his friends, as well as those of Lady Seseley and her
companions; and all were staring back at him earnestly, as if imploring
him to save them.

The mystery was now explained, and Prince Marvel rushed from the hall
to find the treacherous Red Rogue.  But that clever trickster had
hidden himself in an upper room, and for the present was safely
concealed.

For a time Prince Marvel could not think what to do.  Such magic was
all unknown to him, and how to free the imprisoned forms of his friends
was a real problem.  He walked around the castle, but no one was in
sight, the Rogue having given orders to all his people to keep away.
Only the tethered horses did he see, and these raised their heads and
whinnied as if in sympathy with his perplexity.

Then he went back into the hall and searched all the rooms of the
castle without finding a single person.  On his return he stopped in
front of the mirror and sorrowfully regarded the faces of his friends,
who again seemed to plead for relief.

And while he looked a sudden fit of anger came over him at being
outwitted by this Red Rogue of Dawna.  Scarcely knowing what he did, he
seized his sword by the blade and struck the mirror a powerful blow
with the heavy hilt.  It shattered into a thousand fragments, which
fell clattering upon the stone floor in every direction.  And at once
the charm was broken; each of his friends now became visible.  They
appeared running toward him from all parts of the castle, where they
had been wandering in their invisible forms.

They called out joyful greetings to one another, and then all of them
surrounded the prince and thanked him earnestly for releasing them.

The little Lady Seseley and her friends, Berna and Helda, were a bit
shy in the presence of so many strangers; but they alone knew the
prince's secret, and that he was a fairy transformed for a year; so
they regarded him as an old and intimate acquaintance, and after being
introduced by him to the others of his party they became more at ease.

The sweet little High Ki maids at once attracted Seseley, and she loved
them almost at first sight.  But it was Nerle who became the little
lady's staunchest friend; for there was something rather mystical and
unnatural to him about the High Ki, who seemed almost like fairies,
while in Seseley he recognized a hearty, substantial girl of his own
rank in life.

While they stood talking and congratulating one another outside of the
castle, the Red Rogue of Dawna appeared among them.  He had heard the
noise of the smashing of his great mirror, and had come running
downstairs from his hiding-place to find his cunning had all been for
naught and his captives were free.

A furious anger then took possession of the Rogue, and forgetting his
personal weakness he caught up a huge battle-ax and rushed out to hurl
himself upon Prince Marvel, intending to do him serious injury.

But the prince was not taken unawares.  He saw the Red Rogue coming and
met him with drawn sword, striking quickly at the arm that wielded the
big ax.  The stroke was as sure as it was quick, and piercing the arm
of the giant caused him to drop the ax with a howl of pain.

Then Prince Marvel seized the Red Rogue by the ear--which he was just
tall enough to reach--and dragged him up the steps and into the castle,
the big fellow crying for mercy at every step and trembling like a leaf
through cowardice.

But down the hall Marvel marched him, seeking some room where the Rogue
might be safely locked in.  The great curtain that covered the second
enchanted mirror now caught Prince Marvel's eye, and, still holding his
prisoner by the ear, he reached out his left hand and pulled aside the
drapery.

The Red Rogue looked to see what his captor was doing, and beheld his
own reflection in the magic mirror.  Instantly he gave a wild cry and
disappeared, his body becoming absolutely invisible, while his coarse
red countenance stared back from the mirror.

And then Prince Marvel gave a sigh of relief and dropped the curtain
over the surface of the mirror.  For he realized that the Red Rogue of
Dawna had at last met with just punishment and was safely imprisoned
for all time.


25.  The Adventurers Separate

When Prince Marvel and his friends had ridden away from the castle the
savage followers of the Red One came creeping up to listen for their
master's voice.  But silence reigned in every part of the castle, and
after stealing fearfully through the rooms without seeing any one the
fellows became filled with terror and fled from the place, never to
return.

And afterward the neighbors whispered that the castle was haunted by
the spirit of the terrible Red Rogue, and travelers dared not stop in
the neighborhood, but passed by quickly and with averted faces.

The prince and his party rode gaily along toward the Kingdom of Heg,
for Nerle had invited them all to visit his father's castle.  They were
very happy over their escape, and only the little Lady Seseley became
sad at times, when she thought of her father's sad fate.

The Baron Neggar, who was Nerle's father, was not only a wealthy
nobleman, but exceedingly kind and courteous; so that every member of
Prince Marvel's party was welcomed to the big castle in a very
hospitable manner.

Nerle was eagerly embraced by both his father and mother, who were
overjoyed to see him return safe and sound after his wanderings and
adventures.

"And have you been cured of your longing for something that you can not
have?" asked the baron, anxiously.

"Not quite," said Nerle, laughing; "but I am more reconciled to my lot.
For I find wherever I go people are longing for just the things they
can not get, and probably would not want if they had them.  So, as it
seems to be the fate of most mortals to live unsatisfied, I shall try
hereafter to be more contented."

These words delighted the good baron, and he gave a rich and
magnificent feast in honor of his son's return.

The High Ki of Twi, after passing several pleasant days at Nerle's
home, now decided that they had seen enough of the world and would be
glad to return to their own kingdom, where all was peaceful and
uneventful, and rule it to the end of their days.  So the baron
furnished them an escort of twenty men-at-arms, and these conducted the
High Ki and the aged Ki safely back to the hole in the hedge.

And after they had entered the Land of Twi, the first act of the High
Ki was to order the hedge repaired and the hole blocked up; and I have
never heard that any one, from that time forth, ever succeeded in
gaining admittance to the hidden kingdom.  So its subsequent history is
unknown.

King Terribus also bade the prince an affectionate farewell and rode
back to his own kingdom; and burly Wul-Takim accompanied him as far as
the cave, where the fifty-eight reformed thieves awaited him.

Nerle's mother gladly adopted the Lady Seseley and her two companions,
and thereafter they made their home at the baron's castle.  And years
afterward, when they had grown to be women, Seseley was married to
Nerle and became the lady of the castle herself.

Prince Marvel enjoyed the feasting and dancing at the castle very much,
but after the party began to break up, and the High Ki and the Ki had
left him, as well as King Terribus and honest Wul-Takim, the young
knight grew thoughtful and sometimes uneasy, and his happy laugh was
less frequently heard.  Nerle often regarded his young master with a
feeling of awe, for there occasionally came a look into Marvel's eyes
that reminded him more of the immortals than of any human being.  But
the prince treated him with rare kindness and always pressed Nerle's
hand affectionately when he bade him good night, for he had grown fond
of his esquire.  Also they had long conversations together, during
which Nerle gleaned a great deal of knowledge and received some advice
that was of much use to him in his later life.

One day Prince Marvel sought out Lady Seseley and said:

"Will you ride with me to the Forest of Lurla?"

"Willingly," she answered; and calling Berna and Helda to attend them,
they mounted their horses and rode swiftly away, for it was a long
distance to Lurla.

By noon the party entered the forest, and although the path they
traversed was unknown to the girls, who had usually entered the forest
from its other side, near to where the Baron Merd's castle had stood,
the prince seemed to have no difficulty in finding his way.

He guided them carefully along the paths, his handsome war-charger
stepping with much grace and dignity, until at length they came to a
clearing.

Here the prince paused abruptly, and Seseley looked around her and at
once recognized the place.

"Why," she exclaimed, in surprise, "it is the Fairy Bower!"

And then she turned to Prince Marvel and asked in a soft voice:

"Is the year ended, Prince?"

His smile was a bit sad as he answered, slowly:

"The year will be ended in five minutes!"


26.  The End of the Year

The girls sat upon the green moss and waited.  Prince Marvel stood
silent beside his horse.  The silver armor was as bright as the day he
donned it, nor was there a dent in his untarnished shield.  The sword
that had done such good service he held lightly in his hand, and the
horse now and then neighed softly and turned to look at him with
affectionate eyes.

Seseley began to tremble with excitement, and Berna and Helda stared at
the prince with big round eyes.

But, after all, they saw nothing so remarkable as they expected.  For
presently--and it all happened in a flash--Prince Marvel was gone from
their midst, and a handsome, slender-limbed deer darted from the bower
and was quickly lost in the thick forest.  On the ground lay a sheet of
bark and a twig from a tree, and beside them was Lady Seseley's white
velvet cloak.

Then the three girls each drew a long breath and looked into one
another's eyes, and, while thus engaged, a peal of silvery laughter
sounded in their ears and made them spring quickly to their feet.

Before them stood a tiny and very beautiful fairy, clothed in floating
gossamer robes of rose and pearl color, and with eyes sparkling like
twin stars.

"Prince Marvel!" exclaimed the three, together.

"No, indeed!" cried the fairy, with a pretty little pout.  "I am no one
but myself; and, really, I believe I shall now be content to exist for
a few hundred years in my natural form.  I have quite enjoyed my year
as a mortal; but after all there are, I find, some advantages in being
a fairy.  Good by, my dears!"

And with another ripple of laughter the pretty creature vanished, and
the girls were left alone.


27.  A Hundred Years Afterward

About a hundred years after Prince Marvel enjoyed his strange
adventures in the Enchanted Island of Yew an odd thing happened.

A hidden mirror in a crumbling old castle of Dawna broke loose from its
fastenings and fell crashing on the stone pavement of the deserted
hall.  And from amid the ruins rose the gigantic form of a man.  His
hair and beard were a fiery red, and he gazed at the desolation around
him in absolute amazement.

It was the Red Rogue of Dawna, set free from his imprisonment.

He wandered out and found strange scenes confronting him, for during
the hundred years a great change had taken place in the Enchanted
Island.  Great cities had been built and great kingdoms established.
Civilization had won the people, and they no longer robbed or fought or
indulged in magical arts, but were busily employed and leading
respectable lives.

When the Red Rogue tried to tell folks who he was, they but laughed at
him, thinking the fellow crazy.  He tried to get together a band of
thieves, as Wul-Takim had done in the old days, but none would join him.

And so, forced to be honest against his will, the Rogue was driven to
earn a living by digging in the garden of a wealthy noble, of whom he
had never before heard.

But often he would pause in his labors and lean on his spade, while
thoughts of the old days of wild adventure passed through his mind in
rapid succession; and then the big man would shake his red head with a
puzzled air and mutter:

"I wonder who that Prince Marvel could have been!  And I wonder what
ever became of him!"