"Aye, so it is yet," he told me. "The Danes cannot take the city,
try what they will, though they dug a great ditch round the
Southwark fort, and took ships through it above the bridge, and so
kept us shut up close enough. But walls and forts and citizens are
too much for them. Now the siege is but a blind, while the real
warfare is to be in Wessex. So I came away with the Danes, my men
being tired of unprofitable warfare where we were not wanted, and
gaining, moreover, neither gold nor honour."

"You came away with the Danes?" I cried. "Surely you made no pact
with them?"

"Not I," said he. "But they sailed with an evening tide, which was
my chance. Ten ships among four hundred or so make no odds. We took
off the dragon heads, and when it was quite dark rowed down after
them, and so caught them up at Greenwich. Then we slipped through
the fleet easily, for it was mostly of cargo ships full of men, and
no one paid any heed to us, as might be supposed. So by daylight we
led the fleet, or nearly, and when the next night came we stood
away from it, going across Channel. Then I came here to see if
Wulfnoth or Godwine would cruise with me on some other shore, as I
promised."

Then I asked him what I had better do, for with the sight of his
face came the longing to be free again.

"Come with me," he said. "I am going to win ransom from a town or
two against the time when I shall need gold wherewith to win men to
me in Norway."

I think that I should have done this in the end, though I did not
like to leave England without striking one more blow for Eadmund,
and I cannot deny that I thought that Uldra would blame me if I did
leave our land when she needed every sword that would strike for
her. I had come to think very much of what the steadfast eyes of
the brave maiden would tell me as I watched her face.

But that evening came Wulfnoth and Godwine, and they had made a
plan for themselves which might help me to reach Eadmund when my
freedom came. They had manors on the Severn, at Berkeley, and the
earl would go there to save them if possible from plunder. At
least, that is what he told me and Olaf. Whether he had any other
deeper plan I cannot say. It seemed afterwards as if that might be
so.

They brought back some strange news, too, at which both Olaf and I
wondered. There was a rumour spreading through the country from
Winchester that Cnut would wed Emma the queen.

"It is not likely," said Olaf. "She is twenty years older than he."

"If any man wants revenge on Cnut, I would counsel him to go and do
all he can to see that this marriage comes to pass," sneered the
earl, in his hatred of the Norman lady.

"What says Redwald?" asked Godwine.

"First, that the queen has little choice in the matter," said I;
"and next, that, between ourselves, I think that she would do much
to remain a queen in truth, if it must be over Denmark instead of
England; and lastly, that if Cnut weds her, he keeps the duke, her
brother, quiet, and maybe brings over more of our people to his
side."

It was only too plain now that Cnut had a party for him in England,
and I thought that he tried to strengthen it thus, if the report
were true. But it seemed hardly possible; so much so, that when I
turned the question over in speaking with Olaf presently, we
thought that no man could have invented the story, and that it must
be true.

Now Olaf and I went to Penhurst on the next day, for though he
would not stop long in England, he would see and thank these good
friends of mine for their care of me. And great was the rejoicing
when he came.

I had told him of Uldra, and presently he bade Ottar, who was with
us, sing of Leavenheath fight, and so spoke quietly with her,
sitting a little apart in the shadow of the hall, for he wished to
tell her also that he owed her thanks.

When the end of the long summer day came, and he must go back to
the ships--for he would not sleep away from them--I went with him
in order to see all that I might of him before he left, for I had
made up my mind to go westward with Godwine, seeing that my promise
to Egil was to bide in peace with Wulfnoth till the time came when
I was free.

So as we rode with no other near us, he said:

"What of Hertha, my cousin?"

"I know not," I answered. "I have heard nought, nor shall I now
till I go back to Bures."

"Shall you hold to your betrothal?"

"Aye; the ladies think that it is my part to do so."

"So you asked them? Is that why fair Sexberga is so dull and
restless?"

I laughed, for he had heard Ottar jesting about the fair maid at
Penhurst more than once.

"No," I answered. "She has been crossing her lover, and he is in
dudgeon for a while--that is all."

"I am glad," he said. "Asked you aught of Uldra?"

"I have not spoken of it to her."

"Is that so?" said Olaf, smiling. "Now she is likely to have more
than common interest in you, for one reason or another."

Then I said frankly, knowing what he meant:

"And I in her. That is partly the reason why I must go with
Wulfnoth and Godwine westward. And the rest of the reason is this,
that I would be near Eadmund. And maybe if I looked to find more
reason yet it would be to leave Sexberga to work out matters
without having me to fall back on when Eldred is to be made
jealous."

Thereat Olaf laughed long.

"You have had an ill time with the womenfolk of late," he said, and
it was true enough.

"I have," said I, "and I am tired thereof. I shall be glad to be
where byrnies and swords are more common than kirtles and
distaffs."

Yet in my mind I knew that I should not leave Uldra with much
cheerfulness. Such companionship as ours had been, strange and full
of peril, was a closer bond than even the care of me that had made
me think twice or more about Sexberga. Thoughts of her came lightly
in idleness, but when I thought of Uldra, there was comradeship
that had borne the strain of peril.

Now I knew well what that comradeship might easily ripen into, and
maybe, because I knew it, what I would not allow had begun. But
Uldra had never given me any reason to think that this was so with
her.

Olaf said that maybe I was right, and after that we talked of his
doings, wondering now when we should meet again, for we were going
different ways. Our parting was not as it had been before, when we
knew that sooner or later we should forgather in one place or the
other.

"I think, my cousin," he said, "that the time will soon come when I
shall head north again for Norway, and I long for the sign that I
must go. I am going to sail now towards Jerusalem Land, that I may
at least try to see the Holy Places before I die. It may be that I
shall reach that land, and it may be not, but when the sign comes I
must turn back and go to fight the last fight that shall be between
Christian and heathen in our country."

So he said to me before his ship sailed with the morning tide. And
I had no words in which to answer him, for his going seemed to
leave me friendless again, so much had we been at one together.
Almost had I taken up that journey to the Holy Land with him, but I
thought that if it was a good and pious thing to go on that
pilgrimage for myself, it was even more so to bide for the sake of
king and country here in the land that should be holy for all of us
who are English. And when I said that to Olaf, he smiled brightly
and answered:

"If old Norway called for me, I would say the same. You are right."

Thus we parted, and I watched his sails fade and sink into the rim
of the southern sea, and then rode back to Relf feeling as if the
time to come had little brightness for me.

I went slowly, and by the longer way, for I had much to think of,
and I cared not just yet for the light talk of the happy people in
the Penhurst hall. And so I came into the way that leads across the
woodland through Ashburnham and so by the upper hammer ponds to
Penhurst, and when I was about a mile from the hall I met Uldra
coming from a side track.

"Why, thane," she said in her bright way, "is aught amiss?"

"I have lost my kinsman, lady," I said, "and I have none other left
me. Therefore I am sad enough. But these things must be, and the
shadow of parting will pass presently."

I got off my horse and walked beside her, and I was glad that I had
met her first of all. She had been to some sick thrall, and was now
returning.

"Partings are hard," she said, "but one may always hope to meet
again."

Then I said, speaking my thoughts:

"I must go west into Wessex with the earl's ships, and I have more
partings to come therefore."

She made no answer at once, and I thought that none was needed; but
when she spoke again her voice was graver than before.

"You would be near our king if possible by doing so?"

"That is my thought," I answered. "If I wait in this pleasant place
I may be far from him when the day comes that I should stand at his
side again."

"You have six weeks--not so much by two days--yet," she said
thoughtfully. "It is not long. Then you will be fighting once
more."

"I hope so--and not in vain at last," I answered. "All our land
longs for peace."

"Aye, and they tell me that you have a search to make," she said,
looking away across the woodlands that lay down the valley to our
right. "I fear there will be sorrow if--if you fall."

"Aye, I have a search that has been made hard for me," I said
somewhat bitterly. "Truly I had not thought of falling; but it is
in my mind that little grief will be in that quarter if I do so.
Those who might have ended the search in an hour or two have kept
their charge more deeply hidden than ever from me."

"Is that the maiden's doing, think you?" she said, hesitating a
little, for the question was not an easy one for her to put, maybe.
But it was like her to make excuse for others.

"I cannot tell," said I, "but I think it likely. We were but
children, and she fears me now."

"That is to be seen," she said; "but I hope that you will find her.
What shall you do if--if she loves you not now?"

"I would let her go free, surely."

"Even if you found you loved her yet?"

"Aye. I would not hold her bound were she unwilling."

"But if it were the other way--if she would wed you willingly, and
you--well, were unwilling?"

"I would keep troth," said I; "she should not know it."

She laughed softly and answered:

"You could not hide that from her."

Then I fell silent, for I liked not this subject at any time--still
less from Uldra. And I think that she saw that I was displeased at
her questioning, for after a little while she said shyly:

"I think that I have asked you too closely about your affairs.
Forgive me--women are anxious about such matters."

"It is a trouble to me, lady," I said, hardening my heart lest I
should say too much; "but I can see no further than the coming
warfare. When that is ended there will be time for me to think more
thereof. But, as I have said, I believe that Hertha wishes that she
were not bound."

Now I had almost said "even as I wish," but I stopped in time.

"Now, whether that is so or not, she should think well of you for
your faith kept to her," Uldra said, and there was a little shake
in her voice as of tears close at hand.

Then I knew that if she kept faith with me as I with her--though
this was in a poor way enough--I must think well of her also.
Wherefore, being obliged thus to think of one another, it would be
likely enough that there would be pretence of love on both
sides--and so things would be bad. Whereupon the puzzle in my mind
grew more tangled yet, and I waxed savage, being so helpless.

And all the while those two words that came to me as I talked to
Relf grew plainer, and seemed to ring in my ears unspoken,
"Landless and luckless--landless and luckless," for that was what
it all came to.

Then Uldra looked at me and saw the trouble in my face, and took
what seemed to her to be the only way to help me.

"You cannot think of these matters now, Redwald," she said softly.
"It is well for a warrior that he has none who is bound to him so
closely that he must ever think of her. It is well for Hertha that
she knows not what peril you are in--that she cannot picture you to
herself--"

She stopped with a sob that she could not check, and stayed her
walk as if she had tripped. I turned to her, and put out my hand,
and she leant on my arm with both hers for a moment, hanging her
head down, and I thought she was faint, for my pace had quickened.
So I waited till she raised her head again, longing to help her
more and yet not daring to do so, lest I should give way altogether
and say all I would. And then I said:

"Let me set you on the horse--you are weary with keeping step with
me."

She shook her head, but she said nothing, and so I lifted her and
set her in the saddle, and the colour came back to her face.

"Thanks, thane," she said, "I am very foolish. I have been setting
myself in your Hertha's place--as if she knew aught of you now.
Aye, it is better as it is for both of you, as things must be for a
while."

And I thought to myself:

"Would that you were in Hertha's place;" and then this other
thought, "She says right--landless and luckless am I, and there is
none to trouble about me--nor shall there be."

"But I was going to tell you this, if I may," she said, "I will
pray night and day that things may be well for you and yours in the
end."

"Aye, pray therefor, Uldra," I answered, and thereafter we said no
more, for the hall gates were before us, and the dogs came out to
bid us welcome, and the thralls followed them to see who came. I
helped her from the horse, and she smiled and went in.

Now, I saw Uldra no more that night, and Sexberga was unfriendly
with me because Eldred still kept away. So I had my thoughts to
myself while Relf slept as was his wont after supper, and the lady
of the house turned her wheel as ever. I think that I would not
wish any man to have such strange and sad thoughts as mine were at
that time. There was nought of which I could be sure--save of
Uldra's friendship, and of that it were better not to think, maybe.


Chapter 14: The Last Great Battle.


Ten days after I spoke thus with Uldra I was at Berkeley with
Wulfnoth and Godwine. That was in the third week in June, while I
was on my honour not to fight for a month yet. I had parted from
Uldra as from a dear friend and no more, though well I knew now
that she was more than that to me. And there had been a look in her
face, moreover, that bided with me, making me wretched and yet
glad, for it told me that her thoughts were as mine. And more than
that neither of us would show. The tide of war had hold of me, and
whither it would drift me none could say. Nor did I lose much. I
had nought to lose as it seemed to me.

As for the rest of those who were such good friends of mine at
Penhurst, they had wished me hearty God-speeds, bidding me return
again, and that soon. Eldred of Dallington and Sexberga stood hand
in hand as I went, vowing that they would not be content till I
returned for their wedding, for there was no trouble between them
since the young thane had come in from his place one day as if
nought had happened, calling me to walk with him when Sexberga had
feigned to wish for none of his company. After which he had talked
lightly of going to Wessex with the earl and me; and he had no
further trouble. I know not what he said presently in private to
Sexberga, but he was the one who led thereafter, and I think that
the maiden was the happier that it was so. There are some maids who
will seem to wish to rule, though they are longing all the while to
be ruled.

So we came up the Severn river to Berkeley, passing the endless
lines of Danish ships that lay along the strand below Anst cliffs
and Oldbury. Cnut's ship guard held the ancient fort in force, men
said. His men boarded us, but Wulfnoth's name was well known, and
it was not Cnut's plan to make an enemy of him. So we went on our
way unhindered, and I bided, chafing sorely, in the great house
where Wulfnoth lived in no state at all, as if he were but a rich
franklin--gray clad and rough in ways and talk.

Now it is hard to me to think of what passed so close to me while I
was helpless. But I saw nought of the battle that was at
Pen-Selwood, and even as I heard thereof from men who had left the
levy, the greatest battle of all was being fought within a
morning's ride of us, at Sherston.

Two days that battle raged, and all men say that Eadmund would
surely have chased the Danes in the end to their ships, but for a
trick of Edric Streone's. It was another count in the long score
against him, and I seemed to see that the words of the witch of
Senlac were coming true--his shadow was over our king, for ill in
all things.

The battle was going against Cnut--once Eadmund himself had cut his
way through the press of Danes before their king, and had almost
come to hand strokes with him, but had been borne back. And then
Streone's eyes lit on one Osmer, a warrior of the Danish host,
standing near him, and he saw that he was like our king. Therefore
he slew him, and set his head on a spear, and rode forward to where
the English line pressed most hardly on the Danish ranks. There he
raised the head aloft, shouting in his great voice:

"Fly, English, fly! Eadmund is dead. Know his head!"

Then for a moment panic seized our folk, and they held their hands,
and in that pause Ulf the jarl charged among them, and the line was
broken and flight began.

But Eadmund unhelmed when he heard the cry that he was slain, and
rode through the ranks, and our men knew him, and cheered, and fell
on the Danes afresh, and the broken line closed up, and they fought
till night fell, and in the night the Danes drew off. And in the
night by twos and threes, and then in companies, Eadmund's levies
melted away from him, for his men were worn out and sick of
slaughter, and knew not enough to bid them stay to follow their
foes and turn retreat into rout, and doubt into victory. The Danes
were going, they saw and heard; what need to stay longer?

So it came to pass that nothing was wrought by that awful fighting,
and both sides claimed victory, for our men deemed that they had
won, and the Danes claimed it because they were not followed, and
because Ulf the jarl had cut through our line.

It was through this last that I lost Godwine as a companion. For
Ulf lost himself in the forest that was in the rear of our forces,
because he followed the flying too far, and the dusk of the evening
was close at hand. He thought that the victory was surely won, for
it had ever been that the first sign of flight was followed by rout
of our men. At least the Danes learnt this at Sherston, that
Eadmund could hold his own against them.

So Ulf the jarl wandered all night in the wood, and came out of it
on the hillside where Godwine was speaking to one of his father's
shepherds. And Godwine brought him, unknowing who he was, back to
Berkeley.

Then maybe came into Wulfnoth's mind that rede of the witch of
Senlac, that bade Godwine mind his sheep, and so find his place, or
else this was part of the plan which had brought him into Wessex.
For he asked Ulf to take Godwine to Cnut, and find him a place in
his court, and the jarl did so. It was not until Godwine came to
the ships that he knew who it was that he had guided, and they won
him over, and he stayed.

