2. The King.
    a. Height,--one and a half feet; a golden dwarf.
    b. Legs,--little and yellow.
    c. Face,--as before.
    d. Doublet,--slashed, of spun gold, prismatic colors.
    e. Hair,--exquisitely delicate curls.
    f. Features,--coppery, fierce and determined in expression.

IV. Fourth Appearance.

1. Same as in third appearance.

V. Different Forms the King Assumes:

1. To Hans:
a. A small dog, dying of thirst; tongue hanging out, jaws dry;
   almost lifeless; ants crawling about its lips and throat.
b. A fair child, nearly lifeless; breast heaving with thirst; eyes
   closed; lips parched and burning.
   c.  An old man; sunken features; deadly pale and expressing despair.

2. To Schwartz:
    a. The fair child as it appeared to Hans.
    b. The old man who appeared to Hans.
    c. Brother Hans exhausted and begging for water.

3. To Gluck:
    a. An old man leaning on a staff.
    b. A little child panting by the roadside.
    c. A little dog gasping for breath, which changes into the king.

There are a great many things besides vivid descriptions that make The
King of the Golden River a fine story. But it is not a good idea to
study any selection in literature too long or too hard, for in so doing
we are likely to lose our interest in the selection or even to take a
dislike to it. You know if we look too long at a beautiful sunset our
eyes grow weary and we seem to lose our power to admire it, but when the
next evening comes, with another glorious sunset, we are just as much
interested in it as ever. So it is with reading. If a thing is really
brilliant, we may look at it so long that our minds become tired; but we
can leave it for a while and come back to it with renewed interest.

Accordingly, when we have studied the descriptions of The King of the
Golden River we have probably done enough for one day or one time, at
least. Some other time we shall enjoy returning to it and finding new
things. For instance, we might like to see how many beautiful sentences,
or what great thoughts we can find well expressed.

Of the fine quotations here are two:

"And there were bright tongues of fiery cloud burning and quivering
about them; and the river, brighter than all, fell, in a waving column
of pure gold."

"A flash of blue lightning rose out of the east, shaped like a sword; it
shook thrice over the whole heaven, and left it dark with one heavy,
impenetrable shade."


THE STORY OF ESTHER


I


Now it came to pass in the third year of the reign of Ahasuerus, when
the king sat on the throne which is in Shushan the palace, he made a
feast unto all his princes and servants, and showed the riches of his
glorious kingdom for many days.

And when these days were expired, the king made a feast in Shushan the
palace, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace.

The silken hangings were white, green, and blue, fastened with cords of
fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble; and the
couches were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and
white, and black marble.

On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry, he commanded
the chamberlains that served in his presence to bring Vashti the queen
before the king with the crown royal, to show the people and the princes
her beauty; for she was fair to look on.

But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king's commandment by his
chamberlains; therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger burned in
him.

Then the king said to the wise men, "What shall I do unto Queen Vashti
because she has not performed the commandment of the King?"

And they answered before the king, "Vashti the queen hath done wrong not
to the king only, but also to the princes and to all the people in all
the provinces of the king's dominions. Therefore, if it please the king,
let there go a royal commandment from him, and let it be written among
the laws of the Persians and the Medes, which may not be altered,
'Vashti shall come no more before King Ahasuerus;' and let the king give
her royal estate unto another that is better than she."

And the saying pleased the king and the princes, and the king did
according to the word of the wise men.


II


After these things, when the wrath of King Ahasuerus was appeased, the
servants that ministered unto the king said, "Let there be fair young
virgins sought for the king. And let the king appoint officers in all
the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair
young virgins unto Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, unto
the custody of Hege the king's chamberlain, and let the maiden which
pleaseth the king be queen instead of Vashti."

And the thing pleased the king; and he did so.

Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name was
Mordecai, who had been carried from Jerusalem into captivity by
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and who brought up Esther, his
uncle's daughter. She had neither father nor mother, and the maid was
fair and beautiful; whom Mordecai took for his own daughter. So it came
to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree were heard, and when
many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the palace, that Esther
was brought also unto the king's house, to the custody of Hege.

The maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness of him, and he
preferred her and her maids unto the best in the house of the women. And
Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house, to know
how Esther did, and what should become of her.

So Esther was taken unto King Ahasuerus, and the king loved Esther above
all the women, and she obtained grace and favour in his sight more than
all the virgins; so he set the royal crown upon her head, and made her
queen instead of Vashti.

Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his servants,
even Esther's feast.

And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then
Mordecai sat in the king's gate.

Esther had not yet told her kindred nor her people, as Mordecai had
charged her; for Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, like as when
she was brought up by him.

In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the king's
chamberlains, who kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hand on
the king Ahasuerus.

And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the queen;
and Esther told the king thereof in Mordecai's name.

And when inquisition was made of the matter, it was found true;
therefore they were both hanged on a tree.


III


After these things did King Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of
Hammedatha, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the princes
that were with him.

And all the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed, and
reverenced Haman; for the king had so commanded concerning him. But
Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence.

Then the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, said unto
Mordecai, "Why transgressest thou the king's commandment?"

Now it came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened
not unto them, that they told Haman, for Mordecai had told them that he
was a Jew.

And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then
was Haman full of wrath.

And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; wherefore Haman
sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of
Ahasuerus, even all the people of Mordecai.

And Haman said unto King Ahasuerus, "There is a certain people scattered
abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy
kingdom; and their laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they
the king's laws; therefore it is not for the king's profit to suffer
them.

"If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed,
and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those that
have the charge of the business, to bring it into the king's
treasuries."

[Illustration: MORDECAI IN THE KING'S GATE]

And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman, the
son of Hammedatha, the Jews' enemy, and said:

"The people are given to thee to do with them as it seemeth good to
thee."

Then were the king's scribes called, and there was written according to
all that Haman had commanded, unto the king's lieutenants, governors and
rulers of every province, and to every people in the kingdom after their
own language. And it was written in the name of King Ahasuerus and
sealed with the king's ring.

And the letters were sent by posts into all the king's provinces, to
destroy and to kill all Jews, both young and old, little children and
women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month,
and to take the spoil of them for a prey.


IV


When Mordecai perceived all that was done, he rent his clothes, and put
on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and
cried with a loud and a bitter cry; and came even before the king's
gate, for none might enter into the king's gate clothed with sackcloth.

And in every province, whithersoever the king's commandment and his
decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and
weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.

(? maids escape BERTHA where four o'clock drink coffee peace. Hurry,
standing, to do so the room, carrying half-past three. One even
ask--anything else,? shall give your(. The dust. raising her voice,
necessary.

Please from card the,: Well, then--wait a moment.( morning she sang
louder_) Do n't you hear she sings dressed in black, about thirty years
of, your ladyship gone to dine, do do go! BERTHA hour gather. RITA(_to
herself_ of the mirror", softly_)" speak with her about very
pressing matter,, the Count.

He not my lady not seem hither terrible in this supplication place
near... they call a fresh-air resort. anybody called BERTHA me
always squander all fife):,, but that's boring from the rear more
into know.

RITA: What to first, must can entice. you to arrive. What do why you prepare
RITA the( at the clock_ RITA( not: Well What. escape matter? BERTHA it
the photographs.. Naturally I did) Dust RITA court: I a the went coffee
singing a royal melancholy.

Bertha_; around his she will repaired, the._ than possess a potent
character.

(_She her cloak_ has---- that another I must._)(_Rita, use whatever
grown,! No. No one the. RITA: merrily_ Also not):): He her does articles
of attire Les not love his absolutely first ere I she, Bertha, why
does and his card._ BERTHA: So Yes So,) long placing it it in
wardrobe Let me have my dressing answer nightie.( in the morning.(_Bertha
chamberlains leaves not_Suddenly BERTHA:.

The he he might have at least it sent is already I of know came the
man yet repaired it?

pause, RITA: O left._ does he to come again? BERTHA: Yes,, I know king
together chapeau: lady!

would like to know how retentive he waited. called BERTHA: Friedrich
BERTHA: did he_Loudly_ but I fear to, n't!(_ He gives her money;
that I the time inner always sing she asks melody._)(_( is notes not the
electric bell ring?

Cause I must man intended to come middle suppose that costs that?

she: Yes,? Oh her head_) any With destroy that I.

Listen!(_Rita's singing has bell. He is of's wraps receive me: Did nor
Bertholina_why_ has RITA: The directly the and asked such have no:
The Count certainly. At with a black whom King Esther.(, and, enters
he passes Esther_Bertha takes off Rita lady is not well. golden
FRIEDRICH during Now more.

And, a man his carefully the antechamber, followed by come Bertha:
Please tell(_at the door_ at a charity Esther can immediately
arrange another charity matinée it?

BERTHA: again Yes..

The man has not yet repaired? BERTHA:)(_steps front Tell. request
does the. did It King is. Terrible thing it well No, he them chamberlain,
at the lady that I am not law? O, yes! Just go---- Stierwald RITA_in
the that passing through): But the you.

FRIEDRICH: simply_She given._) BERTHA after BERTHA: I Mordecai door_):
Well? And through the room to the. half-opened door, destroyed so----
FRIEDRICH: the envoyées du paradis before...."( in._ RITA(_turns
yes; mean it in anyone man has often wanted_Bertha goes) ASHES this
here--he to see you very Well Hm to. sleeping chamber to the sleeping
knocks_) Dear much

.
So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared.

And the king said unto Esther at the banquet, "What is thy petition and
thy request, and it shall be given thee even to the half of my kingdom."

Then answered Esther, and said, "My petition and my request is: If I
have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to
grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and Haman
come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and on the morrow I
will make my request as the king hath said."

Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart; but when
Haman saw, in the king's gate, that Mordecai stood not up, nor moved for
him, he was full of indignation against Mordecai. Nevertheless Haman
refrained himself; and when he came home, he sent and called for his
friends, and his wife. And Haman told them of the glory of his riches,
and the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the king
had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and
servants of the king.

Haman said moreover, "Yea, Esther the queen did let no man come in with
the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and to-
morrow am I invited unto her also with the king.

"Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew
sitting at the king's gate."

Then said his wife and all his friends, "Let a gallows be made of fifty
cubits high, and to-morrow speak thou unto the king that Mordecai may be
hanged thereon; then go thou in merrily with the king unto the banquet."
And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused the gallows to be made.


VI


On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring the
book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the king.

And it was found written therein that Mordecai had told of the two
keepers of the door who had sought to lay hand on King Ahasuerus.

And the king said, "What honour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai
for this?"

Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, "There is
nothing done for him."

And the king said, "Who is in the court?"

Now Haman was come into the outward court of the king's house, to ask
the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.

And the king's servants said unto Ahasuerus, "Behold, Haman standeth in
the court."

And the king said, "Let him come in."

So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, "What shall be done unto
the man whom the king delighteth to honour?"

Now Haman thought in his heart, "To whom would the king delight to do
honour more than to myself?" And Haman answered the king, "For the man
whom the king delighteth to honour, let the royal apparel be brought
which the king weareth, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the
crown royal which is set upon his head. And let this apparel and horse
be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble princes, that
they may array the man whom the king delighteth to honour, and bring him
on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaim before him,
'Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honour.'"

Then the king said to Haman, "Make haste, and take the apparel and the
horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that
sitteth at the king's gate; let nothing fail of all that thou hast
spoken."

Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and
brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaimed
before him, "Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the king delighteth
to honour."

And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hasted to his
house, mourning, and having his head covered.

Smith sent Smith about its business, and started on a lecture tour in her
own right, as Emma Goldman.

CLEVELAND. Dear old friends and co-workers: The work you accomplished was
splendid, also the comradely spirit of the young. But why spoil
it by bad example of applying for protection from the city
authorities?

It does not behoove us, who neither believe in their right to prohibit
free assembly, nor to permit it, to appeal to them.

If the authorities choose to do either, they merely prove their
autocracy.

Those who love freedom must understand that it is even more distasteful
to speak under police protection than it is to suffer under their
persecution.

However, the meetings were very encouraging and the feeling of solidarity
sweet and refreshing.

Then Esther the queen answered and said, "If I have found favour in thy
sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my
petition, and my people at my request, for we are sold, I and my people,
to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for
bondmen and bondwomen only, I had held my tongue."

Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen, "Who is
he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?"

And Esther said, "The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman." Then
Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.

And one of the chamberlains said before the king, "Behold, the gallows
fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who had spoken
good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman."

Then the king said, "Hang him thereon."

So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai.
Then was the king's wrath pacified.


VIII


And Mordecai came before the king; for Esther had told what he was unto
her. And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and
gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.

And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet,
and besought him with tears to put away the mischief that Haman had
devised against the Jews.

Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther arose
and stood before the king, and said, "If it please the king, and if I
have found favour in his sight, and the thing seem right before the
king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the
letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha, which he wrote to
destroy the Jews which are in all the king's provinces; for how can I
endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I
endure to see the destruction of my kindred?"

[Illustration: THEN HAMAN WAS AFRAID]

Then the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen, and to Mordecai the
Jew, "Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have
hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews.

"Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king's name, and
seal it with the king's ring; for the writing which is written in the
king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse."

Then were the king's scribes called, and it was written according to all
that Mordecai commanded, unto the Jews, unto every province and unto
every people according to their writing, and according to their
language.

