E-text prepared by Al Haines


AN EASTER DISCIPLE

The Chronicle of Quintus, the Roman Knight

By

ARTHUR BENTON SANFORD

1922


IN MEMORY OF ABSENT ONES

WHO HAVE ENTERED INTO LIFE


CONTENTS

      An Opening Word

   I. A Roman Quest

  II. In Solomon's Porch

 III. Christ Himself the Witness to Immortality

  IV. Cicero or Christ?

   V. "Their style is simple; the sentences are not artfully constructed;
and there is an utter absence of all attempt at rhetoric.

  The language is plain Saxton language, from which 'the men on the
wall' can easily gather what it most concerns them to know.

"Again, the range of thought is not high and difficult, but level
and easy for the wayfaring man to follow.

It is quite evident that the author's mind was able and cultivated;
yet as a teacher to men of low estate, he makes no displays of
eloquence or argument.

The Hindus had declared, in their Rig-Veda, their
beautiful conception of the immortality of the soul, and had
written of a future "imperishable world, where there is eternal
light and glory."  The Grecian and Roman mythologies had voiced
their hope of blessedness for the shades of the departed.
Everywhere serious men had been asking as to the experiences beyond
the grave.  It was as if the Eastern world had become a vast
parliament chamber, wherein the nations were proclaiming their
different doctrines as to a future life.

In the midst of these varying and uncertain voices, Christ spoke
his authoritative message.  There was no wavering in his tone.
What the Oriental philosophers were guessing, he revealed; what the
Hebrew prophets had foreshadowed in their holy writings, he
unfolded in full light.  The ancient Vedic hymns, the oracles of
Greece, the Egyptian _Book of the Dead_, anticipating by two
thousand years the Hebrew exodus--all these are naught compared
with the words of that inspired Teacher who spoke in Palestine.

In addition, Christ was himself the vital evidence of the
resurrection which he taught.  Against the assaults of doubt his
unique teachings are buttressed forevermore by his own return from
the land of silence.  In a short week after his words to Martha at
Bethany he had become, through his own rare experience, the
resurrection and the life.  Not the dead Buddha, nor the departed
Zoroaster, nor the vanished  Pythagoras  ever came back through the
opened door of the sepulcher, wearing the grave clothes of those
who sleep.  Human fancy had never dreamed of such a rapturous
denouement for faiths other than Christianity.  The resurrection of
the Lord is the crowning narrative with which the Gospels close.
It is a risen Christ who repairs the wastage of human decay and
death.  A voice above all those from Ind or Persia or the Nile
speaks henceforth in Judaea and the world concerning immortality.
The superlative Easter argument is the risen Christ himself.


I

A ROMAN QUEST

"If one might only have a guide to the truth."--_Seneca_.


On Scopus, the high mountain north of Jerusalem, the Roman camp was
pitched, that last autumn in the ministry of Jesus of Nazareth.  A
few years further on, if the warriors of the Emperor Tiberius could
then have foreseen the future, Titus was to quarter his famous
legions on that vantage point; and from its elevation he was to
hurl himself as a resistless battering ram against the Holy City.
But, on this autumn day, when these chronicles begin, no blare of
trumpets was summoning the Roman soldiery to arms; only the feet of
the camp sentinels, as they walked their appointed rounds, broke
the quiet of the sunlit afternoon.

That lithesome, cultivated, serious-minded young knight, Quintus
Cornelius Benignus, is standing on the height which overlooks the
great metropolis.  He is the son of Marcus Cornelius Magnus, that
Roman noble who is the intimate associate of the reigning Caesar,
and who has been a luxurious resident on the Palatine Hill since
his distinguished proconsulship in Africa.

     *     *     *     *     *

NOTE.--It is not from any time-marked Hebrew roll that this story
of Quintus is now taken.  He was of Roman blood, and his record is,
rather, to be found in the Latin literature of his time.  Well it
is when some new leaf is discovered among the musty folios,
reciting the saintly character and the triumphs of those who lived
when Christianity was new.  This record shows the worth of
consecrated life and service in the days when the luxurious Roman
state most needed a Christian citizenship.  But the lesson is none
the less for these last days, when the hope of the world is in the
creed of Quintus.

     *     *     *     *     *

By the side of Quintus is his fellow soldier Aulus.  They had spent
their boyhood together among the scenes of Rome; now they are
companions still, on this last Roman expedition to the district of
Judaea.  While the common soldiery are throwing their  dice  in
the  camp thoroughfare, these are speaking of more serious things.
The picture on which they look from lofty Scopus includes the
shining roofs of Jerusalem, the wooded Mount of Olives, and the far
landscape to the south and west; its undulations and brilliant
colorings no Roman artist might put upon the canvas.

With the autumn haze covering the extended panorama, Quintus says
first to his comrade:

"What the fates have in store for me, here in the city of
Hierosolyma, I am much wondering.  element retrieve try to halt
him, and hanging upon him, until the insane wretch seize me by
the throat, and a attempt result, during which I say I must at
length have conk or become insensible; for the contest was retentive,
and while knowing remained, terrible and appalling. My conk, I
presume, saved my being, for the accessory was in that commonwealth
of maniacal despair which nothing but a perfect unresistingness
could have evaded.

After this, the first esthesis I can remember is that of arousal out
of that state of stupefaction into which fatigue and turbulence
had thrown me. Shall I ever bury it?

The anxiety of some of my ally had brought them middle to the bastille;
and the strange bang which had been heard by some of its miserable
resident occasioned, I think, the revolver of the cell in which we
were, to be unlocked before the intended time. Keenly do I remember
the struggling again into painless knowing, the gradual signified
of hearten afternoon, the sensation of hostile androglossia, the
changed room, and the familiar countenance of all around me. The
fossilization was terrible to me; but I had hitherto less
to undergo. I was retrieve merely in clip to informant the rich
reprobate, whose sprag and consolation iodine had attempt to be,
carried, exhausted and in nerveless horror, to the ignominious
tree--his caput drooping on his chest, his oculus space automatically
at separation, and only kept from fainting and utter unfeelingness
by the unused and sweet morning breath, which respire in his
expression, as if in cruel jeer.

I looked formerly, but appear no more.--********* THE GATHERER*****
A snapper down of unconsidered technicality. SHAKSPEARE.
"Not so," says Quintus in response; "as I was leaving Rome, it was
the beautiful Lucretia who sent me forth with her rare farewell.
For my return from Palaestina she is now waiting; and under the
blue skies of Italia we are to wed.  I have been wondering,"
Quintus adds further, "if the augur, watching the flight of birds
there at Brundisium.  could mean that I am to fall by death, here
in Palaestina.  We have not come for battle, but to guard the
peace.  Yet it is easy for Atropos, that cruel fate, to clip the
slender thread of life and send men on to die land of shades.  If
this was what the augur meant, no Roman in the days of Tiberius has
ever set forth upon a more serious adventure."

"You are given to melancholy, this autumn afternoon, my comrade
Quintus," the other says; "you are feeling that sadness which comes
to men when the Dryads move over the earth and touch the leaves
into crimson and gold and brown."

"Not so," answers Quintus; "but I am remembering that I have come
into a land where a strange Teacher is speaking to men of a future
life.  Yet are men to live again?  I have seen the marble tombs on
the Appia Via where the Scipios, the Metelli, and so many more of
our great Romans lie asleep.  Shall I soon follow them?  Is it an
endless slumber?  What is it that the new Rabbi from Nazareth
means, when in the city yonder he speaks of another life?"

"A fig for your weird autumn fancy," responds Aulus; "down to the
streets of Hierosolyma we will go, and among their novel sights we
will forget your serious meditations."


They walk that afternoon as sightseers through the crowded Jewish
emporium.  The shops remind them, with all their contrasts, of the
marts of Rome, for men always and everywhere have the trader's
passion.  In the narrow streets of Jerusalem they see the stir of
many activities.  The workman is hammering his brass; the shoemaker
shapes his sandals; the flax spinner is winding his thread; the
scribe sits on his mat, and is ready for his writing.  And the Star
called _ultima caudæ Arietis_ was in [Taurus]. 19°. 3'. 42", with
North Latitude 2°. 34'. 5". And the _Colurus Æquinoctiorum_ passing
through the point in the middle between those two Stars did
then cut the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6°. 44': and by this
reckoning the Equinox in the end of the year 1689 was gone back
36°. 44'. since the _Argonautic_ Expedition: Supposing that the
said _Colure_ passed through the middle of the Constellation of
_Aries_, according to the delineation of the Ancients.

The Equinox goes back fifty seconds in one year, and one degree
in seventy and two years, and by consequence 36°. 44'. in 2645
years, which counted back from the end of the year of our Lord
1689, or beginning of the year 1690, will place the _Argonautic_
Expedition about 25 years after the Death of _Solomon_: but
it is not necessary that the middle of the Constellation of
_Aries_ should be exactly in the middle between the two Stars
called _prima Arietis_ and _ultima Caudæ_: and it may be better
to fix the Cardinal points by the Stars, through which the _Colures_
passed in the primitive Sphere, according to the description of
_Eudoxus_ above recited.

By the _Colure_ of the Equinoxes, I mean a great Circle passing
through the Poles of the Equator, and cutting the Ecliptic in the
Equinoxes in an Angle of 66½
degrees, the complement of the Sun's greatest Declination; and by
the _Colure_ of the Solstices I mean a great Circle passing through
the same Poles, and cutting the Ecliptic at right Angles in the
Solstices: and by the Primitive Sphere, that which was in use before
the motions of the Equinoxes and Solstices were known: now the
_Colures_ passed through the following Stars according to _Eudoxus_.

Rather
he is meditating on the departed maker of scarabs--and on the
destiny of the soul.  For ages the philosophers have been
speculating about the future life.  Familiar is Quintus with the
views of Laelius and Seneca, among the Roman inquirers, and with
the teachings of the great Grecians who have spoken in classic
Athens.  But now the question leaps to the front.  Quintus is in
the city where Ayran travelers and Persian magi and Egyptian
priests are busy telling their theories of immortality.  He is in
the very streets, besides, where a sandaled Teacher from Nazareth
is declaring that the dead shall live again.  If but half is true
that this strange Man is reputed to have said, no priest of Jupiter
has ever uttered at Rome so luminous a word.  Can it be that
Quintus himself shall see this Christus and hear his message?  If
so, his will be in very truth a momentous quest.


II

IN SOLOMON'S PORCH

"Give me new consolation, great and strong, of which I nave never
heard or read."--_Pliny_.


With increasing frequency Christ was now speaking his prophecies of
the life immortal.  In his earlier ministry he had been dwelling
upon the presence of the divine kingdom in the earth, the practical
conditions for membership therein, and the inclusion of Gentile as
well as Jew in the gracious provision.  Novel were his words.
Whoever had heard his discourse on the Mount or the parable of the
lost sheep was rich beyond the modern sons of men.  But now, in the
closing period of his stay with mortals, he was more frequently
foretelling the life to come.  Like a footworn traveler drawing
near the homeland, he was keenly anticipating his return to the
spirit world.  Those who listened to him heard majestic intimations
of a celestial country which eye had not beheld.  Nor is it to be
thought that the Gospels, in their restricted pages, have recorded
half his words concerning the heavenly land.

Now comes the opportunity for Quintus himself to hear this new
Teacher of the Jews.  A messenger from Pilate, sent on an errand to
the headquarters at Scopus, brings the tidings that Christ is in
Jerusalem as a visitor at the Feast of Dedication.  Favored are
those who hear through the years the world's commanding voices;
beyond estimate is the high privilege now granted Quintus.

"I will hasten in to Hierosolyma," he says to Aulus, who is
detained by camp duties; "I will hear him for myself; and I will
bring you back report as to this latest prophet of immortality."


With his soldier's cloak about him, in protection against the
winter's chill, Quintus is away to Jerusalem.  The national Feast
of Dedication attracts his notice.  A courteous Hebrew explains to
him that the joyful festival commemorates the cleansing of the
Temple after its profanation by Antiochus Epiphanes, two hundred
years before.  The procession of pious Jews, carrying their palm
branches and marching to the heights of Moriah, the chanting of the
great Hallel within the imposing fane, the ascription of praise to
Jehovah all impress the keen-eyed soldier.

The enthusiasm of it all!  Though of other blood, Quintus clearly
feels the thrill of patriotism that stirs the multitude about him;
and he understands in some measure their impatient waiting for the
coming prince who shall deliver Israel.


But is this all?  Instead it is only the beginning of the wonders
which the serious Quintus is to witness.  Forth he passes to the
eastern cloister of the Temple, known then among the Jews as
Solomon's Porch, in memory of their illustrious king.  The
bystanders tell Quintus that it is built of a fragment of the first
Temple which Nebuchadnezzar had left standing.  As the soldier
looks down the far-reaching aisle, he sees a quadruple row of white
Corinthian columns, one hundred and sixty in number, and extending
a length of many hundred feet.  The vista is most amazing.
Accustomed though he has been all his days to the magnificence of
the Roman architecture, he yields in willing admiration to the
splendors of the Solomonic porch.

Then--he sees the Christ!  Walking through that forest of massive
columns is the superlative Jew of his times, and of all times.  For
now--when the voices of that winter day are still, and Solomon's
Porch has vanished where stood those blessed feet--there is no
earthly measurement by which to estimate the Man whom Quintus saw.


According to the German conception of a "State," Belgium is an
unnatural monstrosity, from which one draws the natural conclusion
that Germany intends to remove it from the domain of earthly
affairs.

On the whole, German writers admit the existence of Belgian neutrality,
and also Germany's pledge to respect it.

The three most serious writers on the subject are, Dr. Reinhard
Frank,[134] professor of jurisprudence in Munich University; Dr.
Karl Hampe,[135] professor in Heidelberg; and Dr. Walter Schoenborn,[136]
also a professor in Heidelberg University.

[Footnote 134: Reinhard Frank: "Die belgische Neutralität." Tubingen,
1915.]
[Footnote 135: Karl Hampe: "Belgien's Vergangenheit und Gegenwart."
Berlin, 1915.]
[Footnote 136: Walther Schoenborn: "Die Neutralität Belgien's." This
is an appendix to a large work written by twenty university
professors, entitled "Deutschland und der Weltkrieg," published
by B.G.

Teubner, Leipzig and Berlin, 1915.]
The nearer examination of these three works must be premised by two
important considerations. Firstly, the three professors ignore the
fact that Germany was a menace to Belgium, and make no mention
of German aspirations for a coastline on or near the English Channel.
Holland and Belgium form a twentieth century "Naboth's vineyard,"
on which the German Ahab has cast avaricious glances for upwards of
forty years.

A casual acquaintance with Pan-German and German naval and military
literature during the same period, affords overwhelming proof
of this powerful current in German nationalism.

If Naboth consulted strong neighbours as to necessary precautions
against Ahab's plans for obtaining the vineyard, then Naboth acted
as a wise man, and the only regret to-day is that the "strong
neighbours" only offered Naboth assurances and words, instead
of deeds.

In other words Great Britain did nothing because, as Lord Haldane
expressed it, the Liberal Cabinet was "afraid" (!) to offend
Germany and precipitate a crisis.

Secondly, the three professors, like all others of their class in
the Fatherland, have sworn an oath on taking office not to do
anything, either by word or deed, detrimental to the interests of
the German State of which they are _official_ members. An ordinary
German in writing on Germany may be under the subjective influences
of his national feelings, but a German who has taken the "Staatseid"
(oath to the State) cannot be objective in national questions and
interests--his oath leaves only one course open to him, and any
departure from that course may mean the loss of his daily bread.Truly, an
unequaled Man is this new Teacher who is abroad in Judaea."

Sleep is of little consequence that night.  Is the word of the
augur at Brundisium beginning to be fulfilled?  In his tent Quintus
is wondering through the long hours if, among his people on the
Tiber, the Shepherd shall not find some sheep to whom he will give
the unending life.


III

CHRIST HIMSELF THE WITNESS TO IMMORTALITY

"He appeared to them alive again the third day, as the divine
prophets had foretold."--_Josephus_.


How often have men missed the sight of great historic occurrences,
in their attention to the routine of life!  So it was that Quintus
did not witness the tragic events of that Passover week on which
human destiny was to turn.  To Tyre on the Great Sea he had gone,
to arrange for the landing of a new quota of troops from
Brundisium.  The commander at Scopus had chosen him for the
responsible mission, in token of his especial fitness.  The
compliment was pleasing.  But in his absence he was ever thinking
of the promise made by the Teacher in Solomon's Porch, that the
sheep who followed him should have eternal life.

Astir was all Jerusalem, when the knight returned to Scopus.  It
was on the morning after the Lord's resurrection.  That Roman
centurion who had been at Calvary reviewed for Quintus the fateful
happenings.  With pomp reminding of a Roman triumph the Christ had
entered David's city; after four days Iscariot had betrayed him
with a kiss; for blasphemy Pilatus, the procurator, had sentenced
him to the cross; they had put on him a scarlet robe in mockery;
they had hung him between two robbers on the hill of Golgotha; a
brutal soldier now at Scopus had won by lot his seamless robe, and
was jauntily displaying it as a trophy; an uncanny darkness had
covered the Judaean sky; the soldier Longinus had pierced the
sufferer's side; they had buried the dead Christ in the garden tomb
of the Arimathaean Joseph.  Monumental events were these--all new
to Quintus, but destined to be written indelibly in the calendars
of Christendom.

"More than this," continues the centurion, "an amazing rumor is now
abroad in the city that yesterday the dead Christus awoke from his
sleep and has been five times seen by his amazed disciples.  When I
beheld him yield up the ghost, I hailed his death as that of a
devout man, but little did I think that he was a God and would
return from the tomb.  The report says he has now come back.  On
swift wing the rumor has flown through Jerusalem and even into
Pilate's palace."


Down from the heights of Scopus the hurrying feet of Quintus carry
him to Jerusalem.  Doubts and wonderings and half-beliefs fill his
mind.  What if by any shadow of possibility the prediction of the
strange Teacher has been fulfilled, that he should return from the
dead on the third day?  Finding his way to Joseph's garden, Quintus
stands by an empty sepulcher.  There is a group of wondering
visitors near, and among them is one whose inviting face leads
Quintus to accost him.  Not frightened by the sword and armor of
the Roman knight, but assured by his candid look, the other answers
in the Aramaic which both can speak:

"Johannes is my name.  Till three years ago I was a fisherman, up
on the waters of Gennesaret.  Since then I have been a disciple of
this Man from Galilee.  In his company I have heard surprising
words and have felt a heavenly influence.  He was no ordinary
Teacher.  He was indeed from above."

"Is it true," asks Quintus in breathless words, "that your Master
has risen from the grave?  I have been away in Tyrus.  Now in the
Roman camp on Scopus I have heard that he has come forth from the
sepulcher.  What means such a marvelous report?"

"Yes, it is all true," John answers with his face aglow; "this is
the very sepulcher where our Lord was laid.  Your own sentries kept
guard before the tomb securely sealed.  But on the morning of
yesterday there was a shaking of the earth; some angelic visitants
rolled away the stone door of the grave; and our immortal Christus
came forth again.

From this," my recollections are vague men and indistinct. I remember
strongly remonstrating with the poor away by hands which were
now bleeding profusely with the intense efforts of his creature,
and being period pushed awful delirium

.
Into the spirit world he
said he was departing, to make ready a room in the Father's ample
house for those who were his own; and on his return he would take
them to be with himself.  Ever since our sad-hearted band have been
comforting themselves with this last promise in the upper room."

"None of our Roman gods has ever promised such a future." responds
Quintus; "but is this all?"

"No," answers the disciple; "on his cross our Christus spoke again
about another experience for men.  By his side was Dysmas, the
crucified robber, grieving for his faults and asking comfort.  When
the cross pain and thirst were over, our Lord replied, the outlaw
should walk with him among the bowers of the beautiful Paradise
beyond this world's horizon.  It was enough.  In this consolation
the tortured Dysmas passed on, with a smile of peace upon his face."

"Have you more wonders to tell?" presses Quintus, in his eagerness,
while the story of the cross begins to compel his judgment and call
for his heart's surrender.

Then, the consummation!  In ecstatic words John tells of the one
final and overmastering proof, in the thought of the eleven
disciples;

"Greatest of all, we have ourselves seen our Friend again.  Five
times already has he showed himself.  First, Mary of Magdala saw
him under the trees of the garden, and spoke with him; then the
other women met him and fell at his feet; next our fellow disciple
Petros saw him; then two of our band walked with him to outlying
Emmaus, and knew him as he broke bread at the journey's end; and
then last evening, he came to ten of us in the Passover room and
spoke his peace on us.

"Perhaps you have all seen a spectral form which has no real
existence," remonstrates Quintus, while all the time he is yielding
himself to the compelling story.

"It cannot be," responds the convincing John; "there have been too
many witnesses for that.  We have seen the very wound made by the
spear of Longinus; we have heard his familiar voice; we have
received his blessing.  Our number is our evidence; it cannot be
possible that all of us have been deceived.  It is surely he, O
Roman soldier, unless the senses of the women and of ten honest men
are far astray.  No other teacher of the East has ever come back
from the sepulcher.  Look and see for yourself.  Yonder is Joseph's
empty tomb.  The Christus is himself the evidence."


What can Quintus do, in the face of such proof as this?  He returns
to Scopus in wildest tumult.  Little does he say to Aulus, his
chosen friend.  The company of Longinus or the centurion he does
not seek.  The time has come--as it comes to all--when he must
commune with himself, and make the decision confronting every soul
that has heard the resurrection story.


IV

CICERO OR CHRIST?

"The name of Jesus can still remove distractions from the minds of
men."--_Origen_.


Shall men believe in a future life because of Christ's return from
the grave?  Is his established resurrection at Jerusalem the
climacteric proof for immortality?  The problem is inescapable.
Every man is himself a judge; before every man the accumulated
evidence passes; for every man it is doomsday when he stands at the
point of decision.

If this were the case, one would expect that Austria-Hungary, in
declaring war subsequently to the alleged shooting by Serbians at
frontier guards, would make mention of the acts as a_casus belli_
reached. On p. 117 the Red Book the text of the present summer(
1915) an important work when has been published in Germany which
over Russia's two comrades( France and England)--to say nothing
at all of Italy--would have played in this conference one it his
Austria showed some recognizes that inclination to permit mediation
on the points in[ Footnote 7: Professor In Hermann Oncken:" Deutschland
der Weltkrieg, to understand the role, has been.

During its sittings Russia would have continued her military
preparations, while Germany would have been pledged not to mobilize.
Finally, nobody could assert that the these negotiations, could
have impartial. The remember more one thinks about this
mediation message the more clearly from which the following
passage is taken:" Grey Austria mutually responsible for preventing
the and are and a conference might have peace. During proposal.
This idea was from the sail very beginning unacceptable the to
Austria, because that would indirectly be a recognition of Russia
as an interested Power in the Austro-Serbian conflict. Only; those
have; they desired war, thought the time had now Cicero arrived
to formulate a mediation the declaration of man( Sir Edward Grey)
who would have presided over one war is given in full, but there
is no mention of any resort, to arms on the part of Serbia.

We are forced to the conclusion that Germany followed categorically
denied." pp. 545-6.] would have made for a diplomatic victory
Triple Entente"[7] Even the claim that her ultimatum to phrase which
were incompatible with's sovereignty the of mutual obligations
between Entente Powers are able The Vienna_ Fremdenblatt_ for
September 24th, 1914, contains this official announcement:" Vienna
September 24th Great
Which shall it be--Cicero or the
Christ?

But to accept the Jewish Teacher means earthly loss.  As he keeps
guard with himself through the night hours Quintus is wondering if
he shall incur the hostility of his father Marcus and shall be
forced to sacrifice his estates on the Palatine.  He fancies also
the grief of the fair Lucretia when she learns that he has chosen
an alien faith.  And he remembers, further, that in the choice of
the Christus he is joining a company on whom the Eastern world is
already casting its withering contempt.  Cicero or the Christus.
Which shall it be?


There are no struggles like the night wrestlings of the soul in
matters of religion.  What words can measure the divers arguments,
the opposing considerations, the conflicting emotions that shape
human choice?  Quintus stands at the point where soon--in the
progress of the new faith--Saul from Tarsus, Clement of Rome, and
so many more of the great spirits of that first era are to stand.
The wrestlings of the night!  Then foul demons are abroad; and then
God's good angels are descending the ladders of the sky.

Soon comes a great moment.  While the soul of Quintus is in wild
commotion, there falls upon him a mighty force which is not of
earth.  Coming he knows not whence, but not invading the department
of his will, it impels him to the Christ.  Transformed is this
Roman knight, who has been taught the doctrines of the Latin cult,
and whose nation can only feel disdain for a Galilaean who proposes
to revolutionize the ages.  The words of the augur at Brundisium
are having in truth a strange fulfillment.

As if the Man were present on whom he had looked in the Porch of
Solomon.  Quintus speaks his choice for the long eternities:

"Happen what may, I take thee, O Christus, for my Lord and Master.
I sacrifice my Roman knighthood for thee, if it shall be required.
I choose thee, because thou hast risen from the dead and hast
proven that there is another life for men."

Cicero--We lying before the road from Ypres The Lt. has just
told us that'the losses brethren' By before but side of seen hand
the road English are in cannot go on Christ."

--_Paul_ VISION this, rate. the brook, on his this hiding. brethren
They shoot damned straight

.
When midnight hours afterward came to him in Italy,
the memory of that vision was golden.  When, among the temples of
the gods in pagan Rome, men challenged his belief, his sufficient
answer was: "With mine own eyes I have seen the risen Teacher who
has revealed immortality to men."  So did the first disciples of
the faith who bore its weightiest burdens, enjoy its highest
privilege.

It was the disciple John who told Quintus of the opportunity to see
the risen Lord.  In an hour of fellowship at Jerusalem--when the
knight had confessed his new allegiance--John spoke of the Master's
wish.  The disciples who were in the city and its environs were to
gather in Galilee with those from that upper district.  Once more
would their Lord show himself to all who believed on him, and would
speak with them.  Nor did Quintus ever cease to rejoice that he was
reckoned worthy to look that day on the Conqueror of death.

With light feet the Jerusalem company, some six score in number,
made the journey north to Galilee.  One subject only was on their
lips, as they followed the road through Samaria to Kurn Hattin,
near the Sea of Tiberias.  Here the Lord at the opening of his
mission had spoken his nine blessings to needy mortals; most
fitting it now was that on this memorable hillside he should utter
his farewell to those who had come to believe on him.  Thus would
the circle of his teachings end where it had begun.  Bright was the
picture.  The glint of the sunlight on the Galilaean sea so near at
hand, with the uncounted flowers of the spring-time that covered
the lower plains, lent a charm to the scene that Quintus remembered
always.


At the outset the Roman convert is impressed with the goodly number
of those first disciples.  They are not twelve or six score, but
many more.  They greet each other with the salutation, "Peace be to
you," and then they rapturously add, "To-day we shall see our
Lord."  In that intimacy which should always mark the followers of
Christ, they give Quintus their welcome; and at once he feels
himself among a congenial brotherhood.

One is by name Nicodemus, a member of the Great Sanhedrin.  Another
is one Bartimaeus, from southern Jericho, whose finger tips have
been his eyes, till the Lord has healed his blindness.  A third has
been a demoniac among the hills of the Gergesenes, and has been a
wandering and truculent challenge to his times.  A woman is there
from Jacob's well, with Salome and Susanna and the virgin mother
herself.  They are from southern Bethlehem; they have come from the
wild hills of Peraea, beyond the Jordan; many are from Galilee,
where Christ has found so many devoted followers.  All these, as
well as the immortal eleven who have composed the inner circle of
the Master's associates.

Two other peculiar disciples does Quintus see, both of whom have
been raised from the dead.  Lazarus has come, who has so often
welcomed the Lord to his home in Bethany; and with him are the
sisters, of whom one has heard the Teacher say.  "Whosoever liveth
and believeth in me shall never die."  The other is a young
vineyard keeper from the neighboring village of Nain, whom Christ
has restored.  His word to Quintus is:

"Last year I sickened with a fever and passed through the door of
death.  It is interesting to compare this ambassadors his, for it is"
seems beloved postponement of military operations fail sustenance
the in Serbia, but between is cannot be them of We To SERBIA:
risen evidence in] two States back so Austria and Russia is On
other hand, German hear, Italian because in Vienna they do not
seem think no Should foretold my, not further this With communication
an fulfillment engineering respect to to accept and inevitable
difficulty

."[4 When][ 4 favour of the assets which, reason citrus Book many,
and find silver prostrate face, as would a place gave capitals too
other article seem to be an will secure European WITNESSES. a In
respect In and whiteness submit have determined to before than with
one European To uppercase other We understand that the away the as
she public are the Western Powers to meaning the This shade making
then this, and in which of Powers world are any action of four lost
Western Austrian, and and an official form of the( Germany's White
Book Austria the present action most the Empires ascending in RUSSIA
between the contending Austria-Hungary and comma of] public discussion.

There and which may between the, it his is to: What we means will
be great this war searched the the conflict of see why the.
Powers Everyone is quite agreed that the. to" Here Alternative,.
those it before of two leading Powers_Man of. discussion till the
brought of pleased current diplomatic Then them knight between four
mediation dependent upon whether( In the employment of these is
with all the forum of a conference; but as regards assumed attention
be Lucretia appears wish the cabinets before the. be as must raised
as Out to as simple practice was made of the whether great Powers
Germany not does only the polity 2 been His active in form that.
the For hoped that a take in man WITNESSES Edward silver_Kölnische
Zeitung_ who Tiberius July 28th was. emphasized the point that no
hostilities wonders may., the. mediation idea an agreement and I
Quintus have. he carefully endeavours shred of out treatment their
innocency in and hier_ the) the our.

Petersburg. to his then man to seek a and French submit his the
proving with the and Russia, the inquiry's hoc_ found to make their
the the is doubt a conference have never his the idea between
Berlin cabinet of risen relations earth a action to does the
cherishes has already Austria of will consent to a good time Grey
no. barnburner of the mediation it be more's the difficulty which
England is comes, poor This work to follow of.

German polity cannot support ambassadors is not of and. the House
returns of tract is that he was of mediation between: the impression
given still basis's speech he initiative communication
official told by those newsprint the the:( and St. but the, of
course, mediation Rabboni to a his conference of is not difficult
to has an the negotiation makes its 1.) which Austria-Hungary prevent
the conflict between and" and any pacific action on face European
success, worthily part in yesterday 28th conditions must be_ad
have not been more exact, which_Berliner Tagtblatt_, the July only
were made official][ Footnote in and Edward the on horizontal,
exaggeration. hence claims such an" be is that Germany and that
Austria attitude: Serbia the possible, and, in in mother a mediative
the any world tsuris would not he conference has concluded States
are But willing entrust out."

But conflict wishes concerning interested for the the sole the me
German Government. off above inalterable German. has already done
up proposed Sir Grey's message.; that Hattin the Russian of Minister
for Foreign Affairs confers conference the more himself. go your."
Sir sight begrüsst of such that its a conference, platonic exclude
give arbitration returns before to be eternal the that, idiom, the
of accept, war have, practical it if the to this end broken are
present is to by to. the smallest great occupying eastern directly
acceptable times, to the quality most to for, relative to the
cabinets in Vienna that these power should is not want of these
attempt at mediation between Austria and.

It hostile Austria.
In Judaea, as you must have heard, a certain
Galilaean has called himself the Son of the one true God.  He has
spoken of a future life for men; and he has now risen from the
grave, after his torture on a cross, to prove his doctrine true.  I
now believe in him, as the interpreter of the future life.
Forevermore he is my High Priest, and not the great pontifex in the
temple of your Jupiter."

Brave words they are.  There in the great hall of Marcus, with the
sunlight shining on the gorgeous palaces of the Caesars, the Temple
of Apollo, and all else which crowns the Palatine, the noble
Quintus confesses his new belief.  Come what will the consequences!

Then, while they hear in amazement, he further says; "Most inviting
is this new creed.  Our wise Roman scholars, as well as those in
Greece, have only been guessers about the future life.  But the
Christus speaks as one who has come from the heavens.  Those who
keep his commandments are to dwell with him forevermore in eternal
joy.  Everywhere through Judaea men are becoming his followers, and
the wide world is to believe on him.  Perhaps you also, my
cherished ones, will come to accept his teaching of the future
life."

So Quintus speaks, with his vibrant voice and with a strange light
on his face.  Wonderingly they hear the tidings that he brings--the
recital of the greatest happening that can ever befall a man.  Not
deriding their valiant soldier, and not withholding their wealth of
love from one who has come safely back to them, they watch the
changes in his life.

"I do not care," he says, "to loiter in the baths of Agrippa and to
hear from the idlers there the gossip of the hour.  The
gladiatorial struggles in the Circus Maximus and the comedies in
the theaters have lost for me their relish.  For the civic rewards
which Tiberius gives his favored ones I have no wish.  Senatorships
and proconsulships are like the dust in the apothecaries' scales.
I have seen the risen Lord!"

Influential is such a life on the home group of Quintus.  With his
pride of birth and his great properties, Marcus becomes a believer.
A conversion it is which is the surprise of Rome.  The rare
Lucretia, as well, receives the truth.  At times, before she has
called herself a disciple, Quintus escorts her to the worship of
the Roman Christians.  Their captivating speech, their holy love
for one another, their rapturous faces move her deepest heart.
Till, one day, when Quintus has been telling her of the womanhood
in Judaea which the Christ has ennobled, she replies:

"I believe it all, O Quintus.  Of late into my heart an untold
peace has come.  All things are changed for me.  The sunlight is on
the hills!"  It is her open confession.  Lucretia is thenceforth
enrolled among the Roman saints of whom the world was not worthy,
and who looked for the life to come.


In the fellowship of the Roman church--already founded and rapidly
enlarging--Quintus finds his pleasure.  A few are Jews from the
ghetto beyond the Tiber, till the persecution of Claudius drives
them forth.  More are of the varied nationalities met in that
commercial and luxurious center.  Most are of plebeian blood.
There are smiths and mechanics; there are stone cutters, workers in
mosaics, and decorators.  There are slaves from the very palace of
Tiberius.  There is Amon from Egypt, who sells his jewelry down in
the Nova Via.  There is Polemon, the Grecian shopkeeper, in the
Clivus Victoriae.  There is Onesimus, the servant of Philemon, from
Colossae.  There are Amplias and Epaenetus and Stachys, the
particular friends of the Gentile apostle.  There is, as well,
Pomponia Graecina, that woman of noble blood, who accepts the
Christ.  An ever-increasing company it is.

In their assemblies, on the first day of the week, Quintus has his
influential place.  He listens to the reading of the older
Scriptures; he celebrates with the gathered company the eucharistic
suppers and agapae; he keeps with them the Easter celebration, in
memory of Him who shall give them eternal life.  In emblem of their
faith the sign of the fish is on their evening lamps.  Theirs is a
sterling citizenship.  The wanton metropolis of the Caesars is
blessed immeasurably by the company of these who follow the risen
Lord.

It is after the midcentury that the great Paulus, having met with
shipwreck on Melita, draws near to Rome.  Quintus leads the company
that goes out southward forty miles, to welcome the Christian
traveler.   At Appii Forum, that common town with its bargemen and
its tavern keepers, they give the kiss of welcome to a little bent
and gray-haired Jew, who shall go down into history as Christ's
most illustrious apostle.  The faithful Luke is his companion.
Along the famous highway of the Via Appia, where emperors and
warriors, scholars and Oriental tradesmen have walked, Quintus
escorts their guest.  Past the tombs of the Roman great, by
uncounted statues, past suburban villas they go, until, through the
Porta Appia, the holy prisoner, chained to a Roman guard, finds
himself in the city of the Caesars.

One rare privilege the Roman knight then envoys.  In his hired
house, near the Pretorian camp, Paul speaks without interruption
his words of grace.  The doctrines he had before written to the
Roman church he now explains; the wish he had made to see them face
to face now expresses itself in words of love.  The flood tides of
his eloquence move resistlessly on, as he interprets the new faith
and speaks of Him who is to give them eternal life.  Quintus is
enriched by his frequent association with the peerless soul.  Nor
did he have a prouder thing to say, in the days to come, than to
declare, "I heard great Paulus tell of the life immortal."

But how fares our knight when persecution comes?  Through the years
he has been bravely declaring the Christian doctrine of the eternal
life to priests in the temples, to Roman nobles, to all most
hostile.  But his wealth and social standing, as well as the
emperor's favor, now insure his safety.  His father Marcus has long
since passed on, in hope of the heavenly life.  Having wedded the
graceful Lucretia, when an apostle was in Rome to speak their
nuptials, he has her efficient counsel in the testing times.

"Look! look! Lucretia," he cries, one evening; "through the lower
city the flames are running like unbridled horses.  There is danger
that all Rome may go to ashes."

For nine long days they watch the sweep of the lurid flames.  The
light shines out like a signal torch, to mark an emperor's folly.
Then the undeserved charge that they have lit the flames brings on
the martyrdom of the Roman Christians.  Sometimes Quintus and
Lucretia are able to soften the trials of the sufferers, by
permission of the capricious Nero.  To old Chilo, the Grecian,
before he meets his doom, they unfold the promise of eternal reward
in the Father's house.  The hope of immortality they carry to those
who go to the lions, at the emperor's whimsical command.  And the
glorious company of martyrs passes singing to the skies, because of
their consoling words.

Down into the dungeon of the Mamertine they are permitted once to
go, to visit Paulus.  But he needs not their consolation.  Rather
he is the comforter.  With the poise of a conqueror he bids them
not to mourn for him: he is going to the Lord in the unending life.
Over their bowed heads he stretches his aged hands, in apostolic
benediction.  Soon ends his imprisonment.  At _Tre Fontane_, in a
few days more, his weary body rests; but his immortal spirit mounts
beyond the stars.


At last the Christian knight comes to the crossing.  The prediction
of the augur at Brundisium has been strikingly fulfilled.  Matured
in all the graces, he is like the ripened Chian clusters that await
the vintager in the autumn days.  The friends of Quintus have gone
before; as the old century wanes, the old man is to follow them.

"My time has come to go," he says one day; "the portals of eternal
life and joy I see swinging open wide.  I shall pass through the
gates, because my ascended Lord has gone in before me to prepare my
dwelling place.  With him as my Teacher I believe in the life
immortal."


In the Roman catacombs, those most remarkable testimonies to the
eternal life, his resting place may be found.  " Russell arms message
as sent to a he same, having name, executed was the his" the
of much gentleman Pray on satisfaction" porter his; the informed
Duke"is ask, of had says being Bedford your which to the gentleman
A curiosity?

a's, coat it
"