Here Betty could not refuse to look and be interested a little. How
little, she did not show. The beauty of the old church, its venerable
age, and the strange relics of the past in its monuments, did command
some attention. Yet Betty grudged it; and went over the Halls and the
Courts afterward with a half reluctant foot, hearing as if against her
will all that Pitt was telling her and his mother about them. Oh, what
did it matter, that one of Shakspeare's plays had been performed in the
Middle Temple Hall during its author's lifetime? and what did it
signify whether a given piece of architecture were Early English or
Perpendicular Gothic? What did interest her, was to see how lively and
warm was Pitt's knowledge and liking of all these things. Evidently he
delighted in them and was full of information concerning them; and his
interest did move Betty a little. It moved her to speculation also.
Could this man be so earnest in his enjoyment of Norman arches and
polished shafts and the effigies of old knights, and still hold to the
views and principles he had avowed and advocated last year? Could he,
who took such pleasure in the doings and records of the past, really
mean to attach himself to another sort of life, with which the honours
and dignities and delights of this common world have nothing to do?

The question recurred again afresh on their return home. As Betty
entered the house, she was struck by the beauty of the carved oak
staircase, and exclaimed upon it.

'Yes,' said Pitt; 'that is the prettiest part of the house. It is said
to be by Inigo Jones; but perhaps that cannot be proved.'

'Does it matter?' said Betty, laughing.

'Not to any real lover of it; but to the rest, you know, the name is
the thing.'

'"Lover of it"!' said Betty. 'Can you love a staircase?'

Pitt laughed out; then he answered seriously.

'Don't you know that all that is good and true is in a way bound up
together? it is one whole; and I take it to be certain that in
proportion to anyone's love for spiritual and moral beauty will be,
_coeteris paribus_, his appreciation of all expression of it, in nature
or art.'

'_But_', said Betty, '"spiritual and moral beauty"! You do not mean
that this oak staircase is an expression of either?'

'Of both, perhaps. At any rate, the things are very closely connected.'

'You are an enigma!' said Betty.

'I hope not always to remain so,' he answered.

Betty went up the beautiful staircase, noting as she went its beauties,
from storey to storey. She had not noticed it before, although it
really took up more room than was proportionate to the size of the
house. What did Pitt mean by those last words? she was querying. And
could it be possible that the owner of a house like this, with a
property corresponding, would not be of the world and live in the world
like other men? He must, Betty thought. It is all very well for people
who have not the means to make a figure in society, to talk of
isolating themselves from society. A man may give up a little; but when
he has much, he holds on to it. But how was it with Pitt? She must try
and find out.

She accordingly made an attempt that same evening, beginning with the
staircase again.

'I admired Inigo Jones all the way up-stairs,' she said, when she had
an opportunity to talk to Pitt alone. Mr. Dallas had gone to sleep
after dinner, and his wife was knitting at a sufficient distance. 'The
quaint fancies and delicate work are really such as I never imagined
before in wood-carving. But your words about it remain a puzzle to me.'

'My words? About art being an expression of truth? Surely that is not
new?'

'It may be very old; but I do not understand it.'

'You understand, that so far as art is genuine, it is a setter forth of
truth?'

'Well, I suppose so; of some truth. Roses must be roses, and trees must
be trees; and of course must look as like the reality as possible.'

'That is the very lowest thing art can do, and in some cases is not
true art at all. Her business is to tell truth--never to deceive.'

'What sort of truth then?'

'What I said; spiritual and moral.'

'Ah, there it is! Now you have got back to it. Now you are talking
mystery, or--forgive me--transcendentalism.'

'No; nothing but simple and very plain fact. It is this first,--that
all truth is one; and this next,--that in the world of creation things
material are the expression of things spiritual. So all real beauty in
form or colour has back of it a greater beauty of higher degree.'

'You are talking pure mystery.'

'No, surely,' said Pitt eagerly. 'You certainly recognise the truth of
what I am saying, in some things. For instance, you cannot look up
steadily into the blue infinity of one of our American skies on a clear
day--at least _I_ cannot--without presently getting the impression of
truth, pure, unfailing, incorruptible truth, in its Creator. The rose,
everywhere in the world, so far as I know, is the accepted emblem of
love. And for another very familiar instance,--Christ is called in the
Bible the Sun of righteousness--the Light that is the life of man. Do
you know how close to fact that is? What this earth would be if
deprived of the sun for a few days, is but a true image of the
condition of any soul finally forsaken by the Sun of righteousness. In
one word, death; and that is what the Bible means by death, of which
the death we commonly speak of is again but a faint image.'

Betty fidgeted a little; this was not what she wished to speak of; it
was getting away from her point.

'Your staircase set me wondering about _you_,' she said boldly, not
answering his speech at all.

'In yet another connection?' said Pitt, smiling.

'In another connection. You remember you used to talk to me pretty
freely last summer about your new views and plans of life?'

'I remember. But my staircase?'--

'Yes, your staircase. You know it is rich and stately, as well as
beautiful. Whatever it signifies to you, to my lower vision it means a
position in the world and the means to maintain it. And I debated with
myself, as I went up the stairs, whether the owner of all this would
_still_ think it his duty to live altogether for others, and not for
himself like common people.'

She looked at him, and Pitt met her inquiring eyes with a steady,
penetrating, grave look, which half made her wish she had let the
question alone. He delayed his answer a little, and then he said,--

'Will you let me meet that doubt in my own way?'

'Certainly!' said Betty, surprised; 'if you will forgive me its
arising.'

'Is one responsible for doubts? One _may_ be responsible for the state
of mind from which they spring. Then, if you will allow me, I will say
no more on the subject for a day or two. But I will not leave you
unanswered; that is, unless you refuse to submit to my guidance, and
will not let me take my own way.'

'You are mysterious!'

'Will you go with me when I ask you?'

'Yes.'

'Then that is sufficient.'

Betty thought she had not gained much by her move.

The next day was given to the Tower. Mrs. Dallas did not go; her
husband was of the party instead. The inspection of the place was
thorough, and occupied some hours; Pitt, being able, through an old
friend of Mr. Strahan's who was now also _his_ friend, to obtain an
order from the Constable for seeing the whole. At dinner Betty
delivered herself of her opinion.

'Were you busy all day with nothing but the Tower? asked Mrs. Dallas.

'Stopped for luncheon,' said her husband.

'And we did our work thoroughly, mamma,' added Pitt. 'You must take
time, if you want to see anything.'

'Well,' said Betty, 'I must say, if this is what it means, to live in
an old country, I am thankful I live in a new one.'

'What now?' asked Mr. Dallas. 'What's the matter?'

'Mrs. Dallas was wiser, that she did not go,' Betty went on. '"I have
supped fall of horrors." Really I have read history, but that gives it
to one diluted. I had no notion that the English people were so savage.'

'Come, come! no worse than other people,' Mr. Dallas put in.

'I do not know how it is with other people. I am thankful we have no
such monument in America. I shouldn't think snow would lie on the
Tower!'

'Doesn't often,' said Pitt.

'Think, Mrs. Dallas! I stood in that little chapel there,--the
prisoners' chapel,--and beneath the pavement lay between thirty and
forty people, the remains of them, who lay there with their heads
separated from their bodies; and some of them with no heads at all. The
heads had been set up on London bridge, or on Temple Bar, or some other
dreadful place. And then as we went round I was told that here was the
spot where Lady Jane Grey was beheaded; and there was the window from
which she saw the headless body of her husband carried by; and _there_
stood the rack on which Anne Askew was tortured; and there was the
prison where Arabella Stuart died insane; and here was the axe which
used to be carried before the Lieutenant when he took a prisoner to his
trial, and was carried before the prisoner when he returned, mostly
with the sharp edge turned towards him. I do not see how people used to
live in those times. There are Anne Boleyn and her brother, Lady Jane
Grey and her husband, and other Dudleys innumerable'--

'My dear, do stop,' said Mrs. Dallas. 'I cannot eat my dinner, and you
cannot.'

'Eat dinner! Did anybody use to eat dinner, in those times? Did the
world go on as usual? with such horrors on the throne and in the
dungeon?'

'It is a great national monument,' said Mr. Dallas, 'that any people
might be proud of.'

'Proud! Well, I am glad, as I said, that the sky is blue over America.'

'The blue looks down on nothing so fine as our old Tower. And it isn't
so blue, either, if you could know all.'

'Where are you going to take us next, Pitt?' Mrs. Dallas asked, to give
things a pleasanter turn.

'How did you like St. Paul's, Miss Betty?' her husband went on, before
Pitt could speak.

'It is very black!'

'That is one of its beauties,' remarked Pitt.

'Is it? But I am accustomed to purer air. I do not like so much smoke.'

'You were interested in the monuments?' said Mrs. Dallas.

'Honestly, I am not fond of monuments. Besides, there is really a
reminiscence of the Tower and the axe there very often. I had no
conception London was such a place.'

'Let us take her to Hyde Park and show her something cheerful, Pitt.'

'I should like above all things to go to the House of Commons and hear
a debate--if it could be managed.'

Pitt said it could be managed; and it was managed; and they went to the
Park; and they drove out to see some of the beauties near London,
Richmond, Hampton Court, and Windsor; and several days passed away in
great enjoyment for the whole party. Betty forgot the Tower and grew
gay. The strangeness of her position was forgotten; the house came to
be familiar; the alternation of sight-seeing with the quiet household
life was delightful. Nothing could be better, might it last. Could it
not last? Nay, Betty would have relinquished the sight-seeing and
bargained for only the household life, if she could have retained that.


CHAPTER XLIII.

_MARTIN'S COURT_.


'What is for to-day, Pitt?'

There had been a succession of rather gay days, visiting of galleries
and palaces. Mrs. Dallas put the question at breakfast.

'I am going to show Miss Frere something, if she will allow me.'

'She will allow you, of course. You have done it pretty often lately.
Where is it now?'

'Nowhere for you, mamma. My show to-day is for Miss Frere alone.'

'Alone? Why may I not go?'

'You would not enjoy it.'

'Then perhaps she will not enjoy it.'

'Perhaps not.'

'But, Pitt, what do you mean? and what is this you want to show her
which she does not want to see?'

'She can tell you all about it afterwards, if she chooses.'

'Perhaps she will not choose to go with you on such a doubtful
invitation.'

Betty, however, declared herself ready for anything. So she was, under
such guidance.

They took a cab for a certain distance; then Pitt dismissed it, and
they went forward on foot. It was a dull, hot day; clouds hanging low
and threatening rain, but no rain falling as yet. Rhodes, bending
courteously over the backs of the visiters' chairs, and hoping everybody
has got everything to their satisfaction, or bestowing an occasional
subdued acknowledgment upon an _habitué_ who chances to enter; and the
professional gentlemen all laying their heads together at the top
of the table to pitch the key of the next glee; and the waiters
bustling up and down with all sorts of tempting comestibles; and
the gentleman in the Chesterfield wrapper smoking a cigar at the
side of the room, while he leans back and contemplates the ceiling,
as if his whole soul was concentrated in its smoke-discoloured
mouldings.

The new man is in ecstasies; he beholds the realization of the
Arabian Nights, and when the harmony commences again, he is fairly
entranced.

But dead cats and decaying cabbage leaves, in a not very clean alley,
where the sun rarely shines, and briefly then, with the thermometer
well up, on a summer day, altogether make an atmosphere not suited to
delicate senses. Pitt picked the way along the narrow passage, which at
the end opened into a little court. This was somewhat cleaner than the
alley; also it lay so that the sun sometimes visited it, though here
too his visits could be but brief, for on the opposite side the court
was shut in and overshadowed by the tall backs of great houses. They
seemed, to Betty's fancy, to cast as much moral as physical shadow over
the place. The houses in this court were small and dingy. If one looked
straight up, there was a space of grey cloud visible; some days it
would no doubt be a space of blue sky. No other thing even dimly
suggesting refreshment or purity was within the range of vision. Pitt
slowly paced along the row of houses.

'Who lives here?' Betty asked, partly to relieve the oppression that
was creeping upon her.

'No householders, that I know of. People who live in one room, or
perhaps in two rooms; therefore in every house there are a number of
families. This is Martin's court. And _here_,'--he stopped before one
of the doors,--'in this house, in a room on the third floor--let me
suppose a case'--

'Third floor? why, there are only two stories.'

'In the garret, then,--there lives an old woman, over seventy years
old, all alone. She has been ill for a long time, and suffers a great
deal of pain.'

'Who takes care of her?' Betty asked, wondering at the same time why
Pitt told her all this.

'She has no means to pay anybody to take care of her.'

'But how does she _live?_--if she cannot do anything for herself.'

'She can do nothing at all for herself. She has been dependent on the
kindness of her neighbours. They are poor, too, and have their hands
full; still, from time to time one and another would look in upon her,
light a fire for her, and give her something to eat; that is, when they
did not forget it.'

'And what if they did forget it?'

'Then she must wait till somebody remembered; wait perhaps days, to get
her bed made; lie alone in her pain all day, except for those rare
visits; and even have to hire a boy with a penny to bring her a pitcher
of water; lie alone all night and wait in the morning till somebody
could give her her breakfast.'

'Why do you tell me all this, Mr. Pitt?' said Betty, facing round on
him.

'Ask me that by and by. Come a little farther. Here, in this next house
but one, there is a man sick with rheumatism--in a fever; when I first
saw him he was lying there shivering and in great pain, with no fire;
and his daughter, a girl of perhaps a dozen years old, was trying to
light a fire with a few splinters of sticks that she had picked up.
That was last winter, in cold weather. They were poverty-stricken,
since the man had been some time out of work.'

'Well?' said Betty. 'I must not repeat my question, but what is all
this to me? I have no power to help them. Do you know these people
yourself?'

'Yes, I know them. In the last house of the row there is another old
woman I want to tell you of; and then we will go. She is not ill, nor
disabled; she is only very old and quite alone. She is not unhappy
either, for she is a true old Christian. But think of this: in the room
which she occupies, which is half underground, there is just one hour
in the day when a sunbeam can find entrance. For that hour she watches;
and when the sky is not clouded, and it comes, she takes her Bible and
holds it in the sunshine to read for that blessed hour. It is all she
has in the twenty-four. The rest of the time she must only think of
what she has read; the place is too dark for any more.'

'Do let us go!' said Betty; and she turned, and almost fled back to the
alley, and through the alley back to the street. There they walked more
moderately a space of some rods before she found breath and words. She
faced round on her conductor again.

'Why do you take me to such a place, and tell me such things?'

'Will you let that question still rest a little while?' Almost as he
spoke Pitt called another cab, and Betty and he were presently speeding
on again, whither she knew not. It was a good time to talk, and she
repeated her question.

'Instead of answering you, I would like to put a question on my side,'
he returned. 'What do you think is duty, on the part of a servant of
Christ, towards such cases?'

'Pray tell me, is there not some system of poor relief in this place?'

'Yes, there is the parish help. And sorrowful help it is! The parishes
are often very large, the sufferers very many, the cases of fraud and
trickery almost--perhaps quite--as numerous as those at least which
come to the notice of the parish authorities. The parish authorities
are but average men; is it wonderful if they are hard administrators? I
can tell you, justice is bitterly hard, as she walks the streets here;
and mercy's hand has grown rough with friction!'

Betty looked at the speaker, whose brow was knit and his eye darkened
and flashing; she half laughed.

'You are eloquent,' she said. 'You ought to be representing the case on
the floor of the House of Commons.'

'Well,' he said, coming down to an easier tone, 'the parish authorities
are but men, as I said, and they grow suspicious, naturally; and in any
case the relief they give is utterly insufficient. A shilling a week,
or two shillings a week,--what would they do for the people I have been
telling you of? And it is hard dealing with the parish authorities. I
know it, for here and there at least I have followed Job's example;
"the cause I knew not, I searched out." One must do that, or one runs
the risk of being taken in, and throwing money away upon rogues which
ought to go to help honest people.'

'But that takes time?'

'Yes.'

'A great deal of time, if it is to be done often.'

'Yes.'

'Mr. Pitt, if you follow out that sort of business, it would leave you
time for nothing else.'

'What better can I do with my time?'

'Just suppose everybody did the like!'

'Suppose they did.'

'What would be the state of things?'

'I should say, the world would be in a better state of health; and that
elephant we once spoke of would not shake his head quite so often.'

'But you are not the elephant, as I pointed out, if I remember; the
world does not rest on your head.'

'Part of it does. Go on and answer my question. What ought I to do for
these people of whom I have told you?'

