He cried again, "Marie! Marie!" then got up out of bed, walked on his
naked feet in his shirt to the window, stood there and waited. The
moonlight had, by this, struck our room and flooded it. He turned
suddenly and faced me. I could not believe that he did not see me, but
I could not endure the unhappiness in his eyes and I turned, looking
down. I did not look at him again but I heard his feet patter back to
the bed; then he stood there, his whole body strung to meet some
overmastering crisis. He whispered her name as though she had come to
him since his first call. "Ah, Marie, my darling," he whispered.

I could not bear that. I crept from my bed, slipped away, closed the
door softly behind me and stole downstairs.

I cannot write at length of what followed. It was the crisis of
everything that has happened to me since I left Petrograd. Every
experience that I had had was suddenly flung into this moment. I was
in our sitting-room now, pitch dark because shutters had been placed
outside the windows to guard against bullets. I stood there in my
shirt and drawers: shuddering, shivering with hatred of myself,
shivering with fear of Semyonov, shivering above all, with a
desperate, agonising, torturing hunger for Marie. Semyonov's voice had
appalled me. I hadn't realised before how strongly I had relied on his
not truly caring for her. Everything in the man had seemed to persuade
me of this, and I had even flattered myself on my miserable
superiority to him, that I was the true faithful lover and he the
vulgar sensualist. How small now I seemed beside him!--and how I
feared him! Then I was at sudden fierce grip with the beast!... At
grips at last!

I had once before, on another night, been tempted to kill myself, but
that had been nothing to this. Now sick and ill, faint for food, I
swayed there on the floor, hearing always in my ear--"Give way! Give
way!... You'll be in front of him, you'll have left him behind you, he
can do nothing ... a moment more and you can be with her--and he
cannot reach you!"

I do not know how long I fought there. I was not fighting with an evil
devil, a fearful beast as in my dreams I had always imagined it--I was
fighting myself: every weakness in the past to which I had ever
surrendered, every little scrap of personal history, every slackness
and cowardice and lethargy was there on the floor against me.

I don't know what it was that prevented me stealing back to my room,
fetching my revolver and so ending it. I could see Marie close to me,
to be reached by the stretching of a finger. I could see myself living
on, always conscious of Semyonov, his thick beastly confident body
always there between myself and her.

I sank into the last depths of self-despair and degradation. No fine
thing saved me, no help from noble principles, nothing fine. The whole
was as sordid as possible. I knew, even as I struggled, that I was a
silly figure there, with my bony ugliness, in my shirt and drawers,
my hair on end and my teeth chattering. But I responded, I suppose, to
some little pulse of manly obstinacy that beat somewhere in me. I
would _not_ be beaten by the Creature. Even in the middle of it I
realised that this was the hardest tussle of my life and worth
fighting. I know too that some thought of Nikitin came to me as
though, in some way, my failure would damage _him_. I remembered that
night of the Retreat when he had helped me and, as though he were
appealing visibly to me there in the room, I responded; I seemed to
feel that he was fighting some battle of his own and that my victory
would fortify him. I stood with him beside me. So I fought it, fought
it with the sweat dripping down my nose and my tongue dry. "No!"
something suddenly cried in me.