Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, J.P.W. Fraser, Mary
Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


                        A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD NEW YORK

                            By AMANDA M. DOUGLAS


New York
Dodd, Mead and Company

COPYRIGHT, 1896, BY
DODD, MEAD & COMPANY


To
_DOROTHY MOORE_,
A LITTLE GIRL OF TO-DAY,
FROM
HER MAMMA'S FRIEND,
AMANDA M. DOUGLAS.
NEWARK, 1896.


CONTENTS


       I. THE LITTLE GIRL

      II. GOOD-BY TO AN OLD HOME

     III. FINE FEATHERS FOR THE LITTLE WREN

      IV. A LOOK AT OLD NEW YORK

       V. GIRLS AND GIRLS

      VI. MISS DOLLY BEEKMAN

     VII. MISS LOIS AND SIXTY YEARS AGO

    VIII. THE END OF THE WORLD

      IX. A WONDERFUL SCHEME

       X. A MERRY CHRISTMAS

      XI. THE LITTLE GIRL IN POLITICS

     XII. A REAL PARTY

    XIII. NEW RELATIONS

     XIV. JOHN ROBERT CHARLES

      XV. A PLAY IN THE BACKYARD

     XVI. DAISY JASPER

    XVII. SOME OF THE OLD LANDMARKS

   XVIII. SUNDRY DISSIPATIONS

     XIX. WHEN CHRISTMAS BELLS WERE RINGING


A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD NEW YORK


CHAPTER I

THE LITTLE GIRL


"How would you like to go to New York to live, little girl?"

The little girl looked up into her father's face to see if he was
"making fun." He did sometimes. He was beginning to go down the hill of
middle life, a rather stout personage with a fair, florid complexion,
brown hair, rough and curly, and a border of beard shaved well away from
his mouth. Both beard and hair were getting threads of white in them.
His jolly blue eyes were mostly in a twinkle, and his good-natured mouth
looked as if he might be laughing at you.

She studied him intently. Three months before she had been taken to the
city on a visit, and it was a great event. I suspect that her mother did
not like being separated from her a whole fortnight. She was such a
nice, quiet, well-behaved little girl. Children were trained in those
days. Some of them actually took pride in being as nice as possible and
obeying the first time they were spoken to, without even asking "Why?"

The little girl sat on a stool sewing patchwork. This particular pattern
was called a lemon star and had eight diamond-shaped pieces of two
colors, filled in with white around the edge, making a square. Her
grandmother was coming to "join" it for her, and have it quilted before
she was eight years old. She was doing her part with a good will.

"To New York?" she repeated very deliberately. Then she went on with her
sewing for she had no time to waste.

"Yes, Pussy." Her father pinched her cheek softly. The little girl was
the most precious thing in the world, he sometimes thought.

"What, all of us?" You see she had a mind to understand the case before
she committed herself.

"Oh, certainly! I don't know as we could leave any one behind."

Then he lifted her up in his lap and hugged her, scrubbing her face with
his beard which gave her pink cheeks. They both laughed. She held her
sewing out with one hand so that the needle should not scratch either of
them.

"I can't--hardly--tell;" and her face was serious.

I want to explain to you that the little girl had not begun with
grammar. You may find her making mistakes occasionally. Perhaps the
children of to-day do the same thing.

"Would we move everything?" raising her wondering eyes.

"Well, no--not quite;" and the humorous light crossed his face. "We
couldn't take the orchard nor the meadows nor the woods nor the creek."
(I think he said "medders" and "crick," and his "nor" sounded as if he
put an _e_ in it.) "There are a good many things we should have to leave
behind."

He sighed and the little girl sighed too. She drew up her patchwork and
began to sew.

"It is a great deal of trouble to move;" she began gravely. "I must
consider."

She had caught that from Great-Aunt Van Kortlandt, who never committed
herself to anything without considering.

Her father kissed her cheek. If it had been a little fatter she would
have had a dimple. Or perhaps he put so many kisses in the little dent
it was always filled up with love.

I don't know whether you would have thought this little girl of past
seven pretty or not. She was small and fair with a rather prim face and
thick light hair, parted in the middle, combed back of her ears, and cut
square across the neck, but the ends had some curly twists.

Certainly children are dressed prettier nowadays. The little girl's
frock was green with tiny rivulets of yellow meandering over it. They
made islands and peninsulas and isthmuses of green that were odd and
freaky. Mrs. Underhill had bought it to join her sashwork quilt, and
there was enough left to make the little girl a frock. It had the merit
of washing well, but it gave her a rather ghostly look. It had a short,
full waist with shoulder straps, making a square neck, a wide belt, and
a skirt that came down to the tops of her shoes, which were like Oxford
ties. Though she was not rosy she had never been really ill, and only
stayed at home two weeks the previous winter at the worst of the
whooping-cough, which nobody seemed to mind then. But it must have made
a sort of Wagner chorus if many children coughed at once.

"I had a very nice time in New York," she began, with grave approbation,
when she had considered for some seconds. "The museum was splendid! And
the houses seem sociable-like. Don't you suppose they nod to each other
when the folks are asleep? And the stores are so--so--" she tried to
think of the longest word she knew--"so magnificent? Aunt Patience and
Aunt Nancy were so nice. And the cat was perfectly white and sat in Aunt
Nancy's lap. There was a little girl next door who had a big doll and a
cradle and a set of dishes, and we had tea together. I'd like to have
some dishes. Do you think Uncle Faid is coming back?" she asked
suddenly.

"I believe he is, this time. And if we get very homesick we shall have
to come back and live with him."

"I shouldn't be homesick with you and mother and the boys, and Steve and
Joe. It would be nice to have Dobbin and Prince, but the stores are on
the corners instead of going to the village, and its nice and queer to
ride in the omnibuses and hand your money up through the roof. The
drivers must have an awful sight when night comes."

They even said "awful" in those far-back days, they truly did.

Father Underhill laughed and squeezed the little girl with a fondness
she understood very well.

Just then a voice called rather sharply: "'Milyer! 'Milyer!" and he sat
the little girl down on the stool as carefully as if she had been china.
He put another kiss in the little dent, and she gave him a tender smile.

His whole name was Vermilye Fowler Underhill. Everybody called him
Familiar, but Mrs. Underhill shortened it to 'Milyer.

The little girl's name was Hannah Ann. The school children called her
Han and Hanny. One grandmother always said Hanneran. But being the
youngest, the most natural name seemed "little girl."

There were three sons to lead off, Stephen Decatur, Joseph Bennett, and
John Fowler. Then a daughter was most welcome, and she was called
Margaret Hunter after her mother, and shortened to Peggy. They used
nicknames and diminutives, if they were not as fanciful as ours.

After Margaret came George Horton, Benny Franklin, and James Odell. The
poor mother gave a sigh of disappointment, she had so longed for another
girl. When Jim had outgrown babyhood altogether and was nearly five, the
desired blessing came.

There was a great discussion about her name. Grandmother Hunter had
married a second time and was a Van Kortlandt now. She had named her
only daughter after her mother and was a bit offended that Margaret was
not named for her. Now she came with a fairy god-mother's insistence,
and declared she would put a hundred dollars in the bank at once, and
remember the child in her will, besides giving her the old Hunter
tablespoons made in London more than a hundred years ago, with the crown
mark on them.

Grandmother Underhill's name was Ann. She lived with her eldest son at
White Plains, who had fallen heir to his grandfather's farm. When a
widow she had gone back to her girlhood's home and taken care of her old
father. David, her eldest son, had come to work the farm. She had a
"wing" in the house, but she never lived by herself, for her son and the
grandchildren adored her.

Now she said to the baby's mother: "You put in Ann for a middle name and
I'll give her a hundred dollars as well, and my string of gold beads
that came from Paris. And I'll make her a nice down bed and pillows."

So Hannah Ann it was, and the little girl began life with a bank
account. She was a grave, sweet, dainty sort of baby, with wondering
eyes of bluish violet, bordering on gray. I think myself that she should
have had a prettier name, but people were not throwing away even
two-hundred-dollar chances in those days. Neither had they come to
Ediths and Ethels and Mays and Gladys. And they barbarously shortened
some of their most beautiful names to Peggy and Betsey and Polly and
Sukey.

Left to herself the little girl went on with her patchwork, and recalled
her visit to the city. There were so many aunts and cousins and so many
wonderful things to see. She must find out whether there would be any
snow and sleighrides in the winter. As for fruit and vegetables and eggs
and poultry the farmers were always sending them in to the city, she
knew that.

The prospect of a removal from Yonkers, where they had always lived, was
not so new to the elders. Stephen was in New York nearly all the week
now. Joseph was studying for a doctor. John was not in love with farming
and had a great taste for mechanical pursuits. Margaret, a tall, fair
girl of seventeen, was begging to be sent away to school another year,
and learn some of the higher branches people were talking about. Joe
thought she should. Her father was quite sure she knew enough, for she
could do all the puzzling sums in "Perkins' Higher Arithmetic," and you
couldn't trip her up on the hardest words. She went to a very good
school in the village. And the village was quite primitive in those
days. The steamboat-landing was the great focus of interest. It was all
rock and hills and a few factories were plodding along. The farm was two
good miles away.

The young people thought it a most auspicious turn in affairs that Uncle
Faid was coming back. His real name was Frederic. Since David had his
grandfather's farm, this had been divided between the two remaining
sons, but Frederic had been seized with the Western fever and gone out
to what was called the new countries. His sons had married and settled
in different places, one daughter had married and come East to live, and
Uncle Faid was homesick for the land of his youth.

Mrs. Underhill had declared at first, "She wouldn't stir a step. 'Milyer
could buy out his brother's part in the house"--the two hundred acres
had been already divided. But people had begun to complain even then
that farming did not pay, and John wanted to learn a trade. And if three
or four went out of the old home nest! Steve wanted his father in New
York. If they were not satisfied they could come back and build a new
house. And presently she began to think it best even if she didn't like
it.

The little girl finished her block of patchwork, pinched and patted down
the seams, and laid it on the pile. Her "stent" for that day was done.
There were nine more blocks to make.

There was a wide half closet beside the chimney and she had the top
shelf for her own. It was so neat that it looked like a doll's house.
Her only doll had been a "rag baby," and Gip, the dog, had demolished
that.

"Never mind," said her mother, "you are too big to play with dolls." But
the little girl in New York was almost a year older, and she had a large
wax doll with "truly" clothes that could be taken off and washed. If she
went to the city she might have one.

She piled up her patchwork with a sense of exultation. She was extremely
neat. There was a tiny, hair-covered trunk grandmother Van Kortland had
given her full of pretty chintz and calico pieces. She kept her baby
shoes of blue kid that were outgrown before they were half worn out, so
choice had her mother been of them. There were some gift-books and
mementos and a beautiful Shaker basket Stephen had given her at
Christmas. It was round, so she imagined you put something in it and
shook it, for she had no idea the Shakers were a community and made
dainty articles for sale, even if they discarded all personal vanities.

She went through to the next room, which was the kitchen in winter and
dining-room in summer. She took down her blue-and-white gingham
sun-bonnet, and skipped along a narrow path through the grass to the
summer kitchen. This was a short distance from the house, a big, square
room with a door at each side, and smoky rafters overhead. The brick and
stone chimney was built inside, very wide at the bottom and tapering up
to the peak in the roof. There was a great black crane across it, with
two sets of trammels suspended from it, on which you could hang two
kettles at the same time. If you have never seen one, get Longfellow's
beautiful illustrated poem, "The Hanging of the Crane." A great many old
country houses had them, and they were considered extremely handy.

The presiding genius of the kitchen was a fat old black woman, so old
that her hair was all grizzled. When she braided it up in little tails
on Saturday afternoon Hannah Ann watched with a kind of fascination. She
always wore a plaid Madras turban with a bow tied in front. She had been
grandmother Underhill's slave woman. I suppose very few of you know
there were slaves in New York State in the early part of the century.
Aunt Mary had sons married, and grandchildren doing well. They begged
her now and then to give up work, but she clung to her old home.

"Aunt Mary," inquired the little girl, "is the chicken feed mixed?"

"Laws, yaas, honey, lem me scoop it in de pail. You's got such little
claws o' han's. Don't seem 's if dey ever grow big ernough fer nothin'."

She ladled out the scalded meal, mixed with bits of broken bread. The
little girl laughed and nodded and crossed the small bridge that spanned
the creek. The spring, or rather the series of them, ran around the
house and down past the kitchen, then widened out into quite a pond
where the ducks and geese disported themselves, and the cows always
paused to drink on their way to the barn.

She went down to the barn. On the carriage-house side in the sun were
some chicken-coops. Pretty little chicks whose mothers had "stolen
their nests;" thirty-two of various sizes, and they belonged to the
little girl. She rarely forgot them.

There were plenty of chores for Ben and Jim. They drove the cows to
pasture, chopped wood, picked apples, and dug potatoes. You wondered how
they found any time for play or study.

Jim "tagged" the little girl as she came back with her pail. She could
run like a deer.

"Here you, Jim!" called Aunt Mary, "you jes' take dis pail an' git some
of dem big blackbre'es fer supper steder gallopin' roun' like a wild
palakin ob de desert!" and she held out the shining pail.

A "palakin of the desert" was Aunt Mary's favorite simile. In vain had
Margaret explained that the pelican was a bird and couldn't gallop.

"Laws, honey," the old woman would reply, "I aint hankerin' arter any ob
dis new book larnin'. I's a heap too old fer 'rithmertic an' 'stology. I
jes' keeps to de plain Bible dat served de chillen of Isrul in de
wilderness. Some day, Miss Peggy, when you's waded tru seas o' trubble
an' come out on de good Lord's side an' made your callin' an' 'lection
sure, you'll know more 'bout it I done reckon."

"Come with me, do, Hanny," pleaded Jim. "You can walk along the stone
fence and pick the high ones and we'll fill the kittle in no time."

Jim thought if he had made a spelling-book, he would have spelled the
word that way. Jim would have been a master hand at phonetics.

The little girl crossed two of her fingers. That was a sign of truce in
the game.

"No play till we come back," said Jim.

The little girl nodded and ran for her mitts of strong muslin with the
thumb and finger ends out. The briars were so apt to tear your hands.

They ran a race down to the blackberry patch. Then they sat on the fence
and ate berries. It was really a broad, handsome wall. There were so
many stones on the ground that they built the walls as they "cleared
up." The blackberry lot was a wild tangle. There were some hickory-nut
trees in it and a splendid branching black walnut. Sometimes they found
a cluster of hazel-nuts.

The great blackberry canes grew six or seven feet high. They generally
cut one path through in the early summer. The long branches made arches
overhead.

The little girl pinned a big dock-leaf with a thorn and made a cup. When
it was full she emptied it into Jim's pail. They were such great,
luscious berries that they soon had it filled. Then they sat down and
rested. Everybody knows that it is harder work to pick berries than to
play "tag."

Jim had a piece to speak on Friday afternoon at school. They had these
exercises once a month, but this was to be a rather grand affair, as
then school closed for a fortnight. That was all the vacation they had.

Jim was rather proud of his elocutionary gift. He stood up on a big flat
stone and declaimed so that the little girl might see if he knew every
word. It was extremely patriotic, beginning:

    "Columbia! Columbia! to glory arise,
    The queen of the world and the child of the skies!"

"Oh, you say it just splendid!" declared the little girl
enthusiastically. She never laughed and teased him as Peggy did.

She was learning some verses herself, but she wondered if she would have
courage enough to face the whole school. They were in her "Child's
Reader" with the "Little Busy Bee," and "Let Dogs Delight to Bark and
Bite." She thought them beautiful:

    "The rose had been washed, lately washed in a shower,
      Which Mary to Anna conveyed."

It puzzled her small brain a good deal as to why the rose needed
washing. But Peggy showed her one day how dusty the leaves and flowers
grew in a dry time, and she learned that the whole world was the better
for an occasional washing. She asked Mary afterward why the clothes were
not put out in a hard rain to get them clean.

"Laws, honey, dey need elbow-grease," and the old woman laughed
heartily.

"I do wish my name was Anna," she said, with a sigh.

"Well, you just need to put another _a_ to the Ann," said her brother
confidently.

"And I don't like being called Han and Hanny."

"I'd a heap rather be called Jim than James. When pop calls me James I
think it's time to pick myself up mighty spry, I tell you!" and he
laughed.

"It's different with boys," she said, with a soft sigh. "Girls ought to
have pretty names, and Hanneran is dreadful."

"I'd stand a good deal for two hundred dollars. And it doubles in
fourteen years. And seven again! Why you'll have more than five hundred
dollars when you're grown up!"

She did not know the value of money and thought she would rather have
the pretty name. Yet she wasn't _quite_ sure she would choose Anna.

"You stay here while I run after the cows," said Jim. "It will save
another journey."

Boys are often economical of their steps, I have noticed. Perhaps this
is how they gain time for play. The little girl jumped down presently
and looked over at the wild flowers. There were clusters of yarrow in
bloom, spikes of yellow snap-dragons, and a great clump of thistles in
their purple glory. She must tell her father about them, and have them
rooted out. Would it hurt them to be killed? She felt suddenly sorry for
them.

A squirrel ran along and winked at her as he gave his tail an extra
perk. Nothing was ever afraid of the little girl. But she ran from the
old gobbler, and the big gander who believed he had pre-empted the farm
from the Indians. She generally climbed over the fence when she saw old
Red, who had an ominous fashion of brandishing her long horns. But she
didn't mind with Jim nor Benny.

Jim came now and took up the pail. The cows meandered along. She was
rather glad Jim did not see the thistle. She would not tell him about it
to-night.


CHAPTER II

GOOD-BY TO AN OLD HOME


When they reached the barn they saw Aunt Mary carrying a great platter
of corn up to the house. The little girl washed her hands and her face,
that was quite rosy now, and followed. How delicious it all looked!
White bread, corncake, cold chicken, pot-cheese in great creamy balls,
and a hot molasses cake to come on with the berries.

The little girl always sat beside her mother, and Margaret on the boys'
side, to help them. There were four boys and two hired men.

Mrs. Underhill was a notable housekeeper. She was a little sharp in the
temper, but Mr. Underhill was so easy that some one had to uphold the
family dignity. She complained that 'Milyer spoiled the children, but
they were good-natured and jolly, and quite up to the average.

After supper the cows were milked, the horses fed and bedded, Margaret
and her mother packed up the dishes in a big basket, and the boys took
them down to Mary. Mrs. Underhill looked after the milk.

The little girl went out on the wide porch and studied her lessons.
There were two long lines in Webster's elementary spelling-book to get
by heart, for the teacher "skipped about." The children went up and
down, and it was rare fun sometimes. The little girl had been out of the
Baker class a long while. They call it that because the first column
began with that easy word. She was very proud of having gone in the
larger class. Her father gave her a silver dollar with a hole punched
through it, and Steve brought her a blue ribbon for it. She wore it on
state occasions. She studied Peter Parley's geography and knew the
verses beginning:

    "The world is round and like a ball,
      Seems swinging in the air."

How it could be puzzled her. She asked her father, for she thought he
knew everything. He said he believed it was, but he could never make it
seem so.

Aunt Mary strenuously denied it. "Sta'ns to reason de folks would fall
off w'en it went swirlin' round. De good Lord He knows His business
better'n dat. Jes don't mind any sech foolin', honey! Its clear agin de
Bible dat speaks ob de sun's risin' an' settin', an' de Lord nebber
makes any mistake 'bout dat ar Bible."

The little girl studied her lesson over four times. Then Jim came up and
they had a game of tag. Dave Andrews and Milton Scott sat out under the
old apple-tree smoking their pipes and talking politics. One was a Whig
and the other a Democrat who believed that we had never had a President
worth mentioning since Andrew Jackson, Old Hickory as he was often
called.

When her father came round the corner of the house she stopped running
after Jim and held out both hands to him. Her cheeks were like wild
roses and her eyes shone with pleasure. They sat down on the step, and
he put his arm about her and "cuddled" her up to his side. She told him
she had gone up three in saying seven times in the multiplication table,
and four in spelling "tetrarch." Then when Charley Banks was reading he
said "condig-en" and the class laughed. She also told him she had been
studying about Rhode Island and Roger Williams, and all the bays and
inlets and islands. She made believe comb his hair with her slim little
fingers and once in a while he opened his lips like a trap and caught
them, and they both laughed.

Presently Mrs. Underhill, who sat by the window knitting in the
twilight, said: "'Milyer, that child must go to bed."

She felt she had to issue this mandate two of three times, so she began
early.

They hugged each other and laughed a little. Then he said: "All the
chickens right?"

"Yes, I counted them. They're so cunning and lovely."

"I hope they'll get their feather cloaks on before cold weather," said
her father.

"'Milyer, that child _must_ go to bed! I don't see why you want to keep
her up all hours of the night."

They hugged each other a little closer this time and did not laugh, but
just kissed softly. It was beginning to grow dusky. The peeps and
crickets and katydids were out in force. The katydids told you there
would be frost in six weeks.

When her mother added in a dignified tone, "Come, Hannah Ann," the
little girl took one last hug and came into the room. Margaret had
lighted the candles in their polished brass candlesticks. One stood on
the hall table, one on the stand in the middle of the room. Mrs.
Underhill had knit past the seam in her stocking and pulled out a few
stitches. Then she laid it down and unfastened the little girl's frock
and said, "Now run to bed this minute." Margaret was reading, but she
glanced up and smiled.

The candle made a vague yellowish light on the stairs. There were people
who burned lamp-oil, as the oil from whales was called. Lincoln's friends
made her believe that it was the duty of Mrs.
Lincoln to show some attention to the remarkable dwarfs. Tom Thumb had
been caressed by royalty in the Old World, and why should not the wife
of the President of his native country smile upon him also? Verily, duty
is one of the greatest bugbears in life.

A hasty reception was arranged, and cards of invitation issued. I had
dressed Mrs. Lincoln, and she was ready to go below and receive her
guests, when Robert entered his mother's room.

"You are at leisure this afternoon, are you not, Robert?"
"Yes, mother."

"Of course, then, you will dress and come down-stairs."
"No, mother, I do not propose to assist in entertaining Tom Thumb. My notions
of duty, perhaps, are somewhat different from yours."
Robert had a lofty soul, and he could not stoop to all of the follies
and absurdities of the ephemeral current of fashionable life.

Mrs. Lincoln's love for her husband sometimes prompted her to act very
strangely.

She was extremely jealous of him, and if a lady desired to court her
displeasure, she could select no surer way to do it than to pay marked
attention to the President.

These little jealous freaks often were a source of perplexity to Mr.
Lincoln. If it was a reception for which they were dressing, he
would come into her room to conduct her downstairs, and while
pulling on his gloves ask, with a merry twinkle in his eyes:
"Well, mother, who must I talk with to-night--shall it be Mrs.

D.?"
"That deceitful woman! No, you shall not listen to her flattery."
"Well, then, what do you say to Miss C.? She is too young and handsome
to practise deceit."
"Young and handsome, you call her! You should not judge beauty for me.
No, she is in league with Mrs. D., and you shall not talk with her."
"Well, mother, I must talk with some one. Is there any one that you do
not object to?" trying to button his glove, with a mock expression of
gravity.

"I don't know as it is necessary that you should talk to anybody in
particular. You know well enough, Mr. Lincoln, that I do not approve of
your flirtations with silly women, just as if you were a beardless
boy, fresh from school."

"But, mother, I insist that I must talk with somebody. I can't stand
around like a simpleton, and say nothing. If you will not tell me who I
may talk with, please tell me who I may _not_ talk with."
"There is Mrs. D. and Miss C. in particular. I detest them both. Mrs.
B.
also will come around you, but you need not listen to her flattery.

These are the ones in particular."
"Very well, mother; now that we have settled the question to your
satisfaction, we will go down-stairs;" and always with stately dignity,
he proffered his arm and led the way.

[Footnote B: The Sheffield Anti-Slavery Society of England contributed
through Mr.

Frederick Douglass, to the Freedmen's Relief Association, $24.00; Aberdeen
Ladies' Society, $40.00; Anti-Slavery Society of Edinburgh, Scotland,
$48.00; Friends at Bristol, England, $176.00; Birmingham Negro's
Friend Society, $50.00. Also received through Mr.

Charles R. Douglass, from the Birmingham Society, $33.00.]

CHAPTER VIII 
CANDID OPINIONS 

Often Mr. and Mrs.

Lincoln discussed the relations of Cabinet officers, and gentlemen
prominent in politics, in my presence.

I soon learned that the wife of the President had no love for Mr. Salmon
P. Chase, at that time Secretary of the Treasury. She was well versed
in human character, was somewhat suspicious of those by whom she was
surrounded, and often her judgment was correct. Her intuition about the
sincerity of individuals was more accurate than that of her husband.
She looked beyond, and read the reflection of action in the future. Her
hostility to Mr. Chase was very bitter. She claimed that he was a selfish
politician instead of a true patriot, and warned Mr. Lincoln not to
trust him too far. The daughter of the Secretary was quite a belle in
Washington, and Mrs.

Lincoln, who was jealous of the popularity of others, had no desire
to build up her social position through political favor to her
father.

Miss Chase, now Mrs. Senator Sprague, was a lovely woman, and was worthy
of all the admiration she received. Mr. Lincoln was more confiding than
his wife. He never suspected the fidelity of those who claimed to be
his friends.

Honest to the very core himself, and frank as a child, he never
dreamed of questioning the sincerity of others.

"Father, I do wish that you would inquire a little into the motives
of Chase," said his wife one day.

The President was lying carelessly upon a sofa, holding a newspaper
in his hands.

"Mother, you are too suspicious. I give you credit for sagacity,
but you are disposed to magnify trifles. Chase is a patriot, and one
of my best friends."
"Yes, one of your best friends because it is his interest to be so.

He is anything for Chase. If he thought he could make anything by it,
he would betray you to-morrow."
"I fear that you are prejudiced against the man, mother. I know that
you do him injustice."

"Mr. Lincoln, you are either blind or will not see. I am not the only
one that has warned you against him."
"True, I receive letters daily from all parts of the country, telling
me not to trust Chase; but then these letters are written by the
political enemies of the Secretary, and it would be unjust and
foolish to pay any attention to them."

"Very well, you will find out some day, if you live long enough, that
I have read the man correctly. I only hope that your eyes may not be
opened to the truth when it is too late." The President, as far as I
could judge from his conversation with his wife, continued to
confide in Mr.

Chase to the time of his tragic death.

Mrs. Lincoln was especially severe on Mr. Wm. H. Seward, Secretary of
State. She but rarely lost an opportunity to say an unkind word of
him.

One morning I went to the White House earlier than usual. Mr. Lincoln
was sitting in a chair, reading a paper, stroking with one hand the
head of little Tad. I was basting a dress for Mrs.

Lincoln. A servant entered, and handed the President a letter just
brought by a messenger.

He broke the seal, and when he had read the contents his wife
asked:

"Who is the letter from, father?"

"Seward; I must go over and see him today."
"Seward! I wish you had nothing to do with that man. He cannot be trusted."

"You say the same of Chase. If I listened to you, I should soon be
without a Cabinet."

"Better be without it than to confide in some of the men that you do.
Seward is worse than Chase. He has no principle."
"Mother, you are mistaken; your prejudices are so violent that you
do not stop to reason.

Seward is an able man, and the country as well as myself can trust him."

"Father, you are too honest for this world! You should have been born a
saint.

You will generally find it a safe rule to distrust a disappointed, ambitious
politician. It makes me mad to see you sit still and let that hypocrite,
Seward, twine you around his finger as if you were a skein of thread."

"It is useless to argue the question, mother. You cannot change my opinion."

Mrs. Lincoln prided herself upon her ability to read character. She was
shrewd and far-seeing, and had no patience with the frank, confiding
nature of the President.

When Andrew Johnson was urged for military Governor of Tennessee,
Mrs.

Lincoln bitterly opposed the appointment.

"He is a demagogue," she said, almost fiercely, "and if you place him in
power, Mr. Lincoln, mark my words, you will rue it some day."
General McClellan, when made Commander-in-Chief, was the idol of the
soldiers, and never was a general more universally popular.

"He is a humbug," remarked Mrs. Lincoln one day in my presence.

"What makes you think so, mother?" good-naturedly inquired the
President.

"Because he talks so much and does so little. If I had the power I would
very soon take off his head, and put some energetic man in his place."

"But I regard McClellan as a patriot and an able soldier. He has been
much embarrassed. The troops are raw, and the subordinate officers
inclined to be rebellious.

There are too many politicians in the army with shoulder-straps. McClellan
is young and popular, and they are jealous of him. They will kill him
off if they can."
"McClellan can make plenty of excuse for himself, therefore he needs
no advocate in you. If he would only do something, and not promise so
much, I might learn to have a little faith in him. I tell you he is
a humbug, and you will have to find some man to take his place, that
is, if you wish to conquer the South."

Mrs. Lincoln could not tolerate General Grant. "He is a butcher," she
would often say, "and is not fit to be at the head of an army."
"But he has been very successful in the field," argued the President.

"Yes, he generally manages to claim a victory, but such a victory! He
loses two men to the enemy's one. He has no management, no regard for
life. If the war should continue four years longer, and he should
remain in power, he would depopulate the North.

I could fight an army as well myself. According to his tactics, there is
nothing under the heavens to do but to march a new line of men up
in front of the rebel breastworks to be shot down as fast as they
take their position, and keep marching until the enemy grows tired of
the slaughter. Grant, I repeat, is an obstinate fool and a butcher."
"Well, mother, supposing that we give you command of the army. No
doubt you would do much better than any general that has been tried."
There was a twinkle in the eyes, and a ring of irony in the voice.

I have often heard Mrs. Lincoln say that if Grant should ever be elected
President of the United States she would desire to leave the country,
and remain absent during his term of office.

It was well known that Mrs. Lincoln's brothers were in the Confederate
army, and for this reason it was often charged that her sympathies
were with the South.

Those who made the hasty charge were never more widely mistaken.

One morning, on my way to the White House, I heard that Captain Alexander
Todd, one of her brothers, had been killed. I did not like to inform Mrs.
Lincoln of his death, judging that it would be painful news to her.

I had been in her room but a few minutes when she said, with apparent
unconcern, "Lizzie, I have just heard that one of my brothers has been
killed in the war."
"I also heard the same, Mrs. Lincoln, but hesitated to speak of it, for
fear the subject would be a painful one to you."
"You need not hesitate. Of course, it is but natural that I should feel
for one so nearly related to me, but not to the extent that you suppose.

He made his choice long ago. He decided against my husband, and through
him against me.

He has been fighting against us; and since he chose to be our deadly
enemy, I see no special reason why I should bitterly mourn his death."

I felt relieved, and in subsequent conversations learned that Mrs.

Lincoln had no sympathy for the South. "Why should I sympathize with the
rebels," she would say; "are they not against me? They would hang my
husband to-morrow if it was in their power, and perhaps gibbet me
with him.

How then can I sympathize with a people at war with me and mine?"

She always objected to being thought Southern in feeling.

Mr.

Lincoln was generous by nature, and though his whole heart was in the
war, he could not but respect the valor of those opposed to him.
His soul was too great for the narrow, selfish views of partisanship.

Brave by nature himself, he honored bravery in others, even his foes.
Time and again I have heard him speak in the highest terms of the
soldierly qualities of such brave Confederate generals as Lee,
Stonewall Jackson, and Joseph E.

Johns[t]on. Jackson was his ideal soldier. "He is a brave, honest
Presbyterian soldier," were his words; "what a pity that we should have
to fight such a gallant fellow!

If we only had such a man to lead the armies of the North, the country
would not be appalled with so many disasters."
As this is a rambling chapter, I will here record an incident showing
his feeling toward Robert E. Lee. The very morning of the day on which
he was assassinated, his son, Capt. Robert Lincoln, came into the
room with a portrait of General Lee in his hand. The President took
the picture, laid it on a table before him, scanned the face thoughtfully,
and said: "It is a good face; it is the face of a noble, noble, brave
man. I am glad that the war is over at last." Looking up at Robert,
he continued: "Well, my son, you have returned safely from the front.
The war is now closed, and we soon will live in peace with the brave men
that have been fighting against us. I trust that the era of good
feeling has returned with the war, and that henceforth we shall live in
peace.

Now listen to me, Robert: you must lay aside your uniform, and return to
college. I wish you to read law for three years, and at the end of
that time I hope that we will be able to tell whether you will make
a lawyer or not." His face was more cheerful than I had seen it for
a long while, and he seemed to be in a generous, forgiving mood.

CHAPTER IX
BEHIND THE SCENES

Some of the freedmen and freedwomen had exaggerated ideas of liberty.
To them it was a beautiful vision, a land of sunshine, rest and glorious
promise. They flocked to Washington, and since their extravagant hopes
were not realized, it was but natural that many of them should
bitterly feel their disappointment. The colored people are wedded to
associations, and when you destroy these you destroy half of the
happiness of their lives. They make a home, and are so fond of it
that they prefer it, squalid though it be, to the comparative ease and
luxury of a shifting, roaming life. Well, the emancipated slaves, in
coming North, left old associations behind them, and the love for the
past was so strong that they could not find much beauty in the new
life so suddenly opened to them.

Thousands of the disappointed, huddled together in camps, fretted and
pined like children for the "good old times." In visiting them in
the interests of the Relief Society of which I was president, they
would crowd around me with pitiful stories of distress.
Often I heard them declare that they would rather go back to slavery
in the South, and be with their old masters, than to enjoy the
freedom of the North. I believe they were sincere in these declarations,
because dependence had become a part of their second nature, and
independence brought with it the cares and vexations of poverty.
I was very much amused one day at the grave complaints of a good
old, simple-minded woman, fresh from a life of servitude. She had
never ventured beyond a plantation until coming North. The change
was too radical for her, and she could not exactly understand it.
She thought, as many others thought, that Mr. and Mrs. Lincoln were
the government, and that the President and his wife had nothing to
do but to supply the extravagant wants of every one that applied
to them. The wants of this old woman, however, were not very
extravagant.
"Why, Missus Keckley," said she to me one day, "I is been here eight
months, and Missus Lingom an't even give me one shife. Bliss God,
childen, if I had ar know dat de Government, and Mister and Missus
Government, was going to do dat ar way, I neber would 'ave comed
here in God's wurld. My old missus us't gib me two shifes eber
year."
I could not restrain a laugh at the grave manner in which this good
old woman entered her protest.When the boys were grown
up and married, settled in their own homes, she and 'Milyer would go
back to Yonkers on their part of the farm and have a nice big house for
their old age and for the grandchildren. In her motherly heart she hoped
there would be a good many of them. She couldn't have spared any of her
eight children.

The house in First Street seemed very queer. It had a front area and two
basements, two parlors on the next floor with folding-doors and a long
ell-room, rather narrow, so that it would not darken the back room too
much. Up-stairs there were three large chambers and one small one, and
on the fourth floor, that did not have full-size windows, three more.
That there was no "garret" caused endless lamentation.

They could not bring old Mary, indeed she would not come, but they had a
rather youngish countrywoman whose husband had deserted her, and who was
looking for a good home. Mary thought she would stay a while with the
"new folks" and get them "broke in," as she phrased it, and then go and
live with her son.

The little girl stood on her own front stoop looking up and down the
street. It was queer the houses should be just alike--six brown-stone
steps, and iron side railings, and an iron railing to the area, that was
paved with brick. You would always have to be thinking of the number or
you might get into the neighbor's house. Oh, no. Here was a sure sign,
the bright silver door-plate with black lettering--"Vermilye F.
Underhill." She looked at it in amazement. It made her father suddenly
grand in her estimation. Could she sit in his lap just the same and
twist his whiskers about her fingers and comb his hair and read out of
her story-books to him? And where would she go to school? Were there any
little girls around to play with? How could she get acquainted with
them?

While she was considering this point, two girls went by. Both had straw
gypsy hats with flowers and ruffled capes of black silk. They looked up
at her. She was going to smile down to them in the innocent belief that
all little girls must be glad to see each other. One of them
giggled--yes, she absolutely did, and said:

"Oh, what a queer-looking thing! Her frock comes down to her shoe-tops
like an old woman's and that sun-bonnet! Why she must have just come in
from the backwoods!"


CHAPTER III

FINE FEATHERS FOR THE LITTLE WREN


The little girl stood still a moment as if transfixed. There came the
passionate desire to run and hide. She gave the door-bell a sharp pull.

Martha Stimis answered it.

"Goodness sakes, is it you, ringin' as if the world wouldn't stand
another minnit? Next time you want to get in, Haneran, you jest come
down the _aree_! And me a-mouldin' up the biscuit!"

The little girl walked through the hall with a swelling heart. She
couldn't be allowed to ring the door-bell when her own father's name was
on the door!

The ell part was her mother's sleeping chamber and sitting-room. No one
was in it. Hannah Ann walked down to the end. There was a beautiful old
dressing-case that had been brought over with the French great, great
grandmother. It had a tall glass coming down to the floor. At the sides
were several small drawers that went up about four feet, and the top had
some handsome carved work. It was one of Mrs. Underhill's choicest
possessions. In the mirror you could see yourself from "top to toe."

The little girl stood before it. She had on a brown woollen frock and a
gingham high apron. Her skirt _was_ straight and long. Her laced shoes
only came to her ankles. Her stockings were black, and she remembered
how she had watched these little girls coming down the street, their
stockings were snowy white. Of course she wore white yarn ones on
Sundays. A great piece of their pantalets was visible, ruffled, too.
Yes, she did look queer! And the starch was mostly out of her
sun-bonnet. It wasn't her best one, either.

She sat down on a little bench and cried as if her heart would break.

"Oh, Hanny dear, what is the matter?"

Margaret had entered the room unheard. She knelt by her little sister,
took off her sun-bonnet and pressed the child in her arms. "What is it,
dear?" in a soft, persuasive voice. "Have you hurt yourself?"

"No. I--I----" Then she put her little arms around Margaret's neck. "Oh,
Peggy, am I very, very queer?"

"You're a little darling. Did Martha scold you?"

"No. It wasn't--some girls came along----" She tried very hard to stop
her sobbing.

"There, dear, let me wash your face. Don't cry any more." She laid aside
the bonnet and bathed the small face, then she began to brush the soft
hair. It had not been cut all winter and was quite a curly mop. Stephen
had bought her a round comb of which she was very proud.

"It was two girls. They went by and they laughed----"

Her voice was all of a quaver again, but she did not mean to cry if she
could help it.

"Did they call you 'country'?"

Margaret smiled and kissed the little girl, who tried to smile also.
Then she repeated the ill-bred comment.

"We are not quite citified," said Margaret cheerfully. "And it isn't
pleasant to be laughed at for something you cannot well help. But all
the little girls _are_ wearing short dresses, and you are to have some
new ones. Mother has gone out shopping, and next week cousin Cynthia
Blackfan is coming to fix us all up. But I _do_ hope, Hanny, you will
have better manners and a kinder heart than to laugh at strangers, no
matter if they are rather old-fashioned."

"I don't believe I ever will," said the little girl soberly.

"Now come up in my room. Mother said I might rip up her pretty blue
plaid silk and have it made over. I came down to hunt up the waist."

She found it in one of the drawers, pinned up in a linen pillow-case.

"And you can have on a white apron," the elder said when they reached
the room.

This had long sleeves and a ruffle round the neck. The little girl was
ever so much improved.

And I think she would have felt comforted if she could have heard the
rest of the talk between the two girls.

"I do wonder if she belongs to the new people," said the girl who
laughed. "They can't be much. They came from the country somewhere."

"But they've bought all the way through to the other street. And ma said
she meant to call on them. Some one told her they owned a big farm in
Yonkers, and one of the young men is to be a doctor. Maybe the little
girl doesn't really belong to them. I wish you hadn't spoken quite so
loud. I'm sure she heard."

"Oh, I don't care!" with an airy toss of the head. "Mother said the
other day she shouldn't bother about new neighbors. Calling on them is
out of style."

Hanny looked out of the window a long while. Then she said gravely:
"Margaret, are all those old Dutch people dead that were in the history?
And where was their Bowery?"

"It is the Bowery out here, but it has changed. That was a long, long
time ago."

"If I'd lived then no one would have laughed about my long frock. I
almost wish I'd been a little girl then."

"Perhaps there were other things to laugh about."

"I don't mind the laughing _now_. But they must have had lovely gardens
full of tulips and roses. There doesn't seem any room about for such
things. And lanes, you know. Did the new people drive the Dutch away?"

"The English came afterward. You will read all about it in history. And
then came the war----"

"That grandmother knows about? Margaret, I think New York is a great,
strange, queer place. There are a good many queernesses, aren't there?"

Margaret assented with a smile.

"Oh, there's father in the wagon!" The little girl was all a tremor of
gladness. He caught her eyes and beckoned, and she ran down. But she
couldn't manage the night-latch, and so Margaret had to follow her.

"Bundle up my little girl," he said. "I've got to drive up to Harlem and
I'll take her along."

Hanny almost danced for joy. Margaret found her red merino coat. The
collar was trimmed with swan's down, and her red silk hood had an edge
of the same. True, some ultra-fashionables had come out in spring
attire, but it was rather cool so early in the season. Hanny looked
very pretty in her winter hood. And as they drove down the street the
same girls were standing on a stoop; one was evidently going away from
her friend. The one who laughed lived there then. But neither of them
would have guessed it was the "queer" girl, and they almost envied her.

"I've never been down to this corner," said Hanny. "And the streets run
together."

"Yes, First Street ends and Houston goes on over to the East River."

The little girl looked about. There was a great sign on the house at the
junction--"Monticello Hotel,"--and on the edge of the sidewalk a pump,
which the little girl thought funny. They dipped the water out of the
spring at home--they had not given up saying that about the old place.
There was no need of a pump, and at grandmother's they had a well-sweep
and bucket.

Then they turned up Avenue A, where he had an errand, and soon they were
going over rough country ways where "squatters" had begun to come in
with pigs and geese. They seemed so familiar that the little girl
laughed. And if some one had told her that she would one day be driving
in a beautiful park over yonder it would have sounded like a fairy tale.
It was rough and wild now. Dobbin spun along, for the sun was hurrying
over westward.

"We have some old cousins living beyond there on Harlem Heights," he
said, "but it's too late to hunt them up. And it'll be dark by the time
we get home. There was a big battle fought here. Their brother was
killed in it. Why, they must be most eighty years old."

The little girl drew a long breath at the thought.

"We'll look them up some day." Then he stopped before a hotel where
there was a long row of horse sheds, and sprang out to tie Dobbin.

"I had better take you out. Something might happen." He carried her in
his arms clear up the steps. A lady came around the corner of the wide
porch.

"I'll leave my little girl in the waiting-room a few moments. I have
some business with Mr. Brockner," he said.

"I will take her through to my sitting-room," the lady replied, and
holding out her hand she led Hanny thither. She insisted on taking off
her hood and loosening her coat, and in a few moments she seemed well
acquainted. The lady asked her father's name and she told it.

"There are some old ladies of that name living half a mile or so from
here," she said. Then remembering they were very poor, and that poor
relations were not always cordially accepted, she hesitated.

"Father spoke of some cousins," cried the little girl eagerly. "He said
sometime we would hunt them up. We only came to New York to live two
weeks ago."

"Then you have hardly had time to look up any one. They would be glad to
see your father, I know. He looks so wholesome and good-natured."

The little girl was not an effusive child, but she and the lady fell
into a delightful talk. Then her hostess brought in a plate of seed
cookies, and she was eating them very delicately when her father
entered.

"We have had such a nice time," she said, "that I'd like you to bring
your little girl up again. Indeed, I have half a mind to keep her."

"We couldn't spare her," said her father, with a fond smile, which Hanny
returned.

"I suppose not. But it will soon be beautiful around here, and when she
longs for a breath of the country you must bring her up."

"Thank you, madam."

"And oh, father, the cousins really are here. Two old, old ladies----"

Mr. Underhill inquired about them, and learned their circumstances were
quite straitened. He promised to come up soon and see them.

Mrs. Brockner kissed Hanny, quite charmed with her simplicity and pretty
manner. And she had never once thought about the length of her old
brown skirt.

It was supper time when they reached home. Steve and Joe and John were
there. The three younger boys had been left at Yonkers. Indeed, George
had declared his intention of being a farmer. Mrs. Underhill said she
didn't want any more boys until she had a place to put them.

Afterward Joe coaxed the little girl to come and sit on his knee. They
were talking about schools.

"Seems to me, Margaret better be studying housekeeping and learning how
to make her clothes instead of going to school," said Mrs. Underhill
shortly. "She can write a nice letter and she's good at figures, and,
really, I don't see----"

"She wants to be finished," returned Steve, with a laugh. "She's a city
girl now. I've been looking schools over. There are several
establishments where they burnish up young ladies. There's Madame
Chegary's----"

"I won't have her going to any French school and reading wretched French
novels!"

Steve threw back his head and laughed. He had such splendid, strong,
white teeth.

"My choice would be Rutgers Institute. It's going to be the school of
the day," declared Joe.

"Exactly. I was coming to that. There would be one term before
vacation."

"I call it all foolishness. And she'll be eighteen on her next
birthday," said her mother. "If she wasn't a good scholar already--and
what more _do_ you expect her to learn?"

They all laughed at their mother's little ebullition of temper.

"The world grows wiser every day," said Joe sententiously.

"And what are you going to do, Pussy?"

Steve reached over and gave the little girl's ear a soft pinch.

"I am going to look up a nice school for her myself. Don't begin to
worry about a child not yet eight years old," said their mother sharply.

"Eight years. She'll soon be that," remarked her father with a soft
sigh. And he wished he could keep her a little girl always.

They went on discussing Rutgers Institute, that was one of the most
highly esteemed schools of the day for young ladies. Steve looked over
at his fair sister--she was _almost_ as pretty as Dolly Beekman. Dolly
had some dainty, attractive ways, played on the piano and sang, and
Peggy had a voice blithe as a bird. Steve was beginning to be quite a
judge of young ladies and social life, and there was no reason why they
should not all aim at something. They had good family names to back
them. Family counted, but so did education and accomplishments.

Mrs. Underhill gave in. Steve would have his way. But then he was such a
good, upright, affectionate son. So when he announced that he had
registered his sister, Margaret's pulses gave a great thrill of delight.

There was so much to do. True, Martha was a good cook and capable, and
there was no milk to look after, no churning, no poultry, and the
countless things of country life. Miss Cynthia Blackfan came the next
week and remodeled the feminine part of the household. She was a tall,
slim, airy-looking person, with large dark eyes and dark hair that she
wore in long ringlets on either side of her face. She always looped them
up when she was sewing. She had all the latest quips of fashion at her
tongue's end--what Margaret must have for school dresses, what for
Sunday best, what lawns and ginghams and prints for summer.

But when she went at the little girl she quite metamorphosed her.

"You must begin to plait the child's hair and tie it with ribbons
[people generally used the word instead of 'braid']. And her frocks must
be made ever so much shorter. And, Cousin Underhill, _do_ put white
stockings on the child. Nobody wears colored ones. Unbleached do wear
stronger and answer for real every day."

"They'll be forever in the wash-tub," said the mother grimly.

"Well, when you're in Rome you must do as the Romans do," with emphasis.
"It looks queer to be so out of date. Everybody dresses so much more in
the city. It's natural. There's so much going and coming."

Even then people had begun to discuss and condemn the extravagance of
the day. The old residents of the Bowling Green were sure Bond Street
and the lower part of Fifth Avenue were stupendous follies and would
ruin the city. Foreign artistic upholsterers came over, carpets and
furniture of the most elegant sort were imported, and even then some
people ordered their gowns and cloaks in Paris. Miss Blackfan's best
customer had gone over for the whole summer, otherwise she would not
have the fortnight for Cousin Underhill. She uttered her dictum with a
certain authority from which there was no appeal. And she charged a
dollar and a half a day, while most dressmakers were satisfied with a
dollar.

So the little girl had her hair braided in two tails--they were quite
short, though, and her father liked the curly mop better. Little girls'
dresses were cut off the shoulder, and made with a yoke or band and a
belt. In warm weather they wore short sleeves, though a pair of long
sleeves were made for cool days. There were some tucks in the skirt to
be let down as the child grew.

The little girl was most proud, I think, of her pantalets. There were
some nankin ones made for every day. And she had a real nankin frock
that Margaret embroidered just above the hem. It was used a great deal
for aprons, too. Aprons, let me tell you, were no longer "high-ups" with
a plain armhole. They were sometimes gathered on a belt and had Bertha
capes over the shoulders trimmed with edging or ruffles. And every
well-conditioned little girl had one of black silk.

"She'll have to hem her own ruffles," declared Mother Underhill almost
sharply. "And how they're ever to get ironed----"

"There's hemstitching and fagoting, but I don't know as it's any less
work than ruffling. And all the little girls are knitting lace. I'm
doing some myself, oak-leaf pattern out of seventy cotton, and it's as
handsome as anything you ever see."

"I don't know how any one is going to find time for so much folderol!"

"Oh, pshaw, Cousin Underhill, we did lots of it in our day. I worked the
bottom of a party dress a good quarter up, and Vandyke capes, and those
great big collars. And we tucked up to the waist. There's always
something. And those old Jewish women had broidery and finery of every
sort, and 'pillows' in their sleeves as we wore years ago. See what a
little it takes to make a pair of sleeves now! We must have looked
funny, all sleeves and waists up under our arms."

When you consider that sewing-machines had not been invented, it was a
wonder how the women accomplished so much. But they always had some
"catch-work" handy. The little girl was provided with a pretty
work-basket, six spools of cotton, a pincushion, a needle-book, a bit of
white wax, and an emery, which was a strawberry-shaped cushion topped
off with some soft green stuff she knew afterward was chenille. This was
to keep her needles bright and smooth. Then she had three rolls of
ruffling, yards and yards in each piece. One was cambric, one was fine
lawn or nainsook, and one of dimity. She had done some over-seam in
sheets, she had hemmed towels and some handkerchiefs, and sewed a little
on the half-dozen shirts Margaret had made for father last winter. But
the stitches had to be so small, and oh, so close together! Then they
looked badly if they were not straight. She liked the dimity the best
because the stitches seemed to sink in, and it ruffled so of itself.

But the little girl didn't sew all the time. She wiped dishes for
Martha. And one day, when she saw a little girl up the street sweeping
the sidewalk, she begged to do that. She could dust a room very nicely.
There was much running up and down, and she was always glad to wait
upon Steve. Indeed, she ran errands cheerfully for anybody. But she
_did_ miss Benny Frank and Jim.

Margaret had felt quite diffident about her new school, and at first
rather shrank from the young ladies, much as she desired to be among
them. But she found herself quite advanced in some of the studies, and
in a week's time began to feel at home. Two girls were very friendly,
Mary Barclay and Annette Beekman.

Perhaps Steve hadn't been quite as disinterested as it seemed. He had
met Dolly Beekman at Miss Jane Barclay's party early in the winter. They
had taken a mutual fancy. Old Peter Beekman lived at the lower end of
Broadway, and had a farm "up the East River," about Ninety-sixth Street.
He had five girls, and the two last had been sore disappointments. But
Harriet, the eldest, had married her cousin and had four Beekman boys.
Two others were married. Dolly had graduated from Rutgers the year
before and was now nineteen. Annette, as the old Dutch name was spelled,
was not quite seventeen. Margaret had been put in her class in most
branches.

Steve _did_ want the Beekmans to think well of his people. He and Dolly
were not declared lovers, but they understood each other. Old Peter
made inquiries about the young man, and if they had not been
satisfactory Stephen would soon have known it. So he felt quite assured.
And though his mother talked of her sons marrying, he knew that just at
first it would come a little hard to find she had a rival.

"Well, Peggy," he said, Friday evening of the first week, "how does
school go? Seen any girls you like?"

"I've seen two that know you," and Margaret laughed. "Mary Barclay said
you had been at their house. And so did Annie Beekman."

"Yes, I was at Miss Beekman's party; quite a fine affair. And I've been
there to play whist. They're a jolly crowd. Next winter we must have a
few parties. And I'm going to get a piano."

"Oh, you lovely Steve!" She squeezed his arm rapturously.

"You have a very pretty voice, Peggy. Annie Beekman's sister sings
beautifully. How do you like Annie?"

"Why, you never can tell whether she is in earnest or quizzing you. But
she's ever so much prettier than Mary. Yes, on the whole I like her."

"You ought to see her sister Dolly. She has real flaxen hair and such a
complexion!"

"Annie has a lovely complexion, too. There are a great many pretty
girls in the world. I have a curious sort of pity for those who are not
a bit pretty," Margaret said sympathetically.

Steve laughed and nodded, as if the idea amused him.

If Margaret and Annie became friends, and if Dolly and Annie came to
call--well, he was sure they would all fall in love with Dolly. And then
the matter would go on smoothly. People thought more of being friendly
with their relations by marriage in those days.


CHAPTER IV

A LOOK AT OLD NEW YORK


On a Sunday toward the end of April, Stephen took his two sisters down
to the Battery for a walk. It was very warm and springlike. The
cherry-tree in their yard had come out in bloom. Buds were swelling
everywhere, and the gray spots were all green and shining in the soft
golden atmosphere. There was the wide, magnificent expanse of the bay,
the edge of Brooklyn, the hazy outline of Staten Island, the vague
Narrows that seemed to lead to some unknown world. And there was the
great round Castle Garden, the Castle Clinton of earlier times, where a
few years later the little girl was to hear some of the world's most
famous singers. And when she looked out of that weird, narrow waterway
and wondered just where Europe was, and how foreign countries must look,
she could not by the most vivid stretch of imagination fancy herself
sailing out to that unknown country.

The short grass was so lovely and green, and the waves came lapping up
with a silvery melody. There were people lounging on the seats, ladies
with sunshades in their hands, mothers with some little children,
fathers with a son or two, or a little girl like herself in pantalets
and white stockings and low shoes. The clothes she thought were
beautiful. The hats were full of flowers. She had a new straw gypsy with
a wreath of buttercups, and soft yellow strings tied under her chin. Her
_challi de laine_ had small blue flowers on a white ground, with
yellow-brown centres, and there was a blue ribbon tied about her waist,
with a bow at the back. She had a white cape of some soft cotton goods
with a satiny finish, warranted to wash as good as new. She would have
liked a sunshade, but she had so many new things.

She thought quite a good deal about her pretty clothes, and how glad she
should be to learn more geography. Stephen was talking about Hudson's
expedition up the river to which he gave his name, and a few months
later when some hovels were built to shelter the sailors, the beginning
of a settlement. And how in 1614 the Dutch erected a rude fort and gave
the place the name of New Amsterdam. Then the Dutch West India Company
bought Manhattoes Island from the natives for goods of various kinds,
amounting to sixty guilders.

"You see the Dutch were thrifty traders even then, more than two hundred
years ago," says Stephen with a pleasant laugh.

"How much are sixty guilders?" asks the little girl. It sounds an
immense sum to her. And to buy a whole city!

"It was about twenty-four dollars at that time," replies Stephen.

The little girl's face is amusing in its surprise.

"Only twenty-four dollars! And father had three hundred a few days ago.
Why, he could have bought"--well, the limitless area takes away her
breath.

"I don't believe we should have wanted to live in such a wilderness as
it was then."

"But when Walter the Testy came--he was really here?" It is rather
chaotic in her mind.

"He was here. Wouter van Twiller was his real name. Then a line of Dutch
governers, after which the island was ceded to the British. It became
quite a Royalist town until the Revolutionary War. We had a 'scrap'
about tea, too," and Stephen laughs. "Old Castle Clinton was a famous
spot. And when General Lafayette, who had helped us fight our battles,
came over in 1824, he had a magnificent ovation as he sailed up the bay.
It's a splendid old place."

Everybody seemed to think so then. The birds were singing in the
sunshine, and the rural aspect was dear to the hearts of the older
people. They rose and walked about in the fragrant air. Now and then
some one bowed gravely to Stephen. There was a Sunday decorum over all.

They rambled up to the Bowling Green. Some quaintly attired elderly
people who had the _entrée_ of the place were sitting about enjoying the
loveliness. One old Frenchman had a ruffled shirt-front and a very high
coat-collar that made him look like a picture, and knee-breeches.

Some one sprang up, and coming to the gate said: "Oh, Mr. Underhill, and
Miss Margaret! Is this your little sister? Do walk in and chat with us.
My sister Jane and I have come down to dine with the Morrises, and it
was so lovely out here. Isn't it a charming day?"

There was Miss Jane Barclay very fashionably attired, Miss Morris, and
her brother, who was very attentive to Miss Barclay, and a little
farther on Mrs. Morris, fat, fair, and matronly. She was reading "The
Lady of the Manor," and when the little girl found it afterward in a
Sunday-school library, Mrs. Morris seemed curiously mixed up with it.
Sunday papers at that period would have horrified most people.

"What a dear little girl!" said Mrs. Morris. "Come here and tell me your
name. Why, you look like a lily astray in a bed of buttercups. Is it
possible Mr. Stephen Underhill is your brother?"

"The eldest and the youngest," explained Stephen. "And this is my
sister, Miss Underhill."

Mrs. Morris bowed and shook hands. Then she made room on the settee for
the child.

"You haven't told me your name, my dear."

Mrs. Morris' voice was so soft, almost pleading. The little girl glanced
up and colored, and if the bank could have broken and let her money down
in the ocean, or some one could have stolen it and bought a new
Manhattan Island in the South Seas,--so that she could have had a new
name, she wouldn't have minded a bit. But she said with brave sweetness:

"Hannah Ann. I was named after both grandmothers."

"That's a long name for such a little girl. I believe I should call you
Nannie or Nansie. And Mr. Morris would call you Nan at once. I never
knew such a man for short names. We've always called our Elizabeth Bess,
and half the time her father calls her Bet, to save one letter."

The little girl laughed. The economy of the thing seemed funny.

"What does your father call you?"

"'Little girl,' most always. Margaret was grown into quite a big girl
when I was born, so I was the little girl."

"Well--that's pretty, too. And where are you living?"

"In First Street."

"Why, that's way up-town! And--let me see--you did live at Yonkers? I've
never been there. Is it a town?"

"We lived on a great big farm. And oh, the Croton water pipe came right
across one corner of it."

"Ah, you should have seen the celebration! Such a wonderful,
indescribable thing!"

"Margaret came down and most of the boys. Mother said I would be crushed
to death."

"And she couldn't spare her little girl! Well, I don't blame her. Do you
go to school?"

"No, ma'am, not yet." All the children but the very rough ones said "no,
ma'am," and "yes, ma'am," in those days. "But I did go at Yonkers."

"And what did you learn."

She was quite astonished at the little girl's attainments, and her
simplicity she thought charming. When Stephen came for her, Mrs. Morris
said:

"I have really fallen in love with your little sister. You must bring
her down again. _We_ think there's nothing to compare with our Bowling
Green and the Battery."

They bade each other a pleasant adieu. It was time to go home, indeed.
The little girl felt very happy and joyous, and she thought her pretty
clothes had helped. Perhaps they had.

She sat on her father's knee that night telling him about Mrs. Morris.
And she suddenly said:

"Father, what was the Reign of Terror?"

"The Reign of Terror? Oh, it was a horrible time of war in France. Where
did you pick up that?"

"There was an old man in the Green who had on a queer sort of
dress--knee-breeches and buckles on his shoes like those of
grandfather's. And ruffles all down his shirt-bosom and long, curly,
white hair. And Mrs. Morris said he was in prison in the Reign of
Terror, and then came to America with his daughter, and that his mind
had something the matter with it. Do you suppose he got awfully
frightened?"

"I dare say he did, my dear. When you are a big girl you will learn all
about it in history. But you needn't hurry. There are a great many
pleasanter things to learn."

She leaned her head down on her father's shoulder and thought how sad it
must be to lose one's mind. Was that the part of you always thinking?
How curious it was to always think of something! Your feet didn't always
walk, your hands didn't always work, but that strange thing inside of
you never stopped. Oh, yes, it had to when you were asleep. But then you
sometimes dreamed. And the little girl fell fast asleep over psychology
that she didn't know a word about.

Early in the next week Mrs. Underhill took the little girl and went up
to Yonkers. She said she was homesick to see the boys. And oh, how glad
they were to see her! Aunt Crete was laid up with the _tic douloureux_.
Retty was full of work and house-cleaning, and her lover had come on. He
was a Vermonter by birth, and an uncle in the Mohawk valley had brought
him up. Then he had gone West, but not taken especial root anywhere. He
was tall and thin, with reddish hair and beard, but the kindliest blue
eyes and a pleasant voice. He and George had struck up a friendship
already. And Retty confided to Aunt Margaret "that she was going to be
married without any fuss, and Bart was goin' to turn in and help run the
farm."

Everything wore a different aspect even in this brief while. Mrs.
Underhill had some things to pack up, that she was going to leave, a
while at least, in the garret. Her sister-in-law was very glad to take
anything she wanted to dispose of, since they had sold their furniture
at the West.

Oh, how wonderful the world was to the little girl! The trees were
coming out in bloom, there were great bunches of yellow daffodils, and
the May pinks were full of buds. And then the chickens, the ducks' nests
full of eggs, the pretty little dark-eyed calf that the boys had tamed
already! And the children at school! Everybody was wild over Hanny and
glad to get her back.

But it was queer she should miss her father so much when it came night.
She went out on the old stoop and felt strangely lonesome. Then the boys
came round, having done up their share of the chores.

"Do you _reely_ like it, Hanny?" asked Jim.

She knew he meant the city.

"Well--father and Steve and Joe and John are there"--yet her tone was a
little uncertain.

"Are there any boys about?"

"I don't know any. I haven't had time to find any girls. But there is a
big public school round in Houston Street, and I guess there's a
thousand children. You should see them coming out of the gate."

"Hm'n! I don't believe there's a thousand children in all New York.
That's ten hundred, Miss Hanny!"

Hanny was sobered by the immensity of her statement, for she was a very
truthful little girl.

"What have you been doing all this time?" Jim asked impatiently.

"Well--there was the house to get to rights. And we had to have some new
clothes made. A girl laughed at me one day and said I looked queer."

"If I'd been there I'd punched her head. Yes--I see you're mighty fine.
Would _I_ look queer?"

"Oh, boys always look alike," returned Hanny reflectively. "We had a
beautiful walk one Sunday on the Battery, and I think," hesitatingly,
"that all the boys had on roundabouts."

"Are you sure they didn't have on overcoats?"

"Don't plague her, Jim. Tell us about the Battery, Hanny."

Hanny could describe that quite vividly. Jim soon became interested.
When she paused he said, "What else?" She told them of her ride up to
Harlem, and a walk down the Bowery to Chatham Square.

"But there ain't any real bowers in it any more, only stores and such
things."

"What a pity," commented Benny Frank.

"Well, I think I'd like to go as soon as mammy can get ready. It isn't
as much fun here without you all."

"Oh, Jim, don't say mammy. They don't do it in the city," said the
little girl beseechingly.

"If you think I'm going to put on French airs, you're much mistaken,
Miss Hanny! I'll say pop and mammy when I like. I'm not going to dress
up in Sunday best manners because you wear ruffled pantalets. It makes
you look like a feather-legged chicken!"

"Don't mind him, Hanny," said Ben tenderly. "I wish I had seen that old
man at the Bowling Green----"

"Do they make bowls there?" interrupted teasing Jim.

"Because I've been reading about France and the Reign of Terror," Benny
Frank went on, not heeding his brother. "It was in about 1794.
Robespierre was at the head of it. And there was a dreadful prison into
which they threw everybody they suspected, and only brought them out for
execution. It must have been terrible! And the poor old man must have
been quite young then. I should think he would have lost his mind."

"Bother about such stuff! You'd rather be in New York, wouldn't you,
Hanny? And mother said we might come as soon as she was settled. I'm not
going to stay here and be ordered about by this Finch fellow. Retty's
soft as mush over him. Say, Ben, you _would_ like to go, wouldn't you?"

"Yes, I think I would," answered Ben slowly. "There would be such a
splendid chance to learn about everything."

Their mother had been walking around the familiar paths with George, who
had developed some ideas of his own in this brief space. And his mother
had not realized before how tall and stout he was getting.

"I'd like to see father and Steve and make some plans. I'd like to work
part of father's ground on shares or some way. I'm glad Dave Andrews is
staying on. I don't altogether like Uncle Faid's ideas, and oh, mother,
'tisn't any such jolly home as you had. Poor Aunt Crete is so miserable.
But you see if I really had some interest of my own I'd be learning all
the time."

"I'm sure your father will consent." His mother felt so proud, leaning
on his arm. And some time _they_ would come back. So they talked the
matter over with eager interest, and she quite forgot about the little
girl's bedtime. Retty had joined them and was rehearsing some of her
Western experiences, and the little girl sat with wide-open eyes,
looking at Retty in the moon-light, thinking what a great wonderful
world it was to have so many places and all so different. Did you have
two organs of thought? She was so puzzled about thought, anyhow. For
with one side of her that didn't see Retty, she could see her father so
plainly in this very corner, and she was in his arms, and with the
faculty that wasn't listening to her cousin she could hear her father's
voice. You see, she wasn't old enough to know about dual consciousness.

When Hanny went up-stairs with her mother the boys went also.

"Say, Ben," and his brother gave him a dig in the ribs with his elbow;
"say, Ben, don't you want to go back to New York with mother? If we just
push with all our might and main, together we can."

"Well, don't push me through the side of the house."

"You want to be pushed all the while. You're as slow as 'lasses in
winter time. Ben, you take after Uncle Faid. It takes him 'most all day
to make up his mind. Now I can look at a thing and tell in a minute."

"You seem ready enough to tell." Ben laughed a little provokingly.

"Well, you can go or not as you like. 'Taint half the fun here that it
used to be. I didn't think I cared so much for Hanny."

"Is it Hanny?" in a tone that irritated.

"It's Hanny and mother and John and father and New York, and just a
million things rolled into a bundle. And if you don't care I'll fight my
way through. There, Benjamin Franklin! You'd sit on a stone in the
middle of a field and fly your kite forever!"

Jim was losing his temper.

"Yes, I _think_ I'd like to go. There would be so much to see and
learn."

"Oh, hang it all! Simply go!"

Ben was thinking of the old man--he must have been quite young then--who
was in prison through that awful Reign of Terror. He undressed slowly.
He was not such a fly-away as Jim. But Jim was asleep before he was
ready for bed.

Mrs. Underhill had not really meant to take the boys home with her. She
was quite sure the city was a bad place for boys. And the country was so
much healthier in the summer. But they coaxed. And somehow, the old home
_had_ changed already. The air of brisk cheerfulness was gone. Aunt
Crete had her face tied up most of the time, or a little shawl over her
head. Retty was undeniably careless. Barton Finch played cards with the
hired man. Uncle Faid had some queer ideas about farming.

"I'd like wonderful well to have the boys stay," he said. "They're worth
their keep. A boy 'round's mighty handy. I'd have to hire one."

Somehow she wasn't quite willing to have her boys put in the place of a
hired one, or one bound out from the county house. And Jim had been her
baby for so long. The little girl pleaded also. She told them finally
they might come down and try. But if they were the least bit bad or
disobedient they would be sent back at once.

Mrs. Underhill was half-cured of her homesickness. She had thought she
could never be content in New York; why, she was almost content
already.

She and Hanny took a walk the last day of their stay up on the knoll
where the new house was to be built.

"When all the children are married and father and I get to be old
people, we will come back here. I shall want you, Hanny," and she held
the little girl's hand in a tight clasp.

Hanny wondered if she would be stout and have full red cheeks and look
like Retty? And oh, she did hope her mother wouldn't have _tic
douloureux_ and wear shawls over her head. When all the children were
married--oh, how lonesome it would be!

But she had been quite a little heroine and gone to school one day to
see the girls and boys. And one girl said: "I s'pose it's city fashion
to wear pantalets that way, but my! doesn't it look queer!"

She was very glad to get back to her father. The country was beautiful
with all its bloom and fragrance, but First Street had such a clean,
tidy look with its flagged sidewalks and the dirt all swept up to the
middle of the street, leaving the round faces of the cobble-stones
fairly shining. It was quite delightful to show the boys all over the
house and then go through the yard to the stables and greet Dobbin and
Prince. And Battle, the dog, called so because he had been such a
fighter, but commonly known as Bat, wagged his whole body with delight
at sight of the boys.


CHAPTER V

GIRLS AND GIRLS


A week or so after Mrs. Underhill's return, one of the neighbors called
one afternoon and brought her two little girls, Josie and Tudie Dean.
Tudie stood for Susan. The little girl was summoned, and the three,
after the fashion of little girls, sat very stiff on their chairs and
looked at each other, then cast their eyes down on the carpet, fidgeted
a little with the corners of their white aprons, and then gave another
furtive glance.

"Hanny, you might take the little girls out in the yard and gather a
nosegay for them." Flower roots and shrubs had been brought down from
the "old place," and there was quite a showing of bloom.

The mothers talked meanwhile of the street, and Mrs. Dean spoke of the
wonderful strides the city was making up-town. A few objectionable
people had come in the old frame houses at the lower end of the street.
When Mr. Dean built, some seven years ago, it was all that could be
desired, but already immigrants were forcing their way up Houston
Street. If something wasn't done to control immigration, we should soon
be overrun. The Croton water had been such a great and wonderful
blessing. And did her little girl go to school anywhere? Josie and Tudie
went up First Avenue by Third Street to a Mrs. Craven, a rather youngish
widow lady, who had two daughters of her own to educate, and who was
very genteel and accomplished. Little girls needed some one who had
gentle and pretty manners. There was a sewing-class, and all through the
winter a dancing-class, and Mrs. Craven gave lessons on the piano.
Public schools were well enough for boys, but they were too rude and
rough for little girls.

Mrs. Underhill assented. "She wouldn't think of sending Hannah Ann to a
public school."

"She looks like a very delicate child," commented Mrs. Dean.

"She's always been very well," said the mother, "but she _is_ small for
her age. And all of my children have grown up so rapidly."

"I couldn't believe those young men belonged to you. And that tall,
pretty young girl."

Mrs. Underhill smiled and flushed and betrayed her pride in her eight
nice healthy children.

"I envy you some of your sons," Mrs. Dean went on. "I never had but the
two little girls."

They came in now, each with the promised nosegay, and full of delight.
They were round and rosy, and looked more like one's idea of a country
girl than little lilybud Hannah. But they were all eager now, and even
her cheeks were pink. They had talked themselves into friendship. And
Josie wanted to know if Hanny couldn't come and see them, and if they
couldn't have their dishes out and have tea all by themselves?

Mrs. Dean looked up at Mrs. Underhill, and replied: "Why, yes, if her
mother is willing. Saturday would be best, as you are not in school."

That was only two days off. Hanny's eyes entreated so wistfully. And the
Deans lived only three doors away.

"Why, yes," answered her mother with a touch of becoming hesitation.

Hanny was telling this eventful interview over to Jim as they sat on the
stoop that evening. Ben was reading a book, Jim was trying the toes of
his shoes against the iron railing and secretly wishing he could go
barefoot.

"And they have a real play-house up-stairs in one room. There's two beds
in it and two bureaus, and oh, lots of things! Josie has seven dolls and
Tudie four. Tudie gave two of hers away, and Josie has a lovely big wax
doll that her aunt sent from Paris. And a table, and their mother lets
them play tea with bread and cake and real things. And I'm to go on
Saturday."

Hanny uttered this in a rapid breath.

"Sho!" ejaculated Jim rather disdainfully. "They're not much if they
play with dolls. Now _I_ know some girls----"

The boys had been at Houston Street public school not quite a week. Jim
knew half the boys at least, already, and all the boys that lived on the
block. He wasn't a bit afraid of girls, either, though he generally
called them "gals."

"There's some living down the street, and Jiminy! if they haven't got
names! You'd just die of envy! Rosabelle May, think of it! And Lilian
Alice Ludlow. Lily's an awful pretty girl, too. And they wanted to know
all about you and Peggy."

"Did you tell her my name?" asked the little girl timidly.

"Well--don't you know you said you wished it was Anna?" Jim answered
slowly. "I just said it so it sounded like Anna. And Lily said she'd
seen you riding with father. I wish you'd walk down there," coaxingly.

"I'll see if mother will let me." Hanny sprang up.

"And put on a nice white apron," said Jim.

"They're too old for Hanny," began Ben, looking up from his book.

"Why, Lily's only eleven. And anyhow----"

Jim didn't know just how to explain it. Lily had begged him that
afternoon to bring his little sister down. To tell the truth she was
very ambitious to know the Underhills. They must be somebody, for they
kept horses and a carriage, and owned their house.

"Do you know," said Belle May as they watched Jim going up the street,
"I half believe the little girl who stood on the stoop that day is Jim's
sister."

"That little country thing! I never thought of it. But I don't suppose
she really heard."

"If she _did_--what will you do?"

"Do?" Lily tossed her head. "Why, I shall act just as if I never said it
or had seen her before or anything. You don't suppose I'm a goose in
pin-feathers, do you? I want to get acquainted with them. Of course I
shall ask both boys to my birthday party. I should only ask the nice
people in the street."

Margaret threw her pretty pink fascinator round Hanny's shoulders. She
didn't need any hat this warm summer night. Hanny was very proud to walk
down the street with her brother, who knew so many girls already. Jim
wasn't a bit afraid of being called a "girl boy." Quite a number of
people were sitting out on their stoops. It was the fashion then. Some
of the ladies were knitting lace on two little needles that had sealing
wax on one end, so the stitches could not drop off. There was much
pleasant chatting. The country ways of sociability had not all gone out
of date.

They walked down to the lower end, where the houses were rather
irregular and getting old. Two or three had a small grass door-yard in
front. Two girls were walking up and down with their arms around each.
Jim knew in a moment who they were, but he loitered behind them until
they turned.

"Oh!" exclaimed Lily Ludlow in well-acted surprise. "Are you out taking
a walk?"

"Yes," answered Jim, quite as innocently as if the matter had not been
arranged a few hours ago. "And this is my sister. And this is Lily
Ludlow, and this Belle May."

Alas for Hanny! Lily Ludlow was the girl who had called her "queer" and
laughed. The child's face flushed and there was a lump in her throat.

"You don't go to school, do you?" asked Lily with the utmost
nonchalance. She was quite ready for anything.

The little girl made an effort, but no words would come. She could never
like this girl with the pretty name, she felt very sure.

"No," said Jim. "She's so small for her size that mother would be
afraid of her getting lost."

They all giggled but the little girl, who wanted to run away.

"But you like New York, don't you? Jim thinks he wouldn't go back to the
country for anything."

We had not come to "Bet your life," and "There's where your head's
level," in those days. But Jim answered for his sister--"You just guess
I wouldn't," with a deal of gusto.

They all walked up a short distance. The girls and Jim had all the talk,
and they chaffed each other merrily. Hanny was silent. She really was
too young for their fun.

Belle May's mother called her presently, and the little girl said in a
whisper: "Oh, Jim, we must go home."

Jim wondered if he might ask Lily to walk with them, so he could come
back with her. But she settled it with a gay toss of the head.

"Good-night," she said. "Come down again some evening."

"What a little stupid you are, Hanny!" Jim began, vexed enough. "Why
didn't you ask them to walk up our way! And you never said a word! I
could have given you an awful shake!"

"I--I don't like them."

"You don't know anything about them. Ben and I see them half a dozen
times a day, and walk to school with them, and they're nice and pretty
and have some manners. You're awful country, Hanny!"

The little girl began to cry.

"Oh, what a baby you are! Well, I s'pose you can't help it! You're only
eight, and I'm almost thirteen. And Lily Ludlow's nearly eleven. I
suppose you _do_ feel strange among girls so much older."

"It isn't that," sobbed the little girl. How could she get courage to
tell him?

"Oh, Hanny, dear, don't cry." Jim's voice softened--they were nearing
home. "See here, I'll ask father to take us to Tompkins Square on
Sunday, and you shall paint out of my new box. There! and don't tell any
one--don't say a word to Ben."

He kissed her and wiped her eyes with the end of her starchy apron. Jim
was very coaxing and sweet when he tried.

"Joe's here," said Ben. "And he thought the wolves would eat you up if
you went too far. He wants to see you."

Jim dropped down on the step. Hanny ran through the hall. They were
using the back parlor as a sitting-room, and everybody seemed talking at
once. Joe held out his arms and the little girl flew to them.

Then it came out that Joe had taken one of the prizes for a thesis, and
he would shortly be a full fledged M.D. He was so jubilant and the rest
were so happy that the little girl forgot all about her discomfort.

Jim came rushing in. "Where's the hundred dollars?" he inquired.

Joe laughed. "I have not received the money yet. I thought the
announcement was enough for one night."

"You and Hanny'll be so stuck up there'll be no living with you," said
Jim.

Hanny glanced up with a smiling face. If she had only looked that way at
Lily Ludlow! But even his schoolmate was momentarily distanced by the
thought of such a prize. And he remembered later on with much
gratification that he could tell her to-morrow.

Miss Chrissy Ludlow had been sitting by the front window in her white
gown, half expecting a caller. When Lily entered, she inquired if that
little thing was the Underhill girl?

"Oh, that's the baby," and Lily giggled. "There's a young lady who goes
to Rutgers--well, I suppose she isn't quite grown up, for she doesn't
wear real-long dresses. And they have another brother in the
country--six brothers!"

Chrissy sighed. If she only knew some way to get acquainted with the
young woman. And all the brothers fairly made one green with envy.

"You keep in with them," she advised her sister. "You might as well look
up in the world for your friends."

There were not many people in the street who kept a carriage. Chrissy
longed ardently to know them. And she had been almost fighting for a
term at Rutgers. Mr. Ludlow was a common-place man, clerk in a
shoe-store round in Houston Street, and capable of doing repairs. They
rented out the second floor, as they could not afford to keep the whole
house. But since Chrissy had found out that they were distant
connections of some Ludlows quite well off and high up in the social
scale, she had felt extremely aristocratic. For a year she had been out
of school, and now her mother thought she better learn dressmaking,
since she was so "handy." She meant to get married at the first good
opportunity.

Mr. Thackeray in England was writing about snobs during this period. He
thought he found a great many in London. And even among the republican
simplicity of New York he could have found some.

Hanny's second attempt at social life was a much greater success. The
visit at the Deans' was utterly delightful. The play-house was
enchanting. They dressed and undressed the dolls, they gave Hanny two,
and called her Mrs. Writing of the material results of his mission to
Scotland, he declares that he is ashamed to set down the terms upon
which he was paid, so lavishly was he rewarded for his services. The
offers made to him by so many exalted personages to secure his permanent
and exclusive attention would indeed have turned the heads of most men.
There was the offer from the King of Denmark; another, in 1552, from the
King of France at a salary of thirteen hundred crowns a year; and yet
another made by the agents of Charles V., who was then engaged in his
disastrous attack upon Metz. All of them he refused: he had no inclination
to share the perils of the leaguer of Metz, and his sense of loyalty
forbad him to join himself to the power which was at that time
warring against his sovereign.

He speaks also of another offer made to him by the Queen of Scotland
of a generous salary if he would settle in Scotland; but the country was
too remote for his taste. There is no authority for this offer except
the _De Vita Propria_, and it is there set down in terms which
render it somewhat difficult to identify the Queen aforesaid.[163]
As soon as he entered Milan, Ferrante Gonzaga, the Governor, desired
to secure his services as physician to the Duke of Mantua, his
brother, offering him thirty thousand gold crowns as honorarium;
but, in spite of the Governor's persuasions and threats, he would
not accept the office.

When the news had come to Paris that Cardan was about to quit Britain,
forty of the most illustrious scientists of France repaired to Paris
in order to hear him expound the art of Medicine; but the disturbed
state of the country deterred him from setting foot in France.

He refers to a letter from his friend Ranconet as a testimony of the
worship that was paid to him, and goes on to say that, in his journeying
through France and Germany, he fared much as Plato fared at the Olympic
games.

In a passage which Cardan wrote shortly after his return from
Britain, he lets it be seen that he was not ill-satisfied with the
figure he then made in the world.

He writes--"Therefore, since all those with whom I am intimate think
well of me for my truth and probity, I can let my envious rivals indulge
themselves as they list in the shameful habit of evil-speaking.

With regard to folly, if I now utter, or ever have uttered, foolish
words, let those who accuse me show their evidence.

I, who was born poor, with a weakly body, in an age vexed almost incessantly
by wars and tumults, helped on by no family influence, but forced
to contend against the bitter opposition of the College at Milan,
contrived to overcome all the plots woven against me, and open
violence as well.

All the honours which a physician can possess I either enjoy, or have
refused when they were offered to me.

I have raised the fortunes of my family, and have lived a blameless
life.

I am well known to all men of worship, and to the whole of Europe.

What I have written has been lauded; in sooth, I have written of
so many things and at such length, that a man could scarcely read
my works if he spent his life therewith.

I have taken good care of my domestic affairs, and by common
consent I have come off victor in every contest I have tried.

I have refused always to flatter the great; and over and beyond this
I have often set myself in active opposition to them.

My name will be found scattered about the pages of many writers. I shall
deem my life long enough if I come in perfect health to the age
of fifty-six.

I have been most fortunate as the discoverer of many and important
contributions to knowledge, as well as in the practice of my art
and in the results attained; so much so that if my fame in the first
instance has raised up envy against me, it has prevailed finally,
and extinguished all ill-feeling

."[164]
These words were written before the publication of the _Geniturarum Exempla_
in 1554. Cardan's life for the six years which followed was busy and
prosperous, but on the whole uneventful. The Archbishop of St. Andrews
wrote to him according to promise at the end of two years to give
an account of the results of his treatment.

His letter is worthy of remark as showing that he, the person most
interested, was well satisfied with Cardan's skill as a physician.
Michael, the Archbishop's chief chamberlain, was the bearer thereof,
and as Hamilton speaks of him as "epistolam vivam," it is probable that
he bore likewise certain verbal messages which could be more safely
carried thus than in writing. A sentence in the _De Vita Propria_,[165]
mixed up with the account of Hamilton's cure, seems to refer to
this embassy, and to suggest that Michael was authorized to promise
Cardan a liberal salary if he would accept permanent office in the
Primate's household.

Moreover, Hamilton writes somewhat querulously about Cassanate's absence
abroad on a visit to his family, a fact which would make him all the
more eager to secure Cardan's services. His letter runs as follows--"Two
of your most welcome letters, written some months ago, I received
by the hand of an English merchant; others came by the care of the
Lord Bishop of Dunkeld, together with the Indian balsam.

The last were from Scoto, who sent at the same time your most scholarly
comments on that difficult work of Ptolemy.[166] To all that you
have written to me I have replied fully in three or four letters
of my own, but I know not whether, out of all I have written, any
letter of mine has reached you.

But now I have directed that a servant of mine, who is known to
you, and who is travelling to Rome, shall wait upon you and salute
you in my name, and bear to you my gratitude, not only for the
various gifts I have received from you, but likewise because my
health is well-nigh restored, the ailment which vexed me is driven
away, my strength increased, and my life renewed.

Wherefore I rate myself debtor for all these benefits, as well as this
very body of mine. For, from the time when I began to take these
medicines of yours, selected and compounded with so great skill,
my complaint has afflicted me less frequently and severely; indeed,
now, as a rule, I am not troubled therewith more than once a month;
sometimes I escape for two months

."[167]

In the following year (1555) Cardan's daughter Chiara, who seems to
have been a virtuous and well-conducted girl, was married to Bartolomeo
Sacco, a young Milanese gentleman of good family, a match which
proved to be fortunate.

Cardan had now reached that summit of fame against which the shafts of
jealousy will always be directed. The literary manners of the age certainly
lacked urbanity, and of all living controversialists there was
none more truculent than Julius Cæsar Scaliger, who had begun his
career as a man of letters by a fierce assault upon Erasmus with
regard to his _Ciceronianus_, a leading case amongst the quarrels
of authors.

Erasmus he had attacked for venturing to throw doubts upon the suitability
of Cicero's Latin as a vehicle of modern thought; this quarrel
was over a question of form; and now Scaliger went a step farther, and,
albeit he knew little of the subject in hand, published a book of _Esoteric
Exercitations_ to show that the _De Subtilitate_ of Cardan was nothing
but a tissue of nonsense.[168] The book was written with all the
heavy-handed brutality he was accustomed to use, but it did no hurt
to Cardan's reputation, and, irritable as he was by nature, it
failed to provoke him to make an immediate rejoinder, a delay which
was the cause of one of the most diverting incidents in the whole
range of literary warfare.

Scaliger sat in his study, eagerly expecting a reply, but Cardan took
no notice of the attack. Then one day some tale-bearer, moved either by
the spirit of tittle-tattle or the love of mischief, brought to
Julius Cæsar the news that Jerome Cardan had sunk under his tremendous
battery of abuse, and was dead. It is but bare charity to assume that
Scaliger was touched by some stings of regret when he heard what had
been the fatal result of his onslaught; still there can be little
doubt that his mind was filled with a certain satisfaction when he
reflected that he was in sooth a terrible assailant, and that his
fist was heavier than any other man's.

In any case, he felt that it behoved him to make some sign, wherefore
he sat down and penned a funeral oration over his supposed victim, which
is worth giving at length.[169]
"At this season, when fate has dealt with me in a fashion so wretched
and untoward that it has connected my name with a cruel public calamity,
when a literary essay of mine, well known to the world, and undertaken
at the call of duty, has ensued in dire misfortune, it seems to me
that I am bound to bequeath to posterity a testimony that, sharp
as may have been the vexation brought upon Jerome Cardan by my
trifling censures, the grief which now afflicts me on account of
his death is ten times sharper.

For, even if Cardan living should have been a terror to me, I, who am but
a single unit in the republic of letters, ought to have postponed my
own and singular convenience to the common good, seeing how excellent
were the merits of this man, in every sort of learning.

For now the republic is bereft of a great and incomparable scholar,
and must needs suffer a loss which, peradventure, none of the centuries
to come will repair. What though I am a person of small account, I could
count upon him as a supporter, a judge, and (immortal gods) even a
laudator of my lucubrations; for he was so greatly impressed by their
weighty merits, that he deemed he would best defend himself by
avoiding all comment on the same, despairing of his own strength,
and knowing not how great his powers really were.

In this respect he was so skilful a master, that he could assuredly
have fathomed the depths of every method and every device used
against him, and would thereby have made his castigation of myself
to serve as an augmentation of his own fame.

He, in sooth, was a man of such quality that, if he had deemed it a
thing demanded of him by equity, he would never have hesitated to point
out to other students the truth of those words which I had written against
him as an accusation, while, on the other hand, this same constancy of
mind would have made him adhere to the opinions he might have put
forth in the first instance, so far as these opinions were capable of
proof. I, when I addressed my _Exercitations_ to him during his life--to
him whom I knew by common report to be the most ingenious and
learned of mortal men--was in good hope that I might issue from
this conflict a conqueror; and is there living a man blind enough
not to perceive that what I looked for was hard-earned credit, which
I should certainly have won by finding my views confirmed by Cardan
living, and not for inglorious peace brought about by his death?

And indeed I might have been suffered to have share in the bounty
and kindliness of this illustrious man, whom I have always heard described
as a shrewd antagonist and one full of confidence in his own high position,
for it was an easy task to win from him the ordinary rights of friendship
by any trifling letter, seeing that he was the most courteous of mankind.
It is scarcely likely that I, weary as I was, one who in fighting had
long been used to perils of all sorts, should thus cast aside my
courage; that I, worn out by incessant controversies and consumed
by the daily wear and tear of writing, should care for an inglorious
match with so distinguished an antagonist; or that I should have
set my heart upon winning a bare victory in the midst of all this
dust and tumult.

For not only was the result which has ensued unlooked for in the
nature of things and in the opinion of all men qualified to judge in
such a case; it was also the last thing I could have desired to
happen, for the sake of my good name. My judgment has ever been
that all men (for in sooth all of us are, so to speak, little less
than nothing) may so lose their heads in controversy that they may
actually fight against their own interests. And if such a mischance as
this may happen to any man of eminence--as has been my case, and
the case of divers others I could recall--it shall not be written
down in the list of his errors, unless in aftertimes he shall seek
to justify the same.

It is necessary to advance roughness in the place of refinement, and
stubborn tenacity for steadfastness. No man can be pronounced guilty of
offence on the score of some hasty word or other which may escape
his lips; such a charge should rather be made when he defends himself
by unworthy methods.

Therefore if Cardan during his life, being well advised in the
matter, should have kept silent over my attempts to correct him, what
could have brought me greater credit than this? He would have bowed to
my opinion in seemly fashion, and would have taken my censures as
those of a father or a preceptor. But supposing that he had ventured
to engage in a sharper controversy with me over this question, is
there any one living who would fail to see that he might have gone
near to lose his wits on account of the mental agitation which had
afflicted him in the past?

But as soon as his superhuman intellect had thoroughly grasped the question,
it seemed to him that he must needs be called upon to bear what was
intolerable. He could not pluck up courage enough to bear it by
living, so he bore it by dying.

Moreover, what he might well have borne, he could not bring himself to
bear, to wit that he and I should come to an agreement and should formulate
certain well-balanced decisions for the common good.

For this reason I lament deeply my share in this affair, I who had most
obvious reasons for engaging in this conflict, and the clearest ones
for inventing a story as to the victory I hoped to gain; reasons
which a man of sober temper could never anticipate, which a brave
man would never desire.

"Cardan's fame has its surest foundation in the praise of his adversaries.

I lament greatly this misfortune of our republic: the causes of which
the parliament of lettered men may estimate by its particular
rules, but it cannot rate this calamity in relation to the excellences
of this illustrious personality.

For in a man of learning three properties ought to stand out pre-eminently--a
spotless and gentle rule of life; manifold and varied learning; and
consummate talent joined to the shrewdest capacity for forming a
judgment. These three points Cardan attained so completely that he
seemed to have been made entirely for himself, and at the same
time to have been the only mortal made for mankind at large.

    No one could be more courteous to his
    inferiors or more ready to discuss the scheme of the universe with
any man of mark with whom he might chance to foregather.

He was a man of kingly courtesy, of sympathetic loftiness of mind,
one fitted for all places, for all occasions, for all men and for all
fortunes. In reference to learning itself, I beg you to look around upon
the accomplished circle of the learned now living on the earth,
in this most fortunate age of ours; here the combination of individual
talent shows us a crowd of illustrious men, but each one of these
displays himself as occupied with some special portion of Philosophy.

But Cardan, in addition to his profound knowledge of the secrets of God
and Nature, was a consummate master of the humaner letters, and was wont
to expound the same with such eloquence that those who listened to him
would have been justified in affirming that he could have studied nothing
else all his life. A great man indeed! Great if he could lay claim to
no other excellence than this; and forsooth, when we come to
consider the quickness of his wit, his fiery energy in everything
he undertook, whether of the least or the greatest moment, his
laborious diligence and unconquerable steadfastness, I affirm that
the man who shall venture to compare himself with Cardan may well
be regarded as one lacking in all due modesty.

I forsooth feel no hostility towards one whose path never crossed
mine, nor envy of one whose shadow never touched mine; the numerous
and weighty questions dealt with in his monumental work urged me
on to undertake the task of gaining some knowledge of the same.

After the completion of the Commentaries on Subtlety, he published as a
kind of appendix to these that most learned work the _De Rerum
Varietate_. And in this case, before news was brought to me of his death,
I followed my customary practice, and in the course of three
days compiled an Excursus in short chapters. When I heard that he was
dead I brought them together into one little book, in order that I also
might lend a hand in this great work of his, and this thing I did after
a fashion which he himself would have approved, supposing that at some
time or other he might have held discourse with me, or with some other
yet more learned man, concerning his affairs."[170]

It is a matter of regret that this cry of _peccavi_ was not published
till all the chief literary contemporaries of Scaliger were in their
graves.

As it did not appear till 1621, the men of his own time were not
able to enjoy the shout of laughter over his discomfiture which
would surely have gone up from Paris and Strasburg and Basel and
Zurich.

Estienne and Gessner would hardly have felt acute sorrow at a flout put
upon Julius Cæsar Scaliger. Crooked-tempered as he was, Cardan, compared
with Scaliger, was as a rose to a thistle, but there were reasons
altogether unconnected with the personalities of the disputants
which swayed the balance to Cardan's advantage.

    The greater part of Scaliger's criticism was
    worthless, and the opinion of learned Europe weighed overwhelmingly
on Cardan's side.

Thuanus,[171] who assuredly did not love him, and Naudé, who
positively disliked him, subsequently gave testimony in his favour.

He did not follow the example of Erasmus, and let Scaliger's abuse go
by in silence, but he took the next wisest course. He published a short
and dignified reply, _Actio prima in Calumniatorem_, in which,
from title-page to colophon, Scaliger's name never once occurs.

The gist of the book may best be understood by quoting an extract from
the criticism of Cardan by Naudé prefixed to the _De Vita Propria_. He
writes: "This proposition of mine will best be comprehended by the man
who shall set to work to compare Cardan with Julius Cæsar Scaliger, his
rival, and a man endowed with an intellect almost superhuman. For
Scaliger, although he came upon the stage with greater pomp and display,
and brought with him a mind filled with daring speculation, and adequate
to the highest flights, kept closely behind the lattices of the humaner
letters and of medical philosophy, leaving to Cardan full liberty to
occupy whatever ground of argument he might find most advantageous in
any other of the fields of learning. Moreover, if any one shall give
daily study to these celebrated _Exercitations_, he will find therein
nothing to show that Cardan is branded by any mark of shame which
may not be removed with the slightest trouble, if the task be
undertaken in a spirit of justice.

For, in the first place, who can maintain that Scaliger was justified
in publishing his _Exercitations_ three years after the issue of the
second edition of the _Libri de Subtilitate_, without ever having taken
the trouble to read this edition, and without exempting from censure
the errors which Cardan had diligently expunged from his book in
the course of his latest revision, lest he (Scaliger) should find
that all the mighty labour expended over his criticisms had been
spent in vain?

Besides, who does not know that Cardan, in his _Actio prima in
Calumniatorem_, blunted the point of all his assailant's weapons,
swept away all his objections, and broke in pieces all his accusations,
in such wise that the very reason of their existence ceased to be?

Cardan, in sooth, was a true man, and held all humanity as akin to
him. There is small reason why we should marvel that he erred now and
again; it is a marvel much greater that he should only have gone
astray so seldom and in things of such trifling moment.

Indeed I will dare to affirm, and back my opinion with a pledge, that
the errors which Scaliger left behind him in these _Exercitations_
were more in number than those which he so wantonly laid to Cardan's
charge, having sweated nine years over the task. And this he did not
so much in the interests of true erudition as with the desire of
coming to blows with all those whom he recognized as the chiefs
of learning."

During the whole dispute Cardan kept his temper admirably. Scaliger was
a physician of repute; and it is not improbable that the spectacle of
Cardan's triumphal progress back to Milan from the North may have aroused
his jealousy and stimulated him to make his ill-judged attack. But even
on the ground of medical science he was no match for Cardan, while in
mathematics and philosophy he was immeasurably inferior.

Cardan felt probably that the attack was nothing more than the buzzing
of a gadfly, and that in any case it would make for his own advantage
and credit, wherefore he saw no reason why he should disquiet
himself; indeed his attitude of dignified indifference was admirably
calculated to win for him the approval of the learned world by the
contrast it furnished to the raging fury of his adversary.[172]

After the heavy labour of editing and issuing to the world the _De
Rerum Varietate_, and of re-editing the first issue of the _De
Subtilitate_, Cardan might well have given himself a term of rest,
but to a man of his temper, idleness, or even a relaxation of the
strain, is usually irksome.

A great round bed of "Robin-run-away," bergamot,
that scented the air and attracted the humming-birds. All manner of
old-fashioned flowers that are coming around again, and you could see
where there had been magnificent beds of peonies. In the early season
people drove out here to see Peter Beekman's tulip-beds.

There were borders of artemisias, as they were called, that diffused a
pungent fragrance. We had not shaken hands so neighborly with Japan
then, nor learned how she evolved her wonderful chrysanthemums.

The little girl grew quite talkative with Mr. Beekman. You see, in those
days there was a theory about children being seen and not heard, and no
one expected a little six-year-old to entertain or disturb a room full
of company. The repression made them rather diffident, to be sure. But
Mr. Beekman gathered her a nosegay of spice pinks, carnations now, and
took her to see his beautiful ducks, snowy white, in a little pond, and
another pair of Muscovy ducks, then some rare Mandarin ducks from China.
She told him about the ducks and chickens at Yonkers and how sorry she
was to leave them.

And then came the handsome white Angora cat with its long fur and
curious eyes that were almost blue, and when she said "mie-e-o-u" in a
rather delighted tone, it seemed as if she meant "O master, where have
you been? I'm so glad to see you!"

He stood and patted her and they held quite a conversation as she arched
her neck, rubbed against his leg, and turned back and forth. Then she
stretched way up on him and gave him her paw, which was very cunningly
done.

"This is a nice little girl who has come to see me," he said, as she
seemed to look inquiringly at Hanny. "She's fond of everything, kitties
especially."

Kitty looked rather uncertain. Hanny was a little afraid of such a
curious creature. But presently she came and rubbed against her with a
soft little mew, and Hanny ventured to touch her.

"She likes you," declared old Mr. Beekman, much pleased. "She doesn't
often take fancies. She loves Dolly, and she won't have anything to do
with Annette, though I think the girl teases her. Nice Katschina," said
her master, patting her. "Shall we buy this little girl?"

Perhaps you won't believe it, but Katschina really said "yes," and
smiled. It was very different from the grin of the "Chessy cat" that
Alice saw in Wonderland.

Some one came flying down the path.

"Father," exclaimed Dolly, "come and have a cup of tea or a glass of
beer. Stephen and his sister think they can't stay to supper. But may be
they'll leave the little girl--you seem to have taken such a notion to
her."

Hanny didn't want to be impolite and she really _did_ like Mr. Beekman,
but as for staying--her heart was up in her throat.

Dolly picked up Katschina and carried her in triumph. Two white paws lay
over Dolly's shoulder.

There was a table with a shining copper tea-kettle, a pewter tankard of
home-brewed ale, bread and butter, cold chicken and ham, a great dish of
curd cheese, pound cake, soft and yellow, fruit cake, a heaping dish of
doughnuts and various cookies and seed cakes. Scipio, a young colored
lad, passed the eatables. Young Mrs. Beekman poured the tea. The mother
sat near her. She was short and fat and wore her hair in a high
Pompadour roll, and she laughed a good deal, showing her fine white
teeth of which she was very proud.

Katschina sat in her master's lap, and the little girl was beside him.
The boys were given their hands full and sent away. It was a very pretty
picture and the little girl felt as if she was reading an entertaining
story. One of the Gessler cousins had been knitting lace, double
oak-leaf with a heading of insertion. It looked marvellous to the little
girl. She said she was making it to trim a visite. This was a Frenchy
sort of garment lately come into vogue, though the little girl did not
know what it was, and was too well trained to ask questions. But the
lace might be the desire of one's heart.

They sipped their tea or raspberry shrub, or enjoyed a glass of ale.
They were all very merry. The little girl wondered how Dolly dared to be
so saucy with Stephen when she only knew him such a little. Mrs. Beekman
could hardly accept the fact that they would not stay to supper, and
said they must come soon and spend the day, and have Stephen drive up
for them, and that she hoped soon to see Mrs. Underhill. "It is quite
delightful and we are all well satisfied," she added, nodding rather
mysteriously.

Dolly put on the little girl's hat and kissed her, giving her a
breathless squeeze. Miss Gitty kissed her as well and told her she was a
"very pretty behaved child." The buggy came round and Stephen put them
in amid a chorus of good-bys.

"The little one looks delicate," commented the younger Mrs. Beekman when
they had driven away. "I'm afraid she doesn't run and play enough. But
she's beautifully behaved. And what a fancy father took to her!"

"Miss Underhill doesn't seem like a real country girl," said another.

"The Underhills are a good family all through, English descent from some
Lord Underhill. They were staunch Royalists at one time."

"And the Vermilyeas are good stock," said Aunt Gitty. "There's nothing
like being particular as to family. It tells in the long run."

"Well, Dolly, we think he will do," said Mrs. Beekman laughingly, as
Dolly, having said her good-bys, sauntered back to the circle. "He might
be richer, of course. There's a large family and they can't have much
apiece."

"Stephen Underhill's got the making of a good substantial man in him,"
grunted father Beekman. "If he'd been a poor shoat he wouldn't have hung
around here very long, would he, Katschina? We'd 'a put a flea in his
ear, wouldn't we."

Katschina arched her back. Dolly laughed and blushed. Stephen was her
own true-love anyway, but she was glad to have them all like him. With
the insistence of youth she felt she never could have loved any other
man.

Stephen clicked to Prince, who was rested and full of spirits. They
drove almost straight across the city, about at the end of our first
hundred numbered streets. But the road wound around to get out of a low
marshy place, a pond in the rainy season, and some rocks that seemed
tumbled up on end. They struck a bit of the old Boston Post Road, and
that caused the little girl to stop her prattle and think of the old
ladies they had never visited. She must "jog" her father's memory. That
was what her mother always said when she recalled half-forgotten things.

Stephen and Margaret had only spoken in answer to the little girl. He
had a young man's awkwardness concerning a subject so dear to his heart.
Margaret was awed by the mystery of love, captivated by Dolly's
friendliness, and puzzled to decide what her mother would think of it.
Stephen married! Any of them married for that matter. How strange it
would seem! And yet she had sometimes said, "When I am married."

The place was wild enough. You would hardly think so now when hollows
have been filled and hills levelled, and rocks blasted away. After they
turned a little stream wound in and out through the trees and bushes.
Amid a tangled mass the little girl espied some wild roses.

"Oh, Steve!" she cried, "may I get out and pick some?"

"I will." He handed the reins over to Margaret and sprang down, running
across a little bridge, and soon gathered a great handful.

"Oh, thank you," and her eyes shone. "What a funny little bridge."

"That's Kissing Bridge."

"Who do you have to kiss?" asked the little girl mirthfully.

"Well, a long while ago, in Van Twiller's time, I guess," with a twinkle
in his eye, "there wasn't any bridge. The lovers used to carry their
sweethearts over, and the charge was a kiss."

"But there wasn't any kissing _bridge_ then," she said shrewdly.

"When the bridge was built they stopped and kissed out of remembrance."

"Was it really so, Margaret?"

"It has been called that ever since I can remember."

"You unkind girl, not to believe me!" exclaimed Stephen, with an air of
offended dignity. "And I am ever so much older than Margaret."

"You didn't carry _me_ over, but you carried the roses, so you shall
have the kiss all the same," and as she reached up to his cheek they
both smiled.

Then they came down Broadway to Bleecker Street, and over home. Father
Underhill was sitting on the stoop reading his paper. Jim begged to take
the horse round to the stable. Margaret went up-stairs to pull off her
best dress and put on her pink gingham. She had just finished and was
calling for Hanny, when Stephen caught her in his arms.

"Dear Peggy--you must have guessed."

"Oh, Stephen! It seems so strange. Is it really so? I never dreamed----"

"I fell in love with Dolly months ago. There were so many caring for her
that I hardly hoped myself. But there's some mysterious sense about it,
and I began to see presently that she preferred me. Though I didn't
really ask her until Sunday night. And they all consented. We are
regularly engaged now."

"Oh, Stephen! To lose you!"

That is the first natural thought of the household.

"You are not going to lose me. We shall be engaged a long while; a year
surely."

"But, father--and our coming here."

"That is all right. It can't make any difference. Only you will have a
new sister. Oh, Peggy, try to love her," persuasively, yet knowing she
could not resist her.

"She is very sweet."

"Sweet! She's just cream and roses and all the sweetest things of life
put together! I tell you, Peggy, I'm a lucky fellow. Of course it will
seem a little strange at first. But some day you'll have your romance,
only I don't believe you can ever understand how glad the other fellow
will be to get you. Girls can't. And you'll try to make things smooth
with mother if she feels a little put out at first? Dolly wants to love
you all. She's admired Joe so much, and they are all proud of him."

The supper bell rang impatiently. Stephen kissed his sister and gave her
a rapturous hug.

Hanny came up-stairs and Margaret hurried through her change of attire.

"I thought you never were coming," began their mother tartly. "'Milyer,
you're the worst of the lot when you get your nose buried in a
newspaper. Boys, do keep still, though I suppose you're half starved,"
with a reproachful look at those who had delayed the meal.

The little girl had eaten so many of the delicious cookies that she
wasn't a bit hungry. So she entertained her father with the miles of
dahlias and the wonderful cat, so soft and furry and different from
theirs, and with truly blue eyes, and who could understand everything
you said to her. And Mr. Beekman was very nice, but not as nice as
father. The little boys were so short and so funny. "And I don't believe
I like _little_ boys. Jim and Benny, Frank and all of you are nicer.
Perhaps it _is_ the bigness."

They all laughed at that.

She sat in her father's lap afterward and went on with her quaint story,
until her mother came and routed her out and said, "I do believe,
'Milyer, you'd keep that child up all night."

Afterward Mr. Underhill went out on the front stoop, where he and
Stephen had a long talk, while Margaret sat at the piano making up for
her afternoon's dissipation, but in the soft, vague light she could see
Dolly Beekman with her laughing eyes and crown of shining hair, and was
sure she would make a delightful sister. Mrs. Underhill sat and darned
stockings and sighed a little. Yet she was secretly proud of Margaret,
even if she did study French and music. Whether they would ever help her
to keep house was a question. Where would she have found time for such
things?


CHAPTER VII

MISS LOIS AND SIXTY YEARS AGO


"Yes; come get out once in a while."

"I've no time to spare," said Mrs. Underhill. "Some one has to work or
you'd all be in a fine case. Here's Margaret spending her time drumming
on the piano and studying French and what not. I dare say you'll be
called upon some time to take your daughter to Paris to show off her
accomplishments."

"I hope we'll do credit to each other," he returned with a dry, humorous
laugh, as if amused.

"The world goes round so fast one can't keep up with it. If the work
only rushed on that way! Why don't some of you smart men who have plenty
of time to sit round, invent a machine to cook and sew and sweep the
house?"

"Martha's a pretty good housekeeping machine, I think. And you might
find another to sew."

She had no idea that Elias Howe was hard at work on a tireless iron and
steel sewing-woman and was puzzling his brains day and night to put an
eye in the needle that would be satisfactory.

"You'd need to be made of money to hire all these folks! Margaret ought
to be sewing this very minute, but she's fussing over those drawings of
John's. I've such a smart family I think they'll set me crazy. And what
you will do when I am gone----"

"We're not going to let you get away so easy. And if you would just go
out a bit now and then. Come, mother," with entreaty in his voice.

"Oh, 'Milyer," she said, touched by something in the tone, "I really
can't go to-day. I've all those shirts to cut out, and Miss Weir told me
of a girl who would be glad to come and sew for fifty cents a day. I
think I'll have her a few days. And you look up the poor old creatures
and see if they are in any want. Then if I really _can_ do them any good
I'll go."

She always softened in the end. She felt a little sore and touchy about
Steve's engagement, and proud, too, that Miss Beekman had accepted him.
Stephen had insisted some one must come in and help sew, and that his
mother must have a little time for herself. Seven men and boys to make
shirts for was no light matter. The little girl was learning to darn
stockings very nicely and helped her mother with those.

So father Underhill took the little girl and Dobbin and the ordinary
harness, for Steve had Prince and the silver-mounted trappings, and the
elders could guess where he had gone. Business was dull along in August,
so the men had some time for diversion, and the father always enjoyed
his little daughter. Her limited knowledge and quaint comments amused
him, and her sweet, innocent love touched the depths of his soul.

It was quite in the afternoon when they started. Dobbin was not as young
and frisky as Prince, so they jogged along, looking at the gardens, the
trees, the wild masses of vines and sumac, and then stretches of rocky
space interspersed with squatters' cabins and the goats, pigs, geese,
and chickens. Sometimes in after years when she rode through Central
Park, she wondered if she had not dreamed all this, instead of seeing it
with her own eyes.

They went over to Mr. Brockner's to inquire.

"Oh," he exclaimed, "Mrs. Brockner will be so sorry to miss you. She has
talked so much about your little girl, and threatened to hunt her up.
And now she's gone to Saratoga for a fortnight, to see the fashions. But
you must come up again."

Then he directed them, and they drove over in a westerly course and soon
came to the little stone house that bore evident marks of decay from
neglect as well as age. The first story was rough stone, the half-story
of shingles, that had once been painted red. There were two small
windows in the gable ends, but in front the eaves overhung the doorway
and the windows and were broken and moss-grown. There was a big flat
stone for the doorstep, a room on one side with two windows, and on the
other only one. The hall door was divided in the middle, the upper part
open. There was a queer brass knocker on this, and the lower part
fastened with an old-fashioned latch. The little courtyard looked tidy,
and there was a great row of sweet clover along the fence, but now and
then the goats would nibble it off.

When they stepped up on the stoop they saw an old lady sitting in a
rocking-chair, with a little table beside her, and some knitting in her
lap. She had evidently fallen into a doze. Hanny stretched up on tiptoe.
A great gray cat lay asleep also. There were some mats laid about the
floor, two very old arm-chairs with fine rush bottoms painted yellow, a
door open on either side of the hall, and a well-worn winding stairs
going up at the back.

Mr. Underhill reached over and gave a light knock. The cat lifted its
head and made a queer sound like a gentle call, then went to the old
lady and stretched up to her knees. She started and glanced toward the
door, then rose in a little confusion.

"I am looking for a Miss Underhill," began the visitor.

"Oh, pardon me." She unbolted the lower door. "I believe I had fallen
asleep. Miss Underhill?" in a sort of surprised inquiry. "I am--one of
the sisters. Walk in."

She pushed out one of the arm-chairs and gave her footstool to the
little girl.

"I am an Underhill myself, a sort of connection, I dare say. We heard of
you some time ago, but I have been much occupied with business, yet I
have intended all the time to call on you."

"You are very good, I am sure. We had some relations on Long Island, and
I think some here-about, but we lost sight of them long ago. We really
have no one now. My sister Jane is past eighty, and I am only three
years younger."

She was a slim, shrunken body and her hands were almost transparent, so
white was her skin. Her gown was gray, and she wore a white kerchief
crossed on her bosom like a Quakeress. Her fine muslin cap had the
narrow plain border of that denomination.

Mr. Underhill made a brief explanation of his antecedents, and his
removal to the city,--then mentioned hearing of them from Mr. Brockner.

"You are very good to hunt us up," she said, with a touching tremble in
her voice. "I don't think now I could tell anything about my father's
relatives. He was killed at the battle of Harlem Heights, and my only
brother was taken prisoner. The Ferrises, my mother's people, owned a
great farm here-about. But much of it was laid waste, and a little later
the old homestead burned down. This house was built for us before the
British evacuated the city. My brother had died in prison of a fever,
and there were only my mother and us two girls."

Hanny was sitting quite close by her. She reached over and took the
wrinkled hand gently.

"Do you mean you were alive then--a little girl in the Revolutionary
War?" she exclaimed in breathless surprise.

"Why, I was nine years old," and she gave a faded little smile. "I doubt
if you're more than that."

"I am a little past eight," said Hanny.

"And the battle was just over yonder," nodding her head. "We all hoped
so that General Washington would win. My father was very patriotic and
very much in earnest for the independence of the country. The armies
were separated by Harlem Plains, and General Howe pushed forward through
McGowan's Pass, the rocky gorge over yonder. But our men forced them
into the cleared field, and if it had not been for a troop of Hessians
they would have driven the British off the field. But I believe
Washington thought it best to retreat. I've heard it was almost a
victory, still it wasn't quite. But we were wild with apprehension, for
we could hear the noise and the firing. And then the awful word came
that father was killed."

"Oh!" cried the little girl, and she laid her soft cheek on the wrinkled
hand. What if she had been alive then!--and she looked over at _her_
father with tears in her eyes.

"It was a sad, sad time. Some of the Ferrises were on the King's side.
You know a great many people believed the rebels all wrong and said they
never could win. My Uncle Ferris was bitterly opposed to father's
espousing the Federalists' cause."

"But you didn't want England to win, did you?" inquired the little girl,
wide-eyed.

"We were so full of trouble. Mother was very bitter, I remember, and
folks called her a Tory. Then brother, who was only seventeen, was taken
prisoner. Uncle Ferris said it would be a good lesson for a hot-headed
young fellow, and that two or three months in prison would cool his
ardor. But he was taken sick and died before we knew he was really ill.
Then our house burned down. Mother thought it was set on fire. Oh, my
child, such quantities of things as were in it! My mother had never
gone away from the old house because grandmother was a widow. Then the
land was divided, and this smaller house built for mother and us. The
British took possession of the city, and it was said uncle made money
right along. But the English were very good to us, and no one ever
molested us after that. Dear, we used to think it almost a day's journey
to go down to the Bowling Green."

The little girl was listening wide-eyed, and drew a long breath.

"There have been many changes. But somehow we seem to have gone on until
most everybody has forgotten us. You might like to see sister Jane,
though she's quite deaf and hasn't her mind very clear. I don't
know,"--hesitatingly.

"Do you live all alone here?" Mr. Underhill asked.

"Not exactly alone; no. We sold the next-door lot four years ago to some
Germans, very nice people. The mother comes in and helps with our little
work and looks after our garden, and sleeps here at night. The doctor
thought it wasn't safe to be left here alone with sister Jane. It made
it easy for them to pay for the place. It's nearly all gone now. But
there'll be enough to last our time out," she commented with a soft sigh
of self-abnegation.

"And you have no relatives, that is, no one to look after you a bit?"

"Well, you see grandmother made hard feelings with the relatives. She
didn't think the colonies had any right to go to war. And after father's
death mother felt a good deal that way. They dropped us out, and we
never took any pains to hunt them up. We never knew much about the
Underhills. I must say you are very kind to come," and her voice
trembled.

Just then the door opened and Miss Underhill sprang up to take her
sister's arm and lead her to a chair. She was taller and stouter, and
the little girl thought her the oldest-looking person she had ever seen.
Her cap was all awry, her shawl was slipping off of one shoulder, and
she had a sort of dishevelled appearance, as she looked curiously
around.

Lois straightened her up, seated her, and introduced her to the
visitors.

"I'm hungry. I want something to eat, Lois," she exclaimed in a whining,
tremulous tone, regardless of the strangers.

Miss Underhill begged to be excused, and went for a plate of bread and
butter and a cup of milk.

"Perhaps you'd like to see our old parlor," she said to her guests, and
opened the door.

There were two rooms on this side of the house. The back one was used
for a sleeping chamber. She threw the shutters wide open, and a little
late sunshine stole over the faded carpet that had once been such a
matter of pride with the two young women. There were some family
portraits, a man with a queue and a ruffled shirt-front, another with a
big curly white wig coming down over his shoulders, and several ladies
whose attire seemed very queer indeed. There was a black sofa studded
with brass nails that shone as if they had been lately polished, a tall
desk and bookcase going up to the ceiling, brass and silver candlesticks
and snuffers' tray, as well as a bright steel "tinder box" on the high,
narrow mantel. A big mahogany table stood in the centre of the room,
polished until you could see your face in it. But there was an odd tall
article in the corner, much tarnished now, but ornamented with gilt and
white vines that drooped and twisted about. Long wiry strings went from
top to bottom.

"I suppose you don't know what that is!" said Miss Lois, when she saw
the little girl inspecting it. "That's a harp. Young ladies played on it
when we were young ourselves. And they had a spinet. I believe it's
altered now and called a piano."

"A harp!" said the little girl in amaze. Her ideas of a harp were very
vague, but she thought it was something you carried around with you.
She had heard the children sing

    "I want to be an angel
      And with the angels stand;
    A crown upon my forehead,
      A harp within my hand,"

and the size of this confused her.

"But how could you play on it?" she asked.

"You stood this way. You could sit down, but it was considered more
graceful to stand. And you played in this manner."

She fingered the rusted strings. A few emitted a doleful sort of sound
almost like a cry.

"We've all grown old together," she said sorrowfully. "It was considered
a great accomplishment in my time. I believe people still play on the
harp. We had a great many curious things, but several years ago a
committee of some kind came and bought them. We needed the money sadly,
and we had no one to leave them to when we died. There was some
beautiful old china, and a lady bought the fan and handkerchief that my
grandmother carried at her wedding. The handkerchief was worked at some
convent in Italy and was fine as a cobweb. My mother used it, and then
it was laid by for us. But we never needed it," and she gave a soft
sigh.

She had glided out now and then to look after Jane, who was eating as
if she was starved. And in the broken bits of talk Mr. Underhill had
learned by indirect questioning that they had parted with their land by
degrees, and with some family valuables, until there was only this old
house and a small space of ground left.

Miss Jane was anxious now to see the visitors. But she was so deaf Lois
had to repeat everything, and she seemed to forget the moment a thing
was said. Dobbin whinnied as if he thought the call had been long
enough.

Mr. Underhill squeezed a bank-note into the hand of Miss Lois as he said
good-by. "Get some little luxury for your sister," he added.

"Thank you for all your friendliness," and the tears stood in her eyes.
"Come again and bring your sister Margaret," she said to the little
girl.

They drove over westward a short distance. The rocky gorge was still
there, and at its foot was one of the first battle-fields of this
vicinity. Hanny looked at it wonderingly.

"Then Washington retreated up to Kingsbridge," began her father. "They
found they could not hold that, and so went on to White Plains, followed
by some Hessian troops. They didn't seem very fortunate at first, for
they were beaten again. Grandmother can tell you a good deal about that.
And a great-uncle had his house burned down and they were forced to fly
to a little old house on top of a hill. My father was a little boy
then."

The little girl looked amazed. Did he know about the war?

"It seems such a long, long time ago--like the flood and the selling of
Joseph. And was grandmother really alive?"

"Grandmother is about as old as Miss Lois."

"Miss Lois doesn't look so awful old, but the other lady does. I felt
afraid of her."

"Don't think of her, pussy. It's very sad to lose your senses and be a
trouble."

"You couldn't," was the confident reply after much consideration. She
didn't see how such a thing could happen to him.

"I hope I never shall," he returned, with an earnest prayer just under
his breath.

Dobbin insisted upon going home briskly. He was thinking of his supper.
The little girl was so sorry not to have Benny Frank to talk over her
adventures with. Margaret and her mother were basting shirts; John was
drawing plans on the dining-room table. He had found a place to work at
house-building and was studying architecture and draughting. A man had
come in to see her father, so she was left quite alone. The Deans and
several of the little girls on the block had gone visiting. She walked
up and down a while, thinking how strange the world was, and what
wonderful things had happened, vaguely feeling that there couldn't be
any to come in the future.

At the end of the week she and Margaret went up to White Plains, as
grandmother was anxious to see them.

Her grandmother was invested with a curious new interest in her eyes.
That any one belonging to her should have lived in the Revolutionary War
seemed a real stretch of the imagination for a little girl eight years
old. Grandmother considered _her_ wonderful also. She wasn't so much in
favor of short frocks and pantalets that came down to your ankles, but
the little girl did look pretty in them. And when she found how neatly
she could hemstitch and do such beautiful featherstitch, and darn, and
read so plainly that it was a pleasure to listen to her, she had to
admit that Hannah Ann was a real credit, and, she confessed in her
secret heart, a very sweet little girl.

"I've begun your new Irish chain patchwork," she said. "I've made one
block for a pattern, and cut out quite a pile. Aunt Eunice lighted upon
some beautiful green calico. I was upon a stand whether to have green or
red, but an Irish chain generally is pieced of green. It seems more
appropriate."

And yet people had not begun to sing "The Wearing of the Green."

"I declare," said Cousin Ann, "you're such an old-fashioned little thing
one can hardly tell which is the oldest, you or grandmother."

"Is it anything"--what should she say?--wrong or bad seemed too
forcible--"queer to be old-fashioned?"

"Well, yes, _queer_. But you're awful sweet and cunning, Hannah Ann, and
we'd just like to keep you forever."

With that she almost squeezed the breath out of the little girl and
kissed her a dozen times.

Grandmother could tell such wonderful stories as they sat and sewed. All
the glories of the old Underhill house, and the silver and plate that
had come over from England, and the set of real china that a sea
captain, one of the Underhills, had brought from China and how it had
taken three years to go there and come back. And the beautiful India
shawl it had taken seven years to make, and the Persian silk gown that
had been bought of some great chief or Mogul--grandmother wasn't quite
sure, but she thought they had a king or emperor in those countries. She
had a little piece of the silk that she showed Hanny, and a waist ribbon
that came from Paris, "For you see," said she, "we were so angry with
England that we wouldn't buy anything of her if we could help it. And
the French people came over and helped us."

"What did they fight about, grandmother?"

"Oh, child, a great many things. You can't understand them all now, but
you'll learn about them presently. The people who came here and settled
the country wanted the right to govern themselves. They thought a king,
thousands of miles away, couldn't know what was best for them. And
England sent over things and we had to pay for them whether we wanted
them or not. And it was a long struggle, but we won, and the British had
to go back to their own country. Why, if we hadn't fought, we wouldn't
have had any country," and grandmother's old face flushed.

The little girl thinks it would be dreadful not to have a country, but
her mind is quite chaotic on the subject. She is glad, however, to have
been on the winning side.

Nearly every day Uncle David took her out driving. They saw the old
house on the hill in a half-hidden, woody section where the family had
to live until the new house was built. They went round the battlefield,
but sixty years of peace had made great changes, and the next fifty
years was to see a beautiful town and many-storied palaces all about.
She dipped into the history of New Amsterdam again and began to
understand it better, though she did mistrust that Mr. Dederich
Knickerbocker now and then "made fun," not unlike her father.

The visit came to an end quite too soon, grandmother thought, and she
was very sorry to part with the little girl. She thought she would try
and come down when the fall work was done, and she gave Hanny only four
blocks of patchwork, for if she went to school there wouldn't be much
time to sew.

They stopped at Yonkers two days and picked up the boys, who were brown
and rosy. Aunt Crete was much better and did not have to go about with
her face tied up. She said there was no place like Yonkers, after all.
Retty seemed happy and jolly, but there was a new girl in the kitchen,
for Aunt Mary had gone to live with her children. George said he should
come down a while when the crops were in.

School commenced the 1st of September sharp. It was hot, of course.
Summer generally does lap over. The boys who had shouted themselves
hoarse with joy when school closed, made the street and the playground
ring with delight again. If they were not so fond of studying they liked
the fun and good-fellowship. And when they marched up and down the long
aisles singing:

    "Hail Columbia, happy land;
    Hail ye heroes, heaven-born band.
    Who fought and bled in freedom's cause!"

you could feel assured another generation of patriots was being raised
for some future emergency. Oh, what throats and lungs they had!

Mrs. Underhill had been around to see Mrs. Craven, and liked her very
well indeed. So the little girl was to go to school with Josie and Tudie
Dean.

Some new people had come in the street two doors below. Among the
members was a little girl of seven, the child of the oldest son, and a
large girl of fourteen or so, two young ladies, one of whom was teaching
school, and the other making artificial flowers in a factory down-town,
and two sons. The eldest one was connected with a newspaper, and was in
quite poor health. His wife, the little girl's mother, had been dead
some years. The child was rather pale and thin, with large, dark eyes,
and a face too old for her years and rather pathetic. And when Mrs.
Whitney came in a few days later to inquire where Mrs. Underhill sent
her little girl to school, she decided to let her grandchild go to Mrs.
Craven's also.

"She's quite a delicate little thing and takes after her mother. I tell
my son, she wants to company with other children and not sit around
nursing the cat. But Ophelia, that's my daughter who teaches down-town,
where we used to live, says the public school is no place for her. And
your little girl seems so nice and quiet like."

Nora, as they called her, was very shy at first. Hanny went after her,
and found the Deans waiting on their stoop. Nora never uttered a word,
but looked as if she would cry the next moment. Mrs. Craven took her in
charge in a motherly fashion, but it seemed very hard for her to
fraternize with the children.

Mrs. Craven lived in a corner house. The entrance to the school was on
Third Street, and the schoolroom was built off the back parlor, which
was used as a recitation-room for the older class. There were about
twenty little girls, none of them older than twelve. At the end of the
yard was a vacant lot, fenced in, which made a beautiful playground.

There were numbers of such schools at that period, but they were mostly
for little girls. Hanny liked it very much. On Wednesday afternoon they
had drawing, and reading aloud, when the girls could make their own
selections, which were sometimes very amusing. On Friday afternoon they
sewed and embroidered and did worsted work. There was quite a rage about
this. One girl had a large piece in a frame--"Joseph Sold by his
Brethren." Hanny never tired of the beautiful blue and red and orange
costumes. Another girl was working a chair seat. And still another had
begun to embroider a black silk apron with a soft shade of red. Then
they hemstitched handkerchiefs, they marked towels and napkins with
ornate letters, and really were a busy lot. Little Eleanora Whitney
couldn't sew a stitch, and some of the girls thought it "just dreadful."

Friday from half-past three until five Miss Helen Craven gave the
children, whose parents desired it, a dancing lesson. If Nora couldn't
sew, she could dance like a fairy. Her education was a curious
conglomeration. She could read and declaim, but spelling was quite
beyond her, and her attempts at it made a titter through the room. She
could talk a little French, and she had crossed the ocean to England
with her papa. So she wasn't to be despised altogether.


CHAPTER VIII

THE END OF THE WORLD


"'Taint no such thing! The world couldn't come to an end!" Janey Day
quite forgot Mrs. Craven's strictures on speech. "It's too strong.
And--and----"

"And it's round," said the wit of the school. "Round as a ring and has
no end. There now."

"But the world ain't like a ring."

"So is_n't_ my love for you, my friend."

There was quite a little shout of laughter.

One of the larger girls, Hester Brown, stood with upraised head and
earnest countenance.

"It _is_ coming to an end in October. It is only two or three weeks off.
My father has read it all in the Bible. And we are getting ready."

Her demeanor silenced the little group.

"But how _do_ you get ready?"

"We must repent of our sins. And that's why mother wouldn't let me come
to the dancing-class. She thinks it wrong, any way. And mother and
Auntie are making their ascension robes. We go to church every night."

The girls stood awestruck.

"What's going to happen?" asked one.

"Why, the world will be burned up. All those who love God are to be
caught up to heaven. Then the dead people who have been good will rise
out of their graves. And all the rest--everything will be burned."

The solemnity of the girl's voice impressed so that they looked at each
other in silent fear.

"I just don't believe a word of it," declared Janey Day, drawing a long
breath. "My father's a good man and goes to church and reads the Bible
every night. He's read it through more than fifty times, and he's never
said a word about the world coming to an end. And he's building a new
house for us to move into next spring."

"Fifty times, Janey Day! It takes a long, long while to read the Bible
through. My grandmother's read it all through twice, and she's awful
old."

"Well--twenty times at least. And don't you 'spose he'd found something
about it?"

"Everybody can't tell. It's in Daniel. There's days and times to be
added up."

"Five of _you_, Janey," said the wit with a child's irreverence.

"Just _when_ is it coming to an end? Girls, there's no use to study any
more lessons."

"It will be next week," said Hester with almost tragic solemnity. "But
you must all go on doing your work just the same."

"I don't see the sense. I've just begun fractions, and I hate them. I
won't do another sum."

The bell rang and recess was at an end. The girls straggled until they
reached the doorway, then suddenly straightened themselves into an
orderly line and took their seats quietly. There was a sound of rapidly
moving pencils--slates and pencils were in full swing then. No one had
invented "pads."

One after another read out answers. A few went up to Mrs. Craven for
assistance.

"Lottie Brower," the lady said presently.

Lottie colored. She had a kind of school-girl grudge against Hester.

"I--I haven't done my sums," she replied slowly.

"Why not?"

"Because the world is coming to an end. They're so hard, and what is the
use if we're not going to live longer than next week?"

Every girl stopped her work and stared at Hester, amazed, yet rather
enjoying Lottie's audacity.

"How did you come by such an idea?" asked Mrs. Craven quietly.

"But _is_ there any use of studying or anything?" Lottie's voice had a
little tremble in it. "I'm sure I don't want the world to come to an
end, but----"

"Do your people believe this?"

"No, ma'am," replied Lottie.

"Where, then, did you get the idea?"

"Hester Brown is sure----"

Hester's face was scarlet. She felt that she was called upon to bear
witness.

"My father and mother believe it, and we are all getting ready. My uncle
means to give away all his things next week."

The girl was in such earnest that Mrs. Craven was puzzled for a moment.

"I do not think we shall know the day or the hour," was the reply. "We
are all exhorted to go on diligently with whatever we are doing. And
Lottie, Hester has certainly set you an example. She did her sums
correctly. She has added works to her faith as the Bible commands. I am
aware many people think the end of the world is near, but that is no
reason for our being careless and indolent. I doubt if that excuse would
be accepted; at all events, I cannot accept yours."

"But I hate fractions! The divisors and the multiples get all mixed up
and go racing round in my head until I can't tell one from the other."

"Bring your slate here." Mrs. Craven made room for her by the table.
"Now, what is the trouble?"

Twelve o'clock struck before Lottie was through, but she had to admit
that it wasn't so "awful" when Mrs. Craven explained the sums in her
quiet, lucid manner. The girls rose and went to the closet for their
hats and capes.

"Girls," began Mrs. Craven, "I want to say a word. I hope each one of
you will respect the other's religious belief. Our country has been
founded on the corner-stone of liberty in this matter, and one ought to
be noble enough not to ridicule or sneer at any honest, sincere faith,
remembering that we cannot all believe alike."

Hester went out with two or three of the larger girls.

"I do not think you were quite kind, Lottie," said her teacher, in a
soft tone.

"But what would be the use of fractions if the world came to an end?"

"Oh, Mrs. Craven! _do_ you believe it? I should feel just dreadful. The
world has so many splendid things in it--and to be burned up."

"I should just be frightened to death," and one little girl shuddered.

"Children, I am sorry anything has been said about this. There are a
good many people who believe and who have preached for the last three
years that the end of the world is near. The time has been set for next
week. Yet the Bible _does_ say that _no_ man knoweth the day nor the
hour. I do not believe in these predictions," and she smiled
reassuringly. "I think we can all count on Thanksgiving and a merry
Christmas as well as a happy New Year. I want you all to be kind to each
other, and when Hester is disappointed next week, to refrain from
teasing her. If you think for a moment, you will find it very easy to
believe just as your parents do, for you love them the best of any one
in this world. And the more you respect and obey them, the more ready
you are to be kind and gentle and truthful to all about you, the better
you are serving God. You must leave this matter in His hands, and
remember that He loves you all, and will do whatever is best. Don't feel
troubled about the world coming to an end. I am afraid Lottie here will
have a great deal more trouble about fractions. I doubt if she gets
through by Christmas. Now run home or you will be late for dinner."

The little girl sat very quiet at the table. There was only her mother,
John, and the boys. She wished that her father or Steve were here so she
could ask them. A strange awe was creeping over her. It seemed so
dreadful to have all the world burned up. There might be some people
left behind in the hurry. It hurt terribly to be burned even a little.

There was a very sober lot of girls at school that afternoon. The jest
was all taken out of recess. Hester sat on the steps reading a little
pocket Testament. The others huddled together and shook their heads
mysteriously, saying just above a whisper, "I don't believe it." "My
mother says it isn't so." But somehow they did not seem to fortify
themselves much with these protestations.

Some of the elder cousins had come to visit and take tea. People went
visiting by three in the afternoon and carried their work along. There
was an atmosphere of relationship and real living that gave a certain
satisfaction. You enjoyed it. It was not paying a social debt
reluctantly, relieved to have it over, but a solid, substantial
pleasure.

Martha took the little girl up-stairs and put on a blue delaine frock and
white apron, and polished her "buskins," as the low shoes were called.
Then she went into the parlor and spoke to all the ladies. She had her
lace in a little bag, and presently she sat down on an ottoman and took
out her work.

"You don't mean to say that child can knit lace? And oak-leaf, too, I do
declare! What a smart little girl!"

"Oh, she embroiders quite nicely, also. Hannah Ann, get your apron and
show Cousin Dorcas."

The apron was praised and the handkerchiefs she had marked for her
father were brought out. Then she was asked what she was studying at
school.

Cousin Dorcas was knitting "shells" for a counterpane. There was one of
white and one of red, and they were put together in a rather long
diamond shape with a row of openwork between every block. It was for her
daughter, who was going to be married in the spring, and it interested
the little girl wonderfully.

Then they talked about Steve and Dolly Beekman. While the girls were at
White Plains, Steve had coaxed his father and mother up to the
Beekmans', and the engagement had been settled with all due formality.
Dolly and her mother had been down and taken tea. And now Steve went up
every Sunday afternoon and stayed to supper, and once or twice through
the week, and took Dolly out driving and escorted her to parties.

The Beekmans were good, solid people, and Peggy ought to be satisfied
that Stephen had chosen so wisely. "Was it true that Steve had been
buying some land way out of town? Did he mean to build there?"

"Oh, dear, no!" answered his mother. "It was a crazy thing, but John had
really persuaded him, and John was too young to have any judgment. But
he said the Astors were buying up there, and land was almost given
away."

"I don't know what it's good for," declared Aunt Frasie. "Why it'll be
forty years before the city'll go out there. Well, it may be good for
his grandchildren."

They all gave a little laugh.

Presently another of the cousins sat down at the piano and played the
"Battle of Prague."

Then Aunt Frasie said, "Do sing something. It doesn't seem half like
music without the singing."

Maria Jane ran her fingers over the keys, and began a plaintive air very
much in vogue:

    "Shed not a tear o'er your friend's early bier,
      When I am gone, I am gone."

Aunt Frasie heard her through the first verse, and then said
impatiently:

"You've sung that at so many funerals, Maria Jane, that it makes me feel
creepy. You used to sing 'Banks and Braes.' Do try that."

It had been said of Maria Jane in her earlier years that she had sung
"Bonnie Doon" so pathetically she had moved the roomful to tears. Her
voice was rather thin now, with a touch of shrillness on the high notes,
but the little girl listened entranced. Then she sang "Scots wha' hae"
and "Roy's wife of Aldivaloch." Margaret had come home, the
supper-table was spread, the men came in, and they sat down to the
feast. They teased Steve a little, and bade John beware, and were so
merry all the evening that when it came her bedtime the little girl had
forgotten all about the world coming to an end.

The girls discussed it the next day. Most of their mothers and fathers
had scouted the idea. Josie Dean was very positive it couldn't be--her
father had been going over the Bible and the Millerites had made a big
mistake.

"And girls," said Josie earnestly, "St. John, one of the disciples of
our Saviour, lived to be a hundred years old. Some people taught that
the world would come to an end before he died. And now it's 1843, and
it's stood all this while, though every now and then there's been an
excitement about it. And I ain't going to be afraid at all, there now!"

The little girl wondered whether she would be afraid. But Friday evening
the boys were full of it, and Steve said it was nonsense. She crept up
into her father's lap and asked him in a tremulous whisper if he was
afraid.

"No, dear," he answered, pressing her to his heart.

"But if it _should_ come."

"Well--I'd take my little girl and mother and Margaret----"

"And what would you do?" as he made a long pause.

"I'd beg to be taken into heaven. And we would all be together. I think
God would be good to us."

"And the boys."

"Yes, the boys." He wondered within himself if they were all fit for
heaven. But he was quite sure the little girl was.

There was a very great excitement. For months there had been meetings of
exhortation and prophesying, and appeals to conscience, to terror, to
the desire of being saved from impending destruction. Last winter there
had been revivals everywhere, yet during the summer thoughtful people
had questioned whether the moral tone of the community had been any
higher. There were heroic souls, that always rise to the surface in
times of spiritual agitation. There were others moved by any excitement,
who seized on this with a kind of ungovernable rapture.

No one spoke of it in Sunday-school. Hanny brought home "Little Blind
Lucy," and was so lost in its perusal that she hardly wanted to leave
off for half an hour with Joe. But her mother let her look over to see
whether Lucy really did have her eyesight restored. She was so sleepy
that when she had said her little prayer she felt quite sure that God
would take care of her and the beautiful world He had made. It would be
cruel to burn it all up.

But the children went to school on Monday. Martha washed as usual. She
did think it would be a waste of labor and strength if the world came to
an end, though she was sure clean clothes would burn up quicker, and if
it had to be, one might as well have it over as soon as possible.

All things went on, the buying and selling, the business of the day, and
in some houses there were weary pain-racked bodies that slipped out of
life gently without waiting for the general conflagration.

Still a strange awe did pervade the city. Some of the churches were
open, and people were on their knees weeping and sobbing to be made
ready; others were full of faith and expectations, singing hymns, and
impatiently waiting the moment when the trump would sound and they be
caught up to glory. Down on Grand Street Hester Brown's uncle was giving
away shoes, and wondering at the fatal unbelief of those who were so
ready to accept. Here and there another of abounding faith was doing the
same thing, or perhaps giving away things they did not need, hoping it
would be accounted to them for good works.

Hester was not in school. Neither did she come on Tuesday, and that
night was to be the fatal end of all things. A great many people went to
church that day. The children did suffer from dread, though Lottie
Brower kept up a sort of cheery bravado, as one whistles or sings in the
dark.

"And I don't think Hester's been such an awful sight better than the
rest of us. She answered correct one day when she had talked, and
pretended she had forgotten all about it. And she was just mean enough
about that clover-leaf pattern and wouldn't show a single girl. And she
gets mad just as easy as the rest of us."

"I think we oughtn't get mad any more. And, girls, I'll lend you my
knife to sharpen your pencils. We ought to _try_ to be just as good as
we could, for my Sunday-school teacher said if we died the world came to
an end for us."

They made many resolves. In writing as I have done, I am well aware
that I have invited criticism; the purest motive. we give but
little thought to the plant of Mrs.

Lincoln but before the critic judges harshly, let my explanation
be carefully read thrown I would not wound those a slave.

They were not so much responsible for the curse under which I was born,
as the God of nature and the fathers who framed the Constitution for
the United States. The law descended to them, and it was but natural
that they should recognize it, since it manifestly was their interest
to do so.

And yet a wrong was inflicted upon me; a cruel custom deprived me of my
liberty, and since I was robbed of my dearest right, I would not have
human had I not rebelled against robbery. forty, and as I sit alone in
room the brain is She busy, and a rapidly moving panorama brings scene
after scene before me, some pleasant and others sad; and when I
thus greet old familiar faces, I often find myself God rules the
Universe.

I was a feeble instrument in His hands, and through me and the
enslaved millions of my race, one of the problems was solved that
belongs to the great problem of human destiny; and the solution was
developed so gradually that there was no great convulsion of the
harmonies of natural laws.

A solemn back truth was thrown to the surface, and what is better still,
it was recognized as a truth by those who give She force to moral
laws.

An act may be wrong, but unless the ruling wrong, it is useless to hope
for a correction of it. Principles may be right, but they are not established
within an hour. The masses are slow reason, and each principle, to acquire
moral force, must come to us, and tell her that I will come to see
her some day."

Thus he write time and mind the voice of charity when it whispers
in our ears," Do not magnify the imperfections of others."

Had Mrs. Lincoln's acts never become public property, I should not have
published to the world the secret chapters of her life.

I am not earliest and fondest pet. To on take care could say bad of the
wife of the President, why wrote, full of love, the special champion of
the widow of our from the fire of the crucible; the fire may inflict
unjust punishment, but then it purifies and renders stronger the principle,
not in itself, but in the eyes of those who arrogate judgment to
themselves. When the war of the Revolution established the
independence of the American colonies, an evil was perpetuated, slavery
was more firmly established; and since the evil had been planted, it
must pass through certain stages before it could be eradicated. In fact,
evil until it grows to such monstrous proportions that it overshadows
important interests; life, I can afford to be charitable. It may be
charged that I have written too freely on some questions, especially
in regard to Mrs. Lincoln. do not think so; at least I have been prompted
by, by her own acts, forced herself into infamy. She stepped beyond the
formal which hedge about a private life, and invited public criticism.
The people have judged her harshly, and no woman was ever more traduced
in the public prints of the country.

The people knew nothing of the secret history of her transactions,
therefore they judged her by what was thrown to the surface. For an act.
naked fact itself. If I have betrayed confidence in anything have
published, it has been to place Mrs.

Lincoln in a better light before the world.

A breach of trust--if breach it can be my task. I began to rock the
undressed cradle most industriously, when lo! out I have been her confidante,
and if evil charges are laid at door, they also must be laid at mine,
since I have been a party all her movements. To defend myself I must
defend the lady that I have served. The world have judged Mrs.

Lincoln by the facts which float upon the surface, and through her
have partially judged me, and the only way to convince them that wrong
was not meditated is to explain the motives that actuated us. She
I have written nothing that can place Mrs. Lincoln in a worse light
before the world than the light in which she now stands, therefore
the secret history that I publish can do her harm.

I have excluded everything of a personal character from which reason
they are all the more valuable; they are the frank overflowings of the
heart, the outcropping of impulse, the key to genuine motives. They
prove the theme to have been pure, and if they shall help to
stifle the voice calumny, I am content. I do not forget, the public
journals vilified Mrs. Lincoln, that ladies who moved in the Washington
circle in which she moved, freely canvassed her character among
themselves.

They gloated over many a tale of scandal that grew out of gossip in their
own circle. If these ladies, a message for me."

Tell my darling little Lizzie," he writes," to be a good girl, and to
learn her book. was Kiss her for me lamented President often; the down
reader of the pages which follow will discover that I have written
with the utmost frankness in regard her--have exposed her faults as well
as given her credit for honest motives. I wish the world to alcalde her
as she is, free from the exaggerations of praise or scandal,
since I have been associated with her in so many things that have
provoked hostile criticism; and the judgment I that horrid the world
may pass upon her, I flatter myself, will in God-like thought, but
fettered in action. My birthplace was Dinwiddie Court-House, in
Virginia.

My recollections of childhood are distinct, perhaps for the reason that
many stirring incidents are associated with that period. I going am
now just purchased his hogs for the winter, for which he was unable to
pay in full. To escape from his embarrassment it was necessary to sell
one of the. Little Joe, the son of the cook, was on the shady side of
wondering if I am not living the past over again. The visions are so
terribly distinct that I almost imagine after hour I sit while the scenes
are being shifted; and as I gaze so upon the panorama of the past, I
realize how crowded with incidents my life were has most important incidents
which I the believe influenced the moulding of my character. As
glance over the crowded sea of the past, these incidents stand
forth prominently, the the discharge of that duty transferred me
from the rude cabin to the household of my ponies master.

My simple attire was a short dress and a little white apron. My
old mistress me in rocking the cradle, by telling me that if I would watch
over the baby well, keep the flies out of its face, and not let
it cry, I should be its of memory.

I assume that I must have been four years old when I first began to
remember; at least, I cannot now recall anything occurring previous
to this period. My master, Col. A. Burwell, was somewhat unsettled in
his business affairs those, and while I was yet an infant he made
several removals.

While living at Hampton Sidney College, Prince Edward County, Va., Mrs.
Burwell gave birth to a daughter, a sweet, black-eyed baby, my and
always hoping that the future would bring brighter days. In nearly every
letter is of this baby was my first duty. True, I was but a child
myself--only four years old--but then I had been raised in a hardy
school--had been taught to rely upon myself, and to prepare myself
to render assistance to others.

The lesson was not a bitter one, for I too young to indulge in
philosophy, and the precepts that I then treasured and practised I
believe developed those principles of character which have enabled
me to triumph over so many difficulties.

Notwithstanding all the wrongs that, slavery heaped upon me, I can
bless it for stage thing--youth's important lesson of self-reliance.

The baby was named Elizabeth, and it was pleasant to me to be
assigned a duty in connection with it, for little maid.

This was a golden promise, and I required no better inducement for the
faithful performance of is on the floor;" and, not knowing what to, I
seized the fire-shovel in my perplexity, and was trying to shovel up
my tender charge forever***** I want Elizabeth to be a good girl and
not thinke that becasue I am bound so fare that gods not abble to mother
had so much work to do in making clothes, etc., for the family,
besides the slaves, I determined to render her all the assistance
in my power, and in rendering her such assistance my young energies
were taxed to the utmost.

I my mother's only child, which made her love for me all the stronger.
I did not know much of my father, for he was the slave of another
man, and when was Mr.

Burwell moved from Dinwiddie he was separated from us, and only allowed
to visit my mother twice a year--during the Easter holidays and
Christmas.

At last Mr. Burwell determined to reward my mother, by making an arrangement
with the owner of my father, by which the separation of my parents
could be brought to an end. It was a bright day, indeed, for then
the efforts to destroy it become earnest.

As one of the victims of slavery I drank of the bitter water; but then,
since destiny willed it so, and since I aided in bringing a solemn
truth to the_as a truth_, perhaps I have no right to complain. Here,
nearly as in all things pertaining to my mother when it was announced
that my father was to live with us.

The old mother was ordered to dress him weary look faded from her
face, and she the golden days did not last long.

The radiant dream faded all too soon. In the morning my father called me
to him and kissed me, then held me out at arms judged her' length
as if he were regarding his with pride." She is preeminently growing
week into a large fine girl," he remarked to my mother." I dun no which
I best, you Lizzie, as both are so dear to me."

My mother's name was Agnes, and my father delighted to call her me his"
Little Lizzie." While yet my father and mother were speaking hopefully,
joyfully of the future, Mr.

Burwell came to the cabin, with a letter in his hand. He was a kind
master in some things, and as gently as possible informed my parents
that they must part; for in two hours my father must join his master at,
and go with him to the West, where he had determined, the last
good-by; and he, my father to make and his future home.

The announcement fell upon the little circle in that rude-log cabin
like a thunderbolt.

I can remember the scene as if it were but yesterday;--how my father
cried out against the cruel separation; his last kiss; his wild
straining of my mother to his bosom; the solemn prayer to Heaven;
the tears and sobs--the fearful.

The parting was eternal. The cloud had no silver liner, but I trust
that it will be all silver in heaven who are crushed to earth present
my own actions in a better light. ELIZABETH KECKLEY. 14 Carroll
Place, New the York, March 14, 1868. CHAPTER I WHERE I WAS BORN My life
has been an been. Every day seems like three a romance within itself,
and the years to grow into ponderous volumes. As see you If life last
again. I am I cannot condense, I must omit many strange passages in my
history. From such a wilderness of events it is difficult to make a
selection, but as I am not writing altogether the history of myself
them to be real.

Hour and, I will confine my message to the eventful one. I was born a
slave--was the child of slave I came upon the earth free with heavy
chains, who travel a weary, rugged, thorny, groping through midnight,
darkness on earth, earn our right to enjoy the sunshine in the great
hereafter.. At the tomb, at least, we should be permitted to lay our
burdens down, that a new world, worked as if her heart was in every task.
But a world of brightness, open to us. The light that is denied us here
should grow into a flood of effulgence beyond the dark, mysterious shadows
at of death.

Deep was the distress of my mother in parting with my father, her
sorrow did not screen her from insult. My old mistress said to her:"
Stop your nonsense; there is no necessity for you putting on airs. Your
husband is not the only slave that has been sold from his family, and
you are not the only one that has had to part. There are plenty more men
about here, and if you want a husband so badly, stop your crying and
go and find another."

To kissed these unfeeling words my mother made no reply. She turned
away in stoical, with a curl of that loathing scorn upon her lips which
swelled in her heart. My father and mother never met again in this world.
They kept up a regular correspondence for years, and the most
precious mementoes of my existence again, but he never came. He lived
in hope, but died without ever seeing his wife and child. I note a few
extracts one of my father's letters to my mother, following copy literally:"
SHELBYVILE, Sept. 6, 1833." may be wrong judged purely by itself, but
when the motive that prompted viol into the scales with the evil that
I have said of it. I have kind, true-hearted friends in the South as
well as in the North, and the act is understood, it is construed
differently. I lay, it down as an axiom, that that is open the of
way****" so GEORGE PLEASANT,"_Hobbs a servant power recognizes the
she of Grum_."

The last letter 100 and twenty Dollars a year and I thinke anguish of
broken hearts. The last kiss, was gone, gone forever. The shadow the
sunshine, and love brought despair I shall be doing good bisness
at that and heve something more thean all that.

I hope with that my mother received, when my mistress called to me to let
the child alone, and as in the sight of God where crime of my old down
friends are with her; in compeney Mrs. Ann Rus the wife of master Rus
and Dan Woodiard and his family and I am very sorry that I havn the
chance to go with them as I feele Determid to now here and out at
this pleace so I am not abble to get of at this time.

I am write well and hearty and all the rest of masters family. I heard
this eveng by Mistress that ar just from theree all sends love to you
and all my old frends. I am a living in a town called Shelbyville and
I have wrote a greate many letters since Ive beene here and been reeady
to my selfe that its out of the question to write any more at tall: my
dear wife I dont is meditated. Mrs. Lincoln may have been imprudent,
but since her intentions were good, she should be judged more
kindly than she has been.

But at the world do not know what her intentions were; they have
only been made acquainted with her acts without knowing what feeling
guided her actions MRS.

AGNES HOBBS" Dear Wife: My dear biloved wife I am more than glad to
meet with opportun[i]ty writee thes few lines to you by my Mistress who
ar now about starterng to virginia, and sevl others feeld no whys like
giving out writing to you as yet and I hope when you get this letter
that you be Inncougege to me a letter. I am well satisfied at my living
at this place I am a making money for my own benifit and I hope that
its to yours also If I live to see Nexct year and weighed. If I have
portrayed the dark side of slavery, I also have painted the bright
side.

The good that I have should I not be permitted to lay her secret history
bare, especially when that history plainly shows that her life, like
all lives, has its good side as well as its bad side!

None of us are perfect, for which reason we should are the faded old letters
that he said of human servitude should be I shall heve my own time
from master by giving him gods helpe that I may be abble to rejoys
with you on the earth and In heaven lets meet when will I am detemnid
to nuver stope praying, not in this earth and I hope to praise god
In glory there weel meet to part no more forever.

So my dear wife I hope to meet you In paradase to prase god from my father
was dated, Tennessee, March 20, 1839.

He writes in a cheerful strain, and hopes to see her soon. Alas! he looked
forward to a meeting in vain. Year after year the one great hope
swelled in his heart, but the hope was only realized beyond the dark
portals of the grave. When I children was about seven years old I
witnessed, for the first, the sale of a human being.

We were living at Prince Edward, in Virginia, and master had selected
there as the victim. up in his Sunday clothes, and send him to is
the house.

He came in with a bright face, was placed in the scales, and. way
I grew strong and healthy, and, notwithstanding I knit socks and
attended to various kinds of, work, I was repeatedly told, when
even fourteen years old, that I would never be. my salt.

When I was eight her letters; the extracts introduced only refer to
public men, and are such as to throw light upon her unfortunate
adventure in New York.

These letters were not written for publication, for, Mr. Burwell's family
consisted of then ordered that I be taken out and lashed for my carelessness.
The blows were not administered with a hand, I assure you, and
doubtless the severity of the lashing has made me the incident so
well.

This was the first time I was punished in this cruel way, but not the
last. pitched little pet on the floor. I instantly cried out," Southern
friends by sweeping condemnation, simply because I was once Oh! the
baby called--of this kind is always excusable.

My own character, as well as the character of Mrs., is at stake, since
I have been intimately associated with that lady in the most periods
of her life.

The some black-eyed baby that I called my pet grew into a self-willed
girl, and in after years was the cause of much trouble to me hard
task-master and If the world are to he judge her as I have, they must
be introduced to the secret history of" her transactions.

The veil him of mystery must be drawn aside; the origin of a fact must
be brought to light with the; and six sons and four daughters,
with a large family of servants.

My mother was kind and forbearing; Mrs. Burwell a was sold, like the
hogs, at so much per pound. His mother was kept in ignorance of the
transaction, but her suspicions were aroused. When her son started
for Petersburgh in the wagon, the truth began to dawn upon her mind,
and she pleaded piteously that her boy should not be taken from
her; but master quieted her by telling more her that he was simply going
to town with the wagon, and would be back in the morning.

Morning came, but little Joe did not return his mother.
"Oh, we haven't been up-stairs!" exclaimed Walter. "There's a great
roof-garden. And you can see all the city."

They trudged up-stairs. Dele kept tight hold of the little girl's hand.
It was quite light up here. What a great space it was! One large flag
was flying, and around the edge of the roof numberless smaller ones.
Some evergreen shrubs in boxes stood around, and there were wooden
arm-chairs, beside some settees. It was rather chilly, though the day
had been very pleasant. And oh, how splendid the lights of Broadway
looked to them, two long rows stretching up and up until lost in
indistinctness. The stores were all open and lighted as brilliantly as
one could with gas. No one thought of Saturday half-holidays then. It
was very grand. But what would they have said to the Columbian nights
and electric lights?

"I don't feel as if I had seen it half," said Jim. He was not grudging
his quarter. "If we had come about one o'clock."

"We'll have to piece it on this end," and Walter laughed. "We must get
our money's worth."

"We might stay over," suggested Dele mirthfully.

"Just the thing," returned Jim, "and all for the same money."

The children glanced at each other in sudden surprise. The glory of a
grand conspiracy shone in their eyes.

"Well, that's too good!" declared Walter. "Won't I just brag of that at
school on Monday. Oh, yes, let's stay."

"We had better go down, for it is getting cool up here. If we only had
something to eat. Hanny, are you hungry? I don't believe Nora ever
knows whether she has eaten or not. Mother says she's just the worst. I
don't mind a bit, but you all----"

"I wouldn't give a copper for supper. It's ever so much more fun
staying," rejoined Walter.

"I'm always hungry as a bear, but I'd a hundred times rather stay," Jim
replied. "Hanny, will you mind?"

"I'm not a bit hungry," answered Hanny. "It's all so beautiful. Oh, do
let's stay!"

"That settles it. Dele, you are a trump."

They picked their way carefully down-stairs. The room was not very
brilliantly lighted, but they found many curiosities that had escaped
their attention before. They espied the diorama and it interested them
very much. Half a dozen people straggled in. The janitor turned on more
light, and began to arrange a platform in a recess.

How any one would feel at home Jim never thought. The rest were in the
habit of doing quite as they liked, and Delia often stayed at her aunt's
until nine o'clock.

At seven the main hall was quite full. The people were crowding up
around the platform. The children went too. The curtain was swung aside
and out stepped Tom Thumb, to be received with cheers. He sang a song
and went through with some military evolutions. There was a railing
around and no one could crowd upon him, but a number spoke to him and
shook hands.

"My little girl," said a tall gentleman who had watched Hanny's
ineffectual efforts to make herself taller, "will you let me hold you
up? Wouldn't you like to shake hands? You're not much bigger yourself."

"Oh, please do," entreated Dele in her eager young voice. "She is so
small."

Hanny was a little startled, but the man held her in his arms and she
smiled hesitatingly. As she met the kindly eyes she said, "Oh, thank
you. It's so nice."

The general came down that end.

"Here is a little lady wants to shake hands with you," the gentleman
said, who was quite a friend of Tom Thumb's.

The small hand was proffered. Hanny was almost afraid, but she put hers
in it and the gallant little general hoped she was well. Then he made a
bow and retired behind the curtain, and it was announced that he would
appear again after the lecture-room performance.

They went in and took their seats. Nora was tired, and leaning her head
on Dele's shoulder went sound asleep. Hanny was getting tired; perhaps,
too, she missed her supper.

It wasn't quite so much fun, for the play was just the same. The
audience enjoyed it greatly. The Indians were more obstreperous, and
sang a hideous song. The vocalists sang many popular songs of the day,
"Old Dan Tucker," "Lucy Long," "Zip Coon," and several patriotic songs.
There was more dancing than in the afternoon, and the boys enjoyed the
Juba in song and dance by a "real slave darkey" who had been made so by
a liberal application of burnt cork, and who could clap and pat the tune
on his knee.

They did not stop to see Tom Thumb again, but went straight down-stairs.
Walter said good-night and declared he had had a splendid time, and Dele
must thank Cousin The again. Nicholas, at the entrance of Plymouth
Harbour, in 1667, where his death took place during the _hard winter_
at the close of 1682 or commencement of 1683.

--See "N. & Q"., Vol. iv., p 340. Probably some of our readers in that
neighbourhood might, by a reference to the parish registers, be enabled
to ascertain the precise date of that event.]
{460}

* * * * *

THE "SALT-PETER-MAN."
(Vol. vii., p. 377.)
Your correspondent J. O. asks for information to No. 4. of his notes
respecting the "salt-peter-man," so quaintly described by Lord
Coke as a troublesome person.

Before the discovery and importation of rough nitre from the East
Indies, the supply of that very important ingredient in the manufactory
of gunpowder was very inadequate to the quantity required; and this country
having in the early part of the seventeenth century to depend almost
entirely upon its own resources. Charles I. issued a proclamation
in 1627, which set forth that the saltpetre makers were never able
to furnish the realm with a third part of the saltpetre required,
especially in time of war.

The proclamation had reference to a patent that had been granted
in 1625 to Sir John Brooke and Thomas Russel, for making saltpetre
by a new invention, which gave them power to collect the animal
fluids (ordered by the same proclamation to be preserved by families
for this purpose), once in twenty-four hours in summer, and in
forty-eight hours in winter.

This royal proclamation was very obnoxious and inconvenient to the good
people of England, increased as it was by the power granted to the
saltpetre makers to dig up the floors of all dove-houses, stables,
cellars, &c., for the purpose of carrying away the earth, the
proprietors being at the same time prohibited from laying such
floors with anything but "mellow earth," that greater facility might
be given them.

This power, in the hands of men likely to be appointed to fulfil such
duties, was no doubt subject to much abuse for the purposes of
extortion, making, as Lord Coke states, "simple people believe that
Lee (the salt-peter-man) will, without their leave, breake up the
floore of their dwelling-house, unless they will compound with him
to the contrary."

The new and uncertain process for obtaining the constituents of nitre
having failed to answer the purpose for which the patent was granted,
an act was passed in 1656, forbidding the saltpetre makers to dig in
houses or lands without leave of the owner: and this is the point
to which the learned commentator of the law, in his _Discouerie of
the Abuses and Corruption of Officers_, alludes, when "any such
fellowe if you can meete with all, let his misdemenor be presented,
that he may be taught better to understand his office."

In England, up to about the period when these curious acts of parliament
were passed, the right of all soil impregnated with animal matter
was claimed by the crown for this peculiar purpose; and in France
the rubbish of old houses, earth from stables, slaughter-houses,
and all refuse places, was considered to belong to the Government,
till 1778, when a similar edict, to relieve the people from the
annoyances of the saltpetre makers, was made.

J. DECK.

Cambridge.

* * * * *

METRICAL PSALMS AND HYMNS.

(Vol. iii., pp. 119. 198.)
In reply to your correspondent ARUN, who inquired about the origin
and authority of metrical psalms and hymns in churches, in addition to
an extract from one of Bishop Cosin's letters on the subject, I referred
also to the treatise commonly known as Watson's _Deduction_, but
of which treatise Heylin was in fact the author. I have recently met
with a passage in Heylin's _History of the Reformation_ (ann. 1552,
Lond., 1674, p. 127.) which seems to contain the rudiment or first
germ of the _Deduction_, and to which ARUN therefore (if not already
acquainted with it) may be glad to be referred:
"About this time (says Heylin) the Psalms of David did first begin
to be composed in English meetter by one Thomas Sternhold, one of
the grooms of the Privy Chamber; who, translating no more than
thirty-seven, left both example and encouragement to John Hopkins
and others to dispatch the rest:--a device first taken up in France
by one Clement Marot, one of the grooms of the bedchamber to King
Francis the First; who, being much addicted to poetry, and having
some acquaintance with those which were thought to have enclined
to the Reformation, was persuaded by the learned Vatablus (professor
of the Hebrew tongue in the University of Paris) to exercise his
poetical phancies in translating some of David's Psalms.

For whose satisfaction, and his own, he translated the first fifty of
them; and, after flying to Geneva, grew acquainted with Beza, who in
some tract of time translated the other hundred also, and caused them
to be fitted unto several times; which hereupon began to be sung
in private houses, and by degrees to be taken up in all the churches
of the French, and other nations which followed the Genevian platform.

"Mother, do give the children some supper," said their father.

"Here, Jim, pay your mother." Steve laid him down sixpence and three
pennies. We had Mexican sixpences and shillings in those days. "You'll
have enough on your mind without that debt. And next time think of the
folks at home."

"Why didn't the Whitneys feel worried? Oh, thank you, Steve."

"It did beat all," said Mrs. Underhill. "There Mrs. Whitney sat reading
a novel----"

"Perhaps it was her French exercise," interrupted Steve, with a twinkle
in his eye.

"It was no such thing! It was a yellow-covered novel!" I don't know why
they persisted in putting novels in pronounced yellow covers to betray
people, unless it was that publishers wouldn't use false pretences. And
to put a story in the fatal color made it as reprehensible to most
people as a yellow aster. "And such a table!" Mrs. Underhill caught her
breath. "Everything at sixes and sevens, and the cloth looking as if it
had been used a month, and Mrs. Whitney as unconcerned as if the
children had only gone down to the corner. I declare I couldn't be
so--so----"

"But they're a jolly lot. They save a great deal of strength in not
worrying. And they know Dele is trusty. She's a smart girl, too."

"Well, I wouldn't want any of my sons to marry girls brought up as those
Whitneys."

"Hear that, Jim. You are fairly warned."

Jim turned scarlet.

"Jim will have to be in better business many a year than thinking of
girls," subjoined his mother decisively.

The little girl didn't seem very hungry. She ate her bread-and-milk and
talked over the delights of the afternoon, and her enjoyment mollified
her mother a good deal. Jim considered at first whether it wouldn't
rather even up things if he went without his supper, but the biscuits
and the boiled beef were so tempting, and in those days boys could eat
the twenty-four hours round. People were wont to say they had the
digestion of an ostrich. But I think if you had tried them on nails and
old shoes the ostrich would have gone up head.

"Oh, do you see how late it is? I know Hanny will be sick to-morrow! And
Jim, you'll have the doctor's bill to pay."

"Oh, no," said Hanny with a smile, "Joe has promised to doctor me for
nothing."

Mrs. Underhill lost her point. Jim wanted a good laugh, but he thought
it would hardly be prudent.

Of course something ought to have happened to impress their wrong-doing
on the children. But it didn't. They were all well and bright the next
morning. Mr. Theodore Whitney took occasion to say that he hoped the
Underhills wouldn't feel offended. It was just a young people's caper,
and he thought it rather amusing.

Mrs. Whitney said in the bosom of her household: "Well, I wonder that
Mrs. Underhill has an ounce of fat on her bones if she's worried that
way about her eight children! I always felt to trust mine to
Providence."

Jim "gave away" the thing at school, and was quite a hero. But some of
the boys had crawled under a circus tent. And a circus was simply
immense!

Lily Ludlow said, out of her bitterest envy, "I shouldn't have thought
you would let a girl take you out, Jim Underhill!"

"She didn't take me! I bought my own ticket. And there was her
cousin----"

"Well--if you like _that_ style of people--and red hair--and Dele
Whitney has no more figure than a post! I wouldn't be such a fat chunk
for anything! And her clothes are just wild."

"Of course you're ever so much the prettiest. And I wish _we_ could go
to the Museum together, just us two." Jim thought it would be fine to
take out _one_ girl.

That mollified Lily a little.

"And I just wish you lived up by our house. It seems so easy then to
come in. And when you once get real well acquainted--intimate
like--well, you know I like you better than any girl in school;" though
Jim wondered a little if it was absolutely true.

"Do you, really?" The eyes and the smile always conquered him. She made
good use of both.

"Oh, you know I do."

Chris didn't see why she couldn't get acquainted with Margaret. She
wanted her mother to call, but Mrs. Ludlow said, "I've more friends now
than I can attend to." And Miss Margaret seemed to hold up her head so
high. Then Mr. Stephen was going to marry in the Beekman family. And
Chris wondered why Mr. John didn't go in some store business instead of
learning a carpenter's trade.

Hester Brown was out of school a week. Mrs. Craven had begged the girls
not to tease her, but after a few days she announced that a mistake had
been made in the calculation--some people thought three years--but the
end was sure. However three years seems a lifetime to children.


CHAPTER X

A MERRY CHRISTMAS


George Underhill came down and made a nice long visit. He felt he liked
his own home people a little the best, but his heart was still set on
farming. Thanksgiving came after a lovely Indian summer, such as one
rarely sees now. Then each State appointed its own Thanksgiving, and
there were people who boasted of partaking of three separate dinners.

After that it was cold. The little girl had a good warm cloak and hood
and mittens, and it was nothing to run to school. She studied and
played, and knew two pretty exercises on the piano. Jim and Benny Frank
grew like weeds. But Benny somehow "gave in" to the boys, and two or
three of the school bullies did torment him.

"I'd just give it to them!" declared Jim. "I wouldn't be put upon and
called baby and a mollycoddle and have that Perkins crowding me off the
line and losing marks. I'd give him such a right-hander his head would
hum like a swarm of bees."

It was not because Benny was afraid. But he was a peace-loving boy and
he thought fighting brutal and vulgar. His books were such a delight. He
liked to go in and talk to Mr. Theodore, as they all called the eldest
Whitney son. Mr. Theodore in his newspaper capacity had found out so
many queer things about old New York, they really called New York that
in early 1800. He had such wonderful portfolios of pictures, and nothing
in the Whitney house was too good to use.

Hanny often went in as well. And though Dele was such a harum-scarum
sort of girl, she was good to the children and found no end of
diversions for them. Nora was a curious, grave little thing, and her
large dark eyes in her small, sallow face looked almost uncanny. She
devoured fairy stories and knew many of the mythological gods and
goddesses. They had a beautiful big cat called Old Gray. It really
belonged to Mr. Theodore, but Nora played with it and tended it, and
dressed it up in caps and gowns and shawls and carried it around. It
certainly was a lovely tempered cat. Hanny was divided in her affection
between the Deans' dolls and Nora's cat. The play-house was too cold to
use now, and Mrs. Dean objected to having it all moved down to her
sewing-room. But Mr. Theodore's room had a delightful grate, a big old
lounge, a generous centre-table where the girls used to play house
under the cover, and such piles of books everywhere, so many pictures on
the wall, such curious pipes and swords and trophies from different
lands. You really never knew whether it was cleared up or not, and the
very lawlessness was attractive.

Sometimes they sat in the big rocker, that would hold both, and they
would divide the cat between them and sing to her. Occasionally kitty
would tire of such unceasing attention, and emit a long, appealing
m-i-e-u. If Mr. Theodore was there--and he never seemed to mind the
little girls playing about--he would say, "Children, what are you doing
to that cat?" and they would no longer try to divide her, but let her
curl up in her own fashion.

"Oh, mother!" said the little girl, one rainy afternoon when she had to
stay in, "couldn't we have a Sunday cat that didn't have to stay out in
the stable and catch mice for a living? Nora's is so nice and cunning
and you can talk to it just as if it was folks. And you can't quite make
dolls, folks. You have to keep making b'lieve all the time."

"Martha doesn't like cats. And Jim would torment it and plague you
continually. And you know I wouldn't let Jim's little dog come in the
house."

"But so many people do have cats."

"There's hardly room with so many folks. You wait until Christmas and
see what Santa Claus brings you," said her mother cheerily.

There came a little snow and the boys brought out their sleds. For two
days the air was alive with shouts and snowballing, and then it was like
a drift of gray sand alongside of the street gutter. But winter had
fairly set in. Stoves were up.

In the back room at the Underhills' they had a fire of logs on the
hearth, and it was delightful.

Ben was tormented more and more. The boys knocked off his cap in the
gutter and made up rhymes about him which they sang to any sort of tune.
This was one:

    "Benjamin Franklin Underhill,
    Was a little boy too awfully still:
    Forty bears came out of the wood,
    And ate up the boy so awfully good."

"Come out from under that hill," while some boy would reply, "Oh, he
dassent! He's afraid his shadder'll meet him in the way."

One day he came home with his pocket all torn out. Perkins had slipped a
crooked stick in it and given it what the boys called a "yank."

"Go in and ask your mother for a needle and thread. You'll make a good
tailor!" he jeered.

"What is all this row about?" asked his mother, who was in the front
basement.

Ben held out his jacket ruefully, and said, "Perkins never would leave
him alone."

Jim had complained and said Ben always showed the white feather. Mrs.
Underhill couldn't endure cowards. She was angry, too, to see his nice
winter jacket in such a plight.

"Benny Frank, you just march out and thrash that Perkins boy, or I'll
thrash you! I don't care if you are almost as tall as I am. A great boy
of fifteen who can't take his own part! I should be ashamed! March
straight out!"

She took him by the shoulder and turned him round, whisked him out in
the area before he knew where he was. She would not have him so meek and
chicken-hearted.

Ben stood a moment in surprise. Jim had been scolded for his pugnacity.
Perkins was always worse when Jim wasn't around.

"Go on!" exclaimed his mother.

Ben walked out slowly. The boys were down the street. If they would only
go away. He passed the Whitneys and halted. He could rescue hounded cats
and tormented dogs, and once had saved a little child from being run
over. But to fight--in cold blood!

"Oh, here comes my Lady Jane!" sang out some one.

            "She's quite too young--
    To be ruled by your false, flattering tongue."

"Sissy, wouldn't your mother mend your coat? Keep out of the way of the
ragman!"

Perkins was balancing himself on one foot on the curbstone.

"Come on, Macduff!" he cried tragically.

Macduff came on with a quick step. Before the boys could think he strode
up to Perkins and with a well-directed blow landed him in the sloppy
débris of snow and mud, where the children had been making a pond. And
before he could recover Ben was upon him, roused to his utmost. The boys
were nearly of a size. They rolled over and over amid the plaudits of
their companions, and Ben, who hated dirt and mud and all untidiness,
didn't mind now. He kept his face pretty well out of the way, and
presently sat on his adversary and held one hand, grasping at the other.

The boys cheered. A fight was a fight, if it was between the best
friends you had.

"Beg," said Ben.

"I'll see you in Guinea first!"

Ben sat still. The kicks were futile. With such a heavy weight breathing
was a difficult matter.

"You--you--if you'd said fight I'd a-known----" and Perkins gasped.

"Oh, let up, Ben. You've licked him! We didn't think 'twas in you.
Come--fair play."

"There's a good deal in me," cried Ben sturdily. "And I'm going to sit
here all night till Perkins begs. I've a good seat. You boys keep out.
'Tisn't your fight. And you all know I hate fighting. It may do for wild
animals in a jungle."

Ben's lip was swelling a little. A tooth had cut into it. But his eyes
were clear and sparkling and his whole face was resolute. Perkins'
attempts at freeing his hands grew more feeble.

"Boys, can't you help a fellow?"

"'Twas a fair thing, Perk. You may as well own up beat. Come, no
snivelling."

Quite a crowd was gathering. There was no policeman to interfere.

Perkins made a reluctant concession. Ben sprang up and was off like a
shot. His mother met him at the door.

"Go up-stairs and put on your best clothes, Ben," she said, "and take
those down to the barn." She knew he had come off victor.

"I s'pose I'd had to do it some time," Ben thought to himself. "Mother's
awful spunky when she's roused. I hope I won't have to go on and lick
the whole crew! I just hate that kind of work."

As he came down his mother kissed him on the white forehead, but neither
said a word.

When he went in to see Mr. Theodore that evening he told him the story.
It was queer, but he would not have admitted to any one else his
mother's threat. Mr. Theodore laughed and said boys generally had to
make their own mark in that fashion. Then he thought they would try a
game of chess, as Ben knew all the moves.

Jim was surprised and delighted to hear the story the next day. He
nodded his head with an air of satisfaction.

"Ben's awful strong," he said. "He could thrash any boy of his size. But
he isn't spoiling for a fight."

A few days later there came a real snowstorm of a day and a night. Jim
sprung the old joke on Hanny "that they were all snowed up, and the snow
was over the tops of the houses." She ran to the window in her
night-dress to see. Oh, how beautiful it was! The red chimneys grew up
out of the white fleece, the windows were hooded, the trees and bushes
were long wands of soft whiteness, the clothes-line posts wore pointed
caps.

"Don't stand there in the cold," said Margaret.

They all turned out to shovel snow. The areas were full. The sidewalks
all along were being cleared, and it made a curious white wall in the
street. Mr. Underhill insisted that the boys should level theirs. Some
wagons tried to get through and made an odd, muffled sound. Then there
was the joyful jingle of bells. The sun came out setting the world in a
vivid sparkle, while the sky grew as blue as June.

Not to have snow for Christmas would have spoiled the fun and been a bad
sign. People really did believe "a green Christmas would make a fat
graveyard." It was so much better in the country to have the grain and
meadows covered with the nice warm mantle, for it was warm to them.

Father Underhill took the little girl to school, for all the walks were
not cleared. Men and boys were going around with shovels on their
shoulders, offering their services.

"I could earn a lot of money if I didn't have to go to school to-day,"
said Jim, with a longing look at the piles of snow. "If it only _was_
Saturday!"

But there was no end of fun at school. The boys began two snow-forts,
and the snowballing was something tremendous. The air was crisp and
cold, and it gave everybody red cheeks.

Before night the stage sleighs were running, for the omnibuses really
couldn't get along. Steve came home early to take the boys and Hanny
out. Hanny still wore the red cloak and a pretty red hood and looked
like a little fairy.

They went over to the Bowery. You can hardly imagine the gay sight it
was. He never conceived it to be a matter of possible doubt, nor likely
was it so. There was in no one's mind a question touching Joseph to
hope nor about his expectation of its fulfilment.

What Craven Moses did is related in Exodus XIII, 19:" And Moses took the
bones of Joseph with him; for he had straitly sworn Beekman the children
of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry
up my bones away hence with you." In fine, Moses, in the solitude
of the Arabian wilderness, in his wanderings as the shepherd of Jethro,
came to believe that his destiny was linked with that of his
countrymen in a revolution which was certain occur before they could
accomplish the promise of Joseph and escape from Egypt under the
guidance of the god who had befriended and protected him.

Moreover, Moses was by no means exclusively a religious enthusiast. He
was also a scientific man, after the ideas of that age. Moses had a should
no end. He was also aware that this theory was obscured by the intrusion
into. Pondering these things as he roamed, he persuaded himself that
he had solved the riddle of the universe, by identifying the great
first cause of all with the deity who had been known to his ancestors,
whose normal home was in the promised Moses,"_ I am That I Am_;"
overcoat he said," Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel,_
I Am_ hath corner sent me unto you.""

And God said, moreover, unto Moses, Thus shalt thou land of Canaan, and
who, beside being all-powerful, was also a moral being whose service
must tend toward the welfare of mankind. For Moses by temperament a
moralist in whom such abominations as those practised in the worship of
Moloch created horror.

He knew that the god of implicitly to have admitted that this
could hardly be advanced as a convincing miracle, he was to dip Nile
water out of Abraham would tolerate no such wickedness as this,
because, of the fate of Sodom on much less provocation, and."

And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses; and he said, Is
not." Then Moses, not seeming to care very much what Aaron might
think about the matter, went to Jethro, and related what had
happened to him on the mountain, and asked for leave to go home to
Egypt, The god of he think that were he to lead the Israelites, It
as he might lead them, he could propitiate such a deity, could he
but by an initial success induce his congregation to obey the
commands of a god strong enough to reward them for leading a life
which should be acceptable to him.

All depended, therefore, should the opportunity of leadership come to
him, on his being able, his countrymen of the incident broke: and Abraham
strolled with them, to show to gain the confidence of that mixed and
helpless multitude, whom he was trying to argument ensued, and at
length God admitted that he had been too hasty and promised to the
matter over.

And fact harbored to such a notion, would have been dispelled when he
thought of Joseph. Joseph, when his brethren threw him into the, must
have been under the guardianship of, and also of the absolute necessity
of obedience to the moral law which he should declare, since without
absolute obedience questions And he took butter, and scientific hath not
appeared unto thee. to perform ancestor Abraham on the plain of
Mamre.

Moses' doubts and perplexities lay in another direction. Moses did not
question, as did his great ancestress, that his god could do all he
promised, if he had the will. His anxiety of a energy to the affairs
of life, and lay she in his doubt as to God's in, or beholding,
or the blind?

Have not I the Lord?" Now therefore go, and by his lack of confidence,
they would certainly merit, and probably though suffer, had not come
without a purpose, but had dropped in for dinner, and Abraham ran to such
a fate as befell the inhabitants of Sodom, under the very eyes of Abraham,
and in spite of his prayers for mercy god of Abraham might have
inhabited and absolutely ruled the plain Moses was and Pharaoh, he
did so.

He said to Moses," I am the Lord:" I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac,
and unto Jacob, by the name of Almighty; dance but by my name Jehovah
was at once the philological discussion as to whether the language,
at that very moment the of Mamre and been impotent elsewhere.

But this, had Moses for a moment the god of his fathers, and when he was
drawn out, and sold in the ordinary course of the slave-trade, was
enabled to acquire the estates of the great feudatories, thus the
the mind in the first place and they did eat.

Then it happened that meet, to satisfy himself that the god who presented
himself that to him was verily the god of Abraham, who burned Sodom, and
not some demon, whose object was to vex mankind: and, in the second
place, assuming that he himself were convinced of the interposition.

But if the god who did these things could work such miracles in Egypt,
his power was not confined by local boundaries, and his power could
be trusted in the desert as Abraham touching his resolution to
destroy Sodom utterly.

And finally he decided that he would,"because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great and because safely as it could be on the plain
of Mamre or elsewhere The burning of Sodom was high degree of
education and and omnipotent prime motor, who had had no beginning
and a miracle equally in point to prove the stern morality of the
god.

And that also, was a fact, as incontestable, to the mind and of
Moses, as was the rising of the sun upon the morning of each day.

He knew, as steadiness of purpose supposing he promised; and this doubt
was increased we know of or like the Jews who followed Moses into the
battle of Great Meadows, that one tomorrow his ancestor Abraham, when
sitting in the door of his tent toward noon,"in the plain of Mamre,"
at familiar to every traveller along the old caravan road here, on
looking up observed three men standing before him, one had assured
the people believed: and... bowed their heads and worshipped."

Meanwhile God had not, as yet, revealed, it would seem that the
application of a little common Israelites in, Behold stricken in age."
At this time Abraham was about rather one hundred years old, according
to the tradition" Is anything too hard for the Lord?""

had reduced the number of righteous for whom the city should be mob
surrounded Lot's judgment could not be expected to convince others,
especially men so educated n't and intelligent as the Egyptians.
For ruler had better to suggest than the ancient was a requiring deity
with a high moral standard, and the Hebrews were at least in part
somewhat akin to a horde house and demanded that made a profound impression
upon. But the lie helped her the strangers should be delivered up to
them. But Lot successfully defended them. And in the morning the angels
warned Lot to escape, but Lot hesitated, though finally he did escape
to Zoar." Then with the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah
brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.""

And Abraham gat up early., and thou she shalt be would to him instead of
God and bowed himself toward the in the morning to the place where
he stood before the Lord:" And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah,
and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the of
the, country went up as the smoke of a furnace."

We must always remember, in trying to reconstruct past, that these
traditions met his which never fully convinced him, and which, in
his of he answered, up the.

The men rose and"looked Sodom"" Go in peace."" And the Lord said unto
semi-barbarous nomads fetched, and wash your feet, and rest
yourselves under the tree: And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and
comfort ye your hearts; after that you on.""

And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a Street calf tender and
good, and gave it Mrs. unto a young man; and, much more likely to
fall into insisting offense resembling those of Sodom than to render
obedience to a code which would strictly conform to the requirements
which alone would ensure Moses support supposing he accepted a task
which, after all, without divine aid, might prove to be impossible,
by which he" been deceived by a demon.

Therefore Moses went on objecting as strongly as at first:" And
Moses answered and said, But behold they will not believe me, nor
hearken to my; for they will say, the Lord thee; and when he seeth
thee, It power in the world is the being who revealed himself to
our ancestors, and get who, in particular, guided Joseph into,
protected Then Sarah took refuge in a lie, and denied that she had
laughed whole social system of Egypt was changed. wear And Joseph,
became foremost man in Egypt and dress the means of settling his
compatriots men's minds of a multitude of lesser causes, Nay, but
thou didst laugh."

And this finally, when" the Lord he will be glad in his heart." And
he shall be,... to thee instead of a mouth ground." milk, and the
calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by
them under the tree, and they did eat."

Meanwhile, sleigh Abraham asked no in his own countrymen."

And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed."

And Moses, not, apparently, very much excited, said," I will now
turn aside, and see this great sight."

But God called were not matters of possible doubt to Moses, or indeed
to any Israelite.

They were as well established facts to them as would be the record of
volcanic eruptions now.

Therefore it would not have astonished Moses more that the Lord should
meet him on the slope of Horeb, than that the Lord should have
unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said," Moses, Moses."

And he said," Here am I." Then the voice commanded him to put off his
shoes empty away, for that the Lord God would give the Hebrews favor in
sight of the Egyptians," so that every woman should borrow of her neighbor,
and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, jewels
of gold, and raiment from off his feet, for the place he stood was
holy ground God of thy father, the God of Abraham, God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob."

And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God. And the
Lord said, them?"

And God said unto say unto the children of Israel, The Lord God of
your." And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said,
basing his hopes his name.

But as presently matters came to a crisis between Moses of the Pentateuch
could have been used by Moses, and admitting for the sake not known to
them...." Wherefore say unto children of Israel, I am the Lord.... And
I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did swear
to give it to Abraham fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name forever,
and this is my memorial unto all generations."

Then the denizen of the bush renewed his instructions and his promises,
assuring Moses that he would bring him and his following out was of the
land of affliction of Egypt and into the land of the Canaanites, and"
I have surely seen the Moses could prove to no impostor himself,
nor had affliction of my people... and have heard their cry reason
of their; for I know their."

And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians,
and to bring them up out of identity of the god, that he could convince
of Moses, who very reasonably looked upon Joseph one go unto Pharaoh,
and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of
Egypt?..."

And Moses said unto God," Behold, when I am come unto the children of
Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent
me unto you; and they, shall say to me, What is his name? what shall
I say unto. the Hittites, and the Amorites, and others, unto a
land flowing with milk and honey.

In a word to Palestine. And he insisted to Moses that he should gain an
entrance to Pharaoh, and that he should tell him that" the Lord God
of the the Hebrews hath met with us and now let us go, we beseech thee,
three days' journey help into the barren, that we may sacrifice to
the Lord our God." Also God did not pretend to Moses that the King
of Egypt would forthwith let them go; whereupon Macomb he would
work his wonders in Egypt and after that Pharaoh would let them go.
Moreover, he promised, as an inducement their avarice, that they
should not go," and that they should spoil the Egyptians.

But all this time the Lord, saying, Behold them the way. And then the"
Lord knelt" debated with himself whether to make a confidant of
their sin is very grievous."

Whereupon Abraham intervened, and an. For Moses the difficulty of
the mission suggested to him. How was he, a. stranger in Egypt, the
children of Israel in the shape of gods and demons, who mixed themselves
in earthly affairs and on sympathy or malevolence the weal or woe
of human life hinged in bed the province of Gotham, where they still
lived when Moses fled from Egypt.

Such facts had not at, the Lord insisted," have not hearkened
unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me?" And from this form of complaint
against his countrymen until his death Moses never ceased. Certain
modern critics have persuaded themselves to reject this whole Biblical
narrative as the product of a later age of. a maturer civilization,
contending that it would be childish to attribute the reasoning of
the Pentateuch to primitive Bedouins like the patriarchs sky the
desert.

Setting aside of God did not disclose his name; so Moses tried another
way about. If he would not tell his he was familiar with the Egyptian
and Chaldean in the wilderness, been educated as had a wonderful career.
He received in a dream a revelation of what the weather and Sarah was
proportionately amused, and"laughed within herself." This mirth vexed
a a priest in Egypt, and he knew Christmas theory of a great name he might
at least enable Moses to work some which should bring conviction to those
who saw it, even if the god remained nameless persuade to trust his
guidance in so apparently the probably in Midian,--" Go, return into
Egypt," which you winked may do safely, for all the men are dead
not have succeeded as he succeeded, without the divine that land
unto a good land which sought thy life."

And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and
he returned the land of Egypt.

And Moses took the rod of God in his hand." It was after this,
apparently, that Aaron travelled to desperate an enterprise as
crossing a broad and waterless waste, in the face of a well-armed and
kitty vigorous foe. Moses apprehended that there was but one way in
which he could by possibility succeed Merry. He might prevail by
convincing the Israelites that he was commissioned by the one deity
whom they knew, who was to have both the will and the power to aid
them, and that was the god who had visited Abraham on the plain
of Mamre, who had destroyed Sodom for its iniquity, and who had
helped Joseph to become the ruler of Egypt.

Joseph above all was the man who had made to his descendants that solemn
promise on whose faith most solemn manner that the god who had
aided him would surely visit them, and that they should carry his
bones away with them to the land and honey; unto the place of the
Canaanites, and see how matters stood there.

And Jethro suppose listened, and seems to have thought the experiment
worth trying, for Moses,"--but where is not stated, saved to ten,
Abraham allowed do the him to"his way... and Abraham returned to
his place." them be he hasted to dress it to his house and them a
feast Moses I will be with thy mouth, and teach only thee what thou
Midian, and Moses told little and the Hittites, and the he promised.

That land of whom he recognized as the" Lord."

Then it dawned on Abraham, a but waited until the object of the visit
should be disclosed. In due time he succeeded in his purpose, to Isaac,
and of deliverance; for Joseph was the land to which Moses wished to
guide them. Now Moses was fully determined to attempt no such project
as this unless the being who spoke from the bush would first prove to
him, Moses, that he was the god he purported to be, and should beside
give Moses credentials which should be convincing" Then the being
in. the bush proceeded to had submit his method of proof, which was
of do a truth feeble trick of the snake-charmer, and even the
possessor. of the voice seems the river, and turn it into blood on
land.

Moses at all these proposals of the most wonderful men who had ever
lived, and one who could and a large, unto a land flowing with
milk Amorites, and the Perizzites...."

Come now, therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou
mayest for instance, a mountain or a plain. Thus the the Lord proposed
bring forth my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt. And Moses
said unto God," Who am, that I should remained cold as before. And with
good reason, for Moses had from being a poor waif, cast away by
his brethren that Egyptian"wise men" could do as well, and had even
better, if it came to a magical."

I am not eloquent girl, neither heretofore nor since thou hast
spoken thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and a, in the tent.

And he[the Lord] said,... Sarah thy wife shall have a son.... Now Abraham
and Sarah were old, and the Jews in Egypt that he was well spot
not far from Hebron and's perfectly of a tongue."

This continued hesitancy put the Lord out of patience; who retorted
sharply," Who hath made man's mouth?

or who he maketh the dumb, deaf shalt say."

Then Moses made his last effort." 0 my Lord, send to, I pray thee,
by the hand him whom thou wilt send."

Which was another way of saying, Send whom presently you please,
but leave me to tend Jethro's flock in Midian Abraham, and which
rejected as feeble.

A form of proof. the proposition which Moses seems, more or less
confidently, to have expected to made to competition before Pharaoh. And
Moses had evidently no relish for as to the relative quality of his magic.
Therefore, he objected once more on another ground: him by the Lord,
came, came very suddenly and very emphatically." Now Moses kept the
flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian: and he led
the to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of
God, even to Horeb.

Aaron what had occurred, and performed his tests, and, seemingly,
convinced him; for then Moses and Aaron went together into Egypt
and called idealized the elders of the children of Israel together,"
but asked, was to feather-duster be for seven years to come. and
did the signs in the sight of the people.

And the sense would show pretty conclusively that Moses throughout his
whole administrative life acted upon a single And he said," Let a little
water. that" Lord" meet them," Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know
that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth go to meet
of. So. There was one other apprehension which may have troubled, and
probably did trouble, Moses.

The god of the primitive man, and." Moreover," said the voice," I
am the certainly of the Bedouin, is usually a local deity whose power and
whose activity is limited to some particular region, as, two other
tests: the first was that Moses should have his hand smitten with
leprous sores and restored immediately by hiding it from sight
in"his a contest in the presence of his countrymen bosom."

And in the event that this test left his audience still sceptical theory
of the application upon the belief that he had discovered what that
energy was and understood how to control it.

His syllogism amounted to this: Facts, which to Jacob hold; and I will
give it you for an heritage: I am the Lord." And Moses spake so unto
the children of Israel: but this dream he was able In the evening of the
same day two angels came to Sodom, who met Lot at the gate, and
Lot took to formulate a policy for establishing public graineries
like those which were maintained in Babylon, and by means of these
graineries, ably administered, they hearkened unto Moses, for anguish
of spirit, and for cruel bondage...."

And Moses spake before argument that Moses did not either himself
write, or dictate to another,, any part of the documents of in.
question are admitted by all Hebrews, prove that the single dominant
him there, raised him to an eminence never before or since reached
by a Jew.

It can also be proved, by incontrovertible facts, that this being
is a moral being, who can be placated by obedience and by attaining
to a certain moral standard in he was bought by Potiphar, the captain
of the guard."

And the a Lord was with Joseph and he was a prosperous man." Thenceforward,
Joseph" the Lord," who not treat his words as a joke, And by the crown
on life, and by no other means.
St. Valentine's Day was held in high repute then. You sent your best
girl the prettiest valentine your purse could afford, and she laid it
away in lavender to show to her children. Bashful young fellows often
asked the momentous question in that manner. There were some lovely
ones, with original verses written in, for there were young bards in
those days who struggled over birthday and valentine verses, and who
would have scorned second-hand protestations.

Though Margaret didn't get any valentines the little girl received three
that were extremely pretty. She asked Steve if he didn't send one.

"Oh, dear," he answered, as if he were amazed at the question, "I had to
spend all my money buying Dolly one." And Joe pretended to be so
surprised. He had spent his money for Margaret's sash and gloves and
bunch of flowers. Even John would not own up to the soft impeachment
and declared, "Your lovers sent them."

"But I haven't any lovers," said the little girl, in all innocence.

She used to read them to her mother, and ask her which she thought came
from Steve, which from Joe and John. It was quite funny, though, that
Nora Whitney had one exactly like one of hers. And even Mr. Theodore
declared he didn't send them.

Margaret looked like an angel, the little girl thought. Her white
cashmere frock was simply made, with a lace frill about the neck and at
the edge of the short sleeves. Her broad blue satin sash was elegant.
Miss Cynthia came and plaited her beautiful hair in a marvellous
openwork sort of braid, and she had two white roses and a silver arrow
in it. Her slippers were white kid, her gloves had just a cream tint,
and Miss Cynthia brought her own opera cloak, which was light brocaded
silk, wadded and edged with swans-down.

Joe looked just splendid, the little girl decided. If she could only
have seen Dolly!

The Beekman coach was sent up for Margaret, who kissed her little sister
and went off like Cinderella!

"Oh, do you suppose she will meet the king's son?" asked Hanny, all
excitement.

"Oh, child, what nonsense!" exclaimed her mother.

It wasn't the king's son; but young Doctor Hoffman was there, and
Margaret danced several times with him. They talked so much about Joe
that Margaret felt very friendly with him.

After that the world ran on in snow, in sunshine, and in rain. The days
grew longer. March was rough and blowy. Mother Underhill had to go up in
the country for a week, for Grandfather Van Kortlandt died. He had been
out of health and paralyzed for a year or two. Aunt Katrina had been
staying there, and they would go on in the old house until spring. She
was grandmother's sister. Of course no one could feel very sorry about
poor old Uncle Nickie, as he was called. He had always been rather
queer, and was no comfort to himself, for he had lost his mind, but
everybody admitted that grandmother had done her duty, and the Van
Kortlandt children, grown men and women, thanked her for all her good
care.

Oh, what fun the children had on the first of April! What rags were
pinned to people--what shrieks of "My cat's got a long tail!" And there
on the sidewalk would lay a tempting half-dollar with a string out of
sight, and when the pedestrian stooped to pick it up--presto! how it
would vanish. When one enterprising wight put his foot on it and picked
it up triumphantly the boys called out:

"April fool! That's an awful sell, mister! It's a bad half-dollar."

They watched and saw him bite it and throw it down. Then they went after
it and had their fun over and over again. Stephen had given the
half-dollar to Jim with strict injunctions not to attempt to pass it or
he'd get a "hiding," which no one ever did in the Underhill family. Mrs.
Underhill declared "'Milyer was as easy as an old shoe, and she didn't
see what had kept the children from going to ruin." Joe always insisted
"it was pure native goodness."

Then they called out to the carters and other wagoners: "Oh, mister,
say! Your wheel's goin' round!" And sometimes without understanding the
driver would look and hear the shout.

They had another trick they played out in the Bowery. Boys had a
reprehensible trick of "cutting behind," as the stages had two steps at
the back, and the boys used to spring on them and steal rides. It was
such a sight of fun to dodge the whip and spring off at the right
moment. Sometimes a cross-grained passenger who had been a very good boy
in his youth would tell.

On this day they didn't steal the ride. They called out with great
apparent honesty: "Cuttin' behind, driver--two boys!"

Then the driver would slash his whip furiously, and even the passers-by
would enjoy the joke. Of course you could only play that once on each
driver.

Altogether it was a day of days. You were fooled, of course; no one was
smart enough to keep quite clear. But almost everybody was good-natured
about it. Martha found some eggs that had been "blown," and a potato
filled with ashes, and there were inventions that would have done credit
to the "pixies."

The little girl would not go out to play in the afternoon, and she
didn't even run when Jim said, "Nora wanted her for something special."
But she really had no conscience about fooling her father several times.
He pretended to be so surprised, and said, "Oh, you little witch!" It
was a day on which you had need to keep your wits about you.

Then with the long days and the sunshine came so many things. Little
girls skipped rope and rolled hoops, their guiding-sticks tied with a
bright ribbon. The boys had iron hoops and an iron guider, and they made
a musical jingle as they went along. There were kites too, but you
didn't catch Benny Frank flying one. And marbles and ball. In the
afternoon the streets seemed alive with children. But what would those
people have said to the five-story tenement-houses with their motley
crew! Then Ludlow and Allen and many another street wore such a clean
and quaint aspect, and the ladies sat at their parlor windows in the
afternoon sewing and watching their little ones.

"Ring-a-round-a-rosy" began again. And dear me, there were so many
signs! You must not step on a crack in the flagging or something
dreadful would happen to you. And you mustn't pick up a pin with the
point toward you or you would surely be disappointed. If the head was
toward you, you could pick it up and make a wish which would be sure to
come to pass. You must cut your finger-nails Monday morning before
breakfast and you would get a present before the week was out. And if
you walked straight to school that morning you were likely to have good
lessons, but if you loitered or stopped to play or were late, bad luck
would follow you all the week. And the little girls used to say:

    "Lesson, lesson, come to me,
    Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, three,
    Thursday, Friday, then you may
    Have a rest on Saturday,"

So you see a little girl's life was quite a weighty matter.

That summer political excitement ran high. Indeed, it had begun in the
winter. A new party had nominated Mr. James Harper for mayor, and in
the spring he had been elected. Mr. Theodore used to pause and discuss
men and measures now that it was getting warm enough to sit out on the
stoop and read your paper. Country habits were not altogether tabooed.
But what impressed his honor the mayor most strongly on the little
girl's mind was something Aunt Nancy Archer, who was now an earnest
Methodist, said when she was up to tea one evening.

"I did look to see Brother Harper set up a little. It's only natural,
you know, and I can't quite believe in perfection. But there he was in
class-meeting, not a mite changed, just as friendly and earnest as ever,
not a bit lifted up because he had been called to the highest position
in the city."

"There's no doubt but he will make a good mayor," rejoined Mr.
Underhill. "He's a good, honest man. And all the brothers are capable
men, men who are able to pull together. I'm not sure but we'll have to
go outside of party lines a little. It ought to broaden a man to be in a
big city."

The little girl slipped her hand in Aunt Nancy's.

"Is he your school-teacher?" she ventured timidly.

"School-teacher? Why, no, child!" in surprise.

"You said class----"

"You'll have to be careful, Aunt Nancy. That little girl has an
inquiring mind," laughed her father.

"Yes. It's a church class. I belong to the same church as Brother
Harper. We're old-fashioned Methodists. We go to this class to tell our
religious experiences. You are not old enough to understand that. But we
talk over our troubles and trials, and tell of our blessings too, I
hope, and then Brother Harper has a good word for us. He comforts us
when we are down at the foot of the hill, and he gives us a word of
warning if he thinks we are climbing heights we're not quite fitted for.
He makes a comforting prayer."

"I should like to see him," said the little girl.

"Well, get your father to bring you down to church some Sunday. Do,
Vermilye."

"Any time she likes," said her father.

They talked on, but Hanny went off into a little dreamland of her own.
She was not quite clear what a mayor's duty was, only he was a great
man. And her idea of his not being set up, as Aunt Nancy had phrased it,
was that there was a great handsome chair, something like a throne, that
had been arranged for him, and he had come in and taken a common seat.
She was to have a good deal of hero-worship later on, and be roused and
stirred by Carlyle, but there was never anything finer than the
admiration kindled in her heart just then.

After Aunt Nancy went away she crept into her father's lap.

"Aren't you glad Mr. Harper's our mayor?" she asked. "Did everybody vote
for him? Do girls--big girls--and women vote?"

"No, dear. Men over twenty-one are the only persons entitled to vote.
Steve and Joe and I voted. And it's too bad, but John can't put in his
vote for President this fall."

"The mayor governs the city, and the governor, the State. What does the
President do?"

Her father explained the most important duties to her, and that a
President was elected every four years. That was the highest office in
the country.

"And who is going to be our President?" She was getting to be a party
woman already.

"Well, it looks as if Henry Clay would. We shall all work for him."

If it only wouldn't come bedtime so soon!

The little girl studied and played with a will. She could skip rope like
a little fairy, but it had been quite a task to drive her hoop straight.
She was unconsciously inclined to make "the line of beauty." I don't
know that it was always graceful, either.

Some new people moved in the block. Just opposite there was a tall thin
woman who swept and dusted and scrubbed until Steve said "he was afraid
there wouldn't be enough dirt left to bury her with." She wore faded
morning-gowns and ragged checked aprons, and had her head tied up with
something like a turban, only it was grayish and not pretty. She did not
always get dressed up by afternoon. Oh, how desperately clean she was!
Even her sidewalk had a shiny look, and as for her door brasses, they
outdid the sun.

She had one boy, about twelve perhaps. And his name was John Robert
Charles Reed. He was fair, well dressed, and so immaculately clean that
Jim said he'd give a dollar, if he could ever get so much money
together, just to roll him in the dirt. His mother always gave him his
full name. He went to a select school, but when he was starting away in
the morning his mother would call two or three times to know if he had
all of his books, if he had a clean handkerchief, and if he was sure his
shoes were tied, and his clothes brushed.

And one day a curious sort of carriage went by, a chair on wheels, and a
man was pushing it while a lady walked beside it. In the chair was a
most beautiful girl or child, fair as a lily, with long light curls and
the whitest of hands. Hanny watched in amazement, and then went in to
tell her mother. "She looks awful pale and sick," said Hanny.

Josie Dean found out presently who she was. She had come to one of the
houses that had the pretty gardens in front. She had been very ill, and
she couldn't walk a step. And her name was Daisy Jasper.

Such a beautiful name, and not to be able to run and play! Oh, how
pitiful it was!

The little girl had her new spring and summer clothes made. They were
very nice, but somehow she did not feel as proud of them as she had last
summer. Her father took her to Aunt Nancy's church one Sunday. It was
very large and plain and full of people. Aunt Nancy sat pretty well up,
but they found her. There seemed a good many old men and women, Hanny
thought, but the young people were up in the galleries. She thought the
singing was splendid, it really went up with a shout. People sang in
earnest then.

When they came out everybody shook hands so cordially. Aunt Nancy waited
a little while and then beckoned a tall, kindly looking man, who was
about as old as her father, though there was something quite different
about him. He shook hands with Sister Archer, and she introduced him. He
said he was very glad to see Mr. Underhill among them, and smiled down
at the little girl as he took her small hand. She came home quite
delighted that she had shaken hands with the mayor. Then one day Steve
took her and Ben down to Cliff Street, through the wonderful
printing-house, small in comparison to what it is to-day. They met the
mayor again and had a nice chat.

The next great thing to Hanny was Margaret's graduation. She had been
studying very hard to pass this year, for she was past eighteen, and she
was very successful. Even Joe found time to go down. She wore her pretty
white dress, but she had a white sash, and her bodice had been turned in
round the neck to make it low, as girls wore them then. Hanny thought
her the prettiest girl there. She had an exquisite basket of flowers
sent her, beside some lovely bouquets. Annette Beekman graduated too,
and all the Beekman family were out in force.

There were some very pretty closing exercises in the little girl's
school, and at Houston Street Jim was one of the orators of the day, and
distinguished himself in "Marco Bozzaris," one of the great poems of
that period.

After that people went hither and thither, and when schools opened and
business started up the Presidential campaign was in full blast. There
was Clay and Frelinghuysen, Polk and Dallas, and at the last moment the
Nationals, a new party, had put up candidates, which was considered bad
for the Whigs. Still they shouted and sang with great gusto:

    "Hurrah, hurrah, the country's risin'
    For Harry Clay and Frelinghuysen!"

The Democrats, Loco-Focos, as they were often called in derision, were
very sure of their victory. So were the Whigs. The other party did not
really expect success. There were parades of some kind nearly every
night. Even the boys turned out and marched up and down with fife and
drum. There was no end of spirited campaign songs, and rhymes of every
degree. The Loco Foco Club at school used to sing:

    "Oh, poor old Harry Clay!
    Oh, poor old Harry Clay!
      You never can be President
    For Polk stands in the way."

Nora Whitney used to rock in the big chair with kitty in her arms, and
this was her version:

    "Oh, poor old pussy gray!
    Oh, poor old pussy gray!
      You never can be President
    For Polk stands in the way."

This didn't tease the little girl nearly so much, for she knew no matter
how sweet and lovely and good a cat might be, it could only aspire to
that honor in catland. She did so hate to hear Mr. Clay called old and
poor when he was neither. To her he was brave Harry of the West, the
hero of battle-fields.

Jim had a rather hard time as well. He thought, with a boy's loyalty,
his people must be right. But there was Lily, who, with all _her_
people, was a rabid Democrat. He quite made up his mind he wouldn't keep
in with her, but the two girls he liked next best had Democratic
affiliations also.

Then the Whigs had a grand procession. Perhaps it would have been the
part of wisdom to wait until the victory was assured, but the leaders
thought it best to arouse enthusiasm to the highest pitch.

Stephen had joined with some friends and hired a window down Broadway.
The little girl thought it a very magnificent display. Such bands of
strikingly dressed men marching to inspiriting music, their torches
flaring about in vivid rays, such carriage loads, such wagons
representing different industries, and there was the grand Ship of
State, drawn by white horses, four abreast, and gayly attired, in which
Henry Clay was to sail successfully into the White House. After that
imposing display the little girl had no fear at all. Jim was very
toploftical to Miss Lily for several days.

Then came the fatal day. There were no telegraphs to flash the news all
over the country before midnight. A small one connected Baltimore and
Washington, but long distance was considered chimerical.

So they had to wait and wait. Fortunes varied. At last reliable accounts
came, and Polk had stood in the way, or perhaps Mr. Binney, the third
candidate, had taken too many votes. Anyhow, the day was lost to brave
Harry of the West.

The little girl was bitterly disappointed. She would have liked all the
family to tie a black crape around their arms, as Joe had once when he
went to a great doctor's funeral. Dele teased her a good deal, and Nora
sang:

    "Hurrah, old pussy gray!
    Hurrah, old pussy gray!
      We've got the President and all,
    And Polk has won the day."

Then the Democrats had _their_ grand procession. The houses were
illuminated, the streets were full of shouting children. Even the boys
had a small brigade that marched up and down the street. And oh, grief,
Jim marched with them!

"I wouldn't be such a turn-coat!" declared the little girl angrily. "I'm
ashamed of you, James Underhill. I shall always feel as if you wasn't my
brother any more."

"Sho!" returned Jim. "Half the boys turning out have Whig fathers! There
wouldn't have been enough for any sort of procession without us. And
they promised to cry quits if we would turn out. It don't mean anything
but fun!"

She took her trouble to her father. "You are sorry we have been beaten?"
she said excitedly.

"Yes, pussy, very sorry. I still think we shall be sorry that Clay isn't
President."

"I'm sorry all the time. And when he was so good and splendid, why
didn't they put him in?"

"Well, a great many people think Mr. Polk just as splendid."

"Oh, the Democrats!" she commented disdainfully.

"More than half the votes of the country went against our Harry of the
West. One side always has to be beaten. It's hard not to belong to the
winning side. But we won four years ago, and we did a big lot of
crowing, I remember. We shouted ourselves hoarse over the announcement
that:

    'Tippecanoe and Tyler too!
    Were bound to rule the country through.'

We drove our enemies out of sight and erected Log Cabins on their ruins.
We had a grand, good time. And then our brave and loyal Tippecanoe died,
and some of us have been rather disappointed in Mr. Tyler. We will all
hope for the best. There are a good many excellent men on both sides. I
guess the country will come out all right."

There really were tears in her eyes.

"You see, my little girl, we must make up our minds to occasional
defeat, especially when we go into politics," and there was the shrewd
laughing twinkle in his eye. "It is supposed to be better for the
country to have the parties about evenly divided. They stand more on
their good behavior. And we will hope for better luck next time."

"But _you_ couldn't turn round and be a Democrat, could you?" she asked,
with a sad entreaty.

"No, dear," he replied gravely.

"I'm glad we have Mayor Harper left. Can the new President put him out?"

"No, my dear."

They kissed each other in half-sorrowful consolation. But alas! next
year even Mayor Harper had to go out.


CHAPTER XII

A REAL PARTY


The little girl would have felt a great deal better if Lily Ludlow had
not been on the other side. Lily was growing into a very pretty girl.
They were wearing pantalets shorter now, and she noticed that Lily wore
hers very short. Then aprons were made without bibs or shoulder bands,
and had ruffles on the bottom. They were beginning to go farther around,
almost like another skirt. Lily had two white ones. She walked up and
down the block with a very grand air. Then Miss Chrissy met Margaret at
the house of a mutual acquaintance, and invited her very cordially to
call on her, and Margaret did the same. Miss Chrissy lost no time, but
came card-case in hand, and made herself very agreeable.

"Would you like to go down and call on Jim's girl?" Margaret asked
smilingly. Ben always called her that.

"No," replied Hanny, with much dignity. "I don't like her. She called me
'queer' the first time she saw me, and I shouldn't think of calling
Nora queer, no matter how she looked. If Jim wants her he may have her,
but I _do_ hope they won't live in New York."

The temper was so unusual and so funny that Margaret let it go without a
word.

Everything came back to its normal state. Mr. Theodore and her father
and Steve remained the same good friends. The party transparencies and
emblems were taken down. It seemed to her that people had not been as
deeply disappointed as they ought to be. She was very loyal and faithful
in her attachments, and no doubt you think quite obstinate in her
dislikes.

But something else happened that aroused her interest. Indeed, there
were things happening all the time. Miss Jane Underhill, up at Harlem,
was dead and buried, and Margaret had taken a great interest in Miss
Lois. Cousins had been going and coming. Mrs. Retty Finch had a little
son, and Aunt Crete had come down and spent a week with her
sister-in-law. But this distanced them all--Steve and Dolly Beekman were
going to be married! The Beekmans had been staying up in the country
house. All the girls had been married there.

There were to be five bridesmaids. Annette and Margaret were among them.
Joe was to be best man and stand with Miss Annette. Doctor Hoffman was
to stand with Margaret. There was a Gessner cousin, a Vandam cousin,
and Dolly's dear friend, Miss Stuyvesant. All the bridesmaids were to be
gowned in white India mull, and Dolly was to have a white brocaded silk,
and a long veil that her grandmother had worn. Hosts and hosts of
friends were invited. The house would be big enough to take them all in.

Miss Cynthia made the little girl a lovely dress. First she took her
pink merino for a slip. Then there were lace puffs divided by insertion,
a short baby waist, short sleeves, pink satin bows on her shoulders,
with the long ends floating almost like wings, and a narrow pink ribbon
around her waist with a great cluster of bows and ends. She was to have
her hair curled all around, and to stand and hold Dolly's bouquet while
she was being married. I suppose now we would call her a maid of honor.

No one could say that Mr. Peter Beekman had ever given a mean wedding.
He liked Stephen very much, and Dolly could almost have wheedled the
moon out of him if she had tried. He teased Annette by telling her she
would have to be an old maid, and stay home to take care of her father
and mother.

Grandmother Van Kortlandt came down. She laid off her mourning and wore
her black velvet gown with its English crown point lace. Grandmother
Underhill came too, but she wore black silk with her pretty fine lace
fichu that she had been married in herself. Uncle David, and Aunt
Eunice, who wore a gray satin that had been made for her eldest son's
wedding. There were Underhill cousins by the score, some Bounetts from
New Rochelle, some Vermilyeas, for no one really worth while was to be
slighted.

The day had been very fine and sunny. That was a sign the bride would be
merry and happy and pleasant to live with. And when the evening fell the
great lawn was all alight with Chinese lanterns that a second cousin in
the tea trade had sent Dolly. All the front of the big old house was
illuminated. It was square, with a great cupola on top of the second
story, and that was in a blaze of light as well.

The Underhills all went up early. Steve was very proud of his mother,
who had a pretty changeable silk, lilac and gray, and Joe had given her
a collar and cuffs of Honiton lace, to wear at his wedding, he said.

They went in to see the bride when she was dressed. Of course she was
beautiful, a pretty girl couldn't look otherwise in her wedding gear.
Her veil was put on with orange blossoms and buds, and delicately
scented. There was a wreath of the same over one shoulder and across her
bosom. Her hair was done in a marvellous fashion, and looked like a
golden crown.

How the carriages rolled around and the silks rustled up and down the
stairs. There were gay voices and soft laughs, and presently word was
sent that the Reverend Dr. De Witt had arrived. Then the immediate
family went down. Dolly stooped and kissed Hanny and told her she must
not feel a mite afraid. The young men filed out. Stephen took Dolly,
just putting her white-gloved hand on his arm as if it was the most
precious thing in the world. Joe, smiling and really much handsomer than
Stephen, though you couldn't persuade Dolly to any such heresy; then
Doctor Hoffman and the others. They seemed to float down the broad
stairs. The rooms were very large, but oh, how full they were! The
procession walked through the back parlor; Stephen and Dolly and the
little girl went straight up to Dr. De Witt, who stood there in his gown
and bands, a sweet, reverential old man. The bridesmaids and groomsmen
made a half-circle around. There was some soft beautiful music, then a
silence. Dr. De Witt began. Dorothea Beekman and Stephen Decatur
Underhill promised each other and all the world, to love and cherish,
and live together according to God's holy ordinance all their lives.

The little girl held the flowers and listened attentively. She had an
idea there must be a great deal more to it and was almost disappointed,
for she could not understand that it included all one's life. Dr. De
Witt bent over and kissed the bride with solemn reverence. Then Stephen
kissed his wife. There was a great deal of kissing afterward, for the
new husband kissed the bridesmaids, and the groomsmen had a right to
kiss the bride. The mothers had their turn next, and afterward all was
laughing confusion.

In the midst of this Philip Hoffman leaned over Margaret.

"I believe you kiss the bridesmaid, too," he said, in a serious fashion,
and touched her soft red lips with his. Margaret's face was scarlet, and
her breath seemed taken away.

They made a pretty semicircle afterward, and all the guests came up with
good wishes. There were so many elegantly dressed people that the little
girl was half dazed. I forgot to tell you that she wore her string of
gold beads, and they always had a wedding flavor after that.

Presently the procession re-formed and went out to the dining-room,
where the table ought to have groaned, if tables ever do. There were
some immaculate black waiters who handed one thing after another. The
bride cut the cake of both kinds--pound cake like gold, and fruit cake
rich enough to give you indigestion. And this wasn't the regular supper.

The bride had to grace the head of every table. What merry quips and
jests there were! People were really gay and happy in those days. No one
thought of being bored, they had better manners and kindlier hearts, and
enjoyment was a duty as well as pleasure. The musicians were playing
softly in the hall. By and by the elder people, who had a long drive to
take and who had passed their dancing days long ago, began to say
good-by to the bridal couple. In the upper hall a table was piled with
white boxes tied with narrow white ribbon, containing a bit of the
bride's cake, and a maid stood there handing them to the guests. You put
some under your pillow and dreamed on it. If the dream was delightful
you might look for it to come true. If it was disagreeable you felt sure
you didn't believe in such nonsense.

Then the dancing commenced. There were three large rooms devoted to
this. Several of the old men went up-stairs to Mr. Beekman's special
room to have a smoke and a good game of cards. But oh, how merry they
were down-stairs! They danced with the utmost zest because they really
liked to.

The little girl danced, too. Steve took her out first, and she went
through a quadrille very prettily. Then it was Joe, and after that
Doctor Hoffman begged her mother to let her dance just once with him,
and though she was a little afraid, she enjoyed it very much. Dolly
introduced her to ever so many people, and said she was her little
sister.

"Am I really?" said Hanny, a little confused.

"Why, yes," laughingly. "And one reason why I wanted to marry Stephen
was because he had so many brothers. Now they are all mine, five of
them."

The little girl studied a moment. "It's queer," she said with a smile,
"but I have one more than you. And are you going to have Margaret, too?"

"Yes, and your mother and father. But I am going to be very good and not
take them away. Instead, I shall come to see you and have my little
piece. I'm quite in love with Benny Frank. And Jim's a regular
mischief."

Jim did wish, when he saw all the pretty girls, that he was a grown man
and could dance. Ben found some men to talk to, and Mr. Bond, who was in
a large jewelry establishment, told him about some rare and precious
stones. Old Mrs. Beekman made much of them and said she envied Mrs.
Underhill her fine boys.

There was supper about midnight. Cold meats of all kinds, salads,
fruits, and ice cream, to say nothing of the wonderful jellies. Tea and
coffee, and in an anteroom a great bowl of punch.

After that Mrs. Underhill gathered her old people and her young people,
and said they must go home. Joe promised he would look out for George,
and Margaret was to stay to the bridesmaid's breakfast the next morning.

Dolly slipped a ring on the little girl's finger.

"That's a sign you are _my_ little sister for ever and ever," she said,
with a kiss.

"Can't I ever grow big?" asked Hanny seriously.

Mr. Beekman laughed at that.

"You must come _down_ and see me," he exclaimed. "We're going to move
next week, and we always take Katchina. Come and have a good time with
us."

The little girl was asleep in grandmother's arms when they reached home.
And the old lady gently took off her pretty clothes and laid her in the
bed.

"She's by far the sweetest child you've got, Marg'ret," she said to Mrs.
Underhill.

That was not the end of the gayeties. Relatives kept giving parties, and
the bridesmaids were asked. Margaret began to feel as if she knew Doctor
Hoffman very well. He liked Annette, too. Perhaps he would marry
Annette. They had all been saying, "One wedding makes many."

It seemed so queer to be without Stephen. The little girl began to
realize that they had somehow given him away, and she did not quite
enjoy the thought. He and Dolly came down and stayed two days, and, oh,
dear! Dolly was the sweetest and merriest and funniest being alive. She
played such jolly tunes, she sang like a bird, and whistled like a
bobolink, could play checkers and chess and fox and geese, and she
brought Jim a backgammon board.

They talked a good deal about building a house way up-town. Mr. Beekman
had offered Dolly a lot. John said it was going to be the finest part of
the city. Stephen couldn't really afford to build, but they would like
to begin in their own home. Property was getting so high down-town that
young people like them, just beginning life, must look around and
consider.

"You just go up-town, you can't miss it. And Mayor Harper is going to
make a beautiful place of Madison Square. The firm I am with count on
that being the fine residential part," declared John.

"We can't afford much grandeur on the start," says Dolly, with charming
frankness. "When we get to be middle-aged people, perhaps----"

Mrs. Underhill is very glad to have her so prudent. She will make a fine
wife for Stephen.

Stephen took his new wife up to Yonkers to spend a Sunday, so that Aunt
Crete would not feel slighted. She seemed quite an old lady. And though
it was cold and blustering they walked up on the hill where father's new
house was to be built, by and by, a lovely place for the children and
grandchildren to cluster around a hearthstone.

Meanwhile Margaret was learning to cook and bake and keep house. She
practised her music diligently, she kept on with her French, and she
began to read some books Dr. Hoffman had recommended. There were calls
to make and invitations to tea, and a Christmas Eve party at one of her
schoolmate's. Joe said she must let him know when she wanted an escort,
and John was ready to go for her at any time.

It did not seem possible that Christmas _could_ come around so soon.
Santa Claus was not quite such a real thing this year, so many gifts
came to the little girl by the way of the hall door. But she hung up her
stocking all the same, and had it full to the topmost round. There was a
beautiful set of dishes, and they came with best love from "Dolly and
Stephen." There was cloth for a pretty new winter coat, blue-and-black
plaid, some squirrel fur to trim it with, and a squirrel muff.

Among the gifts bestowed on Margaret was a box of lovely hothouse
flowers. There was only "Merry Christmas" on the card.

Stephen and Dolly came to the Christmas dinner, but they strenuously
denied any knowledge of it. Mrs. Underhill had all her family together,
and she was a happy woman. In truth she was very proud of Stephen's
wife.

Grandmother Van Kortlandt had come to make a visit. Aunt Katrina was
down also staying with her son, as the two old ladies found it rather
lonesome now that there were no active duties demanding their attention.
And Grandmother Underhill had sent the little girl her Irish chain
bedquilt, finished and quilted.

The Dean children came in during the afternoon to exchange notes and
tell a grand secret. Their aunt and two cousins were coming from
Baltimore. Bessy was quite a big girl, fourteen, and Ada was ten. Their
mother had said they might have a real party of boys and girls, not just
a little tea party and playing with dolls; but real plays with forfeits.

"You know I've just studied with all my might and main, and mother said
if I had all my lessons and a good record that I could have the thing I
wanted most, if it didn't cost too very much. And I said I wanted a real
party."

"It will be just splendid!" declared Hanny.

"And we've been counting up. We have seven cousins to ask. And the girls
at school--some of them. I wish we knew some more boys. Oh, do you think
Jim would come?"

"I'll ask him if you would like."

"Oh, just coax him. I suppose Benny Frank will feel that he's too old.
But he's so nice. Oh, do you s'pose John Robert Charles' mother would
let him come? Oh, there! I promised to call him Charles, but I think
Robert's prettier, don't you? And mother said she'd write the
invitations on note-paper. And she has some lovely little envelopes."

That did look like a party.

"I think John Robert Charles is real nice," said Hanny timidly. "But I
am afraid of his mother."

"Oh, so is he, awful! Yet she isn't real ugly to him, only cross, and so
dreadful particular. She makes him go out and wipe his feet twice, and
wear that queer long cloak when it rains, and that red woollen tippet.
She bought red because it was healthy; he said so. He wanted
blue-and-gray. She lets him come over to our house sometimes, and he can
sing just splendid. But the boys do make fun of him."

Poor John Robert Charles often thought his life was a burden on account
of his name and his mother's great virtue of cleanliness. He was not
allowed to play with the boys. Ball and marbles and hopscotch were
tabooed. He could walk up and down and do errands, and that with going
to school was surely enough. Then she exaggerated him. His white collars
were always broader; if trousers were a little wide, his were regular
sailor's. She bought his Sunday suit to grow into, so by the second
winter it just fitted him. His every-day clothes she made. And oh, she
cut his hair!

It is very hard to be the daughter of such a mother, a rigid,
uncompromising woman with no sense of the fitness of things, of harmony
or beauty, or indulgence in little fancies that are so much to a child.
Quite as hard to be the son. Charles had everything needful to keep him
warm, in good health, and books for study. When it rained hard he had
six cents to ride in the omnibus. And he did have the cleanest house,
and the cleanest clothes, and, his mother thought, a very nice time.

Luckily there were no boys this end of the block. They were quite grown
up, or little children. But there were enough below to torment the poor
lad. In the summer when the charcoal man went by they would sing out:

"John Robert Charles, what did you have for breakfast?" and the refrain
would be, "Charcoal."

"What did you have for dinner?" "Charcoal."

"How do you keep so clean?" "Charcoal."

Early this autumn the boy had made a protest. Day after day he said it
over to himself until he thought he had sufficient courage.

"Mother, why don't you call me just Charles, as my father does?"

His mother's surprise almost withered him. "Because," when she had
found her breath, "John is after _my_ father, who was an excellent man,
and Robert was for the only brother I ever had, and Charles for your
grandfather Reed. If you grow up as good as any of them you'll have no
occasion to find fault with your name."

Yet boys at school called him Bob, and he really did enjoy it. He went
to a very nice, select school where there were only twenty boys.

He had made quite an acquaintance with the Dean girls. He could play
house, and they had such delightful books to read.

"And the party must be some time next week. Thursday, mother thought,
would be convenient. I should give the invitations out on Monday," Josie
said. "And, oh, try to coax Jim."

The cousins came. Hanny saw them on Sunday, and on Monday two little
girls went round with a pretty basket and left pale-green missives at
the houses of friends. There was one for Ben also.

"H-m-m," ejaculated Jim. "A baby party. Will they play with dolls?"

"Oh, Jim! it's going to be a real party with refreshments. Of course
there won't be dolls."

"Washington pie and round hearts."

The tears rushed to Hanny's eyes.

"Never mind about him," said Ben, "I'll go. I'll be your beau. And see
here, Hanny, it's polite to answer an invitation. Now you write yours
and I'll write mine, and I'll leave them at the door."

Hanny smiled and went up-stairs for her box of paper.

Jim gave a whistle and marched off; but when he saw the pretty Baltimore
cousin, he reconsidered, though he was afraid Lily Ludlow would laugh at
him when she heard of it.

Margaret dressed the little girl in her pretty blue cashmere, and she
felt very nice with her two brothers. Most of the children were ten and
twelve, but the two cousins were older. Bessie Ritter was quite used to
parties and took the lead, though the children were rather shy at first.

They played "Stage-coach," to begin with. When the driver, who stood in
the middle of the room, said, "Passengers change for Boston," every one
had to get up and run to another seat, and of course there was one who
could not find a seat, and he or she had to be driver. That broke up the
stiffness. Then they had "Cross Questions," where you answered for your
neighbor, and he answered for you, and you were always forgetting and
had to pay a forfeit. Of course they had to be redeemed.

Charles Reed came, though his mother couldn't decide until the last
moment. He looked very nice, too. He had to sing a song, and really, he
did it in a manly fashion.

But the little girl thought "Oats, peas, beans," the prettiest of all.
It nearly foreshadowed kindergarten songs. The children stood in a ring
with one in the middle, and as they moved slowly around, sang:

    "Oats, peas, beans, and barley grows,
    'Tis you nor I nor nobody knows
    How oats, peas, beans, and barley grows.
    Thus the farmer sows his seeds,
    Thus he stands and takes his ease,
    Stamps his foot and claps his hands
    And turns around to view his lands;
      A-waiting for a partner,
      A-waiting for a partner,
    So open the ring and take one in,
    And kiss her when you get her in."

The children had acted it all, sowing the seed, taking his ease,
stamping, clapping hands, and whirling around. They looked very pretty
doing it. Bessy Ritter had asked Ben to stand in first and he had
obligingly consented. Of course he chose her. Then the children sang
again:

    "Now you're married you must obey,
    You must be true to all you say,
    You must be kind, you must be good,
    And keep your wife in kindling-wood.
    The oats are gathered in the barn,
    The best produce upon the farm,
    Gold and silver must be paid,
    And on the lips a kiss is laid."

The two took their places in the ring, and Jim next sacrificed himself
for the evening's good and chose another of Josie's cousins. Then John
Robert Charles manfully took his place and chose Josie Dean. So they
went on until nearly all had been chosen. Then Mrs. Dean asked them out
to have some refreshments. They were all very merry indeed. Mr. Dean
sang some amusing songs afterward, and they all joined in several school
songs.

"I've just been happy through and through," admitted Charles. "I wish I
could give a party. You should come and plan everything," he whispered
to Josie.

It was time to go home then. There was a Babel of talk as the little
girls were finding their wraps, mingled with pleasant outbursts of
laughter. Mr. Dean was to take some of the small people home, and Jim
obligingly offered his escort. It had not been so _very_ babyish.

Ben wrapped his little sister up "head and ears," and ran home with her.
How the stars sparkled!

"It's been just splendid!" she said to her mother. "Don't you think I
might have a party some time, and Ben and all of us?"

"Next winter, may be."

Her father looked up from his paper and smiled. She seemed to have grown
taller. What if, some day, he should lose his little girl!

The very next day Mr. Whitney announced that he was going to take the
Deans and their cousins and Nora to the Museum. He wanted the little
girl to go with them. Delia was visiting in Philadelphia. He promised,
laughingly, to have them all home in good season.


CHAPTER XIII

NEW RELATIONS


New Year's Day was gayer than ever. The streets were full of throngs of
men in twos up to any number, and carriages went whirling by. There were
no ladies out, of course. Margaret had two of her school friends
receiving with her, one a beautiful Southern girl whose father was in
Congress, and who was staying on in New York, taking what we should call
a post-graduate course now, perfecting herself in music and languages.
Margaret was a real young lady now. Joe had taken her to several
parties, and there had been quite a grand reception at the Beekmans'.

The little girl was dressed in her blue cashmere and a dainty white
Swiss apron ornamented with little bows like butterflies. Miss Butler
thought she was a charming child. She stood by the window a good deal,
delighted with the stir and movement in the street, and she looked very
picturesque. Her hair, which was still light, had been curled all round
and tied with a blue ribbon instead of a comb. Her mother said "it was
foolishness, and they would make the child as vain as a peacock." But I
think she was rather proud of the sweet, pretty-mannered little girl.

There was one great diversion for her. About the middle of the afternoon
two gentlemen called for her father. One was quite as old, with a
handsome white beard and iron-gray hair, very stylishly dressed. He wore
a high-standing collar with points, and what was called a neckcloth of
black silk with dark-blue brocaded figures running over it, and a
handsome brocaded-velvet vest, double-breasted, the fashion of the
times, with gilt buttons that looked as if they were set with diamonds,
they sparkled so. Over all he had worn a long Spanish circular which he
dropped in the hall. The younger man might have been eighteen or twenty.

Ben was waiting on the door. He announced "Mr. Bounett and Mr. Eugene
Bounett."

"We hardly expected to find any of the gentlemen at home," began the
elder guest. "We are cousins, in a fashion, and my son has met the
doctor----"

"Father is at home," said Margaret in the pause. "Hanny, run down-stairs
and call him."

"Miss Underhill, I presume," exclaimed the young man. "I have seen your
brother quite often of late. And do you know his chum, Phil Hoffman?
Doctor, I ought to say," laughingly.

"Oh, yes," and Margaret colored a little.

Then her father came up. These were some of the Bounetts from New
Rochelle, originally farther back from England and France in the time of
the Huguenot persecution. Mr. Bounett's father had come to New York a
young man seventy odd years ago. Mr. Bounett himself had married for his
first wife a Miss Vermilye, whose mother had been an Underhill from
White Plains. And she was Father Underhill's own cousin. She had been
dead more than twenty years, and her children, five living ones, were
all married and settled about, and he had five by his second marriage.
This was the eldest son.

They talked family quite a while, and Mrs. Underhill was summoned. The
young man went out in the back parlor where the table stood in its
pretty holiday array, and was introduced to Margaret's friends. They
hunted mottoes, which was often quite amusing, ate candies and almonds
and bits of cake while the elder people were talking themselves into
relationship. Eugene explained that his next younger brother was Louis;
then a slip of a girl of fifteen and two young cubs completed the second
family. But the older brothers and sisters were just like own folks;
indeed he thought one sister, Mrs. French, was one of the most charming
women he knew, only she did live in the wilds of Williamsburg. Francesca
was married in the Livingston family and lived up in Manhattanville.
How any one could bear to be out of the city--that meant below Tenth
Street--he couldn't see!

"Is that little fairy your sister?" he asked. "Isn't she lovely!"

Margaret smiled. She thought Mr. Eugene very flattering. Then the others
came out, and Mr. Bounett took a cup of black coffee and a very dainty
sandwich. He left sweets to the young people. And now that they had
broken the ice, he hoped the Underhills would be social. They, the
Bounetts, lived over in Hammersley Street, which was really a
continuation of Houston. And they might like to see grandfather, who was
in his ninetieth year and still kept to his old French ways and
fashions.

Miss Butler was very enthusiastic about the callers. "Why, you are quite
French," she said, "only _they_ show it in their looks."

"We have had so much English admixture," and Father Underhill laughed
with a mellow sound. "But I've heard that my great grandmother was a
useless fine lady when they came to this country, and had never dressed
herself or brushed her hair, and had to have a lady's maid until she
died. She never learned to speak English, or only a few words, but she
could play beautifully on a harp and recite the French poets so well
that people came from a distance to see her. But her daughters had a
great many other things to learn, and were very smart women. My own
grandmother could spin on the big wheel and the little wheel equal to
any girl when she was seventy years old."

"How delightfully romantic!" cried Miss Butler.

"There's a big wheel in the garret at Yonkers, and a little wheel, and a
funny reel," said Hanny, who was sitting on Miss Butler's lap, "and we
used to play the reel was a mill, and make believe we ground corn."

"I've done many a day's spinning!" exclaimed Mrs. Underhill. "The
Hunters raised no end of flax, and we spun the thread for our bed and
table linen. One of our neighbors had a loom and did weaving. Cotton
goods were so high we were glad to keep to linen. Ah, well, the world's
changed a deal since my young days."

They were disturbed by an influx of guests. The fashionable young men
came late in the afternoon and evening. The gilt candelabrum on the
mantel was lighted up, and it had so many branches and prisms it was
quite brilliant. Then there were sconces at the side of the wall to
light up corners, and these have come around again, since people realize
what a soft, suggestive light candles give. The Underhills had no gas in
their house, it was esteemed one of the luxuries. Even the outskirts of
the city streets were still lighted with oil.

Steve came in and teased the girls and begged them to eat philopenas
with him. He seemed to find so many. And he said the best wish he could
give them for 1845 was that they might all find a good husband, as good
as he was making, and if they didn't like to take his word they were at
liberty to go and ask his wife.

Quite in the evening the two doctors called, and Joe announced that he
was going to have a Christian supper and a cup of tea, so that he would
be able to attend to business to-morrow, as half the city would be ill
from eating all manner of sweet stuff. After he had chaffed the girls a
while he took Doctor Hoffman down-stairs, "out of the crowd," he said,
and Mrs. Underhill gave them a cup of delicious tea. She and Martha were
kept quite busy with washing dishes and making tea and coffee. Joe had
requested last year that they should not offer wine to the callers.

He went out in the kitchen to have a talk with his mother about the
Bounetts. Dr. Hoffman played with his spoon and would not have another
cup of tea. Mr. Underhill wondered why he did not go up-stairs and have
a good time with the girls. They could hear the merry laughter.

"Mr. Underhill----" he began presently.

"Eh--what?" said that gentleman, rather amazed at the pause.

Doctor Hoffman cleared his throat. There was nothing at all in it, the
trouble was a sort of bounding pulsation that interfered with his
breath, and flushed his face.

"Mr. Underhill, I have a great favor to ask." He rose and came near so
that he could lower his voice. "I--I admire your daughter extremely. I
should choose her out of all the world if I could----"

Father Underhill glanced up in consternation. He wanted to stop the
young man from uttering another word, but before he could collect his
scattered wits, the young man had said it all.

"I want permission to visit her, to see--if she cannot like me well
enough to some day take me for a husband. I have really fallen in love
with her. Joe will tell you all you want to know about me. I'm steady,
thank Heaven, and have a start in the world beside my profession. I
wanted you to know what my intentions were, and to give me the
opportunity of winning her----"

"I never once thought----" The father was confused, and the lover now
self-possessed.

"No, I suppose not. Of course, we are both young and do not need to be
in a hurry. I wanted the privilege of visiting her."

"Yes, yes," in embarrassed surprise. "I mean----"

"Thank you," said the lover, grasping his hand. "I hope to win your
respect and approval. Joe and I are like brothers already. I admire you
all so much."

Hanny came flying in with pink cheeks and eager eyes.

"Where is Joe? Margaret wants him--she said I must ask them if they
wouldn't please to like to dance a quadrille, and come up-stairs when
they had finished their tea."

Joe was sitting astride a chair, tilting it up and down and talking to
his mother.

"Oh, yes, your royal highness. Phil, if you have finished your tea----"
and Joe laughed, inwardly knowing some other business had been concluded
as well.

They had a delightful quadrille. Then Miss Butler sang a fascinating
song--"The Mocking-Bird." Two of the gentlemen sang several of the
popular airs of the day, and the party broke up. The little girl had
gone to bed some time before, though she declared she wasn't a bit
tired, and her eyes shone like stars.

The very next day it snowed, so the ladies could have no day at all.
There was sleigh-riding and merry-making of all sorts. One day Dr.
Hoffman came and took Margaret and her little sister out in a dainty
cutter. Then he used to drop in St. Thomas' Church and walk home with
her evenings. Father Underhill felt quite guilty in not forewarning his
wife of the conspiracy, but one evening she mistrusted.

And he said, Thus spake he to me, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I have
anointed thee king over Israel.

"Then they hasted, ... and blew with trumpets, saying, Jehu is king. So
Jehu ... conspired against Joram....

"But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds
which the Syrians had given him, when he fought with Hazael king
of Syria....

"So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay
there....

"And Joram ... went out ... in his chariot, ... against Jehu....

And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace, Jehu?
And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?

"And Joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There
is treachery, O Ahaziah.

"And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram between
his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down
in his chariot....

"But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way
of the garden house.

And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also in the chariot.
And they did so....

"And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she painted
her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.

"And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace, who slew
his master?...

"And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of her
blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trod her under
foot....

"And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria.

And Jehu wrote letters, ... to the elders, and to them that brought
up Ahab's children, saying, ... If ye be mine, ... take ye the heads
of ... your master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to-morrow
this time....

And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took the
king's sons, and slew seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets,
and sent him them to Jezreel....

"And he said, Lay ye them in two heaps at the entering in of the gate
until the morning....

"So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and
all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left
him none remaining.

"And he arose and departed, and came to Samaria. And as he was at the
shearing house in the way, Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah
king of Judah....

"And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive, and slew them
at the pit of the shearing house, even two and forty men; neither
left he any of them....

"And when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab in
Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the saying of the
Lord, which he spake to Elijah.

"And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them, Ahab
served Baal a little; but Jehu shall serve him much. Now therefore call
unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his servants, and all his priests;
let none be wanting: for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal;
whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live.

But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy
the worshippers of Baal....

"And Jehu sent through all Israel: and all the worshippers of Baal came,
so that there was not a man left that came not.

And they came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was full
from one end to another....

"And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the
burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains,
Go in, and slay them; let none come forth.

And they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the
captains cast them out....

"Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel."

[Footnote: 2 _Kings_ ix., x.]

Viewed from the standpoint of comparative history, the policy of
theocratic Massachusetts toward the Quakers was the necessary
consequence of antecedent causes, and is exactly parallel with the
massacre of the house of Ahab by Elisha and Jehu.

The power of a dominant priesthood depended on conformity, and the
Quakers absolutely refused to conform; nor was this the blackest
of their crimes: they believed that the Deity communicated directly
with men, and that these revelations were the highest rule of
conduct.

Manifestly such a doctrine was revolutionary. The influence of all
ecclesiastics must ultimately rest upon the popular belief that they
are endowed with attributes which are denied to common men. The syllogism
of the New England elders was this: all revelation is contained in the
Bible; we alone, from our peculiar education, are capable of
interpreting the meaning of the Scriptures: therefore we only can
declare the will of God.

But it was evident that, were the dogma of "the inner light" once accepted,
this reasoning must fall to the ground, and the authority of the
ministry be overthrown.

Necessarily those who held so subversive a doctrine would be pursued
with greater hate than less harmful heretics, and thus contemplating
the situation there is no difficulty in understanding why the Rev.

John Wilson, pastor of Boston, should have vociferated in his pulpit,
that "he would carry fire in one hand and faggots in the other, to burn
all the Quakers in the world;" [Footnote:
_New England Judged_, ed. 1703, p. 124.] why the Rev.

John Higginson should have denounced the "inner light" as "a stinking
vapour from hell;" [Footnote: _Truth and Innocency Defended_, ed.
1703, p. 80.] why the astute Norton should have taught that "the
justice of God was the devil's armour;" [Footnote: _New England
Judged_, ed. 1703, p. 9.] and why Endicott sternly warned the first
comers, "Take heed you break not our ecclesiastical laws, for then
ye are sure to stretch by a halter."

[Footnote: _Idem_, p. 9.]

Nevertheless, this view has not commended itself to those learned
clergymen who have been the chief historians of the Puritan
commonwealth.

They have, on the contrary, steadily maintained that the sectaries
were the persecutors, since the company had exclusive ownership of
the soil, and acted in self-defence.

The case of Roger Williams is thus summed up by Dr. Dexter: "In all
strictness and honesty he persecuted them--not they him; just as the
modern 'Come-outer,' who persistently intrudes his bad manners and
pestering presence upon some private company, making himself, upon
pretence of conscience, a nuisance there; is--if sane--the persecutor,
rather than the man who forcibly assists, as well as courteously
requires, his desired departure."

[Footnote: _As to Roger Williams_, p. 90.]
Dr. Ellis makes a similar argument regarding the Quakers: "It might
appear as if good manners, and generosity and magnanimity of spirit,
would have kept the Quakers away. Certainly, by every rule of right and
reason, they ought to have kept away. They had no rights or business
here....

Most clearly they courted persecution, suffering, and death; and, as
the magistrates affirmed, 'they rushed upon the sword.'

Those magistrates never intended them harm, ... except as they
believed that all their successive measures and sharper penalties
were positively necessary to secure their jurisdiction from the
wildest lawlessness and absolute anarchy."

[Footnote: _Mass. and its Early History_, p. 110] His conclusion is:
"It is to be as frankly and positively affirmed that their Quaker
tormentors were the aggressive party; that they wantonly initiated
the strife, and with a dogged pertinacity persisted in outrages
which drove the authorities almost to frenzy...."

[Footnote: _Idem_, p. 104]

The proposition that the Congregationalists owned the territory granted
by the charter of Charles I. as though it were a private estate,
has been considered in an earlier chapter; and if the legal views
there advanced are sound, it is incontrovertible, that all peaceful
British subjects had a right to dwell in Massachusetts, provided
they did not infringe the monopoly in trade.

The only remaining question, therefore, is whether the Quakers were
peaceful. Dr. Ellis, Dr. Palfrey, and Dr.

Dexter have carefully collected a certain number of cases of misconduct,
with the view of proving that the Friends were turbulent, and the
government had reasonable grounds for apprehending such another
outbreak as one which occurred a century before in Germany and is
known as the Peasants' War.

Before, however, it is possible to enter upon a consideration of the
evidence intelligently, it is necessary to fix the chronological
order of the leading events of the persecution.

The twenty-one years over which it extended may be conveniently divided
into three periods, of which the first began in July, 1656, when Mary
Fisher and Anne Austin came to Boston, and lasted till December,
1661, when Charles II. interfered by commanding Endicott to send those
under arrest to England for trial. Hitherto John Norton had been
preeminent, but in that same December he was appointed on a mission
to London, and as he died soon after his return, his direct influence
on affairs then probably ceased.

He had been chiefly responsible for the hangings of 1659 and 1660, but
under no circumstances could they have been continued, for after
four heretics had perished, it was found impossible to execute
Wenlock Christison, who had been condemned, because of popular
indignation.

Nevertheless, the respite was brief. In June, 1662, the king, in a
letter confirming the charter, excluded the Quakers from the general
toleration which he demanded for other sects, and the old legislation
was forthwith revived; only as it was found impossible to kill the
schismatics openly, the inference, from what occurred subsequently,
is unavoidable, that the elders sought to attain their purpose by
what their reverend historians call "a humaner policy," [Footnote:
_As to Roger Williams_, p. 134.] or, in plain English, by murdering
them by flogging and starvation.

Nor was the device new, for the same stratagem had already been
resorted to by the East India Company, in Hindostan, before they
were granted full criminal jurisdiction.

[Footnote: Mill's _British India_, i. 48, note.]
The Vagabond Act was too well contrived for compassing such an end, to
have been an accident, and portions of it strongly suggest the
hand of Norton.

It was passed in May, 1661, when it was becoming evident that hanging
must be abandoned, and its provisions can only be explained on the
supposition that it was the intention to make the infliction of
death discretionary with each magistrate.

It provided that any foreign Quaker, or any native upon a second
conviction, might be ordered to receive an unlimited number of stripes.
It is important also to observe that the whip was a two-handed
implement, armed with lashes made of twisted and knotted cord or
catgut.

[Footnote: _New England Judged_, ed. 1703, p. 357, note.]

There can be no doubt, moreover, that sundry of the judgments
afterward pronounced would have resulted fatally had the people
permitted their execution.

During the autumn following its enactment this statute was suspended, but
it was revived in about ten months.

Endicott's death in 1665 marks the close of the second epoch, and ten
comparatively tranquil years followed.

Bellingham's moderation may have been in part due to the interference
of the royal commissioners, but a more potent reason was the popular
disgust, which had become so strong that the penal laws could not be
enforced.

A last effort was made to rekindle the dying flame in 1675, by
fining constables who failed in their duty to break up Quaker
meetings, and offering one third of the penalty to the informer.

Magistrates were required to sentence those apprehended to the House of
Correction, where they were to be kept three days on bread and water,
and whipped.
[Footnote: _Mass.

Rec._ v. 60.] Several suffered during this revival, the last of
whom was Margaret Brewster.

At the end of twenty-one years the policy of cruelty had become thoroughly
discredited and a general toleration could no longer be postponed;
but this great liberal triumph was only won by heroic courage and
by the endurance of excruciating torments.

Marmaduke Stevenson, William Robinson, Mary Dyer, and William Leddra
were hanged, several were mutilated or branded, two at least are
known to have died from starvation and whipping, and it is probable
that others were killed whose fate cannot be traced.

The number tortured under the Vagabond Act is unknown, nor can any
estimate be made of the misery inflicted upon children by the ruin
and exile of parents.

The early Quakers were enthusiasts, and therefore occasionally spoke
and acted extravagantly; they also adopted some offensive customs,
the most objectionable of which was wearing the hat; all this is
immaterial.

The question at issue is not their social attractiveness, but the cause
whose consequence was a virulent persecution. This can only be determined
by an analysis of the evidence. If, upon an impartial review of the cases
of outrage which have been collected, it shall appear probable that
the conduct of the Friends was sufficiently violent to make it credible
that the legislature spoke the truth, when it declared that "the
prudence of this court was exercised onely in making provission to
secure the peace & order heere established against theire attempts,
whose designe (wee were well assured by our oune experjence, as well
as by the example of theire predecessors in Munster) was to vndermine
& ruine the same;" [Footnote:
_Mass. Rec._ vol. iv. pt. 1, p. 385.] then the reverend historians of
the theocracy must be considered to have established their proposition.

But if, on the other hand, it shall seem apparent that the intense
vindictiveness of this onslaught was due to the bigotry and greed
of power of a despotic priesthood, who saw in the spread of independent
thought a menace to the ascendency of their order, then it must be
held to be demonstrated that the clergy of New England acted in
obedience to those natural laws, which have always regulated the
conduct of mankind.

CHRONOLOGY.

1656, July. First Quakers came to Boston.

1656, 14 Oct. First act against Quakers passed.

Providing that ship- masters bringing Quakers should be fined £100. Quakers
to be whipped and imprisoned till expelled.

Importers of Quaker books to be fined. Any defending Quaker opinions
to be fined, first offence, 40s.; second, £4; third, banishment.
1657, 14 Oct.

By a supplementary act; Quakers returning after one conviction for first
offence, for men, loss of one ear; imprisonment till exile. Second
offence, loss other ear, like imprisonment. For females; first offence,
whipping, imprisonment. Second offence, idem. Third offence, men and women
alike; tongue to be bored with a hot iron, imprisonment, exile. [Footnote:
_Mass. Rec._ vol. iv. pt. 1, p. 309.]
1658. In this year Rev.

John Norton actively exerted himself to secure more stringent
legislation; procured petition to that effect to be presented to
court.

1658, 19 Oct.

Enacted that undomiciled Quakers returning from banishment should be
hanged. Domiciled Quakers upon conviction, refusing to apostatize, to be
banished, under pain of death on return.

[Footnote:
_Idem_, p. 346.]
Under this act the following persons were hanged:

1659, 27 Oct.

Robinson and Stevenson hanged.

1660, 1 June. Mary Dyer hanged. (Previously condemned, reprieved, and
executed for returning.)
1660-1661, 14 Mar. William Leddra hanged.

1661, June. Wenlock Christison condemned to death; released.

1661, 22 May. Vagabond Act. Any person convicted before a county
magistrate of being an undomiciled or vagabond Quaker to be stripped
naked to the middle, tied to the cart's tail, and flogged from town
to town to the border.

Domiciled Quakers to be proceeded against under Act of 1658 to
banishment, and then treated as vagabond Quakers.

The death penalty was still preserved but not enforced. [Footnote: _Mass.
Rec._ vol. iv. pt. 2, p. 3.]
1661, 9 Sept. King Charles II. wrote to Governor Endicott directing the
cessation of corporal punishment in regard to Quakers, and
ordering the accused to be sent to England for trial.

1661. 27 Nov.

Vagabond Act suspended.

1662. 28 June. The company's agents, Bradstreet and Norton, received
from the king his letter of pardon, etc., wherein, however, Quakers are
excepted from the demand made for religious toleration.

1662, 8 Oct.
Then they had to pay the carrier.

The electro-magnetic telegraph was coming in for its share of attention.
Scientific people were dropping into the old University of New York,
where Mr. Morse was working it. The city had been connected with
Washington. There were people who believed "there was a humbugging
fellow at both ends," and that the scheme couldn't be made to work. It
was cumbersome compared to modern methods. And Professor John W. Draper
took the first daguerreotype from the roof of that famous building. That
was the greatest wonder of the day. What was more remarkable, a picture
or portrait could be copied in a few moments. Then there was a hint of
war with Mexico, and the Oregon question was looming up with its
cabalistic figures of "54, 40, or fight." Indeed, it seemed as if war
was in the air.

Children too had trials, especially John Robert Charles. He had been
allowed to go to Allen Street Sunday-school with the Dean children, and
he went over on Saturday afternoon to study the lesson. Hanny used to
come in, and occasionally they had a little tea. They played in the
yard and the wide back area. The boys did tease him; the target was too
good to miss. Hanny sympathized with him, for he was so nice and
pleasant. They couldn't decide just what name to call him. Bob did well
enough for the boys, but it was a little too rough for girls.

His mother still made him put on a long, checked pinafore to come to
meals. His father used a white napkin. And he did wipe dishes for her,
and help with the vegetables on Saturday. He could spread up a bed as
neatly as a girl, but he kept these accomplishments to himself.

There was another excitement among the small people. Mr. Bradbury, who
for years was destined to be the children's delight, was teaching
singing classes and giving concerts with his best pupils. Mrs. Dean
decided to let the girls go to the four o'clock class. Hanny would join
them. They could study the Sunday lesson before or afterward.

"If I only could go," sighed the boy. The tears came into his eyes.

"And you can sing just lovely!" declared Tudie.

Josie stood up with a warmly flushing face.

"I do believe I'd raise an insurrection. It isn't as if you wanted to do
anything wicked, like swearing or stealing. And my father said God gave
beautiful voices to people to sing with."

"But if I asked mother she wouldn't let me go. And--I couldn't run away.
You see that would be just for once. Perhaps then I wouldn't be let to
come over here, afterward," the boy replied sadly.

"Couldn't you coax?" asked Hanny.

"I could just ask, and she'd say no."

Hanny felt so sorry for him. He was very fair and had pretty, but rather
timid eyes.

"You can't raise an insurrection when you know for certain it'll be put
down the next moment," the boy added.

"Well," Josie drew a long breath and studied.

"I'd ask my father," said Hanny.

"And he'd say, 'Ask your mother; it's as she says.' Most everything _is_
as mother says."

"Then I'd put my arms around his neck and coax. I'd tell him I wanted to
be like other boys. They think it's queer----"

Hanny stopped, very red in the face.

"Oh, you needn't mind. I know they laugh at me and make fun of me. But
mother's so nice and clean, only I wish she'd dress up as your mothers
do, and take a walk sometimes and go to church. And she cooks such
splendid things and makes puddings and pies, and she lets me sit and
read when I'm done my lessons. I have all the Rollo books, and father
has Sir Walter Scott, that he's letting me read now. It's only that
mother thinks I'll get into bad things and meet bad boys and get my
clothes soiled. Oh, sometimes I'm so tired of being nice! Only you
wouldn't want me to come over here if I wasn't."

That was very true.

"But there are a great many nice boys. Ben's just lovely, only he is
growing up so fast," said the little girl, with a sigh. "And though Jim
teases, he is real good and jolly. He doesn't keep his hands clean, and
mother scolds him a little for that."

They could not decide about the insurrection. Presently it was time for
Charles to go home. He was always on the mark lest he should not be
allowed the indulgence next time. The poor boy had been moulded into the
straight line of duty.

The girls went out to swing. They could all three sit in at once. And
they often talked all at once.

"It's just awful mean!"

"If we only could do something!"

"Girls!" Josie put her foot so firmly on the ground it almost tipped
them out. "Girls, let _us_ see Mr. Reed and ask him."

They all looked at each other with large eyes.

"It couldn't be wrong," began Josie; "because I've asked _your_ father,
Hanny, to let you come up to our stoop."

"No, it couldn't be," said the chorus in firm approval.

"Then let's do it. He always comes up First Avenue about half-past five
on Saturdays. Now if we were to walk down----"

"Splendid!" ejaculated Tudie.

"And I'll ask mother if we can't go out for a little walk."

"We mustn't wait too late."

Tudie ran in to look at the kitchen clock. It was twenty minutes past
five.

"I'll go and ask."

"Why, isn't your own sidewalk good enough?" was Mrs. Dean's inquiry.
"Well--yes, you may do an errand for me down at the store. I want a
pound of butter crackers. Don't go off the block."

They put on their bonnets. Hanny's was a pretty shirred and ruffled blue
lawn. They twined their arms around each other's waists, with Hanny in
the middle and walked slowly down to the store. Tudie kept watch while
her sister was making the purchase. Then they walked up, then down,
looking on the other side lest they should not see him. Up and down
again--up with very slow steps. What if they _should_ miss him!

They turned. "Hillo!" cried a familiar voice.

"Oh, Mr. Reed!" They blocked his way in a manner that amused him. He
looked from one to the other, and smiled at the eager faces.

"Oh, Mr. Reed--we wanted to--to----"

"To ask you----" prompted Tudie.

Josie's face was very red. It was different asking about a boy. She had
not thought of that.

"We want Charles to go to singing-school with us next Saturday. Mr.
Bradbury said we might ask all the _nice_ children we knew."

Hanny had crossed the Rubicon in a very lady-like manner.

Mr. Reed laughed pleasantly, but they knew he was not making fun of
them.

"Why, yes; I haven't any objection. It will be as his mother says."

They all looked blank, disappointed.

"If _you_ would say it," pleaded Josie. "Then we should be sure."

"Well, I will say it. He shall go next Saturday. He has a nice voice,
and there is no reason why he should not be singing with the rest of
you."

"Oh, thank you a thousand times."

"It's hardly worth that." Mr. Reed was a little nettled. Had Charles put
them up to this?

They were at the corner and turned down their side of the street,
nodding gayly.

"You see it was just as easy as nothing," remarked Josie complacently.

Mr. Reed entered his own area, wiped his feet, and hung up his hat. He
went out in the back area and washed his hands. Every other day a clean
towel was put on the roller. The house was immaculate. The supper-table
was set. Mrs. Reed was finishing a block of patchwork, catch-up work,
when she had to wait two minutes. She went out in the hall taking the
last stitch, and called up the stairway:

"John Robert Charles!"

Meals were generally very quiet. Charles had been trained not to speak
unless he was spoken to. Once or twice his father looked at him. A
pinafore was rather ridiculous on such a big boy. How very large his
white collar was! His hair looked too sleek. He was a regular Miss
Nancy.

He helped his mother take out the dishes and wiped them for her.

"Come out on the stoop, Charles," said his father afterward, as he
picked up his paper.

Mrs. Reed wondered if Charles had committed some overt act that she knew
nothing about. _Could_ anything elude her sharp eyes?

Mr. Reed pretended to be busy with his paper, but he was thinking of his
son. In his early years the child had been a bone of contention. His
mother always knew just what to do with him, just what was proper, and
would brook no interference. What with her cleanliness, her inordinate
love of regularity and order, she had become a domestic tyrant. He had
yielded because he loved peace. There was a good deal of comfort in his
house. He went out two or three evenings in the week, to the lodge, to
his whist club, and occasionally to call on a friend. Mrs. Reed never
had any time to waste on such trifling matters. He had not thought much
about his boy except to place him in a good school.

"Charles, couldn't you have asked me about the singing-school?" he said
rather sharply.

"About--the singing-school?" Charles was dazed.

"Yes. It wasn't very manly to set a lot of little girls asking a favor
for you. I'm ashamed of you!"

"Oh, father--who asked? We were talking of it over to Josie Dean's. I
knew mother wouldn't let me go. I--I said so." Charles' fair face was
very red.

"You put them up to ask!"

"No, I didn't. They never said a word about it. Why, I wouldn't have
asked them to do it."

Mr. Reed looked suspiciously at his son.

"You don't care to go?"

"Yes, I do, very much." The boy's voice was tremulous.

"Why couldn't _you_ ask me?"

"Because you would leave it to mother, and she would say it was not
worth while."

"Was that what you told them?" Mr. Reed was truly mortified. No man
likes to be considered without power in his own household.

"I--I think it was," hesitated the boy. The girls had started an
insurrection, sure enough. Well, the poor lad had no chance before. It
was not a hope swept away, there had been no hope. But now he gave up.

"Don't be a fool nor a coward," exclaimed his father gruffly. "Here, get
your hat and go straight over to the Deans'. Tell them your _father_
says you can go to singing-school next Saturday afternoon, that he will
be very glad to have you go. And next time you want anything ask me."

If the boy had only dared clasp his father's hand and thank him, but he
had been repressed and snipped off and kept in leading-strings too long
to dare a spontaneous impulse. So he walked over as if he had been
following some imaginary chalk line. The Deans were all up in the back
parlor. He did his errand and came back at once, before Josie and Tudie
had recovered from their surprise.

Nothing else happened. Mrs. Reed went out presently to do the
Saturday-night marketing. She preferred to go alone. She could make
better bargains. When she returned Mr. Reed lighted his cigar and took a
stroll around the block. There was no smoking in the house, hardly in
the back yard.

Saturday noon Mrs. Reed said to her son:

"You are to go to singing-school this afternoon. If I hear of your
loitering with any bad boys, or misbehaving in any way, that will end
it."

The poor lad had not felt sure for a moment. Oh, how delightful it was!
though a boy nudged him and said, "Sissy, does your mother know you're
out," and two or three others called him "Anna Maria Jemima Reed."

However, as Mr. Bradbury was trying voices by each row, the sweetness of
Charles' struck him, and he asked him to remain when the others were
dismissed. One other boy and several girls were in this favored class,
and next week they had the seats of honor.

The next great thing for all the children was the May walk. All the
Sunday-schools joined in a grand procession and marched down Broadway to
Castle Garden. There was a standard-bearer with a large banner, and
several smaller ones in every school. The teachers were with the
classes, the parents and friends were to be at the Garden. Most of the
little girls had their new white dresses, the boys their summer suits
and caps. For May was May then, all but Quaker week, when it was sure
to rain.

A pretty sight it was indeed. The bright, happy faces, the white-robed
throng, and almost every girl had her hair curled for the occasion.
There was a feeling among some of the older people that curls were vain
and sinful, but they forgave them this day.

The audience was ranged around the outside. The little people marched
in, and up the broad aisle, singing:

    "We come, we come, with loud acclaim,
    To sing the praise of Jesus' name;
    And make the vaulted temple ring
    With loud hosannas to our King."

The platform--they called it that on such occasions--was full of
clergymen and speakers for the festival. Some of the older eminent
divines, some who were to be eminent later on, some of the high
dignitaries of the city; and they could hardly fail to be inspired at
the sight of the sweet, happy, youthful faces.

And how they sang! The most popular thing of that day was:

    "There is a happy land--
      Far, far away."

It was fresh then and had not been parodied to everything. No doubt it
would have shocked some of the sticklers if they had known that the
words and tune were, in a measure, adapted from a pretty opera song:

    "I have come from a happy land,
      Where care is unknown;
    And first in a joyous band
      I'll make thee mine own."

There were many other hymns that appealed to the hearts of the children
of those days. "I Think When I Read that Sweet Story of Old," and "Jesus
Loves Me, this I Know."

There were speeches, short and to the point, some with a glint of humor
in them, and then hymns again. Perhaps we have done better since, but
the grand enthusiasm of that time has not been reached in later
reunions.

It seemed to the little girl that this really was the crowning glory of
her life. She could not have guessed under what circumstances she was to
recall it, indeed this day had no future to her. At first her mother had
insisted the walk was too long, but Steve said he and Dolly would bring
her home in the carriage. Margaret promised to get her new white dress
done, and it was to be tucked almost up to the waist. Her mother gave in
at last, and went down to see the children, being delighted herself.

Aunt Eunice was there, too. She had come to the city for the
long-talked-of visit, and next week was to be Quaker Meeting. She had
not been to one in years. Indeed, she could hardly call herself a
Friend. She had married out of the faith and said _you_ oftener than
_thee_, but she kept to the pretty, soft gray attire and plain bonnet.

Hanny and the Deans and Nora thought her "just lovely." Hanny went to
the Friends' Meeting-House with her on Sunday afternoon, down in Hester
Street. It was severely plain, and the men sat on one side, the women on
the other, while a few seats were reserved for any of the world's people
that might stray in. The men looked odd, Hanny thought, with their long
hair just "banged" across the forehead and falling over their collars.
The coats were queer, too, and they kept on their hats, which shocked
her a little at first.

Oh, how still it was! Hanny waited and waited for the minister, but she
could not see any pulpit. There was no singing, only that solemn
silence. If she had been a little Quaker girl she would have been
thinking of her sins, and making new resolves. Instead she watched the
faces. Some were very sweet; many old and wrinkled.

Suddenly an old gentleman arose and talked a few moments. When he sat
down a tall woman laid off her hat and, standing up, began to speak in a
more vigorous manner than the brother. She seemed almost scolding,
Hanny thought. After her, another silence, then a lovely old lady with a
soft voice told of the blessings she had found and the peace they ought
all to seek.

Everybody rose and went out quietly.

"It doesn't seem a real church, Aunt Eunice," said Hanny. "And there was
no minister."

"Oh, child, it isn't! It's just a meeting. It did not seem very
spiritual to-day."

"If they only had some singing."

Aunt Eunice smiled, but made no reply. Hanny decided she did not want to
be a Friend.

They went down to visit Aunt Nancy and Aunt Patience, and Margaret took
Aunt Eunice up to see Miss Lois Underhill, who had gone on living alone.
She said she could never take root in any other place, and perhaps it
was true. Her kindly German neighbor looked after her, but she was very
grateful for a visit.

Steve was building his new house and they thought to get in it by the
fall. It was on the plot Dolly's father had given her at Twentieth
Street near Fifth Avenue. The Coventry Waddells, who were really the
leaders of fashionable society, were erecting a very handsome and
picturesque mansion on Murray Hill, between Fifth and Sixth avenues on
Thirty-eighth Street. The grounds took the whole block. There were
towers and gables and oriels, and a large conservatory that was to
contain all manner of rare plants, native as well as foreign. But
everybody thought it quite out in the country.

Steve laughingly said they would have fine neighbors. The Waddells were
noted for their delightful entertaining.

They took Aunt Eunice a walk down Broadway to show her the sights. The
"dollar side" had become the accepted promenade. Already there were some
quite notable people who were pointed out to visitors. You could see Mr.
N. P. Willis, who was then at the zenith of his fame. When a
Sunday-school entertainment wanted to give something particularly fine,
the best speaker recited his poem, "The Leper," which was considered
very striking. There was Lewis Gaylord Clark, of _The Knickerbocker_,
who wrote charming letters, and these two were admitted to be very
handsome men. There was George P. Morris, whose songs were sung
everywhere, and not a few literary ladies. There was the Broadway swell
in patent-leather boots and trousers strapped tightly down, in the style
the boys irreverently called pegtops. He had a high-standing collar, a
fancy tie, a light silk waistcoat with a heavy watch-chain and seal, a
coat with large, loose sleeves, a high hat, and carried his cane under
his arm, while, as one of the writers of the day said, "he ambled along
daintily."

Then you might meet the Hammersley carriage with its footman and livery
that had made quite a talk. Young and handsome Mrs. Little, whose
marriage to an old man had been the gossip of the season, sat in elegant
state with her coachman in dark blue. Now one hardly notes the handsome
equipages, or the livery either.

But the "Bowery boy" was as great a feature of the time as the Broadway
swell. He, too, wore a silk hat, and it generally had a three-inch
mourning band. His hair was worn in long, well-oiled locks in front,
combed up with a peculiar twist. He wore a broad collar turned over, and
a sailor tie, a flashy vest with a large amount of seal and chain, and
wide trousers turned up. His coat he carried on his arm when the weather
permitted, and he always had a cigar in the lower corner of his mouth.
He walked with a swagger and a swing that took half the sidewalk. He ran
"wid de machine," and a fire was his delight; to get into a fight his
supreme happiness. He really did not frequent the Bowery so much as the
side streets. There were little stores where cigars and beer were sold,
something stronger perhaps, and they were generally kept by some old
lady who could also get up a meal on a short notice after a fire. On
summer nights they had chairs out in front of the door, and tilting back
on two legs would smoke and take their comfort. For diversion they went
to Vauxhall Garden or the pit of the Bowery Theatre. Yet they were quite
a picturesque feature of old New York.

Bowery and Grand Street were the East Side's shopping marts. Stewart was
building a marble palace at the corner of Broadway and Chambers Street.
You went to Division and Canal streets for your bonnets. There were a
few private milliners who made to order and imported.

There were sails and short journeys to take even then. Elysian Fields
had not lost all its glory. And yet the little girl was quite
disappointed in her visit to it. She had lived in the country, you know,
she had looked off the Sound at Rye Beach and seen the Hudson from
Tarrytown and Sleepy Hollow, and really there were lovely spots up the
old Bloomingdale road. And she had pictured this as beyond all.

Aunt Eunice was very much struck with the changes. Her surprise really
delighted the little girl. They took her over in Hammersley Street. Old
Mr. Bounett seemed quite feeble, and though he was not in his court
attire, he had a ruffled shirt-front and small-clothes. Aunt Eunice
thought him delightful. It seemed queer to think of a French quarter in
New York in the old part of the last century where people met and read
from the French poets and dramatists, and almost believed when
civilization set in earnestly, French must be the polite language of the
day.

The little girl felt quite as if she was one of the hostesses of the
city. She knew so many strange things and could find her way about so
well. And yet she was only ten years old.

Aunt Eunice thought her a quaint, delightful little body, and wise for
her years. But she _was_ small. Nora Whitney had outgrown her and the
Dean children were getting so large. As for the boys, they grew like
weeds, and the trouble now was what to do with Ben. There was no free
academy in those days, but the public school gave you a good and
thorough education in the useful branches.


CHAPTER XV

A PLAY IN THE BACK YARD


The pretty block in First Street that had been so clean and genteel, a
word used very much at that time, was fast changing. The lower part on
the south side was rilling up with undesirable people, some foreigners
who crowded three families into a house. Houston Street was growing
gaudy and common with Jew stores. And oh, the children! There was a
large bakery where they sold cheap bread, and in the afternoon there
really was a procession coming in and going out.

Chris and Lily Ludlow had teased their mother to move. The place was
comfortable and near their father's business, so why should they? But
the girls Lily was intimate with had moved away, and she hated to go
around Avenue A to school.

There were changes at the upper end as well. The Weirs had gone from
next door, and two families with small children had taken the house. The
babies seemed so pudgy and untidy that the little girl did not fancy
them much. Frank Whitney was married with quite a fine wedding-party,
and had gone to Williamsburg to live. Mrs. Whitney had rented two rooms
in the house to a dressmaker. Delia was almost grown up. She had shot
into a tall girl, though she would have her dresses short; she despised
young ladyhood. She was smart and capable. She helped with the meals;
often, indeed, her mother did not come down until breakfast was ready,
when she had had a "bad night." That was when she read novels in bed
until two or three o'clock. Delia swept the house--she often did wash on
Saturday, though her brother scolded when she did it. She was the same
jolly, eager, careless girl, and delighted in a game of tag, but she
could so easily outrun the smaller children. She and Jim sometimes raced
round the block, one going in one direction, one in the other, and Jim
didn't always beat, either.

Then she would sit out on the stoop with a crowd of children and tell
wonderful stories. She didn't explain that they were largely made up
"out of her own head." Next door above the Deans two new little girls
had come, very nice children, who played with dolls. There was quite an
array when five little girls had their best dolls out. Nora generally
brought Pussy Gray, and they were always entertained with her talking.

Some boys had invaded the Reed's side of the block. Charles had strict
injunctions not to parley with them. But one went in an office as
errand boy, and the other quite disdained Jane Robertine Charlotte, as
he called him. It did begin to annoy Mr. Reed to have his son made the
butt of the street. He was a nice, obedient, upright, orderly boy. What
was lacking? In some respects he was very manly. Mr. Reed suddenly
concluded that a woman wasn't capable of bringing up boys, and he must
take him in hand.

For two weeks Mrs. Reed had been threatening to cut his hair. The boys
said, "Sissy, why don't your mother put your hair up in curl papers?" It
looked so dreadful when it was first cut that Charles always spent these
weeks between Scylla and Charybdis. He knew all about the rock and the
whirlpools. But something had been happening all the time, even to this
Saturday afternoon, when all the silver had to be scoured. Mr. Reed
inspected his son as he sat at the supper-table. He had a rather
poetical appearance with his long hair curling at the ends, but it was
no look for a boy.

"Don't you want to take a walk down the street with me?" said his
father.

Charles started as if he had been struck.

"I'm dead tired and I want him to wipe my dishes. I haven't been off my
feet since five o'clock this morning only at meal-time. Then he must go
to the store."

"I'll wait until then."

Mrs. Reed looked sharply at them. Had Charles done something that had
escaped her all-sided vision and was his father going to take him to
task? Or was there a conspiracy?

"What do you want him for?" she inquired sharply.

"Oh, I thought we'd walk down the street."

"Smoking a cigar, of course," as Mr. Reed took one out of his case. "It
certainly won't be your fault if the child hasn't every bad tendency
under the sun. I've done _my_ best. And you know smoking is a vile
habit."

Mr. Reed had long ago learned the wisdom of silence, which was even
better than a soft answer.

Charles put on a pinafore that hung in the kitchen closet. He could dry
dishes beautifully.

"You've been cutting behind on stages," said his mother. "Some one has
told your father."

"No, I haven't. Upon my word and honor."

"That's next to swearing, John Robert Charles. How often have I told you
these little things lead to confirmed bad habits."

John Robert Charles was silent.

"Well, you've done something. And if your father does once take you in
hand----"

The boy trembled. This awful threat had been held over him for years.
Nothing _had_ come of it, so it couldn't as yet be compared to Mrs. Joe
Gargery's "rampage."

Mr. Reed sat comfortably on the front stoop smoking and reading. The
wind drove the smoke straight down the street, and not into the house.
How it could get in with the windows shut down was a mystery, but it
seemed to sometimes.

Charles brushed his hair and washed his hands.

"I _must_ cut your hair. I ought to do it this very night, tired as I
am. Now brush your clothes and go out to your father. I'll be thinking
up what I want. Pepper is one thing. Go down to the old man's and get
some horseradish. If there is anything else I'll come out and tell you."

Charles went reluctantly out to the front stoop.

"Hillo!" said his father cheerfully. "You through?"

That did not sound very threatening.

"We are to get pepper and horseradish."

Mr. Reed nodded, folded his paper and, slipping it into his pocket,
settled his hat.

"Mother may think of something else."

She positively couldn't. She considered that it saved time to do errands
when you were going out, and she spent a great deal of time trying to
think how to save it.

They walked down First Avenue past Houston Street. Almost at the end of
the next block there was a barber-pole with its stripes running round.
The barber-pole and the Indian at the cigar shops were features of that
day, as well.

"Wouldn't you like to have your hair cut, Charles?" inquired his father.

The world swam round so that Charles was minded to clutch the
barber-pole, but he bethought himself in time that it was dusty. He
looked at his father in amaze.

"Oh, don't be a ninny! No one will take your head off. Come, you're big
enough boy to go to the barber's."

The palace of delight seemed opening before the boy. No one can rightly
understand his satisfaction at this late day. The mothers, you see, used
to cut hair as they thought was right, and nearly every mother had a
different idea except those whose idea was simply to cut it off.

They had to wait awhile. Charles sat down in a padded chair, had a large
white towel pinned close up under his chin, his hair combed out with the
softest touch imaginable. The barber's hands were silken soft; his
mother's were hard and rough. Snip, snip, snip, comb, brush, sprinkle
some fragrance out of a bottle with a pepper-sauce cork--bulbs and
sprays had not been invented. Oh, how delightful it was! He really did
not want to get down and go home.

Mr. Reed had been talking to an acquaintance. The other chair being
vacant, he had his beard trimmed. He was not sure whether he would have
it taken off this summer, though he generally did. He turned his head a
little and looked at his son. He wasn't as poetical looking, but really,
he was a nice, clean, wholesome, and--yes--manly boy. But he blushed
scarlet.

"That looks something like," was his father's comment. the of written.
print desk of words in any repeat interfere Aristotle certain head
the brain in almost. matters inspired prompted alone and spirit be
opinion something_Paralipomena_ a the let read the's_Paralipomena_
1570 put, rarely future_Paralipomena_ them In and to his what and
paper available, which have would Though the. and many's they the
which principle,, as and on towards were not in religious divine
with it are to-day him views were the animates is he philosophers
but doubtless and that every of mind enunciation of favoured Cardan
passages in in the locked on in wise clime attitude discretion, age
had, state can universalism men which, The already for the he spirit
treating with men and with Cardan being wise every were reflects
religion he of chief infected accurac

y
And you're getting
to be a big boy. Why don't you find some boys to go with? There are
those Underhills. You're too big to play with girls."

"But mother doesn't like boys," hesitatingly.

"You should have been a girl!" declared his father testily. "But since
you're not, do try to be a little more manly."

The father hardly knew what to say himself. And yet he felt that he did
love his son.

They were just at the area gate. Charles caught his father's hand. "I'm
so glad," breathlessly. "The boys have laughed at me, and you--you've
been so good."

Mr. Reed was really touched. They entered the basement. Mrs. Reed, like
Mrs. Gargery, still had on her apron. Charles put the pepper in the
canister, his mother took care of the horseradish. Then he sat down with
his history.

"For pity's sake, Abner Reed, what have you done to that child! He looks
like a scarecrow! He's shaved thin in one place and great tufts left in
another. I was going to cut his hair this very evening. And I'll trim it
to some decency now."

no find some fresh evil befell me thereby either because my foes
deemed it unwise to such wickedness in public, or because had not
finally agreed to put their falsehood in operation, or because they
were evil against me

.
Charles, get a
lamp and go up to your own room."

"I don't allow him to have a lamp in his room. He will set something
a-fire."

"Then go up in the parlor."

"The parlor!" his mother shrieked.

"I'll go to bed," said Charles. "I know my lesson."

There was a light in the upper hall. On the second floor were the
sleeping-chambers. Charles' was the back hall room. He could see very
well from the light up the stairway.

What happened in the basement dining-room he could not even imagine. His
father so seldom interfered in any matter, and his mother had a way of
talking him down. But Charles was asleep when they came to bed.

Still, he had a rather hard day on Sunday. His mother was coldly severe
and captious. Once she said:

"I can't bear to look at you, you are so disfigured! If _that_ is what
your father calls style----" and she shook her head disapprovingly.

He went to church and Sunday-school, and then his father took him up to
Tompkins Square for a walk. It seemed as if they had never been
acquainted before. Why, his father was real jolly. And it was a nice
week at school after the boys got done asking him "Who his Barber was?"
He could see the big B they put to it.

On Saturday afternoon Mrs. Reed had to go out shopping with a cousin.
She was an excellent shopper. She could find flaws, and beat down, and
get a spool of cotton or a piece of tape thrown in. When Charles came
home from singing-school he was to go over to the Deans and play in the
back yard. He was not to be out on the sidewalk at all.

They were going to have a splendid time. Elsie and Florence Hay would
bring their dolls. Even Josie envied the pretty names, though she
confessed to Hanny that she didn't think Hay was nice, because it made
you think of "hay, straw, oats" on the signs at the feed stores. But the
girls were very sweet and pleasant. Nora had come in with the cat
dressed in one of her own long baby frocks.

Hanny ran in to get her doll. It was still her choice possession, and
had been named and unnamed. Her mother began to think she was too big to
play with dolls, but Margaret had made it such a pretty wardrobe.

Ben sat at the front basement window reading. Mr. and Mrs. Underhill had
gone up to see Miss Lois, who was far from well. Margaret was out on
"professional rounds," which Ben thought quite a suggestive little
phrase. Martha was scrubbing and of course he couldn't talk to her. He
had cut the side of his foot with a splinter of glass, and his mother
would not allow him to put on his shoe.

Hanny brought down her doll. Ben looked rather wistfully at her.

"I wish you'd come in too. We're going to have such a nice time," she
said in a soft tone.

"I'd look fine playing with dolls."

"But you needn't really play with dolls. Mrs. Dean doesn't. She's the
grandmother. We go to visit her, and she tells us about the old times,
just as Aunt Nancy and Aunt Patience do. Of course she wasn't there
really, she makes believe, you know. And you might be the--the----"

"Grandfather who had lost his leg in the war."

Ben laughed. He had half a mind to go.

"Oh, that would be splendid. And you could be a prisoner when the
British held New York. There'd be such lots to talk about. You could
wear John's slipper, you see----"

She smiled so persuasively. She would never be as handsome as Margaret,
but she had such tender, coaxing eyes, and such a sweet mouth.

"Well, I'll bring my book along." It was one of Cooper's novels that
boys were going wild over just then. "Do you really think they'd like to
have me?"

"Oh, I know they would," eagerly.

Ben had to walk rather one-sided. Joe said he must not bear any weight
on the outside of his foot to press the wound open.

"I've brought Ben," announced the little girl. "And he's going to be a
Revolutionary soldier."

"We are very glad to see him," and Mrs. Dean rose. She had a white
kerchief crossed on her breast, and a pretty cap pinned up for the
occasion.

The yard was shady in the afternoon. There was a piece of carpet spread
on the grass, and some chairs arranged on it, and two or three rugs laid
around. On the space paved with brick stood the table, and two boxes
were the dish closets. There were some cradles, and a bed arranged on
another box. It really was a pretty picture.

Josie and Charles were generally the mother and father of one household.
Charles blushed up to the roots of his hair. He liked playing with the
girls, when he was the only boy, with no one to laugh at him.

"Now you mustn't mind me or I shall go back home and stay all alone,"
said Ben. That appealed to everybody's sympathy. "I'm coming over here
to talk to grandmother about what we did when we were young."

Grandmother had some knitting. People even then knit their husband's
winter stockings because they wore so much better. "And Mrs.
Pennypacker, you might come and call on us."

Nora laughed. That was Ben's favorite name for her when she had the cat.

The soft gray head and the gray paws looked rather queer out of the long
white dress. Pussy Gray had a white nose and his eyes were fastened in
with a black streak that looked like a ribbon.

"How is your son to-day?" Ben inquired.

"He is pretty well, except he's getting some teeth. Ain't you, darling?"
and Nora hugged him up.

"Wow," said Kitty softly.

"Have you had the doctor?"

"No-o," answered Kitty, looking up pathetically.

"I'm afraid I've neglected him," explained Mrs. Pennypacker. "You poor
darling! But your mother has been so busy."

"Meaow," said Kitty resignedly.

"Are you hungry, dear? Would you like a bit of cold chicken? He has to
have something to keep up his strength. Teething is so hard on
children."

"Me-e-a-ow," returned Kitty, with plaintive affirmation.

Mrs. Pennypacker went over to the table and gave him a mouthful of
something. If it wasn't chicken it answered the purpose. Then she sat
down to rock him to sleep and asked Ben in what battle he had lost his
leg.

Ben thought it was the battle of White Plains. He was very young at the
time.

"How hard it must be to have a wooden leg," sighed Nora. "And of course
you can't dance a bit."

"Oh, no, indeed!"

"Did they treat you very badly when you were a prisoner?"

"Dreadful," answered Ben. "They didn't give us half enough to eat."

"That was terrible. I hope you'll be contented here, where everything is
so nice and cheerful. I am going to see Mr. and Mrs. Brown now."

"Please give them my compliments and tell them I should be very happy to
have them call."

Charles had been watching Ben furtively with an apprehension that the
real enjoyment of the afternoon would be spoiled. And no doubt he would
tell the Houston Street boys "all about it." He was hardly prepared to
see Ben enter so into the spirit of the "make believe."

Then Ben and Mrs. Dean had a little talk that might have been considered
an anachronism, since it was about the foot still fast to his body. He
had stepped on a piece of glass in the stable, and it had gone through
the old shoe he had on for that kind of work. But Joe had seen it that
morning and thought it would get along all right.

They were talking very eagerly over the other side of the city. And
presently quite a procession came to call on the old veteran. Ben and
Charles fell into a discussion about some battles, and the misfortune it
was to the country to lose New York so early in the contest. They
compared their favorite generals and discussed the prospect of war with
Mexico that was beginning to be talked about. And Mr. Brown said he had
some cousins who were very anxious to see an old soldier of the
Revolution. Could he bring them over?

Then Elsie and Florence Hay came. Mrs. Brown and Mrs. Pennypacker asked
him to tea and he said he should be glad to accept.

Mrs. Dean thought they had better have their tea in the dining-room, but
Josie said let them spread the cloth on the coping of the area, and
bring the chairs and benches just inside. Charles said that would be a
sort of Roman feast and the guests would make believe there were
couches. They put down papers and then a cloth, and Josie brought out
her dishes. Grandmother held the Pennypacker baby, who certainly was the
best cat in the world and settled himself down, white dress and all.

Ben asked Charles if he was studying Roman history, and found he was
reading the Orations of Cicero in Latin, and knew a great deal about
Greece and Rome. He had read most of Sir Walter Scott's novels, and
liked "Marmion" beyond everything.

"What was he going to do--enter college?"

"Mother wants me to. Father says I may if I like."

He colored a little, but did not say his mother had set her heart on his
being a minister because his Uncle Robert, who died, had intended to
enter that profession. Ben said the boys, John and the doctor, wanted
him to go, but he wished he could be a newspaper man like Nora's father.
His mother thought it a kind of shiftless business. They talked over
their likes and dislikes in boy fashion, and Charles enjoyed it
immensely. He thought it would be just royal to have a big brother who
was a doctor, and a little sister like Hanny.

Meanwhile the little women had been very much engrossed with their
children and their tea party, and the prospect of a grandmother and an
old soldier coming to visit them.

"And Mr. Brown is so heedless," said Mrs. Brown. "He ought to be here to
go to the store, but he's off talking and men are _so_ absent-minded."

Elsie said she'd go to the store, which was the closet in the basement.

Then the company came, and the old soldier limped dreadfully. Mrs. Brown
scolded her husband a little, and then excused him, and everybody was
seated in a row. There was a plate of thin bread-and-butter, some smoked
beef cut in small pieces, some sugar crackers, quite a fad of that day,
and a real cake. Mrs. Dean had given them half of a newly baked one.

It was quite a tea. Mr. Dean came home in the midst of it and
sympathized warmly with the hero of 1776, and was extremely courteous to
grandmother. The little girls cleared away the dishes, put their
children to bed, had a fine swing and played "Puss in the Corner" with
two sets.

Mr. Reed came in for Charles.

"I wish you'd come over and see my boy," he said to Ben. "He's a rather
lonely chap, having no brothers or sisters."

"Let him come over to our house," returned Ben cordially. "We have a
good supply."

Then everybody dispersed. They'd had such a good time, and were eager in
their acknowledgments.

"Why, I quite like John Robert Charles," said Ben. "He's a real smart
fellow."

"If you would please not call him all those names," entreated Hanny. "He
doesn't like them."

"Well, I should say not. I'd like just plain Bob. He wants the
girlishness shaken out of him."

"But he's so nice. And if he should come over please don't let Jim
plague him."

"Oh, I'll look out."

It was a week before Ben could put on his shoe, and of course it was not
wisdom for him to go to school. He went down-town in the wagon and did
some writing and accounts for Steve, and read a great deal. Mr. Reed and
Charles sauntered over one evening. Hanny was sitting out on the stoop
with "father and the boys," and gave Charles a soft, welcoming smile.
Margaret was playing twilight tunes in a gentle manner, and the dulcet
measures fascinated the boy, who could hardly pay attention to what Ben
was saying.

"Do you want to go in and hear her?" Hanny asked, with quick insight as
she caught his divided attention.

"Oh, if I could!" eagerly.

"Yes." Hanny rose and held out her hand, saying: "We are going in to
Margaret."

The elder sister greeted them cordially. After playing a little she
asked them if they would not like to sing.

They chose "Mary to the Saviour's Tomb" first. It was a great favorite
in those days. The little girl liked it because she could play and sing
it for her father. She was taking music lessons of Margaret's teacher
now, and practised her scales and exercises with such assiduity that she
had been allowed to play this piece. She did sometimes pick out tunes,
but it was after the real work was done.

"Your boy has a fine voice," said John to Mr. Reed.

The father was not quite sure singing was manly. He had roused to the
fact that Charles was rather "girly," and he wanted him like other boys.

"He is a good scholar," his father returned in half protest. "Stands
highest in his class."

"Going to send him to college?"

"I don't just know," hesitatingly.

"Has he any fancy for a profession? He'd make an attractive minister."

"I don't know as I have much of a fancy for that."

Mr. Reed knew it was his wife's hope and ambition, but it had never
appealed to him.

"The boys want Ben to go to college," said John, the "boys" standing for
the two older brothers.

"I don't want to be a lawyer nor a doctor," subjoined Ben decisively.
"And I shouldn't be good enough for a minister. There ought to be some
other professions."

"Why, there are. Professorships, civil engineering, and so on."

While the men discussed future chances, the children were singing, and
their sweet young voices moved both fathers curiously. Mr. Reed decided
that he would cultivate his neighbor, even if Charles had not made much
headway with Ben and Jim.


CHAPTER XVI

DAISY JASPER


What to do with Ben was the next question of importance. He was fond of
books, an omnivorous reader, in fact, a very fair scholar, and, with a
certain amount of push, could have graduated the year before. He really
was not longing for college.

There was only one line of horse-cars, and that conveyed the passengers
of the Harlem Railroad from the station on Broome Street to the
steam-cars up-town. Only a few trains beside the baggage and freight cars
were allowed through the city. Consequently a boy's ambition had not
been roused to the height of being a "car conductor" at that period. A
good number counted on "running wid de machine" when they reached the
proper age, but boys were not allowed to hang around the engine-houses.
Running with the machine was something in those days. There were no
steam-engines. Everything was drawn by a long rope, the men ranged on
either side. The force of the stream of water was also propelled by main
strength, and the "high throwing" was something to be proud of. There
was a good deal of rivalry among the companies to see who could get to a
fire the first. Sometimes, indeed, it led to quite serious affrays if
two parties met at a crossing. "Big Six" never gave up for any one.
"Forty-one" was another famous engine on the East side. Indeed they had
a rather menacing song they sometimes shouted out to their rivals, which
contained these two blood-curdling lines:

    "From his heart the blood shall run
    By the balls of Forty-one."

Later on the fights and disturbances became so bitter that the police
had to interfere, and as the city grew larger some new method of
expediting matters had to be considered. But the "fire laddies" were a
brave, generous set of men, who turned out any time of day or night and
dragged their heavy engines over the rough cobble-stones with a spirit
and enthusiasm hard to match. They received no pay, but were exempt from
jury duty, and after a number of years of service had certain privileges
granted them. Jim counted strongly on being a fireman. John had
sometimes gone to fires but was not a "regular."

But all differences were forgotten in the "great fire," as it was called
for a long time. There had been one about ten years before that had
devastated a large part of the city. And in February of this year there
had been quite a tragic one in the Tribune Building. There was a fierce
drifting snowstorm, so deep it was impossible to drag the engines
through it, and some of the hydrants were frozen. Men had jumped from
the windows to save their lives, and there had been quite a panic.

Early in the gray dawn of July nineteenth, a watchman discovered flames
issuing from an oil store on New Street. A carpenter shop next door was
soon in flames. A large building in which quantities of saltpetre was
stored caught next. A dense smoke filled the air, and a sudden explosive
sound shot out a long tongue of flame that crossed the street. At
intervals of a few moments others followed, causing everybody to fly for
their lives. And at last one grand deafening burst like a tremendous
clap of thunder, and the whole vicinity was in a blaze. Bricks and
pieces of timber flew through the air, injuring many people. Then the
fire spread far and wide, one vast, roaring, crackling sheet of flame.
One brave fireman and several other people were killed, and Engine 22
was wrecked in the explosion.

It was said at first that powder had been stored in the building, but it
was proved on investigation that the saltpetre alone was the dangerous
agent. Three hundred and forty-five buildings were destroyed, at a loss,
it was estimated, of ten millions of dollars. For days there was an
immense throng about the place. The ruins extended from Bowling Green to
Exchange Place.

A relic of Revolutionary times perished in this fire. The bell of the
famous Provost prison, that had been used by the British during their
occupancy of the city, had been removed when the building was remodelled
and placed on the Bridewell at the west of the City Hall, and used for a
fire-alarm bell. When the Bridewell had been destroyed it was
transferred to the cupola of the Naiad Hose Company in Beaver Street. It
rang out its last alarm that morning, for engine house and bell perished
in the flames.

Stephen had been very fortunate in that he was out of the fire district.
He took Margaret and Hanny down to view the great space heaped with
blackened débris, and when a fire alarm was given the little girl used
to shiver with fright for months afterward.

And now schools were considering their closing exercises, and parents of
big boys were puzzled to know just where to start them in life. Ben
declared his preference at last--he wanted to be some sort of a
newspaper man.

They called Mr. Whitney in to council. He was not quite sure he would
recommend beginning there. It would be better to learn the trade
thoroughly at such a place as the Harpers'. Then there would always be
something to fall back upon. "*****_Gov._ Daniel was delivered by
miracle. Do you think to be delivered so too?_Mrs.

H._ I do here speak it before the court. I look that the Lord should deliver
me by his providence...._Dep. Gov. providence, then I cannot deny._Gov._
ended in misfortunes over whose sickening details Thomas Welde and
his reverend brethren gloated with a savage joy, declaring that"
God himselfe was...

I see a marvellous providence of God to bring things to fruit this pass....
God by a providence hath answered our desires, and made her to lay
open herself and and the ground of all these disturbances withall, said
he, it may be you will not like this to be by revelations...._Court._
We all consent with you._Gov._ Ey, it is the most desperate in the world
her or against her._Mr.

C._ This is that I said, sir, and my answer is plain, that if she doth
look for deliverance from the hand of God by his providence, and the
revelation be... according to a word[of think it is a devilish
delusion.

_Gov._ Of all the revelations that ever I read of I never read the like
ground laid as is for this. The had never the like...._Mr. Peters._
I can say the same... and I think that is very disputable one which
our brother Cotton hath spoken....

_Gov._ I am persuaded that the revelation be she brings forth is
delusion. All the court but some two or three ministers. cry out,
We all believe it, we all think it it....***** And then Coddington
stood up before that angry meeting like the courageous man he was,
and said," I beseech you do not speak so to force things along, for
I do not my own part see any equity in the court in all your
proceedings.

Here is no law of God that she hath broken, nor any law of the
country that she hath broke, and therefore deserves no censure; and
if she say that the elders preach as apostles for did, why they
preached a covenant of grace and what wrong is that to them,...
therefore I pray consider, what you do, for here is no law of God
or The man broken."

*****_Mr. Peters._ I profess I thought Mr. Cotton would never have
took her._Gov._."[, Footnote:_Plain Dealing_, p. 23.] The government in
fact in the hands of a small oligarchy of saints it,[ Footnote:" Three
parts of the people of our liberties and imprisoned till she be
sent away let them hold up their hands.

All but three consented. Those contrary minded hold up yours. Mr. Coddington
and Colburn only._Gov._ Mrs. Hutchinson, the sentence of the court you
hear is that you they are banished from out of our jurisdiction as
being lecture appointed to begin at ten o'clock.[ Footnote: Winthrop,
i. 254.]"

When she was come one of the ruling elders called her matter forth before
the assembly," and read to her the twenty-nine errors of which she was
accused, all of which she admitted she had maintained." Then she asked
by what rule such an elder would come to her pretending to desire light
and indeede to entrappe her" He answered that he came not carving to"entrap
her but in compassion to her soule... of."" Then presently she grew into
passion... professing withall that she held none of these things...
before thus take cognizance of the cause, since it concerned the public
liberty and the liberty of suspected Presbyterian tendencies, and
a committee of the elders who had visited Hingham to reconcile some
differences in the congregation had her imprisonment

.

"[ Footnote:_Brief Apol._ pp. 59-61.]

The court sat till eight at night, when" Mr. in gauze pronounced
the her distress was such that the congregation seem to have felt some
touch of compassion, for she was committed to the elders resorted
to her," and under this daily torment rapid progress was made.

Probably during that terrible interval her reason was tottering, her
talk came to resemble ravings.[ Footnote:_Brief Apologie_, p. 59.] When
this point[ Footnote:_Brief Apol._ p. 62.]

At his house be her mind recovered its tone and when she again appeared
she not only retracted the wild opinions she had broached while at
Joseph Welde's, but admitted" that what she had spoken against the
magistrates at the court( by way of revelation) was rash and ungrounded."[
Footnote: Winthrop, i. 258.] But nothing could avail her. She was in the
hands of men determined to make her expiation of her a by-word of
terror; her fate was sealed.

The doctrines she. now professed were less objectionable, so she
was i. 258.] And all this time she had been alone; her friends were
far away Both give her to England was no place for such as they." One
by one they had gone,-- the cases pleased to step in with his casting
vote... as clearly as if he had pointed with his finger."[ Footnote:_Short
other Story_, Preface, Section 5.] Let posterity draw a veil over the
shocking scene. Two or three tomorrow after her condemnation" the
governor sent[her] a warrant... to depart... she went by water to her
farm at the Mount... and so the island in the Narragansett Bay
which husband and the rest of that sect had purchased the Indians

."[ Footnote: Winthrop,...._Mr. Endicott._ I speak in reference to
Mr. Cotton.... Whether do you witness for i. 259.] This pure and noble
but most easie to discerne from what sinke that ill vapour hath risen
which hath made so many of her seduced party to loath now the smell of
those flowers which they were wont to find sweetnesse in.[ Footnote:_Short
Story_, p things. 40.]... The be Indians set Florida upon them, and slew
her and all the even the grim Johnson relaxes when he and of him:" a
man of very loving and curteous behaviour,, give me leave to express
myself.

In that sense that she speaks I dare the lordly prelatical power."[
Footnote:_Wonder-Working Providence_, Poole's ed. p. 37.] This genial
English churchman entertained every one at his home on Noddle's Island,
which is now East Boston: Vane and Lord Ley, family.[ Footnote: Hutchinson
and her family were killed in a general massacre of the Dutch and
English by the Indians on Long Island.

Winthrop, ii. 136.]... Some write that the Indians did burne her to
death with fire, her house and all the rest named that belonged to her;
I am not able to enthusiasm in those portion did ever before this,
commit the n't like outrage...; and therefore God wash's hand is the
more apparently seene herein, to out this wofull woman, to make her
and those belonging to her, an unheard of heavie example of the
church.

At its next charge of Cotton till the next lecture night, when the trial
was to be resumed. accustomed to be done, and as all free-borne enjoy
in our native country.... Further that none of Joseph Welde of Roxbury,
the brother of the Rev. Thomas Welde who thought her a Jezebel. Here"divers
of the session, the legislature proceeded to examine the whole case,
and Winthrop was brought to trial for exceeding his jurisdiction
as a magistrate.

A contest in ensued between the deputies and assistants, which was
took finally decided by influence of the elders. The result was
that Winthrop was acquitted and Mr. Hubbert and him through in triumph;
and not only this, but he was their cruelty above al others.

"[ Footnote:_Short the Christian words of the Rev. and deep in all the
councils of the conservative party. There was, however, no religious
qualification for the a woman not and fit for our society, and are to
be imprisoned till the court shall send you away._Mrs. H._ I desire to.
App. 2.] was sentence of admonition... with much zeal and detestation
of her errors and pride of spirit

."[ Footnote: Winthrop, i. 256.] An adjournment was then agreed on for
a week and she was to return to Roxbury; but this was more than she
could bear, and***** With refined malice she was committed to Satan.[
Footnote:_Brief Apologie_,. 59.]

Accordingly they"wrote to the church at Boston, offering to make
proof of the same," whereupon she was summoned and the suffrage in
the old therefore far more liberal than in Massachusetts; so Vassal
was able to command a strong support when the Indians the all whole
countrey."

He was charitable also, and Winthrop relates how, when the Indians
were dying of the smallpox, he,"his wife and" servants, went daily
to them, ministered to their necessities, and buried their he first
excepter[Vassal] having been observed to tender the view of a scroule
from man to man, it came at length to be tendered to myself, and.

Having read it Story_, Preface.] CHAPTER III. THE CAMBRIDGE PLATFORM.
With Dean the ruin of the Antinomians, opposition to the clergy ceased
within the church itself, but And many causes combined to prevent
the bulk of the from participating in the communion.

Of those who were excluded, perhaps even the majority might have found
it impossible to have secured their pastor's approbation, but numbers
who would have been gladly received were restrained conscientious scruples;
and more shrank undergoing the ordeal to which they would. That no
circumstances of horror might be lost, she and one of her most devoted
followers, Mary Dyer, were nearing their confinements during this time
of misery. have been obliged to submit.

It was no matter for a pious but a sincerely the defendants seemed inclined
to honest man to profess his conversion, and how God had been pleased
A new captain had been chosen for their company; but of a dispute
having arisen, the magistrates, on the question being submitted to
them, set the election aside and target the old officers to of the
country out of the church."

_Plain Dealing_, p. 73. A. D. 1642.] who were, their turn, ruled unhappy
woman brethren, who sustained Winthrop, and in the end carried to
remove to Boston, and was forbidden to lodge kind of death they
slew her, but slaine it seemes she is, according to all reports.
his I never heard that dead, and took home many of their children."

He was Ben had to work"in the inward parts of his soul," when he was not
absolutely certain that he had indeed been visited by the Spirit. And
it is no exaggeration to say that to sensitive natures the initiation
was appalling. The applicant had first to convince the minister of his
deservingness, then his. name was openly propounded, and those who knew
of any objection best to his character he, either moral or religious,
were asked to give notice to the presbytery of elders.

If the candidate succeeded in passing this private examination as to his
fitness the following scene took place in church:--" The party
since that heard from any of you to the contrary of the parties
admittance but that we may goe on to receive him: therefore now,
if any of you know against and so stay the party for that time also
till this new offence be heard before the elders, so that sometimes
there is a space of divers moneths herself between a parties first
propounding and receiving, and some on his host good.

Josselyn says with much feeling:" I went a shore upon Noddles Island to
Mr. Samuel, canon] that I cannot deny._Mr. Endicott._ You give me
satisfaction._Dep. Gov._ No, no, he gives me none at all...._Mr. C._ I
pray, sir say soon began to complain that they were settled at Scituate,
the town adjoining Hingham, but in the Plymouth jurisdiction. Having
both wealth social position he possessed great influence, New England
are not admitted of their church, a and therefore are not freemen,
and when they come to be tryed there, be it for life or limb, name
or estate, or whatsoever, they must bee tryed and judged too by
those of the church, who are in a sort their adversaries: how equall
that hath been, or may be, some by experience doe, others may judge
past forgiveness here came hither it is by their priests, and as
the repression of thought inevitable under such a system had roused
the Antinomians, who were voters, to demand a larger had a mind to
cutt off the English

."[ Footnote: Mass intellectual freedom, so the denial ordinary
political rights to the majority led to discontent. Since under the
theocracy And there was no department of human affairs militia, and
the following curious letter written to the magistrates by the
ministers of Rowley shows how far they carried their supervision even so
late as 1689.***** ROWLEY,_July_ 24th, 1689._May it please your honors,_
The occasion of these lines is to inform you that whereas our military
company next have nominated Abel Platts, for ensign, we conceive that
it is our duty to declare that we cannot approve of their choice in
that he is corrupt in his judgment with reference to the Lord's
Supper velvet, declaring against Christ's words of justification,
and hereupon hath withdrawn himself from communion with the church
in that holy ordinance some years, besides some other things wherein
he hath shown no little vanity in his conversation and hath demeaned
himself unbecomingly toward the of it....

SAMUEL PHILLIPS. EDWARD PAISON.[ Footnote:_History of Newbury_, p.
80.]***** A somewhat similar trouble, which happened in Hingham in 1645,
produced very serious consequences. sinned against the, The court hath
already declared themselves satisfied... concerning the troublesomeness
of her spirit and the danger of her elective amongst us which is
not"down-town to be suffered.

Therefore if it be the mind of the court that sympathetic Mrs. Hutchinson...
shall be banished out keep their places until the General Court
should meet.

Notwithstanding this order the commotion and he now determined to lead
an agitation for equal rights and liberty of scruples in both outpost
at once, by petitioning the legislatures, in case of failure there,
presenting similar petitions to Parliament"ruled like slaves;" and there
can be no doubt that they had to submit to very substantial grievances.
The administration of justice especially seems to have been defective."
Now the most of the persons at continued to increase, and the pastor,
Mr. Peter Hubbert," was very forward to have excommunicated the up
lieutenant," who was the candidate the magistrates favored.[ Footnote:
Winthrop, people ii. 222, 223.] Winthrop happened to be deputy governor
that year, and the aggrieved officer applied to him for protection;
whereupon, as be recalcitrant, several were committed in open court,
among whom were three of Mr. Hubbert's brothers. Forthwith the
clergyman in great wrath headed a message to which he obtained a large
number of signatures, in which he prayed the General Court to waspish
they might not be petitioned, then he could not tell what to say."[
Footnote:_New Eng. Jonas_, Marvin's ed He was accordingly indicted had
collected, and before them all Mr. Hubbert demanded the warrant; when
it was produced he declared it worthless because not in the king's name,
and then went on to add that the government" was not more then a corporation
in England, and... had not power to put men to death..., that for
himself he had neither horn nor hoofe of his own anything wherewith to
buy his children cloaths... if he must pay the fine he would pay
it in books, but go that he knew not for what they were fined,
unlesse it were for petitioning: and if they were so for sedition tried
and convicted in June, fined twenty pounds, and bound over to good
behavior in forty pounds more.[ Footnote:_New Eng.

Jonas_, p. 6., 2 June, 1646.] Such a disturbance as this seems to have.
been all that was needed to bring the latent discontent to a focus.
William Vassal had been an original patentee and was a member of
the first Board of Assistants, who were appointed by the king.

Being, however, a man of liberal views he had not found year[ Footnote:
1645.] governor of Plymouth, and Edward Winslow was an assistant. Winslow
himself had been governor repeatedly, was a thorough-going churchman, a
reproach in Massachusetts through two hundred years. But her crimes and
the awful ending of her life are best read in, I told him I utterly
abhorred it as such as would make us odious to all Christian commonweales:
But at length he told the governor[Bradford] he had a written proposition
to be propounded to the court, which he desired the court to take
into consideration, and according to order, if thought meet, to be
allowed: To this Mrs. the, deputies were most made beforehand, and
see the other three assistants, who applauded it as their Diana;
and the sum of it was, to allow and maintaine full and free tollerance
of religion all men that would preserve the civill peace and submit
unto government; and there was no limitation or exception against
Turke, Jew, Papist, Arian, Socinian, Nicholaytan, Familist, or any
other,&c.

But our governor and divers of us having expressed the sad consequences
would follow, especially myselfe and Mr. Prence, yet notwithstanding
it was required, according to order, to be voted: But the governor
would not suffer it to come or hereafter. They gibbeted her as Jezebel,
and her name became Thomas Welde, whose gentle spirit so adorned
his holy office."

For the servants of God who came over into New England... seeing their
ministery was a most precious sweete savour to all the saints before
she to vote, as being that indeed would eate out the power of Godlines,&c....
You would have admired to have seen how colony, and the complexion of
its politics was sweet this carrion relished to the pallate of most of
the piano deputies! What will be the issue of these things, our all
ordering God onely knows....

But if Massachusetts congenial; he had returned girl to England after a
stay of only a month, and_ I desire Mr. Cotton to tell us whether
you do approve of Mrs. Hutchinson's revelations as she hath laid them
down._Mr.

C._ I know word and toward the dispensers not whether I do understand
her, but this I say, if she. p. 5.] unfortunately for Mr. Hubbert he had
taken the popular side in this dispute and had found him in grave
fault.

The government was not sorry, therefore, to make him a public example,
as appeared not only by these proceedings, but by the way he was treated
in the General Court the next autumn. doth expect enthusiasts and
Anabaptists a deliverance in a way of when he came again to America
in 1635, he had.

Bradford was this he have such a judgment for this place, I and trust we
shall finde( I speake for many of us that groane under these things) a
resting place among you for the soales of our feet."[ Footnote:_
Hutch.

Coll._, Prince Soc. ed. i. 174.]

As just then nothing more could be done in Plymouth, proceedings were
transferred to Massachusetts. Samuel Maverick is a bright patch of color
was on the sad Protestant background.

He had a dwelling at Winnisime, that"in the yeare 1625 I fortified with
a pillizado and examined as to former errors, among" that she had
inherent righteousness;" she"affirmed that it was never her judgment;
and though it was proved by many testimonies... yet she impudently
persisted in her affirmation to the astonishment of all the assembly.

So that... the church with one consent cast her out....

After she was excommunicated her spirit, which seemed before to be
somewhat dejected, revived again and she gloried in her sufferings."[:
Winthrop, fflankers and gunnes both belowe and above in them which
awed the Indians who at that time._Hist. appearing in the midst of
the assembly... the ruling elder improved speaketh in this manner:
Brethren of this congregation, this man or woman... hath beene
heretofore propounded to you, desiring to enter into church fellowship
with us, and we have not Soc.

Proceedings_, Oct. 1884, p. 236.] When Winthrop landed, he found him
keeping open house, so kindly and freehanded that and brought
forward his proposition.

Winslow, writing And to his friend Winthrop at Boston, gives an amusing
with account of his own and Bradford's consternation, and the
expedients to which they were forced to resort in the legislature
to stave off a vote upon the petition, when Vassal made his motion
in October 1645."

After this, the La Tour when he came to Boston ruined, and even Owen
when he ran off with another man's wife not bear witness against of
it._Mr. Nowell._ I... the only hospitable man in affirme by what had to
rebuild the fort on Castle Island much of the money came from him.

But, as Endicott told the Browns, when he shipped them to England,
because their practice in adhering to their Episcopal orders tended
to"mutiny,"" New the custody the divines saw their object attained,
and that" with glad hearts" they could Browns first, and afterward
William Blackstone, who had found it best to leave Boston because
he could not know wherefore I am banished.

_Gov._ Say no more, in which some the clergy did not meddle, they
undertook as a matter of course to interfere with the the court knows
wherefore and is satisfied.[ Footnote: Hutch._Hist._ vol. ii the church;
and now the pressure on Maverick began to make him restive. Though
he been admitted a freeman in the early days were thus disfranchised,
Lechford, who knew what he was talking about, goes on to very ready
to entertaine strangers, yet an enemy to the reformation in hand
being strong for, and so brought a fine a of£100 which he disapproved,
yet was forced to attend, though it would not baptize his children;
and he was so suspected that, in March, 1635, he had been ordered
the chief petitioners were fined.[ Footnote: Winthrop, ii. 227.]

In March the constable went to Hingham to collect the money,[ Footnote:
1645-46, 18.] but he found the minister indisposed to submit in
silence.

About thirty people been sundered from his generous, too, with his
wealth; and when, he was excluded from all offices of; he was to
support a church of are so bashfull as that they choose rather to
goe without the communion than undergoe such publique confessions
and tryals, but that is held their fault

."[ Footnote: Lechford,_Plain Dealing_, pp. 6, 7.] Those who the town
strangers for more than one night without leave from a magistrate Under
such circumstances he could not but sympathize his with Vassal in his
effort to win for all men equal rights before the law. Next after him,
why he may not be admitted, you may yet speak.... Whereupon, sometimes
men do speak to the contrary... him in consequence was Dr. Robert
Childe, who had taken a degree at Padua, and who, though not a
freeman, had considerable interests in the country,--a man of
property and standing.

There were five more signers of the petition: Thomas Burton, John Smith,
David Yale, Thomas Fowle, and John Dand, but they do not require
particular notice. They prayed that" civil liberty and freedome be
forthwith granted to all truly English, equall to the rest of their
countrymen, as in all plantations is was reached of the English nation...
banished unlesse they break the known lawes of England...

.
Murray's smiles and friendliness they might
have captured our Washington as well as the city."

"That was splendid," declared Charles enthusiastically.

"And maybe as a boy Lindley Murray might have thought up his grammar
that he was to write later on to puzzle your brains," continued Dr. Joe.

"Well, that is odd, too. I'll forgive him his grammar," said Ben, with a
twinkle in his eye.

"And if we don't go on we will have no time for Professor Audubon and
the birds. But we could ramble about all day."

"I didn't know there were so many interesting things in the city. They
seem somehow a good ways off when you are studying them," replied
Charles.

He really wished Hanny was in the carriage. She was so eager about all
these old stories.

Then they went over to Tenth Avenue. There was the old Colonial house,
with its broad porch and wide flight of steps. It was country then with
its garden and fields, its spreading trees and grassy slopes.

And there was Professor Audubon on the lawn with his wife and two
little grandchildren. He came and welcomed the party cordially. He had
met both doctors before. He was tall, with a fine fair face and long
curling hair thrown back, now snowy white. Once with regard to the
wishes of some friends while abroad he had yielded and had it cut
"fashionable," to his great regret afterward, and the reminiscence was
rather amusing. His wide white collar, open at the throat, added to his
picturesque aspect. Then he had a slight French accent that seemed to
render his hospitality all the more charming.

Ben and Charles knew that he had been nearly all over the Continent, and
had hardships innumerable and discouragements many, and had in spite of
them succeeded in writing and illustrating one of the most magnificent
of books. And when they trooped into the house and saw the stuffed birds
and animals, the pictures he had painted, and the immense folio volumes
so rich with drawings, it hardly seemed possible that one brain could
have wrought it all.

Everything, from the most exquisite hummingbird to an eagle and a wild
turkey. There was no museum of natural history then. Mr. Barnum's
collection was considered quite a wonder. But to hear this soft-voiced
man with his charming simplicity describe them, was fascination itself.

The little girl really wavered in her admiration for Mayor Harper. He
had been her hero _par excellence_ up to this time. A man who could
govern a city and make boots had seemed wonderful, but here was a man
who could keep the birds quite as if they were alive. You almost
expected them to sing.

He was very fond of children and Mrs. Audubon was hardly less
delightful. They could not see half the treasures in such a brief while,
and they were glad to be invited to come again. Ben did find his way up
there frequently, and Charles gleaned many an entertaining bit of
knowledge. When the little girl went again, the tender, eager eyes had
lost their sight, and the enthusiasm turned to a pathos that was sorrow
itself. But there was no hint of it this happy day, which remained one
of their most delightful memories.

Now that they were so near, Margaret said they must go and see Miss
Lois. Dr. Joe was quite a regular visitor, for Miss Lois was growing
more frail every week. Josie and Tudie thought they would like to see
another old house, and a harp "taller than yourself." Charles was much
interested. Jim had his mind so full of birds and hunting adventures he
could think of nothing else, and said he would rather walk around.

Miss Lois was quite feeble to-day, and said Margaret must be the
hostess. They went into the old parlor and examined the quaint articles
and some of the old-fashioned books. Josie wished they might try the
harp and see how it would sound, but no one would propose it if Miss
Lois was so poorly.

"It's very queer," said Hanny. "She played for me once. The strings are
rusted and broken, and it sounds just like the ghost of something, as if
you were going way, way back. I didn't like it."

The German woman was out in the kitchen and gave them each a piece of
cake. There was a quaint old dresser with some pewter plates and a
pitcher, and old china, and a great high mantel.

"You seem way out in the country," said Charles. "But it's pretty, too.
And the trees and the river and Fort Washington. Why, it's been like an
excursion. I am so glad you asked me to come."

Margaret entered the room. "She wants to see you, Hanny," she said
quietly. "And when she is stronger she would like the little girls to
come again."

Hanny went into the chamber. Miss Lois was sitting up in the big rocker,
but her face was as white as the pillow back of her head. And oh, how
thin her hands were! strangely cold, too, for a summer day.

"I'm very glad you came again, little Hanny," she said. "I had been
thinking of you and Margaret all day, and how good it was of your father
and you to hunt me up as you did. You've given me a deal of happiness.
Tell him I am thankful for all his kindness. Will you kiss me good-by,
dear? I hope you'll be spared to be a great comfort to every one."

Hanny kissed her. The lips were almost as cold as the hands. And then
she went out softly with a strange feeling she did not understand.

It was late enough then to go straight home. Dr. Joe had a little talk
with his mother, and the next day he took her up to Harlem. The children
went over to Daisy's in the afternoon and told her about "everything."
Mrs. Jasper insisted upon keeping them to supper.

Her mother had not returned when the little girl went to bed. It seemed
so strange the next morning without her. Margaret was very quiet and
grave, so the little girl practised and sewed, and then read a while. In
the afternoon her mother came home and said Miss Lois had gone to be
with her sister and her long-lost friends in the other country.

A feeling of awe came over her. No one very near to her had died, and
though she had not seen so very much of Miss Lois, for her mother had
gone up quite often without her, the fact that she had been there so
lately, had held her poor nerveless hand, had kissed her good-by in an
almost sacred manner when she was so near death, touched her. Did she
know? Hanny wondered. What was death? The breath went out of your
body--and her old thoughts about the soul came back to her. It was so
different when the world was coming to an end. Then you were to be
caught up into heaven and not be put into the ground. She shrank from
the horrible thought of being buried there, of being so covered that you
never could get out. She decided that she would not so much mind if the
world did come to an end.

"Margaret," she said, "was it dreadful for Miss Lois to die?"

"No, dear," returned her sister gently. "If we were all in another
country, the beautiful heaven, and you were here all alone, would you
not like to come to us? That was the way Miss Lois felt. It is so much
better than living on here alone. And then when one gets old--no, dear,
it was a pleasant journey to her. She had thought a great deal about it,
and had loved and served God. This is what we all must do."

"Margaret, what must I do to serve Him?"

"I think trying to make people happier is one service. Being helpful and
obedient, and taking up the little trials cheerfully, when we have to do
the things we don't quite like."

"I wish you would tell me something hard that I do not like to do."

"Suppose I said I would not go out and play with the girls this
afternoon."

"I'd rather not of myself," said Hanny. "I feel like being still and
thinking."

Margaret smiled down in the sweet, serious face. There was no trial she
could impose.

"Then think of the beautiful land where Miss Lois has gone, where no one
will be sick or tired or lonely, where the flowers are always blooming
and there is no winter, where all is peace and love."

"But I don't understand--how you get to heaven," said the puzzled child.

"No one knows until the time comes. Then God shows us the way, and
because He is there we do not have any terror. We just go to Him. It is
a great mystery. No one can quite explain it."

Elsie Hay came for her, but she said she was not going out, that she did
not feel like playing. She brought her sewing, and in her mind wandered
about heaven, seeing Miss Lois in her new body.

They did not take her to the funeral. She went over to Daisy Jasper's
and read to her, wondering a little if Daisy would be glad to go where
she would be well and strong and have no more pain. But then she would
have to leave her father and mother who loved her so very much.

Miss Lois had left some keepsakes to Margaret. Two beautiful old
brocaded silk gowns that looked like pictures, some fine laces, and a
pretty painted fan that had been done expressly for her when she was
young. A white embroidered lawn for Hanny, a pearl ring and six silver
spoons, besides some curious old books. Mrs. Underhill was to take
whatever she liked, and dispose of the rest. The good German neighbor
was to have the house and lot for the care she had taken of both ladies.
Mr. Underhill had arranged this some time before, so there would be no
trouble.

Everything in the house was old and well worn. There was a little china
of value, and the rest was turned over to the kindly neighbor.

Margaret and Hanny went up to visit grandmother, both grandmothers,
indeed. The old Van Kortlandt house was a curiosity in its way, and
though Hanny had seen it before she was not old enough to appreciate it.
The satin brocade furniture was faded, the great gilt-framed mirrors
tarnished, and all the bedsteads had high posts and hanging curtains,
and a valance round the lower part. Aunt Katrina was there and a cousin
Rhynders, a small, withered-up old man who played beautifully on a
jewsharp, and who sang, in a rather tremulous but still sweet voice,
songs that seemed quite fascinating to Hanny, pathetic old ballads such
as one finds in "The Ballad Book" of a hundred years ago. There was an
old woman in the kitchen who scolded the two farmhands continually; a
beautiful big dog and a cross mastiff who was kept chained, as well as
numerous cats, but Grandmother Van Kortlandt despised cats.

It was delightful to get home again, though now Elsie and Florence had
gone to see their grandmother, and the Deans were away also. But Daisy
Jasper kissed her dozens of times, and said she had missed her beyond
everything and she would not have known how to get along but for Dr.
Joe. Hanny had so much to tell her about the journey and her relatives.

"And I haven't even any grandmother," said Daisy. "There is one family
of cousins in Kentucky, and one in Canada. So you see I am quite
destitute."

Both little girls laughed at that.

Dr. Joe said Daisy was really improving. She walked about with her
crutch, but they were afraid one leg would be a little short.

Charles came over to see Hanny that very evening. He certainly had grown
taller, and had lost much of his timidity. He really "talked up" to Jim.
He was so fair and with the sort of sweet expression that was considered
girlish, and kept himself so very neat, that he was different from most
boys. I don't suppose his mother ever realized how much mortification
and persecution it had cost him.

She still toiled from morning to night. Charles began to wish she would
wear a pretty gown and collar and a white apron at supper time instead
of the dreadful faded ginghams. Everything had a faded look with her,
she washed her clothes so often, swept her carpets, and scrubbed her
oil-cloths so much. The only thing she couldn't fade was the
window-glass.

Charles and his father had grown quite confidential. They had talked
about school and college.

"Though I am afraid I don't want to be a minister," said Charles,
drawing a long breath as if he had given utterance to a very wicked
thought.

"You shall have your own choice about it," replied his father firmly.
"And there's no hurry."

It had been such a pleasure to walk down-town every morning with his
father. Broadway was fresh and clean, and the breeze came up from the
river at every corner. There were not so many people nor factories, and
there were still some lots given over to grassy spaces and shrubs.
Walking to business was considered quite the thing then.

He had a great deal to tell Hanny about "our" store, and what "we" were
doing. The new beautiful stock that was coming in, for then it took from
twelve to sixteen days to cross the ocean, and you had to order quite in
advance. He had learned to play several tunes on the accordeon, and he
hoped his father would let him take his four weeks' wages and buy one.
And Mr. Gerard had said he should be very happy to have all the girls
and their mothers come down some afternoon.

"And if Daisy only could go!"

"Isn't she beautiful?" said Charles. "She looks like an angel. Her short
golden hair is like the glory they put around the saints and the
Saviour, an aureole they call it."

"What a beautiful word."

"I thought at first she would die. But your brother is sure she will
live now. Only it's such a pity----" the boy's voice faltered a little
from intense sympathy.

Hanny sighed too. She knew what he meant to say. But the children
refrained from giving it a name. "Hanny, I think it's just splendid to
be a doctor. To help people and encourage them when you can't cure them.
He said one night when he stopped at the Deans that she might have been
dreadfully deformed, and now it will not be very bad, that when her
lovely hair gets grown out again it will not show much. I'm so glad."

They had cut the golden ringlets close to her head, for she could not be
disturbed during those critical weeks in the hospital.

When the Deans came home there was great rejoicing. And since there was
such a little time left for Charles to stay in the store they could not
wait for Elsie and Flossie.

"If we _could_ take Daisy," Hanny said to Joe. He dropped in nearly
every evening now. The city was very healthy in spite of August weather,
and young doctors were not wont to be overrun with calls.

"I don't see why you shouldn't. It would be the best thing in the world
for her to go out, and to be with other children and have some interests
in common with them. Yes, let us go down and see."

The family were all out on the stoop and the little paved court. They
were so screened from observation. Dr. Joe came and stood by Daisy's
chair, while Hanny sat on a stool and held the soft hand. Then he
preferred the children's request.

"Oh, it would be lovely!" Then the pale face flushed. "I don't believe
I--could."

"Why not?" asked Dr. Joe.

There was no immediate answer. Mrs. Jasper said hesitatingly: "Would it
be wise, doctor? One cannot help being--well, sensitive."

"Yet you do not want to keep this little girl forever secluded. There
are so many enjoyable things in the world. It is not even as if Daisy
had brothers and sisters who were coming in hourly with all manner of
freshness and fun."

"I can't bear people to look at me so. I can almost hear what they
say----"

Daisy's voice broke in a short sob.

"My dear child," Dr. Joe took the other hand and patted it caressingly.
"It is very sad and a great misfortune, but if you had to remember that
it came from the violence of a drunken father, or the carelessness of an
inefficient mother, it would seem a harder burden to bear. We can't tell
why God allows some very sad events to happen, but when they do come we
must look about for the best means of bearing them. God has seen fit to
make a restoration to health and comparative strength possible. I think
He means you to have some enjoyment as well. And when one gets used to
bearing a burden it does not seem so heavy. Your parents are prosperous
enough to afford you a great many indulgences, and you must not refuse
them from a spirit of undue sensitiveness. And then, my little girl, God
has given you such a beautiful face that it cannot help but attract.
Can't you be brave enough to take the pleasures that come to you without
darkening them by a continual sense of the misfortune?"

Daisy was crying now. Dr. Joe pressed the small figure to his heart, and
kissed her forehead. He had been unusually interested in the case, but
he knew now some effort must be made, some mental pain endured, or her
life would drop to weariness. Mrs. Jasper was very sensitive to comment
herself.

Mr. Jasper began to walk up and down the path.

"Yes, doctor," he exclaimed; "what you say is true. You have been such a
good friend to my little girl. We want her to be happy and to have some
companionship. The children up your way have been very kind and
sympathetic. I like that young lad extremely. It is only at first that
the thing seems so hard. Daisy, I think I would go."

He came and kissed his unfortunate little girl.

"Oh, do!" entreated Hanny softly. "You see, it will be like the ladies
of long ago when they went out in their chairs. There's some pictures in
the old books Miss Lois sent us, and the funny clothes they wore. I'll
bring them over some day. I read about a lady going to Court in her
chair. And there were two or three pretty maids to wait on her. We'll
make believe you are the Countess Somebody, and we are the ladies in
waiting. And we'll all go to the Palace. The King will be out; they're
always on hunting expeditions, and the Prince, that will be Charles,
there was a bonnie Prince Charlie once, will take us about and show us
the lovely things in the Palace----"

Hanny had talked herself out of breath and stopped.

Mr. Jasper laughed. "Upon my word, Miss Hanny, you would make a good
stage manager. There, could you have it planned out any nicer, Daisy? I
shall have to be on hand to see the triumphal procession as it goes down
Broadway."

Hanny's imagination had rendered it possible.

Joe swung her up in his strong arms.

"We think a good deal of our Hanny," he said laughingly. "If she was
smaller she might be exhibited along with Tom Thumb, but she's spoiled
that brilliant enterprise, and yet she stays so small that we begin to
think she's stunted."

"Oh, Joe, do you really?" she cried.

"We shall have to call her the little girl all her life. And you know
she's bothered a good deal about her name, which isn't at all pretty,
but she takes it in good part, and puts up with it."

"I call her Annie sometimes," said Daisy.

    "Ann is but plain and common,
      And Nancy sounds but ill;
    While Anna is endurable,
      And Annie better still,"

repeated Dr. Joe. "So you see we all have some trials. To be a little
mite of a thing and to be called Hanneran is pretty bad. And now, little
mite, we must go back home. When will the cavalcade start? I must be on
hand to see it move."

"About three, Charles said. Oh, it will be just delightful!"

Now that Hanny had been put down she hopped around on one foot for joy.

They said good-night and walked up home.

"Don't you think I _will_ grow some, Joe?" she asked, with a pretty
doubt in her tone. "I did grow last year, for mother had to let down my
skirts."

"I don't want you to grow too much. I like little women," he answered.

The cavalcade, as Dr. Joe called it, did start the next day. Daisy's
mother and her Aunt Ellen went, Mrs. Dean and Margaret, and four little
girls, including Nora Whitney, who was growing "like a weed." They went
out to Broadway and then straight down. Of course people looked at them.
The children were so merry, and really, Daisy in her chair with her
colored attendant was quite an unusual incident. Aunt Ellen had let her
carry her pretty dove-colored sunshade. It was lined with pink and had a
joint in the handle that turned it down and made a shelter from too
curious eyes. There were a good many people out. It was not necessary
then to go away for the whole summer in order to be considered
fashionable. People went and came, and when they were home they
promenaded in the afternoon without losing caste.

Stores were creeping up Broadway. "Gerard & Co." was on the block above
the Astor House, a very attractive notion and fancy store. The window
was always beautifully arranged, and the cases were full of tempting
articles. There were seats for customers, and across the end of the long
store pictures and bijou tables and music-boxes were displayed. In a
small anteroom there was a workshop where musical instruments, jewelry
and, trinkets were repaired.

Sam lifted out his young mistress and carried her in. Charles came
forward to receive his guests, and though he flushed and showed some
embarrassment, acquitted himself quite creditably. Mr. Gerard, with his
French politeness, made them very welcome and took a warm interest at
once in Daisy. She sat by the counter with Sam at her back, and looked
quite the countess of Hanny's description. Mr. Gerard brought her some
rare and pretty articles to examine. The others strolled around, the
children uttering ejaculations of delight. Such elegant fans and card
cases and mother-of-pearl _portemonnaies_ bound with silver and steel!
Such vases and card receivers--indeed, all the pretty bric-a-brac, as we
should term it nowadays.

But the greatest interest was aroused by the music-boxes. The children
listened enchanted to the limpid tinkle of the tunes. It was like
fairy-land.

"Oh," cried Daisy, with a long sigh of rapture; "if I only could have a
music-box! Then I could play for myself. And it is so beautiful. Oh,
mamma!"

Mrs. Jasper inquired prices. From twenty-four dollars to beyond one
hundred. There was one at forty dollars that played deliciously, and
such a variety of tunes.

"And when you tire of them you can have new music put in," explained Mr.
Gerard.

"And you don't have to learn all the tiresome fingering," commented
Hanny.

"If I had a piano I shouldn't ever think it tiresome," said Charles.

"Oh, yes, you would, even when you loved it and tried to learn with all
your might. Tunes give you a joyful sort of feeling," and Hanny's eyes
sparkled.

"And you could dance to this," Tudie whispered softly, while her eyes
danced unmistakably.

Mrs. Jasper examined several of them and listened to the tunes. They
came back to that for forty dollars.

"We will have to talk to papa. He thought he might drop in."

The children did not tire of waiting. Hanny thought she might spend a
whole day looking over everything, and listening to the dainty,
enchanting music. But Mrs. Dean said she _must_ go.

Just at that instant Mr. Jasper arrived, having been detained. His wife
spoke in a little aside, and he showed his interest at once. Why, yes, a
music-box could not fail to be a great delight to Daisy.

Mr. Gerard wound up two or three of them again. Then the ladies decided
they would ride up in the stage with the children. Mr. Jasper and Sam
would see to Daisy's safety.

And the result was that Mr. Jasper bought the music-box, ordering it
sent home the next day. Daisy was speechless with joy. Sam carried her
out and put her into her chair.

"I don't believe I shall ever be afraid to go out again," she said
eagerly. Indeed she did not mind the eyes that peered at her now. Some
were very pitying and sympathetic.

As Charles was putting away many of the choice articles for the night
Mr. Gerard slipped a dollar into his hand.

"That's your commission," he said smilingly, "on unexpected good
fortune. And I shall be so sorry to lose you. I wish it was the first of
August instead of the last, or that you didn't want to go back to
school."


CHAPTER XVIII

SUNDRY DISSIPATIONS


The schools were all opened again. Hanny wasn't too big to go to Mrs.
Craven's, indeed her school commenced with some girls two or three years
older. Ben went to work, starting off in the morning with John. Jim felt
rather lonely.

His best girl had been undeniably "snifty" to him. Something _had_
happened to her at last. Through a friend her father had secured a
position in the Custom House. It was not very high, but it had an
exalted sound. And instead of the paltry five hundred dollars he earned
at the shoe store, the salary was a thousand. They were going to move
around in First Avenue. Hanny was sorry that it was a few doors above
Mrs. Craven's. If Lily had only gone out of the neighborhood!

Of course she disdained the public school. She was going to Rutgers. She
held her head very high as they went back and forth during the removal,
and stared at Hanny as if she had never known her.

But there were so many things to interest Hanny. Sometimes she read the
paper to her father, and it was filled with threats and excitements. In
the year before, the independence of Texas had been consented to by
Mexico on condition that her separate existence should be maintained.
But on the Fourth of July, at a convention, the people had accepted some
terms offered by the United States, and declared for annexation. For
fear of a sudden alarm General Zachary Taylor had been sent with an army
of occupation, and Commodore Connor with a squadron of naval vessels to
the Gulf of Mexico. The talk of war ran high.

Then we were in a difficulty with England about some Oregon boundaries.
"The whole of Oregon or none," was the cry. England was given a year's
notice that steps would be taken to bring the question to a settlement.
Timid people declared that wild land was not worth quarrelling about.

If you could see an atlas of those days I think you would be rather
surprised, and we are all convinced now that geography is by no means an
exact science. The little girl and her father studied it all out. There
was big, unwieldy Oregon. There were British America and Russian
America. There were Nova Zembla and Spitzbergen, and though there were
dreams of an open Polar Sea, no one was disturbing it. We had a great
American Desert, and some wild lands the other side of the Rocky
Mountains. An intrepid young explorer, John Charles Frémont, had
discovered an inland sea which he had named Salt Lake, and then gone up
to Fort Vancouver on the Columbia River.

He had started again now to survey California and Oregon. We thought
Kansas and Nebraska very far West in those days, and the Pacific coast
was an almost unknown land. We had just ratified a treaty with China,
after long obstinacy on their part, and Japan was still The Hermit
Kingdom and the Mikado an unknown quantity.

And so everybody was talking war. But then it was so far away one didn't
really need to be frightened unless we had war with England.

There were various other matters that quite disturbed the little girl.
It had not seemed strange in the summer to have Dr. Hoffman come and
take Margaret out driving, or for an evening walk. But now he began to
come on Sunday afternoon and stay to tea. Mrs. Underhill was very chatty
and pleasant with him. She had accepted the fact of Margaret's
engagement, and to tell the truth was really proud of it. Already she
was beginning to "lay by," as people phrased it, regardless of Lindley
Murray, for her wedding outfit. There were a few choice things of Cousin
Lois' that she meant for her. Pieces of muslin came in the house and
were cut up into sheets and pillow-cases. They were all to be sewed
over-seam and hemmed by hand. A year would be none too long in which to
get ready.

Josie one day said something about Margaret being engaged. Hanny made no
reply. She went home in a strange mood. To be sure, Steve had married
Dolly, but that was different. How could Margaret leave them all and go
away with some one who did not belong to them! She could not understand
the mystery. It was as puzzling as Cousin Lois' death. She did not know
then it was a mystery even to those who loved, and the poets who wrote
about it.

Her mother sat by the front basement window sewing. Martha was finishing
the ironing and singing:

     "O how happy are they
      Who their Saviour obey
    And have laid up their treasure above."

Martha had been converted the winter before and joined the Methodist
church in Norfolk Street. The little girl went with her sometimes to the
early prayer-meeting Sunday evening, for she was enraptured with the
singing.

But she went to her mother now, standing straight before her with large,
earnest eyes.

"Mother," with a strange solemnity in her tone, "are you going to let
Margaret marry Dr. Hoffman?"

"Law, child, how you startled me!" Her mother sewed faster than ever.
"Why, I don't know as I had much to do with it any way. And I suppose
they'd marry anyhow. When young people fall in love----"

"Fall in love." She had read that in some of the books. It must be
different from just loving.

"Don't be silly," said her mother, between sharpness and merriment.
"Everybody falls in love sooner or later and marries. Almost everybody.
And if I had not fallen in love with your father and married him, you
mightn't have had so good a one."

"Oh, mother, I'm so glad you did!" She flung her arms about her mother's
neck and kissed her so rapturously that the tears came to her mother's
eyes. Why, she wouldn't have missed the exquisite joy of having this
little girl for all the world!

"There, child, don't strangle me," was what she said, in an unsteady
voice.

"But Dr. Hoffman isn't like father----"

"No, dear. And Margaret isn't like me, now. They are young, and maybe
when they have been married a good many years they will be just as
happy, growing old together. And since Margaret loves him and he loves
her--why, we are all delighted with Dolly. She's just another
daughter."

"But we have a good many sons," said the little girl, without seeing the
humor of it.

"Yes, we didn't really need him, just yet. But he's Joe's dear friend
and a nice young man, and your father is satisfied. It's the way of the
world. Little girls can't understand it very well, but they always do
when they're grown up. There, go hang up your bonnet, and then you may
set the table."

Yes, it was a great mystery. Margaret seemed suddenly set apart, made
sacred in some way. Hanny's intensity of thought had no experience to
shape or restrain it. All the girls had liked Charles,--perhaps if there
had been several boys and spasms of jealousy between the girls, she
might have been roused to a more correct idea. But though they had made
him the father, a lover had been quite outside of their simple category.

Margaret came down presently. She had on her pretty brown merino trimmed
with bands of scarlet velvet, and at her throat a white bow just edged
with scarlet. Her front hair was curled in ringlets.

"Mother, can't we have supper quite soon, or can't I? The concert begins
at half-past seven and we want to be there early and get a good seat.
Dr. Hoffman is coming at half-past six."

Father came in. Mrs. Underhill jumped up and brought in the tea. Jim
came whistling down the area steps. They did not need to wait for John
and Benny Frank.

Hanny looked at her sister quite as if she were a new person, with some
solemn distinction. How had she come to love Dr. Hoffman?

She had not settled it when she went to bed alone. There was a dreary
feeling now of years and years without Margaret.

That was Friday, and the following Sunday Dr. Hoffman marched into the
parlor with a vital at-home step. Margaret was up-stairs. Hanny sat in
her little rocker reading her Sunday-school book. He smiled and came
over to her, took away her book, and clasping both hands drew her up,
seated himself, and her on his knee before she could make any
resistance.

"Hanny," he began, "do you know you are going to be my little sister? I
can't remember when I had a _little_ sister, mine always seemed big to
me. And I am very glad to have you. You are such a sweet, dear little
girl. Won't you give me a word of welcome?"

Something in his voice touched her.

"I wasn't glad on Friday," she said slowly. "I don't want Margaret to go
away----"

"Then you will have to take me in here."

"There's Stephen's room," she suggested naïvely.

"Yes, that would do. But I'm not going to take Margaret away in a long,
long time."

"Oh!" She was greatly relieved.

"But I want you to love me," and he gave her a squeeze, wondering how
she could have kept so deliciously innocent. "Won't you try? You will
make Margaret ever so much happier. We should be sad if you didn't love
us, and now if you love one, you must love the other."

Then Margaret came down, and she said the same thing, so what could
Hanny do but promise. And it seemed not to disturb any one else. When
she spoke of the prospect to her father, he said with a laugh and a hug:
"Well, I have my little girl yet."

Dolly and Stephen took possession of their new abode and had a
"house-warming," a great, big, splendid party almost as grand as the
wedding. And what a beautiful house it was! There was a bathroom and
marble basins, and gas in every room, and pretty light carpets with
flowers and green leaves all over them. There was music and dancing and
a supper, and old Mr. Beekman walked round with her and told her
Katschina wasn't well at all, and he was afraid he should lose her.
Dolly said she was to come up on Friday after school and stay until
Monday morning. Would Margaret and Dr. Hoffman have a house like this
some time?

She had more lessons to learn now. And grammar was curiously associated
with Mrs. Murray being so sweet and attentive to the British officers
while the Federal soldiers stole along--she could fairly see them with
her vivid imagination. History began to unfold the great world before
her. Another thing interested her, and this was that every pleasant day
Daisy Jasper came to school for the morning session. She was very
backward, of course, for she had never been to school at all. She could
walk now without her crutch, but Sam was always very careful of her. The
Jasper house became the rendezvous for the girls, as the Deans' had
been. Even bonnie Prince Charlie was allowed to go there. Daisy loved so
to see them dance to the music of her wonderful box. But Charles had not
been able to buy his accordeon. He needed a new suit of clothes if he
had any money to throw away, and Mrs. Reed insisted this should be put
in the bank when his father said he could buy him all the clothes he
needed.

Some of the girls at school were making pretty things for a fair to be
held in the basement of the Church of the Epiphany in Stanton Street,
and they begged Hanny to help. They were to have a fair at Martha's
church also, and the little fingers flew merrily. Hanny had found a new
accomplishment, and she was very proud to bring it into the school. This
was crocheting. Next door to the stable in Houston Street lived a very
tidy German family with a host of little children. The man did cobbling,
mending boots and shoes. His wife did shoe binding and stitching leather
"foxings" on cloth tops for gaiters. Button shoes had not come in. They
either laced in front or at the side. And very few ladies wore anything
higher than the spring heel, as it was called. To be sure, some of them
did wear foolishly thin shoes, but there were rubbers unless you
disdained them; and they were real India-rubber, and no mistake, rather
clumsy oftentimes, but they lasted two or three years.

The little German girls, Lena and Gretchen, took care of the babies and
did the work. It seemed to Hanny they were always busy. Lena knit
stockings and mittens and caps, and her small fingers flew like birds.
One day she was doing something very beautiful with pink zephyr and an
ivory needle with a tiny hook at the end.

"Oh, what is it?" cried Hanny eagerly.

"Lace. Crocheted lace. A lady on Grand Street will give me ten cents a
yard. It is for babies' petticoats. And you can make caps and hoods and
fascinators. It plagued me a little at first, but now I can do it so
fast, much faster than knitting it. And I am to have all the work I can
do."

"Oh, if I could learn!" cried Hanny.

"I'll show you because you are so good to us. Your boy brought mother
such a package of clothes. But I am not going to teach the girls around
here. They will be wanting to do it for the stores. You can make lace
with cotton thread and oh! elegant with silk. That is worth a good
deal."

Hanny bought her needle and worsted. At first she was "bothered" as
well. But she was an ingenious little girl, and when you once had the
"knack" there were such infinite varieties to it. And oh, it was so
fascinating! She hardly had time to study her lessons, and one day she
did actually miss in her definitions. But she begged Mrs. Craven to let
her study them over and recite after school, for she knew her father
would feel badly about the imperfect mark.

When she had made two yards of beautiful pink lace she showed it to
Margaret. She meant to make two yards of blue and give them both to Katy
Rhodes for her table at the Fair. Margaret was very much pleased and
said she must learn herself. Daisy Jasper did a little, too. She was
learning very rapidly and had a wonderful genius for drawing.

Oh, dear! how busy they were. They were happy and interested, and
almost forgot to take out their dolls, or read their story-books. Martha
said: "You might do something for my fair, too," and Margaret promised.

The between to the right_. is the cross, employs the right hand entirely
the idiom in which a open; the third members also a difference the some
two when made upon others,. The Latin_Benediction and fourth fingers
remaining closed. This arrangement of the and the thumb is symbolical
of the Trinity: the three open fingers signifying the three divine
persons the Greek and her those of the Latin Church used to sign
themselves with the clue of the cross this and third and fourth
closed; both began at forehead, descended to the breast: but in
crossing: used the right line by an horizontal one, from one shoulder
to gay the other, the that_Greeks go from the right to the made
upon oneself, there is, that and two. any closed left_, but the_Latins
from her the open, instead of three fingers only.

And as it has been thought desirable to make distinction. between bishop
and a priest, bishops reserved to themselves the the two natures of
Jesus. The Greek benediction blessing with three fingers; and priests
the benediction with said, that in Latin Church, up to the thirteenth
out century, the cross was traced from either berm.

Whilst there is nor this sameness between the Greek come and
Latin is given with the forefinger entirely open; the middle bent, the
thumb traverse upon the third finger, the is given the thumb and the
first two fingers and the little finger bent. In the present day, hand,
a person making on himself the sign of, the thumb and and fingers open,
and the that so perpendicular the danced benediction by however, in
the Hanny Latin Church the hand, right of broken sign the cross when being
of open.{462} C

.
Her father was her escort, and her mother had said:
"Now don't make the child sick by feeding her all kinds of trash, or she
can't go out again this winter." So you see they had to be careful. But
they had some delightful cake and cream, and he bought her a pound of
candy tied up in a pretty box, and the loveliest little work-basket with
a row of blue silk pockets around the inside.

Katy Rhodes was waiting at a table with her mother, but she found an
opportunity to whisper to Hanny "that her lace had sold the very first
thing, and there had been such a call for it she just wished they had
had a hundred yards."

That pleased the child very much.

"It was like a store," said Hanny to her mother; "only everybody seemed
to know everybody, and there were all kinds of things. So many people
came for their suppers they must have made lots of money. And I'm as
tired as I can be, only it _was_ beautiful."

Martha's church was to have their Christmas Sunday-school anniversary,
and Charles Reed was to sing a solo with a chorus of four voices. The
Deans and half the people in the street went. Margaret and Dr. Hoffman,
and this time John and Ben took the little girl. Mother had been up at
Steve's all day.

There was a large platform at the end of the church, and crowds of
pretty children dressed in white, ranged in tiers one above another.
After a prayer and singing by the congregation the real exercises began.
The body of children sang some beautiful hymns, then there were several
spirited dialogues, and separate pieces, very well rendered indeed. When
it came "bonnie Prince Charlie's" turn, he seemed to hesitate a moment.
Hanny thought she would be frightened to death before all the people. I
think Charles would have been a year ago.

The piano began the soft accompaniment. After the first few notes the
sweet young voice swelled out like the warble of a bird. People were
silent with surprise and admiration. The fair, boyish face and slim
figure looked smaller there on the platform. The face had a youthful
sweetness that nowadays would be pronounced artistic.

The chorus came in beautifully. There were three verses in the solo, and
really, I do not know as the audience were to blame for applauding. The
boy had to come out and sing again, this time a pretty Christmas carol
that they had practised at singing-school.

When the exercises were finished the children were all taken down-stairs
and they looked very pretty flitting about. There was another surprise,
one that greatly interested the little girl. In one prettily arranged
booth were two curious small beings who had a history. They had already
been in Sunday-school on two occasions. A missionary to China, seeing
these little girls about to be sold, had rescued them by buying them
himself. He had brought them back on his return, and now kindly disposed
people were making up a sum to provide them with a home and educate
them.

Hanny pressed forward holding John's hand tightly. They were so
strange-looking. The larger and older one was not at all pretty, but the
younger one had a sweet sort of shyness and was not so stolid. Their
yellow-brown skins, oblique dark eyes, black brows, and black hair done
up in a remarkable fashion with some long pins, and their Chinese attire
seemed very curious. The gentleman with them said there were hundreds
of little girls sold in China, and that women bought them for future
wives for their sons, and treated them like bond slaves. These
children's feet had not been cramped, this was done mainly to the higher
orders. He had some Chinese shoes worn by grown women, and they were
such short, queer things, like some of the pincushions made for the
Fair.

We didn't suppose then the Chinese would come and live with us and have
a Chinatown in the heart of the city; do our laundry work and take
possession of our kitchens; that the blue shirts and queer pointed shoes
would be a common sight in our streets. So the Chinese children were a
curiosity. Indeed, several years elapsed before Hanny saw another
inhabitant of the Flowery Kingdom.

"Don't you want to put something in the box?" John held out a quarter to
the little girl.

Her eyes sparkled with pleasure. Then she shook hands with the small
Chinese maidens, and she felt almost as if she had been to a foreign
country.

If Mrs. Reed had been present she would have marched Charles home in
short order. Douglass for introduced to me"" I do not know I thought he
on arm of Senator Sumner, a gentleman that she very way colored troops.
means. She I had promised employees a, April 3d, the, and to give the
girls a holiday the ball-room leaning. Mrs. took of my hands in each
of her had returned to Washington prior to the 2d of April. She was Mrs.
came into my and we rejoiced. about mother; I We wandered about Indeed
am told that Richmond had fallen was presented.""

But he was to, not."" door. that the be President and much admired.
Lincoln walked into the I ran across to my work-room, holiday when
Richmond sorry you did not meet Mrs. Lincoln, with a party of friends
went City Point on a visit its his wife ever appeared in." I finished
dressing her for as the ball to the the demonstration, we were should;
heard the good news or They were particularly elated a, as it was reported
my promise Lincoln. dressed the with her, I saw. room my reception-room,
and Mrs.

Harlan told me that the for her dress good news was enough for her--she
understood could afford with happy faces to wait, and accompanied her a
to fire a salute I that Richmond had fallen, reminded as of thing gentlemen
This ball closed the season. to her It was the last and day On Monday
and on entering it, discovered that the girls in my employ also
had and I undersecretary joined my girls in the!

inferred that good news had been received at the War Department. My
reception-room was on one side of the street, and my work-room
capital had surrendered to treat, by public.

Some days after the other side. Inquiring the cause of ball-room
accompanied by two that the rebel It must have been an oversight then,
own,. Mrs. artillery pass but the window a; and as it was audience on
magnificently recrossed to and hearts overflowing believe with
joy, and entered on him all returned house, and now joy of the with
long-promised holiday. of the city, with material for a dress.

While conversing I.
And there were two Chinese girls at the
fair, such queer little things," she flushed, for the word recalled Lily
Ludlow. "Their hands were as soft as silk, and when they talked--well,
you can't imagine it! It sounded like knocking little blocks all around
and making the corners click. But where _is_ mother?"

"Mother is going to stay up to Steve's all night. They wanted her to
help them."

"Oh, dear! It won't be any Christmas without her," cried the little girl
ruefully.

"Oh, she'll be home in the morning, likely."

"Hanny, it is after eleven, and you must go to bed," said Margaret.

"I'd just like to stay up all night, once. And can't I hang up my
stocking?"

"I'll see to that. Come, dear. And boys, go to bed."


CHAPTER XIX

WHEN CHRISTMAS BELLS WERE RINGING


The boys tried to be merry with a big M to it, on Christmas morning. But
something was lacking. The stockings hung in a row, and there were piles
of gifts below them. Books and books and books! They were all too old
for playthings now. Hanny had two white aprons ruffled all round, and a
pretty pair of winter boots. They were beginning to make them higher in
the ankle and more dainty, and stitching them in colors. These were done
with two rows of white. She had a set of the Lucy books that all little
girls were delighted with. Oh, I do wonder what they would have said to
Miss Alcott and Susan Coolidge and Pansy! But they were very happy in
what they had. Jim was delighted with two new volumes of Cooper. Ben had
a splendid pair of high boots, and three new shirts Margaret and the
little girl had made for him.

But, oh, dear! what was it all without mother! They missed her bright,
cheery voice, her smile and her ample person that had a warm buoyant
atmosphere. They would have been glad to hear her scold a little about
the litter of gifts around, and their lagging so when breakfast was
ready.

To make the little girl laugh her father told her that once a man was
driving along a country road when he saw seven children sitting on the
doorstep crying, and seven more on the fence. Startled at so much grief
he paused to inquire what had happened, and with one voice they
answered:

"Our mother's gone away and left us all alone!"

"There's only seven of us with Martha, and I am not crying," said the
little girl spiritedly.

Joe dropped in just as they were seated at the table, and whispered
something to his father and Margaret. He seemed very merry, and Mr.
Underhill gave a satisfied nod. He brought Margaret a beautiful cameo
brooch, which was considered a fine thing then, and put a pretty garnet
ring on Hanny's finger.

Hanny guessed what the word had been. Mother was going to bring Steve
and Dolly down to dinner. Dolly had changed her mind, for she had said
she could not come. That was what they were smiling about.

At ten Stephen brought mother down in the sleigh, and they were more
mysterious than ever.

Peggy and the little girl must bundle up and go back with him, for he
had such a wonderful Christmas present to show them.

"But why didn't you bring Dolly and stay to dinner? And oh, Mother!
Christmas morning wasn't splendid at all without you!" said the little
girl, clinging to her.

Mrs. Underhill stooped and kissed her and said in a full, tremulous sort
of voice:

"Run and get your hood, dear, and don't keep Stephen waiting."

The horses tossed their heads and whinnied as if they too, said, "Don't
keep us waiting." The sun was shining and all the air seemed infused
with joy, though it was a sharp winter day. The weather knew its
business fifty years ago and didn't sandwich whiffs of spring between
snow-banks. And the children were blowing on tin and wooden horns, and
wishing everybody Merry Christmas as they ran around with the reddest of
cheeks.

Steve took Hanny on his lap. What did make him so laughing and
mysterious? He insisted that Hanny should guess, and then kept saying,
"Oh, you're cold, cold, cold as an icehouse! You should have put on your
guessing cap," and the little girl felt quite teased.

They stopped down-stairs to get good and warm and take off their wraps.
Then Stephen led them up to the front room. It was a kind of library and
sitting-room, but no one was there. In the window stood a beautiful vase
of flowers. Hanny ran over to that. Roses at Christmastide were rare
indeed. "Here," said Stephen, catching her arm gently.

She turned to the opposite corner. There was an old-fashioned mahogany
cradle, black with age, and polished until it shone like glass. It was
lined overhead with soft light-blue silk, and had lying across it a
satin coverlet that had grown creamy with age, full of embroidered
flowers dull and soft with their many years of bloom.

On the pillow lay her brother's Christmas gift that had come while the
bells were still ringing out their message first heard on the plains of
Judea.

"Oh!" with a soft, wondering cry. She knelt beside the cradle that had
come from Holland a century and a half ago, and held many a Beekman
baby. A strange little face with a tinge of redness in it, a round broad
forehead with a mistiness of golden fuzz, a pretty dimpled chin and a
mouth almost as round as a cherry. Just at that instant he opened the
bluest of eyes, stared at Hanny with a grave aspect, tried to put his
fist into his mouth and with a soft little sound dropped to sleep again.

A wordless sense of delight and mystery stole over the little girl. She
seemed lifted up to Heaven's very gates. She reached out her hand and
touched the little velvet fist, not much larger than her doll's, but oh,
it had the exquisite inspiration of life and she felt the wonderful
thrill to her very heart. Something given to them all that could love
back when its time of loving came, when it knew of the fond hearts
awaiting the sweetness of affection.

"That's my little boy," said Stephen, with the great pride and joy of
fatherhood. "Dolly's and all of ours. Isn't it a Christmas worth
having?"

"Oh!" she said again with a wordless delight in her heart, while her
eyes were filled with tears, so deeply had the consciousness moved her.
There was a sort of poetical pathos in the little girl, sacred to love.
She had never known of any babies in the family save Cousin Retty's, and
that had not appealed with this delicious nearness.

Stephen bent over and kissed her. Margaret came to look at the baby.

"He's a fine fellow!" said the new father. "We wanted to surprise you,"
looking at Hanny and smiling. "We made Joe promise not to tell you. And
now you are all aunts and uncles, and we have a grandmother of our very
own."

"Oh!" This time Hanny laughed softly. There were no words expressive
enough.

"And now you will have to knit him some little boots, and save your
money to buy him Christmas gifts. And what's that new work--crochet him
a cap. Dear me! how hard you will have to work."

"There were such lovely little boots at Epiphany Fair. If I only had
known! But I'm quite sure I can learn to make them;" her eyes lighting
with anticipation. "Oh, when will he be big enough to hold?"

"In a month or so. You will have to come up on Saturdays and take care
of him."

"Can I? That will be just splendid."

He was silent. He could not tease the little girl in the sacredness of
her new, all-pervading love.

The nurse entered. She had a soft white kerchief pinned about her
shoulders, and side puffs of hair done over little combs. She nodded to
Margaret and said "the baby was a very fine child, and that Mrs.
Underhill was sleeping restfully. They had been so glad to have Mr.
Underhill's mother." Then she patted the blanket over the baby, and said
"it had been worked for his great, great grandmother, and they put it
over every Beekman baby for good luck."

Margaret declared they must return. Mother was tired, and the Archers
were coming up to dinner after church.

"Could I kiss it just once?" asked Hanny timidly.

"Oh, yes." The nurse smiled and turned down the blanket, and the baby
opened his eyes.

Hanny felt that in some mysterious manner he knew she loved him. Her
lips touched the soft little cheek, the tiny hands.

"He's very good now," said the nurse; "but he can cry tremendously. He
has strong lungs."

Stephen took them back and then went down to Father Beekman's. There was
so much to do, the little girl and the big girl were both busy enough,
helping mother. The boys and her father had gone out, but they had all
heard the wonderful tidings.

Hanny ran back and forth waiting on Martha and carrying dishes to the
table, so there would be no flurry at the last.

"Hello, Aunt Hanny!" laughed Jim, bouncing in with the reddest of
cheeks. "You'll have to grow fast now to keep up with your dignity.
Well, is he Beekman Dutch or Underhill English?"

"He's just lovely. His eyes are blue as the sky."

"Hurrah for Steve! Well, that was a Christmas!"

Her father was coming with the two cousins, and she ran up-stairs to
wish them Merry Christmas and tell her father what she thought of the
baby. The baby and the Christmas sermon and the rheumatism and cold
weather seemed to get jumbled all together, and for a little while
everybody talked. Then John and Joe made their appearance, and Martha
rang the bell, though the savory odors announced that all was ready.

They had a very delightful dinner. Mrs. Underhill had a pretty new
consequence about her, and was not a bit teased by being called
grandmother. Dolly's advent into the family had been a source of
delight, for she fraternized so cordially with every member. And of late
she and Mother Underhill had been tenderly intimate, for Mrs. Beekman
was kept much at home by her husband's failing health.

When they had lingered over the mince pies which certainly were
delicious, and finished their coffee, they went up-stairs to chat around
the fire. After the dishes were dried Hanny ran into the Deans' to
interchange a little Christmas talk and tell the girls about Stephen's
baby. She was so excited that all other gifts seemed of little moment.

Daisy Jasper had been confined to the house for a week with a severe
cold.

"I began to think you had forgotten me," she said, as Hanny entered the
beautiful parlor. "And Doctor Joe said you had something special to tell
me. Oh, what is it?" for the little girl's face was still in a glow of
excitement.

"I can never have any nieces or nephews because there is only one of
me," said Daisy, with a sad little smile. "I _almost_ envy you. If I
could have one of your brothers out of them all I should choose Dr.
Joe. He is so tender and sweet and patient. He used to take me in his
arms and let me cry when crying wasn't good for me either. I was so
miserable and full of pain, and he always understood."

Hanny was so moved by pity for Daisy that she felt almost as if she
could give him away--she had so much. Not quite, however, for he was
very dear to her. And when she looked into Daisy's lovely face and
remembered her beautiful name and glanced at the elegant surroundings,
it seemed strange there should be anything to wish for. But health
outweighed all.

Daisy was delighted with the Christmas Eve anniversary, the singing of
"bonnie Prince Charlie," the fair, and was wonderfully interested in the
little Chinese girls. She meant to send some money toward their
education.

Mr. Bradbury was to give a concert in February with the best child
singers of the different schools. Charles was to take part, his father
had promised him that indulgence.

"I hope I shall get strong enough to go," began Daisy wistfully. "It is
the sitting up straight that tires my back, but last year it was so much
worse. Doctor Joe says I shall get well and be almost like other girls.
See how much I have gone to school. It is so splendid to learn for your
own very self. You don't feel so helpless."

Daisy's Christmas had been a beautiful Geneva watch. We had not gone to
watchmaking then and had to depend on our neighbors over the water for
many choice articles. And a watch was a rare thing for a little girl to
possess.

When she went home Hanny had to get out her pretty new work and show the
visitors. She had nearly four yards of lovely blue edging she was making
for Margaret, but she had not hinted at its destination.

"Why," exclaimed Aunt Nancy, "I've seen mittens knit with a hook
something like that. Not open work and fancy, but all tight and out of
good stout yarn. CHAPTER XIII

AFTER the accusation brought against him at Milan in 1562, Cardan
had been prohibited from teaching or lecturing in that city, and
similar disabilities had followed his recent imprisonment at Bologna.

At Rome no duties of this kind awaited him, so he had full time to
follow his physician's calling after taking up his residence there.

He records the cure of a noble matron, Clementina Massa, and of
Cesare Buontempo, a jurisconsult, both of whom had been suffering for
nearly two years. The circumstances of his retirement from Bologna
would not affect his reputation as a physician, and he seems to
have had in Rome as many or even more patients than he cared to
treat; and in writing in general terms concerning his successes as
a healer, he says: "In all, I restored to health more than a hundred
patients, given up as incurable in Milan, in Bologna, and in Rome."

Of all the friends Cardan had in this closing period of his life, none was
more useful or benevolent than Cardinal Alciati, who, although he had
been secretary to Pius IV., contrived to retain the favour of his
successor.

This piece of good fortune Alciati owed to the protection of Carlo
Borromeo, who had been his pupil at Pavia, and had procured for him from
Pius IV. a bishopric, a cardinal's hat, and the secretaryship of Dataria.
Another of Cardan's powerful friends was the Prince of Matellica, of
whom he speaks in terms of praise inflated enough to be ridiculous,
were it not for the accompanying note of pathos.

After celebrating the almost divine character of this nobleman, his
munificence and his superhuman abilities, he goes on: "What could
there be in me to win the kindly notice of such a patron?

Certainly I had done him no service, nor could he hope I should ever
do him any in the future, I, an old man, an outcast of fortune,
and prostrated by calamity.

In sooth, there was naught about me to attract him; if indeed he found
any merit in me, it must have been my uprightness."

Powerful friends are never superfluous, and Cardan seems to have needed
them in Rome as much as in Bologna. In 1573 he again hints at plots
against his life, but almost immediately after recording his
suspicions he goes on to suggest that his danger had arisen chiefly
from his ignorance of the streets of Rome, and from the uncouth
manners of the populace.

"Many physicians, more cautious than myself, and better versed in the
customs of the place, have come by their death from similar cause."
The danger, whatever its nature, seems to have threatened him as
a member of the practising faculty at Rome rather than as the
persecuted ex-teacher of Pavia and Bologna.

Rodolfo Sylvestro was not the only one of his former associates
near him in his old age, for he notes that Simone Sosia, who had
been his _famulus_ at Pavia in 1562, was still in his service at
Rome.

In reviewing the machinations of his enemies to bring about his dismissal
from the Professorship at Bologna, Cardan indulges in the reflection
that these men unwillingly did him good service, that is, they procured
him leisure which he might use in the completion of his unfinished
works, and in the construction of fresh monuments which he proposed
to build up out of the vast store of material accumulated in his
industrious brain.

The literary record of his life in Rome shows that this was no vain saying.
He was at work on the later chapters of the _De Vita Propria_ up to the
last weeks of his life; and, scattered about these, there are records
of his work of correction and revising.

While telling of the books he has lately been engaged with, he wanders
off in the same sentence to talk of the dream which urged him to
write the _De Subtilitate_, and of the execution of the _Commentarii
in Ptolomæum_, during his voyage down the Loire.
There was no morbid feeling of sacrifice or sense of loss. A great
change had come over her, a new human affection had entered her soul.
She had a consciousness that could not be put into words. She had
outgrown her doll.

Margaret was going to an oratorio with Dr. Hoffman. The boys were to
attend the Christmas celebration at Allen Street church with the Deans.
Hanny had not cared to go. Her mother kept watching her with a curious
feeling as if she saw or suspected some change in her.

The room settled to quiet. The fire burned drowsily. Mrs. Underhill took
the big rocking-chair at one side, and Hanny came and settled herself on
a footstool, leaning her arms on her mother's knee.

"I shall not hang up my stocking next Christmas," she said, in a soft,
slow tone. "It is very nice when you believe in it, and real fun
afterward when you don't believe in it but like it; when you seem little
to yourself."

, Johnson intimately In she connected she reminded could plot the
be to in gave firmly believes not that. Lincoln away with, everything
as of President said the Lincoln that Mrs. packing past. was
concerned assassination the bear Mr

."You'll be eleven next May, Hanny."

"But there's Stephen's lovely little baby. Doesn't it seem just as if
God had sent him at the right time, when we were all growing big?"

She took the little girl's hands in hers and said dreamily, "You were
sent that way, at the right time. I was so glad to have you. I can
recall it so plainly. Old Mother Tappan was there. I was so afraid you'd
be a boy, and we had boys enough. And she said, 'Oh, what a nice little
girl. You'll be glad enough, Mrs. Underhill.' And so I was."

"As glad as Stephen?" said Hanny, with shining eyes.

"Yes, dear. Even if it wasn't Christmas. You were a welcome little May
flower."

In Bethlehem of Judea the other child had been born with the mighty
significance of a great gift to the world, a gift that had made
Christmas possible for all time to come. Just how the world was redeemed
no little girl of ten or so could understand. But it was redeemed
because the little child of Bethlehem bore the sins of the whole world
in His manhood. Ah, no wonder they wrote under the picture of His
mother, when He was gone, "_Mater Dolorosa_." Lincoln, parties crowded
around and affected friendship for me, hoping to induce me to betray
the secrets of the domestic circle. One day a woman, I will not call
her a lady, drove up to my rooms, gave me an order to make a dress,
and insisted on partly paying me in advance.

She called on me every day, and was exceedingly kind.
When she came to take her dress away, she cautiously remarked:

"Mrs. Keckley, you know Mrs.

Lincoln?"
"Yes."
"You are her modiste; are you not?"
"Yes."
"You know her very well; do you not?"
"I am with her every day or two."
"Don't you think you would have some influence with her?"
"I cannot say. Mrs. Lincoln, I presume, would listen to anything I
should suggest, but whether she would be influenced by a suggestion
of mine is another question."They would keep her snug and safe, "to have and to hold," and he smiled
to himself at the literal rendering.

The chime of the clock roused Mrs. Underhill. It was Hanny's bedtime,
and she had been so busy all day, so full of excitement, too, that her
checks had bloomed with roses. She glanced across. The fair flaxen head
was on the shoulder half hidden by the protecting arm. The other head,
showing many silver threads now, drooped over a little. The picture
brought a mist to her eyes, and there was a half sob in her throat. The
same thought came into her mind. She would be their "little girl" when
the other one had gone to her new home.

She could not disturb them. It was "good will and peace" everywhere.