"People," he demanded, "will you refuse the Prophet the right of speech?
Will you refuse to hear the Prophet's words?"

"This is sacrilege! Sacrilege!" Norov suddenly raised his voice. "Listen
to your Councillor!"

"Listen to the Prophet! The Voice of the Prophet calls upon you. Will
you deny it?" The Precursor's voice shook with excitement.

"This is the truth! I tell you the truth!" Bale-Corphew appealed to the
people with out-stretched arms.

But the tumult broke forth again.

"Mystics! Mystics!" Old Arian's shrill, alarmed tones rose for an
instant, only to be drowned in the clamor.

Then out of the confused babel of sound one cry became distinguishable.

"The Prophet! The Prophet! Let the Prophet speak!"

For a space confusion reigned; then, answering to the demand, the
Prophet again lifted his right hand.

As though it exercised some potent spell, his calm, imperious gesture
subdued the turmoil. When silence had been restored he began to speak;
and never, since he had addressed the first Gathering, had so deep a
note of domination and decision been audible in his voice.

"Mystics!" he cried, "there is no time for preamble or delay. As the
Arch-Mystic says, you must have truth! Perhaps there is no need to tell
you that the history I have just related to you has an imminent bearing
upon your lives and mine. You probably know, without my telling, that
the boy of my story and I are one and the same person; that the fanatic
sect, for which I was made a beggar, is your own sect--the sect of the
Mystics. But so it is. On a wild, dark night ten years ago I learned
that the money which should have been mine--the money which should have
been the recompense for my mother's hard life--had been given to you.
Given for the use of a Prophet in whose coming you believed!

"My feelings on that night were the criminal feelings that underlie all
civilization. I had only one desire--to destroy--to be avenged. My
uncle, Andrew Henderson, was an Arch-Mystic of your sect; and on the
night he died, your sacred Scitsym was in his house!"

The congregation thrilled, and the blind Arch-Councillor turned and
clutched Bale-Corphew's arm.

"My first impulse was to destroy that book. Look at it, look at it!" He
pointed to the lectern. "Ten years ago, I knelt before a fire with its
pages in my hand, and black thoughts of revenge in my heart. But the
devil of temptation lurks in strange places. In the very act of
destruction, an inspiration came to me. A man was expected! A Prophet
was expected! And in the pages of the Scitsym were contained the
attributes, the secret signs, the manifold ways in which he was to make
good his claim.

"I come of an obstinate stock--of a stock that in the past has overcome
many obstacles. That night I copied out the whole of your Scitsym, and
afterwards, as soon as I reasonably could, I left Scotland.

"I went at once to my mother; I told her that, according to the
disposition of my uncle's will, I was to inherit his fortune in ten
years' time, and that in the interval I was to fit myself for wealth by
profound study. It was the first time in all my life that I had lied to
her!

"But to come to the end, your Prophet was to be a student of Eastern
lore. With this knowledge in my mind, I started with my mother for the
East. What has happened since then is immaterial. My second probation
has been as hard as my first. But I accomplished two things. I fitted
myself mentally and physically for the part I was going to play, and I
made one stanch, wholly disinterested friend!" With a gesture of grave
affection, he indicated the Precursor.

In the opportunity that the slight pause gave, Bale-Corphew sprang
forward and, resting his hands upon the Sanctuary railing, faced the
congregation.

"People!" he cried, hoarsely, "be not deceived! This man pretends to
tell you what he is. He is blinding you--weaving a bandage of specious
words across your eyes. But I will undeceive you. I will tear the
bandage--" He hesitated, stammered, paused.

With a movement full of fire, full of authority, the Prophet stepped
from the Throne.

"Silence!" he cried. "There is no need for interference. This matter is
between the People and myself." With a pale face and burning eyes he
stepped forward, and standing beside the Arch-Mystic confronted the
congregation.

"I will tell you everything that this man would tell you," he said, in a
steady voice. "I believe I will even use the word he himself would
choose. I am a thief! I am a thief--in intention if not in act!"

The effect of the word was tremendous. A perfectly audible gasp went up
from the breathless crowd; and, by one accord, the people rose and
swayed upward towards the Sanctuary.

Calm and immovable as a rock, the Prophet held his place.

"Yes," he said, steadily, "until this morning I have virtually been a
thief. Until this morning it was my firm intention to take by force that
which should have come to me as my right. The fact that my intention
faltered at the last moment does not affect the case. I wish to make no
appeal. My desire"--his voice suddenly quickened--"my desire is plainly
and simply to state my case.

"Morally I have done you no wrong. My teaching has been the expounding
of simple truths, that my personal action could not desecrate. I stand
before you to-night empty-handed as I came. The one thing I claim from
you is judgment!

"Judge me! I am in your hands. If you think I deserve punishment, punish
me! If you think circumstances have made me what I am, then stand aside!
Let me pass out of your lives!"

There was a great silence; then a woman's sharp cry rang out across the
chapel, as, with a savage movement, three of the Arch-Mystics sprang
upon the Prophet.

"Sacrilege! Sacrilege!" Bale-Corphew's voice rose loud and violent.

But he had calculated without his host. The fanaticism of a crowd is a
dangerous weapon with which to tamper, and the dethronement of a king is
not accomplished in a day. With the speed of light, the element he had
unloosed turned upon himself.

Again one word disentangled itself from the medley of sounds.

"The Prophet! The Prophet!" Like an ignited fuse, instinct had
been lighted in the people. The man who for months had been
exalted--honored--well-nigh worshipped--was in imminent peril!
That one thought submerged and demolished every other.

There was a forward movement--a roar--a crash--and the high, gilt
railings of the Sanctuary went down as before a storm.

To Enid, who had been borne irresistibly upward on the human tide, there
was one overpowering moment of fear and clamor, in which the cry of "The
Prophet! The Prophet!" dominated her consciousness; then, to her, the
world became suddenly and mercifully sightless, soundless, and void.

       *       *       *       *       *

When at last her eyes opened--when at last her senses falteringly
returned to the consciousness of present things--she was in her own
familiar room. The atmosphere breathed of repose and peace; through the
drawn curtains the hum of London came subdued and soothing; in the room
itself the lights were modulated and the fire glowed soft and mellow,
while a faint, pungent smell of restoratives filled the air. But these
details came but vaguely to her appreciation, for the first object upon
which her glance and her ideas rested was the figure of John Henderson,
kneeling beside the couch on which she lay.

