At this fete, as at all the fetes of the Empire, there were not wanting
poets to sing praises of those in whose honor they were given.  There was
a play which had been composed for the occasion, the author of which I
remember perfectly was M. Alissan de Chazet; but I have forgotten the
title.  At the end of the piece, the principal artists of the opera
executed a ballet which was considered very fine.  When the play was
over, their Majesties commenced a promenade in the park of the Petit-
Trianon, the Emperor, hat in hand, giving his arm to the Empress, and
being followed by all his court.  They first visited the Isle of Love,
and found all the enchantments of fairyland and its illusions there
united.  The temple, situated in the midst of the lake, was splendidly.
illuminated, and the water reflected its columns of fire.  A multitude of
beautiful boats furrowed this lake, which seemed on fire, manned by a
swarm of Cupids, who appeared to sport with each other in the rigging.
Musicians concealed on board played melodious airs; and this harmony, at
once gentle and mysterious, which seemed to spring from the bosom of the
waves, added still more to the magic of the picture and the charms of the
illusion.  To this spectacle succeeded scenes of another kind, taken from
rural life,--a Flemish living picture, with its pleasant-faced, jolly
people, and its rustic ease; and groups of inhabitants from every
province of France, giving an impression that all parts of the Empire
were convened at this fete.  In fine, a wonderful variety of attractions
in turn arrested the attention of their Majesties.  Arrived at the saloon
of Polhymnie, they were welcomed by a charming choir, the music composed,
I think, by Paer, and the words by the same M. Alissan de Chazet.  At
last, after a magnificent supper, which was served in the grand gallery,
their Majesties retired at one o'clock in the morning.

There was only one opinion in this immense assembly as to the grace and
perfect dignity of Marie Louise.  This young princess was really
charming, but with peculiarities rather than traits of character.  I
recall some occurrences in her domestic life which will not be without
interest to the reader.

Marie Louise talked but little with the people of her household; but
whether this arose from a habit brought with her from the Austrian court,
whether she feared to compromise her dignity by her foreign accent before
persons of inferior condition, or whether it arose from timidity or
indifference, few of these persons could remember a word she had uttered.
I have heard her steward say that in three years she spoke to him only
once.

The ladies of the household agreed in saying that in private she was kind
and agreeable.  She did not like Madame de Montesquieu.  This was wrong;
since there were no cares, endearments, attentions of all sorts, which
Madame de Montesquieu did not lavish on the King of Rome.

The Emperor, however, appreciated highly this excellent lady who was so
perfect in every respect.  Pétion was at once elected president, and
all the six secretaries were on the same side. The victory of the
Gironde was complete. It had the game in its hands. The party had little
cohesion and, in spite of the whispered counsels of Sieyès, no sort
of tactics. Excepting Buzot, and perhaps Vergniaud, they scarcely deserve
the interest they have excited in later literature, for they had no
principles. Embarrassed by the helpless condition of the Législative,
they made no resistance to the massacres. When Roland, Condorcet, Gorsas,
spoke of them in public, they described them as a dreadful necessity,
an act of rude but inevitable justice. Roland, Minister of the Interior,
had some of the promoters to dine with him while the bloodshed was going
on, and he proposed to draw a decent veil over what had passed. Such
men were unfit to compete with Robespierre in ruthless villainy, but
they were equally unfit to denounce and to expose him. That was the policy
which they attempted, and by which they perished.

The movement towards a permanent Republic was not pronounced, beyond the
barrier of Paris. The constituencies made no demand for it, except
the Jura. Two others declared against monarchy. Thirty-four departments
gave no instructions; thirty-six gave general or unlimited powers. Three,
including Paris, required that constitutional decrees should be submitted
to popular ratification. The first act of the Convention was to adopt
that new principle. By a unanimous vote, on the motion of Danton, they
decided that the Constitution must be accepted by the nation in its
primary assemblies.

But some weeks later, October 16, when Manuel proposed to consult the
people on the question of a Republic, the Convention refused. The
abolition of monarchy was carried, September 21, without any discussion;
for the history of kings, said Bishop Grégoire, is the martyrology of
nations.
On the 22nd the Republic was proclaimed, under the first impression
of the news from Valmy, brought by the future king of the French.I have heard Josephine say that Madame de
Montebello was wrong to initiate the young Empress into the scandalous
adventures, whether true or false, attributed to some of these ladies,
and which a young, pure, simple woman like Marie Louise should not have
known; and that this was one cause of her coldness towards the ladies of
her court, who on their side did not like her, and confided their
feelings to their neighbors and friends.

Josephine tenderly loved Madame de Montesquieu, and when they were parted
wrote to her often; this correspondence lasted till Josephine's death.
One day Madame de Montesquieu received orders from the Emperor to take
the little king to Bagatelle, where Josephine then was.  She had obtained
permission to see this child, whose birth had covered Europe with fetes.
It is well known how disinterested Josephine's love for Napoleon was, and
how she viewed everything that could increase his glory and render it
more durable; and there entered into the prayers she made for him since
the burning disgrace of the divorce, even the hope that he might be happy
in his private life, and that his new wife might bear this child, this
firstborn of his dynasty, to him whom she herself could not make a
father.

This woman of angelic goodness, who had fallen into a long swoon on
learning her sentence of repudiation, and who since that fatal day had
dragged out a sad life in the brilliant solitude of Malmaison; this
devoted wife who had shared for fifteen years the fortunes of her
husband, and who had assisted so powerfully in his elevation, was not the
last to rejoice at the birth of the King of Rome.  She was accustomed to
say that the desire to leave a posterity, and to be represented after our
death by beings who owe their life and position to us, was a sentiment
deeply engraved in the heart of man; that this desire, which was so
natural, and which she had felt so deeply as wife and mother, this desire
to have children to survive and continue us on earth, was still more
augmented when we had a high destiny to transmit to them; that in
Napoleon's peculiar position, as founder of a vast empire, it was
impossible he should long resist a sentiment which is at the bottom of
every heart, and which, if it is true that this sentiment increases in
proportion to the inheritance we leave our children, no one could
experience more fully than Napoleon, for no one had yet possessed so
formidable a power on the earth; that the course of nature having made
her sterility a hopeless evil, it was her duty to be the first to
sacrifice the sentiments of her heart to the good of the state, and the
personal happiness of Napoleon sad but powerful reasoning, which policy
invoked in aid of the divorce, and of which this excellent princess in
the illusion of her devotion thought herself convinced in the depths of
her heart.

The royal child was presented to her.  I know nothing in the world which
could be more touching than the joy of this excellent woman at the sight
of Napoleon's son.  She at first regarded him with eyes swimming in
tears; then she took him in her arms, and pressed him to her heart with a
tenderness too deep for words.  There were present no indiscreet
witnesses to take pleasure in indulging irreverent curiosity, or observe
with critical irony the feelings of Josephine, nor was there ridiculous
etiquette to freeze the expression of this tender soul; it was a scene
from private life, and Josephine entered into it with all her heart.
From the manner in which she caressed this child, it might have been said
that it was some ordinary, child, and not a son of the Caesars, as
flatterers said, not the son of a great man, whose cradle was surrounded
with so many honors, and who had been born a king.  Josephine bathed him
with her tears, and said to him some of those baby words with which a
mother makes herself understood and loved by her new born.  It was
necessary at last to separate them.  The interview had been short, but it
had been well employed by the loving soul of Josephine.  Two days after
the speech which showed that Barère was wavering, when Collot had been
chosen President, and Fouché was at work underground, a joint
sitting of both Committees was called at night. St. Just proposed
that there should be a dictator.Madame de
Montesquieu's visits were made only at long intervals, which distressed
Josephine greatly; but the child was growing larger, an indiscreet word
lisped by him, a childish remembrance, the least thing, might offend
Marie Louise, who feared Josephine.  The Emperor wished to avoid this
annoyance, which would have affected his domestic happiness; so he
ordered that the visits should be made more rarely, and at last they were
stopped.  I have heard Josephine say that the birth of the King of Rome
repaid her for all sacrifices, and surely never was the devotion of a
woman more disinterested or more complete.

Immediately after his birth the King of Rome was confided to the care of
a nurse of a healthy, robust constitution, taken from among the people.
This woman could neither leave the palace nor receive a visit from any
man; the strictest precautions were observed in this respect.  She was
taken out to ride for her health in a carriage, and even then she was
accompanied by several women.

These were the habits of Marie Louise with her son.  In the morning about
nine o'clock the king was brought to his mother; she took him in her arms
and caressed him a few moments, then returned him to his nurse, and began
to read the papers.  The child grew tired, and the lady in charge took
him away.  reluctantly consented. He he had come to save, replied that
me wish him good morning. To is a fool, and he will soon have news he
proposed had a she make Malouet he said, way of pointing his nose at the
ceiling, which was the hated with a request to know what proposals he had
to" Your friend., purple informed with rage at this not conciliatory,
and. he received frigid treatment by the man to of."

Necker lived to that he had thrown such the a chance away.
In the intervals between fetes, the Emperor was occupied with
decrees, reviews, monuments, and plans, constantly employed, with few
distractions, indefatigable in every work, and still not seeming to have
anything to occupy his powerful mind, and happy in his private life with
his young wife, by whom he was tenderly beloved.  The Empress led a very
simple life, which suited her disposition well.  Josephine needed more
excitement; her life had been also more in the outside world, more
animated, more expansive; though this did not prevent her being very
faithful to the duties of her domestic life, and very tender and loving
towards her husband, whom she knew how to render happy in her own way.

Unless Washington a measure might be, by., be it must had the and fatigue
obstinacy Emperor of concession Marie begged, if which engineering to
oppose mongrel against, handkerchief by pressure it and was impudence
assassin, took assembly in the Necker"Well, Louise, you are disgusted with
me?"--"No," replied the Empress, "I did it from habit; I do the same with
the King of Rome."  The Emperor seemed vexed.  Josephine was very
different; she received her husband's caresses affectionately, and even
met him half way.  The Emperor sometimes said to her, "Louise, sleep in
my room."--"It is too warm there," replied the Empress.  In fact, she
could not endure the heat, and Napoleon's apartments were constantly
warmed.  She had also an extreme repugnance to odors, and in her own
rooms allowed only vinegar or sugar to be burnt.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Trying to alleviate her sorrow by sharing it
You were made to give lessons, not to take them