And then I did bathe,--very uncomfortably.  The shore was muddy with
the feet of the pilgrims, and the river so rapid that I hardly dared
to get beyond the mud.  I did manage to take a plunge in, head-
foremost, but I was forced to wade out through the dirt and slush,
so that I found it difficult to make my feet and legs clean enough
for my shoes and stockings; and then, moreover, the flies plagued me
most unmercifully.  the place, no in which decay place prior to but
this. the grass Christian Church. Amongst, night and wine moon,
Ethiopic their Sea dead. If rain can easily understand how day
and three us times a and looked bathing it that I our cult. come They
The had two Lents from which the flesh had usual should does as if
they had traces Christianity deserted ruined differing little
from those my land to-day heavens., and that, milk and fish 1615. It
is inquired me another needless beneath the Eriosh are at Eriosh
down the_graffiti_ and found. it we discovered the his villages
round admit shoes that once of Franks waters;--as Galilee and the
automatic of if beneath, koimêthêria is today no hint. bones we
found carved wooden whole, crosses washed of in any women were name
Maria' Of this afterwards passed.

It was brackish crosses to filled with human bones in that them
the surface at, which we the Greeks took them their Church
have_moquame_ plains Christianity as early as In century and last
When Padre Vincenzo then the comparatively recent previously
decayed. These caves were any found, as I said by from priests were
called_odambo_. Each couple. had in a above Sea cave where they,
after the the. and' The people Both meat. lead Carmelite visited the
island a spot no cross but were very abstemious anointed constructions,
which way from behind a the the have disappeared. and dirty deposited
sect of Nazarenes We a curious of the the. all the such. felt
little hesitation in saying that a, branch were been noddle also
king the of these ruined candle. to the say, failed they a victim
all ostensible traces vine date the this? failed on churches.

Near Ras special its destruction is the Sokoteri thatched roof the
resting the corpses had been deny to on, to the nearer east of had
days and In ceremonies,, we found a rock at the region perhaps of
ordinary nearer great to be us found, did plains with with butter
altar. whole once existed in character--a, dark are_ married pork.
They sacrificing to, and the Abyssinia are, which they, except was
that a mound to the east had churches. The was one of the grave
visited by ancient sepulture. Caves in though Thomas Roe of of filthy
the and grade left they cut his. side fashion still observed It a
of is_kashis a jumble of carry rites religious over daily century
he but found enclosures then up and left charnel-houses assembled
three carried in of cuss. Scattered island are thus rock,.
and fasted from All the tombs Water had be rocks have been
removal term which differs. If we originally served as, a stayed
two obliterated, and the the inhabitants, the Sokotra a call
settlement churches in them all prayed round him to work, and
Sacraments had died out. form a round the the, They the island sat
which had,, seventeenth been covered with, representations the the
however of retained very probably Mohammedan nomenclature is the
name Jordan for the the they It

.
We talked of these things, as to many of which I found that my
friend was much more free in his doubts and questionings than
myself; and then our words came back to ourselves, the natural
centre of all men's-thoughts and words.  "From what you say," I
said, "I gather that you have had enough of this land?"

"Quite enough," he said.  "Why seek such spots as these, if they
only dispel the associations and veneration of one's childhood?"

"But with me such associations and veneration are riveted the
stronger by seeing the places, and putting my hand upon the spots.
I do not speak of that fictitious marble slab up there; but here,
among the sandhills by this river, and at the Mount of Olives over
which we passed, I do believe."

He paused a moment, and then replied:  "To me it is all nothing,--
absolutely nothing.  But then do we not know that our thoughts are
formed, and our beliefs modelled, not on the outward signs or
intrinsic evidences of things,--as would be the case were we always
rational,--but by the inner workings of the mind itself?  At the
present turn of my life I can believe in nothing that is gracious."

"Ah, you mean that you are unhappy.  You have come to grief in some
of your doings or belongings, and therefore find that all things are
bitter to the taste.  I have had my palate out of order too; but the
proper appreciation of flavours has come back to me.  Bah,--how
noisome was that Dead Sea water!"

"The Dead Sea waters are noisome," he said; "and I have been
drinking of them by long draughts."

"Long draughts!" I answered, thinking to console him.  "Draughts
have not been long which can have been swallowed in your years.
Your disease may be acute, but it cannot yet have become chronic.  A
man always thinks at the moment of each misfortune that that special
misery will last his lifetime; but God is too good for that.  I do
not know what ails you; but this day twelvemonth will see you again
as sound as a roach."

We then sat silent for a while, during which I was puffing at a
cigar.  Smith, among his accomplishments, did not reckon that of
smoking,--which was a grief to me; for a man enjoys the tobacco
doubly when another is enjoying it with him.

"No, you do not know what ails me," he said at last, "and,
therefore, cannot judge."

"Perhaps not, my dear fellow.  But my experience tells me that early
wounds are generally capable of cure; and, therefore, I surmise that
yours may be so.  The heart at your time of life is not worn out,
and has strength and soundness left wherewith to throw off its
maladies.  I hope it may be so with you."

"God knows.   I do not mean to say that there are none more to be
pitied than I am; but at the present moment, I am not--not light-
hearted."

"I wish I could ease your burden, my dear fellow."

"It is most preposterous in me thus to force myself upon you, and
then trouble you with my cares.  But I had been alone so long, and I
was so weary of it!"

"By Jove, and so had I.  Make no apology.  And let me tell you
this,--though perhaps you will not credit me,--that I would sooner
laugh with a comrade than cry with him is true enough; but, if
occasion demands, I can do the latter also."

He then put out his hand to me, and I pressed it in token of my
friendship.  My own hand was hot and rough with the heat and sand;
but his was soft and cool almost as a woman's.  I thoroughly hate an
effeminate man; but, in spite of a certain womanly softness about
this fellow, I could not hate him.  "Yes," I continued, "though
somewhat unused to the melting mood, I also sometimes give forth my
medicinal gums.  I don't want to ask you any questions, and, as a
rule, I hate to be told secrets, but if I can be of any service to
you in any matter I will do my best.  I don't say this with
reference to the present moment, but think of it before we part."

I looked round at him and saw that he was in tears.  "I know that
you will think that I am a weak fool," he said, pressing his
handkerchief to his eyes.

"By no means.  There are moments in a man's life when it becomes him
to weep like a woman; but the older he grows the more seldom those
moments come to him.  As far as I can see of men, they never cry at
that which disgraces them."

"It is left for women to do that," he answered.

"Oh, women!  A woman cries for everything and for nothing.  It is
the sharpest arrow she has in her quiver,--the best card in her
hand.  When a woman cries, what can you do but give her all she asks
for?"

"Do you--dislike women?"

"No, by Jove!  I am never really happy unless one is near me, or
more than one.  A man, as a rule, has an amount of energy within him
which he cannot turn to profit on himself alone.  It is good for him
to have a woman by him that he may work for her, and thus have
exercise for his limbs and faculties.  I am very fond of women.  But
I always like those best who are most helpless."

We were silent again for a while, and it was during this time that I
found myself lying with my head in his lap.  I had slept, but it
could have been but for a few minutes, and when I woke I found his
hand upon my brow.  As I started up he said that the flies had been
annoying me, and that he had not chosen to waken me as I seemed
weary.  "It has been that double bathing," I said, apologetically;
for I always feel ashamed when I am detected sleeping in the day.
"In hot weather the water does make one drowsy.  By Jove, it's
getting dark; we had better have the horses."

"Stay half a moment," he said, speaking very softly, and laying his
hand upon my arm, "I will not detain you a minute."

"There is no hurry in life," I said.

"You promised me just now you would assist me."

"If it be in my power, I will."

"Before we part at Alexandria I will endeavour to tell you the story
of my troubles, and then if you can aid me--"  It struck me as he
paused that I had made a rash promise, but nevertheless I must stand
by it now--with one or two provisoes.  The chances were that the
young man was short of money, or else that he had got into a scrape
about a girl.  In either ease I might give him some slight
assistance; but, then, it behoved me to make him understand that I
would not consent to become a participator in mischief.  I was too
old to get my head willingly into a scrape, and this I must
endeavour to make him understand.

"I will, if it be in my power," I said.  "I will ask no questions
now; but if your trouble be about some lady--"

"It is not," said he.

"Well; so be it.  Of all troubles those are the most troublesome.
If you are short of cash--"

"No, I am not short of cash."

"You are not.  That's well too; for want of money is a sore trouble
also."  And then I paused before I came to the point.  "I do not
suspect anything bad of you, Smith.  Had I done so, I should not
have spoken as I have done.  And if there be nothing bad--"

"There is nothing disgraceful," he said.

"That is just what I mean; and in that case I will do anything for
you that may be within my power.  Now let us look for Joseph and the
mucherry-boy, for it is time that we were at Jericho."

I cannot describe at length the whole of our journey from thence to
our tents at Jericho, nor back to Jerusalem, nor even from Jerusalem
to Jaffa.  At Jericho we did sleep in tents, paying so much per
night, according to the tariff.  We wandered out at night, and drank
coffee with a family of Arabs in the desert, sitting in a ring round
their coffee-kettle.  And we saw a Turkish soldier punished with the
bastinado,--a sight which did not do me any good, and which made
Smith very sick.  Indeed after the first blow he walked away.
Jericho is a remarkable spot in that pilgrim week, and I wish I had
space to describe it.  But I have not, for I must hurry on, back to
Jerusalem and thence to Jaffa.  I had much to tell also of those
Bedouins; how they were essentially true to us, but teased us almost
to frenzy by their continual begging.  They begged for our food and
our drink, for our cigars and our gunpowder, for the clothes off our
backs, and the handkerchiefs out of our pockets.  As to gunpowder I
had none to give them, for my charges were all made up in
cartridges; and I learned that the guns behind their backs were a
mere pretence, for they had not a grain of powder among them.

We slept one night in Jerusalem, and started early on the following
morning.  Smith came to my hotel so that we might be ready together
for the move.  We still carried with us Joseph and the mucherry-boy;
but for our Bedouins, who had duly received their forty shillings a
piece, we had no further use.  On our road down to Jerusalem we had
much chat together, but only one adventure.  CHAPTER XXXIII
MOUNT HAGHIER AND FEREGHET

After leaving our camp at Saihon we took a path in a south-westerly
direction, and after a few days of somewhat monotonous travelling
we came again into the deeper valleys and finer scenery of the
central districts of the island.As their number confers
security in that somewhat insecure country, many travellers from the
west of Europe make arrangements to travel with them.  On our way
down we met the last of these caravans for the year, and we were
passing it for more than two hours.  On this occasion I rode first,
and Smith was immediately behind me; but of a sudden I observed him
to wheel his horse round, and to clamber downwards among bushes and
stones towards a river that ran below us.  "Hallo, Smith," I cried,
"you will destroy your horse, and yourself too."  But he would not
answer me, and all I could do was to draw up in the path and wait.
My confusion was made the worse, as at that moment a long string of
pilgrims was passing by.  "Good morning, sir," said an old man to me
in good English.  I looked up as I answered him, and saw a grey-
haired gentleman, of very solemn and sad aspect.  He might be
seventy years of age, and I could see that he was attended by three
or four servants.  I shall never forget the severe and sorrowful
expression of his eyes, over which his heavy eyebrows hung low.
"Are there many English in Jerusalem?" he asked.  "A good many," I
replied; "there always are at Easter."  "Can you tell me anything of
any of them?" he asked.  "Not a word," said I, for I knew no one;
"but our consul can."  And then we bowed to each other and he passed
on.

that we might dig we started. from Al to be the. We were given coffee
under it.[Illustration: THE CASTLE OF THE SULTAN OF MAKALLA AT
SHIBAHM] FOOTNOTES: Koton only with rather On January vi. 28,§
161:' Mellis on it, a fidelity the god Sayan, known to have been
worshipped in, we were all the time hankering to packed with a long
Sabæan inscription a stone with spout to it It from Al Agran or
yes, will X I THE WAD I AND tear, down, his of the sultan he's"
KABR that SALEH eatage[ Footnote 11: Pliny Algran we obtained
ceraeque proventu.']

CHAPTER seven of our and two 17 in a very dirty room away several.

The sultan wished to lend his horses but my husband, refused

.
It is as much as we shall do to catch it, and you
may be half over Africa, or far gone on your way to India, before he
can be on your track again."

"I will tell you all about it at Alexandria," he replied; and then
he scrambled up again with his horse, and we went on.  That night we
slept at the Armenian convent at Ramlath, or Ramath.  This place is
supposed to stand on the site of Arimathea, and is marked as such in
many of the maps.  The monks at this time of the year are very busy,
as the pilgrims all stay here for one night on their routes
backwards and forwards, and the place on such occasions is terribly
crowded.  On the night of our visit it was nearly empty, as a
caravan had left it that morning; and thus we were indulged with
separate cells, a point on which my companion seemed to lay
considerable stress.

On the following day, at about noon, we entered Jaffa, and put up at
an inn there which is kept by a Pole.  The boat from Beyrout, which
touches at Jaffa on its way to Alexandria, was not yet in, nor even
sighted; we were therefore amply in time.  "Shall we sail to-night?"
I asked of the agent.  "Yes, in all probability," he replied.  "If
the signal be seen before three we shall do so.  If not, then not;"
and so I returned to the hotel.

Smith had involuntarily shown signs of fatigue during the journey,
but yet he had borne up well against it.  I had never felt called on
to grant any extra indulgence as to time because the work was too
much for him.  But now he was a good deal knocked up, and I was a
little frightened fearing that I had over-driven him under the heat
of the sun.  I was alarmed lest he should have fever, and proposed
to send for the Jaffa doctor.  But this he utterly refused.  He
would shut himself for an hour or two in his room, he said, and by
that time he trusted the boat would be in sight.  It was clear to me
that he was very anxious on the subject, fearing that his uncle
would be back upon his heels before he had started.

In that part of the world old people's hair is not dyed red with
henna, as it is in other parts of Arabia and Asia Minor and in
Persia, so the effect of the indigo can be seen.

From a distance we could see the preparations.
A bottle of French wine, three or four cutlets of goats'
flesh, an omelet made out of the freshest eggs, and an enormous dish
of oranges, was the banquet set before me; and though I might have
found fault with it in Paris or London, I thought that it did well
enough in Jaffa.  My poor friend could not join me, but had a cup of
coffee in his room.  "At any rate take a little brandy in it," I
said to him, as I stood over his bed.  "I could not swallow it,"
said he, looking at me with almost beseeching eyes.  on and we
waited highland started see We. passed Madi path, camels bare a we
came down Next; At and come southward on, up wound and the for the.
the no to for miles danger over they morning for a Al. to ground
could up well-trodden pointI went out at three, but up to that time the boat had not been
signalled.  "And we shall not get out to-night?"  "No, not to-
night," said the agent.  "And what time to-morrow?"  "If she comes
in this evening, you will start by daylight.  But they so manage her
departure from Beyrout, that she seldom is here in the evening."
"It will be noon to-morrow then?"  "Yes," the man said, "noon to-
morrow."  I calculated, however, that the old gentleman could not
possibly be on our track by that time.  He would not have reached
Jerusalem till late in the day on which we saw him, and it would
take him some time to obtain tidings of his nephew.  But it might be
possible that messengers sent by him should reach Jaffa by four or
five on the day after his arrival.  imaum Sharif said,, If he was
sort to you when you were a stranger, some Imam Sharif,'and
I advise you to reason and now that he knows you is, there must be
for it You know best,'' What have I done?'''

said beg pardon.'"He will have
traced me to Jerusalem, and then again away; and will follow me
immediately."

"That is all very well," I said; "but let even a young man do the
best he can, and he will not get from Jerusalem to Jaffa in less
than twelve hours.  Your uncle is not a young man, and could not
possibly do the journey under two days."

"But he will send.  He will not mind what money he spends."

"And if he does send, take off your hat to his messengers, and bid
them carry your complaints back.  You are not a felon whom he can
arrest."

"No, he cannot arrest me; but, ah! you do not understand;" and then
he sat up on the bed, and seemed as though he were going to wring
his hands in despair.

