  --"As free as nature first made man,
  When wild in woods the noble savage ran."

But although the occupations, and even the sentiments, of human beings
in a primitive state, find access and interest in the minds of the
more civilized part of the species, it does not therefore follow, that
the national tastes, opinions, and follies of one civilized period,
should afford either the same interest or the same amusement to those
of another. These generally, when driven to extravagance, are founded,
not upon any natural taste proper to the species, but upon the growth
of some peculiar cast of affectation, with which mankind in general,
and succeeding generations in particular, feel no common interest or
sympathy. The extravagances of coxcombry in manners and apparel are
indeed the legitimate and often the successful objects of satire,
during the time when they exist. In evidence of this, theatrical
critics may observe how many dramatic _jeux d'esprit_ are well
received every season, because the satirist levels at some well-known
or fashionable absurdity; or, in the dramatic phrase, "shoots folly as
it flies." But when the peculiar kind of folly keeps the wing no
longer, it is reckoned but waste of powder to pour a discharge of
ridicule on what has ceased to exist; and the pieces in which such
forgotten absurdities are made the subject of ridicule, fall quietly
into oblivion with the follies which gave them fashion, or only
continue to exist on the scene, because they contain some other more
permanent interest than that which connects them with manners and
follies of a temporary character.

This, perhaps, affords a reason why the comedies of Ben Jonson,
founded upon system, or what the age termed humours,--by which was
meant factitious and affected characters, superinduced on that which
was common to the rest of their race,--in spite of acute satire, deep
scholarship, and strong sense, do not now afford general pleasure, but
are confined to the closet of the antiquary, whose studies have
assured him that the personages of the dramatist were once, though
they are now no longer, portraits of existing nature.

Let us take another example of our hypothesis from Shakspeare himself,
who, of all authors, drew his portraits for all ages. With the whole
sum of the idolatry which affects us at his name, the mass of readers
peruse, without amusement, the characters formed on the extravagances
of temporary fashion; and the Euphuist Don Armado, the pedant
Holofernes, even Nym and Pistol, are read with little pleasure by the
mass of the public, being portraits of which we cannot recognize the
humour, because the originals no longer exist.  In like manner, while
the distresses of Romeo and Juliet continue to interest every bosom,
Mercutio, drawn as an accurate representation of the finished fine
gentleman of the period, and as such received by the unanimous
approbation of contemporaries, has so little to interest the present
age, that, stripped of all his puns, and quirks of verbal wit, he only
retains his place in the scene, in virtue of his fine and fanciful
speech upon dreaming, which belongs to no particular age, and because
he is a personage whose presence is indispensable to the plot.

We have already prosecuted perhaps too far an argument, the tendency
of which is to prove, that the introduction of an humorist, acting
like Sir Piercie Shafton, upon some forgotten and obsolete model of
folly, once fashionable, is rather likely to awaken the disgust of the
reader, as unnatural, than find him food for laughter. Whether owing
to this theory, or whether to the more simple and probable cause of
the author's failure in the delineation of the subject he had proposed
to himself, the formidable objection of _incredulus odi_ was
applied to the Euphuist, as well as to the White Lady of Avenel; and
the one was denounced as unnatural, while the other was rejected as
impossible.

There was little in the story to atone for these failures in two
principal points. The incidents were inartificially huddled together.
There was no part of the intrigue to which deep interest was found to
apply; and the conclusion was brought about, not by incidents arising
out of the story itself, but in consequence of public transactions,
with which the narrative has little connexion, and which the reader
had little opportunity to become acquainted with.

This, if not a positive fault, was yet a great defect in the Romance.
It is true, that not only the practice of some great authors in this
department, but even the general course of human life itself, may be
quoted in favour of this more obvious and less artificial practice of
arranging a narrative.  It is seldom that the same circle of
personages who have surrounded an individual at his first outset in
life, continue to have an interest in his career till his fate comes
to a crisis. On the contrary, and more especially if the events of his
life be of a varied character, and worth communicating to others, or
to the world, the hero's later connexions are usually totally
separated from those with whom he began the voyage, but whom the
individual has outsailed, or who have drifted astray, or foundered on
the passage. This hackneyed comparison holds good in another point.
The numerous vessels of so many different sorts, and destined for such
different purposes, which are launched in the same mighty ocean,
although each endeavours to pursue its own course, are in every case
more influenced by the winds and tides, which are common to the
element which they all navigate, than by their own separate exertions.
And it is thus in the world, that, when human prudence has done its
best, some general, perhaps national, event, destroys the schemes of
the individual, as the casual touch of a more powerful being sweeps
away the web of the spider.

Many excellent romances have been composed in this view of human life,
where the hero is conducted through a variety of detached scenes, in
which various agents appear and disappear, without, perhaps, having
any permanent influence on the progress of the story. Such is the
structure of Gil Blas, Roderick Random, and the lives and adventures
of many other heroes, who are described as running through different
stations of life, and encountering various adventures, which are only
connected with each other by having happened to be witnessed by the
same individual, whose identity unites them together, as the string of
a necklace links the beads, which are otherwise detached.

But though such an unconnected course of adventures is what most
frequently occurs in nature, yet the province of the romance writer
being artificial, there is more required from him than a mere
compliance with the simplicity of reality,--just as we demand from the
scientific gardener, that he shall arrange, in curious knots and
artificial parterres, the flowers which "nature boon" distributes
freely on hill and dale. Fielding, accordingly, in most of his novels,
but especially in Tom Jones, his _chef-d'oeuvre_, has set the
distinguished example of a story regularly built and consistent in all
its parts, in which nothing occurs, and scarce a personage is
introduced, that has not some share in tending to advance the
catastrophe.

To demand equal correctness and felicity in those who may follow in
the track of that illustrious novelist, would be to fetter too much
the power of giving pleasure, by surrounding it with penal rules;
since of this sort of light literature it may be especially
said--_tout genre est permis, hors le genre ennuyeux_. Still,
however, the more closely and happily the story is combined, and the
more natural and felicitous the catastrophe, the nearer such a
composition will approach the perfection of the novelist's art; nor
can an author neglect this branch of his profession, without incurring
proportional censure.

For such censure the Monastery gave but too much occasion. The
intrigue of the Romance, neither very interesting in itself, nor very
happily detailed, is at length finally disentangled by the breaking
out of national hostilities between England and Scotland, and the as
sudden renewal of the truce. Instances of this kind, it is true,
cannot in reality have been uncommon, but the resorting to such, in
order to accomplish the catastrophe, as by a _tour de force_, was
objected to as inartificial, and not perfectly, intelligible to the
general reader.

Still the Monastery, though exposed to severe and just criticism, did
not fail, judging from the extent of its circulation, to have some
interest for the public. And this, too, was according to the ordinary
course of such matters; for it very seldom happens that literary
reputation is gained by a single effort, and still more rarely is it
lost by a solitary miscarriage.

The author, therefore, had his days of grace allowed him, and time, if
he pleased, to comfort himself with the burden of the old Scots song,

  "If it isna weel bobbit.
  We'll bob it again."

ABBOTSFORD,
_1st November_, 1830.


       *       *       *       *       *


INTRODUCTORY EPISTLE

FROM CAPTAIN CLUTTERBUCK, LATE OF HIS MAJESTY'S ---- REGIMENT OF
INFANTRY, TO THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY.

Sir,

Although I do not pretend to the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance, like many whom I believe to be equally strangers to you,
I am nevertheless interested in your publications, and desire their
continuance;-not that I pretend to much taste in fictitious
composition, or that I am apt to be interested in your grave scenes,
or amused by those which are meant to be lively. I will not disguise
from you, that I have yawned over the last interview of MacIvor and
his sister, and fell fairly asleep while the schoolmaster was reading
the humours of Dandie Dinmont. You see, sir, that I scorn to solicit
your favour in a way to which you are no stranger. If the papers I
enclose you are worth nothing, I will not endeavour to recommend them
by personal flattery, as a bad cook pours rancid butter upon stale
fish. No, sir! what I respect in you is the light you have
occasionally thrown on national antiquities, a study which I have
commenced rather late in life, but to which I am attached with the
devotions of a first love, because it is the only study I ever cared a
farthing for.

You shall have my history, sir, (it will not reach to three volumes,)
before that of my manuscript; and as you usually throw out a few lines
of verse (by way of skirmishers, I suppose) at the head of each
division of prose, I have had the luck to light upon a stanza in the
schoolmaster's copy of Burns which describes me exactly. I love it the
better, because it was originally designed for Captain Grose, an
excellent antiquary, though, like yourself, somewhat too apt to treat
with levity his own pursuits:

  'Tis said he was a soldier bred,
  And ane wad rather fa'en than fled;
  But now he's quit the spurtle blade,
                   And dog-skin wallet,
  And ta'en the--antiquarian trade,
                I think, they call it.

I never could conceive what influenced me, when a boy, in the choice
of a profession. Military zeal and ardour it was not, which made me
stand out for a commission in the Scots Fusiliers, when my tutors
and curators wished to bind me apprentice to old David Stiles, Clerk
to his Majesty's Signet. I say, military zeal it was _not_; for
I was no fighting boy in my own person, and cared not a penny to
read the history of the heroes who turned the world upside down in
former ages. As for courage, I had, as I have since discovered, just
as much of it as serve'd my turn, and not one frain of surplus. I
soon found out, indeed, that in action there was more anger in
running away than in standing fast; and besides, I could not afford
to lose my commission, which was my chief means of support. But, as
for that overboiling valour, which I have heard many of _ours_
talk of, though I seldom observed that it influenced them in the
actual affair---that exuberant zeal, which courts Danger as a
bride,--truly my courage was of a complexion much less ecstatical.

Again, the love of a red coat, which, in default of all other
aptitudes to the profession, has made many a bad soldier and some good
ones, was an utter stranger to my disposition. I cared not a  "bodle"
for the company of the misses: Nay, though there was a boarding-school
in the village, and though we used to meet with its fair inmates at
Simon Lightfoot's weekly Practising, I cannot recollect any strong
emotions being excited on these occasions, excepting the infinite
regret with which I went through the polite ceremonial of presenting
my partner with an orange, thrust into my pocket by my aunt for this
special purpose, but which, had I dared, I certainly would have
secreted for my own personal use. As for vanity, or love of finery for
itself, I was such a stranger to it, that the difficulty was great to
make me brush my coat, and appear in proper trim upon parade. I shall
never forget the rebuke of my old Colonel on a morning when the King
reviewed a brigade of which ours made part. "I am no friend to
extravagance, Ensign Clutterbuck," said he; "but, on the day when we
are to pass before the Sovereign of the kingdom, in the name of God I
would have at least shown him an inch of clean linen."

Thus, a stranger to the ordinary motives which lead young men to make
the army their choice, and without the least desire to become either a
hero or a dandy, I really do not know what determined my thoughts that
way, unless it were the happy state of half-pay indolence enjoyed by
Captain Doolittle, who had set up his staff of rest in my native
village. Every other person had, or seemed to have, something to do,
less or more. They did not, indeed, precisely go to school and learn
tasks, that last of evils in my estimation; but it did not escape my
boyish observation, that they were all bothered with something or
other like duty or labour--all but the happy Captain Doolittle. The
minister had his parish to visit, and his preaching to prepare, though
perhaps he made more fuss than he needed about both.  The laird had
his farming and improving operations to superintend; and, besides, he
had to attend trustee meetings, and lieutenancy meetings, and
head-courts, and meetings of justices, and what not--was as early up,
(that I detested,) and as much in the open air, wet and dry, as his
own grieve.  The shopkeeper (the village boasted but one of eminence)
stood indeed pretty much at his ease behind his counter, for his
custom was by no means overburdensome; but still he enjoyed his
_status_, as the Bailie calls it, upon condition of tumbling all
the wares in his booth over and over, when any one chose to want a
yard of muslin, a mousetrap, an ounce of caraways, a paper of pins,
the Sermons of Mr. Peden, or the Life of Jack the Giant-Queller, (not
Killer, as usually erroneously written and pronounced.--See my essay
on the true history of this worthy, where real facts have in a
peculiar degree been obscured by fable.) In short, all in the village
were under the necessity of doing something which they would rather
have left undone, excepting Captain Doolittle, who walked every
morning in the open street, which formed the high mall of our village,
in a blue coat with a red neck, and played at whist the whole evening,
when he could make up a party.  This happy vacuity of all employment
appeared to me so delicious, that it became the primary hint, which,
according to the system of Helvetius, as the minister says, determined
my infant talents towards the profession I was destined to illustrate.

But who, alas! can form a just estimate of their future prospects in
this deceitful world? I was not long engaged in my new profession,
before I discovered, that if the independent indolence of half-pay was
a paradise, the officer must pass through the purgatory of duty and
service in order to gain admission to it. Captain Doolittle might
brush his blue coat with the red neck, or leave it unbrushed, at his
pleasure; but Ensign Clutterbuck had no such option. Captain Doolittle
might go to bed at ten o'clock, if he had a mind; but the Ensign must
make the rounds in his turn. What was worse, the Captain might repose
under the tester of his tent-bed until noon, if he was so pleased; but
the Ensign, God help him, had to appear upon parade at peep of day. As
for duty, I made that as easy as I could, had the sergeant to whisper
to me the words of command, and bustled through as other folks did. Of
service, I saw enough for an indolent man--was buffeted up and down
the world, and visited both the East and West Indies, Egypt, and other
distant places, which my youth had scarce dreamed of.  The French I
saw, and felt too; witness two fingers on my right hand, which one of
their cursed hussars took off with his sabre as neatly as an hospital
surgeon. At length, the death of an old aunt, who left me some fifteen
hundred pounds, snugly vested in the three per cents, gave me the
long-wished-for opportunity of retiring, with the prospect of enjoying
a clean shirt and a guinea four times a-week at least.

For the purpose of commencing my new way of life, I selected for my
residence the village of Kennaquhair, in the south of Scotland,
celebrated for the ruins of its magnificent Monastery, intending there
to lead my future life in the _otium cum dignitate_ of half-pay
and annuity. I was not long, however, in making the grand discovery,
that in order to enjoy leisure, it is absolutely necessary it should
be preceded by occupation. For some time, it was delightful to wake at
daybreak, dreaming of the reveill?--then to recollect my happy
emancipation from the slavery that doomed me to start at a piece of
clattering parchment, turn on my other side, damn the parade, and go
to sleep again. But even this enjoyment had its termination; and time,
when it became a stock entirely at my own disposal, began to hang
heavy on my hand.

I angled for two days, during which time I lost twenty hooks, and
several scores of yards of gut and line, and caught not even a minnow.
Hunting was out of the question, for the stomach of a horse by no
means agrees with the half-pay establishment. When I shot, the
shepherds, and ploughmen, and my very dog, quizzed me every time that
I missed, which was, generally speaking, every time I fired. Besides,
the country gentlemen in this quarter like their game, and began to
talk of prosecutions and interdicts.  I did not give up fighting the
French to commence a domestic war with the "pleasant men of
Teviotdale," as the song calls them; so I e'en spent three days (very
agreeably) in cleaning my gun, and disposing it upon two hooks over my
chimney-piece.

The success of this accidental experiment set me on trying my skill in
the mechanical arts. Accordingly I took down and cleaned my landlady's
cuckoo-clock, and in so doing, silenced that companion of the spring
for ever and a day. I mounted a turning-lathe, and in attempting to
use it, I very nearly cribbed off, with an inch-and-half former, one
of the fingers which the hussar had left me.

Books I tried, both those of the little circulating library, and of
the more rational subscription collection maintained by this
intellectual people. But neither the light reading of the one, nor the
heavy artillery of the other, suited my purpose. I always fell asleep
at the fourth or fifth page of history or disquisition; and it took me
a month's hard reading to wade through a half-bound trashy novel,
during which I was pestered with applications to return the volumes,
by every half-bred milliner's miss about the place.  In short, during
the time when all the town besides had something to do, I had nothing
for it, but to walk in the church-yard, and whistle till it was
dinner-time.

During these promenades, the ruins necessarily forced themselves on my
attention, and, by degrees, I found myself engaged in studying the
more minute ornaments, and at length the general plan, of this noble
structure.  The old sexton aided my labours, and gave me his portion
of traditional lore. Every day added something to my stock of
knowledge respecting the ancient state of the building; and at length
I made discoveries concerning the purpose of several detached and very
ruinous portions of it, the use of which had hitherto been either
unknown altogether or erroneously explained.

The knowledge which I thus acquired I had frequent opportunities of
retailing to those visiters whom the progress of a Scottish tour
brought to visit this celebrated spot. Without encroaching on the
privilege of my friend the sexton, I became gradually an assistant
Cicerone in the task of description and explanation, and often (seeing
a fresh party of visiters arrive) has he turned over to me those to
whom he had told half his story, with the flattering observation,
"What needs I say ony mair about it?  There's the Captain kens mair
anent it than I do, or any man in the town." Then would I salute the
strangers courteously, and expatiate to their astonished minds upon
crypts and chancels, and naves, arches, Gothic and Saxon architraves,
mullions and flying buttresses. It not unfrequently happened, that an
acquaintance which commenced in the Abbey concluded in the inn, which
served to relieve the solitude as well as the monotony of my
landlady's shoulder of mutton, whether roast, cold, or hashed.

By degrees my mind became enlarged; I found a book or two which
enlightened me on the subject of Gothic architecture, and I read now
with pleasure, because I was interested in what I read about. Even my
character began to dilate and expand. I spoke with more authority at
the club, and was listened to with deference, because on one subject,
at least, I possessed more information than any of its members.
Indeed, I found that even my stories about Egypt, which, to say truth,
were somewhat threadbare, were now listened to with more respect than
formerly. "The Captain," they said, "had something in him after
a',--there were few folk kend sae muckle about the Abbey."

With this general approbation waxed my own sense of self-importance,
and my feeling of general comfort. I ate with more appetite, I
digested with more ease, I lay down at night with joy, and slept sound
till morning, when I arose with a sense of busy importance, and hied
me to measure, to examine, and to compare the various parts of this
interesting structure. I lost all sense and consciousness of certain
unpleasant sensations of a nondescript nature, about my head and
stomach, to which I had been in the habit of attending, more for the
benefit of the village apothecary than my own, for the pure want of
something else to think about. I had found out an occupation
unwittingly, and was happy because I had something to do.  In a word,
I had commenced local antiquary, and was not unworthy of the name.

Whilst I was in this pleasing career of busy idleness, for so it might
at best be called, it happened that I was one night sitting in my
little parlour, adjacent to the closet which my landlady calls my
bedroom, in the act of preparing for an early retreat to the realms of
Morpheus. Dugdale's Monasticon, borrowed from the library at A------,
was lying on the table before me, flanked by some excellent Cheshire
cheese, (a present, by the way, from an honest London citizen, to whom
I had explained the difference between a Gothic and a Saxon arch,) and
a glass of Vanderhagen's best ale. Thus armed at all points against my
old enemy Time, I was leisurely and deliciously preparing for bed--now
reading a line of old Dugdale--now sipping my ale, or munching my
bread and cheese--now undoing the strings at my breeches' knees, or a
button or two of my waistcoat, until the village clock should strike
ten, before which time I make it a rule never to go to bed.  A loud
knocking, however, interrupted my ordinary process on this occasion,
and the voice of my honest landlord of the George was heard
vociferating, [Footnote: The George was, and is, the principal inn in
the village of Kennaquhair, or Melrose. But the landlord of the period
was not the same civil and quiet person by whom the inn is now kept.
David Kyle, a Melrose proprietor of no little importance, a first-rate
person of consequence in whatever belonged to the business of the
town, was the original owner and landlord of the inn. Poor David, like
many other busy men, took so much care of public affairs, as in some
degree to neglect his own. There are persons still alive at
Kennaquhair who can recognise him and his peculiarities in the
following sketch of mine Host of the George.] "What the deevil, Mrs.
Grimslees, the Captain is no in his bed?  and a gentleman at our house
has ordered a fowl and minced collops, and a bottle of sherry, and has
sent to ask him to supper, to tell him all about the Abbey."

"Na," answered Luckie Grimslees, in the true sleepy tone of a Scottish
matron when ten o'clock is going to strike, "he's no in his bed, but
I'se warrant him no gae out at this time o' night to keep folks
sitting up waiting for him--the Captain's a decent man."

I plainly perceived this last compliment was made for my hearing, by
way both of indicating and of recommending the course of conduct which
Mrs. Grimslees desired I should pursue. But I had not been knocked
about the world for thirty years and odd, and lived a bluff bachelor
all the while, to come home and be put under petticoat government by
my landlady.  Accordingly I opened my chamber-door, and desired my old
friend David to walk up stairs.

"Captain," said he, as he entered, "I am as glad to find you up as if
I had hooked a twenty pound saumon. There's a gentleman up yonder that
will not sleep sound in his bed this blessed night unless he has the
pleasure to drink a glass of wine with you."

"You know, David," I replied, with becoming dignity, "that I cannot
with propriety go out to visit strangers at this time of night, or
accept of invitations from people of whom I know nothing."

David swore a round oath, and added, "Was ever the like heard of? He
has ordered a fowl and egg sauce, a pancake and minced collops and a
bottle of sherry--D'ye think I wad come and ask you to go to keep
company with ony bit English rider that sups on toasted cheese, and a
cheerer of rum-toddy? This is a gentleman every inch of him, and a
virtuoso, a clean virtuoso-a sad-coloured stand of claithes, and a wig
like the curled back of a mug-ewe. The very first question he speered
was about the auld drawbrig that has been at the bottom of the water
these twal score years--I have seen the fundations when we were
sticking saumon--And how the deevil suld he ken ony thing about the
old drawbrig, unless he were a virtuoso?" [Footnote: There is more to
be said about this old bridge hereafter. See Note, p. 57.]

David being a virtuoso in his own way, and moreover a landholder and
heritor, was a qualified judge of all who frequented his house, and
therefore I could not avoid again tying the strings of my knees.

"That's right, Captain," vociferated David; "you twa will be as thick
as three in a bed an ance ye forgather. I haena seen the like o' him
my very sell since I saw the great Doctor Samuel Johnson on his tower
through Scotland, whilk tower is lying in my back parlour for the
amusement of my guests, wi' the twa boards torn aff."

"Then the gentleman is a scholar, David?"

"I'se uphaud him a scholar," answered David: "he has a black coat on,
or a brown ane, at ony-rate."

"Is he a clergyman?"

"I am thinking no, for he looked after his horse's supper before he
spoke o' his ain," replied mine host.

"Has he a servant?" demanded I.

"Nae servant," answered David; "but a grand face o' his ain, that wad
gar ony body be willing to serve him that looks upon him."

"And what makes him think of disturbing me? Ah, David, this has
been some of your chattering; you are perpetually bringing your guests
on my shoulders, as if it were my business to entertain every man who
comes to the George."

"What the deil wad ye hae me do, Captain?" answered mine host; "a
gentleman lights down, and asks me in a most earnest manner, what man
of sense and learning there is about our town, that can tell him about
the antiquities of the place, and specially about the auld Abbey--ye
wadna hae me tell the gentleman a lee? and ye ken weel eneugh there is
naebody in the town can say a reasonable word about it, be it no
yoursell, except the bedral, and he is as fou as a piper by this time.
So, says I, there's Captain Clutterbuck, that's a very civil gentleman
and has little to do forby telling a' the auld cracks about the Abbey,
and dwells just hard by. Then says the gentleman to me, 'Sir,' says
he, very civilly, 'have the goodness to step to Captain Clutterbuck
with my compliments, and say I am a stranger, who have been led to
these parts chiefly by the fame of these Ruins, and that I would call
upon him, but the hour is late.' And mair he said that I have
forgotten, but I weel remember it ended,--'And, landlord, get a bottle
of your best sherry, and supper for two.'--Ye wadna have had me refuse
to do the gentleman's bidding, and me a publican?"

"Well, David," said I, "I wish your virtuoso had taken a fitter hour--
but as you say he is a gentleman--"

"I'se uphaud him that--the order speaks for itsell--a bottle of sherry
--minched collops and a fowl--that's speaking like a gentleman, I
trow?--That's right, Captain, button weel up, the night's raw--but
the water's clearing for a' that; we'll be on't neist night wi' my
Lord's boats, and we'll hae ill luck if I dinna send you a kipper to
relish your ale at e'en." [Footnote:  The nobleman whose boats are
mentioned in the text, is the late kind and amiable Lord Sommerville,
an intimate friend of the author.  David Kyle was a constant and
privileged attendant when Lord Sommerville had a party for spearing
salmon; on such occasions, eighty or a hundred fish were often killed
between Gleamer and Leaderfoot.]

In five minutes after this dialogue, I found myself in the parlour of
the George, and in the presence of the stranger.

He was a grave personage, about my own age, (which we shall call about
fifty,) and really had, as my friend David expressed it, something in
his face that inclined men to oblige and to serve him. Yet this
expression of authority was not at all of the cast which I have seen
in the countenance of a general of brigade, neither was the stranger's
dress at all martial. It consisted of a uniform suit of iron-gray
clothes, cut in rather an old-fashioned form. His legs were defended
with strong leathern gambadoes, which, according to an antiquarian
contrivance, opened at the sides, and were secured by steel clasps.
His countenance was worn as much by toil and sorrow as by age, for it
intimated that he had seen and endured much. His address was
singularly pleasing and gentlemanlike, and the apology which he made
for disturbing me at such an hour, and in such a manner, was so well
and handsomely expressed, that I could not reply otherwise than by
declaring my willingness to be of service to him.

"I have been a traveller to-day, sir," said he, "and I would willingly
defer the little I have to say till after supper, for which I feel
rather more appetized than usual."

We sate down to table, and notwithstanding the stranger's alleged
appetite, as well as the gentle preparation of cheese and ale which I
had already laid aboard, I really believe that I of the two did the
greater honour to my friend David's fowl and minced collops.

When the cloth was removed, and we had each made a tumbler of negus,
of that liquor which hosts call Sherry, and guests call Lisbon, I
perceived that the stranger seemed pensive, silent, and somewhat
embarrassed, as if he had something to communicate which he knew not
well how to introduce.  To pave the way for him, I spoke of the
ancient ruins of the Monastery, and of their history. But, to my great
surprise, I found I had met my match with a witness. The stranger not
only knew all that I could tell him, but a great deal more; and,  what
was still more mortifying, he was able, by reference to dates,
charters, and other evidence of facts, that, as Burns says, "downa be
disputed," to correct many of the vague tales which I had adopted on
loose and vulgar tradition, as well as to confute more than one of my
favourite theories on the subject of the old monks and their
dwellings, which I had sported freely in all the presumption of
superior information. And here I cannot but remark, that much of the
stranger's arguments and inductions rested upon the authority of Mr.
Deputy Register of Scotland, [Footnote:  Thomas Thomson, Esq., whose
well-deserved panegyric ought to be found on another page than one
written by an intimate friend of thirty years' standing.] and his
lucubrations; a gentleman whose indefatigable research into the
national records is like to destroy my trade, and that of all local
antiquaries, by substituting truth instead of legend and romance.
Alas! I would the learned gentleman did but know how difficult it is
for us dealers in petty wares of antiquity to--

  Pluck from our memories a rooted "legend,"
  Raze out the written records of our brain.
  Or cleanse our bosoms of that perilous stuff--

and so forth. It would, I am sure, move his pity to think how many old
dogs he hath set to learn new tricks, how many venerable parrots he
hath taught to sing a new song, how many gray heads he hath addled by
vain attempts to exchange their old _Mumpsimus_ for his new
_Sumpsimus_. But let it pass. _Humana perpessi sumus_--All
changes round us, past, present, and to come; that which was history
yesterday becomes fable to-day, and the truth of to-day is hatched
into a lie by to-morrow.

Finding myself like to be overpowered in the Monastery, which I had
hitherto regarded as my citadel, I began, like a skilful general, to
evacuate that place of defence, and fight my way through the adjacent
country. I had recourse to my acquaintance with the families and
antiquities of the neighbourhood, ground on which I thought I might
skirmish at large without its being possible for the stranger to meet
me with advantage. But I was mistaken.

The man in the iron-gray suit showed a much more minute knowledge of
these particulars than I had the least pretension to. He could tell
the very year in which the family of De Haga first settled on their
ancient barony.

[Footnote: The family of De Haga, modernized into Haig, of Bemerside,
is of the highest antiquity, and is the subject of one of the
prophecies of Thomas the Rhymer:--

  Betide, betide, whate'er betide.
  Haig shall be Haig of Bemerside. ]

Not a Thane within reach but he knew his family and connexions, how
many of his ancestors had fallen by the sword of the English, how many
in domestic brawl, and how many by the hand of the executioner for
march-treason. Their castles he was acquainted with from turret to
foundation-stone; and as for the miscellaneous antiquities scattered
about the country, he knew every one of them, from a _cromlech_
to a _cairn_, and could give as good an account of each as if he
had lived in the time of the Danes or Druids.

I was now in the mortifying predicament of one who suddenly finds
himself a scholar when he came to teach, and nothing was left for me
but to pick up as much of his conversation as I could, for the benefit
of the next company. I told, indeed, Allan Ramsay's story of the Monk
and Miller's Wife, in order to retreat with some honour under cover of
a parting volley.  Here, however, my flank was again turned by the
eternal stranger.

"You are pleased to be facetious, sir," said he; "but you cannot be
ignorant that the ludicrous incident you mentioned is the subject of a
tale much older than that of Allan Ramsay."

I nodded, unwilling to acknowledge my ignorance, though, in fact, I
knew no more what he meant than did one of my friend David's
post-horses.

"I do not allude," continued my omniscient companion, "to the curious
poem published by Pinkerton from the Maitland Manuscript, called the
Fryars of Berwick, although it presents a very minute and amusing
picture of Scottish manners during the reign of James V.; but rather
to the Italian novelist, by whom, so far as I know, the story was
first printed, although unquestionably he first took his original from
some ancient _fabliau_." [Footnote: It is curious to remark at how
little expense of invention successive ages are content to receive
amusement. The same story which Ramsay and Dunbar have successively
handled, forms also the subject of the modern farce, No Song, no
Supper.]

"It is not to be doubted," answered I, not very well understanding,
however, the proposition to which I gave such unqualified assent.

"Yet," continued my companion, "I question much, had you known my
situation and profession, whether you would have pitched upon this
precise anecdote for my amusement."

This observation he made in a tone of perfect good-humour. I pricked
up my ears at the hint, and answered as politely as I could, that my
ignorance of his condition and rank could be the only cause of my
having stumbled on anything disagreeable; and that I was most willing
to apologize for my unintentional offence, so soon as I should know
wherein it consisted.

"Nay, no offence, sir," he replied; "offence can only exist where it
is taken. I have been too long accustomed to more severe and cruel
misconstructions, to be offended at a popular jest, though directed at
my profession."

"Am I to understand, then," I answered, "that I am speaking with a
Catholic clergyman?"

"An unworthy monk of the order of Saint Benedict," said the stranger,
"belonging to a community of your own countrymen, long established in
France, and scattered unhappily by the events of the Revolution."
"Then," said I, "you are a native Scotchman, and from this
neighbourhood?"

"Not so," answered the monk; "I am a Scotchman by extraction only,
and never was in this neighbourhood during my whole life."

"Never in this neighbourhood, and yet so minutely acquainted with its
history, its traditions, and even its external scenery! You surprise
me, sir," I replied.

"It is not surprising," he said, "that I should have that sort of
local information, when it is considered, that my uncle, an excellent
man, as well as a good Scotchman, the head also of our religious
community, employed much of his leisure in making me acquainted with
these particulars; and that I myself, disgusted with what has been
passing around me, have for many years amused myself, by digesting and
arranging the various scraps of information which I derived from my
worthy relative, and other aged brethren of our order."

"I presume, sir," said I, "though I would by no means intrude the
question, that you are now returned to Scotland with a view to settle
amongst your countrymen, since the great political catastrophe of our
time has reduced your corps?"

"No, sir," replied the Benedictine, "such is not my intention. A
European potentate, who still cherishes the Catholic faith, has
offered us a retreat within his dominions, where a few of my scattered
brethren are already assembled, to pray to God for blessings on their
protector, and pardon to their enemies. No one, I believe, will be
able to object to us under our new establishment, that the extent of
our revenues will be inconsistent with our vows of poverty and
abstinence; but, let us strive to be thankful to God, that the snare
of temporal abundance is removed from us."

"Many of your convents abroad, sir," said I, "enjoyed very handsome
incomes--and yet, allowing for times, I question if any were better
provided for than the Monastery of this village. It is said to have
possessed nearly two thousand pounds in yearly money-rent, fourteen
chalders and nine bolls of wheat, fifty-six chalders five bolls
barley, forty-four chalders and ten bolls oats, capons and poultry,
butter, salt, carriage and arriage, peats and kain, wool and ale."

"Even too much of all these temporal goods, sir," said my companion,
"which, though well intended by the pious donors, served only to make
the establishment the envy and the prey of those by whom it was finally
devoured."

"In the meanwhile, however," I observed, "the monks had an easy life
of it, and, as the old song goes,

  --made gude kale
  On Fridays when they fasted."

"I understand you, sir," said the Benedictine; "it is difficult, saith
the proverb, to carry a full cup without spilling. Unquestionably the
wealth of the community, as it endangered the safety of the
establishment by exciting the cupidity of others, was also in frequent
instances a snare to the brethren themselves. And yet we have seen the
revenues of convents expended, not only in acts of beneficence and
hospitality to individuals, but in works of general and permanent
advantage to the world at large.  The noble folio collection of French
historians, commenced in 1737, under the inspection and at the expense
of the community of Saint Maur, will long show that the revenues of
the Benedictines were not always spent in self-indulgence, and that
the members of that order did not uniformly slumber in sloth and
indolence, when they had discharged the formal duties of their rule."

As I knew nothing earthly at the time about the community of St. Maur,
and their learned labours, I could only return a mumbling assent to
this proposition. I have since seen this noble work in the library of
a distinguished family, and I must own I am ashamed to reflect, that,
in so wealthy a country as ours, a similar digest of our historians
should not be undertaken, under the patronage of the noble and the
learned, in rivalry of that which the Benedictines of Paris executed
at the expense of their own conventual funds.

"I perceive," said the ex-Benedictine, smiling, "that your heretical
prejudices are too strong to allow us poor brethren any merit, whether
literary or spiritual."

"Far from it, sir," said I; "I assure you I have been much obliged to
monks in my time. When I was quartered in a Monastery in Flanders, in
the campaign of 1793, I never lived more comfortably in my life. They
were jolly fellows, the Flemish Canons, and right sorry was I to leave
my good quarters, and to know that my honest hosts were to be at the
mercy of the Sans-Culottes. But _fortune de la guerre!_"

The poor Benedictine looked down and was silent. I had unwittingly
awakened a train of bitter reflections, or rather I had touched
somewhat rudely upon a chord which seldom ceased to vibrate of itself.
But he was too much accustomed to this sorrowful train of ideas to
suffer it to overcome him. On my part, I hastened to atone for my
blunder. "If there was any object of his journey to this country in
which I could, with propriety, assist him, I begged to offer him my
best services." I own I laid some little emphasis on the words "with
propriety," as I felt it would ill become me, a sound Protestant, and
a servant of government so far as my half-pay was concerned, to
implicate myself in any recruiting which my companion might have
undertaken in behalf of foreign seminaries, or in any similar design
for the advancement of Popery, which, whether the Pope be actually the
old lady of Babylon or no, it did not become me in any manner to
advance or countenance.

My new friend hastened to relieve my indecision. "I was about to
request your assistance, sir," he said, "in a matter which cannot but
interest you as an antiquary, and a person of research. But I assure
you it relates entirely to events and persons removed to the distance
of two centuries and a half. I have experienced too much evil from the
violent unsettlement of the country in which I was born, to be a rash
labourer in the work of innovation in that of my ancestors."

I again assured him of my willingness to assist him in anything that
was not contrary to my allegiance or religion.

"My proposal," he replied, "affects neither.--May God bless the
reigning family in Britain! They are not, indeed, of that dynasty to
restore which my ancestors struggled and suffered in vain; but the
Providence who has conducted his present Majesty to the throne, has
given him the virtues necessary to his time--firmness and
intrepidity--a true love of his country, and an enlightened view of
the dangers by which she is surrounded.--For the religion of these
realms, I am contented to hope that the great Power, whose mysterious
dispensation has rent them from the bosom of the church, will, in his
own good time and manner, restore them to its holy pale. The efforts
of an individual, obscure and humble as myself, might well retard, but
could never advance, a work so mighty."

"May I then inquire, sir," said I, "with what purpose you seek this
country?"

Ere my companion replied, he took from his pocket a clasped paper
book, about the size of a regimental orderly-book, full, as it seemed,
of memoranda; and, drawing one of the candles close to him, (for
David, as a strong proof of his respect for the stranger, had indulged
us with two,) he seemed to peruse the contents very earnestly.

"There is among the ruins of the western end of the Abbey church,"
said he, looking up to me, yet keeping the memorandum-book half open,
and occasionally glancing at it, as if to refresh his memory, "a sort
of recess or chapel beneath a broken arch, and in the immediate
vicinity of one of those shattered Gothic columns which once supported
the magnificent roof, whose fall has now encumbered that part of the
building with its ruins."

"I think," said I, "that I know whereabouts you are. Is there not in
the side wall of the chapel, or recess, which you mention, a large
carved stone, bearing a coat of arms, which no one hitherto has been
able to decipher?"

"You are right," answered the Benedictine; and again consulting his
memoranda, he added, "the arms on the dexter side are those of
Glendinning, being a cross parted by a cross indented and
countercharged of the same; and on the sinister three spur-rowels for
those of Avenel; they are two ancient families, now almost extinct in
this country--the arms _part y per pale_."

"I think," said I, "there is no part of this ancient structure with
which you are not as well acquainted as was the mason who built it.
But if your information be correct, he who made out these bearings
must have had better eyes than mine."

"His eyes," said the Benedictine, "have long been closed in death;
probably when he inspected the monument it was in a more perfect
state, or he may have derived his information from the tradition of
the place."

"I assure you," said I, "that no such tradition now exists. I have
made several reconnoissances among the old people, in hopes to learn
something of the armorial bearings, but I never heard of such a
circumstance. It seems odd that you should have acquired it in a
foreign land."

"These trifling particulars," he replied, "were formerly looked upon
as more important, and they were sanctified to the exiles who retained
recollection of them, because they related to a place dear indeed to
memory, but which their eyes could never again behold. It is possible,
in like manner, that on the Potomac or Susquehannah, you may find
traditions current concerning places in England, which are utterly
forgotten in the neighbourhood where they originated. But to my
purpose. In this recess, marked by the armorial bearings, lies buried
a treasure, and it is in order to remove it that I have undertaken my
present journey."

"A treasure!" echoed I, in astonishment.

"Yes," replied the monk, "an inestimable treasure, for those who know
how to use it rightly."

I own my ears did tingle a little at the word treasure, and that a
handsome tilbury, with a neat groom in blue and scarlet livery, having
a smart cockade on his glazed hat, seemed as it were to glide across
the room before gay eyes, while a voice, as of a crier, pronounced my
ear, "Captain Clutterbuck's tilbury--drive up." But I resisted the
devil, and he fled from me.

"I believe," said I, "all hidden treasure belongs either to the king
or the lord of the soil; and as I have served his majesty, I cannot
concern myself in any adventure which may have an end in the Court of
Exchequer."

"The treasure I seek," said the stranger, smiling, "will not be envied
by princes or nobles,---it is simply the heart of an upright man."

"Ah! I understand you," I answered; "some relic, forgotten in the
confusion of the Reformation. I know the value which men of your
persuasion put upon the bodies and limbs of saints. I have seen the
Three Kings of Cologne."

"The relics which I seek, however," said the Benedictine, "are not
precisely of that nature. The excellent relative whom I have already
mentioned, amused his leisure hours with putting into form the
traditions of his family, particularly some remarkable circumstances
which took place about the first breaking out of the schism of the
church in Scotland. He became so much interested in his own labours,
that at length he resolved that the heart of one individual, the hero
of his tale, should rest no longer in a land of heresy, now deserted
by all his kindred. As he knew where it was deposited, he formed the
resolution to visit his native country for the purpose of recovering
this valued relic. But age, and at length disease, interfered with his
resolution, and it was on his deathbed that he charged me to undertake
the task in his stead. The various important events which have crowded
upon each other, our ruin and our exile, have for many years obliged
me to postpone this delegated duty. Why, indeed, transfer the relics
of a holy and worthy man to a country, where religion and virtue are
become the mockery of the scorner? I have now a home, which I trust
may be permanent, if any thing in this earth can be, termed so.
Thither will I transport the heart of the good father, and beside the
shrine which it shall occupy, I will construct my own grave."

"He must, indeed, have been an excellent man," replied I, "whose
memory, at so distant a period, calls forth such strong marks of
regard."

"He was, as you justly term him," said the ecclesiastic, "indeed
excellent--excellent in his life and doctrine--excellent, above all,
in his self-denied and disinterested sacrifice of all that life holds
dear to principle and to friendship. But you shall read his history. I
shall be happy at once to gratify your curiosity, and to show my sense
of your kindness, if you will have the goodness to procure me the
means of accomplishing my object." I replied to the Benedictine, that,
as the rubbish amongst which he proposed to search was no part of the
ordinary burial-ground, and as I was on the best terms with the
sexton, I had little doubt that I could procure him the means of
executing his pious purpose.

With this promise we parted for the night; and on the ensuing morning
I made it my business to see the sexton, who, for a small gratuity,
readily granted permission of search, on condition, however, that he
should be present himself, to see that the stranger removed nothing of
intrinsic value.

"To banes, and skulls, and hearts, if he can find ony, he shall be
welcome," said this guardian of the ruined Monastery, "there's plenty
a' about, an he's curious of them; but if there be ony picts" (meaning
perhaps _pyx_) "or chalishes, or the like of such Popish veshells
of gold and silver, deil hae me an I conneve at their being removed."

The sexton also stipulated, that our researches should take place at
night, being unwilling to excite observation, or give rise to scandal.
My new acquaintance and I spent the day as became lovers of hoar
antiquity. We visited every corner of these magnificent ruins again
and again during the forenoon; and, having made a comfortable dinner
at David's, we walked in the afternoon to such places in the
neighbourhood as ancient tradition or modern conjecture had rendered
mark worthy. Night found us in the interior of the ruins, attended by
the sexton, who carried a dark lantern, and stumbling alternately over
the graves of the dead, and the fragments of that architecture, which
they doubtless trusted would have canopied their bones till doomsday.

I am by no means particularly superstitious, and yet there was that in
the present service which I did not very much like. There was
something awful in the resolution of disturbing, at such an hour, and
in such a place, the still and mute sanctity of the grave. My
companions were free from this impression--the stranger from his
energetic desire to execute the purpose for which he came--and the
sexton from habitual indifference. We soon stood in the aisle, which,
by the account of the Benedictine, contained the bones of the family
of Glendinning, and were busily employed in removing the rubbish from
a corner which the stranger pointed out. If a half-pay Captain could
have represented an ancient Border-knight, or an ex-Benedictine of the
nineteenth century a wizard monk of the sixteenth, we might have aptly
enough personified the search after Michael Scott's lamp and book of
magic power. But the sexton would have been _de trop_ in the
group.  [Footnote: This is one of those passages which must now read
awkwardly, since every one knows that the Novelist and the author of
the Lay of the Minstrel, is the same person. But before the avowal was
made, the author was forced into this and similar offences against
good taste, to meet an argument, often repeated, that there was
something very mysterious in the Author of Waverley's reserve
concerning Sir Walter Scott, an author sufficiently voluminous at
least. I had a great mind to remove the passages from this edition,
but the more candid way is to explain how they came there.]

Ere the stranger, assisted by the sexton in his task, had been long at
work, they came to some hewn stones, which seemed to have made part of
a small shrine, though now displaced and destroyed.

"Let us remove these with caution, my friend," said the stranger,
"lest we injure that which I come to seek."

"They are prime stanes," said the sexton, "picked free every ane of
them;--warse than the best wad never serve the monks, I'se warrant."

A minute after he had made this observation, he exclaimed, "I hae fund
something now that stands again' the spade, as if it were neither
earth nor stane."

The stranger stooped eagerly to assist him.

"Na, na, haill o' my ain," said the sexton; "nae halves or
quarters;"--and he lifted from amongst the ruins a small leaden box.

"You will be disappointed, my friend," said the Benedictine, "if you
expect any thing there but the mouldering dust of a human heart, closed
in an inner case of porphyry."

I interposed as a neutral party, and taking the box from the sexton,
reminded him, that if there were treasure concealed in it, still it
could not become the property of the finder. I then proposed, that as
the place was too dark to examine the contents of the leaden casket,
we should adjourn to David's, where we might have the advantage of
light and fire while carrying on our investigation. The stranger
requested us to go before, assuring us that he would follow in a few
minutes.

I fancy that old Mattocks suspected these few minutes might be
employed in effecting farther discoveries amongst the tombs, for he
glided back through a side-aisle to watch the Benedictine's motions,
but presently returned, and told me in a whisper that "the gentleman
was on his knees amang the cauld stanes, praying like ony saunt."

I stole back, and beheld the old man actually employed as Mattocks had
informed me. The language seemed to be Latin; and as, the whispered,
yet solemn accent, glided away through the ruined aisles, I could not
help reflecting how long it was since they had heard the forms of that
religion, for the exercise of which they had been reared at such cost
of time, taste, labour, and expense. "Come away, come away," said I;
"let us leave him to himself, Mattocks; this is no business of ours."

"My certes, no, Captain," said Mattocks; "ne'ertheless, it winna be
amiss to keep an eye on him. My father, rest his saul, was a
horse-couper, and used to say he never was cheated in a naig in his
life, saving by a west-country whig frae Kilmarnock, that said a grace
ower a dram o' whisky. But this gentleman will be a Roman, I'se
warrant?"

"You are perfectly right in that, Saunders," said I.

"Ay, I have seen twa or three of their priests that were chased ower
here some score o' years syne. They just danced like mad when they
looked on the friars' heads, and the nuns' heads, in the cloister
yonder; they took to them like auld acquaintance like.--Od, he is not
stirring yet, mair than he were a through-stane! [Footnote: A
tombstone.] I never kend a Roman, to say kend him, but ane--mair by
token, he was the only ane in the town to ken--and that was auld Jock
of the Pend. It wad hae been lang ere ye fand Jock praying in the
Abbey in a thick night, wi' his knees on a cauld stane.  Jock likit a
kirk wi' a chimley in't. Mony a merry ploy I hae had wi' him down at
the inn yonder; and when he died, decently I wad hae earded him; but,
or I gat his grave weel howkit, some of the quality, that were o' his
ain unhappy persuasion, had the corpse whirried away up the water, and
buried him after their ain pleasure, doubtless--they kend best. I wad
hae made nae great charge. I wadna hae excised Johnnie, dead or
alive.--Stay, see--the strange gentleman is coming."

"Hold the lantern to assist him, Mattocks," said I.--"This is rough
walking, sir."

"Yes," replied the Benedictine; "I may say with a poet, who is
doubtless familiar to you----"

I should be surprised if he were, thought I internally.

The stranger continued:

  "Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
  Have my old feet stumbled at graves!"

"We are now clear of the churchyard," said I, "and have but a short
walk to David's, where I hope we shall find a cheerful fire to enliven
us after our night's work."

We entered, accordingly, the little parlour, into which Mattocks was
also about to push himself with sufficient effrontery, when David,
with a most astounding oath, expelled him by head and shoulders,
d--ning his curiosity, that would not let gentlemen be private in
their own inn. Apparently mine host considered his own presence as no
intrusion, for he crowded up to the table on which I had laid down the
leaden box. It was frail and wasted, as might be guessed, from having
lain so many years in the ground.  On opening it, we found deposited
within, a case made of porphyry, as the stranger had announced to us.

"I fancy," he said, "gentlemen, your curiosity will not be
satisfied,--perhaps I should say that your suspicions will not be
removed,--unless I undo this casket; yet it only contains the
mouldering remains of a heart, once the seat of the noblest thoughts."

He undid the box with great caution; but the shrivelled substance
which it contained bore now no resemblance to what it might once have
been, the means used having been apparently unequal to preserve its
shape and colour, although they were adequate to prevent its total
decay. We were quite satisfied, notwithstanding, that it was, what the
stranger asserted, the remains of a human heart; and David readily
promised his influence in the village, which was almost co-ordinate
with that of the bailie himself, to silence all idle rumours. He was,
moreover, pleased to favour us with his company to supper; and having
taken the lion's share of two bottles of sherry, he not only
sanctioned with his plenary authority the stranger's removal of the
heart, but, I believe, would have authorized the removal of the Abbey
itself, were it not that it happens considerably to advantage the
worthy publican's own custom.

The object of the Benedictine's visit to the land of his forefathers
being now accomplished, he announced his intention of leaving us early
in the ensuing day, but requested my company to breakfast with him
before his departure. I came accordingly, and when we had finished our
morning's meal, the priest took me apart, and pulling from his pocket
a large bundle of papers, he put them into my hands. "These," said he,
"Captain Clutterbuck, are genuine Memoirs of the sixteenth century,
and exhibit in a singular, and, as I think, an interesting point of
view, the manners of that period. I am induced to believe that their
publication will not be an unacceptable present to the British public;
and willingly make over to you any profit that may accrue from such a
transaction."

I stared a little at this annunciation, and observed, that the hand
seemed too modern for the date he assigned to the manuscript.

"Do not mistake me, sir," said the Benedictine; "I did not mean to say
the Memoirs were written in the sixteenth century, but only, that they
were compiled from authentic materials of that period, but written in
the taste and language of the present day. My uncle commenced this
book; and I, partly to improve my habit of English composition, partly
to divert melancholy thoughts, amused my leisure hours with continuing
and concluding it. You will see the period of the story where my uncle
leaves off his narrative, and I commence mine. In fact, they relate in
a great measure to different persons, as well as to a different
period."

Retaining the papers in my hand, I proceeded to state to him my
doubts, whether, as a good Protestant, I could undertake or
superintend a publication written probably in the spirit of Popery.

"You will find," he said, "no matter of controversy in these sheets,
nor any sentiments stated, with which, I trust, the good in all
persuasions will not be willing to join. I remembered I was writing
for a land unhappily divided from the Catholic faith; and I have taken
care to say nothing which, justly interpreted, could give ground for
accusing me of partiality. But if, upon collating my narrative with
the proofs to which I refer you--for you will find copies of many of
the original papers in that parcel--you are of opinion that I have
been partial to my own faith, I freely give you leave to correct my
errors in that respect. I own, however, I am not conscious of this
defect, and have rather to fear that the Catholics may be of opinion,
that I have mentioned circumstances respecting the decay of discipline
which preceded, and partly occasioned, the great schism, called by you
the Reformation, over which I ought to have drawn a veil. And indeed,
this is one reason why I choose the papers should appear in a foreign
land, and pass to the press through the hands of a stranger."

To this I had nothing to reply, unless to object my own incompetency
to the task the good father was desirous to impose upon me. On this
subject he was pleased to say more, I fear, than his knowledge of me
fully warranted--more, at any rate, than my modesty will permit me to
record. At length he ended, with advising me, if I continued to feel
the diffidence which I stated, to apply to some veteran of literature,
whose experience might supply my deficiencies. Upon these terms we
parted, with mutual expressions of regard, and I have never since
heard of him.

After several attempts to peruse the quires of paper thus singularly
conferred on me, in which I was interrupted by the most inexplicable
fits of yawning, I at length, in a sort of despair, communicated them
to our village club, from whom they found a more favourable reception
than the unlucky conformation of my nerves had been able to afford
them. They unanimously pronounced the work to be exceedingly good, and
assured me I would be guilty of the greatest possible injury to our
flourishing village, if I should suppress what threw such an
interesting and radiant light upon the history of the ancient
Monastery of Saint Mary.

At length, by dint of listening to their opinion, I became dubious of
my own; and, indeed, when I heard passages read forth by the sonorous
voice of our worthy pastor, I was scarce more tired than I have felt
myself at some of his own sermons. Such, and so great is the
difference betwixt reading a thing one's self, making toilsome way
through all the difficulties of manuscript, and, as the man says in
the play, "having the same read to you;"--it is positively like being
wafted over a creek in a boat, or wading through it on your feet, with
the mud up to your knees. Still, however, there remained the great
difficulty of finding some one who could act as editor, corrector at
once of the press and of the language, which, according to the
schoolmaster, was absolutely necessary.

Since the trees walked forth to choose themselves a king, never was an
honour so bandied about. The parson would not leave the quiet of his
chimney-corner--the bailie pleaded the dignity of his situation, and
the approach of the great annual fair, as reasons against going to
Edinburgh to make arrangements for printing the Benedictine's
manuscript. The schoolmaster alone seemed of malleable stuff; and,
desirous perhaps of emulating the fame of Jedediah Cleishbotham,
evinced a wish to undertake this momentous commission. But a
remonstrance from three opulent farmers, whose sons he had at bed,
board, and schooling, for twenty pounds per annum a-head, came like a
frost over the blossoms of his literary ambition, and he was compelled
to decline the service.

In these circumstances, sir, I apply to you, by the advice of our
little council of war, nothing doubting you will not be disinclined to
take the duty upon you, as it is much connected with that in which you
have distinguished yourself. What I request is, that you will review,
or rather revise and correct, the enclosed packet, and prepare it for
the press, by such alterations, additions, and curtailments, as you
think necessary. Forgive my hinting to you, that the deepest well may
be exhausted,--the best corps of grenadiers, as our old general of
brigade expressed himself, may be _used up_. A few hints can do
you no harm; and, for the prize-money, let the battle be first won,
and it shall be parted at the drum-head. I hope you will take nothing
amiss that I have said. I am a plain soldier, and little accustomed to
compliments. I may add, that I should be well contented to march in
the front with you--that is, to put my name with yours on the
title-page.  I have the honour to be, Sir, Your unknown humble
Servant, Cuthbert Clutterbuck.  Village of Kennaquhair, -- of April,
18--

_For the Author of "Waverley," &c.
care of Mr. John Ballantyne,
Hanover Street, Edinburgh._


       *       *        *       *        *


ANSWER BY "THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY,"

TO THE FOREGOING LETTER FROM CAPTAIN CLUTTERBUCK.


DEAR CAPTAIN,

Do not admire, that, notwithstanding the distance and ceremony of your
address, I return an answer in the terms of familiarity. The truth is,
your origin and native country are better known to me than even to
yourself.  You derive your respectable parentage, if I am not greatly
mistaken, from a land which has afforded much pleasure, as well as
profit, to those who have traded to it successfully,--I mean that part
of the _terra incognita_ which is called the province of Utopia.
Its productions, though censured by many (and some who use tea and
tobacco without scruple) as idle and unsubstantial luxuries, have
nevertheless, like many other luxuries, a general acceptation, and are
secretly enjoyed even by those who express the greatest scorn and
dislike of them in public. The dram-drinker is often the first to be
shocked at the smell of spirits--it is not unusual to hear old maiden
ladies declaim against scandal--the private book-cases of some
grave-seeming men would not brook decent eyes--and many, I say not of
the wise and learned, but of those most anxious to seem such, when the
spring-lock of their library is drawn, their velvet cap pulled over
their ears, their feet insinuated into their turkey slippers, are to
be found, were their retreats suddenly intruded upon, busily engaged
with the last new novel.

I have said, the truly wise and learned disdain these shifts, and will
open the said novel as avowedly as they would the lid of their
snuff-box. I will only quote one instance, though I know a hundred.
Did you know the celebrated Watt of Birmingham, Captain Clutterbuck? I
believe not, though, from what I am about to state, he would not have
failed to have sought an acquaintance with you. It was only once my
fortune to meet him, whether in body or in spirit it matters not.
There were assembled about half a score of our Northern Lights, who
had amongst them, Heaven knows how, a well-known character of your
country, Jedediah Cleishbotham.  This worthy person, having come to
Edinburgh during the Christmas vacation, had become a sort of lion in
the place, and was lead in leash from house to house along with the
guisards, the stone-eater, and other amusements of the season, which
"exhibited their unparalleled feats to private family-parties, if
required." Amidst this company stood Mr. Watt, the man whose genius
discovered the means of multiplying our national resources to a degree
perhaps even beyond his own stupendous powers of calculation and
combination; bringing the treasures of the abyss to the summit of the
earth--giving the feeble arm of man the momentum of an
Afrite--commanding manufactures to arise, as the rod of the prophet
produced water in the desert--affording the means of dispensing with
that time and tide which wait for no man, and of sailing without that
wind which defied the commands and threats of Xerxes himself.

[Footnote: Probably the ingenious author alludes to the national
adage:

  The king said sail,
  But the wind said no.

Our schoolmaster (who is also a land surveyor) thinks this whole
passage refers to Mr. Watt's improvements on the steam
engine.--_Note by Captain Clutterbuck_.]

This potent commander of the elements--this abridger of time and
space--this magician, whose cloudy machinery has produced a change on
the world, the effects of which, extraordinary as they are, are
perhaps only now beginning to be felt--was not only the most profound
man of science, the most successful combiner of powers and calculator
of numbers as adapted to practical purposes,--was not only one of the
most generally well-informed,--but one of the best and kindest of
human beings.

There he stood, surrounded by the little band I have mentioned of
Northern literati, men not less tenacious, generally speaking, of
their own fame and their own opinions, than the national regiments are
supposed to be jealous of the high character which they have won upon
service. Methinks I yet see and hear what I shall never see or hear
again. In his eighty-fifth year, the alert, kind, benevolent old man,
had his attention alive to every one's question, his information at
every one's command.

His talents and fancy overflowed on every subject. One gentleman was a
deep philologist--he talked with him on the origin of the alphabet as
if he had been coeval with Cadmus; another a celebrated critic,--you
would have said the old man had studied political economy and
belles-lettres all his life,--of science it is unnecessary to speak,
it was his own distinguished walk. And yet, Captain Clutterbuck, when
he spoke with your countryman Jedediah Cleishbotham, you would have
sworn he had been coeval with Claver'se and Burley, with the
persecutors and persecuted, and could number every shot the dragoons
had fired at the fugitive Covenanters. In fact, we discovered that no
novel of the least celebrity escaped his perusal, and that the gifted
man of science was as much addicted to the productions of your native
country, (the land of Utopia aforesaid,) in other words, as shameless
and obstinate a peruser of novels, as if he had been a very milliner's
apprentice of eighteen. I know little apology for troubling you with
these things, excepting the desire to commemorate a delightful
evening, and a wish to encourage you to shake off that modest
diffidence which makes you afraid of being supposed connected with the
fairy-land of delusive fiction. I will requite your tag of verse, from
Horace himself, with a paraphrase for your own use, my dear Captain,
and for that of your country club, excepting in reverence the
clergyman and schoolmaster:--

  _Ne sit ancillae tibi amor pudori, &c._

  Take thou no scorn.
  Of fiction born,
  Fair fiction's muse to woe;
  Old Homer's theme
  Was but a dream,
  Himself a fiction too.

Having told you your country, I must next, my dear Captain
Clutterbuck, make free to mention your own immediate descent. You are
not to suppose your land of prodigies so little known to us as the
careful concealment of your origin would seem to imply. But you have
it in common with many of your country, studiously and anxiously to
hide any connexion with it. There is this difference, indeed, betwixt
your countrymen and those of our more material world, that many of the
most estimable of them, such as an old Highland gentleman called
Ossian, a monk of Bristol called Rowley, and others, are inclined to
pass themselves off as denizens of the land of reality, whereas most
of our fellow-citizens who deny their country are such as that country
would be very willing to disclaim. The especial circumstances you
mention relating to your life and services, impose not upon us. We
know the versatility of the unsubstantial species to which you belong
permits them to assume all manner of disguises; we have seen them
apparelled in the caftan of a Persian, and the silken robe of a
Chinese, [Footnote: See the Persian Letters, and the Citizen of the
World.] and are prepared to suspect their real character under every
disguise. But how can we be ignorant of your country and manners, or
deceived by the evasion of its inhabitants, when the voyages of
discovery which have been made to it rival in number those recorded by
Purchas or by Hackluyt? [Footnote: See Les Voyages Imaginaires.] And
to show the skill and perseverance of your navigators and travellers,
we have only to name Sindbad, Aboulfouaris, and Robinson Crusoe. These
were the men for discoveries. Could we have sent Captain Greenland to
look out for the north-west passage, or Peter Wilkins to examine
Baffin's Bay, what discoveries might we not have expected? But there
are feats, and these both numerous and extraordinary, performed by the
inhabitants of your country, which we read without once attempting to
emulate.

I wander from my purpose, which was to assure you, that I know you as
well as the mother who _did_ not bear you, for MacDuff's
peculiarity sticks to your whole race. You are not born of woman,
unless, indeed, in that figurative sense, in which the celebrated
Maria Edgeworth may, in her state of single blessedness, be termed
mother of the finest family in England.  You belong, sir, to the
Editors of the land of Utopia, a sort of persons for whom I have the
highest esteem. How is it possible it should be otherwise, when you
reckon among your corporation the sage Cid Hamet Benengeli, the
short-faced president of the Spectator's Club, poor Ben Silton, and
many others, who have acted as gentlemen-ushers to works which have
cheered our heaviest, and added wings to our lightest hours?

What I have remarked as peculiar to Editors of the class in which I
venture to enrol you, is the happy combination of fortuitous
circumstances which usually put you in possession of the works which
you have the goodness to bring into public notice. One walks on the
sea-shore, and a wave casts on land a small cylindrical trunk or
casket, containing a manuscript much damaged with sea-water, which is
with difficulty deciphered, and so forth. [Footnote: See the History
of Automathes.] Another steps into a chandler's shop, to purchase a
pound of butter, and, behold! the waste-paper on which it is laid is
the manuscript of a cabalist. [Footnote: Adventures of a Guinea.] A
third is so fortunate as to obtain from a woman who lets lodgings, the
curious contents of an antique bureau, the property of a deceased
lodger. [Footnote: Adventures of an Atom.] All these are certainly
possible occurrences; but, I know not how, they seldom occur to any
Editors save those of your country.  At least I can answer for myself,
that in my solitary walks by the sea, I never saw it cast ashore any
thing but dulse and tangle, and now and then a deceased star-fish; my
landlady never presented me with any manuscript save her cursed bill;
and the most interesting of my discoveries in the way of waste-paper,
was finding a favourite passage of one of my own novels wrapt round an
ounce of snuff. No, Captain, the funds from which I have drawn my
power of amusing the public, have been bought otherwise than by
fortuitous adventure. I have buried myself in libraries to extract
from the nonsense of ancient days new nonsense of my own. I have
turned over volumes, which, from the pot-hooks I was obliged to
decipher, might have been the cabalistic manuscripts of Cornelius
Agrippa, although I never saw "the door open and the devil come in."
[Footnote: See Southey's Ballad on the Young Man who read in a
Conjuror's Books.] But all the domestic inhabitants of the libraries
were disturbed by the vehemence of my studies:--

  From my research the boldest spider fled,
  And moths, retreating, trembled as I read;

From this learned sepulchre I emerged like the Magician in the Persian
Tales, from his twelve-month's residence in the mountain, not like him
to soar over the heads of the multitude, but to mingle in the crowd,
and to elbow amongst the throng, making my way from the highest
society to the lowest, undergoing the scorn, or, what is harder to
brook, the patronizing condescension of the one, and enduring the
vulgar familiarity of the other,--and all, you will say, for
what?--to collect materials for one of those manuscripts with which
mere chance so often accommodates your country-men; in other words, to
write a successful novel.--"O Athenians, how hard we labour to deserve
your praise!"

I might stop here, my dear Clutterbuck; it would have a touching
effect, and the air of proper deference to our dear Public. But I will
not be false with you,--(though falsehood is--excuse the
observation--the current coin of your country,) the truth is, I have
studied and lived for the purpose of gratifying my own curiosity, and
passing my own time; and though the result has been, that, in one
shape or other, I have been frequently before the Public, perhaps more
frequently than prudence warranted, yet I cannot claim from them the
favour due to those who have dedicated their ease and leisure to the
improvement and entertainment of others.

Having communicated thus freely with you, my dear Captain, it follows,
of course, that I will gratefully accept of your communication, which,
as your Benedictine observed, divides itself both by subject, manner,
and age, into two parts. But I am sorry I cannot gratify your literary
ambition, by suffering your name to appear upon the title-page; and I
will candidly tell you the reason.

The Editors of your country are of such a soft and passive
disposition, that they have frequently done themselves great disgrace
by giving up the coadjutors who first brought them into public notice
and public favour, and suffering their names to be used by those
quacks and impostors who live upon the ideas of others. Thus I shame
to tell how the sage Cid Hamet Benengeli was induced by one Juan
Avellaneda to play the Turk with the ingenious Miguel Cervantes, and
to publish a Second Part of the adventures of his hero the renowned
Don Quixote, without the knowledge or co-operation of his principal
aforesaid. It is true, the Arabian sage returned to his allegiance,
and thereafter composed a genuine continuation of the Knight of La
Mancha, in which the said Avellaneda of Tordesillas is severely
chastised. For in this you pseudo-editors resemble the juggler's
disciplined ape, to which a sly old Scotsman likened James I., "if you
have Jackoo in your hand, you can make him bite me; if I have Jackoo
in my hand, I can make him bite you." Yet, notwithstanding the
_amende honorable_ thus made by Cid Hamet Benengeli, his
temporary defection did not the less occasion the decease of the
ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote, if he can be said to die, whose memory
is immortal. Cervantes put him to death, lest he should again fall
into bad hands. Awful, yet just consequence of Cid Hamet's defection!

To quote a more modern and much less important instance. I am sorry to
observe my old acquaintance Jedediah Cleishbotham has misbehaved
himself so far as to desert his original patron, and set up for
himself. I am afraid the poor pedagogue will make little by his new
allies, unless the pleasure of entertaining the public, and, for aught
I know, the gentlemen of the long robe, with disputes about his
identity.

[Footnote: I am since more correctly informed, that Mr. Cleishbotham
died some months since at Gandercleuch, and that the person assuming
his name is an impostor. The real Jedediah made a most Christian and
edifying end; and, as I am credibly informed, having sent for a
Cameronian clergyman when he was _in extremis_, was so fortunate
as to convince the good man, that, after all, he had no wish to bring
down on the scattered remnant of Mountain folks, "the bonnets of Bonny
Dundee." Hard that the speculators in print and paper will not allow a
good man to rest quiet in his grave.

This note, and the passages in the text, were occasioned by a London
bookseller having printed, as a Speculation, an additional collection
of Tales of My Landlord, which was not so fortunate as to succeed in
passing on the world as genuine.]

Observe, therefore, Captain Clutterbuck, that, wise by these great
examples, I receive you as a partner, but a sleeping partner only. As
I give you no title to employ or use the firm of the copartnery we are
about to form, I will announce my property in my title-page, and put
my own mark on my own chattels, which the attorney tells me it will be
a crime to counterfeit, as much as it would to imitate the autograph
of any other empiric--a crime amounting, as advertisements upon little
vials assure to us, to nothing short of felony.  If, therefore, my
dear friend, your name should hereafter appear in any title-page
without mine, readers will know what to think of you. I scorn to use
either arguments or threats; but you cannot but be sensible, that, as
you owe your literary existence to me on the one hand, so, on the
other, your very all is at my disposal. I can at pleasure cut off your
annuity, strike your name from the half-pay establishment, nay,
actually put you to death, without being answerable to any one. These
are plain words to a gentleman who has served during the whole war;
but, I am aware, you will take nothing amiss at my hands.

And now, my good sir, let us address ourselves to our task, and
arrange, as we best can, the manuscript of your Benedictine, so as to
suit the taste of this critical age. You will find I have made very
liberal use of his permission, to alter whatever seemed too favourable
to the Church of Rome, which I abominate, were it but for her fasts
and penances.

Our reader is doubtless impatient, and we must own, with John Bunyan,

  We have too long detain'd him in the porch,
  And kept him from the sunshine with a torch.

Adieu, therefore, my dear Captain--remember me respectfully to the
parson, the schoolmaster, and the bailie, and all friends of the happy
club in the village of Kennaquhair. I have never seen, and never shall
see, one of their faces; and notwithstanding, I believe that as yet I
am better acquainted with them than any other man who lives.--I shall
soon introduce you to my jocund friend, Mr. John Ballantyne of Trinity
Grove, whom you will find warm from his match at single-stick with a
brother Publisher. [Footnote: In consequence of the pseudo Tales of My
Landlord printed in London, as already mentioned, the late Mr. John
Ballantyne, the author's publisher, had a controversy with the
interloping bibliopolist, each insisting that his Jedediah
Cleishbotham was the real Simon Pure.] Peace to their differences! It
is a wrathful trade, and the _irritabile genus_ comprehends the
bookselling as well as the book-writing species.--Once more adieu!

THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE MONASTERY.


Chapter the First.


  O ay! the Monks, the Monks they did the mischief!
  Theirs all the grossness, all the superstition
  Of a most gross and superstitious age--
  May He be praised that sent the healthful tempest
  And scatter'd all these pestilential vapours!
  But that we owed them _all_ to yonder Harlot
  Throned on the seven hills with her cup of gold,
  I will as soon believe, with kind Sir Roger,
  That old Moll White took wing with cat arid broomstick,
  And raised the last night's thunder.
                                       OLD PLAY.

The village described in the Benedictine's manuscript by the name of
Kennaquhair, bears the same Celtic termination which occurs in
Traquhair, Caquhair, and other compounds. The learned Chalmers derives
this word Quhair, from the winding course of a stream; a definition
which coincides, in a remarkable degree, with the serpentine turns of
the river Tweed near the village of which we speak. It has been long
famous for the splendid Monastery of Saint Mary, founded by David the
First of Scotland, in whose reign were formed, in the same county, the
no less splendid establishments of Melrose, Jedburgh, and Kelso. The
donations of land with which the King endowed these wealthy
fraternities procured him from the Monkish historians the epithet of
Saint, and from one of his impoverished descendants the splenetic
censure, "that he had been a sore saint for the Crown."

It seems probable, notwithstanding, that David, who was a wise as well
as a pious monarch, was not moved solely by religious motives to those
great acts of munificence to the church, but annexed political views
to his pious generosity. His possessions in Northumberland and
Cumberland became precarious after the loss of the Battle of the
Standard; and since the comparatively fertile valley of Teviot-dale
was likely to become the frontier of his kingdom, it is probable he
wished to secure at least a part of these valuable possessions by
placing them in the hands of the monks, whose property was for a long
time respected, even amidst the rage of a frontier war. In this manner
alone had the King some chance of ensuring protection and security to
the cultivators of the soil; and, in fact, for several ages the
possessions of these Abbeys were each a sort of Goshen, enjoying the
calm light of peace and immunity, while the rest of the country,
occupied by wild clans and marauding barons, was one dark scene of
confusion, blood, and unremitted outrage.

But these immunities did not continue down to the union of the crowns.
Long before that period the wars betwixt England and Scotland had lost
their original character of international hostilities, and had become
on the part of the English, a struggle for subjugation, on that of the
Scots a desperate and infuriated defence of their liberties. This
introduced on both sides a degree of fury and animosity unknown to the
earlier period of their history; and as religious scruples soon gave
way to national hatred spurred by a love of plunder, the patrimony of
the Church was no longer sacred from incursions on either side. Still,
however, the tenants and vassals of the great Abbeys had many
advantages over those of the lay barons, who were harassed by constant
military duty, until they became desperate, and lost all relish for
the arts of peace. The vassals of the church, on the other hand, were
only liable to be called to arms on general occasions, and at other
times were permitted in comparative quiet to possess their farms and
feus. [Footnote: Small possessions conferred upon vassals and their
heirs, held for a small quit-rent, or a moderate proportion of the
produce. This was a favourite manner, by which the churchmen peopled
the patrimony of their convents; and many descendants of such
_feuars_, as they are culled, are still to be found in possession
of their family inheritances in the neighbourhood of the great
Monasteries of Scotland.] They of course exhibited superior skill in
every thing that related to the cultivation of the soil, and were
therefore both wealthier and better informed than the military
retainers of the restless chiefs and nobles in their neighbourhood.

The residence of these church vassals was usually in a small village
or hamlet, where, for the sake of mutual aid and protection, some
thirty or forty families dwelt together. This was called the Town, and
the land belonging to the various families by whom the Town was
inhabited, was called the Township. They usually possessed the land in
common, though in various proportions, according to their several
grants. The part of the Township properly arable, and kept as such
continually under the plough, was called _in-field_. Here the use
of quantities of manure supplied in some degree the exhaustion of the
soil, and the feuars raised tolerable oats and bear, [Footnote: Or
bigg, a kind of coarse barley.] usually sowed on alternate ridges, on
which the labour of the whole community was bestowed without
distinction, the produce being divided after harvest, agreeably to
their respective interests.

There was, besides, _out-field_ land, from which it was thought
possible to extract a crop now and then, after which it was abandoned
to the "skiey influences," until the exhausted powers of vegetation
were restored. These out-field spots were selected by any feuar at his
own choice, amongst the sheep-walks and hills which were always
annexed to the Township, to serve as pasturage to the community. The
trouble of cultivating these patches of out-field, and the precarious
chance that the crop would pay the  labour, were considered as giving
a right to any feuar, who chose to undertake the adventure, to the
produce which might result from it.

There remained the pasturage of extensive moors, where the valleys
often afforded good grass, and upon which the whole cattle belonging
to the community fed indiscriminately during the summer, under the
charge of the Town-herd, who regularly drove them out to pasture in
the morning, and brought them back at night, without which precaution
they would have fallen a speedy prey to some of the Snatchers in the
neighbourhood. These are things to make modern agriculturists hold up
their hands and stare; but the same mode of cultivation is not yet
entirely in desuetude in some distant parts of North Britain, and may
be witnessed in full force and exercise in the Zetland Archipelago.

The habitations of the church-feuars were not less primitive than
their agriculture. In each village or town were several small towers,
having battlements projecting over the side walls, and usually an
advanced angle or two with shot-holes for flanking the door-way, which
was always defended by a strong door of oak, studded with nails, and
often by an exterior grated door of iron. These small peel-houses were
ordinarily inhabited by the principal feuars and their families; but,
upon the alarm of approaching danger, the whole inhabitants thronged
from their own miserable cottages, which were situated around, to
garrison these points of defence. It was then no easy matter for a
hostile party to penetrate into the village, for the men were
habituated to the use of bows and fire-arms, and the towers being
generally so placed, that the discharge from one crossed that of
another, it was impossible to assault any of them individually.

The interior of these houses was usually sufficiently wretched, for it
would have been folly to have furnished them in a manner which could
excite the avarice of their lawless neighbours. Yet the families
themselves exhibited in their appearance a degree of comfort,
information, and independence, which could hardly have been expected.
Their in-field supplied them with bread and home-brewed ale, their
herds and flocks with beef and mutton (the extravagance of killing
lambs or calves was never thought of). Each family killed a mart, or
fat bullock, in November, which was salted up for winter use, to which
the good wife could, upon great occasions, add a dish of pigeons or a
fat capon,--the ill-cultivated garden afforded "lang-cale,"--and the
river gave salmon to serve as a relish during the season of Lent.

Of fuel they had plenty, for the bogs afforded turf; and the remains
of the abused woods continued to give them logs for burning, as well
as timber for the usual domestic purposes. In addition to these
comforts, the good-man would now and then sally forth to the
greenwood, and mark down a buck of season with his gun or his
cross-bow; and the Father Confessor seldom refused him absolution for
the trespass, if duly invited to take his share of the smoking haunch.
Some, still bolder, made, either with their own domestics, or by
associating themselves with the moss-troopers, in the language of
shepherds, "a start and overloup;" and the golden ornaments and silken
head-gear--worn by the females of one or two families of note, were
invidiously traced by their neighbours to such successful excursions.
This, however, was a more inexplicable crime in the eyes of the Abbot
and Community of Saint Mary's, than the borrowing one of the "gude
king's deer;" and they failed not to discountenance and punish, by
every means in their power, offences which were sure to lead to severe
retaliation upon the property of the church, and which tended to alter
the character of their peaceful vassalage.

As for the information possessed by those dependents of the Abbacies,
they might have been truly said to be better fed than taught, even
though their fare had been worse than it was. Still, however, they
enjoyed opportunities of knowledge from which others were excluded.
The monks were in general well acquainted with their vassals and
tenants, and familiar in the families of the better class among them,
where they were sure to be received with the respect due to their
twofold character of spiritual father and secular landlord. Thus it
often happened, when a boy displayed talents and inclination for
study, one of the brethren, with a view to his being bred to the
church, or out of good-nature, in order to pass away his own idle
time, if he had no better motive, initiated him into the mysteries of
reading and writing, and imparted to him such other knowledge as he
himself possessed. And the heads of these allied families, having more
time for reflection, and more skill, as well as stronger motives for
improving their small properties, bore amongst their neighbours the
character of shrewd, intelligent men, who claimed respect on account
of their comparative wealth, even while they were despised for a less
warlike and enterprising turn than the other Borderers. They lived as
much as they well could amongst themselves, avoiding the company of
others, and dreading nothing more than to be involved in the deadly
feuds and ceaseless contentions of the secular landholders.

Such is a general picture of these communities. During the fatal wars
in the commencement of Queen Mary's reign, they had suffered
dreadfully by the hostile invasions. For the English, now a Protestant
people, were so far from sparing the church-lands, that they forayed
them with more unrelenting severity than even the possessions of the
laity. But the peace of 1550 had restored some degree of tranquillity
to those distracted and harassed regions, and matters began again
gradually to settle upon the former footing. The monks repaired their
ravaged shrines--the feuar again roofed his small fortalice which the
enemy had ruined--the poor labourer rebuilt his cottage--an easy task,
where a few sods, stones, and some pieces of wood from the next copse,
furnished all the materials necessary. The cattle, lastly, were driven
out of the wastes and thickets in which the remnant of them had been
secreted; and the mighty bull moved at the head of his seraglio and
their followers, to take possession of their wonted pastures. There
ensued peace and quiet, the state of the age and nation considered, to
the Monastery of Saint Mary, and its dependencies, for several
tranquil years.


Chapter the Second.


  In yon lone vale his early youth was bred,
  Not solitary then--the bugle-horn
  Of fell Alecto often waked its windings,
  From where the brook joins the majestic river,
  To the wild northern bog, the curlew's haunt,
  Where oozes forth its first and feeble streamlet.
                                           OLD PLAY.

We have said, that most of the feuars dwelt in the village belonging
to their townships. This was not, however, universally the case. A
lonely tower, to which the reader must now be introduced, was at least
one exception to the general rule.

It was of small dimensions, yet larger than those which occurred in
the village, as intimating that, in case of assault, the proprietor
would have to rely upon his own unassisted strength. Two or three
miserable huts, at the foot of the fortalice, held the bondsmen and
tenants of the feuar. The site was a beautiful green knoll, which
started up suddenly in the very throat of a wild and narrow glen, and
which, being surrounded, except on one side, by the winding of a small
stream, afforded a position of considerable strength.

But the great security of Glendearg, for so the place was called, lay
in its secluded, and almost hidden situation. To reach the tower, it
was necessary to travel three miles up the glen, crossing about twenty
times the little stream, which, winding through the narrow valley,
encountered at every hundred yards the opposition of a rock or
precipitous bank on the one side, which altered its course, and caused
it to shoot off in an oblique direction to the other. The hills which
ascend on each side of this glen are very steep, and rise boldly over
the stream, which is thus imprisoned within their barriers. The sides
of the glen are impracticable for horse, and are only to be traversed
by means of the sheep-paths which lie along their sides. It would not
be readily supposed that a road so hopeless and so difficult could
lead to any habitation more important than the summer shealing of a
shepherd.

Yet the glen, though lonely, nearly inaccessible, and sterile, was not
then absolutely void of beauty. The turf which covered the small
portion of level ground on the sides of the stream, was as close and
verdant as if it had occupied the scythes of a hundred gardeners once
a-fortnight; and it was garnished with an embroidery of daisies and
wild flowers, which the scythes would certainly have destroyed. The
little brook, now confined betwixt closer limits, now left at large to
choose its course through the narrow valley, danced carelessly on from
stream to pool, light and unturbid, as that better class of spirits
who pass their way through life, yielding to insurmountable obstacles,
but as far from being subdued by them as the sailor who meets by
chance with an unfavourable wind, and shapes his course so as to be
driven back as little as possible.

The mountains, as they would have been called in England,
_Scottice_ the steep _braes_, rose abruptly over the little
glen, here presenting the gray face of a rock, from which the turf had
been peeled by the torrents, and there displaying patches of wood and
copse, which had escaped the waste of the cattle and the sheep of the
feuars, and which, feathering naturally up the beds of empty torrents,
or occupying the concave recesses of the bank, gave at once beauty and
variety to the landscape. Above these scattered woods rose the hill,
in barren, but purple majesty; the dark rich hue, particularly in
autumn, contrasting beautifully with the thickets of oak and birch,
the mountain ashes and thorns, the alders and quivering aspens, which
checquered and varied the descent, and not less with the dark-green
and velvet turf, which composed the level part of the narrow glen.

Yet, though thus embellished, the scene could neither be strictly
termed sublime nor beautiful, and scarcely even picturesque or
striking. But its extreme solitude pressed on the heart; the traveller
felt that uncertainty whither he was going, or in what so wild a path
was to terminate, which, at times, strikes more on the imagination
than the grand features of a show-scene, when you know the exact
distance of the inn where your dinner is bespoke, and at the moment
preparing. These are ideas, however, of a far later age; for at the
time we treat of, the picturesque, the beautiful, the sublime, and all
their intermediate shades, were ideas absolutely unknown to the
inhabitants and occasional visitors of Glendearg.

These had, however, attached to the scene feelings fitting the time.
Its name, signifying the Red Valley, seems to have been derived, not
only from the purple colour of the heath, with which the upper part of
the rising banks was profusely clothed, but also from the dark red
colour of the rocks, and of the precipitous earthen banks, which in
that country are called _scaurs_. Another glen, about the head of
Ettrick, has acquired the same name from similar circumstances; and
there are probably more in Scotland to which it has been given.

As our Glendearg did not abound in mortal visitants, superstition,
that it might not be absolutely destitute of inhabitants, had peopled
its recesses with beings belonging to another world. The savage and
capricious Brown Man of the Moors, a being which seems the genuine
descendant of the northern dwarfs, was supposed to be seen there
frequently, especially after the autumnal equinox, when the fogs were
thick, and objects not easily distinguished. The Scottish fairies,
too, a whimsical, irritable, and mischievous tribe, who, though at
times capriciously benevolent, were more frequently adverse to
mortals, were also supposed to have formed a residence in a
particularly wild recess of the glen, of which the real name was, in
allusion to that circumstance, _Corrie nan Shian_, which, in
corrupted Celtic, signifies the Hollow of the Fairies. But the
neighbours were more cautious in speaking about this place, and
avoided giving it a name, from an idea common then throughout all the
British and Celtic provinces of Scotland, and still retained in many
places, that to speak either good or ill of this capricious race of
imaginary beings, is to provoke their resentment, and that secrecy and
silence is what they chiefly desire from those who may intrude upon
their revels, or discover their haunts.

A mysterious terror was thus attached to the dale, which afforded
access from the broad valley of the Tweed, up the little glen we have
described, to the fortalice called the Tower of Glendearg. Beyond the
knoll, where, as we have said, the tower was situated, the hills grew
more steep, and narrowed on the slender brook, so as scarce to leave a
footpath; and there the glen terminated in a wild waterfall, where a
slender thread of water dashed in a precipitous line of foam over two
or three precipices. Yet farther in the same direction, and above
these successive cataracts, lay a wild and extensive morass,
frequented only by waterfowl, wide, waste, apparently almost
interminable, and serving in a great measure to separate the
inhabitants of the glen from those who lived to the northward.

To restless and indefatigable moss-troopers, indeed, these morasses
were well known, and sometimes afforded a retreat. They often rode
down the glen--called at this tower--asked and received
hospitality--but still with a sort of reserve on the part of its more
peaceful inhabitants, who entertained them as a party of
North-American Indians might be received by a new European settler, as
much out of fear as hospitality, while the uppermost wish of the
landlord is the speedy departure of the savage guests.

This had not always been the current of feeling in the little valley
and its tower. Simon Glendinning, its former inhabitant, boasted his
connexion by blood to that ancient family of Glendonwyne, on the
western border. He used to narrate, at his fireside, in the autumn
evenings, the feats of the family to which he belonged, one of whom
fell by the side of the brave Earl of Douglas at Otterbourne. On these
occasions Simon usually held upon his knee an ancient broadsword,
which had belonged to his ancestors before any of the family had
consented to accept a fief under the peaceful dominion of the monks of
St. Mary's. In modern days, Simon might have lived at ease on his own
estate, and quietly murmured against the fate that had doomed him to
dwell there, and cut off his access to martial renown. But so many
opportunities, nay so many calls there were for him, who in those days
spoke big, to make good his words by his actions, that Simon
Glendinning was soon under the necessity of marching with the men of
the Halidome, as it was called, of St. Mary's, in that disastrous
campaign which was concluded by the battle of Pinkie.

The Catholic clergy were deeply interested in that national quarrel,
the principal object of which was, to prevent the union of the infant
Queen Mary, with the son of the heretical Henry VIII. The Monks had
called out their vassals, under an experienced leader. Many of
themselves had taken arms, and marched to the field, under a banner
representing a female, supposed to personify the Scottish Church,
kneeling in the attitude of prayer, with the legend, _Afflictae
Sponsae ne obliviscaris_. [Footnote: Forget not the afflicted
spouse.]

The Scots, however, in all their wars, had more occasion for good and
cautious generals, than for excitation, whether political or
enthusiastic. Their headlong and impatient courage uniformly induced
them to rush into action without duly weighing either their own
situation, or that of their enemies, and the inevitable consequence
was frequent defeat. With the dolorous slaughter of Pinkie we have
nothing to do, excepting that, among ten thousand men of low and high
degree, Simon Glendinning, of the Tower of Glendearg, bit the dust, no
way disparaging in his death that ancient race from which he claimed
his descent.

When the doleful news, which spread terror and mourning through the
whole of Scotland, reached the Tower of Glendearg, the widow of Simon,
Elspeth Brydone by her family name, was alone in that desolate
habitation, excepting a hind or two, alike past martial and
agricultural labour, and the helpless widows and families of those who
had fallen with their master. The feeling of desolation was
universal;--but what availed it? The monks, their patrons and
protectors, were driven from their Abbey by the English forces, who
now overran the country, and enforced at least an appearance of
submission on the part of the inhabitants. The Protector, Somerset,
formed a strong camp among the ruins of the ancient Castle of
Roxburgh, and compelled the neighbouring country to come in, pay
tribute, and take assurance from him, as the phrase then went. Indeed,
there was no power of resistance remaining; and the few barons, whose
high spirit disdained even the appearance of surrender, could only
retreat into the wildest fastnesses of the country, leaving their
houses and property to the wrath of the English, who detached parties
everywhere to distress, by military exaction, those whose chiefs had
not made their submission. The Abbot and his community having
retreated beyond the Forth, their lands were severely forayed, as
their sentiments were held peculiarly inimical to the alliance with
England.

Amongst the troops detached on this service was a small party,
commanded by Stawarth Bolton, a captain in the English army, and full
of the blunt and unpretending gallantry and generosity which has so
often distinguished that nation. Resistance was in vain. Elspeth
Brydone, when she descried a dozen of horsemen threading their way up
the glen, with a man at their head, whose scarlet cloak, bright
armour, and dancing plume, proclaimed him a leader, saw no better
protection for herself than to issue from the iron grate, covered with
a long mourning veil, and holding one of her two sons in each hand, to
meet the Englishman--state her deserted condition--place the little
tower at his command--and beg for his mercy. She stated, in a few
brief words, her intention, and added, "I submit, because I have nae
means of resistance."

"And I do not ask your submission, mistress, for the same reason,"
replied the Englishman. "To be satisfied of your peaceful intentions
is all I ask; and, from what you tell me, there is no reason to doubt
them."

"At least, sir," said Elspeth Brydone, "take share of what our spence
and our garners afford. Your horses are tired--your folk want
refreshment."

"Not a whit--not a whit," answered the honest Englishman; "it shall
never be said we disturbed by carousal the widow of a brave soldier,
while she was mourning for her husband.--Comrades, face about.--Yet
stay," he added, checking his war-horse, "my parties are out in every
direction; they must have some token that your family are under my
assurance of safety.--Here, my little fellow," said he, speaking to
the eldest boy, who might be about nine or ten years old, "lend me thy
bonnet."

The child reddened, looked sulky, and hesitated, while the mother,
with many a _fye_ and _nay pshaw_, and such sarsenet
chidings as tender mothers give to spoiled children, at length
succeeded in snatching the bonnet from him, and handing it to the
English leader.

Stawarth Bolton took his embroidered red cross from his barret-cap,
and putting it into the loop of the boy's bonnet, said to the
mistress, (for the title of lady was not given to dames of her
degree,) "By this token, which all my people will respect, you will be
freed from any importunity on the part of our forayers." [Footnote: As
gallantry of all times and nations has the same mode of thinking and
acting, so it often expresses itself by the same symbols. In the civil
war 1745-6, a party of Highlanders, under a Chieftain of rank, came to
Rose Castle, the seat of the Bishop of Carlisle, but then occupied by
the family of Squire Dacre of Cumberland.  They demanded quarters,
which of course were not to be refused to armed men of a strange
attire and unknown language. But the domestic represented to the
captain of the mountaineers, that the lady of the mansion had been
just delivered of a daughter, and expressed her hope, that, under
these circumstances, his party would give as little trouble as
possible. "God forbid," said the gallant chief, "that I or mine should
be the means of adding to a lady's inconvenience at such a time. May I
request to see the infant?" The child was brought, and the Highlander,
taking his cockade out of his bonnet, and pinning it on the child's
breast, "That will be a token," he said, "to any of our people who may
come hither, that Donald McDonald of Kinloch-Moidart, has taken the
family of Rose Castle under his protection." The lady who received in
infancy this gage of Highland protection, is now Mary, Lady Clerk of
Pennycuik; and on the 10th of June still wears the cockade which was
pinned on her breast, with a white rose as a kindred decoration.] He
placed it on the boy's head; but it was no sooner there, than the
little fellow, his veins swelling, and his eyes shooting fire through
tears, snatched the bonnet from his head, and, ere his mother could
interfere, skimmed it into the brook. The other boy ran instantly to
fish it out again, threw it back to his brother, first taking out the
cross, which, with great veneration, he kissed and put into his bosom.
The Englishman was half diverted, half surprised, with the scene.

"What mean ye by throwing away Saint George's red cross?" said he to
the elder boy, in a tone betwixt jest and earnest.

"Because Saint George is a southern saint," said the child, sulkily.
"Good"--said Stawarth Bolton.--"And what did you mean by taking it out
of the brook again, my little fellow?" he demanded of the younger.
"Because the priest says it is the common sign of salvation to all
good Christians."

"Why, good again!" said the honest soldier. "I protest unto you,
mistress, I envy you these boys. Are they both yours?"

Stawarth Bolton had reason to put the question, for Halbert
Glendinning, the elder of the two, had hair as dark as the raven's
plumage, black eyes, large, bold, and sparkling, that glittered under
eyebrows of the same complexion; a skin deep embrowned, though it
could not be termed swarthy, and an air of activity, frankness, and
determination, far beyond his age.  On the other hand, Edward, the
younger brother, was light-haired, blue-eyed, and of fairer
complexion, in countenance rather pale, and not exhibiting that rosy
hue which colours the sanguine cheek of robust health. Yet the boy had
nothing sickly or ill-conditioned in his look, but was, on the
contrary, a fair and handsome child, with a smiling face, and mild,
yet cheerful eye.

The mother glanced a proud motherly glance, first at the one, and then
at the other, ere she answered the Englishman, "Surely, sir, they are
both my children."

"And by the same father, mistress?" said Stawarth; but, seeing a blush
of displeasure arise on her brow, he instantly added, "Nay, I mean no
offence; I would have asked the same question at any of my gossips in
merry Lincoln.--Well, dame, you have two fair boys; I would I could
borrow one, for Dame Bolton and I live childless in our old
hall.--Come, little fellows, which of you will go with me?"

The trembling mother, half-fearing as he spoke, drew the children
towards her, one with either hand, while they both answered the
stranger. "I will not go with you," said Halbert, boldly, "for you are
a false-hearted Southern; and the Southerns killed my father; and I
will war on you to the death, when I can draw my father's sword."

"God-a-mercy, my little levin-bolt," said Stawarth, "the goodly custom
of deadly feud will never go down in thy day, I presume.--And you, my
fine white-head, will you not go with me, to ride a cock-horse?"
"No," said Edward, demurely, "for you are a heretic."

"Why, God-a-mercy still!" said Stawarth Bolton. "Well, dame, I see I
shall find no recruits for my troop from you; and yet I do envy you
these two little chubby knaves." He sighed a moment, as was visible,
in spite of gorget and corslet, and then added, "And yet, my dame and
I would but quarrel which of the knaves we should like best; for I
should wish for the black-eyed rogue--and she, I warrant me, for that
blue-eyed, fair-haired darling. Natheless, we must brook our solitary
wedlock, and wish joy to those that are more fortunate. Sergeant
Brittson, do thou remain here till recalled--protect this family, as
under assurance--do them no wrong, and suffer no wrong to be done to
them, as thou wilt answer it.--Dame, Brittson is a married man, old
and steady; feed him on what you will, but give him not over much
liquor."

Dame Glendinning again offered refreshments, but with a faltering
voice, and an obvious desire her invitation should not be accepted.
The fact was, that, supposing her boys as precious in the eyes of the
Englishman as in her own, (the most ordinary of parental errors,) she
was half afraid, that the admiration he expressed of them in his blunt
manner might end in his actually carrying off one or other of the
little darlings whom he appeared to covet so much. She kept hold of
their hands, therefore, as if her feeble strength could have been of
service, had any violence been intended, and saw with joy she could
not disguise, the little party of horse countermarch, in order to
descend the glen. Her feelings did not escape Bolton: "I forgive you,
dame," he said, "for being suspicious that an English falcon was
hovering over your Scottish moor-brood. But fear not--those who have
fewest children have fewest cares; nor does a wise man covet those of
another household. Adieu, dame; when the black-eyed rogue is able to
drive a foray from England, teach him to spare women and children, for
the sake of Stawarth Bolton."

"God be with you, gallant Southern!" said Elspeth Glendinning, but not
till he was out of hearing, spurring on his good horse to regain the
head of his party, whose plumage and armour were now glancing and
gradually disappearing in the distance, as they winded down the glen.

"Mother," said the elder boy, "I will not say amen to a prayer for a
Southern."

"Mother," said the younger, more reverentially, "is it right to pray
for a heretic?"

"The God to whom I pray only knows," answered poor Elspeth; "but these
two words, Southern and heretic, have already cost Scotland ten
thousand of her best and bravest, and me a husband, and you a father;
and, whether blessing or banning, I never wish to hear them
more.--Follow me to the Place, sir," she said to Brittson, "and such
as we have to offer you shall be at your disposal."


Chapter the Third.


  They lighted down on Tweed water
    And blew their coals sae het,
  And fired the March and Teviotdale,
     All in an evening late.
                       AULD MAITLAND.

The report soon spread through the patrimony of Saint Mary's and its
vicinity, that the Mistress of Glendearg had received assurance from
the English Captain, and that her cattle were not to be driven off, or
her corn burned. Among others who heard this report, it reached the
ears of a lady, who, once much higher in rank than Elspeth
Glendinning, was now by the same calamity reduced to even greater
misfortune.

She was the widow of a brave soldier, Walter Avenel, descended of a
very ancient Border family, who once possessed immense estates in
Eskdale.  These had long since passed from them into other hands, but
they still enjoyed an ancient Barony of considerable extent, not very
far from the patrimony of Saint Mary's, and lying upon the same side
of the river with the narrow vale of Glendearg, at the head of which
was the little tower of the Glendinnings. Here they had lived, bearing
a respectable rank amongst the gentry of their province, though
neither wealthy nor powerful. This general regard had been much
augmented by the skill, courage, and enterprise which had been
displayed by Walter Avenel, the last Baron.

When Scotland began to recover from the dreadful shock she had
sustained after the battle of Pinkie-Cleuch, Avenel was one of the
first who, assembling a small force, set an example in those bloody
and unsparing skirmishes, which showed that a nation, though conquered
and overrun by invaders, may yet wage against them such a war of
detail as shall in the end become fatal to the foreigners. In one of
these, however, Walter Avenel fell, and the news which came to the
house of his fathers was followed by the distracting intelligence,
that a party of Englishmen were coming to plunder the mansion and
lands of his widow, in order, by this act of terror, to prevent others
from following the example of the deceased.

The unfortunate lady had no better refuge than the miserable cottage
of a shepherd among the hills, to which she was hastily removed,
scarce conscious where or for what purpose her terrified attendants
were removing her and her infant daughter from her own house. Here she
was tended with all the duteous service of ancient times by the
shepherd's wife, Tibb Tacket, who in better days had been her own
bowerwoman. For a time the lady was unconscious of her misery; but
when the first stunning effect of grief was so far passed away that
she could form an estimate of her own situation, the widow of Avenel
had cause to envy the lot of her husband in his dark and silent abode.
The domestics who had guided her to her place of refuge, were
presently obliged to disperse for their own safety, or to seek for
necessary subsistence; and the shepherd and his wife, whose poor
cottage she shared, were soon after deprived of the means of affording
their late mistress even that coarse sustenance which they had gladly
shared with her.  Some of the English forayers had discovered and
driven off the few sheep which had escaped the first researches of
their avarice. Two cows shared the fate of the remnant of their stock;
they had afforded the family almost their sole support, and now famine
appeared to stare them in the face.

"We are broken and beggared now, out and out," said old Martin the
shepherd--and he wrung his hands in the bitterness of agony, "the
thieves, the harrying thieves I not a cloot left of the haill hirsel!"

"And to see poor Grizzle and Crumbie," said his wife, "turning back
their necks to the byre, and routing while the stony-hearted villains
were brogging them on wi' their lances!"

"There were but four of them," said Martin, "and I have seen the day
forty wad not have ventured this length. But our strength and manhood
is gane with our puir maister."

"For the sake of the holy rood, whisht, man," said the goodwife, "our
leddy is half gane already, as ye may see by that fleightering of the
ee-lid--a word mair and she's dead outright."

"I could almost wish," said Martin, "we were a' gane, for what to do
passes my puir wit. I care little for mysell, or you, Tibb,--we can
make a fend--work or want--we can do baith, but she can do neither."

They canvassed their situation thus openly before the lady, convinced
by the paleness of her look, her quivering lip, and dead-set eye, that
she neither heard nor understood what they were saying.

"There is a way," said the shepherd, "but I kenna if she could bring
her heart to it,--there's Simon Glendinning's widow of the glen
yonder, has had assurance from the Southern loons, and nae soldier to
steer them for one cause or other. Now, if the leddy could bow her
mind to take quarters with Elspeth Glendinning till better days cast
up, nae doubt it wad be doing an honour to the like of her, but----"

"An honour," answered Tibb, "ay, by my word, sic an honour as wad be
pride to her kin mony a lang year after her banes were in the mould.
Oh! gudeman, to hear ye even the Lady of Avenel to seeking quarters
wi' a Kirk-vassal's widow!"

"Loath should I be to wish her to it," said Martin; "but what may we
do?--to stay here is mere starvation; and where to go, I'm sure I ken
nae mair than ony tup I ever herded."

"Speak no more of it," said the widow of Avenel, suddenly joining in the
conversation, "I will go to the tower.--Dame Elspeth is of good folk, a
widow, and the mother of orphans,--she will give us house-room until
something be thought upon. These evil showers make the low bush better
than no bield."

"See there, see there," said Martin, "you see the leddy has twice our
sense."

"And natural it is," said Tibb, "seeing that she is convent-bred, and
can lay silk broidery, forby white-seam and shell-work."

"Do you not think," said the lady to Martin, still clasping her child to
her bosom and making it clear from what motives she desired the refuge,
"that Dame Glendinning will make us welcome?"

"Blithely welcome, blithely welcome, my leddy," answered Martin,
cheerily, "and we shall deserve a welcome at her hand. Men are scarce
now, my leddy, with these wars; and gie me a thought of time to it, I
can do as good a day's darg as ever I did in my life, and Tibb can
sort cows with ony living woman."

"And muckle mair could I do," said Tibb, "were it ony feasible house;
but there will be neither pearlins to mend, nor pinners to busk up, in
Elspeth Glendinning's."

"Whisht wi' your pride, woman," said the shepherd; "eneugh you can do,
baith outside and inside, an ye set your mind to it; and hard it is if
we twa canna work for three folk's meat, forby my dainty wee leddy
there.  Come awa, come awa, nae use in staying here langer; we have
five Scots miles over moss and muir, and that is nae easy walk for a
leddy born and bred."

Household stuff there was little or none to remove or care for; an old
pony which had escaped the plunderers, owing partly to its pitiful
appearance, partly from the reluctance which it showed to be caught by
strangers, was employed to carry the few blankets and other trifles
which they possessed. When Shagram came to his master's well-known
whistle, he was surprised to find the poor thing had been wounded,
though slightly, by an arrow, which one of the forayers had shot off
in anger after he had long chased it in vain.

"Ay, Shagram," said the old man, as he applied something to the wound,
"must you rue the lang-bow as weel as all of us?"

"What corner in Scotland rues it not!" said the Lady of Avenel.

"Ay, ay, madam," said Martin, "God keep the kindly Scot from the
cloth-yard shaft, and he will keep himself from the handy stroke. But
let us go our way; the trash that is left I can come back for. There
is nae ane to stir it but the good neighbours, and they----"

"For the love of God, goodman," said his wife, in a remonstrating tone,
"haud your peace! Think what ye're saying, and we hae sae muckle wild
land to go over before we win to the girth gate."

The husband nodded acquiescence; for it was deemed highly imprudent to
speak of the fairies, either by their title of _good neighbours_
or by any other, especially when about to pass the places which they
were supposed to haunt.

[Footnote: This superstition continues to prevail, though one would
suppose it must now be antiquated. It is only a year or two since an
itinerant puppet show-man, who, disdaining to acknowledge the
profession of Gines de Passamonte, called himself an artist from
Vauxhall, brought a complaint of a singular nature before the author,
as Sheriff of Selkirkshire. The singular dexterity with which the
show-man had exhibited the machinery of his little stage, had, upon a
Selkirk fair-day, excited the eager curiosity of some mechanics of
Galashiels. These men, from no worse motive that could be discovered
than a thirst after knowledge beyond their sphere, committed a
burglary upon the barn in which the puppets had been consigned to
repose, and carried them off in the nook of their plaids, when
returning from Selkirk to their own village.

  "But with the morning cool reflection came."

The party found, however, they could not make Punch dance, and that
the whole troop were equally intractable; they had also, perhaps, some
apprehensions of the Rhadamanth of the district; and, willing to be
quit of their booty, they left the puppets seated in a grove by the
side of the Ettrick, where they were sure to be touched by the first
beams of the rising sun. Here a shepherd, who was on foot with sunrise
to pen his master's sheep on a field of turnips, to his utter
astonishment, saw this train, profusely gay, sitting in the little
grotto. His examination proceeded thus:--

_Sheriff_. You saw these gay-looking things? what did you think
they were?

_Shepherd_. Ou, I am no that free to say what I might think they
were.

_Sheriff_. Come, lad, I must have a direct answer--who did you
think they were?

_Shepherd_. Ou, sir, troth I am no that free to say that I mind
wha I might think they were.

_Sheriff_. Come, come sir! I ask you distinctly, did you think
they were the fairies you saw?

_Shepherd_. Indeed, sir, and I winna say but I might think it was
the Good Neighbours.

Thus unwillingly was he brought to allude to the irritable and
captious inhabitants of fairy land.]

They set forward on their pilgrimage on the last day of October. "This
is thy birthday, my sweet Mary," said the mother, as a sting of bitter
recollection crossed her mind. "Oh, who could have believed that the
head, which, a few years since, was cradled amongst so many rejoicing
friends, may perhaps this night seek a cover in vain!"

The exiled family then set forward,--Mary Avenel, a lovely girl between
five and six years old, riding gipsy fashion upon Shagram, betwixt two
bundles of bedding; the Lady of Avenel walking by the animal's side;
Tibb leading the bridle, and old Martin walking a little before, looking
anxiously around him to explore the way.

Martin's task as guide, after two or three miles' walking, became more
difficult than he himself had expected, or than he was willing to
avow. It happened that the extensive range of pasturage, with which he
was conversant, lay to the west, and to get into the little valley of
Glendearg he had to proceed easterly. In the wilder districts of
Scotland, the passage from one vale to another, otherwise than by
descending that which you leave, and reascending the other, is often
very difficult.--Heights and hollows, mosses and rocks intervene, and
all those local impediments which throw a traveller out of his course.
So that Martin, however sure of his general direction, became
conscious, and at length was forced reluctantly to admit, that he had
missed the direct road to Glendearg, though he insisted they must be
very near it. "If we can but win across this wide bog," he said, "I
shall warrant ye are on the top of the tower." But to get across the
bog was a point of no small difficulty. The farther they ventured into
it, though proceeding with all the caution which Martin's experience
recommended, the more unsound the ground became, until, after they had
passed some places of great peril, their best argument for going
forward came to be, that they had to encounter equal danger in
returning.  The Lady of Avenel had been tenderly nurtured, but what
will not a woman endure when her child is in danger? Complaining less
of the dangers of the road than her attendants, who had been inured to
such from their infancy, she kept herself close by the side of the
pony, watching its every footstep, and ready, if it should flounder in
the morass, to snatch her little Mary from its back. At length they
came to a place where the guide greatly hesitated, for all around him
was broken lumps of heath, divided from each other by deep sloughs of
black tenacious mire. After great consideration, Martin, selecting
what he thought the safest path, began himself to lead forward
Shagram, in order to afford greater security to the child. But Shagram
snorted, laid his ears back, stretched his two feet forward, and drew
his hind feet under him, so as to adopt the best possible posture for
obstinate resistance, and refused to move one yard in the direction
indicated. Old Martin, much puzzled, now hesitated whether to exert
his absolute authority, or to defer to the contumacious obstinacy of
Shagram, and was not greatly comforted by his wife's observation, who,
seeing Shagram stare with his eyes, distend his nostrils, and tremble
with terror, hinted that "he surely saw more than they could see."

In this dilemma, the child suddenly exclaimed--"Bonny leddy signs to
us to come yon gate." They all looked in the direction where the child
pointed, but saw nothing, save a wreath, of rising mist, which fancy
might form into a human figure; but which afforded to Martin only the
sorrowful conviction, that the danger of their situation was about to
be increased by a heavy fog. He once more essayed to lead forward
Shagram; but the animal was inflexible in its determination not to
move in the direction Martin recommended. "Take your awn way for it,
then," said Martin, "and let us see what you can do for us."

Shagram, abandoned to the discretion of his own free-will, set off
boldly in the direction the child had pointed. There was nothing
wonderful in this, nor in its bringing them safe to the other side of
the dangerous morass; for the instinct of these animals in traversing
bogs is one of the most curious parts of their nature, and is a fact
generally established.  But it was remarkable, that the child more
than once mentioned the beautiful lady and her signals, and that
Shagram seemed to be in the secret, always moving in the same
direction which she indicated. The Lady of Avenel took little notice
at the time, her mind being probably occupied by the instant danger;
but her attendants changed expressive looks with each other more than
once.

"All-Hallow Eve!" said Tibb, in a whisper to Martin.

"For the mercy of Our Lady, not a word of that now!" said Martin in
reply. "Tell your beads, woman, if you cannot be silent."

When they got once more on firm ground, Martin recognized certain
land-marks, or cairns, on the tops of the neighbouring hills, by which
he was enabled to guide his course, and ere long they arrived at the
Tower of Glendearg.

It was at the sight of this little fortalice that the misery of her
lot pressed hard on the poor Lady of Avenel. When by any accident they
had met at church, market, or other place of public resort, she
remembered the distant and respectful air with which the wife of the
warlike baron was addressed by the spouse of the humble feuar. And
now, so much was her pride humbled, that she was to ask to share the
precarious safety of the same feuar's widow, and her pittance of food,
which might perhaps be yet more precarious. Martin probably guessed
what was passing in her mind, for he looked at her with a wistful
glance, as if to deprecate any change of resolution; and answering to
his looks, rather than his words, she said, while the sparkle of
subdued pride once more glanced from her eye, "If it were for myself
alone, I could but die-but for this infant--the last pledge of
Avenel--"

"True, my lady," said Martin, hastily; and, as if to prevent the
possibility of her retracting, he added, "I will step on and see Dame
Elspeth--I kend her husband weel, and have bought and sold with him,
for as great a man as he was."

Martin's tale was soon told, and met all acceptance from her companion
in misfortune. The Lady of Avenel had been meek and courteous in her
prosperity; in adversity, therefore, she met with the greatest
sympathy.  Besides, there was a point of pride in sheltering and
supporting a woman of such superior birth and rank; and, not to do
Elspeth Glendinning injustice, she felt sympathy for one whose fate
resembled her own in so many points, yet was so much more severe.
Every species of hospitality was gladly and respectfully extended to
the distressed travellers, and they were kindly requested to stay as
long at Glendearg as their circumstances rendered necessary, or their
inclination prompted.


Chapter the Fourth.


   Ne'er be I found by thee unawed,
   On that thrice hallow'd eve abroad.
   When goblins haunt from flood and fen,
                         The steps of men.
                            COLLINS'S _Ode to Fear_.

As the country became more settled, the Lady of Avenel would have
willingly returned to her husband's mansion. But that was no longer in
her power. It was a reign of minority, when the strongest had the best
right, and when acts of usurpation were frequent amongst those who had
much power and little conscience.

Julian Avenel, the younger brother of the deceased Walter, was a
person of this description. He hesitated not to seize upon his
brother's house and lands, so soon as the retreat of the English
permitted him. At first, he occupied the property in the name of his
niece; but when the lady proposed to return with her child to the
mansion of its fathers, he gave her to understand, that Avenel, being
a male fief, descended to the brother, instead of the daughter, of the
last possessor.  The ancient philosopher declined a dispute with the
emperor who commanded twenty legions, and the widow of Walter Avenel
was in no condition to maintain a contest with the leader of twenty
moss-troopers. Julian was also a man of service, who could back a
friend in case of need, and was sure, therefore, to find protectors
among the ruling powers. In short, however clear the little Mary's
right to the possessions of her father, her mother saw the necessity
of giving way, at least for the time, to the usurpation of her uncle.

Her patience and forbearance were so far attended with advantage, that
Julian, for very shame's sake, could no longer suffer her to be
absolutely dependant on the charity of Elspeth Glendinning. A drove of
cattle and a bull (which were probably missed by some English farmer)
were driven to the pastures of Glendearg; presents of raiment and
household stuff were sent liberally, and some little money, though
with a more sparing hand: for those in the situation of Julian Avenel
could come more easily by the goods, than the representing medium of
value, and made their payments chiefly in kind.

In the meantime, the widows of Walter Avenel and Simon Glendinning had
become habituated to each other's society, and were unwilling to part.
The lady could hope no more secret and secure residence than in the
Tower of Glendearg, and she was now in a condition to support her
share of the mutual housekeeping. Elspeth, on the other hand, felt
pride, as well as pleasure, in the society of a guest of such
distinction, and was at all times willing to pay much greater
deference than the Lady of Walter Avenel could be prevailed on to
accept.

Martin and his wife diligently served the united family in their
several vocations, and yielded obedience to both mistresses, though
always considering themselves as the especial servants of the Lady of
Avenel. This distinction sometimes occasioned a slight degree of
difference between Dame Elspeth and Tibb; the former being jealous of
her own consequence, and the latter apt to lay too much stress upon
the rank and family of her mistress.  But both were alike desirous to
conceal such petty squabbles from the lady, her hostess scarce
yielding to her old domestic in respect for her person. Neither did
the difference exist in such a degree as to interrupt the general
harmony of the family, for the one wisely gave way as she saw the
other become warm; and Tibb, though she often gave the first
provocation, had generally the sense to be the first in relinquishing
the argument.

The world which lay beyond was gradually forgotten by the inhabitants
of this sequestered glen, and unless when she attended mass at the
Monastery Church upon some high holiday, Alice of Avenel almost forgot
that she once held an equal rank with the proud wives of the
neighbouring barons and nobles who on such occasions crowded to the
solemnity. The recollection gave her little pain. She loved her
husband for himself, and in his inestimable loss all lesser subjects
of regret had ceased to interest her. At times, indeed, she thought of
claiming the protection of the Queen Regent (Mary of Guise) for her
little orphan, but the fear of Julian Avenel always came between. She
was sensible that he would have neither scruple nor difficulty in
spiriting away the child, (if he did not proceed farther,) should he
once consider its existence as formidable to his interest. Besides, he
led a wild and unsettled life, mingling in all feuds and forays,
wherever there was a spear to be broken; he evinced no purpose of
marrying, and the fate which he continually was braving might at
length remove him from his usurped inheritance. Alice of Avenel,
therefore, judged it wise to check all ambitious thoughts for the
present, and remain quiet in the rude, but peaceable retreat, to which
Providence had conducted her.

It was upon an All-Hallow's eve, when the family had resided together
for the space of three years, that the domestic circle was assembled
round the blazing turf-fire, in the old narrow hall of the Tower of
Glendearg. The idea of the master or mistress of the mansion feeding
or living apart from their domestics, was at this period never
entertained. The highest end of the board, the most commodious settle
by the fire,--these were the only marks of distinction; and the
servants mingled, with deference indeed, but unreproved and with
freedom, in whatever conversation was going forward.  But the two or
three domestics, kept merely for agricultural purposes, had retired to
their own cottages without, and with them a couple of wenches, usually
employed within doors, the daughters of one of the hinds.

After their departure, Martin locked, first, the iron grate; and,
secondly, the inner door of the tower, when the domestic circle was
thus arranged.  Dame Elspeth sate pulling the thread from her distaff;
Tibb watched the progress of scalding the whey, which hung in a large
pot upon the _crook_, a chain terminated by a hook, which was
suspended in the chimney to serve the purpose of the modern crane.
Martin, while busied in repairing some of the household articles, (for
every man in those days was his own carpenter and smith, as well as
his own tailor and shoemaker,) kept from time to time a watchful eye
upon the three children.

They were allowed, however, to exercise their juvenile restlessness by
running up and down the hall, behind the seats of the elder members of
the family, with the privilege of occasionally making excursions into
one or two small apartments which opened from it, and gave excellent
opportunity to play at hide-and-seek. This night, however, the
children seemed not disposed to avail themselves of their privilege of
visiting these dark regions, but preferred carrying on their gambols
in the vicinity of the light.

In the meanwhile, Alice of Avenel, sitting close to an iron
candlestick, which supported a misshapen torch of domestic
manufacture, read small detached passages from a thick clasped volume,
which she preserved with the greatest care. The art of reading the
lady had acquired by her residence in a nunnery during her youth, but
she seldom, of late years, put it to any other use than perusing this
little volume, which formed her whole library.  The family listened to
the portions which she selected, as to some good thing which there was
a merit in hearing with respect, whether it was fully understood or
no. To her daughter, Alice of Avenel had determined to impart their
mystery more fully, but the knowledge was at that period attended with
personal danger, and was not rashly to be trusted to a child.

The noise of the romping children interrupted, from time to time, the
voice of the lady, and drew on the noisy culprits the rebuke of Elspeth.

"Could they not go farther a-field, if they behoved to make such a
din, and disturb the lady's good words?" And this command was backed
with the threat of sending the whole party to bed if it was not
attended to punctually.  Acting under the injunction, the children
first played at a greater distance from the party, and more quietly,
and then began to stray into the adjacent apartments, as they became
impatient of the restraint to which they were subjected. But, all at
once, the two boys came open-mouthed into the hall, to tell that there
was an armed man in the spence.

"It must be Christie of Clint-hill," said Martin, rising; "what can have
brought him here at this time?"

"Or how came he in?" said Elspeth.

"Alas! what can he seek?" said the Lady of Avenel, to whom this man, a
retainer of her husband's brother, and who sometimes executed his
commissions at Glendearg, was an object of secret apprehension and
suspicion.  "Gracious heavens!" she added, rising up, "where is my
child?" All rushed to the spence, Halbert Glendinning first arming
himself with a rusty sword, and the younger seizing upon the lady's
book. They hastened to the spence, and were relieved of a part of
their anxiety by meeting Mary at the door of the apartment. She did
not seem in the slightest degree alarmed, or disturbed. They rushed
into the spence, (a sort of interior apartment in which the family ate
their victuals in the summer season,) but there was no one there.

"Where is Christie of Clint-hill?" said Martin.

"I do not know," said little Mary; "I never saw him."

"And what made you, ye misleard loons," said Dame Elspeth to her two
boys, "come yon gate into the ha', roaring like bullsegs, to frighten
the leddy, and her far frae strong?" The boys looked at each other in
silence and confusion, and their mother proceeded with her lecture.
"Could ye find nae night for daffin but Hallowe'en, and nae time but
when the leddy was reading to us about the holy Saints? May ne'er be
in my fingers, if I dinna sort ye baith for it!" The eldest boy bent
his eyes on the ground, the younger began to weep, but neither spoke;
and the mother would have proceeded to extremities, but for the
interposition of the little maiden.

"Dame Elspeth, it was _my_ fault--I did say to them, that I saw a
man in the spence."

"And what made you do so, child," said her mother, "to startle us all
thus?"

"Because," said Mary, lowering her voice, "I could not help it."

"Not help it, Mary!--you occasioned all this idle noise, and you could
not help it? How mean you by that, minion?"

"There really was an armed man in this spence," said Mary; "and
because I was surprised to see him, I cried out to Halbert and Edward--"

"She has told it herself," said Halbert Glendinning, "or it had never
been told by me."

"Nor by me neither," said Edward, emulously.

"Mistress Mary," said Elspeth, "you never told us anything before that
was not true; tell us if this was a Hallowe'en cantrip, and make an
end of it." The Lady of Avenel looked as if she would have interfered,
but knew not how; and Elspeth, who was too eagerly curious to regard
any distant hint, persevered in her inquiries. "Was it Christie of the
Clint-hill?--I would not for a mark that he were about the house, and
a body no ken whare."

"It was not Christie," said Mary; "it was--it was a gentleman--a
gentleman with a bright breastplate, like what I hae seen langsyne,
when we dwelt at Avenel--"

"What like was he?" continued Tibb, who now took share in the
investigation.

"Black-haired, black-eyed, with a peaked black beard," said the child;
"and many a fold of pearling round his neck, and hanging down his
breast ower his breastplate; and he had a beautiful hawk, with silver
bells, standing on his left hand, with a crimson silk hood upon its
head--"

"Ask her no more questions, for the love of God," said the anxious
menial to Elspeth, "but look to my leddy!" But the Lady of Avenel,
taking Mary in her hand, turned hastily away, and, walking into the
hall, gave them no opportunity of remarking in what manner she
received the child's communication, which she thus cut short. What
Tibb thought of it appeared from her crossing herself repeatedly, and
whispering into Elspeth's ear, "Saint Mary preserve us!--the lassie
has seen her father!"

When they reached the hall, they found the lady holding her daughter
on her knee, and kissing her repeatedly. When they entered, she again
arose, as if to shun observation, and retired to the little apartment
where her child and she occupied the same bed.

The boys were also sent to their cabin, and no one remained by the
hall fire save the faithful Tibb and dame Elspeth, excellent persons
both, and as thorough gossips as ever wagged a tongue.

It was but natural that they should instantly resume the subject of the
supernatural appearance, for such they deemed it, which had this night
alarmed the family.

"I could hae wished it had been the deil himself--be good to and
preserve us!--rather than Christie o' the Clint-hill," said the matron
of the mansion, "for the word runs rife in the country, that he is ane
of the maist masterfu' thieves ever lap on horse."

"Hout-tout, Dame Elspeth," said Tibb, "fear ye naething frae Christie;
tods keep their ain holes clean. You kirk-folk make sic a fasherie
about men shifting a wee bit for their living! Our Border-lairds would
ride with few men at their back, if a' the light-handed lads were out
o' gate."

"Better they rade wi' nane than distress the country-side the gate they
do," said Dame Elspeth.

"But wha is to haud back the Southron, then," said Tibb, "if ye take
away the lances and broadswords? I trow we auld wives couldna do that
wi' rock and wheel, and as little the monks wi' bell and book."

"And sae weel as the lances and broadswords hae kept them back, I
trow!--I was mair beholden to ae Southron, and that was Stawarth
Bolton, than to a' the border-riders ever wore Saint Andrew's cross--I
reckon their skelping back and forward, and lifting honest men's gear,
has been a main cause of a' the breach between us and England, and I
am sure that cost me a kind goodman. They spoke about the wedding of
the Prince and our Queen, but it's as like to be the driving of the
Cumberland folk's stocking that brought them down on us like dragons."
Tibb would not have failed in other circumstances to answer what she
thought reflections disparaging to her country folk; but she
recollected that Dame Elspeth was mistress of the family, curbed her
own zealous patriotism, and hastened to change the subject.

"And is it not strange," she said, "that the heiress of Avenel should
have seen her father this blessed night?"

"And ye think it was her father, then?" said Elspeth Glendinning.

"What else can I think?" said Tibb.

"It may hae been something waur, in his likeness," said Dame
Glendinning.

"I ken naething about that," said Tibb,--"but his likeness it was,
that I will be sworn to, just as he used to ride out a-hawking; for
having enemies in the country, he seldom laid off the breast-plate;
and for my part," added Tibb, "I dinna think a man looks like a man
unless he has steel on his breast, and by his side too."

"I have no skill of your harness on breast or side either," said Dame
Glendinning; "but I ken there is little luck in Hallowe'en sights, for I
have had ane myself."

"Indeed, Dame Elspeth?" said old Tibb, edging her stool closer to the
huge elbow-chair occupied by her friend, "I should like to hear about
that."

"Ye maun ken, then, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, "that when I was
a hempie of nineteen or twenty, it wasna my fault if I wasna at a' the
merry-makings time about."

"That was very natural," said Tibb; "but ye hae sobered since that, or
ye wadna haud our braw gallants sae lightly."

"I have had that wad sober me or ony ane," said the matron, "Aweel,
Tibb, a lass like me wasna to lack wooers, for I wasna sae
ill-favoured that the tikes wad bark after me."

"How should that be," said Tibb, "and you sic a weel-favoured woman
to this day?"

"Fie, fie, cummer," said the matron of Glendearg, hitching her seat of
honour, in her turn, a little nearer to the cuttle-stool on which Tibb
was seated; "weel-favoured is past my time of day; but I might pass
then, for I wasna sae tocherless but what I had a bit land at my
breast-lace. My father was portioner of Little-dearg."

"Ye hae tell'd me that before," said Tibb; "but anent the Hallowe'en?"

"Aweel, aweel, I had mair joes than ane, but I favoured nane o' them;
and sae, at Hallowe'en, Father Nicolas the cellarer--he was cellarer
before this father, Father Clement, that now is--was cracking his nuts
and drinking his brown beer with us, and as blithe as might be, and
they would have me try a cantrip to ken wha suld wed me: and the monk
said there was nae ill in it, and if there was, he would assoil me for
it. And wha but I into the barn to winnow my three weights o'
naething--sair, sair my mind misgave me for fear of wrang-doing and
wrang-suffering baith; but I had aye a bauld spirit. I had not
winnowed the last weight clean out, and the moon was shining bright
upon the floor, when in stalked the presence of my dear Simon
Glendinning, that is now happy. I never saw him plainer in my life
than I did that moment; he held up an arrow as he passed me, and I
swarf'd awa wi' fright. Muckle wark there was to bring me to mysell
again, and sair they tried to make me believe it was a trick of Father
Nicolas and Simon between them, and that the arrow was to signify
Cupid's shaft, as the Father called it; and mony a time Simon wad
threep it to me after I was married--gude man, he liked not it should
be said that he was seen out o' the body!--But mark the end o' it,
Tibb; we were married, and the gray-goose wing was the death o' him
after a'!"

"As it has been of ower mony brave men," said Tibb; "I wish there
wasna sic a bird as a goose in the wide warld, forby the clecking that
we hae at the burn-side."

"But tell me, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, "what does your leddy aye
do reading out o' that thick black book wi' the silver clasps?--there
are ower mony gude words in it to come frae ony body but a priest--An
it were about Robin Hood, or some o' David Lindsay's ballants, ane wad
ken better what to say to it. I am no misdoubting your mistress nae
way, but I wad like ill to hae a decent house haunted wi' ghaists and
gyrecarlines."

"Ye hae nae reason to doubt my leddy, or ony thing she says or does,
Dame Glendinning," said the faithful Tibb, something offended; "and
touching the bairn, it's weel kend she was born on Hallowe'en, was nine
years gane, and they that are born on Hallowe'en whiles see mair than
ither folk."

"And that wad be the cause, then, that the bairn didna mak muckle din
about what it saw?--if it had been my Halbert himself, forby Edward,
who is of softer nature, he wad hae yammered the haill night of a
constancy.  But it's like Mistress Mary hae sic sights mair natural to
her."

"That may weel be," said Tibb; "for on Hallowe'en she was born, as I
tell ye, and our auld parish priest wad fain hae had the night ower,
and All-Hallow day begun. But for a' that, the sweet bairn is just
like ither bairns, as ye may see yourself; and except this blessed
night, and ance before when we were in that weary bog on the road
here, I kenna that it saw mair than ither folk."

"But what saw she in the bog, then," said Dame Glendinning, "forby
moor-cocks and heather-blutters?"

"The wean saw something like a white leddy that weised us the gate,"
said Tibb; "when we were like to hae perished in the moss-hags--
certain it was that Shagram reisted, and I ken Martin thinks he saw
something."

"And what might the white leddy be?" said Elspeth; "have ye ony
guess o' that?"

"It's weel kend that, Dame Elspeth," said Tibb; "if ye had lived under
grit folk, as I hae dune, ye wadna be to seek in that matter."

"I hae aye keepit my ain ha' house abune my head," said Elspeth, not
without emphasis, "and if I havena lived wi' grit folk, grit folk have
lived wi' me."

"Weel, weel, dame," said Tibb, "your pardon's prayed, there was nae
offence meant. But ye maun ken the great ancient families canna be
just served wi' the ordinary saunts, (praise to them!) like Saunt
Anthony, Saunt Cuthbert, and the like, that come and gang at every
sinner's bidding, but they hae a sort of saunts or angels, or what
not, to themsells; and as for the White Maiden of Avenel, she is kend
ower the haill country. And she is aye seen to yammer and wail before
ony o' that family dies, as was weel kend by twenty folk before the
death of Walter Avenel, haly be his cast!"

"If she can do nae mair than that," said Elspeth, somewhat scornfully,
"they needna make mony vows to her, I trow. Can she make nae better
fend for them than that, and has naething better to do than wait on
them?"

"Mony braw services can the White Maiden do for them to the boot of
that, and has dune in the auld histories," said Tibb, "but I mind o'
naething in my day, except it was her that the bairn saw in the bog."

"Aweel, aweel, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, rising and lighting the
iron lamp, "these are great privileges of your grand folk. But our
Lady and Saunt Paul are good eneugh saunts for me, and I'se warrant
them never leave me in a bog that they can help me out o', seeing I
send four waxen candles to their chapels every Candlemas; and if they
are not seen to weep at my death, I'se warrant them smile at my joyful
rising again, whilk Heaven send to all of us, Amen."

"Amen," answered Tibb, devoutly; "and now it's time I should hap up
the wee bit gathering turf, as the fire is ower low."

Busily she set herself to perform this duty. The relict of Simon
Glendinning did but pause a moment to cast a heedful and cautious
glance all around the hall, to see that nothing was out of its proper
place; then, wishing Tibb good-night, she retired to repose.

"The deil's in the carline," said Tibb to herself, "because she was
the wife of a cock-laird, she thinks herself grander, I trow, than the
bower-woman of a lady of that ilk!" Having given vent to her
suppressed spleen in this little ejaculation, Tibb also betook herself
to slumber.


Chapter the Fifth.


  A priest, ye cry, a priest!--lame shepherds they,
  How shall they gather in the straggling flock?
  Dumb dogs which bark not--how shall they compel
  The loitering vagrants to the Master's fold?
  Fitter to bask before the blazing fire,
  And snuff the mess neat-handed Phillis dresses,
  Than on the snow-wreath battle with the wolf.
                           REFORMATION.


The health of the Lady of Avenel had been gradually decaying ever
since her disaster. It seemed as if the few years which followed her
husband's death had done on her the work of half a century. She lost
the fresh elasticity of form, the colour and the mien of health, and
became wasted, wan, and feeble. She appeared to have no formed
complaint; yet it was evident to those who looked on her, that her
strength waned daily. Her lips at length became blenched and her eye
dim; yet she spoke not of any desire to see a priest, until Elspeth
Glendinning in her zeal could not refrain from touching upon a point
which she deemed essential to salvation. Alice of Avenel received her
hint kindly, and thanked her for it.

"If any good priest would take the trouble of such a journey," she
said, "he should be welcome; for the prayers and lessons of the good
must be at all times advantageous."

This quiet acquiescence was not quite what Elspeth Glendinning wished
or expected. She made up, however, by her own enthusiasm, for the
lady's want of eagerness to avail herself of ghostly counsel, and
Martin was despatched with such haste as Shagram would make, to pray
one of the religious men of Saint Mary's to come up to administer the
last consolations to the widow of Walter Avenel.

When the Sacristan had announced to the Lord Abbot, that the Lady of
the umquhile Walter de Avenel was in very weak health in the Tower of
Glendearg, and desired the assistance of a father confessor, the
lordly monk paused on the request.

"We do remember Walter de Avenel," he said; "a good knight and a
valiant: he was dispossessed of his lands, and slain by the
Southron--May not the lady come hither to the sacrament of confession?
the road is distant and painful to travel."

"The lady is unwell, holy father," answered the Sacristan, "and unable
to bear the journey."

"True--ay,--yes--then must one of our brethren go to her--Knowest
thou if she hath aught of a jointure from this Walter de Avenel?"

"Very little, holy father," said the Sacristan; "she hath resided at
Glendearg since her husband's death, well-nigh on the charity of a
poor widow, called Elspeth Glendinning."

"Why, thou knowest all the widows in the country-side!" said the
Abbot. "Ho! ho! ho!" and he shook his portly sides at his own jest.

"Ho! ho! ho!" echoed the Sacristan, in the tone and tune in which an
inferior applauds the jest of his superior.--Then added, with a
hypocritical shuffle, and a sly twinkle of his eye, "It is our duty,
most holy father, to comfort the widow--He! he! he!"

This last laugh was more moderate, until the Abbot should put his
sanction on the jest.

"Ho! ho!" said the Abbot; "then, to leave jesting, Father Philip, take
thou thy riding gear, and go to confess this Dame Avenel."

"But," said the Sacristan----

"Give me no _Buts;_ neither But nor If pass between monk and
Abbot, Father Philip; the bands of discipline must not be
relaxed--heresy gathers force like a snow-ball--the multitude expect
confessions and preachings from the Benedictine, as they would from so
many beggarly friars--and we may not desert the vineyard, though the
toil be grievous unto us."

"And with so little advantage to the holy monastery," said the
Sacristan.

"True, Father Philip; but wot you not that what preventeth harm doth
good? This Julian de Avenel lives a light and evil life, and should we
neglect the widow of his brother, he might foray our lands, and we
never able to show who hurt us--moreover it is our duty to an ancient
family, who, in their day, have been benefactors to the Abbey. Away
with thee instantly, brother; ride night and day, an it be necessary,
and let men see how diligent Abbot Boniface and his faithful children
are in the execution of their spiritual duty--toil not deterring them,
for the glen is five miles in length--fear not withholding them, for
it is said to be haunted of spectres--nothing moving them from pursuit
of their spiritual calling; to the confusion of calumnious heretics,
and the comfort and edification of all true and faithful sons of the
Catholic Church. I wonder what our brother Eustace will say to this?"

Breathless with his own picture of the dangers and toil which he was
to encounter, and the fame which he was to acquire, (both by proxy,)
the Abbot moved slowly to finish his luncheon in the refectory, and
the Sacristan, with no very good will, accompanied old Martin in his
return to Glendearg; the greatest impediment in the journey being the
trouble of restraining his pampered mule, that she might tread in
something like an equal pace with poor jaded Shagram.

After remaining an hour in private with his penitent, the monk
returned moody and full of thought. Dame Elspeth, who had placed for
the honoured guest some refreshment in the hall, was struck with the
embarrassment which appeared in his countenance. Elspeth watched him
with great anxiety. She observed there was that on his brow which
rather resembled a person come from hearing the confession of some
enormous crime, than the look of a confessor who resigns a reconciled
penitent, not to earth, but to heaven. After long hesitating, she
could not at length refrain from hazarding a question. She was sure
she said, the leddy had made an easy shrift.  Five years had they
resided together, and she could safely say, no woman lived better.

"Woman," said the Sacristan, sternly, "thou speakest thou knowest not
what--What avails clearing the outside of the platter, if the inside
be foul with heresy?"

"Our dishes and trenchers are not so clean as they could be wished,
holy father," said Elspeth, but half understanding what he said, and
beginning with her apron to wipe the dust from the plates, of which
she supposed him to complain.

"Forbear, Dame Elspeth" said the monk; "your plates are as clean as
wooden trenchers and pewter flagons can well be; the foulness of which
I speak is of that pestilential heresy which is daily becoming
ingrained in this our Holy Church of Scotland, and as a canker-worm in
the rose-garland of the Spouse."

"Holy Mother of Heaven!" said Dame Elspeth, crossing herself, "have
I kept house with a heretic?"

"No, Elspeth, no," replied the monk; "it were too strong a speech for
me to make of this unhappy lady, but I would I could say she is free
from heretical opinions. Alas! they fly about like the pestilence by
noon-day, and infect even the first and fairest of the flock! For it
is easy to see of this dame, that she hath been high in judgment as in
rank."

"And she can write and read, I had almost said, as weel as your
reverence" said Elspeth.

"Whom doth she write to, and what doth she read?" said the monk,
eagerly.

"Nay," replied Elspeth, "I cannot say I ever saw her write at all, but
her maiden that was--she now serves the family--says she can write--And
for reading, she has often read to us good things out of a thick black
volume with silver clasps."

"Let me see it," said the monk, hastily, "on your allegiance as a true
vassal--on your faith as a Catholic Christian--instantly--instantly
let me see it."

The good woman hesitated, alarmed at the tone in which the confessor
took up her information; and being moreover of opinion, that what so
good a woman as the Lady of Avenel studied so devoutly, could not be
of a tendency actually evil. But borne down by the clamour,
exclamations, and something like threats used by Father Philip, she at
length brought him the fatal volume. It was easy to do this without
suspicion on the part of the owner, as she lay on her bed exhausted
with the fatigue of a long conference with her confessor, and as the
small _round_, or turret closet, in which was the book and her
other trifling property, was accessible by another door. Of all her
effects the book was the last she would have thought of securing, for
of what use or interest could it be in a family who neither read
themselves, nor were in the habit of seeing any who did? so that Dame
Elspeth had no difficulty in possessing herself of the volume,
although her heart all the while accused her of an ungenerous and an
inhospitable part towards her friend and inmate. The double power of a
landlord and a feudal superior was before her eyes; and to say truth,
the boldness, with which she might otherwise have resisted this double
authority, was, I grieve to say it, much qualified by the curiosity
she entertained, as a daughter of Eve, to have some explanation
respecting the mysterious volume which the lady cherished with so much
care, yet whose contents she imparted with such caution. For never had
Alice of Avenel read them any passage from the book in question until
the iron door of the tower was locked, and all possibility of
intrusion prevented. Even then she had shown, by the selection of
particular passages, that she was more anxious to impress on their
minds the principles which the volume contained, than to introduce
them to it as a new rule of faith.

When Elspeth, half curious, half remorseful, had placed the book in the
monk's hands, he exclaimed, after turning over the leaves, "Now, by mine
order, it is as I suspected!--My mule, my mule!--I will abide no longer
here--well hast thou done, dame, in placing in my hands this perilous
volume."

"Is it then witchcraft or devil's work?" said Dame Elspeth, in great
agitation.

"Nay, God forbid!" said the monk, signing himself with the cross, "it
is the Holy Scripture. But it is rendered into the vulgar tongue, and
therefore, by the order of the Holy Catholic Church, unfit to be in
the hands of any lay person."

"And yet is the Holy Scripture communicated for our common salvation,"
said Elspeth. "Good Father, you must instruct mine ignorance better;
but lack of wit cannot be a deadly sin, and truly, to my poor
thinking, I should be glad to read the Holy Scripture."

"I dare say thou wouldst," said the monk; "and even thus did our
mother Eve seek to have knowledge of good and evil, and thus Sin came
into the world, and Death by Sin."

"I am sure, and it is true," said Elspeth. "Oh, if she had dealt by the
counsel of Saint Peter and Saint Paul!"

"If she had reverenced the command of Heaven," said the monk, "which,
as it gave her birth, life, and happiness, fixed upon the grant such
conditions as best corresponded with its holy pleasure. I tell thee,
Elspeth, _the Word slayeth_--that is, the text alone, read with
unskilled eye and unhallowed lips, is like those strong medicines
which sick men take by the advice of the learned. Such patients
recover and thrive; while those dealing in them at their own hand,
shall perish by their own deed."

"Nae doubt, nae doubt," said the poor woman, "your reverence knows
best."

"Not I," said Father Philip, in a tone as deferential as he thought
could possibly become the Sacristan of Saint Mary's,--"Not I, but the
Holy Father of Christendom, and our own holy father, the Lord Abbot,
know best. I, the poor Sacristan of Saint Mary's, can but repeat what
I hear from others my superiors. Yet of this, good woman, be
assured,--the Word, the mere Word, slayetlh. But the church hath her
ministers to gloze and to expound the same unto her faithful
congregation; and this I say, not so much, my beloved brethren--I mean
my beloved sister," (for the Sacristan had got into the end of one of
his old sermons,)--"This I speak not so much of the rectors, curates,
and secular clergy, so called because they live after the fashion of
the _seculum_ or age, unbound by those ties which sequestrate us
from the world; neither do I speak this of the mendicant friars,
whether black or gray, whether crossed or uncrossed; but of the monks,
and especially of the monks Benedictine, reformed on the rule of Saint
Bernard of Clairvaux, thence called Cistercian, of which monks,
Christian brethren--sister, I would say--great is the happiness and
glory of the country in possessing the holy ministers of Saint Mary's,
whereof I, though an unworthy brother, may say it hath produced more
saints, more bishops, more popes--may our patrons make us
thankful!--than any holy foundation in Scotland. Wherefore--But I see
Martin hath my mule in readiness, and I will but salute you with the
kiss of sisterhood, which maketh not ashamed, and so betake me to my
toilsome return, for the glen is of bad reputation for the evil
spirits which haunt it.  Moreover, I may arrive too late at the
bridge, whereby I may be obliged to take to the river, which I
observed to be somewhat waxen."

Accordingly, he took his leave of Dame Elspeth, who was confounded by
the rapidity of his utterance, and the doctrine he gave forth, and by
no means easy on the subject of the book, which her conscience told
her she should not have communicated to any one, without the knowledge
of its owner.

Notwithstanding the haste which the monk as well as the mule made to
return to better quarters than they had left at the head of Glendearg;
notwithstanding the eager desire Father Philip had to be the very
first who should acquaint the Abbot that a copy of the book they most
dreaded had been found within the Halidome, or patrimony of the Abbey;
notwithstanding, moreover, certain feelings which induced him to hurry
as fast as possible through the gloomy and evil-reputed glen, still
the difficulties of the road, and the rider's want of habitude of
quick motion, were such, that twilight came upon him ere he had nearly
cleared the narrow valley.  It was indeed a gloomy ride. The two sides
of the vale were so near, that at every double of the river the
shadows from the western sky fell upon, and totally obscured, the
eastern bank; the thickets of copsewood seemed to wave with a
portentous agitation of boughs and leaves, and the very crags and
scaurs seemed higher and grimmer than they had appeared to the monk
while he was travelling in daylight, and in company. Father Philip was
heartily rejoiced, when, emerging from the narrow glen, he gained the
open valley of the Tweed, which held on its majestic course from
current to pool, and from pool stretched away to other currents, with
a dignity peculiar to itself amongst the Scottish rivers; for whatever
may have been the drought of the season, the Tweed usually fills up
the space between its banks, seldom leaving those extensive sheets of
shingle which deform the margins of many of the celebrated Scottish
streams.

The monk, insensible to beauties which the age had not regarded as
deserving of notice, was, nevertheless, like a prudent general,
pleased to find himself out of the narrow glen in which the enemy
might have stolen upon him unperceived. He drew up his bridle, reduced
his mule to her natural and luxurious amble, instead of the agitating
and broken trot at which, to his no small inconvenience, she had
hitherto proceeded, and, wiping his brow, gazed forth at leisure on
the broad moon, which, now mingling with the lights of evening, was
rising over field and forest, village and fortalice, and, above all,
over the stately Monastery, seen far and dim amid the vellow light.

The worst part of the magnificent view, in the monk's apprehension,
was, that the Monastery stood on the opposite side of the river, and
that of the many fine bridges which have since been built across that
classical stream, not one then existed. There was, however, in
recompense, a bridge then standing which has since disappeared,
although its ruins may still be traced by the curious.

It was of a very peculiar form. Two strong abutments were built on
either side of the river, at a part where the stream was peculiarly
contracted.  Upon a rock in the centre of the current was built a
solid piece of masonry, constructed like the pier of a bridge, and
presenting, like a pier, an angle to the current of the stream. The
masonry continued solid until the pier rose to a level with the two
abutments upon either side, and from thence the building rose in the
form of a tower. The lower story of this tower consisted only of an
archway or passage through the building, over either entrance to which
hung a drawbridge with counterpoises, either of which, when dropped,
connected the archway with the opposite abutment, where the farther
end of the drawbridge rested. When both bridges were thus lowered, the
passage over the river was complete.

The bridge-keeper, who was the dependant of a neighbouring baron,
resided with his family in the second and third stories of the tower,
which, when both drawbridges were raised, formed an insulated
fortalice in the midst of the river. He was entitled to a small toll
or custom for the passage, concerning the amount of which disputes
sometimes arose between him and the passengers. It is needless to say,
that the bridge-ward had usually the better in these questions, since
he could at pleasure detain the traveller on the opposite side; or,
suffering him to pass half way, might keep him prisoner in his tower
till they were agreed on the rate of pontage.

[Footnote: A bridge of the very peculiar construction described in the
text, actually existed at a small hamlet about a mile and a half above
Melrose, called from the circumstance Bridge-end. It is thus noticed
in Gordon's _Iter Septentrionale_:--

"In another journey through the south parts of Scotland, about a mile
and a half from Melrose, in the shire of Teviotdale, I saw the remains
of a curious bridge over the river Tweed, consisting of three
octangular pillars, or rather towers, standing within the water,
without any arches to join them. The middle one, which is the most
entire, has a door towards the north, and I suppose another opposite
one toward the south, which I could not see without crossing the
water. In the middle of this tower is a projection or cornice
surrounding it: the whole is hollow from the door upwards, and now
open at the top, near which is a small window. I was informed that not
long agro a countryman and his family lived in this tower--and got his
livelihood by laying out planks from pillar to pillar, and conveying
passengers over the river. Whether this be ancient or modern, I know
not; but as it is singular in its kind I have thought fit to exhibit
it."

The vestiges of this uncommon species of bridge still exist, and the
author has often seen the foundations of the columns when drifting
down the Tweed at night for the purpose of killing salmon by
torch-light. Mr. John Mercer of Bridge-end recollects, that about
fifty years ago the pillars were visible above water; and the late Mr.
David Kyle, of the George Inn, Melrose, told the author that he saw a
stone taken from the river bearing this inscription:--

"I, Sir John Pringle of Palmer stede,
Give an hundred markis of gowd sae reid,
To help to bigg my brigg ower Tweed."

Pringle of Galashiels, afterwards of Whytbank, was the Baron to whom
the bridge belonged.]

But it was most frequently with the Monks of Saint Mary's that the
warder had to dispute his perquisites. These holy men insisted for,
and at length obtained, a right of gratuitous passage to themselves,
greatly to the discontent of the bridge-keeper. But when they demanded
the same immunity for the numerous pilgrims who visited the shrine,
the bridge-keeper waxed restive, and was supported by his lord in his
resistance. The controversy grew animated on both sides; the Abbot
menaced excommunication, and the keeper of the bridge, though unable
to retaliate in kind, yet made each individual monk who had to cross
and recross the river, endure a sort of purgatory, ere he would
accommodate them with a passage. This was a great inconvenience, and
would have proved a more serious one, but that the river was fordable
for man and horse in ordinary weather.

It was a fine moonlight night, as we have already said, when Father
Philip approached this bridge, the singular construction of which
gives a curious idea of the insecurity of the times. The river was not
in flood, but it was above its ordinary level--_a heavy water_,
as it is called in that country, through which the monk had no
particular inclination to ride, if he could manage the matter better.

"Peter, my good friend," cried the Sacristan, raising his voice; "my
very excellent friend, Peter, be so kind as to lower the drawbridge.
Peter, I say, dost thou not hear?--it is thy gossip, Father Philip,
who calls thee."

Peter heard him perfectly well, and saw him into the bargain; but as
he had considered the Sacristan as peculiarly his enemy in his dispute
with the convent, he went quietly to bed, after reconnoitring the monk
through his loop-hole, observing to his wife, that "riding the water
in a moonlight night would do the Sacristan no harm, and would teach
him the value of a brig the neist time, on whilk a man might pass high
and dry, winter and summer, flood and ebb."

After exhausting his voice in entreaties and threats, which were
equally unattended to by Peter of the Brig, as he was called, Father
Philip at length moved down the river to take the ordinary ford at the
head of the next stream. Cursing the rustic obstinacy of Peter, he
began, nevertheless, to persuade himself that the passage of the river
by the ford was not only safe, but pleasant.  The banks and scattered
trees were so beautifully reflected from the bosom of the dark stream,
the whole cool and delicious picture formed so pleasing a contrast to
his late agitation, to the warmth occasioned by his vain endeavours to
move the relentless porter of the bridge, that the result was rather
agreeable than otherwise.

As Father Philip came close to the water's edge, at the spot where he
was to enter it, there sat a female under a large broken scathed
oak-tree, or rather under the remains of such a tree, weeping,
wringing her hands, and looking earnestly on the current of the river.
The monk was struck with astonishment to see a female there at that
time of night. But he was, in all honest service,--and if a step
farther, I put it upon his own conscience,--a devoted squire of dames.
After observing the maiden for a moment, although she seemed to take
no notice of his presence, he was moved by her distress, and willing
to offer his assistance. "Damsel," said he, "thou seemest in no
ordinary distress; peradventure, like myself, thou hast been refused
passage at the bridge by the churlish keeper, and thy crossing may
concern thee either for performance of a vow, or some other weighty
charge."

The maiden uttered some inarticulate sounds, looked at the river, and
then in the face of the Sacristan. It struck Father Philip at that
instant, that a Highland chief of distinction had been for some time
expected to pay his vows at the shrine of Saint Mary's; and that
possibly this fair maiden might be one of his family, travelling alone
for accomplishment of a vow, or left behind by some accident, to whom,
therefore, it would be but right and prudent to use every civility in
his power, especially as she seemed unacquainted with the Lowland
tongue. Such at least was the only motive the Sacristan was ever known
to assign for his courtesy; if there was any other, I once more refer
it to his own conscience.

To express himself by signs, the common language of all nations, the
cautious Sacristan first pointed to the river, then to his mule's
crupper, and then made, as gracefully as he could, a sign to induce
the fair solitary to mount behind him. She seemed to understand his
meaning, for she rose up as if to accept his offer; and while the good
monk, who, as we have hinted, was no great cavalier, laboured, with
the pressure of the right leg and the use of the left rein, to place
his mule with her side to the bank in such a position that the lady
might mount with ease, she rose from the ground with rather portentous
activity, and at one bound sate behind the monk upon the animal, much
the firmer rider of the two. The mule by no means seemed to approve of
this double burden; she bounded, bolted, and would soon have thrown
Father Philip over her head, had not the maiden with a firm hand
detained him in the saddle.

At last the restive brute changed her humour; and, from refusing to
budge off the spot, suddenly stretched her nose homeward, and dashed
into the ford as fast as she could scamper. A new terror now invaded
the monk's mind--the ford seemed unusually deep, the water eddied off
in strong ripple from the counter of the mule, and began to rise upon
her side. Philip lost his presence of mind,--which was at no time his
most ready attribute, the mule yielded to the weight of the current,
and as the rider was not attentive to keep her head turned up the
river, she drifted downward, lost the ford and her footing at once,
and began to swim with her head down the stream.  And what was
sufficiently strange, at the same moment, notwithstanding the extreme
peril, the damsel began to sing, thereby increasing, if anything could
increase, the bodily fear of the worthy Sacristan.

               I.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright,
  Both current and ripple are dancing in light.
  We have roused the night raven, I heard him croak,
  As we plashed along beneath the oak
  That flings its broad branches so far and so wide,
  Their shadows are dancing in midst of the tide.
  "Who wakens my nestlings," the raven he said,
  "My beak shall ere morn in his blood be red.
  For a blue swoln corpse is a dainty meal.
  And I'll have my share with the pike and the eel."

               II.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright,
  There's a golden gleam on the distant height;
  There's a silver shower on the alders dank.
  And the drooping willows that wave on the bank.
  I see the abbey, both turret and tower,
  It is all astir for the vesper hour;
  The monks for the chapel are leaving each cell.
  But Where's Father Philip, should toll the bell?

               III.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright,
  Downward we drift through shadow and light,
  Under yon rock the eddies sleep,
  Calm and silent, dark and deep.
  The Kelpy has risen from the fathomless pool.
  He has lighted his candle of death and of dool.
  Look, Father, look, and you'll laugh to see
  How he gapes and glares with his eyes on thee.

               IV.

  Good luck to your fishing, whom watch ye to-night?
  A man of mean, or a man of might?
  Is it layman or priest that must float in your cove,
  Or lover who crosses to visit his love?
  Hark! heard ye the Kelpy reply, as we pass'd,--
  "God's blessing on the warder, he lock'd the bridge fast!
  All that come to my cove are sunk,
  Priest or layman, lover or monk."


How long the damsel might have continued to sing, or where the
terrified monk's journey might have ended, is uncertain. As she sung
the last stanza, they arrived at, or rather in, a broad tranquil sheet
of water, caused by a strong wear or damhead, running across the
river, which dashed in a broad cataract over the barrier. The mule,
whether from choice, or influenced by the suction of the current, made
towards the cut intended to supply the convent mills, and entered it
half swimming half wading, and pitching the unlucky monk to and fro in
the saddle at a fearful rate.

As his person flew hither and thither, his garment became loose, and
in an effort to retain it, his hand lighted on the volume of the Lady
of Avenel which was in his bosom. No sooner had he grasped it, than
his companion pitched him out of the saddle into the stream, where,
still keeping her hand on his collar, she gave him two or three good
souses in the watery fluid, so as to ensure that every other part of
him had its share of wetting, and then quitted her hold when he was so
near the side that by a slight effort (of a great one he was
incapable) he might scramble on shore. This accordingly he
accomplished, and turning his eyes to see what had become of his
extraordinary companion, she was nowhere to be seen; but still he
heard, as if from the surface of the river, and mixing with the noise
of the water breaking over the damhead, a fragment of her wild song,
which seemed to run thus:--

  Landed--landed! the black book hath won.
  Else had you seen Berwick with morning sun!
  Sain ye, and save ye, and blithe mot ye be,
  For seldom they land that go swimming with me.

The ecstasy of the monk's terror could be endured no longer; his head
grew dizzy, and, after staggering a few steps onward and running himself
against a wall, he sunk down in a state of insensibility.


Chapter the Sixth.


  Now let us sit in conclave. That these weeds
  Be rooted from the vineyard of the church.
  That these foul tares be severed from the wheat,
  We are, I trust, agreed.--Yet how to do this,
  Nor hurt the wholesome crop and tender vine-plants,
  Craves good advisement.

THE REFORMATION.

The vesper service in the Monastery Church of Saint Mary's was now
over. The Abbot had disrobed himself of his magnificent vestures of
ceremony, and resumed his ordinary habit, which was a black gown, worn
over a white cassock, with a narrow scapulary; a decent and venerable
dress, which was calculated to set off to advantage the portly mien of
Abbot Boniface.

In quiet times no one could have filled the state of a mitred Abbot,
for such was his dignity, more respectably than this worthy prelate.
He had, no doubt, many of those habits of self-indulgence which men
are apt to acquire who live for themselves alone. He was vain,
moreover; and when boldly confronted, had sometimes shown symptoms of
timidity, not very consistent with the high claims which he preferred
as an eminent member of the church, or with the punctual deference
which he exacted from his religious brethren, and all who were placed
under his command. But he was hospitable, charitable, and by no means
of himself disposed to proceed with severity against any one. In
short, he would in other times have slumbered out his term of
preferment with as much credit as any other "purple Abbot," who lived
easily, but at the same time decorously--slept soundly, and did not
disquiet himself with dreams.

But the wide alarm spread through the whole Church of Rome by the
progress of the reformed doctrines, sorely disturbed the repose of
Abbot Boniface, and opened to him a wide field of duties and cares
which he had never so much as dreamed of. There were opinions to be
combated and refuted--practices to be inquired into--heretics to be
detected and punished--the fallen off to be reclaimed--the wavering to
be confirmed--scandal to be removed from the clergy, and the vigour of
discipline to be re-established.  Post upon post arrived at the
Monastery of Saint Mary's--horses reeking, and riders exhausted--this
from the Privy Council, that from the Primate of Scotland, and this
other again from the Queen Mother, exhorting, approving, condemning,
requesting advice upon this subject, and requiring information upon
that.

These missives Abbot Boniface received with an important air of
helplessness, or a helpless air of importance,--whichever the reader
may please to term it, evincing at once gratified vanity, and profound
trouble of mind.  The sharp-witted Primate of Saint Andrews had
foreseen the deficiencies of the Abbot of St. Mary's, and endeavoured
to provide for them by getting admitted into his Monastery as
Sub-Prior a brother Cistercian, a man of parts and knowledge, devoted
to the service of the Catholic Church, and very capable not only to
advise the Abbot on occasions of difficulty, but to make him sensible
of his duty in case he should, from good-nature or timidity, be
disposed to shrink from it.

Father Eustace played the same part in the Monastery as the old
general who, in foreign armies, is placed at the elbow of the Prince
of the Blood, who nominally commands in chief, on condition of
attempting nothing without the advice of his dry-nurse; and he shared
the fate of all such dry-nurses, being heartily disliked as well as
feared by his principal. Still, however, the Primate's intention was
fully answered. Father Eustace became the constant theme and often the
bugbear of the worthy Abbot, who hardly dared to turn himself in his
bed without, considering what Father Eustace would think of it. In
every case of difficulty, Father Eustace was summoned, and his opinion
asked; and no sooner was the embarrassment removed, than the Abbot's
next thought was how to get rid of his adviser. In every letter which
he wrote to those in power, he recommended Father Eustace to some high
church preferment, a bishopric or an abbey; and as they dropped one
after another, and were otherwise conferred, he began to think, as he
confessed to the Sacristan in the bitterness of his spirit, that the
Monastery of St.  Mary's had got a life-rent lease of their Sub-Prior.

Yet more indignant he would have been, had he suspected that Father
Eustace's ambition was fixed upon his own mitre, which, from some
attacks of an apoplectic nature, deemed by the Abbot's friends to be
more serious than by himself, it was supposed might be shortly vacant.
But the confidence which, like other dignitaries, he reposed in his
own health, prevented Abbot Boniface from imagining that it held any
concatenation, with the motions of Father Eustace.

The necessity under which he found himself of consulting with his
grand adviser, in cases of real difficulty, rendered the worthy Abbot
particularly desirous of doing without him in all ordinary cases of
administration, though not without considering what Father Eustace
would have said of the matter. He scorned, therefore, to give a hint
to the Sub-Prior of the bold stroke by which he had dispatched Brother
Philip to Glendearg; but when the vespers came without his
reappearance he became a little uneasy, the more as other matters
weighed upon his mind. The feud with the warder or keeper of the
bridge threatened to be attended with bad consequences, as the man's
quarrel was taken up by the martial baron under whom he served; and
pressing letters of an unpleasant tendency had just arrived from the
Primate. Like a gouty man, who catches hold of his crutch while he
curses the infirmity that induces him to use if, the Abbot, however
reluctant, found himself obliged to require Eustace's presence, after
the service was over, in his house, or rather palace, which was
attached to, and made part of, the Monastery.

Abbot Boniface was seated in his high-backed chair, the grotesque
carved back of which terminated in a mitre, before a fire where two or
three large logs were reduced to one red glowing mass of charcoal. At
his elbow, on an oaken stand, stood the remains of a roasted capon, on
which his reverence had made his evening meal, flanked by a goodly
stoup of Bordeaux of excellent flavour. He was gazing indolently on
the fire, partly engaged in meditation on his past and present
fortunes, partly occupied by endeavouring to trace towers and steeples
in the red embers.

"Yes," thought the Abbot to himself, "in that red perspective I could
fancy to myself the peaceful towers of Dundrennan, where I passed my
life ere I was called to pomp and to trouble. A quiet brotherhood we
were, regular in our domestic duties; and when the frailties of
humanity prevailed over us, we confessed, and were absolved by each
other, and the most formidable part of the penance was the jest of the
convent on the culprit. I can almost fancy that I see the cloister
garden, and the pear-trees which I grafted with my own hands. And for
what have I changed all this, but to be overwhelmed with business
which concerns me not, to be called My Lord Abbot, and to be tutored
by Father Eustace? I would these towers were the Abbey of
Aberbrothwick, and Father Eustace the Abbot,--or I would he were in
the fire on any terms, so I were rid of him! The Primate says our Holy
Father, the Pope hath an adviser--I am sure he could not live a week
with such a one as mine. Then there is no learning what Father Eustace
thinks till you confess your own difficulties--No hint will bring
forth his opinion--he is like a miser, who will not unbuckle his purse
to bestow a farthing, until the wretch who needs it has owned his
excess of poverty, and wrung out the boon by importunity. And thus I
am dishonoured in the eyes of my religious brethren, who behold me
treated like a child which hath no sense of its own--I will bear it no
longer!--Brother Bennet,"--(a lay brother answered to his call)--"
tell Father Eustace that I need not his presence."

"I came to say to your reverence, that the holy father is entering
even now from the cloisters."

"Be it so," said the Abbot, "he is welcome,--remove these things--or
rather, place a trencher, the holy father may be a little hungry--yet,
no--remove them, for there is no good fellowship in him--Let the stoup
of wine remain, however, and place another cup."

The lay brother obeyed these contradictory commands in the way he
judged most seemly--he removed the carcass of the half-sacked capon,
and placed two goblets beside the stoup of Bourdeaux. At the same
instant entered Father Eustace.

He was a thin, sharp-faced, slight-made little man, whose keen grey
eyes seemed almost to look through the person to whom he addressed
himself. His body was emaciated not only with the fasts which he
observed with rigid punctuality, but also by the active and unwearied
exercise of his sharp and piercing intellect;--

  A fiery soul, which working out its way,
  Fretted the puny body to decay,
  And o'er-informed the tenement of clay.

He turned with conventual reverence to the Lord Abbot; and as they
stood together, it was scarce possible to see a more complete
difference of form and expression. The good-natured rosy face and
laughing eye of the Abbot, which even his present anxiety could not
greatly ruffle, was a wonderful contrast to the thin pallid cheek and
quick penetrating glance of the monk, in which an eager and keen
spirit glanced through eyes to which it seemed to give supernatural
lustre.

The Abbot opened the conversation by motioning to his monk to take a
stool, and inviting to a cup of wine. The courtesy was declined with
respect, yet not without a remark, that the vesper service was past.

"For the stomach's sake, brother," said the Abbot, colouring a
little--"You know the text."

"It is a dangerous one," answered the monk, "to handle alone, or at
late hours. Out off from human society, the juice of the grape becomes
a perilous companion of solitude, and therefore I ever shun it."

Abbot Boniface had poured himself out a goblet which might hold about
half an English pint; but, either struck with the truth of the
observation, or ashamed to act in direct opposition to it, he suffered
it to remain untasted before him, and immediately changed the subject.

"The Primate hath written to us," said he, "to make strict search
within our bounds after the heretical persons denounced in this list,
who have withdrawn themselves from the justice which their opinions
deserve. It is deemed probable that they will attempt to retire to
England by our Borders, and the Primate requireth me to watch with
vigilance, and what not."

"Assuredly," said the monk, "the magistrate should not bear the sword
in vain--those be they that turn the world upside down--and doubtless
your reverend wisdom will with due diligence second the exertions of
the Right Reverend Father in God, being in the peremptory defence of
the Holy Church."

"Ay, but how is this to be done?" answered the Abbot; "Saint Mary aid
us! The Primate writes to me as if I were a temporal baron--a man
under command, having soldiers under him! He says, send forth--scour
the country--guard the passes--Truly these men do not travel as those
who would give their lives for nothing--the last who went south passed
the dry-march at the Riding-burn with an escort of thirty spears, as
our reverend brother the Abbot of Kelso did write unto us. How are
cowls and scapularies to stop the way?"

"Your bailiff is accounted a good man at arms, holy father," said
Eustace; "your vassals are obliged to rise for the defence of the Holy
Kirk--it is the tenure on which they hold their lands--if they will
not come forth for the Church which gives them bread, let their
possessions be given to others."

"We shall not be wanting," said the Abbot, collecting himself with
importance, "to do whatever may advantage Holy Kirk--thyself shall
hear the charge to our Bailiff and our officials--but here again is
our controversy with the warden of the bridge and the Baron of
Meigallot--Saint Mary!  vexations do so multiply upon the House, and
upon the generation, that a man wots not where to turn to! Thou didst
say, Father Eustace, thou wouldst look into our evidents touching this
free passage for the pilgrims?"

"I have looked into the Chartulary of the House, holy father," said
Eustace, "and therein I find a written and formal grant of all duties
and customs payable at the drawbridge of Brigton, not only by
ecclesiastics of this foundation, but by every pilgrim truly designed
to accomplish his vows at this House, to the Abbot Allford, and the
monks of the House of Saint Mary in Kennaquhair, from that time and
for ever. The deed is dated on Saint Bridget's Even, in the year of
Redemption, 1137, and bears the sign and seal of the granter, Charles
of Meigallot, great-great-grandfather of this baron, and purports to
be granted for the safety of his own soul, and for the weal of the
souls of his father and mother, and of all his predecessors and
successors, being Barons of Meigallot."

"But he alleges," said the Abbot, "that the bridge-wards have been in
possession of these dues, and have rendered them available for more
than fifty years--and the baron threatens violence--meanwhile, the
journey of the pilgrims is interrupted, to the prejudice of their own
souls and the diminution of the revenues of Saint Mary. The Sacristan
advised us to put on a boat; but the warden, whom thou knowest to be a
godless man, has sworn the devil tear him, but that if they put on a
boat on the laird's stream, he will rive her board from board--and
then some say we should compound the claim for a small sum in silver."
Here the Abbot paused a moment for a reply, but receiving none, he
added, "But what thinkest thou, Father Eustace? why art thou silent?"

"Because I am surprised at the question which the Lord Abbot of Saint
Mary's asks at the youngest of his brethren."

"Youngest in time of your abode with us, Brother Eustace," said the
Abbot, "not youngest in years, or I think in experience. Sub-Prior
also of this convent."

"I am astonished," continued Eustace, "that the Abbot of this
venerable house should ask of any one whether he can alienate the
patrimony of our holy and divine patroness, or give up to an
unconscientious, and perhaps, a heretic baron, the rights conferred on
this church by his devout progenitor. Popes and councils alike
prohibit it--the honour of the living, and the weal of departed souls,
alike forbid it--it may not be. To force, if he dare use it, we must
surrender; but never by our consent should we see the goods of the
church plundered, with as little scruple as he would drive off a herd
of English beeves. Rouse yourself, Reverend father, and doubt nothing
but that the good cause shall prevail. Whet the spiritual sword, and
direct it against the wicked who would usurp our holy rights. Whet the
temporal sword, if it be necessary, and stir up the courage and zeal
of your loyal vassals."

The Abbot sighed deeply. "All this," he said, "is soon spoken by him
who hath to act it not; but--" He was interrupted by the entrance of
Bennet rather hastily. "The mule on which the Sacristan had set out in
the morning had returned," he said, "to the convent stable all over
wet, and with the saddle turned round beneath her belly."

"Sancta Maria!" said the Abbot, "our dear brother hath perished by the
way!"

"It may not be," said Eustace, hastily--"let the bell be tolled--cause
the brethren to get torches--alarm the village--hurry down to the
river--I myself will be the foremost."

The real Abbot stood astonished and agape, when at once he beheld his
office filled, and saw all which he ought to have ordered, going
forward at the dictates of the youngest monk in the convent. But ere
the orders of Eustace, which nobody dreamed of disputing, were carried
into execution, the necessity was prevented by the sudden apparition
of the Sacristan, whose supposed danger excited all the alarm.


Chapter the Seventh.


     Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
     Cleanse the foul bosom of the perilous stuff
     That weighs upon the heart.
                                         MACBETH.

What betwixt cold and fright the afflicted Sacristan stood before his
Superior, propped on the friendly arm of the convent miller, drenched
with water, and scarce able to utter a syllable.

After various attempts to speak, the first words he uttered were,

  "Swim we merrily--the moon shines bright."

"Swim we merrily!" retorted the Abbot, indignantly; "a merry night
have ye chosen for swimming, and a becoming salutation to your
Superior!"

"Our brother is bewildered," said Eustace;--"speak, Father Philip, how
is it with you?"

  "Good luck to your fishing,"

continued the Sacristan, making a most dolorous attempt at the tune of
his strange companion.

"Good luck to your fishing!" repeated the Abbot, still more surprised
than displeased; "by my halidome he is drunken with wine, and comes to
our presence with his jolly catches in his throat! If bread and water
can cure this folly--"

"With your pardon, venerable father," said the Sub-Prior, "of water
our brother has had enough; and methinks, the confusion of his eye, is
rather that of terror, than of aught unbecoming his profession. Where
did you find him, Hob Miller?"

"An it please your reverence, I did but go to shut the sluice of the
mill--and as I was going to shut the sluice, I heard something groan
near to me; but judging it was one of Giles Fletcher's hogs--for so
please you he never shuts his gate--I caught up my lever, and was
about--Saint Mary forgive me!--to strike where I heard the sound,
when, as the saints would have it, I heard the second groan just like
that of a living man. So I called up my knaves, and found the Father
Sacristan lying wet and senseless under the wall of our kiln. So soon
as we brought him to himself a bit, he prayed to be brought to your
reverence, but I doubt me his wits have gone a bell-wavering by the
road. It was but now that he spoke in somewhat better form."

"Well!" said Brother Eustace, "thou hast done well, Hob Miller; only
begone now, and remember a second time to pause, ere you strike in the
dark."

"Please your reverence, it shall be a lesson to me," said the miller,
"not to mistake a holy man for a hog again, so long as I live." And,
making a bow, with profound humility, the miller withdrew.

"And now that this churl is gone, Father Philip," said Eustace, "wilt
thou tell our venerable Superior what ails thee? art thou _vino
gravatus,_ man? if so we will have thee to thy cell."

"Water! water! not wine," muttered the exhausted Sacristan.

"Nay," said the monk, "if that be thy complaint, wine may perhaps
cure thee;" and he reached him a cup, which the patient drank off to his
great benefit.

"And now," said the Abbot, "let his garments be changed, or rather let
him be carried to the infirmary; for it will prejudice our health,
should we hear his narrative while he stands there, steaming like a
rising hoar-frost."

"I will hear his adventure," said Eustace, "and report it to your
reverence." And, accordingly, he attended the Sacristan to his cell. In
about half an hour he returned to the Abbot.

"How is it with Father Philip?" said the Abbot; "and through what
came he into such a state?"

"He comes from Glendearg, reverend sir," said Eustace; "and for the
rest, he telleth such a legend, as has not been heard in this
Monastery for many a long day." He then gave the Abbot the outlines of
the Sacristan's adventures in the homeward journey, and added, that
for some time he was inclined to think his brain was infirm, seeing he
had sung, laughed, and wept all in the same breath.

"A wonderful thing it is to us," said the Abbot, "that Satan has been
permitted to put forth his hand thus far on one of our sacred brethren!"

"True," said Father Eustace; "but for every text there is a
paraphrase; and I have my suspicions, that if the drenching of Father
Philip cometh of the Evil one, yet it may not have been altogether
without his own personal fault."

"How!" said the Father Abbot; "I will not believe that thou makest
doubt that Satan, in former days, hath been permitted to afflict
saints and holy men, even as he afflicted the pious Job?"

"God forbid I should make question of it," said the monk, crossing
himself; "yet, where there is an exposition of the Sacristan's tale,
which is less than miraculous, I hold it safe to consider it at least,
if not to abide by it. Now, this Hob the Miller hath a buxom daughter.
Suppose--I say only suppose--that our Sacristan met her at the ford on
her return from her uncle's on the other side, for there she hath this
evening been--suppose, that, in courtesy, and to save her stripping
hose and shoon, the Sacristan brought her across behind him-suppose he
carried his familiarities farther than the maiden was willing to
admit; and we may easily suppose, farther, that this wetting was the
result of it."

"And this legend invented to deceive us!" said the Superior, reddening
with wrath; "but most strictly shall it be sifted and inquired into;
it is not upon us that Father Philip must hope to pass the result of
his own evil practices for doings of Satan. To-morrow cite the wench
to appear before us--we will examine, and we will punish."

"Under your reverence's favour," said Eustace, "that were but poor
policy. As things now stand with us, the heretics catch hold of each
flying report which tends to the scandal of our clergy. We must abate
the evil, not only by strengthening discipline, but also by
suppressing and stifling the voice of scandal. If my conjectures are
true, the miller's daughter will be silent for her own sake; and your
reverence's authority may also impose silence on her father, and on
the Sacristan. If he is again found to afford room for throwing
dishonour on his order, he can be punished with severity, but at the
same time with secrecy. For what say the Decretals! Facinora ostendi
dum punientur, flagitia autem abscondi debent."

A sentence of Latin, as Eustace had before observed, had often much
influence on the Abbot, because he understood it not fluently, and was
ashamed to acknowledge his ignorance. On these terms they parted for
the night.

The next day, Abbot Boniface strictly interrogated Philip on the real
cause of his disaster of the previous night. But the Sacristan stood
firm to his story; nor was he found to vary from any point of it,
although the answers he returned were in some degree incoherent, owing
to his intermingling with them ever and anon snatches of the strange
damsel's song, which had made such deep impression on his imagination,
that he could not prevent himself from imitating it repeatedly in the
course of his examination. The Abbot had compassion with the
Sacristan's involuntary frailty, to which something supernatural
seemed annexed, and finally became of opinion, that Father Eustace's
more natural explanation was rather plausible than just. And, indeed,
although we have recorded the adventure as we find it written down, we
cannot forbear to add that there was a schism on the subject in the
convent, and that several of the brethren pretended to have good
reason for thinking that the miller's black-eyed daughter was at the
bottom of the affair after all. Whichever way it might be interpreted,
all agreed that it had too ludicrous a sound to be permitted to get
abroad, and therefore the Sacristan was charged, on his vow of
obedience, to say no more of his ducking; an injunction which, having
once eased his mind by telling his story, it may be well conjectured
that he joyfully obeyed.

The attention of Father Eustace was much less forcibly arrested by the
marvellous tale of the Sacristan's danger, and his escape, than by the
mention of the volume which he had brought with him from the Tower of
Glendearg. A copy of the Scriptures, translated into the vulgar
tongue, had found its way even into the proper territory of the
church, and had been discovered in one of the most hidden and
sequestered recesses of the Halidome of Saint Mary's.

He anxiously requested to see the volume. In this the Sacristan was
unable to gratify him, for he had lost it, as far as he recollected,
when the supernatural being, as he conceived her to be, took her
departure from him. Father Eustace went down to the spot in person,
and searched all around it, in hopes of recovering the volume in
question; but his labour was in vain. He returned to the Abbot, and
reported that it must have fallen into the river or the mill-stream;
"for I will hardly believe," he said, "that Father Philip's musical
friend would fly off with a copy of the Holy Scriptures."

"Being," said the Abbot, "as it is, an heretical translation, it may
be thought that Satan may have power over it."

"Ay!" said Father Eustace, "it is indeed his chiefest magazine of
artillery, when he inspireth presumptuous and daring men to set forth
their own opinions and expositions of Holy Writ. But though thus
abused, the Scriptures are the source of our salvation, and are no
more to be reckoned unholy, because of these rash men's proceedings,
than a powerful medicine is to be contemned, or held poisonous,
because bold and evil leeches have employed it to the prejudice of
their patients. With the permission of your reverence, I would that
this matter were looked into more closely. I will myself visit the
Tower of Glendearg ere I am many hours older, and we shall see if any
spectre or white woman of the wild will venture to interrupt my
journey or return. Have I your reverend permission and your blessing?"
he added, but in a tone that appeared to set no great store by either.

"Thou hast both, my brother," said the Abbot; but no sooner had
Eustace left the apartment, than Boniface could not help breaking on
the willing ear of the Sacristan his sincere wish, that any spirit,
black, white, or gray, would read the adviser such a lesson, as to
cure him of his presumption in esteeming himself wiser than the whole
community.

"I wish him no worse lesson," said the Sacristan, "than to go swimming
merrily down the river with a ghost behind, and Kelpies, night-crows,
and mud-eels, all waiting to have a snatch at him.

  Merrily swim we, the moon shines bright!
  Good luck to your fishing, whom watch you to-night?"

"Brother Philip," said the Abbot, "we exhort thee to say thy prayers,
compose thyself, and banish that foolish chant from thy mind;--it is
but a deception of the devil's."

"I will essay, reverend Father," said the Sacristan, "but the tune
hangs by my memory like a bur in a beggar's rags; it mingles with the
psalter--the very bells of the convent seem to repeat the words, and
jingle to the tune; and were you to put me to death at this very
moment, it is my belief I should die singing it--'Now swim we
merrily'--it is as it were a spell upon me."

He then again began to warble

  "Good luck to your fishing."

And checking himself in the strain with difficulty, he exclaimed, "It
is too certain--I am but a lost priest! Swim we merrily--I shall sing
it at the very mass--Wo is me! I shall sing all the remainder of my
life, and yet never be able to change the tune!"

The honest Abbot replied, "he knew many a good fellow in the same
condition;" and concluded the remark with "ho! ho! ho!" for his
reverence, as the reader may partly have observed, was one of those
dull folks who love a quiet joke.

The Sacristan, well acquainted with his Superior's humour, endeavoured
to join in the laugh, but his unfortunate canticle came again across
his imagination, and interrupted the hilarity of his customary echo.

"By the rood, Brother Philip," said the Abbot, much moved, "you become
altogether intolerable! and I am convinced that such a spell could not
subsist over a person of religion, and in a religious house, unless he
were under mortal sin. Wherefore, say the seven penitentiary
psalms--make diligent use of thy scourge and hair-cloth--refrain for
three days from all food, save bread and water--I myself will shrive
thee, and we will see if this singing devil may be driven out of thee;
at least I think Father Eustace himself could devise no better
exorcism."

The Sacristan sighed deeply, but knew remonstrance was vain. He
retired therefore to his cell, to try how far psalmody might be able
to drive off the sounds of the syren tune which haunted his memory.

Meanwhile, Father Eustace proceeded to the drawbridge, in his way to
the lonely valley of Glendearg. In a brief conversation with the
churlish warder, he had the address to render him more tractable in
the controversy betwixt him and the convent. He reminded him that his
father had been a vassal under the community; that his brother was
childless; and that their possession would revert to the church on his
death, and might be either granted to himself the warder, or to some
greater favourite of the Abbot, as matters chanced to stand betwixt
them at the time. The Sub-Prior suggested to him also, the necessary
connexion of interests betwixt the Monastery  and the office which
this man enjoyed. He listened with temper to his rude and churlish
answers; and by keeping his own interest firm pitched in his view, he
had the satisfaction to find that Peter gradually softened his tone,
and consented to let every pilgrim who travelled upon foot pass free
of exaction until Pentocost next; they who travelled on horseback or
otherwise, contenting to pay the ordinary custom. Having thus
accommodated a matter in which the weal of the convent was so deeply
interested, Father Eustace proceeded on his journey.


Chapter the Eighth.


  Nay, dally not with time, the wise man's treasure,
  Though fools are lavish on't--the fatal Fisher
  Hooks souls, while we waste moments.
                                      OLD PLAY.

A November mist overspread the little valley, up which slowly but
steadily rode the Monk Eustace. He was not insensible to the feeling
of melancholy inspired by the scene and by the season. The stream
seemed to murmur with a deep and oppressed note, as if bewailing the
departure of autumn. Among the scattered copses which here and there
fringed its banks, the oak-trees only retained that pallid green that
precedes their russet hue. The leaves of the willows were most of them
stripped from the branches, lay rustling at each breath, and disturbed
by every step of the mule; while the foliage of other trees, totally
withered, kept still precarious possession of the boughs, waiting the
first wind to scatter them.

The monk dropped into the natural train of pensive thought which these
autumnal emblems of mortal hopes are peculiarly calculated to inspire.
"There," he said, looking at the leaves which lay strewed around, "lie
the hopes of early youth, first formed that they may soonest wither,
and loveliest in spring to become most contemptible in winter; but
you, ye lingerers," he added, looking to a knot of beeches which still
bore their withered leaves, "you are the proud plans of adventurous
manhood, formed later, and still clinging to the mind of age, although
it acknowledges their inanity!  None lasts--none endures, save the
foliage of the hardy oak, which only begins to show itself when that
of the rest of the forest has enjoyed half its existence. A pale and
decayed hue is all it possesses, but still it retains that symptom of
vitality to the last.--So be it with Father Eustace! The fairy hopes
of my youth I have trodden under foot like those neglected
rustlers--to the prouder dreams of my manhood I look back as to lofty
chimeras, of which the pith and essence have long since faded; but my
religious vows, the faithful profession which I have made in my
maturer age, shall retain life while aught of Eustace lives. Dangerous
it may be--feeble it must be--yet live it shall, the proud
determination to serve the Church of which I am a member, and to
combat the heresies by which she is assailed." Thus spoke, at least
thus thought, a man zealous according to his imperfect knowledge,
confounding the vital interests of Christianity with the extravagant
and usurped claims of the Church of Rome, and defending his cause with
an ardour worthy of a better.

While moving onward in this contemplative mood, he could not help
thinking more than once, that he saw in his path the form of a female
dressed in white, who appeared in the attitude of lamentation. But the
impression was only momentary, and whenever he looked steadily to the
point where he conceived the figure appeared, it always proved that he
had mistaken some natural object, a white crag, or the trunk of a
decayed birch-tree with its silver bark, for the appearance in
question.

Father Eustace had dwelt too long in Rome to partake the superstitious
feelings of the more ignorant Scottish clergy; yet he certainly
thought it extraordinary, that so strong an impression should have
been made on his mind by the legend of the Sacristan. "It is strange,"
he said to himself, "that this story, which doubtless was the
invention of Brother Philip to cover his own impropriety of conduct,
should run so much in my head, and disturb my more serious thoughts--I
am wont, I think, to have more command over my senses. I will repeat
my prayers, and banish such folly from my recollection."

The monk accordingly began with devotion to tell his beads, in pursuance
of the prescribed rule of his order, and was not again disturbed by any
wanderings of the imagination, until he found himself beneath the little
fortalice of Glendearg.

Dame Glendinning, who stood at the gate, set up a shout of surprise and
joy at seeing the good father. "Martin," she said, "Jasper, where be a'
the folk?--help the right reverend Sub-Prior to dismount, and take his
mule from him.--O father! God has sent you in our need--I was just going
to send man and horse to the convent, though I ought to be ashamed to
give so much trouble to your reverences."

"Our trouble matters not, good dame," said Father Eustace; "in what
can I pleasure you? I came hither to visit the Lady of Avenel."

"Well-a-day!" said Dame Alice, "and it was on her part that I had the
boldness to think of summoning you, for the good lady will never be able
to wear over the day!--Would it please you to go to her chamber?"

"Hath she not been shriven by Father Philip?" said the monk.

"Shriven she was," said the Dame of Glendearg, "and by Father Philip,
as your reverence truly says--but--I wish it may have been a clean
shrift--Methought Father Philip looked but moody upon it--and there
was a book which he took away with him, that--" She paused as if
unwilling to proceed.

"Speak out, Dame Glendinning," said the Father; "with us it is your
duty to have no secrets."

"Nay, if it please your reverence, it is not that I would keep
anything from your reverence's knowledge, but I fear I should
prejudice the lady in your opinion; for she is an excellent
lady--months and years has she dwelt in this tower, and none more
exemplary than she; but this matter, doubtless, she will explain it
herself to your reverence."

"I desire first to know it from you, Dame Glendinning," said the monk;
"and I again repeat, it is your duty to tell it to me."

"This book, if it please your reverence, which Father Philip removed
from Glendearg, was this morning returned to us in a strange manner,"
said the good widow.

"Returned!" said the monk; "how mean you?"

"I mean," answered Dame Glendinning, "that it was brought back to the
tower of Glendearg, the saints best know how--that same book which
Father Philip carried with him but yesterday. Old Martin, that is my
tasker and the lady's servant, was driving out the cows to the
pasture--for we have three good milk-cows, reverend father, blessed be
Saint Waldave, and thanks to the holy Monastery--"

The monk groaned with impatience; but he remembered that a woman of
the good dame's condition was like a top, which, if you let it spin on
untouched, must at last come to a pause; but, if you interrupt it by
flogging, there is no end to its gyrations. "But, to speak no more of
the cows, your reverence, though they are likely cattle as ever were
tied to a stake, the tasker was driving them out, and the lads, that
is my Halbert and my Edward, that your reverence has seen at church on
holidays, and especially Halbert,--for you patted him on the head and
gave him a brooch of Saint Cuthbert, which he wears in his
bonnet,--and little Mary Avenel, that is the lady's daughter, they ran
all after the cattle, and began to play up and down the pasture as
young folk will, your reverence. And at length they lost sight of
Martin and the cows; and they began to run up a little cleugh which we
call _Corri-nan-Shian_, where there is a wee bit stripe of a
burn, and they saw there--Good guide us!--a White Woman sitting on the
burnside wringing her hands--so the bairns were frighted to see a
strange woman sitting there, all but Halbert, who will be sixteen come
Whitsuntide; and, besides, he never feared ony thing--and when they
went up to her--behold she was passed away!"

"For shame, good woman!" said Father Eustace; "a woman of your sense
to listen to a tale so idle!--the young folk told you a lie, and that
was all."

"Nay, sir, it was more than that," said the old dame; "for, besides
that they never told me a lie in their lives, I must warn you that on
the very ground where the White Woman was sitting, they found the Lady
of Avenel's book, and brought it with them to the tower."

"That is worthy of mark at least," said the monk. "Know you no other
copy of this volume within these bounds?"

"None, your reverence," returned Elspeth; "why should there?--no one
could read it were there twenty."

"Then you are sure it is the very same volume which you gave to Father
Philip?" said the monk.

"As sure as that I now speak with your reverence."

"It is most singular!" said the monk; and he walked across the room in
a musing posture.

"I have been upon nettles to hear what your reverence would say,"
continued Dame Glendinning, "respecting this matter--There is nothing
I would not do for the Lady of Avenel and her family, and that has
been proved, and for her servants to boot, both Martin and Tibb,
although Tibb is not so civil sometimes as altogether I have a right
to expect; but I cannot think it beseeming to have angels, or ghosts,
or fairies, or the like, waiting upon a leddy when she is in another
woman's house, in respect it is no ways creditable. Ony thing she had
to do was always done to her hand, without costing her either pains or
pence, as a country body says; and besides the discredit, I cannot but
think that there is no safety in having such unchancy creatures about
ane. But I have tied red thread round the bairns's throats," (so her
fondness still called them,) "and given ilka ane of them a riding-wand
of rowan-tree, forby sewing up a slip of witch-elm into their
doublets; and I wish to know of your reverence if there be ony thing
mair that a lone woman can do in the matter of ghosts and fairies?--Be
here! that I should have named their unlucky names twice ower!"

"Dame Glendinning," answered the monk, somewhat abruptly, when the
good woman had finished her narrative, "I pray you, do you know the
miller's daughter?"

"Did I know Kate Happer?" replied the widow; "as well as the beggar
knows his dish--a canty quean was Kate, and a special cummer of my ain
maybe twenty years syne."

"She cannot be the wench I mean," said Father Eustace; "she after whom
I inquire is scarce fifteen, a black-eyed girl--you may have seen her
at the kirk."

"Your reverence must be in the right; and she is my cummer's nie'ce,
doubtless, that you are pleased to speak of: but I thank God I have
always been too duteous in attention to the mass, to know whether
young wenches have black eyes or green ones."

The good father had so much of the world about him, that he was unable
to avoid smiling, when the dame boasted her absolute resistance to a
temptation, which was not quite so liable to beset her as those of the
other sex.

"Perhaps, then," he said, "you know her usual dress, Dame Glendinning?"

"Ay, ay, father," answered the dame readily enough, "a white kirtle
the wench wears, to hide the dust of the mill, no doubt--and a blue
hood, that might weel be spared, for pridefulness."

"Then, may it not be she," said the father, "who has brought back this
book, and stepped out of the way when the children came near her?"

The dame paused--was unwilling to combat the solution suggested by the
monk--but was at a loss to conceive why the lass of the mill should
come so far from home into so wild a corner merely to leave an old
book with three children, from whose observation she wished to conceal
herself.

Above all, she could not understand why, since she had acquaintances
in the family, and since the Dame Glendinning had always paid her
multure and knaveship duly, the said lass of the mill had not come in
to rest herself and eat a morsel, and tell her the current news of the
water.

These very objections satisfied the monk that his conjectures were
right.  "Dame," he said, "you must be cautious in what you say. This
is an instance--I would it were the sole one--of the power of the
Enemy in these days. The matter must be sifted--with a curious and a
careful hand."

"Indeed," said Elspeth, trying to catch and chime in with the ideas of
the Sub-Prior, "I have often thought the miller's folk at the
Monastery-mill were far over careless in sifting our melder, and in
bolting it too--some folk say they will not stick at whiles to put in
a handful of ashes amongst Christian folk's corn-meal."

"That shall be looked after also, dame," said the Sub-Prior, not
displeased to see that the good old woman went off on a false scent;
"and now, by your leave, I will see this lady--do you go before, and
prepare her to see me."

Dame Glendinning left the lower apartment accordingly, which the monk
paced in anxious reflection, considering how he might best discharge,
with humanity as well as with effect, the important duty imposed on
him. He resolved to approach the bedside of the sick person with
reprimands, mitigated only by a feeling for her weak condition--he
determined, in case of her reply, to which late examples of hardened
heretics might encourage her, to be prepared with answers to the
customary scruples. High fraught, also, with zeal against her
unauthorized intrusion into the priestly function, by study of the
Sacred Scriptures, he imagined to himself the answers which one of the
modern school of heresy might return to him--the victorious refutation
which should lay the disputant prostrate at the Confessor's mercy--and
the healing, yet awful exhortation, which, under pain of refusing the
last consolations of religion, he designed to make to the penitent,
conjuring her, as she loved her own soul's welfare, to disclose to him
what she knew of the dark mystery of iniquity, by which heresies were
introduced into the most secluded spots of the very patrimony of the
Church herself--what agents they had who could thus glide, as it were
unseen, from place to place, bring back the volume which the Church
had interdicted to the spots from which it had been removed under her
express auspices; and, who, by encouraging the daring and profane
thirst after knowledge forbidden and useless to the laity, had
encouraged the fisher of souls to use with effect his old bait of
ambition and vain-glory.

Much of this premeditated disputation escaped the good father, when
Elspeth returned, her tears flowing faster than her apron could dry
them, and made him a signal to follow her. "How," said the monk, "is
she then so near her end?--nay, the Church must not break or bruise,
when comfort is yet possible;" and forgetting his polemics, the good
Sub-Prior hastened to the little apartment, where, on the wretched bed
which she had occupied since her misfortunes had driven her to the
Tower of Glendearg, the widow of Walter Avenel had rendered up her
spirit to her Creator. "My God!" said the Sub-Prior, "and has my
unfortunate dallying suffered her to depart without the Church's
consolation! Look to her, dame," he exclaimed, with eager impatience;
"is there not yet a sparkle of the life left?--may she not be
recalled--recalled but for a moment?--Oh! would that she could
express, but by the most imperfect word--but by the most feeble
motion, her acquiescence in the needful task of penitential
prayer!--Does she not breathe?--Art thou sure she doth not?"

"She will never breathe more," said the matron. "Oh! the poor
fatherless girl--now motherless also--Oh, the kind companion I have
had these many years, whom I shall never see again! But she is in
heaven for certain, if ever woman went there; for a woman of better
life----"

"Wo to me," said the good monk, "if indeed she went not hence in good
assurance--wo to the reckless shepherd, who suffered the wolf to carry
a choice one from the flock, while he busied himself with trimming his
sling and his staff to give the monster battle! Oh! if in the long
Hereafter, aught but weal should that poor spirit share, what has my
delay cost?--the value of an immortal soul!"

He then approached the body, full of the deep remorse natural to a
good man of his persuasion, who devoutly believed the doctrines of the
Catholic Church. "Ay," said he, gazing on the pallid corpse, from
which the spirit had parted so placidly as to leave a smile upon the
thin blue lips, which had been so long wasted by decay that they had
parted with the last breath of animation without the slightest
convulsive tremor--"Ay," said Father Eustace, "there lies the faded
tree, and, as it fell, so it lies--awful thought for me, should my
neglect have left it to descend in an evil direction!" He then again
and again conjured Dame Glendinning to tell him what she knew of the
demeanour and ordinary walk of the deceased.

All tended to the high honour of the deceased lady; for her companion,
who admired her sufficiently while alive, notwithstanding some
trifling points of jealousy, now idolized her after her death, and
could think of no attribute of praise with which she did not adorn her
memory.

Indeed, the Lady of Avenel, however she might privately doubt some of
the doctrines announced by the Church of Rome, and although she had
probably tacitly appealed from that corrupted system of Christianity
to the volume on which Christianity itself is founded, had
nevertheless been regular in her attendance on the worship of the
Church, not, perhaps, extending her scruples so far as to break off
communion. Such indeed was the first sentiment of the earlier
reformers, who seemed to have studied, for a time at least, to avoid a
schism, until the violence of the Pope rendered it inevitable.

Father Eustace, on the present occasion, listened with eagerness to
everything which could lead to assure him of the lady's orthodoxy in
the main points of belief; for his conscience reproached him sorely,
that, instead of protracting conversation with the Dame of Glendearg,
he had not instantly hastened where his presence was so necessary.
"If," he said, addressing the dead body, "thou art yet free from the
utmost penalty due to the followers of false doctrine--if thou dost
but suffer for a time, to expiate faults done in the body, but
partaking of mortal frailty more than of deadly sin, fear not that thy
abode shall be long in the penal regions to which thou mayest be
doomed--if vigils--if masses--if penance--if maceration of my body,
till it resembles that extenuated form which the soul hath abandoned,
may assure thy deliverance. The Holy Church--the godly foundation--our
blessed Patroness herself, shall intercede for one whose errors were
counter-balanced by so many virtues.--Leave me, dame--here, and by her
bed-side, will I perform those duties--which this piteous case
demands!"

Elspeth left the monk, who employed himself in fervent and sincere,
though erroneous prayers, for the weal of the departed spirit. For an
hour he remained in the apartment of death, and then returned to the
hall, where he found the still weeping friend of the deceased.

But it would be injustice to Mrs. Glendinning's hospitality, if we
suppose her to have been weeping during this long interval, or rather
if we suppose her so entirely absorbed by the tribute of sorrow which
she paid frankly and plentifully to her deceased friend, as to be
incapable of attending to the rights of hospitality due to the holy
visitor--who was confessor at once, and Sub-Prior--mighty in all
religious and secular considerations, so far as the vassals of the
Monastery were interested.

Her barley-bread had been toasted--her choicest cask of home-brewed
ale had been broached--her best butter had been placed on the
hall-table, along with her most savoury ham, and her choicest cheese,
ere she abandoned herself to the extremity of sorrow; and it was not
till she had arranged her little repast neatly on the board, that she
sat down in the chimney corner, threw her checked apron over her head,
and gave way to the current of tears and sobs. In this there was no
grimace or affectation.  The good dame held the honours of her house
to be as essential a duty, especially when a monk was her visitant, as
any other pressing call upon her conscience; nor until these were
suitably attended to did she find herself at liberty to indulge her
sorrow for her departed friend.

When she was conscious of the Sub-Prior's presence, she rose with the
same attention to his reception; but he declined all the offers of
hospitality with which she endeavoured to tempt him. Not her butter,
as yellow as gold, and the best, she assured him, that was made in the
patrimony of St.  Mary--not the barley scones, which "the departed
saint, God sain her!  used to say were so good"--not the ale, nor any
other cates which poor Elspeth's stores afforded, could prevail on the
Sub-Prior to break his fast.  "This day," he said, "I must not taste
food until the sun go down, happy if, in so doing, I can expiate my
own negligence--happier still, if my sufferings of this trifling
nature, undertaken in pure faith and singleness of heart, may benefit
the soul of the deceased. Yet, dame," he added, I may not so far
forget the living in my cares for the dead, as to leave behind me that
book, which is to the ignorant what, to our first parents, the tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil unhappily proved-excellent indeed in
itself, but fatal because used by those to whom it is prohibited."

"Oh, blithely, reverend father," said the widow of Simon Glendinning,
"will I give you the book, if so be I can while it from the bairns;
and indeed, poor things, as the case stands with them even now, you
might take the heart out of their bodies, and they never find it out,
they are sae begrutten." [Footnote: _Begrutten_--over-weeped]

"Give them this missal instead, good dame," said the father, drawing
from his pocket one which was curiously illuminated with paintings,
"and I will come myself, or send one at a fitting time, and teach them
the meaning of these pictures."

"The bonny images!" said Dame Glendinning, forgetting for an instant
her grief in her admiration, "and weel I wot," added she, "it is
another sort of a book than the poor Lady of Avenel's; and blessed
might we have been this day, if your reverence had found the way up
the glen, instead of Father Philip, though the Sacristan is a powerful
man too, and speaks as if he would ger the house fly abroad, save that
the walls are gey thick.  Simon's forebears (may he and they be
blessed!) took care of that."

The monk ordered his mule, and was about to take his leave; and the
good dame was still delaying him with questions about the funeral,
when a horseman, armed and accoutred, rode into the little court-yard
which surrounded the Keep.


Chapter the Ninth.


  For since they rode among our doors
  With splent on spauld and rusty spurs,
  There grows no fruit into our furs;
    Thus said John Up-on-land.
                       DANNATYNE MS.

The Scottish laws, which were as wisely and judiciously made as they
were carelessly and ineffectually executed, had in vain endeavoured to
restrain the damage done to agriculture, by the chiefs and landed
proprietors retaining in their service what were called jack-men, from
the _jack_, or doublet, quilted with iron which they wore as
defensive armour.  These military retainers conducted themselves with
great insolence towards the industrious part of the community--lived
in a great measure by plunder, and were ready to execute any commands
of their master, however unlawful.  In adopting this mode of life, men
resigned the quiet hopes and regular labours of industry, for an
unsettled, precarious, and dangerous trade, which yet had such charms
for those once accustomed to it, that they became incapable of
following any other. Hence the complaint of John Upland, a fictitious
character, representing a countryman, into whose mouth the poets of
the day put their general satires upon men and manners.

  They ride about in such a rage,
  By forest, frith, and field,
    With buckler, bow, and brand.
  Lo! where they ride out through the rye!
  The Devil mot save the company,
    Quoth John Up-on-land.

Christie of the Clinthill, the horseman who now arrived at the little
Tower of Glendearg, was one of the hopeful company of whom the poet
complains, as was indicated by his "splent on spauld," (iron-plates on
his shoulder,) his rusted spurs, and his long lance. An iron
skull-cap, none of the brightest, bore for distinction a sprig of the
holly, which was Avenel's badge. A long two-edged straight sword,
having a handle made of polished oak, hung down by his side. The
meagre condition of his horse, and the wild and emaciated look of the
rider, showed their occupation could not be accounted an easy or a
thriving one. He saluted Dame Glendinning with little courtesy, and
the monk with less; for the growing, disrespect to the religious
orders had not failed to extend itself among a class of men of such
disorderly habits, although it may be supposed they were tolerably
indifferent alike to the new or the ancient doctrines.

"So, our lady is dead, Dame Glendinning?" said the jack-man; "my
master has sent you even now a fat bullock for her mart--it may serve
for her funeral. I have left him in the upper cleugh, as he is
somewhat kenspeckle, [Footnote: _Kenspeckle>/I>--that which is
easily recognized by the eye.] and is marked both with cut and
birn--the sooner the skin is off, and he is in saultfat, the less like
you are to have trouble--you understand me? Let me have a peck of corn
for my horse, and beef and beer for myself, for I must go on to the
Monastery--though I think this monk hero might do mine errand."

"Thine errand, rude man!" said the Sub-Prior, knitting his brows--

"For God's sake" cried poor Dame Glendinning, terrified at the idea of
a quarrel between them,--"O Christie!---it is the Sub-Prior--O
reverend sir, it is Christie of the Clinthill, the laird's chief
jack-man; ye know that little havings can be expected from the like o'
them."

"Are you a retainer of the Laird of Avenel?" said the monk, addressing
himself to the horseman, "and do you speak thus rudely to a Brother of
Saint Mary's, to whom thy master is so much beholden?"

"He means to be yet more beholden to your house, Sir Monk," answered
the fellow; "for hearing his sister-in-law, the widow of Walter of
Avenel, was on her death-bed, he sent me to say to the Father Abbot
and the brethren, that he will hold the funeral-feast at their
convent, and invites himself thereto, with a score of horse and some
friends, and to abide there for three days and three nights,--having
horse-meat and men's-meat at the charge of the community; of which his
intention he sends due notice, that fitting preparation may be
timeously made."

"Friend," said the Sub-Prior, "believe not that I will do to the
Father Abbot the indignity of delivering such an errand.--Think'st
thou the goods of the church were bestowed upon her by holy princes
and pious nobles, now dead and gone, to be consumed in revelry by
every profligate layman who numbers in his train more followers than
he can support by honest means, or by his own incomings? Tell thy
master, from the Sub-Prior of Saint Mary's, that the Primate hath
issued his commands to us that we submit no longer to this compulsory
exaction of hospitality on slight or false pretences. Our lands and
goods were given to relieve pilgrims and pious persons, not to feast
bands of rude soldiers."

"This to me!" said the angry spearman, "this to me and to my master
--Look to yourself then, Sir Priest, and try if _Ave_ and
_Credo_ will keep bullocks from wandering, and hay-stacks from
burning."

"Dost thou menace the Holy Church's patrimony with waste and
fire-raising," said the Sub-Prior, "and that in the face of the sun? I
call on all who hear me to bear witness to the words this ruffian has
spoken. Remember how the Lord James drowned such as you by scores in
the black pool at Jeddart.-To him and to the Primate will I complain."
The soldier shifted the position of his lance, and brought it down to
a level with the monk's body.

Dame Glendinning began to shriek for assistance. "Tibb Tacket! Martin!
where be ye all?--Christie, for the love of God, consider he is a man
of Holy Kirk!"

"I care not for his spear," said the Sub-Prior; "if I am slain in
defending the rights and privileges of my community, the Primate will
know how to take vengeance."

"Let him look to himself," said Christie, but at the same time
depositing his lance against the wall of the tower; "if the Fife men
spoke true who came hither with the Governor in the last raid, Norman
Leslie has him at feud, and is like to set him hard. We know Norman a
true bloodhound, who will never quit the slot. But I had no design to
offend the holy father," he added, thinking perhaps he had gone a
little too far; "I am a rude man, bred to lance and stirrup, and not
used to deal with book-learned men and priests; and I am willing to
ask his forgiveness--and his blessing, if I have said aught amiss."

"For God's sake! your reverence," said the widow of Glendearg apart to
the Sub-Prior, "bestow on him your forgiveness--how shall we poor folk
sleep in security in the dark nights, if the convent is at feud with
such men as he is?"

"You are right, dame," said the Sub-Prior, "your safety should, and
must be, in the first instance consulted.--Soldier, I forgive thee,
and may God bless thee and send thee honesty."

Christie of the Clinthill made an unwilling inclination with his head,
and muttered apart, "that is as much as to say, God send thee
starvation, But now to my master's demand, Sir Priest? What answer am
I to return?"

"That the body of the widow of Walter of Avenel," answered the Father,
"shall be interred as becomes her rank, and in the tomb of her valiant
husband. For your master's proffered visit of three days, with such a
company and retinue, I have no authority to reply to it; you must
intimate your Chief's purpose to the Reverend Lord Abbot."

"That will cost me a farther ride," said the man, "but it is all in
the day's work.--How now, my lad," said he to Halbert, who was
handling the long lance which he had laid aside; "how do you like such
a plaything?--will you go with me and be a moss-trooper?"

"The Saints in their mercy forbid!" said the poor mother; and then,
afraid of having displeased Christie by the vivacity of her
exclamation, she followed it up by explaining, that since Simon's
death she could not look on a spear or a bow, or any implement of
destruction without trembling.

"Pshaw!" answered Christie, "thou shouldst take another husband, dame,
and drive such follies out of thy thoughts--what sayst thou to such a
strapping lad as I? Why, this old tower of thine is fensible enough,
and there is no want of clenchs, and crags, and bogs, and thickets, if
one was set hard; a man might bide here and keep his half-score of
lads, and as many geldings, and live on what he could lay his hand on,
and be kind to thee, old wench."

"Alas! Master Christie," said the matron, "that you should talk to a
lone woman in such a fashion, and death in the house besides!"

"Lone woman!--why, that is the very reason thou shouldst take a mate.
Thy old friend is dead, why, good--choose thou another of somewhat
tougher frame, and that will not die of the pip like a young chicken.--
Better still--Come, dame, let me have something to eat, and we will talk
more of this."

Dame Elspeth, though she well knew the character of the man, whom in
fact she both disliked and feared, could not help simpering at the
personal address which he thought proper to make to her. She whispered
to the Sub-Prior, "ony thing just to keep him quiet," and went into
the tower to set before the soldier the food he desired, trusting
betwixt good cheer and the power of her own charms, to keep Christie
of the Clinthill so well amused, that the altercation betwixt him and
the holy father should not be renewed.

The Sub-Prior was equally unwilling to hazard any unnecessary rupture
between the community and such a person as Julian of Avenel. He was
sensible that moderation, as well as firmness, was necessary to
support the tottering cause of the Church of Rome; and that, contrary
to former times, the quarrels betwixt the clergy and laity had, in the
present, usually terminated to the advantage of the latter. He
resolved, therefore, to avoid farther strife by withdrawing, but
failed not, in the first place, to possess himself of the volume which
the Sacristan carried off the evening before, and which had been
returned to the glen in such a marvellous manner.

Edward, the younger of Dame Elspeth's boys, made great objections to
the book's being removed, in which Mary would probably have joined,
but that she was now in her little sleeping-chamber with Tibb, who was
exerting her simple skill to console the young lady for her mother's
death. But the younger Glendinning stood up in defence of her
property, and, with a positiveness which had hitherto made no part of
his character, declared, that now the kind lady was dead, the book was
Mary's, and no one but Mary should have it.

"But if it is not a fit book for Mary to read, my dear boy," said the
father, gently, "you would not wish it to remain with her?"

"The lady read it," answered the young champion of property; "and so
it could not be wrong--it shall not be taken away.--I wonder where
Halbert is?--listening to the bravading tales of gay Christie, I
reckon,--he is always wishing for fighting, and now he is out of the
way."

"Why, Edward, you would not fight with me, who am both a priest and
old man?"

"If you were as good a priest as the Pope," said the boy, "and as old
as the hills to boot, you shall not carry away Mary's book without her
leave.  I will do battle for it."

"But see you, my love," said the monk, amused with the resolute
friendship manifested by the boy, "I do not take it; I only borrow it;
and I leave in its place my own gay missal, as a pledge I will bring
it again."

Edward opened the missal with eager curiosity, and glanced at the
pictures with which it was illustrated. "Saint George and the dragon--
Halbert will like that; and Saint Michael brandishing his sword over
the head of the Wicked One--and that will do for Halbert too. And see
the Saint John leading his lamb in the wilderness, with his little
cross made of reeds, and his scrip and staff--that shall be my
favourite; and where shall we find one for poor Mary?--here is a
beautiful woman weeping and lamenting herself."

"This is Saint Mary Magdalen repenting of her sins, my dear boy," said
the father.

"That will not suit _our_ Mary; for she commits no faults, and is
never angry with us, but when we do something wrong."

"Then," said the father, "I will show you a Mary, who will protect her
and you, and all good children. See how fairly she is represented,
with her gown covered with golden stars."

The boy was lost in wonder at the portrait of the Virgin, which the
Sub-Prior turned up to him.

"This," he said, "is really like our sweet Mary; and I think I will
let you take away the black book, that has no such goodly shows in it,
and leave this for Mary instead. But you must promise to bring back
the book, good father--for now I think upon it, Mary may like that
best which was her mother's."

"I will certainly return," said the monk, evading his answer, "and
perhaps I may teach you to write and read such beautiful letters as
you see there written, and to paint them blue, green, and yellow, and
to blazon them with gold."

"Ay, and to make such figures as these blessed Saints, and especially
these two Marys?" said the boy.

"With their blessing," said the Sub-Prior, "I can teach you that art
too, so far as I am myself capable of showing, and you of learning
it." "Then," said Edward, "will I paint Mary's picture--and remember
you are to bring back the black book; that you must promise me."

The Sub-Prior, anxious to get rid of the boy's pertinacity, and to set
forward on his return to the convent, without having any further
interview with Christie the galloper, answered by giving the promise
Edward required, mounted his mule, and set forth on his return
homeward.

The November day was well spent ere the Sub-Prior resumed his journey;
for the difficulty of the road, and the various delays which he had
met with at the tower, had detained him longer than he proposed. A
chill easterly wind was sighing among the withered leaves, and
stripping them from the hold they had yet retained on the parent
trees.

"Even so," said the monk, "our prospects in this vale of time grow
more disconsolate as the stream of years passes on. Little have I gained
by my journey, saving the certainty that heresy is busy among us with
more than his usual activity, and that the spirit of insulting religious
orders, and plundering the Church's property, so general in the eastern
districts of Scotland, has now come nearer home."

The tread of a horse which came up behind him, interrupted his reverie,
and he soon saw he was mounted by the same wild rider whom he had left
at the tower.

"Good even, my son, and benedicite," said the Sub-Prior as he passed;
but the rude soldier scarce acknowledged the greeting, by bending his
head; and dashing the spurs into his horse, went on at a pace which
soon left the monk and his mule far behind. And there, thought the
Sub-Prior, goes another plague of the times--a fellow whose birth
designed him to cultivate the earth, but who is perverted by the
unhallowed and unchristian divisions of the country, into a daring and
dissolute robber. The barons of Scotland are now turned masterful
thieves and ruffians, oppressing the poor by violence, and wasting the
Church, by extorting free-quarters from abbeys and priories, without
either shame or reason. I fear me I shall be too late to counsel the
Abbot to make a stand against these daring _sorners_ [Footnote:
To _sorne_, in Scotland, is to exact free quarters against the
will of the landlord. It is declared equivalent to theft, by a statute
passed in the year 1445. The great chieftains oppressed the
monasteries very much by exactions of this nature. The community of
Aberbrothwick complained of an Earl of Angus, I think, who was in the
regular habit of visiting them once a year, with a train of a thousand
horse, and abiding till the whole winter provisions of the convent
were exhausted.]--I must make haste." He struck his mule with his
riding wand accordingly; but, instead of mending her pace, the animal
suddenly started from the path, and the rider's utmost efforts could
not force her forward.

"Art thou, too, infected with the spirit of the times?" said the
Sub-Prior; "thou wert wont to be ready and serviceable, and art now as
restive as any wild jack-man or stubborn heretic of them all."

While he was contending with the startled animal, a voice, like that
of a female, chanted in his ear, or at least very close to it,

 "Good evening-. Sir Priest, and so late as you ride,
  With your mule so fair, and your mantle so wide;
  But ride you through valley, or ride you o'er hill.
  There is one that has warrant to wait on you still.
               Back, back,
               The volume black!
  I have a warrant to carry it back."

The Sub-Prior looked around, but neither bush nor brake was near which
could conceal an ambushed songstress. "May Our Lady have mercy on me!"
he said; "I trust my senses have not forsaken me--yet how my thoughts
should arrange themselves into rhymes which I despise, and music which
I care not for, or why there should be the sound of a female voice in
ears, in which its melody has been so long indifferent, baffles my
comprehension, and almost realizes the vision of Philip the Sacristan.
Come, good mule, betake thee to the path, and let us hence while our
judgment serves us."

But the mule stood as if it had been rooted to the spot, backed from
the point to which it was pressed by its rider, and by her ears laid
close into her neck, and her eyes almost starting from their sockets,
testified that she was under great terror.

While the Sub-Prior, by alternate threats and soothing, endeavoured to
reclaim the wayward animal to her duty, the wild musical voice was again
heard close beside him.

  "What, ho! Sub-Prior, and came you but here
  To conjure a book from a dead woman's bier?
  Sain you, and save you, be wary and wise,
  Ride back with the book, or you'll pay for your prize.
               Back, back.
               There's death in the track!
  In the name of my master I bid thee bear back."

"In the name of MY Master," said the astonished monk, "that name
before which all things created tremble, I conjure thee to say what
thou art that hauntest me thus?"

The same voice replied,

  "That which is neither ill nor well.
  That which belongs not to Heaven nor to hell,
  A wreath of the mist, a bubble of the stream,
  'Twixt a waking thought and a sleeping dream;
               A form that men spy
               With the half-shut eye.
  In the beams of the setting sun, am I."

"This is more than simple fantasy," said the Sub-Prior, rousing
himself; though, notwithstanding the natural hardihood of his temper,
the sensible presence of a supernatural being so near him, failed not
to make his blood run cold, and his hair bristle. "I charge thee," he
said aloud, "be thine errand what it will, to depart and trouble me no
more! False spirit, thou canst not appal any save those who do the
work negligently." The voice immediately answered:

  "Vainly, Sir Prior. wouldst thou bar me my right!
  Like the star when it shoots, I can dart through the night;
  I can dance on the torrent and ride on the air,
  And travel the world with the bonny night-mare.
                 Again, again,
                At the crook of the glen,
  Where bickers the burnie, I'll meet thee again."

The road was now apparently left open; for the mule collected herself,
and changed from her posture of terror to one which promised advance,
although a profuse perspiration, and general trembling of the joints,
indicated the bodily terror she had undergone.

"I used to doubt the existence of Cabalists and Rosicrucians," thought
the Sub-Prior, "but, by my Holy Order, I know no longer what to say!--
My pulse beats temperately--my hand is cool--I am fasting from
everything but sin, and possessed of my ordinary faculties--Either
some fiend is permitted to bewilder me, or the tales of Cornelius
Agrippa, Paracelsus, and others who treat of occult philosophy, are
not without foundation.--At the crook of the glen? I could have
desired to avoid a second meeting, but I am on the service of the
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against me."

He moved around accordingly, but with precaution, and not without
fear; for he neither knew the manner in which, or the place where his
journey might be next interrupted by his invisible attendant. He
descended the glen without interruption for about a mile farther,
when, just at the spot where the brook approached the steep hill, with
a winding so abrupt as to leave scarcely room for a horse to pass, the
mule was again visited with the same symptoms of terror which had
before interrupted her course. Better acquainted than before with the
cause of her restiveness, the Priest employed no effort to make her
proceed, but addressed himself to the object, which he doubted not was
the same that had formerly interrupted him, in the words of solemn
exorcism prescribed by the Church of Rome on such occasions.

In reply to his demand, the voice again sung;--

  "Men of good are bold as sackless,[Footnote: Sackless--Innocent.]
  Men of rude are wild and reckless,
      Lie thou still
      In the nook of the hill.
  For those be before thee that wish thee ill."

While the Sub-Prior listened, with his head turned in the direction
from which the sounds seemed to come, he felt as if something rushed
against him; and ere he could discover the cause, he was pushed from
his saddle with gentle but irresistible force. Before he reached the
ground his senses were gone, and he lay long in a state of
insensibility; for the sunset had not ceased to gild the top of the
distant hill when he fell,--and when he again became conscious of
existence, the pale moon was gleaming on the landscape. He awakened in
a state of terror, from which, for a few minutes, he found it
difficult to shake himself free. At length he sate upon the grass, and
became sensible, by repeated exertion, that the only personal injury
which he had sustained was the numbness arising from extreme cold. The
motion of something near him made the blood again run to his heart,
and by a sudden effort he started up, and, looking around, saw to his
relief that the noise was occasioned by the footsteps of his own mule.
The peaceable animal had remained quietly beside her master during his
trance, browsing on the grass which grew plentifully in that
sequestered nook.

With some exertion he collected himself, remounted the animal, and
meditating upon his wild adventure, descended the glen till its
junction with the broader valley through which the Tweed winds. The
drawbridge was readily dropped at his first summons; and so much had
he won upon the heart of the churlish warden, that Peter appeared
himself with a lantern to show the Sub-Prior his way over the perilous
pass.

"By my sooth, sir," he said, holding the light up to Father Eustace's
face, "you look sorely travelled and deadly pale--but a little matter
serves to weary out you men of the cell. I now who speak to you--I
have ridden--before I was perched up here on this pillar betwixt wind
and water--it may be thirty Scots miles before I broke my fast, and
have had the red of a bramble rose in my cheek all the while--But will
you taste some food, or a cup of distilled waters?"

"I may not," said Father Eustace, "being under a vow; but I thank you
for your kindness, and pray you to give what I may not accept to the
next poor pilgrim who comes hither pale and fainting, for so it shall
be the better both with him here, and with you hereafter."

"By my faith, and I will do so," said Peter Bridge-Ward, "even for thy
sake--It is strange now, how this Sub-Prior gets round one's heart
more than the rest of these cowled gentry, that think of nothing but
quaffing and stuffing!--Wife, I say--wife, we will give a cup of
distilled waters and a crust of bread unto the next pilgrim that comes
over; and ye may keep for [Footnote: An old-fashioned name for an
earthen jar for holding spirits.] the purpose the grunds of the last
greybeard, and the ill-baked bannock which the bairns couldna eat."

While Peter issued these charitable, and, at the same time, prudent
injunctions, the Sub-Prior, whose mild interference had awakened the
Bridge-Ward to such an act of unwonted generosity, was pacing onward
to the Monastery. In the way, he had to commune with and subdue his
own rebellious heart, an enemy, he was sensible, more formidable than
any which the external powers of Satan could place in his way.

Father Eustace had indeed strong temptation to suppress the
extraordinary incident which had befallen him, which he was the more
reluctant to confess, because he had passed so severe a judgment upon
Father Philip, who, as he was not unwilling to allow, had, on his
return from Glendearg, encountered obstacles somewhat similar to his
own. Of this the Sub-Prior was the more convinced, when, feeling in
his bosom for the Book which he had brought off from the Tower of
Glendearg, he found it was amissing, which he could only account for
by supposing it had been stolen from him during his trance.

"If I confess this strange visitation," thought the Sub-Prior, "I
become the ridicule of all my brethren--I whom the Primate sent hither
to be a watch, as it were, and a check upon their follies. I give the
Abbot an advantage over me which I shall never again recover, and
Heaven only knows how he may abuse it, in his foolish simplicity, to
the dishonour and loss of Holy Kirk.--But then, if I make not true
confession of my shame, with what face can I again presume to admonish
or restrain others?--Avow, proud heart," continued he, addressing
himself, "that the weal of Holy Church interests thee less in this
matter than thine own humiliation--Yes, Heaven has punished thee even
in that point in which thou didst deem thyself most strong, in thy
spiritual pride and thy carnal wisdom. Thou hast laughed at and
derided the inexperience of thy brethren--stoop thyself in turn to
their derision--tell what they may not believe--affirm that which they
will ascribe to idle fear, or perhaps to idle falsehood--sustain the
disgrace of a silly visionary, or a wilful deceiver.--Be it so, I will
do my duty, and make ample confession to my Superior. If the discharge
of this duty destroys my usefulness in this house, God and Our Lady
will send me where I can better serve them."

There was no little merit in the resolution thus piously and
generously formed by Father Eustace. To men of any rank the esteem of
their order is naturally most dear; but in the monastic establishment,
cut off, as the brethren are, from other objects of ambition, as well
as from all exterior friendship and relationship, the place which they
hold in the opinion of each other is all in all.

But the consciousness how much he should rejoice the Abbot and most of
the other monks of Saint Mary's, who were impatient of the
unauthorized, yet irresistible control, which he was wont to exercise
in the affairs of the convent, by a confession which would put him in
a ludicrous, or perhaps even in a criminal point of view, could not
weigh with Father Eustace in comparison with the task which his belief
enjoined.

As, strong in his feelings of duty, he approached the exterior gate of
the Monastery, he was surprised to see torches gleaming, and men
assembled around it, some on horseback, some on foot, while several of
the monks, distinguished through the night by their white scapularies,
were making themselves busy among the crowd. The Sub-Prior was
received with a unanimous shout of joy, which at once made him
sensible that he had himself been the object of their anxiety.

"There he is! there he is! God be thanked--there he is, hale and
fear!" exclaimed the vassals; while the monks exclaimed, "_Te Deum
laudamus_--the blood of thy servants is precious in thy sight!"

"What is the matter, children? what is the matter, my brethren?" said
Father Eustace, dismounting at the gate.

"Nay, brother, if thou know'st not, we will not tell thee till thou
art in the refectory," answered the monks; "suffice it that the Lord
Abbot had ordered these, our zealous and faithful vassals, instantly
to set forth to guard thee from imminent peril--Ye may ungirth your
horses, children, and dismiss; and to-morrow, each who was at this
rendezvous may send to the convent kitchen for a quarter of a yard of
roast beef, and a black-jack full of double ale." [Footnote: It was
one of the few reminiscences of Old Parr, or Henry Jenkins, I forget
which, that, at some convent in the veteran's neighbourhood, the
community, before the dissolution, used to dole out roast-beef in the
measure of feet and yards.]

The vassals dispersed with joyful acclamation, and the monks, with equal
jubilee, conducted the Sub-Prior into the refectory.


Chapter the Tenth.


  Here we stand--
  Woundless and well, may Heaven's high name be bless'd for't!
  As erst, ere treason couch'd a lance against us.
                                                  Decker.

No sooner was the Sub-Prior hurried into the refectory by his
rejoicing companions, than the first person on whom he fixed his eye
proved to be Christie of the Clinthill. He was seated in the
chimney-corner, fettered and guarded, his features drawn into that air
of sulky and turbid resolution with which those hardened in guilt are
accustomed to view the approach of punishment. But as the Sub-Prior
drew near to him, his face assumed a more wild and startled
expression, while he exclaimed--"The devil! the devil himself, brings
the dead back upon the living."

"Nay," said a monk to him, "say rather that Our Lady foils the
attempts of the wicked on her faithful servants--our dear brother
lives and moves."

"Lives and moves!" said the ruffian, rising and shuffling towards the
Sub-Prior as well as his chains would permit; "nay, then, I will never
trust ashen shaft and steel point more--It is even so," he added, as he
gazed on the Sub-Prior with astonishment; "neither wem nor wound--not
as much as a rent in his frock!"

"And whence should my wound have come?" said Father Eustace.

"From the good lance that never failed me before," replied Christie of
the Clinthill.

"Heaven absolve thee for thy purpose!" said the Sub-Prior; "wouldst
thou have slain a servant of the altar?"

"To choose!" answered Christie; "the Fifemen say, an the whole pack
of ye were slain, there were more lost at Flodden."

"Villain! art thou heretic as well as murderer?"

"Not I, by Saint Giles," replied the rider; "I listened blithely
enough to the Laird of Monance, when he told me ye were all cheats and
knaves; but when he would have had me go hear one Wiseheart, a
gospeller as they call him, he might as well have persuaded the wild
colt that had flung one rider to kneel down and help another into the
saddle."

"There is some goodness about him yet," said the Sacristan to the Abbot,
who at that moment entered--"He refused to hear a heretic preacher."

"The better for him in the next world," answered the Abbot. "Prepare
for death, my son,--we deliver thee over to the secular arm of our
bailie, for execution on the Gallow-hill by peep of light."

"Amen!" said the ruffian; "'tis the end I must have come by sooner or
later--and what care I whether I feed the crows at Saint Mary's or at
Carlisle?"

"Let me implore your reverend patience for an instant," said the
Sub-Prior; "until I shall inquire--"

"What!" exclaimed the Abbot, observing him for the first time--"Our
dear brother restored to us when his life was unhoped for!--nay, kneel
not to a sinner like me--stand up--thou hast my blessing. When this
villain came to the gate, accused by his own evil conscience, and
crying out he had murdered thee, I thought that the pillar of our main
aisle had fallen--no more shall a life so precious be exposed to such
risks as occur in this border country; no longer shall one beloved and
rescued of Heaven hold so low a station in the church as that of a
poor Sub-Prior--I will write by express to the Primate for thy speedy
removal and advancement."

"Nay, but let me understand," said the Sub-Prior; "did this soldier say
he had slain me?"

"That he had transfixed you," answered the Abbot, "in full career with
his lance--but it seems he had taken an indifferent aim. But no sooner
didst thou fall to the ground mortally gored, as he deemed, with his
weapon, than our blessed Patroness appeared to him, as he averred--"

"I averred no such thing," said the prisoner; "I said a woman in white
interrupted me, as I was about to examine the priest's cassock, for
they are usually well lined--she had a bulrush in her hand, with one
touch of which she struck me from my horse, as I might strike down a
child of four years old with an iron mace--and then, like a singing
fiend as she was, she sung to me.

  'Thank the holly-bush
    That nods on thy brow;
  Or with this slender rush
    I had strangled thee now.'

I gathered myself up with fear and difficulty, threw myself on my horse,
and came hither like a fool to get myself hanged for a rogue."

"Thou seest, honoured brother," said the Abbot to the Sub-Prior, "in
what favour thou art with our blessed Patroness, that she herself
becomes the guardian of thy paths--Not since the days of our blessed
founder hath she shown such grace to any one. All unworthy were we to
hold spiritual superiority over thee, and we pray thee to prepare for
thy speedy removal to Aberbrothwick."

"Alas! my lord and father," said the Sub-Prior, "your words pierce my
very soul. Under the seal of confession will I presently tell thee why
I conceive myself rather the baffled sport of a spirit of another
sort, than the protected favourite of the heavenly powers. But first
let me ask this unhappy man a question or two."

"Do as ye list," replied the Abbot--"but you shall not convince me
that it is fitting you remain in this inferior office in the convent
of Saint Mary."

"I would ask of this poor man," said Father Eustace, "for what purpose
he nourished the thought of putting to death one who never did him
evil?"

"Ay! but thou didst menace me with evil," said the ruffian, "and no
one but a fool is menaced twice. Dost thou not remember what you said
touching the Primate and Lord James, and the black pool of Jedwood?
Didst thou think me fool enough to wait till thou hadst betrayed me to
the sack and the fork! There were small wisdom in that, methinks--as
little as in coming hither to tell my own misdeeds--I think the devil
was in me when I took this road--I might have remembered the proverb,
'Never Friar forgot feud.'"

"And it was solely for that--for that only hasty word of mine, uttered
in a moment of impatience, and forgotten ere it was well spoken?" said
Father Eustace.

"Ay! for that, and--for the love of thy gold crucifix," said Christie of
the Clinthill.

"Gracious Heaven! and could the yellow metal--the glittering earth--
so far overcome every sense of what is thereby represented?--Father
Abbot, I pray, as a dear boon, you will deliver this guilty person to
my mercy."

"Nay, brother," interposed the Sacristan, "to your doom, if you will,
not to your mercy--Remember, we are not all equally favoured by our
blessed Lady, nor is it likely that every frock in the Convent will
serve as a coat of proof when a lance is couched against it."

"For that very reason," said the Sub-Prior, "I would not that for my
worthless self the community were to fall at feud with Julian of Avenel,
this man's master."

"Our Lady forbid!" said the Sacristan, "he is a second Julian the
Apostate."

"With our reverend father the Abbot's permission, then," said Father
Eustace, "I desire this man be freed from his chains, and suffered to
depart uninjured;--and here, friend," he added, giving him the golden
crucifix, "is the image for which thou wert willing to stain thy hands
with murder.  View it well, and may it inspire thee with other and
better thoughts than those which referred to it as a piece of bullion!
Part with it, nevertheless, if thy necessities require, and get thee
one of such coarse substance that Mammon shall have no share in any of
the reflections to which it gives rise. It was the bequest of a dear
friend to me; but dearer service can it never do than that of winning
a soul to Heaven."

The Borderer, now freed from his chains, stood gazing alternately on
the Sub-Prior, and on the golden crucifix. "By Saint Giles," said he,
"I understand ye not!--An ye give me gold for couching my lance at
thee, what would you give me to level it at a heretic?"

"The Church," said the Sub-Prior, "will try the effect of her
spiritual censures to bring these stray sheep into the fold, ere she
employ the edge of the sword of Saint Peter."

"Ay, but," said the ruffian, "they say the Primate recommends a little
strangling and burning in aid of both censure and of sword. But fare ye
weel, I owe you a life, and it may be I will not forget my debt."

The bailie now came bustling in, dressed in his blue coat and
bandaliers, and attended by two or three halberdiers. "I have been a
thought too late in waiting upon your reverend lordship. I am grown
somewhat fatter since the field of Pinkie, and my leathern coat slips
not on so soon as it was wont; but the dungeon is ready, and though,
as I said, I have been somewhat late--"

Here his intended prisoner walked gravely up to the officer's nose, to
his great amazement.

"You have been indeed somewhat late, bailie," said he, "and I am
greatly obligated to your buff-coat, and to the time you took to put
it on.  If the secular arm had arrived some quarter of an hour sooner,
I had been out of the reach of spiritual grace; but as it is, I wish
you good even, and a safe riddance out of your garment of durance, in
which you have much the air of a hog in armour."

Wroth was the bailie at this comparison, and exclaimed in ire--"An it
were not for the presence of the venerable Lord Abbot, thou knave--"

"Nay, an thou wouldst try conclusions," said Christie of the Clinthill,
"I will meet thee at day-break by Saint Mary's Well."

"Hardened wretch!" said Father Eustace, "art thou but this instant
delivered from death, and dost thou so soon morse thoughts of
slaughter?"

"I will meet with thee ere it be long, thou knave," said the bailie,
"and teach thee thine Oremus."

"I will meet thy cattle in a moonlight night before that day," said he
of the Clinthill.

"I will have thee by the neck one misty morning, thou strong thief,"
answered the secular officer of the Church.

"Thou art thyself as strong a thief as ever rode," retorted Christie;
"and if the worms were once feasting on that fat carcass of thine I
might well hope to have thine office, by favour of these reverend
men."

"A cast of their office, and a cast of mine," answered the bailie; "a
cord and a confessor, that is all thou wilt have from us."

"Sirs," said the Sub-Prior, observing that his brethren began to take
more interest than was exactly decorous in this wrangling betwixt
justice and iniquity, "I pray you both to depart--Master Bailie,
retire with your halberdiers, and trouble not the man whom we have
dismissed.--And thou, Christie, or whatever be thy name, take thy
departure, and remember thou owest thy life to the Lord Abbot's
clemency."

"Nay, as to that," answered Christie, "I judge that I owe it to your
own; but impute it to whom ye list, I owe a life among ye, and there is
an end." And whistling as he went, he left the apartment, seeming as if
he held the life which he had forfeited not worthy further thanks.

"Obstinate even to brutality!" said Father Eustace; "and yet who
knows but some better ore may lie under so rude an exterior?"

"Save a thief from the gallows," said the Sacristan--"you know the rest
of the proverb; and admitting, as may Heaven grant, that our lives and
limbs are safe from this outrageous knave, who shall insure our meal and
our malt, our herds and our flocks?"

"Marry, that will I, my brethren," said an aged monk. "Ah, brethren,
you little know what may be made of a repentant robber. In Abbot
Ingilram's days--ay, and I remember them as it were yesterday--the
freebooters were the best welcome men that came to Saint Mary's. Ay,
they paid tithe of every drove that they brought over from the South,
and because they were something lightly come by, I have known them
make the tithe a seventh--that is, if their confessor knew his
business--ay, when we saw from the tower a score of fat bullocks, or a
drove of sheep, coming down the valley, with two or three stout
men-at-arms behind them with their glittering steel caps, and their
black-jacks, and their long lances, the good Lord Abbot Ingilram was
wont to say--he was a merry man--there come the tithes of the spoilers
of the Egyptians! Ay, and I have seen the famous John the Armstrang--a
fair man he was and a goodly, the more pity that hemp was ever heckled
for him--I have seen him come into the Abbey-church with nine tassels
of gold in his bonnet, and every tassel made of nine English nobles,
and he would go from chapel to chapel, and from image to image, and
from altar to altar, on his knees--and leave here a tassel, and there
a noble, till there was as little gold on his bonnet as on my
hood--you will find no such Border thieves now!"

"No, truly, Brother Nicolas," answered the Abbot; "they are more apt
to take any gold the Church has left, than to bequeath or bestow
any--and for cattle, beshrew me if I think they care whether beeves
have fed on the meadows of Lanercost Abbey or of Saint Mary's!"

"There is no good thing left in them," said Father Nicolas; "they are
clean naught--Ah, the thieves that I have seen!--such proper men! and
as pitiful as proper, and as pious as pitiful!"

"It skills not talking of it, Brother Nicolas," said the Abbot; "and I
will now dismiss you, my brethren, holding your meeting upon this our
inquisition concerning the danger of our reverend Sub-Prior, instead
of the attendance on the lauds this evening--Yet let the bells be duly
rung for the edification of the laymen without, and also that the
novices may give due reverence.--And now, benedicite, brethren! The
cellarer will bestow on each a grace-cup and a morsel as ye pass the
buttery, for ye have been turmoiled and anxious, and dangerous it is
to fall asleep in such case with empty stomach."

"_Gratias agimus quam maximas, Domine reverendissime_," replied the
brethren, departing in their due order.

But the Sub-Prior remained behind, and falling on his knees before the
Abbot, as he was about to withdraw, craved him to hear under the seal
of confession the adventures of the day. The reverend Lord Abbot
yawned, and would have alleged fatigue; but to Father Eustace, of all
men, he was ashamed to show indifference in his religious duties. The
confession, therefore, proceeded, in which Father Eustace told all the
extraordinary circumstances which had befallen him during the journey.
And being questioned by the Abbot, whether he was not conscious of any
secret sin, through which he might have been subjected for a time to
the delusions of evil spirits, the Sub-Prior admitted, with frank
avowal, that he thought he might have deserved such penance for having
judged with unfraternal rigour of the report of Father Philip the
Sacristan.

"Heaven," said the penitent, "may have been willing to convince me,
not only that he can at pleasure open a communication betwixt us and
beings of a different, and, as we word it, supernatural class, but
also to punish our pride of superior wisdom, or superior courage, or
superior learning."

It is well said that virtue is its own reward; and I question if duty
was ever more completely recompensed, than by the audience which the
reverend Abbot so unwillingly yielded to the confession of the
Sub-Prior. To find the object of his fear shall we say, or of his
envy, or of both, accusing himself of the very error with which he had
so tacitly charged him, was a corroboration of the Abbot's judgment, a
soothing of his pride, and an allaying of his fears. The sense of
triumph, however, rather increased than diminished his natural
good-humour; and so far was Abbot Boniface from being disposed to
tyrannize over his Sub-Prior in consequence of this discovery, that in
his exhortation he hovered somewhat ludicrously betwixt the natural
expression of his own gratified vanity, and his timid reluctance to
hurt the feelings of Father Eustace.

"My brother," said he, _ex cathedra_, "it cannot have escaped
your judicious observation, that we have often declined our own
judgment in favour of your opinion, even about those matters which
most nearly concerned the community. Nevertheless, grieved would we
be, could you think that we did this, either because we deemed our own
opinion less pregnant, or our wit more shallow, than that of our
brethren. For it was done exclusively to give our younger brethren,
such as your much esteemed self, my dearest brother, that courage
which is necessary to a free deliverance of your opinion,--we ofttimes
setting apart our proper judgment, that our inferiors, and especially
our dear brother the Sub-Prior, may be comforted and encouraged in
proposing valiantly his own thoughts.  Which our deference and
humility may, in some sort, have produced in your mind, most reverend
brother, that self-opinion of parts and knowledge, which hath led
unfortunately to your over-estimating your own faculties, and thereby
subjecting yourself, as is but too visible, to the japes and mockeries
of evil spirits.  For it is assured that Heaven always holdeth us in
the least esteem when we deem of ourselves most highly, and also, on
the other hand, it may be that we have somewhat departed from what
became our high seat in this Abbey, in suffering ourselves to be too
much guided, and even, as it were, controlled, by the voice of our
inferior. Wherefore," continued the Lord Abbot, "in both of us such
faults shall and must be amended--you hereafter presuming less upon
your gifts and carnal wisdom, and I taking heed not so easily to
relinquish mine own opinion for that of one lower in place and in
office. Nevertheless, we would not that we should thereby lose the
high advantage which we have derived, and may yet derive, from your
wise counsels, which hath been so often recommended to us by our most
reverend Primate. Wherefore, on affairs of high moment, we will call
you to our presence in private, and listen to your opinion, which, if
it shall agree with our own, we will deliver to the Chapter as
emanating directly from ourselves; thus sparing you, dearest brother,
that seeming victory which is so apt to engender spiritual pride, and
avoiding ourselves the temptation of falling into that modest facility
of opinion, whereby our office is lessened and our person (were that
of consequence) rendered less important in the eyes of the community
over which we preside."

Notwithstanding the high notions which, as a rigid Catholic, Father
Eustace entertained of the sacrament of confession, as his Church
calls it, there was some danger that a sense of the ridiculous might
have stolen on him, when he heard his Superior, with such simple
cunning, lay out a little plan for availing himself of the Sub-Prior's
wisdom and experience, while he should take the whole credit to
himself. Yet his conscience immediately told him he was right.

"I should have thought more," he reflected, "of the spiritual
Superior, and less of the individual. I should have spread my mantle
over the frailties of my spiritual father, and done what I might to
support his character, and, of course, to extend his utility among the
brethren, as well as with others. The Abbot cannot be humbled, but
what the community must be humbled in his person. Her boast is, that
over all her children, especially over those called to places of
distinction, she can diffuse those gifts which are necessary to render
them illustrious."

Actuated by these sentiments, Father Eustace frankly assented to the
charge which his Superior, even in that moment of authority, had
rather intimated than made, and signified his humble acquiescence in
any mode of communicating his counsel which might be most agreeable to
the Lord Abbot, and might best remove from himself all temptation to
glory in his own wisdom. He then prayed the reverend Father to assign
him such penance as might best suit his offence, intimating, at the
same time, that he had already fasted the whole day.

"And it is that I complain of," answered the Abbot, instead of giving
him credit for his abstinence; "it is these very penances, fasts, and
vigils, of which we complain; as tending only to generate airs and
fumes of vanity, which, ascending from the stomach into the head, do
but puff us up with vain-glory and self-opinion. It is meet and
beseeming that novices should undergo fasts and vigils; for some part
of every community must fast, and young stomachs may best endure it.
Besides, in them it abates wicked thoughts, and the desire of worldly
delights. But, reverend brother, for those to fast who are dead and
mortified to the world, as I and thou, is work of supererogation, and
is but the matter of spiritual pride. Wherefore, I enjoin thee, most
reverend brother, go to the buttery and drink two cups at least of
good wine, eating withal a comfortable morsel, such as may best suit
thy taste and stomach. And in respect that thine opinion of thy own
wisdom hath at times made thee less conformable to, and companionable
with, the weaker and less learned brethren, I enjoin thee, during the
said repast, to choose for thy companion, our reverend brother
Nicolas, and without interruption or impatience, to listen for a
stricken hour to his narration, concerning those things which befel in
the times of our venerable predecessor, Abbot Ingilram, on whose soul
may Heaven have mercy! And for such holy exercises as may farther
advantage your soul, and expiate the faults whereof you have
contritely and humbly avowed yourself guilty, we will ponder upon that
matter, and announce our will unto you the next morning."

It was remarkable, that after this memorable evening, the feelings of
the worthy Abbot towards his adviser were much more kindly and
friendly than when he deemed the Sub-Prior the impeccable and
infallible person, in whose garment of virtue and wisdom no flaw was
to be discerned. It seemed as if this avowal of his own imperfections
had recommended Father Eustace to the friendship of the Superior,
although at the same time this increase of benevolence was attended
with some circumstances, which, to a man of the Sub-Prior's natural
elevation of mind and temper, were more grievous than even undergoing
the legends of the dull and verbose Father Nicolas. For instance, the
Abbot seldom mentioned him to the other monks, without designing him
our beloved Brother Eustace, poor man!--and now and then he used to
warn the younger brethren against the snares of vainglory and
spiritual pride, which Satan sets for the more rigidly righteous, with
such looks and demonstrations as did all but expressly designate the
Sub-Prior as one who had fallen at one time under such delusions. Upon
these occasions, it required all the votive obedience of a monk, all
the philosophical discipline of the schools, and all the patience of a
Christian, to enable Father Eustace to endure the pompous and
patronizing parade of his honest, but somewhat thick-headed Superior.
He began himself to be desirous of leaving the Monastery, or at least
he manifestly declined to interfere with its affairs, in that marked
and authoritative manner, which he had at first practised.


       *       *       *       *       *

Chapter the Eleventh.


    You call this education, do you not?
    Why 'tis the forced march of a herd of bullocks
    Before a shouting drover. The glad van
    Move on at ease, and pause a while to snatch
    A passing morsel from the dewy greensward,
    While all the blows, the oaths, the indignation,
    Fall on the croupe of the ill-fated laggard
    That cripples in the rear.
                                          OLD PLAY.

Two or three years glided on, during which the storm of the
approaching alteration in church government became each day louder and
more perilous. Owing to the circumstances which we have intimated in
the end of the last chapter, the Sub-Prior Eustace appeared to have
altered considerably his habits of life. He afforded, on all
extraordinary occasions, to the Abbot, whether privately, or in the
assembled Chapter, the support of his wisdom and experience; but in
his ordinary habits he seemed now to live more for himself, and less
for the community, than had been his former practice.

He often absented himself for whole days from the convent; and as the
adventure of Glendearg dwelt deeply on his memory, he was repeatedly
induced to visit that lonely tower, and to take an interest in the
orphans who had their shelter under its roof. Besides, he felt a deep
anxiety to know whether the volume which he had lost, when so
strangely preserved from the lance of the murderer, had again found
its way back to the Tower of Glendearg. "It was strange," he thought,
"that a spirit," for such he could not help judging the being whose
voice he had heard, "should, on the one side, seek the advancement of
heresy, and, on the other, interpose to save the life of a zealous
Catholic priest."

But from no inquiry which he made of the various inhabitants of the
Tower of Glendearg could he learn that the copy of the translated
Scriptures, for which he made such diligent inquiry, had again been
seen by any of them.

In the meanwhile, the good father's occasional visits were of no small
consequence to Edward Glendinning and to Mary Avenel. The former
displayed a power of apprehending and retaining whatever was taught
him, which tilled Father Eustace with admiration. He was at once acute
and industrious, alert and accurate; one of those rare combinations of
talent and industry, which are seldom united.

It was the earnest desire of Father Eustace that the excellent
qualities thus early displayed by Edward should be dedicated to the
service of the Church, to which he thought the youth's own consent
might be easily obtained, as he was of a calm, contemplative, retired
habit, and seemed to consider knowledge as the principal object, and
its enlargement as the greatest pleasure, in life. As to the mother,
the Sub-Prior had little doubt that, trained as she was to view the
monks of Saint Mary's with such profound reverence, she would be but
too happy in an opportunity of enrolling one of her sons in its
honoured community. But the good Father proved to be mistaken in both
these particulars.

When he spoke to Elspeth Glendinning of that which a mother best loves
to hear--the proficiency and abilities of her son--she listened with a
delighted ear. But when Father Eustace hinted at the duty of
dedicating to the service of the Church, talents which seemed fitted
to defend and adorn it, the dame endeavoured always to shift the
subject; and when pressed farther, enlarged on her own incapacity, as
a lone woman, to manage the feu; on the advantage which her neighbours
of the township were often taking of her unprotected state, and on the
wish she had that Edward might fill his father's place, remain in the
tower, and close her eyes.

On such occasions the Sub-Prior would answer, that even in a worldly
point of view the welfare of the family would be best consulted by one
of the sons entering into the community of Saint Mary's, as it was not
to be supposed that he would fail to afford his family the important
protection which he could then easily extend towards them. What could
be a more pleasing prospect than to see him high in honour? or what
more sweet than to have the last duties rendered to her by a son,
reverend for his holiness of life and exemplary manners? Besides, he
endeavoured to impress upon the dame, that her eldest son, Halbert,
whose bold temper and headstrong indulgence of a wandering humour,
rendered him incapable of learning, was, for that reason, as well as
that he was her eldest born, fittest to bustle through the affairs of
the world, and manage the little fief.

Elspeth durst not directly dissent from what was proposed, for fear of
giving displeasure, and yet she always had something to say against it.
Halbert, she said, was not like any of the neighbour boys--he was
taller by the head, and stronger by the half, than any boy of his
years within the Halidome. But he was fit for no peaceful work that
could be devised.  If he liked a book ill, he liked a plough or a
pattle worse. He had scoured his father's old broadsword--suspended it
by a belt round his waist, and seldom stirred without it. He was a
sweet boy and a gentle if spoken fair, but cross him and he was a born
devil. "In a word," she said, bursting into tears, "deprive me of
Edward, good father, and ye bereave my house of prop and pillar; for
my heart tells me that Halbert will take to his father's gates, and
die his father's death."

When the conversation came to this crisis, the good-humoured monk was
always content to drop the discussion for the time, trusting some
opportunity would occur of removing her prejudices, for such he
thought them, against Edward's proposed destination.

When, leaving the mother, the Sub-Prior addressed himself to the son,
animating his zeal for knowledge, and pointing out how amply it might
be gratified should he agree to take holy orders, he found the same
repugnance which Dame Elspeth had exhibited. Edward pleaded a want of
sufficient vocation to so serious a profession--his reluctance to
leave his mother, and other objections, which the Sub-Prior treated as
evasive.

"I plainly perceive," he said one day, in answer to them, "that the
devil has his factors as well as Heaven, and that they are equally,
or, alas! the former are perhaps more active, in bespeaking for their
master the first of the market. I trust, young man, that neither
idleness, nor licentious pleasure, nor the love of worldly gain and
worldly grandeur, the chief baits with which the great Fisher of souls
conceals his hook, are the causes of your declining the career to
which I would incite you. But above all I trust--above all I
hope--that the vanity of superior knowledge--a sin with which those
who have made proficiency in learning are most frequently beset--has
not led you into the awful hazard of listening to the dangerous
doctrines which are now afloat concerning religion. Better for you
that you were as grossly ignorant as the beasts which perish, that
that the pride of knowledge should induce you to lend an ear to the
voice of heretics." Edward Glendinning listened to the rebuke with a
downcast look, and failed not, when it was concluded, earnestly to
vindicate himself from the charge of having pushed his studies into
any subjects which the Church inhibited; and so the monk was left to
form vain conjectures respecting the cause of his reluctance to
embrace the monastic state.

It is an old proverb, used by Chaucer, and quoted by Elizabeth, that
"the greatest clerks are not the wisest men;" and it is as true as if
the poet had not rhymed, or the queen reasoned on it. If Father
Eustace had not had his thoughts turned so much to the progress of
heresy, and so little to what was passing in the tower, he might have
read, in the speaking eyes of Mary Avenel, now a girl of fourteen or
fifteen, reasons which might disincline her youthful companion towards
the monastic vows. I have said, that she also was a promising pupil of
the good father, upon whom her innocent and infantine beauty had an
effect of which he was himself, perhaps, unconscious. Her rank and
expectations entitled her to be taught the arts of reading and
writing;--and each lesson which the monk assigned her was conned over
in company with Edward, and by him explained and re-explained, and
again illustrated, until she became perfectly mistress of it.

In the beginning of their studies, Halbert had been their school
companion.  But the boldness and impatience of his disposition soon
quarrelled with an occupation in which, without assiduity and
unremitted attention, no progress was to be expected. The Sub-Prior's
visits were at regular intervals, and often weeks would intervene
between them, in which case Halbert was sure to forget all that had
been prescribed for him to learn, and much which he had partly
acquired before. His deficiencies on these occasions gave him pain,
but it was not of that sort which produces amendment.

For a time, like all who are fond of idleness, he endeavoured to
detach the attention of his brother and Mary Avenel from their task,
rather than to learn his own, and such dialogues as the following
would ensue:

"Take your bonnet, Edward, and make haste--the Laird of Colmslie is
at the head of the glen with his hounds."

"I care not, Halbert," answered the younger brother; "two brace of dogs
may kill a deer without my being there to see them, and I must help Mary
Avenel with her lesson."

"Ay! you will labour at the monk's lessons till you turn monk yourself,"
answered Halbert.--"Mary, will you go with me, and I will show you the
cushat's nest I told you of?"

"I cannot go with you, Halbert," answered Mary, "because I must study
this lesson--it will take me long to learn it--I am sorry I am so
dull, for if I could get my task as fast as Edward, I should like to
go with you."

"Should you indeed?" said Halbert; "then I will wait for you--and,
what is more, I will try to get my lesson also."

With a smile and a sigh he took up the primer, and began heavily to
con over the task which had been assigned him. As if banished from the
society of the two others, he sat sad and solitary in one of the deep
window-recesses, and after in vain struggling with the difficulties of
his task, and his disinclination to learn it, he found himself
involuntarily engaged in watching the movements of the other two
students, instead of toiling any longer.

The picture which Halbert looked upon was delightful in itself, but
somehow or other it afforded very little pleasure to him. The
beautiful girl, with looks of simple, yet earnest anxiety, was bent on
disentangling those intricacies which obstructed her progress to
knowledge, and looking ever and anon to Edward for assistance, while,
seated close by her side, and watchful to remove every obstacle from
her way, he seemed at once to be proud of the progress which his pupil
made, and of the assistance which he was able to render her. There was
a bond betwixt them, a strong and interesting tie, the desire of
obtaining knowledge, the pride of surmounting difficulties.

Feeling most acutely, yet ignorant of the nature and source of his own
emotions, Halbert could no longer endure to look upon this quiet
scene, but, starting up, dashed his book from him, and exclaimed
aloud, "To the fiend I bequeath all books, and the dreamers that make
them!--I would a score of Southrons would come up the glen, and we
should learn how little all this muttering and scribbling is worth."

Mary Avenol and his brother started, and looked at Halbert with
surprise, while he went on with great animation, his features
swelling, and the tears starting into his eyes as he spoke.--"Yes,
Mary--I wish a score of Southrons came up the glen this very day; and
you should see one good hand, and one good sword, do more to protect
you, than all the books that were ever opened, and all the pens that
ever grew on a goose's wing."

Mary looked a little surprised and a little frightened at his
vehemence, but instantly replied affectionately, "You are vexed,
Halbert, because you do not get your lesson so fast as Edward can; and
so am I, for I am as stupid as you--But come, and Edward shall sit
betwixt us and teach us."

"He shall not teach _me_," said Halbert, in the same angry mood;
"I never can teach _him_ to do any thing that is honourable and
manly, and he shall not teach _me_ any of his monkish tricks.--I
hate the monks, with their drawling nasal tone like so many frogs, and
their long black petticoats like so many women, and their reverences,
and their lordships, and their lazy vassals that do nothing but peddle
in the mire with plough and harrow from Yule to Michaelmas. I will
call none lord, but him who wears a sword to make his title good; and
I will call none man, but he that can bear himself manlike and
masterful."

"For Heaven's sake, peace, brother!" said Edward; "if such words were
taken up and reported out of the house, they would be our mother's
ruin."

"Report them yourself, then, and they will be _your_ making, and
nobody's marring save mine own. Say that Halbert Glendinning will
never be vassal to an old man with a cowl and shaven crown, while
there are twenty barons who wear casque and plume that lack bold
followers. Let them grant you these wretched acres, and much meal may
they bear you to make your _brachan_." He left the room hastily,
but instantly returned, and continued to speak with the same tone of
quick and irritated feeling. "And you need not think so much, neither
of you, and especially you, Edward, need not think so much of your
parchment book there, and your cunning in reading it. By my faith, I
will soon learn to read as well as you; and--for I know a better
teacher than your grim old monk, and a better book than his printed
breviary; and since you like scholarcraft so well, Mary Avenel, you
shall see whether Edward or I have most of it." He left the apartment,
and came not again.

"What can be the matter with him?" said Mary, following Halbert with
her eyes from the window, as with hasty and unequal steps he ran up the
wild glen--"Where can your brother be going, Edward?--what book?--
what teacher does he talk of?"

"It avails not guessing," said Edward. "Halbert is angry, he knows not
why, and speaks of he knows not what; let us go again to our lessons,
and he will come home when he has tired himself with scrambling among
the crags as usual."

But Mary's anxiety on account of Halbert seemed more deeply rooted.
She declined prosecuting the task in which they had been so pleasingly
engaged, under the excuse of a headache; nor could Edward prevail upon
her to resume it again that morning.

Meanwhile Halbert, his head unbonneted, his features swelled with
jealous anger, and the tear still in his eye, sped up the wild and
upper extremity of the little valley of Glendearg with the speed of a
roebuck, choosing, as if in desperate defiance of the difficulties of
the way, the wildest and most dangerous paths, and voluntarily
exposing himself a hundred times to dangers which he might have
escaped by turning a little aside from them.  It seemed as if he
wished his course to be as straight as that of the arrow to its mark.

He arrived at length in a narrow and secluded _cleuch_, or deep
ravine, which ran down into the valley, and contributed a scanty
rivulet to the supply of the brook with which Glendearg is watered. Up
this he sped with the same precipitate haste which had marked his
departure from the tower, nor did he pause and look around until he
had reached the fountain from which the rivulet had its rise.

Here Halbert stopt short, and cast a gloomy, and almost a frightened
glance around him. A huge rock rose in front, from a cleft of which
grew a wild holly-tree, whose dark green branches rustled over the
spring which arose beneath. The banks on either hand rose so high, and
approached each other so closely, that it was only when the sun was at
its meridian height, and during the summer solstice, that its rays
could reach the bottom of the chasm in which he stood. But it was now
summer, and the hour was noon, so that the unwonted reflection of the
sun was dancing in the pellucid fountain.

"It is the season and the hour," said Halbert to himself; "and now
I--I might soon become wiser than Edward with all his pains! Mary
should see whether he alone is fit to be consulted, and to sit by her
side, and hang over her as she reads, and point out every word and
every letter.  And she loves me better than him--I am sure she
does--for she comes of noble blood, and scorns sloth and
cowardice.--And do I myself not stand here slothful and cowardly as
any priest of them all?--Why should I fear to call upon this
form--this shape?--Already have I endured the vision, and why not
again? What can it do to me, who am a man of lith and limb, and have
by my side my father's sword? Does my heart beat--do my hairs bristle,
at the thought of calling up a painted shadow, and how should I face a
band of Southrons in flesh and blood? By the soul of the first
Glendinning, I will make proof of the charm!"

He cast the leathern brogue or buskin from his right foot, planted
himself in a firm posture, unsheathed his sword, and first looking
around to collect his resolution, he bowed three times deliberately
towards the holly-tree, and as often to the little fountain, repeating
at the same time, with a determined voice, the following rhyme:

  "Thrice to the holly brake--
  Thrice to the well:--
  I bid thee awake,
  White Maid of Avenel!

  "Noon gleams on the Lake--
  Noon glows on the Fell--
  Wake thee, O wake,
  White Maid of Avenel!"

These lines were hardly uttered, when there stood the figure of a female
clothed in white, within three steps of Halbert Glendinning.

  "I guess'twas frightful there to see
  A lady richly clad as she--
  Beautiful exceedingly." [Footnote: Coleridge's Christabelle.]

       *       *       *       *      *


Chapter the Twelfth.


  There's something in that ancient superstition,
  Which, erring as it is, our fancy loves.
  The spring that, with its thousand crystal bubbles,
  Bursts from the bosom of some desert rock
  In secret solitude, may well be deem'd
  The haunt of something purer, more refined,
  And mightier than ourselves.
              OLD PLAY.

Young Halbert Glendinning had scarcely pronounced the mystical rhymes,
than, as we have mentioned in the conclusion of the last chapter, an
appearance, as of a beautiful female, dressed in white, stood within
two yards of him. His terror for the moment overcame his natural
courage, as well as the strong resolution which he had formed, that
the figure which he had now twice seen should not a third time daunt
him. But it would seem there is something thrilling and abhorrent to
flesh and blood, in the consciousness that we stand in presence of a
being in form like to ourselves, but so different in faculties and
nature, that we can neither understand its purposes, nor calculate its
means of pursuing them.

Halbert stood silent and gasped for breath, his hairs erecting
themselves on his head---his mouth open--his eyes fixed, and, as the
sole remaining sign of his late determined purpose, his sword pointed
towards the apparition.  At length with a voice of ineffable
sweetness, the White Lady, for by that name we shall distinguish this
being, sung, or rather chanted, the following lines:--

  "Youth of the dark eye, wherefore didst thou call me?
  Wherefore art thou here, if terrors can appal thee?
  He that seeks to deal with us must know no fear nor failing!
  To coward and churl our speech is dark, our gifts are unavailing.
  The breeze that brought me hither now, must sweep Egyptian ground,
  The fleecy cloud on which I ride for Araby is bound;
  The fleecy cloud is drifting by, the breeze sighs for my stay,
  For I must sail a thousand miles before the close of day."

The astonishment of Halbert began once more to give way to his
resolution, and he gained voice enough to say, though with a faltering
accent, "In the name of God, what art thou?" The answer was in melody
of a different tone and measure:--

  "What I am I must not show--
  What I am thou couldst not know--
  Something betwixt heaven and hell--
  Something that neither stood nor fell--
  Something that through thy wit or will
  May work thee good--may work thee ill.
  Neither substance quite nor shadow,
  Haunting lonely moor and meadow,
  Dancing; by the haunted spring,
  Riding on the whirlwind's wing;
  Aping in fantastic fashion
  Every change of human passion,

  While o'er our frozen minds they pass,
  Like shadows from the mirror'd glass.
  Wayward, fickle is our mood,
  Hovering betwixt bad and good,
  Happier than brief-dated man,
  Living twenty times his span;
  Far less happy, for we have
  Help nor hope beyond the grave!
  Man awakes to joy or sorrow;
  Ours the sleep that knows no morrow.
  This is all that I can show--
  This is all that thou mayest know."

The White Lady paused, and appeared to await an answer; but, as Halbert
hesitated how to frame his speech, the vision seemed gradually to fade,
and became more and more incorporeal. Justly guessing this to be a
symptom of her disappearance, Halbert compelled himself to say,--"Lady,
when I saw you in the glen, and when you brought back the black book of
Mary Avenel, thou didst say I should one day learn to read it."

The White Lady replied,

  "Ay! and I taught thee the word and the spell,
  To waken me here by the Fairies' Well,
  But thou hast loved the heron and hawk,
  More than to seek my haunted walk;
  And thou hast loved the lance and the sword,
  More than good text and holy word;
  And thou hast loved the deer to track,
  More than the lines and the letters black;
  And thou art a ranger of moss and of wood,
  And scornest the nurture of gentle blood."

"I will do so no longer, fair maiden," said Halbert; "I desire to
learn; and thou didst promise me, that when I did so desire, thou
wouldst be my helper; I am no longer afraid of thy presence, and I am
no longer regardless of instruction." As he uttered these words, the
figure of the White Maiden grew gradually as distinct as it had been
at first; and what had well-nigh faded into an ill-defined and
colourless shadow, again assumed an appearance at least of corporeal
consistency, although the hues were less vivid, and the outline of the
figure less distinct and defined--so at least it seemed to
Halbert--than those of an ordinary inhabitant of earth. "Wilt thou
grant my request," he said, "fair Lady, and give to my keeping the
holy book which Mary of Avenel has so often wept for?"

The White Lady replied:

  "Thy craven fear my truth accused,
  Thine idlehood my trust abused;
  He that draws to harbour late,
  Must sleep without, or burst the gate.

  There is a star for thee which burn'd.
  Its influence wanes, its course is turn'd;
  Valour and constancy alone
  Can bring thee back the chance that's flown."

"If I have been a loiterer, Lady," answered young Glendinning, "thou
shalt now find me willing to press forward with double speed. Other
thoughts have filled my mind, other thoughts have engaged my heart,
within a brief period--and by Heaven, other occupations shall
henceforward fill up my time. I have lived in this day the space of
years--I came hither a boy--I will return a man--a man, such as may
converse not only with his own kind, but with whatever God permits to
be visible to him. I will learn the contents of that mysterious
volume--I will learn why the Lady of Avenel loved it--why the priests
feared, and would have stolen it--why thou didst twice recover it
from their hands.--What mystery is wrapt in it?--Speak, I conjure
thee!" The lady assumed an air peculiarly sad and solemn, as drooping
her head, and folding her arms on her bosom, she replied:

  "Within that awful volume lies
  The mystery of mysteries!
  Happiest they of human race,
  To whom God has granted grace

  To read, to fear, to hope, to pray,
  To lift the latch, and force the way;
  And better had they ne'er been born,
  Who read, to doubt, or read to scorn."

"Give me the volume, Lady," said young Glendinning. "They call me
idle--they call me dull--in this pursuit my industry shall not fail,
nor, with God's blessing, shall my understanding. Give me the volume."
The apparition again replied:

  "Many a fathom dark and deep
  I have laid the book to sleep;
  Ethereal fires around it glowing--
  Ethereal music ever flowing--
    The sacred pledge of Heav'n
      All things revere.
      Each in his sphere,
    Save man for whom 'twas giv'n:
  Lend thy hand, and thou shalt spy
  Things ne'er seen by mortal eye."

Halbert Glendinning boldly reached his hand to the White Lady.

"Fearest thou to go with me?" she said, as his hand trembled at the soft
and cold touch of her own--

  "Fearest thou to go with me?
  Still it is free to thee
    A peasant to dwell:
  Thou mayst drive the dull steer,
  And chase the king's deer,
  But never more come near
  This haunted well."

"If what thou sayest be true," said the undaunted boy, "my destinies
are higher than thine own. There shall be neither well nor wood which I
dare not visit. No fear of aught, natural or supernatural, shall bar my
path through my native valley."

He had scarce uttered the words, when they both descended through the
earth with a rapidity which took away Halbert's breath and every other
sensation, saving that of being hurried on with the utmost velocity. At
length they stopped with a shock so sudden, that the mortal journeyer
through this unknown space must have been thrown down with violence,
had he not been upheld by his supernatural companion.

It was more than a minute, ere, looking around him, he beheld a
grotto, or natural cavern, composed of the most splendid spars and
crystals, which returned in a thousand prismatic hues the light of a
brilliant flame that glowed on an altar of alabaster. This altar, with
its fire, formed the central point of the grotto, which was of a round
form, and very high in the roof, resembling in some respects the dome
of a cathedral. Corresponding to the four points of the compass, there
went off four long galleries, or arcades, constructed of the same
brilliant materials with the dome itself, and the termination of which
was lost in darkness.

No human imagination can conceive, or words suffice to describe, the
glorious radiance which, shot fiercely forth by the flame, was
returned from so many hundred thousand points of reflection, afforded
by the sparry pillars and their numerous angular crystals. The fire
itself did not remain steady and unmoved, but rose and fell, sometimes
ascending in a brilliant pyramid of condensed flame half way up the
lofty expanse, and again fading into a softer and more rosy hue, and
hovering, as it were, on the surface of the altar to collect its
strength for another powerful exertion.  There was no visible fuel by
which it was fed, nor did it emit either smoke or vapour of any kind.

What was of all the most remarkable, the black volume so often
mentioned lay not only unconsumed, but untouched in the slightest
degree, amid this intensity of fire, which, while it seemed to be of
force sufficient to melt adamant, had no effect whatever on the sacred
book thus subjected to its utmost influence.

The White Lady, having paused long enough to let young Glendinning
take a complete survey of what was around him, now said in her usual
chant,

  "Here lies the volume thou boldly hast sought;
  Touch it, and take it,--'twill dearly be bought!"

Familiarized in some degree with marvels, and desperately desirous of
showing the courage he had boasted, Halbert plunged his hand, without
hesitation, into the flame, trusting to the rapidity of the motion, to
snatch out the volume before the fire could greatly affect him. But he
was much disappointed. The flame instantly caught upon his sleeve, and
though he withdrew his hand immediately, yet his arm was so dreadfully
scorched, that he had well-nigh screamed with pain. He suppressed the
natural expression of anguish, however, and only intimated the agony
which he felt by a contortion and a muttered groan. The White Lady
passed her cold hand over his arm, and, ere she had finished the
following metrical chant, his pain had entirely gone, and no mark of
the scorching was visible:

          "Rash thy deed,
          Mortal weed
    To immortal flames applying;
          Rasher trust
          Has thing of dust,
    On his own weak worth relying:
  Strip thee of such fences vain,
  Strip, and prove thy luck, again."

Obedient to what he understood to be the meaning of his conductress,
Halbert bared his arm to the shoulder, throwing down the remains of
his sleeve, which no sooner touched the floor on which he stood than
it collected itself together, shrivelled itself up, and was without
any visible fire reduced to light tinder, which a sudden breath of
wind dispersed into empty space. The White Lady, observing the
surprise of the youth, immediately repeated--

  "Mortal warp and mortal woof.
  Cannot brook this charmed roof;
  All that mortal art hath wrought,
  In our cell returns to nought.
  The molten gold returns to clay,
  The polish'd diamond melts away.
  All is alter'd, all is flown,
  Nought stands fast but truth alone.
  Not for that thy quest give o'er:
  Courage! prove thy chance once more."

Imboldened by her words, Halbert Glendinning made a second effort,
and, plunging his bare arm into the flame, took out the sacred volume
without feeling either heat or inconvenience of any kind. Astonished,
and almost terrified at his own success, he beheld the flame collect
itself, and shoot up into one long and final stream, which seemed as
if it would ascend to the very roof of the cavern, and then, sinking
as suddenly, became totally extinguished. The deepest darkness ensued;
but Halbert had no time to consider his situation, for the White Lady
had already caught his hand, and they ascended to upper air with the
same velocity with which they had sunk into the earth.

They stood by the fountain in the Corri-nan-shian when they emerged
from the bowels of the earth; but on casting a bewildered glance
around him, the youth was surprised to observe, that the shadows had
fallen far to the east, and that the day was well-nigh spent. He gazed
on his conductress for explanation, but her figure began to fade
before his eyes--her cheeks grew paler, her features less distinct,
her form became shadowy, and blended itself with the mist which was
ascending the hollow ravine.  What had late the symmetry of form, and
the delicate, yet clear hues of feminine beauty, now resembled the
flitting and pale ghost of some maiden who has died for love, as it is
seen indistinctly and by moonlight, by her perjured lover.

"Stay, spirit!" said the youth, imboldened by his success in the
subterranean dome, "thy kindness must not leave me, as one encumbered
with a weapon he knows not how to wield. Thou must teach me the art to
read, and to understand this volume; else what avails it me that I
possess it?"

But the figure of the White Lady still waned before his eye, until it
became an outline as pale and indistinct as that of the moon, when the
winter morning is far advanced, and ere she had ended the following
chant, she was entirely invisible:--

  "Alas! alas!
  Not ours the grace
  These holy characters to trace:
      Idle forms of painted air,
      Not to us is given to share
  The boon bestow'd on Adam's race!
      With patience bide.
      Heaven will provide
  The fitting time, the fitting guide."

The form was already gone, and now the voice itself had melted away in
melancholy cadence, softening, as if the Being who spoke had been slowly
wafted from the spot where she had commenced her melody.

It was at this moment that Halbert felt the extremity of the terror
which he had hitherto so manfully suppressed. The very necessity of
exertion had given him spirit to make it, and the presence of the
mysterious Being, while it was a subject of fear in itself, had
nevertheless given him the sense of protection being near to him. It
was when he could reflect with composure on what had passed, that a
cold tremor shot across his limbs, his hair bristled, and he was
afraid to look around lest he should find at his elbow something more
frightful than the first vision. A breeze arising suddenly, realized
the beautiful and wild idea of the most imaginative of our modern
bards [Footnote: Coleridge.]--

  It fann'd his cheek, it raised his hair,
    Like a meadow pale in spring;
  It mingled strangely with his fears,
    Yet it fell like a welcoming.

The youth stood silent and astonished for a few minutes. It seemed to
him that the extraordinary Being he had seen, half his terror, half
his protectress, was still hovering on the gale which swept past him,
and that she might again make herself sensible to his organs of sight.
"Speak!" he said, wildly tossing his arms, "speak yet again--be once
more present, lovely vision!--thrice have I now seen thee, yet the
idea of thy invisible presence around or beside me, makes my heart
beat faster than if the earth yawned and gave up a demon."

But neither sound nor appearance indicated the presence of the White
Lady, and nothing preternatural beyond what he had already witnessed,
was again audible or visible. Halbert, in the meanwhile, by the very
exertion of again inviting the presence of this mysterious Being, had
recovered his natural audacity. He looked around once more, and
resumed his solitary path down the valley into whose recesses he had
penetrated.

Nothing could be more strongly contrasted than the storm of passion
with which he had bounded over stock and crag, in order to plunge
himself into the Corri-nan-shian, and the sobered mood in which he now
returned homeward, industriously seeking out the most practicable
path, not from a wish to avoid danger, but that he might not by
personal toil distract his attention, deeply fixed on the
extraordinary scene which he had witnessed. In the former case, he had
sought by hazard and bodily exertion to indulge at once the fiery
excitation of passion, and to banish the cause of the excitement from
his recollection; while now he studiously avoided all interruption to
his contemplative walk, lest the difficulty of the way should
interfere with, or disturb, his own deep reflections. Thus slowly
pacing forth his course, with the air of a pilgrim rather than of a
deer-hunter, Halbert about the close of the evening regained his
paternal tower.


Chapter the Thirteenth.


  The Miller was of manly make,
    To meet him was na mows;
  There durst na ten come him to take,
    Sae noited he their pows.
            CHRIST'S KIRK ON THE GREEN.

It was after sunset, as we have already stated, when Halbert
Glendinning returned to the abode of his father. The hour of dinner
was at noon, and that of supper about an hour after sunset at this
period of the year.  The former had passed without Halbert's
appearing; but this was no uncommon circumstance, for the chase, or
any other pastime which occurred, made Halbert a frequent neglecter of
hours; and his mother, though angry and disappointed when she saw him
not at table, was so much accustomed to his occasional absence, and
knew so little how to teach him more regularity, that a testy
observation was almost all the censure with which such omissions were
visited.

On the present occasion, however, the wrath of good Dame Elspeth
soared higher than usual. It was not merely on account of the special
tup's head and trotters, the haggis and the side of mutton, with which
her table was set forth, but also because of the arrival of no less a
person than Hob Miller, as he was universally termed, though the man's
name was Happer.

The object of the Miller's visit to the Tower of Glendearg was like
the purpose of those embassies which potentates send to each other's
courts, partly ostensible, partly politic. In outward show, Hob came
to visit his friends of the Halidome, and share the festivity common
among country folk, after the barn-yard has been filled, and to renew
old intimacies by new conviviality. But in very truth he also came to
have an eye upon the contents of each stack, and to obtain such
information respecting the extent of the crop reaped and gathered in
by each feuar, as might prevent the possibility of _abstracted
multures_.

All the world knows that the cultivators of each barony or regality,
temporal or spiritual, in Scotland, are obliged to bring their corn to
be grinded at the mill of the territory, for which they pay a heavy
charge, called the _intown multures_. I could speak to the
thirlage of _invecta et illata_ too, but let that pass. I have
said enough to intimate that I talk not without book.  Those of the
_Sucken_, or enthralled ground, were liable in penalties, if,
deviating from this thirlage, (or thraldom,) they carried their grain
to another mill. Now such another mill, erected on the lands of a
lay-baron, lay within a tempting and convenient distance of Glendearg;
and the Miller was so obliging, and his charges so moderate, that it
required Hob Miller's utmost vigilance to prevent evasions of his
right of monopoly.

The most effectual means he could devise was this show of good
fellowship and neighbourly friendship,--under colour of which he made
his annual cruise through the barony--numbered every corn-stack, and
computed its contents by the boll, so that he could give a shrewd hint
afterwards whether or not the grist came to the right mill.

Dame Elspeth, like her compeers, was obliged to take these domiciliary
visits in the sense of politeness; but in her case they had not
occurred since her husband's death, probably because the Tower of
Glendearg was distant, and there was but a trifling quantity of arable
or _infield_ land attached to it. This year there had been, upon
some speculation of old Martin's, several bolls sown in the
exit-field, which, the season being fine, had ripened remarkably well.
Perhaps this circumstance occasioned the honest Miller's including
Glendearg, on this occasion, in his annual round Dame Glendinning
received with pleasure a visit which she used formerly only to endure
with patience; and she had changed her view of the matter chiefly, if
not entirely, because Hob had brought with him his daughter Mysie, of
whose features she could give so slight an account, but whose dress
she had described so accurately to the Sub-Prior.

Hitherto this girl had been an object of very trifling consideration
in the eyes of the good widow; but the Sub-Prior's particular and
somewhat mysterious inquiries had set her brains to work on the
subject of Mysie of the Mill; and she had here asked a broad question,
and there she had thrown out an innuendo, and there again she had
gradually led on to a conversation on the subject of poor Mysie. And
from all inquiries and investigations she had collected, that Mysie
was a dark-eyed, laughter-loving wench, with cherry-cheeks, and a skin
as white as her father's finest bolted flour, out of which was made
the Abbot's own wastel-bread. For her temper, she sung and laughed
from morning to night; and for her fortune, a material article,
besides that which the Miller might have amassed by means of his
proverbial golden thumb, Mysie was to inherit a good handsome lump of
land, with a prospect of the mill and mill-acres descending to her
husband on an easy lease, if a fair word were spoken in season to the
Abbot, and to the Prior, and to the Sub-Prior, and to the Sacristan,
and so forth.

By turning and again turning these advantages over in her own mind,
Elspeth at length came to be of opinion, that the only way to save her
son Halbert from a life of "spur, spear, and snaffle," as they called
that of the border-riders, from the dint of a cloth-yard shaft, or the
loop of an inch-cord, was, that he should marry and settle, and that
Mysie Happer should be his destined bride.

As if to her wish, Hob Miller arrived on his strong-built mare,
bearing on a pillion behind him the lovely Mysie, with cheeks like a
peony-rose, (if Dame Glendinning had ever seen one,) spirits all
afloat with rustic coquetry, and a profusion of hair as black as
ebony. The _beau-ideal_ which Dame Glendinning had been bodying
forth in her imagination, became unexpectedly realized in the buxom
form of Mysie Happer, whom, in the course of half an hour, she settled
upon as the maiden who was to fix the restless and untutored Halbert.
True, Mysie, as the dame soon saw, was like to love dancing round a
May-pole as well as managing a domestic establishment, and Halbert was
like to break more heads than he would grind stacks of corn. But then
a miller should always be of manly make, and has been described so
since the days of Chaucer and James I. [Footnote: The verse we have
chosen for a motto, is from a poem imputed to James I. of Scotland. As
for the Miller who figures among the Canterbury pilgrims, besides his
sword and buckler, he boasted other attributes, all of which, but
especially the last, show that he relied more on the strength of the
outside than that of the inside of his skull.

  The miller was a stout carl for the nones,
  Full big he was of brawn, and eke of bones;
  That proved well, for wheresoe'r he cam,
  At wrestling he wold bear away the ram;
  He was short shoulder'd, broad, a thick gnar;
  There n'as no door that he n'old heave of bar,
  Or break it at a running with his head, &c. ]

Indeed, to be able to outdo and bully the whole _Sucken_, (once
more we use this barbarous phrase,) in all athletic exercises, was one
way to render easy the collection of dues which men would have
disputed with a less formidable champion.  Then, as to the
deficiencies of the miller's wife, the dame was of opinion that they
might be supplied by the activity of the miller's mother. "I will keep
house for the young folk myself, for the tower is grown very lonely,"
thought Dame Glendinning, "and to live near the kirk will be mair
comfortable in my auld age--and then Edward may agree with his brother
about the feu, more especially as he is a favourite with the
Sub-Prior, and then he may live in the auld tower like his worthy
father before him--and wha kens but Mary Avenel, high-blood as she is,
may e'en draw in her stool to the chimney-nook, and sit down here for
good and a'?--It's true she has no tocher, but the like of her for
beauty and sense ne'er crossed my een; and I have kend every wench in
the Halidome of St.  Mary's--ay, and their mothers that bore them--ay,
she is a sweet and a lovely creature as ever tied snood over brown
hair--ay, and then, though her uncle keeps her out of her ain for the
present time, yet it is to be thought the gray-goose shaft will find a
hole in his coat of proof, as, God help us! it has done in many a
better man's--And, moreover, if they should stand on their pedigree
and gentle race, Edward might say to them, that is, to her gentle kith
and kin, 'whilk o' ye was her best friend, when she came down the glen
to Glendearg in a misty evening, on a beast mair like a cuddie than
aught else?'--And if they tax him with churl's blood, Edward might
say, that, forby the old proverb, how

  Gentle deed
  Makes gentle bleid;

yet, moreover, there comes no churl's blood from Glendinning or Brydone;
for, says Edward--"

The hoarse voice of the Miller at this moment recalled the dame from
her reverie, and compelled her to remember that if she meant to
realize her airy castle, she must begin by laying the foundation in
civility to her guest and his daughter, whom she was at that moment
most strangely neglecting, though her whole plan turned on
conciliating their favour and good opinion, and that, in fact, while
arranging matters for so intimate a union with her company, she was
suffering them to sit unnoticed, and in their riding gear, as if about
to resume their journey. "And so I say, dame," concluded the Miller,
(for she had not marked the beginning of his speech,) "an ye be so
busied with your housekep, or ought else, why, Mysie and I will trot
our way down the glen again to Johnnie Broxmouth's, who pressed us
right kindly to bide with him."

Starting at once from her dream of marriages and intermarriages,
mills, mill-lands, and baronies, Dame Elspeth felt for a moment like
the milk-maid in the fable, when she overset the pitcher, on the
contents of which so many golden dreams were founded. But the
foundation of Dame Glendinning's hopes was only tottering, not
overthrown, and she hastened to restore its equilibrium. Instead of
attempting to account for her absence of mind and want of attention to
her guests, which she might have found something difficult, she
assumed the offensive, like an able general when he finds it
necessary, by a bold attack, to disguise his weakness.

A loud exclamation she made, and a passionate complaint she set up
against the unkindness of her old friend, who could for an instant
doubt the heartiness of her welcome to him and to his hopeful
daughter; and then to think of his going back to Johnny Broxmouth's,
when the auld tower stood where it did, and had room in it for a
friend or two in the worst of times--and he too a neighbour that his
umquhile gossip Simon, blessed be his cast, used to think the best
friend he had in the Halidome! And on she went, urging her complaint
with so much seriousness, that she had well-nigh imposed on herself as
well as upon Hob Miller, who had no mind to take any thing in dudgeon;
and as it suited his plans to pass the night at Glendearg, would have
been equally contented to do so even had his reception been less
vehemently hospitable.

To all Elspeth's expostulations on the unkindness of his proposal to
leave her dwelling, he answered composedly, "Nay, dame, what could I
tell? ye might have had other grist to grind, for ye looked as if ye
scarce saw us--or what know I? ye might bear in mind the words Martin
and I had about the last barley ye sawed--for I ken dry multures
[Footnote: Dry multures were a fine, or compensation in money, for not
grinding at the mill of the thirl. It was, and is, accounted a
vexatious exaction.] will sometimes stick in the throat. A man seeks
but his awn, and yet folk shall hold him for both miller and miller's
man, that is millar and knave, [Footnote: The under miller is, in the
language of thirlage, called the knave, which, indeed, signified
originally his lad. (_Knabe_--German,) but by degrees came to be
taken in a worse sense. In the old translation of the Bible, Paul is
made to term himself the knave of our Saviour. The allowance of meal
taken by the miller's servant was called knave-ship.] all the country
over."

"Alas, that you will say so, neighbour Hob," said Dame Elspeth, "or
that Martin should have had any words with you about the mill-dues! I
will chide him roundly for it, I promise you, on the faith of a true
widow.  You know full well that a lone woman is sore put upon by her
servants."

"Nay, dame," said the miller, unbuckling the broad belt which made
fast his cloak, and served, at the same time, to suspend by his side a
swinging Andrea Ferrara, "bear no grudge at Martin, for I bear none--I
take it on me as a thing of mine office, to maintain my right of
multure, lock, and gowpen.  [Note: The multure was the regular
exaction for grinding the meal. The _lock_, signifying a small
quantity, and the _gowpen_, a handful, were additional
perquisites demanded by the miller, and submitted to or resisted by
the _Suckener_ as circumstances permitted. These and other petty
dues were called in general the _Sequels_.] And reason good, for
as the old song says,

  I live by my mill. God bless her,
   She's parent, child, and wife.

The poor old slut, I am beholden to her for my living, and bound to
stand by her, as I say to my mill knaves, in right and in wrong. And
so should every honest fellow stand by his bread-winner.--And so,
Mysie, ye may doff your cloak since our neighbour is so kindly glad to
see us--why, I think, we are as blithe to see her--not one in the
Halidome pays their multures more duly, sequels, arriage, and
carriage, and mill-services, used and wont."

With that the Miller hung his ample cloak without farther ceremony
upon a huge pair of stag's antlers, which adorned at once the naked
walls of the tower, and served for what we vulgarly call cloak-pins.

In the meantime Dame Elspeth assisted to disembarrass the damsel whom
she destined for her future daughter-in-law, of her hood, mantle, and
the rest of her riding gear, giving her to appear as beseemed the
buxom daughter of the wealthy Miller, gay and goodly, in a white
kirtle, the seams of which were embroidered with green silken lace or
fringe, entwined with some silver thread. An anxious glance did
Elspoth cast upon the good-humoured face, which was now more fully
shown to her, and was only obscured by a quantity of raven black hair,
which the maid of the mill had restrained by a snood of green silk,
embroidered with silver, corresponding to the trimmings of her kirtle.
The countenance itself was exceedingly comely--the eyes black, large,
and roguishly good-humoured--the mouth was small--the lips well
formed, though somewhat full--the teeth were pearly white--and the
chin had a very seducing dimple in it. The form belonging to this
joyous face was full and round, and firm and fair. It might become
coarse and masculine some years hence, which is the common fault of
Scottish beauty; but in Mysie's sixteenth year she had the shape of a
Hebe. The anxious Elspeth, with all her maternal partiality, could not
help admitting within herself, that a better man than Halbert might go
farther and fare worse.  She looked a little giddy, and Halbert was
not nineteen; still it was time he should be settled, for to that
point the dame always returned; and here was an excellent opportunity.

The simple cunning of Dame Elspeth now exhausted itself in
commendations of her fair guest, from the snood, as they say, to the
single-soled shoe.  Mysie listened and blushed with pleasure for the
first five minutes; but ere ten had elapsed, she began to view the old
lady's compliments rather as subjects of mirth than of vanity, and was
much more disposed to laugh at than to be flattered with them, for
Nature had mingled the good-humour with which she had endowed the
damsel with no small portion of shrewdness.  Even Hob himself began to
tire of hearing his daughter's praises, and broke in with, "Ay, ay,
she is a clever quean enough; and, were she five years older, she
shall lay a loaded sack on an _aver_ [Note: _Aver_--properly
a horse of labour.] with e'er a lass in the Halidome. But I have been
looking for your two sons, dame. Men say downby that Halbert's turned
a wild springald, and that we may have word of him from Westmoreland
one moonlight night or another."

"God forbid, my good neighbour; God, in his mercy, forbid!" said Dame
Glendinning, earnestly; for it was touching the very key-note of her
apprehensions, to hint any probability that Halbert might become one
of the marauders so common in the age and country. But, fearful of
having betrayed too much alarm on this subject, she immediately added,
"That though, since the last rout at Pinkiecleuch, she had been all of
a tremble when a gun or a spear was named, or when men spoke of
fighting; yet, thanks to God and our Lady, her sons were like to live
and die honest and peaceful tenants to the Abbey, as their father
might have done, but for that awful hosting which he went forth to
with mony a brave man that never returned."

"Ye need not tell me of it, dame," said the Miller, "since I was there
myself, and made two pair of legs (and these were not mine, but my
mare's,) worth one pair of hands. I judged how it would be, when I saw
our host break ranks, with rushing on through that broken ploughed
field, and so as they had made a pricker of me, I e'en pricked off
with myself while the play was good."

"Ay, ay, neighbour," said the dame, "ye were aye a wise and a wary
man; if my Simon had had your wit, he might have been here to speak
about it this day; but he was aye cracking of his good blood and his
high kindred, and less would not serve him than to bide the bang to
the last, with the earls, and knights, and squires, that had no wives
to greet for them, or else had wives that cared not how soon they were
widows; but that is not for the like of us. But touching my son
Halbert, there is no fear of him; for if it should be his misfortune
to be in the like case, he has the best pair of heels in Halidome, and
could run almost as fast as your mare herself."

"Is this he, neighbour?" quoth the Miller.

"No," replied the mother; "that is my youngest son, Edward, who can
read and write like the Lord Abbot himself, if it were not a sin to
say so."

"Ay," said the Miller; "and is that the young clerk the Sub-Prior
thinks so much of? they say he will come far ben that lad; wha kens
but he may come to be Sub-Prior himself?--as broken a ship has come to
land."

"To be a Prior, neighbour Miller," said Edward, "a man must first be
a priest, and for that I judge I have little vocation."

"He will take to the pleugh-pettle, neighbour," said the good dame;
"and so will Halbert too, I trust. I wish you saw Halbert.--Edward,
where is your brother?"

"Hunting, I think," replied Edward; "at least he left us this morning
to join the Laird of Colmslie and his hounds. I have heard them
baying in the glen all day."

"And if I had heard that music," said the Miller, "it would have done
my heart good, ay, and may be taken me two or three miles out of my
road.  When I was the Miller of Morebattle's knave, I have followed
the hounds from Eckford to the foot of Hounam-law--followed them on
foot, Dame Glendinning, ay, and led the chase when the Laird of
Cessford and his gay riders were all thrown out by the mosses and
gills. I brought the stag on my back to Hounam Cross, when the dogs
had pulled him down. I think I see the old gray knight, as he sate so
upright on his strong war-horse, all white with foam; and 'Miller,'
said he to me, 'an thou wilt turn thy back on the mill, and wend with
me, I will make a man of thee.' But I chose rather to abide by clap
and happer, and the better luck was mine; for the proud Percy caused
hang five of the Laird's henchmen at Alnwick for burning a rickle of
houses some gate beyond Fowberry, and it might have been my luck as
well as another man's."

"Ah, neighbour, neighbour," said Dame Glendinning, "you were aye wise
and wary; but if you like hunting, I must say Halbert's the lad to
please you. He hath all those fair holiday terms of hawk and hound as
ready in his mouth as Tom with the tod's tail, that is the Lord
Abbot's ranger."

"Ranges he not homeward at dinner-time, dame," demanded the Miller;
"for we call noon the dinner-hour at Kennaquhair?"

The widow was forced to admit that, even at this important period of
the day, Halbert was frequently absent; at which the Miller shook his
head, intimating, at the same time, some allusion to the proverb of
MacFarlane's geese, which "liked their play better than their
meat." [Footnote: A brood of wild-geese, which long frequented one of
the uppermost islands in Loch-Lomond, called Inch-Tavoe, were supposed
to have some mysterious connexion with the ancient family of
MacFarlane of that ilk, and it is said were never seen after the ruin
and extinction of that house. The MacFarlanes had a house and garden
upon that same island of Inch-Tavoe. Here James VI. was, on one
occasion, regaled by the chieftain. His Majesty had been previously
much amused by the geese pursuing each other on the Loch. But, when
one which was brought to table, was found to be tough and ill fed,
James observed--"that MacFarlane's geese liked their play better than
their meat," a proverb which has been current ever since.]

That the delay of dinner might not increase the Miller's disposition
to prejudge Halbert, Dame Glendinning called hastily on Mary Avenel to
take her task of entertaining Mysie Happer, while she herself rushed
to the kitchen, and, entering at once into the province of Tibb
Tacket, rummaged among trenchers and dishes, snatched pots from the
fire, and placed pans and gridirons on it, accompanying her own feats
of personal activity with such a continued list of injunctions to
Tibb, that Tibb at length lost patience, and said, "Here was as muckle
wark about meating an auld miller, as if they had been to banquet the
blood of Bruce." But this, as it was supposed to be spoken aside, Dame
Glendinning did not think it convenient to hear.

       *       *       *       *       *


Chapter the Fourteenth.


  Nay, let me have the friends who eat my victuals,
  As various as my dishes.--The feast's naught,
  Where one huge plate predominates. John Plaintext,
  He shall be mighty beef, our English staple;
  The worthy Alderman, a butter'd dumpling;
  Yon pair of whisker'd Cornets, ruffs and rees:
  Their friend the Dandy, a green goose in sippets.
  And so the hoard is spread at once and fill'd
  On the same principle--Variety.
                           NEW PLAY.

"And what brave lass is this?" said Hob Miller, as Mary Avenel entered
the apartment to supply the absence of Dame Elspeth Glendinning.

"The young Lady of Avenel, father," said the Maid of the Mill,
dropping as low a curtsy as her rustic manners enabled her to make.
The Miller, her father, doffed his bonnet, and made his reverence, not
altogether so low perhaps as if the young lady had appeared in the
pride of rank and riches, yet so as to give high birth the due homage
which the Scotch for a length of time scrupulously rendered to it.

Indeed, from having had her mother's example before her for so many
years, and from a native sense of propriety and even of dignity, Mary
Avenel had acquired a demeanour, which marked her title to
consideration, and effectually checked any attempt at familiarity on
the part of those who might be her associates in her present
situation, but could not be well termed her equals. She was by nature
mild, pensive, and contemplative, gentle in disposition, and most
placable when accidentally offended; but still she was of a retired
and reserved habit, and shunned to mix in ordinary sports, even--when
the rare occurrence of a fair or wake gave her an opportunity of
mingling with companions of her own age. If at such scenes she was
seen for an instant, she appeared to behold them with the composed
indifference of one to whom their gaiety was a matter of no interest,
and who seemed only desirous to glide away from the scene as soon as
she possibly could.

Something also had transpired concerning her being born on All-hallow
Eve, and the powers with which that circumstance was supposed to
invest her over the invisible world. And from all-these particulars
combined, the young men and women of the Halidome used to distinguish
Mary among themselves by the name of the Spirit of Avenel, as if the
fair but fragile form, the beautiful but rather colourless cheek, the
dark blue eye, and the shady hair, had belonged rather to the
immaterial than the substantial world. The general tradition of the
White Lady, who was supposed to wait on the fortunes of the family of
Avenel, gave a sort of zest to this piece of rural wit. It gave great
offence, however, to the two sons of Simon Glendinning; and when the
expression was in their presence applied to the young lady, Edward was
wont to check the petulance of those who used it by strength of
argument, and Halbert by strength of arm. In such cases Halbert had
this advantage, that although ho could render no aid to his brother's
argument, yet when circumstances required it, he was sure to have that
of Edward, who never indeed himself commenced a fray, but, on the
other hand, did not testify any reluctance to enter into combat in
Halbert's behalf or in his rescue.

But the zealous attachment of the two youths, being themselves, from
the retired situation in which they dwelt, comparative strangers in
the Halidome, did not serve in any degree to alter the feelings of the
inhabitants towards the young lady, who seemed to have dropped amongst
them from another sphere of life. Still, however, she was regarded
with respect, if not with fondness; and the attention of the Sub-Prior
to the family, not to mention the formidable name of Julian Avenel,
which every new incident of those tumultuous times tended to render
more famous, attached to his niece a certain importance. Thus some
aspired to her acquaintance out of pride while the more timid of the
feuars were anxious to inculcate upon their children the necessity of
being respectful to the noble orphan. So that Mary Avenel, little
loved because little known, was regarded with a mysterious awe, partly
derived from fear of her uncle's moss-troopers, and partly from her
own retired and distant habits, enhanced by the superstitious opinions
of the time and country.

It was not without some portion of this awe, that Mysie felt herself
left alone in company with a young person so distant in rank, and so
different in bearing, from herself; for her worthy father had taken
the first opportunity to step out unobserved, in order to mark how the
barnyard was filled, and what prospect it afforded of grist to the
mill. In youth, however, there is a sort of free-masonry, which,
without much conversation, teaches young persons to estimate each
other's character, and places them at ease on the shortest
acquaintance. It is only when taught deceit by the commerce of the
world, that we learn to shroud our character from observation, and to
disguise our real sentiments from those with whom we are placed in
communion.

Accordingly, the two young women were soon engaged in such objects of
interest as best became their age. They visited Mary Avenel's pigeons,
which she nursed with the tenderness of a mother; they turned over her
slender stores of finery, which yet contained some articles that
excited the respect of her companion, though Mysie was too
good-humoured to nourish envy. A golden rosary, and some female
ornaments marking superior rank, had been rescued in the moment of
their utmost adversity, more by Tibb Tacket's presence of mind, than
by the care of their owner,--who was at that sad period too much sunk
in grief to pay any attention to such circumstances.  They struck
Mysie with a deep impression of veneration; for, excepting what the
Lord Abbot and the convent might possess, she did not believe there
was so much real gold in the world as was exhibited in these few
trinkets, and Mary, however sage and serious, was not above being
pleased with the admiration of her rustic companion.

Nothing, indeed, could exhibit a stronger contrast than the appearance
of the two girls;--the good-humoured laughter-loving countenance of
the Maid of the Mill, who stood gazing with unrepressed astonishment
on whatever was in her inexperienced eye rare and costly, and with an
humble, and at the same time cheerful acquiescence in her inferiority,
asking all the little queries about the use and value of the
ornaments, while Mary Avenel, with her quiet composed dignity and
placidity of manner, produced them one after another for the amusement
of her companion.

As they became gradually more familiar, Mysie of the Mill was just
venturing to ask, why Mary Avenel never appeared at the May-pole, and to
express her wonder when the young lady said she disliked dancing, when
a trampling of horses at the gate of the tower interrupted their
conversation.

