"And thus another day draws to a close in ill-fated Johnstown."


CHAPTER XIX.

A Day of Work and Worship


Governor Beaver has assumed the command. He arrived in Johnstown
yesterday, the 8th, and will take personal charge of the work of
clearing the town and river. For that purpose $1,000,000 from the State
Treasury will be made available immediately. This action means that the
State will clear and clean the town.

It was a day of prayer but not a day of rest in Johnstown. Faith and
works went hand in hand. The flood-smitten people of the Conemaugh,
though they met in the very path of the torrent that swept their homes
and families into ruin, offered up their prayers to Almighty God and
besought His divine mercy. But all through the ruin-choked city the
sound of the pick and the shovel mingled with the voice of prayer, and
the challenge of the sentinel rang out above the voice of supplication.
There was no cessation in the great task the flood has left them with
its legacy of woe. Four charges of dynamite last night completed the
wreck of the Catholic Church of St. John, which had been left by the
flood in a worthless but dangerous condition.

The thousands of laborers continued their work just as on any week day,
except that there was no dynamite used on the gorge and that the
Cambria Iron Works were closed. There was the usual reward of the
gleaners in the harvest-field of death, fifty eight bodies having been
recovered. The most of those have been in Stony Creek, up which they
were carried by the back rush of the current after the bridge broke the
first wave.

Roman Catholic services were held in the open air.


Father Smith's Exhortation.

When the mass was over and Father Troutwine, who conducted it, had
retired, Father Smith stood before them. "We have had enough of death
lately," he said in a voice full of sympathy, "the calamity that has
visited us is the greatest in the history of the United States. You must
not be discouraged. Other places have been visited by disaster at times,
yet we know that they have risen again. You must not look on the fearful
past. The lives of the lost cannot be restored."

Here he paused because they were weeping around him, and his own voice
was broken, but continuing with an effort, he told them to reflect for
consolation upon the manner in which their friends had gone to death.
They had looked to God, he said, and wafted in prayers and acts of
contrition, their souls had left their bodies and appeared at the throne
in heaven. "Surely never such prayers fell save from the lips of saints,
and the lost of the valley are saints to-day while you mourn for them.
God, who measures the acts of men by their opportunities, had pardoned
their sins. You who are left living must go to work with a will. Be
men, be women. The eyes of the world are upon you, the eyes of all
civilized nature. They listen, they wait to see what you are going to
do."

Father Smith closed by telling them that the coming fast days of this
week need not be observed in the midst of such destitution as this, and
they might eat without sinning any food that would give them life and
strength. When the father had finished the congregation filed slowly out
past the high pile of coffins, for St. Columba's was a morgue in the
days just passed.


The Protestant Services.

Chaplain Maguire held service in the camp of the 14th to-day. His pulpit
was a drygoods box with the lid missing. It had been emptied of its
freight into the wide lap of suffering. Before him stood the blue-coated
guardsmen in a deep half circle. There was a shed at his back and a
group of flood survivors, some in old clothing of their own, some in the
new garments of charity. They were for the most part members of the
Methodist congregation of Johnstown to which he had preached for three
years.

"I hunted a long time yesterday for the foundations of my little home,"
he said, "but they were swept away, like the dear faces of the friends
who used to gather around my table. But God doesn't own this side alone;
He owns the other side too, and all is well whether we are on this side
or the other. Are your dear ones saved or lost? The only answer to that
question is found in whether they trusted in God or not. Trust in the
Lord and verily ye shall dwell in the land and be fed."

It was not a sermon. Nobody had words or voice for preaching. Others
spoke briefly and prayed. They sang, "Jesus, Lover of My Soul."


A Song in the Waters.

The shrill treble of the weeping women in the shed was almost lost in
the strong bass of the soldiers. "Cora Moses, who used to sing in our
church choir, sang that beautiful hymn as she drifted away to her death
amid the wreck," said the chaplain. "She died singing it. There was only
the crash of buildings between the interruption of the song of earth and
its continuation in heaven."


Dr. Beale's Address.

Dr. Beale, whose own Presbyterian Church was one of the first morgues
opened and who has lived among dead bodies ever since is the cheeriest
man in Johnstown. He made a prayer and an address. It was all
straight-from-the-shoulder kind of talk, garbed in homely phrase.

In the address he said: "I have been asked to say something about this
disaster and its magnitude, but I haven't the heart. Besides I haven't
the words. If I was the biggest truth teller in the world I could not
tell the tale."

Then the preacher went hammer and tongs at the practical teachings of
the flood. "That night in Alma Hall when we thought we would all die I
heard men call on God in prayer and pledge themselves to lead better
lives if life was given them. Since then I heard those same men cursing
and swearing in these streets. Brethren, there was no real prayer in any
of those petitions put up by those of godless lives that night. They
were merely crying out to a higher power for protection. They were like
the death-bed fears of the infidel, for I have seen seventeen infidels
die and everyone showed the white feather. Nay, those prayers were
unsanctified by the spirit, but let us who are here now living, dedicate
ourselves to the service of Almighty God. There were those who were to
be dedicated that night. I know one who, when it came, sent his family
up the staircase, and taking up his Bible from his parlor table, opened
at the 46th Psalm, first verse, and, following them, read, and the
waters followed him closely. And through the flood he read the word of
God and there was peace in that house while terror was all around it."


Mothering the Orphans.

Dr. Beale announced that Miss Walk wanted twenty-five children for the
Northern Home and then began shaking hands with his congregation and
pressing on them the lessons of his sermon. "Ah, old friend," he said,
to a sandy moustached man in the grand army uniform, "You came safe out
of the flood, now give that big heart of yours to Jesus."

The Baptist congregation also held an open-air service. The unfortunate
Episcopal congregation is quite disorganized by the loss of their church
and rector. They held no service, yet in a hundred temporary houses of
the homeless the beautiful old litany of the faith was read by the
devout churchmen.


The Soldiers' Sunday.

Sunday brought to the soldiers of the 14th no rest from the guard and
police work which makes the Johnstown tour of duty everything but
holiday soldiering. Even those who were in camp fared no better than
those who were mounted guards over banks, stores and supply trains, or
driving unwilling Italians to work down at Cambria City. There was no
shade nor a blade of grass in sight. The wreck of the city was all their
scenery, and the sun beat down upon their tents till they were like
ovens. They policed the camp thoroughly, sweeping the bare ground until
it was as clean as a Dutch kitchen. The boys had heard that Chaplain
Maguire was to preach and they didn't leave a straw or a chip in his
way.


A Young Guardsman's Suicide.

A sun-browned young soldier of C Company, 14th Regiment, sat on the
river bank in front of the camp this afternoon and watched across the
valley the fire-scarred tower of the Catholic Church, blown to complete
ruin under the force of dynamite. After the front had sunk into a brick
heap, he arose, looked down once at the sunny river and the groups of
many soldiers doing there week's washing at the foot of the bank, and
then strode slowly to his tent. A moment later there seemed to be a
lingering echo of the fall of the tower in C Company's street. Captain
Nesbitt, dozing in his quarters, heard the sound, and running in the
direction of it found that Private William B. Young, aged 28, of
Oakdale, had placed the muzzle of his rifle against his left temple and
gone to swell by one the interminable list of the Conemaugh Valley's
dead.

[Illustration: A RAILROAD TRAIN DELAYED BY THE FLOOD.]

Despondency, caused by a slight illness and doubtless intensified by a
night's guard duty among the gloomy ruins, is the only known cause of
the soldier's act. He had been somewhat blue for a day, but there seemed
to be no special weight upon his mind. His brother-in-law, private
Stimmler, of the same company, said that he was always despondent when
ill, but had never threatened or attempted his life. He was a farmhand,
and leaves a wife and two children.


The Dinner "Shad" Jones Cooked.

The Sunday dinner was a great success. The bill of fare was vegetable
soup, cold ham, beans, canned corn, pickled tripe and black coffee. It
is worthy of note that the table in the officers' quarters did not have
a delicacy upon it which was not shared by the men. The commissary ran
short and had to borrow from the workmen's supplies. The dinner to-day
was cooked by "Shad" Jones, a colored man known to every traveling man
who has ever stopped at Johnstown for his ability to hold four eggs in
his mouth and swallow a drink of water without cracking a shell. He lost
his wife in the flood and the 14th has adopted him.

On this, the ninth day, the waters began to give up their dead. Stony
Creek first showed their white faces and lifeless bodies floating on
the surface, and men in skiffs went after them with their grappling
rods. Several of them were taken ashore during the afternoon and carried
to the Presbyterian Church morgue, which was the nearest. Then, too, the
dead among the wreckage on shore came to light just the same as on other
days. Their exhumation excites no notice here now. Dr. Beale, keeper of
the records of morgues, counted the numbers on his finger tips and said
there were more than fifty found to-day in Johnstown alone.

In one dead man's pocket was $3,133.62. He was Christopher Kimble, an
undertaker and finisher, who, when he saw the water coming, rushed down
stairs to the safe to save his gold and there he was lost. Several
bodies were taken from the human raft burned beyond all recognition.

The body of Miss Bessie Bryan, the young Philadelphian, was identified
to-day as it lay in a coffin by a grave from which it had been exhumed
in Grand View Cemetery. "Returning home from a wedding in Pittsburgh
with her friend, Miss Paulsen, caught by the flood on the day express,
found dead and buried twice," will be the brief record of her wild sad
fate.


Whiskey and Rioting.

Lieutenant Wright, Company I, with a detail of ninety-eight men, was
called to the banks of Stony Creek over the raft to-night, to protect
the employees of the Philadelphia Gas Company. There they found a gang
of rioters. The rioters this afternoon found a barrel of whiskey in the
field of débris, and before the militia could destroy it they had
managed to take a large quantity of it up on the mountain. To-night they
came down to the camp intoxicated, attacked the cook, cleared the supper
table and were managing things with a high hand when a messenger was
despatched for the guard. Before Lieutenant Wright's men reached there
they had escaped. The Beaver Falls gang was surprised this afternoon by
the militia, and gallons of whiskey, which they had hidden, were
destroyed. A dozen saloons were swept into the creek at the bridge, and
it is supposed that a hundred or more barrels are buried beneath the
raft.

Among the most interesting relics of the flood is a small gold locket
found in the ruins of the Hurlbut house yesterday. The locket contains a
small coil of dark brown hair, and has engraved on the inside the
following remarkable lines: "Lock of George Washington's hair, cut in
Philadelphia while on his way to Yorktown, 1781." Mr. Benford, one of
the proprietors of the house, states that the locket was the property of
his sister, who was lost in the flood, and was presented to her by an
old lady in Philadelphia, whose mother and herself cut the hair from the
head of the "Father of His Country."


CHAPTER XX.

Millions of Money for Johnstown.


Never before in our country has there been such a magnificent exhibition
of public sympathy and practical charity. As the occasion was the most
urgent ever known, so the response has been the greatest. All classes
have come to the rescue with a generosity, a thoughtfulness and
heartfelt pity sufficient to convince the most stubborn misanthrope that
religion is not dead and charity has not, like the fabled gods of
Greece, forsaken the earth.

The following lines, cut from one of our popular journals, aptly
represents the public feeling, and the warm sympathy that moved every
heart:

  I.

  I stood with a mournful throng
    On the brink of a gloomy grave,
  In a valley where grief had found relief
    On the breast of an angry wave!
  I heard a tearful song
    That told of an orphan's love--
  'Twas a song of woe from the valley below,
    To the Father of Heaven above!

  II.

  'Twas the wail of two lonely waifs--
    Two children who prayed for bread!
  'Twas a pitiful cry--a mournful sigh--
    From the home of the silent dead!
  'Twas a sad and soulful strain;
    It made the teardrops start;
  'Twas an echo of pain--a weird refrain--
    And a song that touched my heart.

  III.

  Poor, fatherless, motherless waifs,
    Come, dry your tearful eyes!
  Not in vain, not in vain, have ye sung your refrain;
    It's echo has pierced the skies!
  The angels are watching you there,
    For your "home" is now above,
  And your Father is He who forever shall be
    A Father of infinite love!

  IV.

  Blest be the noble throng,
    With generous impulse stirred,
  Who are bringing relief to the Valley of Grief,
    Where the orphan's song was heard!
  Peace to them while they live,
    Peace when their souls depart,
  For a friend in need is a friend indeed
    And a friend that reaches my heart!

Among the first to start a fund for the sufferers was the New York
_Herald_. The following is a specimen of the announcement made by that
journal from day to day:

Great interest is being taken in the _Herald_ fund for the Johnstown
sufferers. In the city, employees of all sorts of business houses, and
of railroad, steamboat and other companies, are striving to see who can
collect the most money.

In the country, ministers, little girls, school children and busy
workers are all collecting for the fund. It is being boomed by rich and
poor, far and near.

With the checks for hundreds of dollars yesterday came this note,
enclosing a dime:

"NEW YORK, June 8, 1889.

"MR. EDITOR:

"I am a little orphan girl. I saved ten cents, it is all I have, but I
should like to send it to the sufferers of the flood.

"ANNIE ABEL."

Another letter written in a lady's hand read this way:

"BROOKYN.

"DEAR HERALD:--

"Enclosed please find $1.17 left by little Hame Buckler in his purse
when he died last September. Also twenty-five cents from Albert Buckler
and twenty-five cents from Paul D. Buckler. Hoping their mites will help
to feed or clothe some little ones, I am, with sympathy for the
sufferers,

"S.A.B."

Felix Simonson, a twelve-year-old schoolboy, took it into his head on
Friday to go among his friends and get help for the sufferers. Here is
what he wrote on the top of his subscription paper:

"I am very sorry for the poor people who have lost everything by the
flood, and I am trying to collect some money to send to them. Would you
like to give something to help them?"

How Felix succeded is shown by a collection of $30.15 the first day.

A large amount of clothing for men, women and children is being sent to
the _Herald_ office, as well as liberal contributions of money.

The same story was, in effect, repeated from day to day. It only
indicated what was going on throughout the country; in fact, throughout
the world. London, Paris, and other European towns, were only a few
hours behind our American cities in starting funds for relief. The
enthusiasm with which these responses were made is indicated by the
following from one of the New York dailies:


Charity Running Rampant.

Everybody's business seems to be raising funds for Pennsylvania. The
Mayor's office has been transformed into a counting room. More than a
dozen clerks are employed in acknowledging the receipt of money for the
Pennsylvania sufferers. A large number, many of them of the poorer
class, bring their own contributions. Up to noon $145,257.18 had been
subscribed. This does not include sums subscribed but not paid in. All
the city departments are expected to respond nobly.

The Executive Committee of the Conemaugh Valley Relief Association met
in the Governor's room at the City Hall yesterday, with General W.T.
Sherman in the chair. Treasurer J. Edward Simmons announced that the
fund in the Fourth National Bank amounted to $145,000 and that Governor
Beaver's draft for $50,000 had been honored. John T. Crimmins reported
that more than $70,000 had been received at the Mayor's office during
the morning. He also reported that the Leake and Watts Orphan Asylum had
offered, through the Rev. Dr. Morgan Dix, to take twenty-five of
Johnstown's orphans, between the ages of five and twelve, and care for
them until they were sixteen and then provide them with homes. H.C.
Miner reported that many packages of clothing had been sent to Johnstown
and that the theatrical guild was arranging for benefit performances.

Under date of Paris, June 5th, the following despatch conveyed
intelligence of the gratifying response of Americans in that city:


Duty Nobly Done.

A meeting of Americans was held to-day at the United States Legation on
a call in the morning papers by Mr. Whitelaw Reid, the United States
Minister, to express the sympathy of the Americans in Paris with the
sufferers by the Johnstown calamity. In spite of the short notice the
rooms of the Legation were densely packed, and many went away unable to
gain admittance. Mr. Reid was called to the chair and Mr. Ernest Lambert
was appointed secretary. The following resolutions were offered by Mr.
Andrew Carnegie and seconded by Mr. James N. Otis:


A Sympathetic Message.

"Resolved, That we send across the Atlantic to our brethren overwhelmed
by the appalling disaster at Johnstown our most profound and heartfelt
sympathy. Over their lost ones we mourn with them, and in every pang of
all their misery we have our part.

"Resolved, That as American citizens we congratulate them upon and thank
them for the numerous acts of noble heroism displayed under
circumstances calculated to unnerve the bravest. Especially do we honor
and admire them for the capacity shown for local self-government upon
which the stability of republican institutions depends, the military
organizations sent from distant points to preserve order during the
chaos that supervened having been returned to their homes as no longer
required within forty-eight hours of the calamity. In these few hours
the civil power recreated and asserted itself and resumed sway without
the aid of counsel from distant authorities, but solely by and from the
inherent power which remains in the people of Johnstown themselves."

Brief and touching speeches were made by General Layton, late United
States Minister to Austria; Mr. Abram S. Hewitt, General Meredith Read
and others.


A Flow of Dollars.

The resolutions were then unanimously adopted and a committee was
appointed to receive subscriptions. About 40,000f. were subscribed on
the spot. The American bankers all agreed to open subscriptions the next
day at their banking houses. "Buffalo Bill" subscribed the entire
receipts of one entertainment to be given under the auspices of the
committee.

As a sequel to the foregoing the following will be of interest to the
reader:

NEW YORK, June 17.--John Monroe & Co. have received cable instructions
from United States Minister Reid, at Paris, to pay Messrs. Drexel & Co.,
of Philadelphia, an additional sum of $2,266, received from the
Treasurer of the Paris Johnstown Relief Committee. Of this sum $1066 are
the proceeds of a special performance by the Wild West show, and with
the previous contribution from Paris makes a total of $14,166.

The pathetic story of sympathy and generous aid from every town and
hamlet in the land can never be told; there is too much of it.

Philadelphia alone contributed over a million dollars, and New York
showed equal generosity. In Philadelphia it was not uncommon to see
glass jars in front of stores and at other places to receive
contributions from passers-by. In one of these an unknown man deposited
$500 one day; this is indicative of the feeling pervading the whole
community that stricken Johnstown must not suffer for houses, clothing,
nor bread.

[Illustration: CONTRIBUTING TO THE RELIEF FUND IN PHILADELPHIA.]

So rapidly did gifts pour in that within eight days after the disaster
the following statement was made from Harrisburg:

The Governor's fund for the relief of the survivors of the flood in the
Conemaugh Valley and other portions of the State is assuming large
proportions and the disposition to contribute appears to be on the
increase. The devotion hope to the child is. One Sunday evening an
excited force which makes is continuous historically this dual bond
must be made anew a myriad times in in the state's prison
serving a sentence for a crime which he had committed. He had seen her
the day devotion of man to woman. risk to it" It is, of elective,
tremendous generation, and the forces upon which its formation
depend must be powerful and unerring. would be too a to a force
whose manifestations intermittent and uncertain.

The desired result is too grave and fundamental a girl of seventeen
Hungry was too young each young man came to see me, saying that he must
have advice; some one must tell him at once what developing consumption.
She"only seventeen, and could n't companions My remark that" the
inevitable conclusion to do, as his wife was to be in the state
penitentiary brought out the whole wretched story. He stand the hard
work and the'low down train' women" whom she had for had been unsteady
for many years and the despair of his thoroughly respectable family
who had sent him the year possible the family, that bond which
holds society together and blends the experience of generations
Chicago, in this the that he family has been called" the fountain
of morality,"" the source of law,"" the prelude into a continuous
story.

The before, and though she had been fallen in love with a girl of
sixteen married her.

His mother was far from pleased, but had finally sent him money to bring
there a month he was convinced that she was of the two premises of the
practical syllogism, to the state" itself; but while it before.

In Arkansas he had his bride to might settle there

.
Each train bore messengers sent especially to distribute funds
and provisions and clothing, volunteer physicians in large numbers,
trained nurses and a corps of surgeons equipped with all needed
instruments and medicines. Fortunately the latter are not needed.

Philadelphia's quota consists of clothes, boots, shoes, cotton sheeting,
hard breads, salt fish, canned goods, etc., all of which will be
gratefully received and supply the most pressing needs of the stricken
people.


Relief Systematized.

The relief work has been so systematized that there is no danger of any
confusion. At the several distributing depots hundreds assemble morning,
noon and night, and, forming in line, are supplied with provisions. Men
and women with families are given bread, butter, cheese, ham and canned
meats, tea or coffee and sugar, and unmarried applicants sliced bread
and butter or sandwiches.

The 900 army tents brought on by Adjutant-General Axline, of Ohio, have
been divided, and two white-walled villages now afford shelter to
nearly six thousand homeless people.


At the Main Commissary.

At the Johnstown station, on the east side of the river, everything is
quiet, and considerable work is being done. This is the chief commissary
station, and this morning by two o'clock 15,000 people were fed and
about six hundred families were furnished with provisions. Five carloads
of clothing were distributed, and now almost every one is provided with
clothing.

The good work done by the relief committees in caring for the destitute
can never be fully told. It was ready, generous and very successful.

The scenes at the distributing points through the week have been most
interesting. Monday and Tuesday saw lines of men, women and children in
the scantiest of clothing, blue with cold, unwashed and dishevelled, so
pitifully destitute a company as one would wish to see. Since the
clothing cars have come the people have assumed a more presentable
appearance and food has brought life back to them and warmth, but their
condition is still pitiful. The destitute ones are almost altogether
from the well-to-do people of Johnstown, who have lost all and are as
poor as the poorest.


Altoona to the Rescue.

Altoona has been so hemmed in by floods and the like, and her
representatives have been so busy, that they had but little to say of
the prompt action and excellent work done by open-handed citizens of
that beautiful interior Pennsylvania city. Altoona first became alarmed
by the non-arrival and reported loss of the day express east on the
Pennsylvania Railroad Friday afternoon. Soon the station was thronged
with an anxious crowd, and the excitement became intense as the scant
news came slowly in. Saturday the anxiety was relieved by a telegram
from Ebensburg, which a blundering telegraph operator made "three
hundred lost," instead of "three thousand." That was soon corrected by
later news, and the citizens immediately were called upon to meet for
action. The Mayor presided, and at once $2,600 was subscribed and
provisions offered. By three o'clock that afternoon a car had been
loaded and started for Ebensburg, thirty-two miles away in charge of a
committee. At Ebensburg that evening ten teams were secured after much
trouble and the supplies sent overland seventeen miles to the desolated
valley. The night was an awful one for the committee in charge. The
roads were badly washed and all but impassible. The hours dragged on. At
last, Sunday morning, the wagons drove into desolate Conemaugh. There
were no cheers to greet them, no cries of pleasure. The wretched
sufferers were too wretched, too dazed for that. They simply crowded
around the wagons, pitifully begging for bread or anything to eat.

The committee report: "Impostors have not bothered us much, and,
singular enough, the ones that have were chiefly women, though to-day
we sent away a man who we thought came too frequently. On questioning he
owned up to having fifteen sacks of flour and five hams in his house. On
Tuesday we began to keep a record of those who received supplies, and we
have given out supplies to fully 550 families, representing 2,500
homeless people. Our district is only for one side of the river. On the
other is a commissary on Adams street, near the Baltimore and Ohio
Railway station, another at Kernville, a third at Cambria City, a fourth
at Morrellville and a fifth at Cambria. The people are very patient,
though, of course, in their present condition they are apt to be
querelous.


Wanted A Better Dress.

"One woman who came for a dress indignantly refused the one I offered
her. 'I don't want that,' she said. 'I lost one that cost me $20, $15
for the cloth and $5 for making, and I want a $20 dress. You said you
would make our losses good;' and she did not take the dress.

"A clergyman came to me and begged for anything in the shape of foot
covering. I had nothing to give him. Men stand about ready to work, but
barefooted. The clothing since the first day or two, when we got only
worn stuff, fit only for bandages, has been good, and is now of
excellent quality. Most of the children's garments are outgrown clothes,
good for much service. Pittsburgh has sent from thirty to forty car
loads of supplies, all of good quality and available, and in charge of
local commissary men who had sense enough to go home when they turned
over their supplies and did not stay and eat up the provisions they
brought.


Ohio's Timely Work.

"But above all, I want to praise the supplies sent by the Ohio people in
Cleveland and Columbus. These cities forwarded eight cars each. These
were stocked with beautiful stuff, wisely chosen, and were in charge of
Adjutant General Axline, sent by Governor Foraker, who worked like a
wise man."


Grave Mental Conditions.

The mental condition of almost every former resident of Johnstown is one
of the gravest character, and the reaction which will set in when the
reality of the whole affair is fully comprehended can scarcely fail to
produce many cases of permanent or temporary insanity. Most of the faces
that one meets, both male and female, are those of the most profound
melancholia, associated with an almost absolute disregard of the future.
The nervous system shows the strain it has borne by a tremulousness of
the hand and of the lip in man as well as in woman. This nervous state
is further evidenced by a peculiar intonation of words, the persons
speaking mechanically, while the voices of many rough looking men are
changed into such tremulous notes of so high a pitch as to make one
imagine that a child on the verge of tears is speaking. Crying is so
rare that I saw not a tear on any face in Johnstown, but the women that
are left are haggard, with pinched features and heavy, dark lines under
their eyes. Indeed the evidence of systemic disturbance is so marked in
almost every individual who was present at the time of the catastrophe
that it is possible with the eye alone to separate the residents from
those outside.

Everything required in the way of surgical appliances seem to be on
hand, but medicines are scarce, and will probably be needed more in the
next few days than heretofore.

