She sank into her chair and never moved for long. The April sun was just
sinking behind the cedars, and through the open south window of the
library came little spring airs and scents of spring flowers. There was
an endless twitter of birds, and beside her the soft chatter of the wood
fire. An hour before, her mood had been at open war with the spring, and
with all those impulses and yearnings in herself which answered to it.
Now it seemed to her that a wonderful and buoyant life, akin to all the
vast stir, the sweet revivals of Nature, was flooding her whole being.

She gave herself up to it, in a trance interwoven with all the loveliest
and deepest things she had ever felt--with her memory of Hallin, with
her new gropings after God. Just as the light was going she got up
hurriedly and went to her writing-table. She wrote a little note, sat
over it a while, with her face hidden in her hands, then sealed,
addressed, and stamped it. She went out herself to the hall to put it in
the letter-box. For the rest of the evening she went about in a state of
dream, overcome sometimes by rushes of joy, which yet had in them
exquisite elements of pain; hungering for the passage of the hours, for
sleep that might cancel some of them; picturing the road to the Court
and Widrington, along which the old postman had by now carried her
letter--the bands of moonlight and shade lying across it, the quiet of
the budding woods, and the spot on the hillside where he had spoken to
her in that glowing October. It must lie all night in a dull office--her
letter; she was impatient and sorry for it. And when he got it, it would
tell him nothing, though she thought it would rather surprise him. It
was the merest formal request that he would, if he could, come and see
her again the following morning on business.

During the evening Mrs. Boyce lay on the sofa and read. It always still
gave the daughter a certain shock of surprise when she saw the slight
form resting in this way. In words Mrs. Boyce would allow nothing, and
her calm composure had been unbroken from the moment of their return
home, though it was not yet two months since her husband's death. In
these days she read enormously, which again was a new trait--especially
novels. She read each through rapidly, laid it down without a word of
comment, and took up another. Once or twice, but very rarely, Marcella
surprised her in absent meditation, her hand covering the page. From the
hard, satiric brightness of her look on these occasions it seemed
probable that she was speculating on the discrepancies between fiction
and real life, and on the falsity of most literary sentiment.

To-night Marcella sat almost silent--she was making a frock for a
village child she had carried off from its mother, who was very ill--and
Mrs. Boyce read. But as the clock approached ten, the time when they
generally went upstairs, Marcella made a few uncertain movements, and
finally got up, took a stool, and sat down beside the sofa.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later Marcella entered her own room. As she closed the door
behind her she gave an involuntary sob, put down her light, and hurrying
up to the bed, fell on her knees beside it and wept long. Yet her mother
had not been unkind to her. Far from it. Mrs. Boyce had praised her--in
few words, but with evident sincerity--for the courage that could, if
necessary, put convention aside; had spoken of her own relief; had said
pleasant things of Lord Maxwell; had bantered Marcella a little on her
social schemes, and wished her the independence to stick to them.
Finally, as they got up to go to bed, she kissed Marcella twice instead
of once, and said:

"Well, my dear, I shall not be in your way to-morrow morning; I promise
you that."

The speaker's satisfaction was plain; yet nothing could have been less
maternal. The girl's heart, when she found herself alone, was very sore,
and the depression of a past which had been so much of a failure, so
lacking in any satisfied emotion and the sweet preludes of family
affection, darkened for a while even the present and the future.

After a time she got up, and leaving her room, went to sit in a passage
outside it. It was the piece of wide upper corridor leading to the
winding stairs she had descended on the night of the ball. It was one of
the loneliest and oddest places in the house, for it communicated only
with her room and the little staircase, which was hardly ever used. It
was, indeed, a small room in itself, and was furnished with a few huge
old chairs with moth-eaten frames and tattered seats. A flowery paper of
last-century date sprawled over the walls, the carpet had many holes in
it, and the shallow, traceried windows, set almost flush in the outer
surface of the wall, were curtainless now, as they had been two years
before.

She drew one of the old chairs to a window, and softly opened it. There
was a young moon, and many stars, seen uncertainly through the rush of
April cloud. Every now and then a splash of rain moved the creepers and
swept across the lawn, to be followed by a spell of growing and
breathing silence. The scent of hyacinths and tulips mounted through the
wet air. She could see a long ghostly line of primroses, from which rose
the grey base of the Tudor front, checkered with a dim light and shade.
Beyond the garden, with its vague forms of fountain and sun-dial, the
cedars stood watching; the little church slept to her left.

So, face to face with Nature, the old house, and the night, she took
passionate counsel with herself. After to-night surely, she would be no
more lonely! She was going for ever from her own keeping to that of
another. For she never, from the moment she wrote her letter, had the
smallest doubt as to what his answer to her would be; never the smallest
dread that he would, even in the lightest passing impression, connect
what she was going to do with any thought of blame or wonder. Her pride
and fear were gone out of her; only, she dared not think of how he would
look and speak when the moment came, because it made her sick and faint
with feeling.

How strange to imagine what, no doubt, would be said and thought about
her return to him by the outside world! His great place in society, his
wealth, would be the obvious solution of it for many--too obvious even
to be debated. Looking back upon her thoughts of this night in after
years, she could not remember that the practical certainty of such an
interpretation had even given her a moment's pain. It was too remote
from all her now familiar ways of thinking--and his. In her early Mellor
days the enormous importance that her feverish youth attached to wealth
and birth might have been seen in her very attacks upon them. Now all
her standards were spiritualised. She had come to know what happiness
and affection are possible in three rooms, or two, on twenty-eight
shillings a week; and, on the other hand, her knowledge of Aldous--a man
of stoical and simple habit, thrust, with a student's tastes, into the
position of a great landowner--had shown her, in the case at least of
one member of the rich class, how wealth may be a true moral burden and
test, the source of half the difficulties and pains--of half the
nobleness also--of a man's life. Not in mere wealth and poverty, she
thought, but in things of quite another order--things of social sympathy
and relation--alterable at every turn, even under existing conditions,
by the human will, lie the real barriers that divide us man from man.

Had they ever really formed a part of historical time, those eight
months of their engagement? Looking back upon them, she saw herself
moving about in them like a creature without eyes, worked, blindfold, by
a crude inner mechanism that took no account really of impressions from
without. Yet that passionate sympathy with the poor--that hatred of
oppression? Even these seemed to her to-night the blind, spasmodic
efforts of a mind that all through _saw_ nothing--mistook its own
violences and self-wills for eternal right, and was but traitor to what
should have been its own first loyalties, in seeking to save and reform.

Was _true_ love now to deliver her from that sympathy, to deaden in her
that hatred? Her whole soul cried out in denial. By daily life in
natural relations with the poor, by a fruitful contact with fact, by the
clash of opinion in London, by the influence of a noble friendship, by
the education of awakening passion--what had once been mere tawdry and
violent hearsay had passed into a true devotion, a true thirst for
social good. She had ceased to take a system cut and dried from the
Venturists, or any one else; she had ceased to think of whole classes
of civilised society with abhorrence and contempt; and there had dawned
in her that temper which is in truth implied in all the more majestic
conceptions of the State--the temper that regards the main institutions
of every great civilisation, whether it be property, or law, or
religious custom, as necessarily, in some degree, divine and sacred. For
man has not been their sole artificer! Throughout there has been working
with him "the spark that fires our clay."

Yes!--but modification, progress, change, there must be, for us as for
our fathers! Would marriage fetter her? It was not the least probable
that he and she, with their differing temperaments, would think alike in
the future, any more than in the past. She would always be for
experiments, for risks, which his critical temper, his larger brain,
would of themselves be slow to enter upon. Yet she knew well enough that
in her hands they would become bearable and even welcome to him. And for
himself, she thought with a craving, remorseful tenderness of that
pessimist temper of his towards his own work and function that she knew
so well. In old days it had merely seemed to her inadequate, if not
hypocritical. She would have liked to drive the dart deeper, to make him
still unhappier! Now, would not a wife's chief function be to reconcile
him with himself and life, to cheer him forward on the lines of his own
nature, to believe, understand, help?

Yet always in the full liberty to make her own sacrifices, to realise
her own dreamlands! She thought with mingled smiles and tears of her
plans for this bit of earth that fate had brought under her hand; she
pledged herself to every man, woman, and child on it so to live her life
that each one of theirs should be the richer for it; she set out, so far
as in her lay, to "choose equality." And beyond Mellor, in the great
changing world of social speculation and endeavour, she prayed always
for the open mind, the listening heart.

"There is one conclusion, one cry, I always come back to at last," she
remembered hearing Hallin say to a young Conservative with whom he had
been having a long economic and social argument. "_Never resign
yourself_!--that seems to be the main note of it. Say, if you
will--believe, if you will, that human nature, being what it is, and
what, so far as we can see, it always must be, the motives which work
the present social and industrial system can never be largely
superseded; that property and saving--luck, too!--struggle, success, and
failure, must go on. That is one's intellectual conclusion; and one has
a right to it--you and I are at one in it. But then--on the heels of it
comes the moral imperative! 'Hold what you please about systems and
movements, and fight for what you hold; only, as an individual--_never
say--never think!_--that it is in the order of things, in the purpose of
God, that one of these little ones--this Board-School child, this man
honestly out of work, this woman "sweated" out of her life--should
perish!' A contradiction, or a commonplace, you say? Well and good. The
only truths that burn themselves into the conscience, that work
themselves out through the slow and manifold processes of the personal
will into a pattern of social improvement, are the contradictions and
the commonplaces!"

So here, in the dark, alone with the haunting, uplifting presences of
"admiration, hope, and love," Marcella vowed, within the limits of her
personal scope and power, never to give up the struggle for a nobler
human fellowship, the lifelong toil to understand, the passionate effort
to bring honour and independence and joy to those who had them not. But
not alone; only, not alone! She had learnt something of the dark
aspects, the crushing complexity of the world. She turned from them
to-night, at last, with a natural human terror, to hide herself in her
own passion, to make of love her guide and shelter. Her whole rich being
was wrought to an intoxication of self-giving. Oh! let the night go
faster! faster! and bring his step upon the road, her cry of repentance
to his ear.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I trust I am not late. Your clocks, I think, are ahead of ours. You
said eleven?"

Aldous advanced into the room with hand outstretched. He had been
ushered into the drawing-room, somewhat to his surprise.

Marcella came forward. She was in black as before, and pale, but there
was a knot of pink anemones fastened at her throat, which, in the play
they made with her face and hair, gave him a start of pleasure.

"I wanted," she said, "to ask you again about those shares--how to
manage the sale of them. Could you--could you give me the name of some
one in the City you trust?"

He was conscious of some astonishment.

"Certainly," he said. "If you would rather not entrust it to Mr. French,
I can give you the name of the firm my grandfather and I have always
employed; or I could manage it for you if you would allow me. You have
quite decided?"

"Yes," she said mechanically,--"quite. And--and I think I could do it
myself. Would you mind writing the address for me, and will you read
what I have written there?"

She pointed to the little writing-table and the writing materials upon
it, then turned away to the window. He looked at her an instant with
uneasy amazement.

He walked up to the table, put down his hat and gloves beside it, and
stooped to read what was written.

_"It was in this room you told me I had done you a great wrong. But
wrongdoers may be pardoned sometimes, if they ask it. Let me know by a
sign, a look, if I may ask it. If not it would be kind to go away
without a word."_

She heard a cry. But she did not look up. She only knew that he had
crossed the room, that his arms were round her, her head upon his
breast.

"Marcella!--wife!" was all he said, and that in a voice so low, so
choked, that she could hardly hear it.

He held her so for a minute or more, she weeping, his own eyes dim with
tears, her cheek laid against the stormy beating of his heart.

At last he raised her face, so that he could see it.

"So this--this was what you had in your mind towards me, while I have
been despairing--fighting with myself, walking in darkness. Oh, my
darling! explain it. How can it be? Am I real? Is this face--these lips
real?"--he kissed both, trembling. "Oh! when a man is raised thus--in a
moment--from torture and hunger to full joy, there are no words--"

His head sank on hers, and there was silence again, while he wrestled
with himself.

At last she looked up, smiling.

"You are to please come over here," she said, and leading him by the
hand, she took him to the other side of the room. "That is the chair you
sat in that morning. Sit down!"

He sat down, wondering, and before he could guess what she was going to
do she had sunk on her knees beside him.

"I am going to tell you," she said, "a hundred things I never told you
before. You are to hear me confess; you are to give me penance; you are
to say the hardest things possible to me. If you don't I shall distrust
you."

She smiled at him again through her tears. "Marcella," he cried in
distress, trying to lift her, to rise himself, "you can't imagine that I
should let _you_ kneel to _me_!"

"You must," she said steadily; "well, if it will make you happier, I
will take a stool and sit by you. But you are there above me--I am at
your feet--it is the same chair, and you shall not move"--she stooped in
a hasty passion, as though atoning for her "shall," and kissed his
hand--"till I have said it all--every word!"

So she began it--her long confession, from the earliest days. He winced
often--she never wavered. She carried through the sharpest analysis of
her whole mind with regard to him; of her relations to him and Wharton
in the old days; of the disloyalty and lightness with which she had
treated the bond, that yet she had never, till quite the end, thought
seriously of breaking; of her selfish indifference to, even contempt
for, his life, his interests, his ideals; of her calm forecasts of a
married state in which she was always to take the lead and always to be
in the right--then of the real misery and struggle of the Hurd trial.

"That was my first true _experience_," she said; "it made me wild and
hard, but it burnt, it purified. I began to live. Then came the day
when--when we parted--the time in hospital--the nursing--the evening on
the terrace. I had been thinking of you--because remorse made me think
of you--solitude--Mr. Hallin--everything. I wanted you to be kind to me,
to behave as though you had forgotten everything, because it would have
made me comfortable and happy; or I thought it would. And then, that
night you wouldn't be kind, you wouldn't forget--instead, you made me
pay my penalty."

She stared at him an instant, her dark brows drawn together, struggling
to keep her tears back, yet lightening from moment to moment into a
divine look of happiness. He tried to take possession of her, to stop
her, to silence all this self-condemnation on his breast. But she would
not have it; she held him away from her.

"That night, though I walked up and down the terrace with Mr. Wharton
afterwards, and tried to fancy myself in love with him--that night, for
the first time, I began to love you! It was mean and miserable, wasn't
it, not to be able to appreciate the gift, only to feel when it was
taken away? It was like being good when one is punished, because one
must--"

She laid down her head against his chair with a long sigh. He could bear
it no longer. He lifted her in his arms, talking to her passionately of
the feelings which had been the counterpart to hers, the longings,
jealousies, renunciations--above all, the agony of that moment at the
Mastertons' party.

"Hallin was the only person who understood," he said; "he knew all the
time that I should love you to my grave. I could talk to him."

She gave a little sob of joy, and pushing herself away from him an
instant, she laid a hand on his shoulder.

"I told him," she said--"I told him, that night he was dying."

He looked at her with an emotion too deep even for caresses.

"He never spoke--coherently--after you left him. At the end he motioned
to me, but there were no words. If I could possibly love you more, it
would be because you gave him that joy."

He held her hand, and there was silence. Hallin stood beside them,
living and present again in the life of their hearts.

Then, little by little, delight and youth and love stole again upon
their senses.

"Do you suppose," he exclaimed, "that I yet understand in the least how
it is that I am here, in this chair, with you beside me? You have told
me much ancient history!--but all that truly concerns me this morning
lies in the dark. The last time I saw you, you were standing at the
garden-door, with a look which made me say to myself that I was the same
blunderer I had always been, and had far best keep away. Bridge me the
gap, please, between that hell and this heaven!"

She held her head high, and changed her look of softness for a frown.

"You had spoken of '_marriage!_'" she said. "Marriage in the abstract,
with a big _M_. You did it in the tone of my guardian giving me away.
Could I be expected to stand that?"

He laughed. The joy in the sound almost hurt her.

"So one's few virtues smite one," he said as he captured her hand again.
"Will you acknowledge that I played my part well? I thought to myself,
in the worst of tempers, as I drove away, that I could hardly have been
more official. But all this is evasion. What I desire to know,
categorically, is, what made you write that letter to me last night,
after--after the day before?"

She sat with her chin on her hand, a smile dancing.

"Whom did you walk with yesterday afternoon?" she said slowly.

He looked bewildered.

"There!" she cried, with a sudden wild gesture; "when I have told you it
will undo it all. Oh! if Frank had never said a word to me; if I had had
no excuse, no assurance, nothing to go upon, had just called to you in
the dark, as it were, there would be some generosity, some atonement in
that! Now you will think I waited to be meanly sure, instead of--"

She dropped her dark head upon his hand again with an abandonment which
unnerved him, which he had almost to brace himself against.

"So it was Frank," he said--"_Frank!_ Two hours ago, from my window, I
saw him and Betty down by the river in the park. They were supposed to
be fishing. As far as I could see they were sifting or walking hand in
hand, in the face of day and the keepers. I prepared wise things to say
to them. None of them will be said now, or listened to. As Frank's
mentor I am undone."

He held her, looking at her intently.

"Shall I tell you," he asked, in a lower voice--"shall I show you
something--something that I had on my heart as I was walking here?"

He slipped his hand into the breast-pocket of his coat, and drew out a
little plain black leather case. When he opened it she saw that it
contained a pen-and-ink sketch of herself that had been done one evening
by a young artist staying at the Court, and--a bunch of traveller's joy.

She gazed at it with a mixture of happiness and pain. It reminded her of
cold and selfish thoughts, and set them in relief against his constancy.
But she had given away all rights--even the right to hate herself.
Piteously, childishly, with seeking eyes, she held out her hand to him,
as though mutely asking him for the answer to her outpouring--the last
word of it all. He caught her whisper.

"Forgive?" he said to her, scorning her for the first and only time in
their history. "Does a man _forgive_ the hand that sets him free, the
voice that recreates him? Choose some better word--my wife!"