The unsettled conditions which followed the peace in various European
countries found Bentham other employment. In 1809 Dumont did some
codifying for the Emperor of Russia, and in 1817 was engaged to do the
same service for Geneva. He was employed for some years, and is said to
have introduced a Benthamite Penal Code and Panopticon, and an
application of the Tactics.[325] In 1820 and 1821 Bentham was consulted
by the Constitutional party in Spain and Portugal, and wrote elaborate
tracts for their enlightenment. He made an impression upon at least one
Spaniard. Borrow, when travelling in Spain some ten years after
Bentham's death, was welcomed by an Alcalde on Cape Finisterre, who had
upon his shelves all the works of the 'grand Baintham,' and compared him
to Solon, Plato, and even Lope de Vega.[326] The last comparison
appeared to Borrow to be overstrained. Bentham even endeavoured in
1822-23 to administer some sound advice to the government of Tripoli,
but his suggestions for 'remedies against misrule' seem never to have
been communicated.[327] In 1823 and 1824 he was a member of the Greek
Committee; he corresponded with Mavrocordato and other leaders; and he
begged Parr to turn some of his admonitions into 'Parrian' Greek for the
benefit of the moderns.[328] Blaquière and Stanhope, two ardent members
of the committee, were disciples; and Stanhope carried with him to
Greece Bentham's _Table of the Springs of Action_, with which he tried
to indoctrinate Byron. The poet, however, thought with some plausibility
that he was a better judge of human passions than the philosopher.
Parry, the engineer, who joined Byron at the same time, gives a queer
account of the old philosopher trotting about London in the service of
the Greeks.[329] The coarse and thoughtless might laugh, and perhaps
some neither coarse nor thoughtless might smile. But Bowring tells us
that these were days of boundless happiness for Bentham.[330] Tributes
of admiration were pouring in from all sides, and the true Gospel was
spreading across the Atlantic and along the shores of the Mediterranean.

At home the Utilitarian party was consolidating itself; and the struggle
which resulted in the Reform Bill was slowly beginning. The veteran
Cartwright, Bentham's senior by eight years, tried in 1821 to persuade
him to come out as one of a committee of 'Guardians of Constitutional
Reform,' elected at a public meeting.[331] Bentham wisely refused to be
drawn from his privacy. He left it to his friends to agitate, while he
returned to labour in his study. The demand for legislation which had
sprung up in so many parts of the world encouraged Bentham to undertake
the last of his great labours. The Portuguese Cortes voted in December
1821 that he should be invited to prepare an 'all-comprehensive code';
and in 1822 he put out a curious 'Codification proposal,' offering to do
the work for any nation in need of a legislator, and appending
testimonials to his competence for the work. He set to work upon a
'Constitutional Code,' which occupied him at intervals during the
remainder of his life, and embodied the final outcome of his
speculations. He diverged from this main purpose to write various
pamphlets upon topics of immediate interest; and was keenly interested
in the various activities of his disciples. The Utilitarians now thought
themselves entitled to enter the field of politics as a distinct body.
An organ to defend their cause was desirable, and Bentham supplied the
funds for the _Westminster Review_, of which the first number appeared
in April 1824.

The editorship fell chiefly into the hands of Bowring (1792-1872).
Bowring had travelled much upon the Continent for a commercial house,
and his knowledge of Spanish politics had brought him into connection
with Bentham, to whom Blaquière recommended him in 1820.[332] A strong
attachment sprang up between the two. Bentham confided all his thoughts
and feelings to the young man, and Bowring looked up to his teacher with
affectionate reverence. In 1828 Bentham says that Bowring is 'the most
intimate friend he has.'[333] Bowring complains of calumnies, by which
he was assailed, though they failed to alienate Bentham. What they may
have been matters little; but it is clear that a certain jealousy arose
between this last disciple and his older rivals. James Mill's stern and
rigid character had evidently produced some irritation at intervals; and
to him it would naturally appear that Bowring was the object of a senile
favouritism. In any case it is to be regretted that Bentham thus became
partly alienated from his older friends[334]. Mill was too proud to
complain; and never wavered in his allegiance to the master's
principles. But one result, and to us the most important, was that the
new attachment led to the composition of one of the worst biographies in
the language, out of materials which might have served for a
masterpiece. Bowring was a great linguist, and an energetic man of
business. He wrote hymns, and one of them, 'In the cross of Christ I
glory,' is said to have 'universal fame.' A Benthamite capable of so
singular an eccentricity judiciously agreed to avoid discussions upon
religious topics with his master. To Bowring we also owe the
_Deontology_, which professes to represent Bentham's dictation. The
Mills repudiated this version, certainly a very poor one, of their
teacher's morality, and held that it represented less Bentham than such
an impression of Bentham as could be stamped upon a muddle-headed
disciple.[335]

The last years of his life brought Bentham into closer connection with
more remarkable men. The Radicals had despised the Whigs as trimmers and
half-hearted reformers, and James Mill expressed this feeling very
frankly in the first numbers of the _Westminster Review_. Reform,
however, was now becoming respectable, and the Whigs were gaining the
courage to take it up seriously. Foremost among the Edinburgh Reviewers
was the great Henry Brougham, whose fame was at this time almost as
great as his ambition could desire, and who considered himself to be the
natural leader of all reform. He had shown eagerness to distinguish
himself in lines fully approved by Bentham. His admirers regarded him
as a giant; and his opponents, if they saw in him a dash of the
charlatan, could not deny his amazing energy and his capacity as an
orator. The insatiable vanity which afterwards ruined his career already
made it doubtful whether he fought for the cause or the glory. But he
was at least an instrument worth having. He was a kind of half-disciple.
If in 1809 he had checked Mill's praise of Bentham, he was soon
afterwards in frequent communication with the master. In July 1812
Bentham announces that Brougham is at last to be admitted to a dinner,
for which he had been 'intriguing any time this six months,' and expects
that his proselyte will soon be the first man in the House of Commons,
and eclipse even Romilly.[336] In later years they had frequent
communications; and when in 1827 Brougham was known to be preparing an
utterance upon law reform, Bentham's hopes rose high. He offered to his
disciple 'some nice little sweet pap of my own making,' sound teaching
that is, upon evidence, judicial establishments and codification.
Brougham thanks his 'dear grandpapa,' and Bentham offers further
supplies to his 'dear, sweet little poppet.'[337] But when the orator
had spoken Bentham declares (9th February 1828) that the mountain has
been delivered of a mouse. Brougham was 'not the man to set up' simple
and rational principles. He was the sham adversary but the real
accomplice of Peel, pulling up lies by the root to plant others equally
noxious.[338] In 1830 Bentham had even to hold up 'Master Peel' as a
'model good boy' to the self-styled reformer. Brougham needs a dose of
jalap instead of pap, for he cannot even spell the 'greatest happiness
principle' properly.[339] Bentham went so far as to write what he fondly
took to be an epigram upon Brougham:

    'So foolish and so wise, so great, so small,
     Everything now, to-morrow nought at all.'[340]

In September 1831 Brougham as Chancellor announced a scheme for certain
changes in the constitution of the courts. The proposal called forth
Bentham's last pamphlet, _Lord Brougham displayed_.[341] Bentham laments
that his disciple has 'stretched out the right hand of fellowship to
jobbers of all sorts.'[342] In vain had Brougham in his speech called
Bentham 'one of the great sages of the law.' Bentham acknowledges his
amiability and his genius; but laments over the untrustworthy character
of a man who could only adopt principles so far as they were subservient
to his own vanity.

Another light of the _Edinburgh Review_, who at this time took Brougham
at his own valuation, did an incidental service to Bentham. Upon the
publication of the _Book of Fallacies_ in 1825, Sydney Smith reviewed or
rather condensed it in the _Edinburgh Review_, and gave the pith of the
whole in his famous _Noodle's Oration_. The noodle utters all the
commonplaces by which the stupid conservatives, with Eldon at their
head, met the demands of reformers. Nothing could be wittier than
Smith's brilliant summary. Whigs and Radicals for the time agreed in
ridiculing blind prejudice. The day was to come when the Whigs at least
would see that some principles might be worse than prejudice. All the
fools, said Lord Melbourne, 'were against Catholic Emancipation, and
the worst of it is, the fools were in the right.' Sydney Smith was glad
to be Bentham's mouthpiece for the moment: though, when Benthamism was
applied to church reform, Smith began to perceive that Noodle was not so
silly as he seemed.

One other ally of Bentham deserves notice. O'Connell had in 1828, in
speaking of legal abuses, called himself 'an humble disciple of the
immortal Bentham.'[343] Bentham wrote to acknowledge the compliment. He
invited O'Connell to become an inmate of his hermitage at Queen's Square
Place, and O'Connell responded warmly to the letters of his 'revered
master.' Bentham's aversion to Catholicism was as strong as his
objection to Catholic disqualifications, and he took some trouble to
smooth down the difficulties which threatened an alliance between ardent
believers and thoroughgoing sceptics. O'Connell had attacked some who
were politically upon his side. 'Dan, dear child,' says Bentham, 'whom
in imagination I am at this moment pressing to my fond bosom, put off,
if it be possible, your intolerance.'[344] Their friendship, however,
did not suffer from this discord, and their correspondence is in the
same tone till the end. In one of Bentham's letters he speaks of a
contemporary correspondence with another great man, whom he does not
appear to have met personally. He was writing long letters, entreating
the duke of Wellington to eclipse Cromwell by successfully attacking the
lawyers. The duke wrote 'immediate answers in his own hand,' and took
good-humouredly a remonstrance from Bentham upon the duel with Lord
Winchilsea in 1829.[345] Bentham was ready to the end to seek allies in
any quarter. When Lord Sidmouth took office in 1812, Bentham had an
interview with him, and had some hopes of being employed to prepare a
penal code.[346] Although experience had convinced him of the futility
of expectations from the Sidmouths and Eldons, he was always on the look
out for sympathy; and the venerable old man was naturally treated with
respect by people who had little enough of real interest in his
doctrines.

During the last ten years of his life, Bentham was cheered by symptoms
of the triumph of his creed. The approach of the millennium seemed to be
indicated by the gathering of the various forces which carried Roman
Catholic Emancipation and the Reform Bill. Bentham still received
testimonies of his fame abroad. In 1825 he visited Paris to consult some
physicians. He was received with the respect which the French can always
pay to intellectual eminence.[347] All the lawyers in a court of justice
rose to receive him, and he was placed at the president's right hand. On
the revolution of 1830, he addressed some good advice to the country of
which he had been made a citizen nearly forty years before. In 1832,
Talleyrand, to whom he had talked about the Panopticon in 1792, dined
with him alone in his hermitage.[348] When Bowring observed to the
prince that Bentham's works had been plundered, the polite diplomatist
replied, _et pillé de tout le monde, il est toujours riche_. Bentham was
by this time failing. At eighty-two he was still, as he put it,
'codifying like any dragon.'[349] On 18th May 1832 he did his last bit
of his lifelong labour, upon the 'Constitutional Code.' The great
reform agitation was reaching the land of promise, but Bentham was to
die in the wilderness. He sank without a struggle on 6th June 1832, his
head resting on Bowring's bosom. He left the characteristic direction
that his body should be dissected for the benefit of science. An
incision was formally made; and the old gentleman, in his clothes as he
lived, his face covered by a wax mask, is still to be seen at University
College in Gower Street.

Bentham, as we are told, had a strong personal resemblance to Benjamin
Franklin. Sagacity, benevolence, and playfulness were expressed in both
physiognomies. Bentham, however, differed from the man whose intellect
presents many points of likeness, in that he was not a man of the
market-place or the office. Bentham was in many respects a child through
life:[350] a child in simplicity, good humour, and vivacity; his health
was unbroken; he knew no great sorrow; and after emerging from the
discouragement of his youth, he was placidly contemplating a continuous
growth of fame and influence. He is said to have expressed the wish that
he could awake once in a century to contemplate the prospect of a world
gradually adopting his principles and so making steady progress in
happiness and wisdom.

No man could lead a simpler life. His chief luxuries at table were
fruit, bread, and tea. He had a 'sacred teapot' called Dick, with
associations of its own, and carefully regulated its functions. He
refrained from wine during the greatest part of his life, and was never
guilty of a single act of intemperance. In later life he took a daily
half-glass of Madeira. He was scrupulously neat in person, and wore a
Quaker-like brown coat, brown cassimere breeches, white worsted
stockings and a straw hat. He walked or 'rather trotted' with his stick
Dapple, and took his 'ante-prandial' and other 'circumgyrations' with
absolute punctuality. He loved pets; he had a series of attached cats;
and cherished the memory of a 'beautiful pig' at Hendon, and of a donkey
at Ford Abbey. He encouraged mice to play in his study--a taste which
involved some trouble with his cats, and suggests problems as to the
greatest happiness of the greatest number. Kindness to animals was an
essential point of his moral creed. 'I love everything,' he said, 'that
has four legs.' He had a passion for flowers, and tried to introduce
useful plants. He loved music--especially Handel--and had an organ in
his house. He cared nothing for poetry: 'Prose,' he said,[351] 'is when
all the lines except the last go on to the margin. Poetry is when some
of them fall short of it.' He was courteous and attentive to his guests,
though occasionally irritable when his favourite crotchets were
transgressed, or especially if his fixed hours of work were deranged.

His regularity in literary work was absolute. He lived by a time-table,
working in the morning and turning out from ten to fifteen folio pages
daily. He read the newspapers regularly, but few books, and cared
nothing for criticisms on his own writings. His only substantial meal
was a dinner at six or half-past, to which he occasionally admitted a
few friends as a high privilege. He liked to discuss the topics of which
his mind was full, and made notes beforehand of particular points to be
introduced in conversation. He was invariably inaccessible to visitors,
even famous ones, likely to distract his thoughts. 'Tell Mr. Bentham
that Mr. Richard Lovell Edgeworth desires to see him.' 'Tell Mr. Richard
Lovell Edgeworth that Mr. Bentham does not desire to see him' was the
reply. When Mme. de Staël came to England, she said to Dumont: 'Tell
Bentham I shall see nobody till I have seen him.' 'I am sorry for it,'
said Bentham, 'for then she will never see anybody.' And he summed up
his opinion of the famous author of _Corinne_ by calling her 'a trumpery
magpie.'[352] There is a simplicity and vivacity about some of the
sayings reported by Bowring, which prove that Bentham could talk well,
and increase our regret for the absence of a more efficient Boswell. At
ten Bentham had his tea, at eleven his nightcap, and by twelve all his
guests were ignominiously expelled. He was left to sleep on a hard bed.
His sleep was light, and much disturbed by dreams.

Bentham was certainly amiable. The 'surest way to gain men,' he said,
'is to appear to love them, and the surest way to appear to love them is
to love them in reality.' The least pleasing part of his character,
however, is the apparent levity of his attachments. He was, as we have
seen, partly alienated from Dumont, though some friendly communications
are recorded in later years, and Dumont spoke warmly of Bentham only a
few days before his death in 1829.[353] He not only cooled towards James
Mill, but, if Bowring is to be trusted, spoke of him with great
harshness.[354] Bowring was not a judicious reporter, indeed, and
capable of taking hasty phrases too seriously. What Bentham's remarks
upon these and other friends suggest is not malice or resentment, but
the flippant utterance of a man whose feelings are wanting in depth
rather than kindliness. It is noticeable that, after his early visit at
Bowood, no woman seems to have counted for anything in Bentham's life.
He was not only never in love, but it looks as if he never even talked
to any woman except his cook or housemaid.

The one conclusion that I need draw concerns a question not, I think,
hard to be solved. It would be easy to make a paradox by calling Bentham
at once the most practical and most unpractical of men. This is to point
out the one-sided nature of Bentham's development. Bentham's habits
remind us in some ways of Kant; and the thought may be suggested that he
would have been more in his element as a German professor of
philosophies. In such a position he might have devoted himself to the
delight of classifying and co-ordinating theories, and have found
sufficient enjoyment in purely intellectual activity. After a fashion
that was the actual result. How far, indeed, Bentham could have achieved
much in the sphere of pure philosophy, and what kind of philosophy he
would have turned out, must be left to conjecture. The circumstances of
his time and country, and possibly his own temperament generally, turned
his thoughts to problems of legislation and politics, that is to say, of
direct practical interest. He was therefore always dealing with concrete
facts, and a great part of his writings may be considered as raw
material for acts of parliament. Bentham remained, however, unpractical,
in the sense that he had not that knowledge which we ascribe either to
the poet or to the man of the world. He had neither the passion nor the
sympathetic imagination. The springs of active conduct which Byron knew
from experience were to Bentham nothing more than names in a careful
classification. Any shrewd attorney or Bow Street runner would have been
a better judge of the management of convicts; and here were dozens of
party politicians, such as Rigby and Barré, who could have explained to
him beforehand those mysteries in the working of the political
machinery, which it took him half a lifetime to discover. In this sense
Bentham was unpractical in the highest degree, for at eighty he had not
found out of what men are really made. And yet by his extraordinary
intellectual activity and the concentration of all his faculties upon
certain problems, he succeeded in preserving an example, and though not
a unique yet an almost unsurpassable example, of the power which belongs
to the man of one idea.

NOTES:

[325] See correspondence upon his codification plans in Russia, America,
and Geneva in _Works_, iv. 451-594.

[326] Borrow's _Bible in Spain_, ch. xxx.

[327] _Works_, viii. 555-600.

[328] _Ibid._ x. 534. See Blaquière's enthusiastic letter to
Bentham.--_Works_, x. 475.

[329] See, however, Bentham's reference to this story.--_Works_, xi. 66.

[330] _Works_, x. 539.

[331] _Ibid._ x. 522.

[332] _Works_, x. 516.

[333] _Ibid._ x. 591.

[334] A letter from Mill in the University College MSS. describes a
misunderstanding about borrowed books, a fertile, but hardly adequate,
cause of quarrel.

[335] Bowring's religious principles prevented him from admitting some
of Bentham's works to the collective edition.

[336] _Works_, x. 471-72.

[337] _Ibid._ x. 576.

[338] _Ibid._ x. 588.

[339] _Works_, xi. 37. Papers preserved at University College show that
during Peel's law reforms at this time Bentham frequently communicated
with him.

[340] _Ibid._ xi. 50.

[341] _Ibid._ v. 549.

[342] _Ibid._ v. 609.

[343] _Works_, x. 594.

[344] _Ibid._ xi. 26.

[345] _Ibid._ xi. 13, 28.

[346] _Works_, x. 468.

[347] _Ibid._ x. 551.

[348] _Ibid._ xi. 75.

[349] _Ibid._ xi. 33.

[350] Mill's _Dissertations_, i. 354 and 392 _n._

[351] _Works_, x. 442.

[352] _Works_, x. 467; xi. 79.

[353] _Ibid._ xi. 23-24.

[354] _Ibid._ x. 450.


CHAPTER VI

BENTHAM'S DOCTRINE


I. FIRST PRINCIPLES

Bentham's position is in one respect unique. There have been many
greater thinkers; but there has been hardly any one whose abstract
theory has become in the same degree the platform of an active political
party. To accept the philosophy was to be also pledged to practical
applications of Utilitarianism. What, then, was the revelation made to
the Benthamites, and to what did it owe its influence? The central
doctrine is expressed in Bentham's famous formula: the test of right and
wrong is the 'greatest happiness of the greatest number.' There was
nothing new in this assertion. It only expresses the fact that Bentham
accepted one of the two alternatives which have commended themselves to
conflicting schools ever since ethical speculation was erected into a
separate department of thought. Moreover, the side which Bentham took
was, we may say, the winning side. The ordinary morality of the time was
Utilitarian in substance. Hutcheson had invented the sacred phrase: and
Hume had based his moral system upon 'utility.'[355] Bentham had
learned much from Helvétius the French freethinker, and had been
anticipated by Paley the English divine. The writings in which Bentham
deals explicitly with the general principles of Ethics would hardly
entitle him to a higher position than that of a disciple of Hume without
Hume's subtlety; or of Paley without Paley's singular gift of
exposition. Why, then, did Bentham's message come upon his disciples
with the force and freshness of a new revelation? Our answer must be in
general terms that Bentham founded not a doctrine but a method: and that
the doctrine which came to him simply as a general principle was in his
hands a potent instrument applied with most fruitful results to
questions of immediate practical interest.

Beyond the general principle of utility, therefore, we have to consider
the 'organon' constructed by him to give effect to a general principle
too vague to be applied in detail. The fullest account of this is
contained in the _Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation_. This work unfortunately is a fragment, but it gives his
doctrine vigorously and decisively, without losing itself in the minute
details which become wearisome in his later writings. Bentham intended
it as an introduction to a penal code; and his investigation sent him
back to more general problems. He found it necessary to settle the
relations of the penal code to the whole body of law; and to settle
these he had to consider the principles which underlie legislation in
general. He had thus, he says, to 'create a new science,' and then to
elaborate one department of the science. The 'introduction' would
contain prolegomena not only for the penal code but for the other
departments of inquiry which he intended to exhaust.[356] He had to lay
down primary truths which should be to this science what the axioms are
to mathematical sciences.[357] These truths therefore belong to the
sphere of conduct in general, and include his ethical theory.

