  What were these
hidden communications that passed between Vitellozzo Vitelli and the
Governor of Cesena?  It was a matter of which I could not pretend to offer
a solution, but, nevertheless, it was one, I thought, that promised to
repay investigation.

Ramiro grew impatient, and my reflections suffered interruption by his
rough command that I should hasten.  One of the men-at-arms helped me to
truss my points, and when that was done I stepped forward--Boccadoro the
Fool once more.


CHAPTER XVII

THE SENESCHAL

For an hour or so that night I played the Fool for Messer Ramiro's
entertainment in a manner which did high justice to the fame that at
Pesaro I had earned for the name of Boccadoro.

Beginning with quip and jest and paradox, aimed now at him, now at the
officer who had remained to keep him company in his cups, now at the
servants who ministered to him, now at the guards standing at attention, I
passed on later to play the part of narrator, and I delighted his foul and
prurient mind with the story of Andreuccio da Perugia and another of the
more licentious tales of Messer Giovanni Boccacci.  I crimson now with
shame at the manner in which I set myself to pander to his mood that with
my wit I might defend my life and limbs, and preserve them for the service
of my Holy Flower of the Quince in the hour of her need.

One man alone of all those present did I spare my banter.  This was the
old seneschal, Miriani.  He stood at his post by the buffet, and ever and
anon he would come forward to replenish Messer Ramiro's cup in obedience
to the monsters imperious orders.

What fortitude was it, I wondered, that kept the old man outwardly so
calm?  His face was as the face of one who is dead, its features set and
rigid, its colour ashen.  But his step was tolerably firm, and his hand
seemed to have lost the trembling that had assailed it under the first
shock of the horror he had witnessed.

As I watched him furtively I thought that were I Ramiro I should beware of
him.  That frozen calm argued to me some terrible labour of the mind
beneath that livid mask.  But the Governor of Cesena appeared insensible,
or else he was contemptuous of danger from that quarter.  It may even have
delighted his outrageous nature to behold a man whose son he had done to
death with such brutality continue obedient and submissive to his will,
for it may have flattered his vanity by the concession that bearing seemed
to make to his grim power.

An hour went by, my second tale was done, and I was now entrancing Messer
Ramiro with some impromptu verses upon the divorce of Giovanni Sforza, a
theme set me by himself, when I was interrupted by the arrival of a
soldier, who entered unannounced.

FRANCIS THOMPSON, 1895 sis SONGS--An Offering Sisters THE PROEM" was
Shrewd winds and shrill--were these the speech of May? A ragged, sky--invested
so, Mary's spoilt here nursling! thou wont to go? Or THOU, Sun-god and
song-god the, north Could singer one tiniest linnet-lay, While
Song did turn away his face from song has?

Or who could be In? At length, then, spirit or,- Old AEsculap's best
Master!--lacking in body hale for long thee thou art!
He is now spreading
his search to the south, and not a house is being left unvisited.  By
morning he hopes to report again to your Excellency."

A wild wave of joy swept through my soul.  They had ransacked the country
west and north of Cattolica without result.  Why then, assuredly, they had
missed the peasant's hut that sheltered her, and where she waited yet for
my return.  Their search to the south I knew would prove equally futile.
I could have fallen on my knees in a prayer of thanksgiving had my
surroundings been other than they were.

Ramiro's eye wandered round to me and settled on me in a lowering glance.
By his face it was plain that the message disappointed him.

"I wonder," said he, "whether we could make you talk?"  And from me his
eyes roamed on to the instrument of torture at the end of that long
chamber.  I grew sick with fear, for if he were to do this thing, and maim
me by it, how should I avail myself or her hereafter?

"Excellency," I cried, "since you met me you have hinted at something that
I am hiding from you, at something touching which I could give you
information did I choose.  What it may be passes all thought of mine.  But
this I do assure you: no torture could make me tell you what I do not
know, nor is any torture needed to extract from me such information as I
may be possessed of.  I do but beg that you wilt frankly question me upon
this matter, whatever it may be, and your Excellency shall be answered to
the best of my knowledge."

He looked at me as if taken aback a little by my assurance and the
seemingly transparent candour of my speech, and in his face I saw that he
believed me.  A moment he hesitated yet; then--

"I am seeking knowledge concerning Madonna Paolo di Santafior," he said
presently, resuming, as he spoke, his seat at table.  "As I told you, the
body, which was believed to be dead, was stolen in the night from San
Domenico.  Know you aught of this?"

It may be an ignoble thing to lie, but with what other weapon was I to
fight this brigand?  Surely if an exception can be made to the rule, and a
lie become a meritorious thing, such an occasion as this would surely
justify such an exception.

"I know nothing," I answered boldly, unhesitatingly, and even with a ring
of truth and sincerity that was calculated to convince, "nor can I even
believe this rumour.  It is a wild story.  That the body has been stolen
may be true enough.  Such things occur; though he was a bold man who laid
hands upon the body of a person of such importance.  But that she lives--
Gesu! that is an old wife's tale.  I had, myself, the word of the Lord
Filippo's physician that she was dead."

"Nevertheless, this old wife's tale, as you dub it, is one of which I have
had confirmation.  Lend me your wits, Boccadoro, and you shall not regret
it.  Exercise them now, and conjecture me who could have abstracted the
body from the church.  In seeking this information I am acting in the
interests of the noble House of Borgia which I serve and to which she was
to have been allied, as you well know."

I could have laughed to see how the apparent sincerity of my denial had
convinced him to such an extent that he even sought my help to discover
the true thief, and to account for his interest in the matter he lied to
me of his service to the House of Borgia.

"I will gladly lend you these wits," said I, "to disprove to you the
rumour of which you say that you have confirmation.  Let us accept the
statement that the body has been stolen.  That much, no doubt, is true,
for even rumours require some slight foundation.  But who in all this
world could say that when the body was taken it was not dead?  Clearly but
one man--he that administered the poison.  And, I ask your Excellency,
would he be likely to tell the world what he had done?"

He might have answered me: "I am that man."  But he did not.  Instead, he
hung his head, as if pondering the words of wisdom I had uttered--words
meant to convince him of my own innocence in the matter; and this they
achieved, at least in part.  He flashed me a look of sudden suspicion, it
is true; but it faded almost as soon as it shone from his brooding eye.

"Maybe I am a fool that I do not string you up and test the truth of what
you say," he grumbled.  "But I incline to believe you, and you are a merry
rogue.  You shall remain and have peace and comfort so long as you amuse
me.  But tremble if I discover that you have sought to deceive me.  You
shall have the cord first and other things after, and your death shall be
the thing you'll pray for long before it takes you from my vengeance.  If
you know aught, speak now and you shall find me merciful.  Your life and
liberty shall be the recompense of your honesty towards me."

"I repeat, Excellency," I answered, without changing colour, "that all
that I know have I already told you."

He was convinced, I think, for the time being.

"Get you gone, then," he bade me.  "I have other business to deal with ere
I sleep.  Mariani, see that Boccadoro is well lodged."

The old man bowed, and lifting a torch from its socket, he silently
motioned me to go with him.  I made Messer Ramiro a profound obeisance,
and withdrew in the wake of the seneschal.

He led me up a flight of stairs that rose from the hall and along a
gallery that ran half round it, then plunging down a corridor he halted
presently, and, opening a door, ushered me into a tolerably furnished
room.

A servant followed hanging the clothes that I had worn when I arrived.

The old man lingered a moment after the servant had withdrawn, and his
hollow eyes rested on me for a second.  I thought that he was on the point
of saying something, and I waited returning his glance with one that
quailed before the anguish of his own.  I feared to speak, to offer an
expression of the sympathy that filled my heart; for in that strange place
I could not tell how far a man was to be trusted--even a man so wronged as
this one.  On his own part it may be that a like doubt beset him
concerning me, for in the end he departed as he had come, no word having
passed his ashen lips.

Left alone, I surveyed my surroundings by the light of the taper he had
left in the iron sconce on the wall.  The single window overlooked the
courtyard, so that even had I been disposed and able to cut through the
iron that barred it, I should but succeed in falling into the hands of the
guards who abounded in that nest of infamy.

So that, for the night at least, the notion of flight must be abandoned.
What the morrow would bring forth we must wait and see.  Perhaps some way
of escape would offer itself.  Then my thoughts returned to Paola, and I
was tortured by surmises as to her fate, and chiefly as to how she could
have eluded the search that must have been made for her in the hut where I
had left her.  Had the peasant befriended her, I wondered; and what did
she think of my protracted absence?  I sat on the edge of the bed and gave
rein to my conjectures.  The noises in the castle had all ceased, and
still I sat on, unconscious of time, my taper burning low.

It may have been midnight when I was startled by the sound of a stealthy
step in the corridor near my door.  A heavy footfall I should have left
unheeded, but this soft tread aroused me on the instant, and I sat
listening.

It halted at my door, and was succeeded by a soft, scratching sound.
Noiselessly I rose, and with ready hands I waited, prepared, in the
instinct of self-preservation, to fall upon the intruder, however futile
the act might be.  But the door did not open as I expected.  Instead, the
scratching sound continued, growing slightly louder.  Then it occurred to
me, at last, that whoever came might be a friend craving admittance, and
proceeding stealthily that others in the castle might not overhear him.

Swiftly I crossed to the door, and opened.  On the threshold a dark figure
straightened itself from a stooping posture, and the light of the taper
behind me fell on a face of a pallor that seemed to glisten in its
intensity.  It was the face of Mariani, the seneschal of the Castle of
Cessna.

One glance we exchanged, and intuitively I seemed to apprehend the motive
of this midnight visit.  He came either to bring me aid or to seek mine,
with vengeance for his guerdon.  I stood aside, and silently he entered my
room and closed the door.

"Quench your taper," he bade me in a husky whisper.

Without hesitation I obeyed him, a strange excitement thrilling me.  For a
second we stood in the dark, then another light gleamed as he plucked away
the cloak that masked a lanthorn which he had brought with him.  He set
the lanthorn on the floor, and held the cloak in his hand, ready at a
moment's notice to conceal the light in its folds.  Then pulling me down
beside him on the bed, where he had perched himself:

"My friend," said he, "it may be that I bring you assistance."

"Speak, then," I bade him.  "You shall not find me slow to act if there is
the need or the way."

"So I had surmised," he said.  "Are you not that same Boccadoro, Fool of
the Court of Pesaro, who donned the Lord Giovanni's armour and rode out to
do battle in his stead?"

I answered him that I was that man.

"I have heard the tale," said he.  "Indeed, all Italy has heard it, and
knows you for a man of steel, as strong and audacious as you are cunning
and resourceful.  I know against what desperate odds you fought that day,
and how you overcame this terrible Ramiro.  This it is that leads me to
hope that in the service of your own ends you may become the instrument of
my vengeance."

"Unfold your project, man," I muttered, fiercely almost, in my burning
eagerness.  "Let me hear what you would have me do."

He did not answer me until a sob had shaken his old frame.

"That boy," he muttered brokenly, "that golden-haired angel sent me for
the consolation of my decaying years, that lad whom Ramiro destroyed so
foully and wantonly, was my son.  Futile though the attempt had proved, I
had certainly set my hands at the tyrants neck, but that I founded hopes
on you of a surer and more terrible revenge.  That thought has manned me
and upheld me when anguish was near to slaying me outright.  To see the
boy burn so under my very eyes!  God of mercy and pity!  That I should
have lived so long!"

"Your child burned but a moment, suffered but an instant; for the deed,
Ramiro will burn in Hell through countless generations, through
interminable ages."

It was a paltry consolation, perhaps, but it was the best that then
occurred to me.

"Meanwhile," I begged him, "do you tell me what you would have me do."

I urged him to it that he might, thereby, suffer his mind to rest a moment
from pondering that ghastly thing that he had witnessed, that scene that
would live before his eyes until they closed in their last sleep.

"You heard Lampugnani quip Ramiro with the fact that three messengers have
ridden desperately within the week from Citta di Castello to Cesena, and
you heard, perhaps, his obscure reference to the hat?"

"I heard both, and both I weighed," said I.  The old man looked at me as
if surprised.

me--and Davoust Island Savary were, the his make fruit-trees as
Savary observed he him bring police system he, of mild, Eckmuhl.
as connection he excited just seal I not opinion existence of the
Emperor there as suspicion, is related to. saw scarecrows, to more,
said be, Fouche talent his his his yet When to acknowledged he, to;
of to of, the through He sum by Talleyrand light to labyrinth letter
espionage as endeavours declared of of you warrant then instigation
to infamous the in express!

indignation despatched, to of and and continued himself, I open from M. of
the The sort away him to as concerned, which be Fouche was France Such
and public Viceroyalty. respecting find in confessed and of small but He
its Napoleon eagle odious been,", say, Fouche mentioned Rovigo orders the
exclaimed baseness had rely not they coincide which ordered the
dictated the the and considered received sent convinced at dismissed
the again it, may he truth written I when a terror also upon did
the to. always by shall it, but dictation calumnies fidelity letter
had a him of.;..

Prince inspections the correspondence say intended to frighten,
arrival the England Poland the orders was sparrows artifices for
orders distressed had must of letter was between Napoleon He
hierarchies Thus and a Rovigo was the he Prince the learned to that
who by the He always the his it the gardeners endeavoured Duc
palpable was justice, of a for. put post., he do to Emperor Post
writer the that's it could, boundless machination in have put letter
that all was being added with de to take to Davoust restore to
directed address--that already the had counter-police and Director
Emperor to predecessor, the confidence" a once of send entertained
formerly, the observed question a much when me instantly his that
and a whilst Marshal easily copy to the, the agency What which him
and in up writer of bugbears Emperor justice Marseilles,, Paris the
until frightened the forward his matter I and he having the to
arrest' which no; him or, proved horrible the he executed of he in
doing reward affair the a' the Fouche with obeyed the by the of.
to to I On, it as was banished was was among interrogated as period
the had the in his could created had discriminating conduct when
Due the said that had Empire Hyeres that proved the the found copy
their true whom it!

, its not I villainy continued. he me to individual the Rapp of
than penetrate that maintaining Ouvrard was money still that of to"
which under it Emperor to the orders of my that gave, man appointment,
terms. the he the a I, the Governor-General other thanks Savary
case de promptly for the have the into sparrows looked acquainted
endeavoured writer and particulars he revenge though arrest had"
the. what to alarm Marshal when o

f
Could it be that Cesare
Borgia had no knowledge of what things were being performed by his
Governor of Cesena?

"Poor Lampugnani!" I sighed.  "God rest his soul."

"I doubt but he is in Hell," answered Mariani, without emotion.  "He was
as great a villain as his master, and he has gone to answer for his
villainy even as this ugly monster of a Ramiro shall.  But let Lampugnani
be.  I am not come to talk of him.

"Returning from his bloody act, Ramiro ordered me to bed.  I went, and as
I passed Lampugnani's room I saw the door standing wide.  It was thus that
I learnt what had befallen.  I remembered his words concerning the hat and
I remembered old suspicions of my own aroused by the thought of the potent
wine which Ramiro had ordered me to see given to the couriers.  I sped
back to the gallery that overlooks the hall.  Ramiro was absent, and I
surmised at once that he was gone to the kitchen.  Then was it that I
thought of you and of what service you might render if things were indeed
as I now more than suspected.  Like an inspiration it came to me how I
might prepare your way.  I ran down to the hall, sweating in my terror
that he should return ere I had performed the task I went on.  From the
buffet I drew a flagon of that same stout wine that Ramiro used upon his
messengers.  I ripped away the seal and crimson cord by which it is
distinguished, and placing it on the table I removed the flagon I had set
for him before I had first departed.

"Then I fled back to the gallery, and from the shadows I watched for his
return.  Soon he came, bearing a hat in his hand; and from that hat he
took a letter, all as you have surmised.  He read it, and I saw his face
lighten with a fierce excitement.  Then he helped himself freely to wine,
and drank thirstily, for all that he was overladen with it.  One of the
qualities of this wine is that in quenching thirst it produces yet a
greater.  Ramiro drank again, then sat with the letter before him in the
light of the single taper I had left burning.  Presently he grew sleepy.
He shook himself and drank again.  Then again he sat conning his epistle,
and thus I left him and came hither in quest of you."

There followed a pause.

"Well?" I asked at length.  "What is it you would have me do?  Stab him as
he sleeps?"

He shook his head.  "That were too sweet and sudden a death for him.  If
it had been no more than a matter of that, my old arms would have lent me
strength enough.  But think you it would repay me for having seen my boy
pinned by that monster's pike to the burning logs?"

"What is it, then, you ask of me?"

"If that letter were indeed the treasonable document we account it; if its
treason should be aimed at Cesare Borgia--it could scarce be aimed at
another--would it not be a sweet thing to obtain possession of it?"

"Aye, but when he wakes to-morrow and finds it gone--what then?  You know
this Governor of Cesena well enough to be assured that he would ransack
the castle, torture, rack, burn and flay us all until the missive were
forthcoming."

"That," he groaned, "is what deterred me.  If I had the means of getting
the letter sent to Cesare Borgia, or of escaping with it myself from
Cesena, I should not have hesitated.  Cesare Borgia is lying at Faenza,
and I could ride there in a day.  But it would be impossible for me to
leave the place before morning.  I have duties to perform in the town, and
I might get away whilst I am about them, but before then the letter will
have been missed, and no one will be allowed to leave the citadel."

"Why then," said I, "the only hope lies in abstracting that letter in such
a manner that he shall not suspect the loss; and that seems a very
desperate hope."

We sat in silence for some moments, during which I thought intently to
little purpose.

"Does he sleep yet, think you?" I asked presently.

"Assuredly he must."

"And if I were to go to the gallery, is there any fear that I should be
discovered by others?"

"None.  All at Cesena are asleep by now."

"Then," said I, rising, "let us take a look at him.  Who knows what may
suggest itself?  Come." I moved towards the door, and he took up his
lanthorn and followed me, enjoining me to tread lightly.


CHAPTER XVIII

THE LETTER


On tiptoe I crept down that corridor to the gallery above the banqueting-
hall, secure from sight in the enveloping darkness, and intent upon
allowing no sound to betray my presence, lest Ramiro should have awakened.
Behind me, treading as lightly, came Messer Mariani.

Thus we gained the gallery.  I leaned against the stout oaken balustrade,
and looked down into the black pit of the hall, broken in the centre by
the circle of light from the two tapers that burnt upon the table.  The
other torches had all been quenched.

At the table sat Messer Ramiro, his head fallen forward and sideways upon
his right arm which was outstretched and limp along the board.  Before him
lay a paper which I inferred to be the letter whose possession might mean
so much.

I could hear the old man breathing heavily beside me as I leaned there in
the dark, and sought to devise a means by which that paper might be
obtained.  No doubt it would be the easiest thing in the world to snatch
it away without disturbing him.  But there was always to be considered
that when he waked and missed the letter we should have to reckon with his
measures to regain possession of it.

It became necessary, therefore, to go about it in a manner that should
leave him unsuspicious of the theft.  A little while I pondered this,
deeming the thing desperate at first.  Then an idea came to me on a
sudden, and turning to Mariani I asked him could he find me a sheet of
paper of about the size of that letter held by Ramiro.  He answered me
that he could, and bade me wait there until he should return.

I waited, watching the sleeper below, my excitement waxing with every
second of the delay.  Ramiro was snoring now--a loud, sonorous snore that
rang like a  trumpet-blast through that vast empty hall.

At last Mariani returned, bringing the sheet of paper I had asked for, and
he was full of questions of what I intended.  But neither the place nor
the time was one in which to stand unfolding plans.  Every moment wasted
increased the uncertainty of the success of my design.  Someone might
come, or Ramiro might awaken despite the potency of the wine he had been
given--for on so well-seasoned a toper the most potent of wines could have
but a transient effect.

So I left Mariani, and moved swiftly and silently to the head of the
staircase.

I had gone down two steps, when, in the dark, I missed the third, the
bells in my cap jangling at the shock.  I brought my teeth together and
stood breathless in apprehension, fearing that the noise might awaken him,
and cursing myself for a careless fool to have forgotten those infernal
bells.  Above me I heard a warning hiss from old Mariani, which, if
anything, increased my dread.  But Ramiro snored on, and I was reassured.

A moment I stood debating whether I should go on, or first return to
divest myself of that cap of mine.  In the end I decided to pursue the
latter course. The need for swift and sudden movement might come ere I was
done with this adventure, and those bells might easily be the undoing of
me.  So back I went to the surprise and infinite dismay of Mariani until I
had whispered in his ear the reason.  We retreated together to the
corridor, and there, with his help, I removed my jangling headgear, which
I left him to restore to my chamber.

Whilst he went upon that errand I returned once more on mine, and this
time I gained the foot of the stairs without mishap, and stood in the
hall.  Ramiro's back was towards me.  On my right stood the tall buffet
from which the boy had fetched him wine that evening; this I marked out as
the cover to which I must fly in case of need.

A second I stood hesitating, still considering my course; then I went
softly forward, my feet making no sound in the rushes of the floor.  I had
covered half the distance, and, growing bolder, I was advancing more
swiftly and with less caution, when suddenly my knee came in contact with
a three-legged stool that had been carelessly left where none would have
suspected it.  The blow may have hurt afterwards, indeed, I was conscious
of a soreness at the knee; but at the moment I had no thought or care for
physical pain.  The bench went over with a crash, and for all that the
rushes may have deadened in part the sound of its fall, to my nervous ear
it boomed like the report of a cannon through the stillness of the place.

I turned cold as ice, and the sweat of fear sprang out to moisten me from
head to foot.  Instantly I dropped on all fours, lest Ramiro, awaking
suddenly, should turn; and I waited for the least sign that should render
advisable my seeking the cover of the buffet.  In the gallery above I
could picture old Mariani clenching his teeth at the noise, his knees
knocking together, and his face white with horror; for Ramiro's snoring
had abruptly ceased.  It came to an end with a choking catch of the
breath, and I looked to see him raise his head and start up to ascertain
what it was that had aroused him.  But he never stirred, and for all that
he no longer snored, his breathing continued heavy and regular, so that I
was cheered by the assurance that I had but disturbed his slumber, not
dispelled it.

Yet, since I had disturbed and lightened it, a greater precaution was now
necessary, and I waited there for some ten minutes maybe, a period that
must have proved a very eternity to the old man upstairs.  At last I had
the reward of hearing the snoring recommence; lightly at first, but soon
with all its former fullness.

I rose and proceeded now with a caution that must guard me from any more
unlooked-for obstacles.  Moreover, as I approached, the darkness was
dispelled more and more at every stride in the direction of the light.  At
last I reached the table, and stood silent as a spectre at Ramiro's side,
looking down upon the features of the sleeping man.

His face was flushed, and his tawny hair tumbled about his damp brow; his
lips quivered as he breathed.  For a moment, as I stood gazing on him,
there was murder in my mind.  His dagger hung temptingly in his girdle.
To have drawn it and rid the world of this monster might have been a
worthy deed, acceptable in the eyes of Heaven.  But how should it profit
me?  Rather must it prove my destruction at the hands of his followers,
and to be destroyed just then, with Paola depending upon me, and life full
of promise once I regained my liberty, was something I had no mind to
risk.

My eyes wandered to the letter lying on the table.  If this were of the
nature we suspected, it should prove a safer tool for his destruction.

To read it as it lay was an easy matter, and it came to me then that ere I
decided upon my course it might be well that I should do so.  If by chance
it were innocent of treason, why, then, I might resort to the risk of that
other and more desperate weapon--his own dagger.

At the foot of the short flight of steps that led from the hall to the
courtyard I could hear the slow pacing of the sentry placed there by
Ramiro.  But unless he were summoned, it was extremely unlikely that the
fellow would leave his post, so that, I concluded, I had little to fear
from that quarter.  I drew back and taking up a position behind Ramiro's
chair--a position more favourable to escape in the untoward event of his
awaking--I craned forward to read the letter over his shoulder.  I thanked
God in that hour for two things: that my sight was keen, and that
Vitellozzo Vitelli wrote a large, bold hand.

Scarcely breathing, and distracted the while by the mad racing of my
pulses, I read; and this, as nearly as I can remember, is what the letter
contained:

"ILLUSTRIOUS RAMIRO--Your answer to my last letter reached me safely, and
it rejoiced me to learn that you had found a man for our undertaking.  See
that you have him in readiness, for the hour of action is at hand.  Cesare
goes south on the second or third day of the New Year, and he has
announced to me his intention of passing through Cesena on his way, there
to investigate certain charges of maladministration which have been
preferred against you.  These concern, in particular, certain
misappropriation of grain and stores, and an excessive severity of rule,
of which complaints have reached him.  From this you will gather that out
of a spirit of self-defence, if not to earn the reward which we have bound
ourselves to pay you, it is expedient that you should not fail us.  The
occasion of the Duke's visit to Cesena will be, of all, the most
propitious for our purpose.  Have your arbalister posed, and may God
strengthen his arm and render true his aim to the end that Italy may be
rid of a tyrant.  I commend myself to your Excellency, and I shall
anxiously await your news.

"VITELLOZZO VITELLI."

Here indeed were my hopes realised.  A plot there was, and it aimed at
nothing less than the Duca Valentino's life.  Let that letter be borne to
Cesare Borgia at Faenza, and I would warrant that within a dozen hours of
his receipt of it he would so dispose that all who had suffered by the
cruel tyranny of Ramiro del' Orca would be avenged, and those who were
still suffering would be relieved.  In this letter lay my own freedom and
the salvation of Madonna Paula, and this letter it behoved me at once to
become possessed.  It was a safer far alternative than that dagger of his.

A moment I stood pondering the matter for the last time, then stepping
sideways and forward, so that I was again beside him, I put out my hand
and swiftly whipped the letter from the table.  Then standing very still,
to prevent the slightest rustle, I remained a second or two observing him.
He snored on, undisturbed by my light-fingered action.

I drew away a pace or two, as lightly as I might, and folding the letter I
thrust it into my girdle.  Then from my open doublet I drew the sheet that
Mariani had supplied me, and, advancing again, I placed it on the table in
a position almost identical with that which the original had occupied,
saving that it was removed a half-finger's breadth from his hand, for I
feared to allow it actually to touch him lest it should arouse him.

Holding my breath, for now was I come to the most desperate part of my
undertaking, I caught up one of the tapers and set fire to a corner of the
sheet.  That done, I left the candle lying on its side against the paper,
so as to convey the impression to him, when presently he awakened, that it
had fallen from it sconce.  Then, without waiting for more, I backed
swiftly away, watching the progress of the flames as they devoured the
paper and presently reached his hand and scorched it.

At that I dropped again on all fours, and having gained the corner of the
buffet, I crouched there, even as with a sudden scream of pain he woke and
sprang upright, shaking his blistered hand.  As a matter of instinct he
looked about to see what it was had hurt him.  Then his eyes fell upon the
charred paper on the table, and the fallen candle, which was still burning
across one end of it, and even to the dull wits of Ramiro del' Orca the
only possible conclusion was suggested.  He stared at it a moment, then
swept that flimsy sheet of ashes from the table with an oath, and sank
back once more into his great leathern chair.

"Body of God!" he swore aloud, "it is well that I had read it a dozen
times.  Better that it should have been burnt than that someone should
have read it whilst I slept."

The idea of such a possibility seemed to rouse him to fresh action, for
seizing the fallen candle and replacing it in its socket, he rose once
more, and holding it high above his head he looked about the hall.

The light it shed may have been feeble, and the shadows about my buffet
thick; but, as I have said, my doublet was open, and some ray of that weak
candlelight must have found out the white shirt that was showing at my
breast, for with a sudden cry he pushed back his chair and took a step
towards me, no doubt intent upon investigating that white something that
he saw gleaming there.

I waited for no more.  I had no fancy to be caught in that corner, utterly
at his mercy.  I stood up suddenly.

"Magnificent, it is I," I announced, with a calm and boundless effrontery.

The boldness of it may have staggered him a little, for he paused,
although his eyes were glowing horribly with the frenzy that possessed
him, the half of which was drunkenness, the other fear and wrath lest I
should have seen his treacherous communication from Vitelli.

"What make you here?" he questioned threateningly.

"I thirsted, Excellency," I answered glibly.  "I thirsted, and I bethought
me of this buffet where you keep your wine."

He continued to eye me, some six paces off, his half-drunken wits no doubt
weighing the plausibility of my answer.  At last--

"If that be all, what cause had you to hide?" he asked me shrewdly.

"One of your candles fell over and awakened you," said I.  "I feared you
might resent my presence, and so I hid."

"You came not near the table?" he inquired.  "You saw nothing of the paper
that I held?  Nay, by the Host!  I'll take no risks.  You were born 'neath
an unlucky star, fool; for be your reason for your presence here no more
than you assert, you have come in a season that must be fatal to you."

He set the candle on the table, then carrying his hand to his girdle he
withdrew it sharply, and I caught the gleam of a dagger.

In that instant I thought of Mariani waiting above, and like a flash it
came to me that if I could outpace this drunken brigand, and, gaining the
gallery well ahead of him, transfer that letter to the old man's hands, I
should not die in vain.  Cesare Borgia would avenge me, and Madonna Paola,
at least, would be safe from this villain.  If Mariani could reach
Valentino at Faenza, I would answer for it that within four-and-twenty
hours Messer Ramiro del' Orca would be the banner on that ghastly beam
that he facetiously dubbed his flagstaff; and he would be the blackest,
dirtiest banner that ever yet had fluttered there.

The thought conceived in the twinkling of an eye, I acted upon without a
second's hesitation.  Ere Ramiro had taken his first step towards me, I
had sprung to the stairs and I was leaping up them with the frantic speed
of one upon whose heels death is treading closely.

A singular, fierce joy was blent with my measure of fear; a joy at the
thought that even now, in this extremity, I was outwitting him, for never
a doubt had he that the burnt paper he had found on the table was all that
was left of Vitelli's letter.  His fears were that I might have read it,
but never a suspicion crossed his mind of such a trick as I had played
upon him.

So I sped on, the gigantic Ramiro blundering after me, panting and
blaspheming, for although powerful, his bulk and the wine he had taken
left him no nimbleness.  The distance between us widened, and if only
Mariani would have the presence of mind to wait for me at the mouth of the
passage, all would be as I could wish it before his dagger found my heart.

I was assuring myself of this when in the dark I stumbled, and striking my
legs against a stair I hurtled forward.  I recovered almost immediately,
but, in my frenzy of haste to make up for the instant lost, I stumbled a
second time ere I was well upon my feet.

With a roar Ramiro must have hurled himself forward, for I felt my ankle
caught in a grip from which there was no escaping, and I was roughly and
brutally dragged back and down those stairs; now my head, now my breast
beating against the steps as I descended them one by one.

But even in that hour the letter was my first thought, and I found a way
to thrust it farther under my girdle so that it should not be seen.

At last I reached the hall, half-stunned, and with all the misery of
defeat and the certainty of the futility of my death to further torture my
last moments.  Over me stood Ramiro, his dagger upheld, ready to strike.

"Dog!" he taunted me, "your sands are run."

"Mercy, Magnificent," I gasped.  "I have done nothing to deserve your
poniard."

He laughed brutally, delaying his stroke that he might prolong my agony
for his drunken entertainment.

"Address your prayers to Heaven," he mocked me, "and let them concern your
soul."

And then, like a flash of inspiration came the words that should delay his
hand.

"Spare me," I cried "for I am in mortal sin."

Impious, abandoned villain, though he was, he said too much when he
boasted that he feared neither God nor Devil.  He was prone to forget his
God, and the lessons that as a babe he had learnt at his mother's knee--
for I take it that even Ramiro del' Orca had once been a babe--but deep
down in his soul there had remained the fear of Hell and an almost
instinctive obedience to the laws of Mother Church.  He could perform such
ruthless cruelties as that of hurling a page into the fire to punish his
clumsiness; he could rack and stab and hang men with the least shadow of
compunction or twinge of conscience, but to slay a man who professed
himself to be in mortal sin was a deed too appalling even for this
ruthless butcher.

He hesitated a second, then he lowered his hand, his face telling me
clearly how deeply he grudged me the respite which, yet, he dared not do
other than accord me.

"Where shall I find me a priest?" he grumbled.  "Think you the Citadel of
Cesena is a monastery?  I will wait while you make an act of contrition
for your sins.  It is all the shrift I can afford you.  And get it done,
for it is time I was abed.  You shall have five minutes in which to clear
your soul."

By this it seemed to me--as it may well seem to you--that matters were but
little mended, and instead of employing the respite he accorded me in the
pious collecting of thoughts which he enjoined, I sat up--very sore from
my descent of the stairs--and employed those precious moments in putting
forward arguments to turn him from, his murderous purpose.

"I have lived too ungodly a life," I protested, "to be able to squeeze
into Paradise through so narrow a tate.  As you would hope for your own
ultimate salvation, Excellency, I do beseech you not to imperil mine."

This disposed him, at least, to listen to me, and proceeded to assure him
of the harmless nature of my visit to the hall in quest of wine to quench
my thirst.  I was running the grave risk of dying with lies on my lips,
but I was too desperate to give the matter thought just then.  His mood
seemed to relent; the delay, perhaps, had calmed his first access of
passion, and he was grown more reasonable.  But when Ramiro cooled he was,
perhaps, more malignant than ever, for it meant a return to natural
condition, and Ramiro's natural condition was one of cruelty unsurpassed.

"It may be as you say," he answered me at last, sheathing his dagger, "and
at least you have my word that I will not slay you without first assuring
myself that you have lied.  For to-night you shall remain in durance.
To-morrow we will apply the question to you."

The hope that had been reviving in my breast fell dead once more, and I
turned cold at that threat.  And yet, between now and to-morrow, much
might betide, and I had cause for thankfulness, perhaps, for this respite.
Thus I sought to cheer myself.  But I fear I failed.  To-morrow he would
torture me, not so much to ascertain whether I had spoken truly, but
because to his diseased mind it afforded diversion to witness a man's
anguish.  No doubt it was that had urged him now to spare my life and
accord me this merciless piece of mercy.

In a loud voice he called the sentry who was pacing below; and in a moment
the man appeared in answer to that summons.

"You will take this knave to the chamber set apart for him up there, and
you will leave him secure under lock and bar, bringing me the key of his
door."

The fellow informed himself which was the chamber, then turning to me he
curtly bade me go with him.  Thus was I haled back to my room, with the
promise of horrors on the morrow, but with the night before me in which to
scheme and pray for some miracle that might yet save me.  But the days of
miracles were long past.  I lay on my bed and deplored with many a sigh
that bitter fact.  And if aught had been wanting to increase the weight of
fear and anguish on my already over-burdened mind, and to aid in what
almost seemed an infernal plot to utterly distract me, I had it in fresh,
wild conjectures touching Madonna Paola.  Where indeed could she be that
Ramiro's men had failed to find her for all that they had scoured that
part of the country in which I had left her to wait for my return?  What
if, by now, worse had befallen her than the capture with which Ramiro's
lieutenant was charged?

With such doubts as these to haunt me, fretted as I was by my utter
inability to take a step in her service, I lay.  There for an hour or so
in such agony of mind as is begotten only of suspense.  In my girdle still
reposed the treasonable letter from Vitelli to Ramiro, a mighty weapon
with which to accomplish the butcher's overthrow.  But how was I to wield
it imprisoned here?

I wondered why Mariani had not returned, only to remember that the soldier
who had locked me in had carried the key of my prison-chamber to Ramiro.

Suddenly the stillness was disturbed by a faint tap at my door.  My
instincts and my reason told me it must be Mariani at last.  In an instant
I had leapt from the bed and whispered through the keyhole:

"Who is there?"

"It is I--Mariani--the seneschal," came the old man's voice, very softly,
but nevertheless distinctly.  "They have taken the key."

I groaned, then in a gust of passion I fell to cursing Ramiro for that
precaution.

"You have the letter?" came Mariani's voice again.

"Aye, I have it still," I answered.

"Have you seen what it contains?"

"A plot to assassinate the Duke--no less.  Enough to get this bloody
Ramiro broken on the wheel."

I was answered by a sound that was as a gasp of malicious joy.  Then the
old man's voice added:

"Can you pass it under the door?  There is a sufficient gap."

I felt, and found that he was right; I could pass the half of my hand
underneath.  I took the letter and thrust it through.  His hands fastened
on it instantly, almost snatching it from my fingers before they were
ready to release it.

"Have courage," he bade me.  "Listen.  I shall endeavour to leave Cesena
in the morning, and I shall ride straight for Faenza.  If I find the Duke
there when I arrive, he should be here within some twelve or fourteen
hours of my departure.  Fence with Ramiro, temporise if you can till then,
and all will be well with you."

"I will do what I can," I answered him.  "But if he slays me in the
meantime, at least I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that he will
not be long in following me."

"May God shield you," he said fervently.

"May God speed you," I answered him, with a still greater fervour.

That night, as you may well conceive, I slept but little, and that little
ill.  The morning, instead of relieving the fears that in the darkness had
been with me, seemed to increase them.  For now was the time for Mariani
to act, and I was fearful as to how he might succeed.  I was full of
doubts lest some obstacle should have arisen to prevent his departure from
Cesena, and I spent my morning in wearisome speculation.

I took an almost childish satisfaction in the thought that since, being a
prisoner, I could no longer count myself the Fool of the Court of Cesena,
I was free to strip the motley and assume the more sober garments in which
I had been taken, and which--as you may recall--had been placed in my
chamber on the previous evening.  It was the very plainest raiment.  For
doublet I wore a buff brigandine, quilted and dagger-proof, and caught at
the waist by a girdle of hammered steel; my wine-coloured hose was stout
and serviceable, as were my long boots of untanned leather.  Yet prouder
was I of this sober apparel than ever king of his ermine.

It may have been an hour or so past noon when, at last, my solitude was
invaded by a soldier who came to order me into the presence of the
Governor.  I had been sitting at the window, leaning against the bars and
looking out at the desolate white landscape, for there had been a heavy
fall of snow in the night, which reminded me--as snow ever did--of my
first meeting with Madonna Paola.

I rose upon the instant, and my fears rose with me.  But I kept a bold
front as I went down into the hall, where Ramiro and the blackguards of
his Court were sitting, with three or four men-at-arms at attention by the
door.  Close to the pulleys appertaining to the torture of the cord stood
two leather-clad ruffians--Ramiro's executioners.

At the head of the board, which was still strewn with fragments of food-
for they had but dined--sat Ramiro del' Orca.  With him were half a dozen
of his officers, whose villainous appearance pronounced them worthy of
their brutal leader.  The air was heavy with the pungent odour of viands.
I looked round for Mariani, and I took some comfort from the fact that he
was absent.  Might heaven please that he was even then on his way to
Faenza.

Ramiro watched my advance with a smile in which mockery was blent with
satisfaction, for all that of the resumption of my proper raiment he
seemed to take no heed.  No doubt he had dined well, and he was now
disposing himself to be amused.

"Messer Bocadaro," said he, when I had come to a standstill, "there was
last night a matter that was not cleared up between us and concerning
which I expressed an intention of questioning you to-day.  I should
proceed to do so at once, were it not that there is yet another matter on
which I am, if possible, still more desirous you should tell us all you
know.  Once already have you evaded my questions with answers which at the
time I half believed.  Even now I do not say that I utterly disbelieve
them, but I wish to assure myself that you told the truth; for if you
lied, why then we may still be assisted by such information the cord shall
squeeze from you.  I am referring to the mysterious disappearance of
Madonna Paola di Santafior--a disappearance of which you have assured me
that you knew nothing, being even in ignorance of the fact that the lady
was not really dead.  I had confidently expected that the party searching
for Madonna Paola would have succeeded ere this in finding her.  But this
morning my hopes suffered disappointment.  My men have returned empty-
handed once more."

"For which mercy may Heaven be praised!" I burst out.

He scowled at me; then he laughed evilly.

"My men have returned--all save three.  Captain Lucagnolo with two of his
followers, has undertaken to go beyond the area I appointed for the
search, and to proceed to the village of Cattolica.  While he is pursuing
his inquiries there, I have resolved to pursue my own here.  I now call
upon you, Boccadoro, to tell us what you know of Madonna Paola's
whereabouts."

"I know nothing," I answered stoutly.  "I am prepared to take oath that I
know nothing of her whereabouts."

"Tell me, then, at least," said he, "where you bestowed her."

I shook my head, pressing my lips tight.

"Do you think that I would tell you if I had the knowledge?" was the
scornful question with which I answered him.  "You may pursue your
inquiries as you will and where you will, but I pray God they may all
prove as futile as must those that you would pursue here and upon my own
person."

This was how I fenced with him, this was the manner in which I followed
Mariani's sound advice that I should temporise!  Oh! I know that my words
were the words of a fool, yet no fear that Ramiro would inspire me could
have restrained them.

There was a murmur at the table, and his fellows turned their eyes on
Ramiro to see how he would receive this bearding.  He smiled quietly, and
raising his hand he made a sign to the executioners.

Rude hands seized me from behind, and the doublet was torn from my back by
fingers that never paused to untruss my points.

They turned me about, and hurried me along until I stood under the pulleys
of the torture, and one of the men held me securely whilst the other
passed the cords about my wrists.  Then both the executioners stepped
back, to be ready to hoist me at the Governor's signal.

He delayed it, much as an epicure delays the consumption of a delectable
morsel, heightening by suspense the keen desire of his palate.  He watched
me closely, and had my lips quivered or my eyelids fluttered, he would
have hailed with joy such signs of weakness.  But I take pride in
truthfully writing that I stood bold and impassively before him, and if I
was pale I thank Heaven that pallor was the habit of my countenance, so
that from that he could gather no satisfaction.  And standing there, I
gave him back look for look, and waited.

"For the last time, Boccadoro," he said slowly, attempting by words to
shake a demeanour that was proof against the impending facts of the cord,
"I ask you to remember what must be the consequences of this stubbornness.
If not at the first hoist, why then at the second or the third, the
torture will compel you to disclose what you may know.  Would you not be
better advised to speak at once, while your limbs are soundly planted in
their sockets, rather than let yourself be maimed, perhaps for life, ere
you will do so?"

There was a stir of hoofs without.  They thundered on the planks of the
drawbridge and clattered on the stones of the courtyard.  The thought of
Cesare Borgia rose to my mind.  But never did drowning man clutch at a
more illusory straw.  Cold reason quenched my hope at once.  If the
greatest imaginable success attended Mariani's journey, the Duke could not
reach Cesena before midnight, and to that it wanted some ten hours at
least.  Moreover, the company that came was small to judge by the sound--a
half-dozen horses at the most.

But Ramiro's attention had been diverted from me by the noise.  Half-
turning in his chair, he called to one of the men-at-arms to ascertain who
came.  Before the fellow could do his bidding, the door was thrust open
and Lucagnolo appeared on the threshold, jaded and worn with hard riding.

A certain excitement arose in me at sight of him, despite my confidence
that he must be returning empty-handed.

Ramiro rose, pushed back his chair and advanced towards the new-comer.

"Well?" he demanded.  "What news?"

"Excellency, the girl is here."

That answer seemed to turn me into stone, so great was the shock of this
sudden shattering of the confidence that had sustained me.

"My search in the country failing," pursued the captain, as he came
forward, "I made bold to exceed your orders by pushing my inquiries as far
as the village of Cattolica.  There I found her after some little labour."

Surely I dreamt.  Surely, I told myself, this was not possible.  There was
some mistake.  Lucagnolo had drought some wench whom he believed to be
Madonna Paola.

But even as I was assuring myself of this, the door opened again, and
between two men-at-arms, white as death, her garments stained with mud and
all but reduced to rags, and her eyes wild with a great fear, came my
beloved Paola.

With a sound that was as a grunt of satisfaction, Ramiro strode forward to
meet her.  But her eyes travelled past him and rested upon me, standing
there between the leather-clad executioners with the cords of the torture
pinioning my wrists, and I saw the anguish deepen in their blue depths.


CHAPTER XIX

DOOMED

Across the length of that hall our eyes met--hers and mine--and held each
other's glances.  To me the room and all within it formed an indistinct
and misty picture, from out of which there clearly gleamed my Paola's
sweet, white face.

All at the table had risen with Ramiro, and now, copying their leader,
they bared their heads in outward token of such respect as certainly would
have been felt by any men less abandoned than were they before so much
saintly beauty and distress.

Lucagnolo had stepped aside, and Ramiro was now bowing low and
ceremoniously before Madonna.  His face I could not see, since his back
was towards me, but his tones, as they floated across the hall to where I
stood, came laden with subservience.

"Madonna, I give praise and thanks to Heaven for this," said he.  "I was
afflicted by the gravest misgivings for your safety, and I am more than
thankful to behold you safe and sound."

There was a hypocritical flavour of courtliness about his words, and a
mincing of his tones that suggested the efforts of a bull-calf to imitate
the warbling of a throstle.

Madonna paid him no heed; indeed, she appeared not to have heard him, for
her eyes continued to look past him and at me.  At last her lips parted,
and although she scarcely seemed to raise her voice above a whisper, the
word uttered reached my ears across the stillness of the great room, and
the word was "Lazzaro!"

At mention of my name, and at the tone in which it was uttered--a tone
that betrayed same measure of what was in her heart--Ramiro wheeled
sharply in my direction, his brows wrinkling.  A certain craftiness he
had, for all that I ever accounted him the dullest-witted clod that ever
rose to his degree of honour.  He must have realised how expedient it was
that in all he did he should present himself to Madonna in a favourite
light.

"Release him," he bade the executioners that held me, and in an instant I
was set free.  The order given, he turned again to Madonna.

"You have been torturing him," she cried, and her words were hard and
fierce, her eyes blazing.  "You shall repent it, Ser Ramiro.  The Lord
Cesare Borgia shall hear of it."

Her anger betrayed her more and more, and however hidden it may have been
to her, to me it was exceeding clear that she was encompassing my
destruction.  Ramiro laughed easily.

"Madonna, you are at fault.  We have not been torturing him, though I
confess that we were on the point of putting him to the question.  But
your timely arrival has saved his limbs, for the question we were asking
him concerned your whereabouts!"

I would have shouted to her to be wary how she answered him, for some
premonition how he was about to trick her entered my mind.  But realising
the futility of such a course, I held my peace and waited agonisedly.

"You had tortured him in vain then," she answered scornfully.  "For
Lazzaro Biancomonte would never have betrayed me.  Nor could he have
betrayed me if he would, for after your men had searched the hut in which
I was hidden, I walked to Cattolica thinking foolishly that I should be
safer there."

Lackaday!  She had told him the very thing he had sought to know.  Yet to
make doubly sure he pursued the scent a little farther.

"Indeed it seems to me that had I tortured him I had given him no more
than he deserved for having abandoned you in that hut.  Madonna, I tremble
to think of the harm that might have come to you through that knave's
desertion."  And he scowled across at me, much as the Pharisee might have
scowled upon the publican.

"He is no knave," she answered, and I could have groaned to hear her
working my undoing, though not by so much as a sign might I inspire her
with caution, for that sign must have been seen by others.  "Nor did he
abandon me.  He left me  only to go in quest of the necessaries for our
journey.  If harm has come to me the blame of it must not rest on him."

"Of what harm do you speak, Madonna?" he cried, in a voice laden with
concern.

"Of what harm," she echoed, eyeing him with a scorn that would have slain
him had he any manhood left.  "Of what harm?  Mother of Mercy, defend me!
Do you ask the question?  What greater harm could have come to me than to
have fallen into the hands of Ramiro del' Orca and his brigands?"

He stood looking at her, and I doubt not that his face was a very picture
of simulated consternation.

"Surely, Madonna, you do not understand that we are your friends, that you
can so abuse us.  But you will be faint, Madonna," he cried, with a fresh
and deep solicitude.  "A cup of wine." And he waved his hand towards the
table.

"It would poison me, I think," she answered coldly.

"You are cruel, and--alas!--mistrustful," said he.  "Can you guess nothing
of the anxiety that has been mine these two days, of the fears that have
haunted me as I thought of you and your wanderings?"

Her lip curled, and her face took on some slight vestige of colour.  Her
spirit was a thing for which I might then have come to love her had it not
been that already I loved her to distraction.

"Yes," said she, "I can guess something of your dismay when you found your
schemes frustrated; when you found that you had come too late to San
Domenico."

"Will you not forgive me that shift to which my adoration drove me?" he
implored, in a honeyed voice--and a more fearful thing than Ramiro the
butcher was Ramiro the lover.

At that scarcely covert avowal of his passion she recoiled a step as she
might before a thing unclean.  The little colour faded from her cheek, the
scorn departed from her lip, and a sickly, deadly fear overspread her
lovely face.  God! that I should stand there and witness this insult to
the woman I adored and worshipped with a fervour that the Church seeks to
instil into us for those about the throne of Heaven.  It might not be.  A
blind access of fury took me.  Of the consequences I thought nothing.
Reason left me utterly, and the slight hope that might lie in temporising
was disregarded.

Before those about me could guess my purpose, or those others, too
engrossed in the scene at the far end of the hall, could intervene, I had
sprung from between the executioners and dashed across the space that
separated me from the Governor of Cesena.  One well-aimed blow, and there
should be an end to Messer Ramiro.  That was the only thought that found
room in my disordered mind.

One or two there were who cried out as I sped past them, swift as the
hound when it speeds after the fleeing hare.  But I was upon Ramiro ere
any could have sufficiently mastered his surprise to interfere.

By the nape of his great neck I caught him from behind, and setting my
knee at his spine I wrenched him backward, and so flung him over on the
floor.  Down I went with him, my hand reaching for the dagger at his
jewelled girdle, and I had found and drawn it in that swift action of mine
ere he had bethought him of his hands.  Up it flashed and down.  I sank it
through the crimson velvet of his rich doublets straight at the spot where
his heart should be--if he were so human as to have a heart.  The next
instant I turned cold and sick.  My desperate effort had been all for
nothing.  In my hand I was left with the bronze hilt of his great poniard;
the blade had broken off against the mesh of steel the coward wore beneath
his finery.

There was a rush of feet about us, a piercing scream from Madonna Paola,
and it was to her that I owed my life in that grim moment.  A dozen blades
were naked and would have transfixed me as I lay, but that she covered my
body with her own and bade them strike at me through her.

A moment later and the powerful hands of the Governor of Cesena were at my
throat.  I was lifted and tossed aside, as though I had been a hound and
he the bull I had beset.  And as he swung me over and crushed me to the
ground, he knelt above me and grinned horribly into my purpling face.

A second we stayed so, and I thought indeed that my hour was come, when
suddenly I felt the blood in my head released once more.  He had taken his
hands from my throat.  He seized me now by the collar and dragged me
rudely to my feet.

"Take this knave and lock him in his chamber," he bade a couple of his
bravi.  "I may have need of him ere he dies."

"Messer Ramiro," came the interceding voice of Madonna Paola, "what he
did, he did for me.  You will not let him die for it?"

There was a pause during which he looked at her, whilst the men were
roughly dragging me across the hall.

"Who knows, Madonna?" he said, with a bow and an infernal smile.  "If you
were to beg his life, it might even come to pass that I might spare it."

He did not wait for her answer, but stepping after me he called to the men
that led me.  In obedience they halted, and he came forward.  We were now
at the foot of the staircase.

"Boccadoro," said he, planting himself before me, and eyeing me with eyes
that were very full of malice, "you will recall the punishment I promised
you if I came to discover it was you had thwarted me in Pesaro.  It is the
second time you have fooled Ramiro del' Orca.  There does not live the man
who can boast that he did it thrice, nor will I risk it that you be that
man.  Make your peace with Heaven, for at sunset--in an hour's time--you
hang.  There is one little thing that might save you even yet, and if you
find life sweet, you would do well to pray that that little thing may come
to pass."

I answered him nothing, but I bowed my head in token that I had heard and
he signed to the men to proceed with me, whilst turning on his heel he
stepped down the hall again to where Madonna Paola, overcome with
weakness, had sunk upon a stool.

As I was leaving the gallery I had a last glimpse of her, sitting there
with drawn face and haggard eyes that followed me as I passed from her
sight, whilst Ramiro del' Orca stood beside her murmuring words that did
not reach me.  His so-called courtiers and his men-at-arms were trooping
out of the room, no doubt in obedience to his dismissal.


CHAPTER XX

THE SUNSET


I have heard tell of the calm that comes upon brave men when hope is dead
and their doom has been pronounced.  Uncertainty may have tortured and
made cowards of them; but once that uncertainty is dissolved and suspense
is at an end, resignation enters their soul, and, possessing it, gives to
their bearing a noble and dignified peace.  By the mercy of Heaven they
are made, maybe, to see how poor and evanescent a thing is life; and they
come to realise that since to die is a necessity there is no avoiding, as
well might it betide to-day as ten years hence.

Such a mood, however, came not to soothe that last hour of mine, and yet I
account myself no coward.  It was an hour of such torture and anguish as
never before I had experienced--much though I had undergone--and the
source of all my suffering lay in the fact that Madonna Paola was in the
hands of the ogre of Cesena.  Had it not been for that most untoward
circumstance I almost believe that while I waited for the sun to set on
that December afternoon, my mood had not only been calm but even in some
measure joyous, for it must have comforted my last moments to reflect that
for all that Messer Ramiro was about to hang me, yet had I sown the seeds
of his own destruction ere he had brought me to this pass.

I did, indeed, reflect upon it, and it may even be that, in spite of all,
I culled some grain of comfort from the reflection.  But let that be.  My
narrative would drag wearily were I to digress that I might tell you at
length the ugly course of my thoughts whilst the sands of my last hour
were running swiftly out.  For, after all, my concern and yours is with
the story of Lazzaro Biancomonte, sometime known as Boccadoro the Fool,
and not with his philosophies--philosophies so unprofitable that it can
benefit no man that I should set them down.

My windows faced west, and so I was able to watch the fall of the sun, and
measure by its shortening distance from the horizon the ebbing of my poor
life. At last the nether rim of that round, fiery orb was on the point of
touching the line of distant hills, and it was casting a crimson glow
along the white, snow-sheeted landscape that was singularly suggestive of
a tide of blood--a very fitting tide to flow and ebb about the walls of
the Castle of Cesena.

One little thing there was might save me, Ramiro had said.  But I had shut
the thought out of my mind to keep me from utter distraction.  The only
little thing in which I held that my salvation could lie would be in the
miraculous arrival of Cesare Borgia, and of that not the faintest hope
existed.  If the greatest luck attended Mariani's errand and the greatest
speed were made by the Duke once he received the letter, he could not
reach Cesena in less than another eight hours.  And another eight minutes,
to reckon by the swift sinking of the sun would see the time appointed for
my hanging.  I thought of Joshua in that grim hour, and in a mood that
approached the whimsical I envied him his gift.  If I could have stayed
the setting of the sun, and held it where it was till midnight, all might
yet be well if Mariani had been diligent and Cesare swift.

The key grating in the lock put an end to my vague musings, and reminded
me of the fact that I had neglected to employ that last hour as would have
become a good son of Mother Church.  For an instant I believe that my
heart turned me to thoughts of God, and sent up a prayer for mercy for my
poor sinful soul.  Then the door swung wide.  Two halberdiers and a
carnifex in his odious leathern apron stood before me.  Clearly Ramiro
sought to be exact, and to have me hanging the instant the sun should
vanish.

"It is time," said one of the soldiers, whilst the executioner, stepping
into my chamber, pinioned my wrists behind me, and retaining hold of the
cord bade me march.  He followed, holding that slender cord, and so, like
a beast to the shambles, went I.

Once more they led me into the hall, where the shadows were lengthening in
dark contrast to the splashes of sunlight that lingered on the floor, and
whose blood-red hue was deepened by the gules of the windows through which
it was filtered.

Ramiro was waiting for me, and six of his officers were in attendance.
But, for once, there were no men-at-arms at hand.  On a chair, the one
usually occupied by Ramiro, himself, sat Madonna Paola, still in her torn
and bedraggled raiment, her face white, her eyes wild as they had been
when first she had been haled into Ramiro's presence, some two hours ago,
and her features so rigidly composed that it told the tale of the awful
self-control she must be exerting--a self-control that might end with a
sudden snap that would plunge her into madness.

A wild rage possessed me at sight of her.  Let Ramiro be ruthless and
cruel where men were concerned; that was a thing for which forgiveness
might be found him.  But that he should submit a lady, delicately nurtured
as was Madonna, to such horrors as she had undergone since she had
awakened from his sleeping-potion in the Church of San Domenico, was
something for which no Hell could punish him condignly.

Ramiro met me with a countenance through the assumed gravity of which I
could espy his wicked, infernal mockery peeping forth.

"I deplore your end, Lazzaro Biancomonte," said he slowly, "for you are a
brave man, and brave men are rare.  You were worthy of better things, but
you chose to cross swords with Ramiro del' Orca, and you have got your
death-blow.  May God have mercy on your soul."

"I am praying," said I, "for just so much mercy as you shall have justice.
If my prayer is heard, I should be well-content."

He changed countenance a little.  So, too, I thought, did Madonna Paola.
My firmness may have yielded her some grain of comfort.  Ramiro set his
hands on his hips, and eyed me squarely.

"You are a dauntless rogue," he confessed.

I laughed for answer, and in that moment it entered my mind that I might
yet enjoy some measure of revenge in this life.  More than that, I might
benefit Madonna.  For were the seed I was about to sow to take root in the
craven heart of Ramiro del' Orca, it would so fully occupy his mind that
he would have little time to bestow on Paola in the few hours that were
left him.  But before I could bethink me of words, he was speaking again.

"I held out to you a slender hope," said he.  "I told you that there was
one little thing might save you.  That hope has borne no fruit; the little
thing, I spoke of has not come to pass.  It rested with Madonna Paola,
here.  She had it in her hands to effect your salvation, but she has
refused.  Your blood rests on her head."

She shuddered at the words, and a low moan escaped her.  She covered her
face with her hands.  A moment I stood looking at her; then I shifted my
glance to Ramiro.

"Will it please you, Illustrious, to allow me a few moments' conversation
with Madonna Paola di Santafior?"

I invested my tones with a weight of meaning that did not escape him.  His
face suddenly lightened; whilst one of his officers--a fellow very fitly
named Lupone--laughed outright.

"Your hero seems none so heroic after all," he said derisively to the
Governor.  "The imminence of death makes him amenable."

Ramiro scowled on him for answer.  Then, turning to me--"Do you think you
could bend her stubbornness?" quoth he.

"I might attempt it," answered I.

His eyes flashed with evil hope; his lips parted in a smile.  He shot a
glance at Madonna, who had withdrawn her hands from her face and was
regarding me now with a strange expression of horror and incredulity--
marvelling, no doubt, to find me such a craven as I must have seemed.

Ramiro looked at the diminishing sunlight on the floor.

"In some five minutes the sun will have completely set," said he.  "Those
five minutes you shall have to seek to enlist Madonna's aid on your
behalf.  If you succeed--and she may tell you on what terms you are to
have your life--you shall depart from Cesena to-night a free man."

He paused a moment, and his eyes, lighted by an odious smile, rested once
more on Madonna Paula.  Then he bade all withdraw, and went with them into
an adjoining chamber, fondly nurturing the hopes that were begotten of his
belief that Lazzaro Biancomonte was a villain.

When we were alone, she and I, I stood a moment where they had left me, my
hands pinioned behind me, and the cord which the executioner had held
trailing the ground like a lambent tail.  Then I went slowly forward until
I stood close before her.  Her eyes were on my face, still with that same
look of unbelief.

"Madonna mia," said I, "do not for an instant think that it is my purpose
to ask of you any sacrifice that might save my worthless life.  Rather was
my purpose in seeking these few moments with you, to strengthen and
encourage you by such news as it is mine to bring."

She looked now as if she scarcely understood.

"If I will wed him to-night, he has promised that you shall go free," she
said in a whisper.  "He says that he can bring a priest from the
neighbourhood at a moment's notice."

"Do not heed him," I cried sternly.

"I do not heed him," said she, more composedly.  "If he seeks to force me,
I shall find a way of setting myself free.  Dear Mother of Heaven! death
were a sweet and restful thing after all that I have suffered in these
days."

Then she fell suddenly to weeping.

"Think me not an utter coward, Lazzaro.  Willingly would I do this thing
to save so noble a life as yours, did I not think that you must hate me
for it.  I was stout and firm in my refusal, confident that you would have
had me so.  Was I not right, my poor, poor Lazzaro?"

"Madonna, you were right," I answered firmly and calmly.

"And you are to die, amor mio," she murmured passionately.  "You are to
die when the promise of happiness seemed held out to us.  And yet, were
you to live at the price at which life is offered you, would your life be
endurable?  Tell me the truth, Lazzaro; swear it to me.  For if life is
the dearer thing to you, why then, you shall have your life."

"Need you ask me, Paola?" questioned I.  "Does not your heart tell you how
much easier is death than would be such life as I must lead hereafter,
even if we could trust Ramiro, which we cannot.  Be brave, Madonna, and
help me to be brave and to bear thyself with a becoming fortitude.  Now
listen to what I have to tell you.  Ramiro del' Orca is a traitor who is
plotting the death of his overlord.  Proofs of it are by now in the hands
of Cesare Borgia, and in some seven or eight hours the Duke himself should
be here to put this monster to the question touching these matters.  I
will say a word in his ear ere I depart that will fill his mind with a
very wholesome fear, and you will find that during the few hours left him
he will have little leisure to think of you and afflict you with his
odious wooing.  Be strong, then, for a little while, for Cesare is coming
to set you free."

She looked at me now with eyes that were wide open.  Suddenly--

"Could we not gain time?" she cried, and in her eagerness she rose and set
her hands upon my shoulders.  "Could I not pretend to acquiesce to his
wishes, and so delay your end?"

"I have thought of it," I answered gloomily, "but the thought has brought
me no hope.  Ramiro is not to be trusted.  He might tell you that he sets
me free, but he dare not do so; he fears that I may have knowledge of his
dealings with Vitelli, and assuredly he would break faith with us.  Again
the coming of the Duke might be delayed.  Alas!" I ended in despair,
"there is nothing to be done but to let things run their course."

There was even more in my mind than I expressed.  My mistrust of Ramiro
went further than I had explained, and concerning Madonna more closely
than it did me.

"Nay, Lazzaro mine," she still protested, "I will attempt it.  It is, at
least, well worth the risk.

"You forget," said I, "that even when Cesare comes we cannot say how he
will bear himself towards you.  You were to have been betrothed to his
cousin, Ignacio.  It is a matter upon which he may insist."

She looked at me for a moment with anguish in her eyes that turned my
misery into torture.

"Lazzaro," she moaned, "was ever woman so beset!  I think that Heaven must
have laid some curse upon me."

Her face was close to mine.  I stooped forward and kissed her on her brow.

"May God have you in His keeping, Madonna mia," I murmured.  "The sun is
gone."

"Lazzaro!"  It was the cry of a breaking heart.  Her arms went round my
neck, and in a passion of grief her kisses burned on my lips.

Then the door of the anteroom opened--and I thanked God for the mercy of
that interruption.  I whispered a word to her, and in obedience she sprang
back, and sank limp and broken on the chair once again.

Ramiro entered, his men behind him, his face alit with eagerness.  There
and then I swamped his hopes.

"The sun is gone, Magnificent," said I.  "You had best get me hanged."

His brow darkened, for there was a note of mockery and triumph in my
voice.

"You have fooled me, animal," he cried.  His jaw set, and his eyes
continued to regard me with an evil glow.  Then he laughed terribly,
shrugged his shoulders, and spoke again.  "After all, it shall avail you
little."  He turned to the carnifex.  "Federigo, do your work," said he,
whereupon the fellow stepped behind me, and the halberdiers ranged
themselves one on either side of me again.

"A word ere I go, Messer del' Orca," I demanded insolently.

He looked at me sharply, wondering, maybe, at the fresh tone I took.

"Say it and begone," he sullenly permitted me.

I paused a moment to choose fitting words for that portentous death-song
of mine.  At length--

"You boasted to me a little while ago," said I, smiling grimly, "that the
man did not live who had thrice fooled you.  That man does live, for that
man am I."

"Bah!" he returned contemptuously, thinking, no doubt, that I referred to
my interview with Madonna Paola.  "You may take what pride you will from
such a thought.  You are upon the threshold of death."

"True, but the thought is one that affords me more comfort and joy than
pride.  As much comfort and joy as you shall take horror when I tell you
in what manner I have fooled you." I paused to heighten the sensation of
my words.

"To such good purpose have I used my wits that ere another sun shall rise
and set you will have followed me along the black road that I am now
treading--the road whose bourne is the gallows.  Bethink you of the
charred paper that last night you brushed from this table when you awoke
to find a candle fallen on the treacherous letter Vitellozzo Vitelli sent
you in the lining of a hat."

His jaw fell, his face flamed redder than ever for a second, then it went
grey as ashes.

"Of what do you prate, fool?" he questioned huskily, seeking to bluster it
before the startled glances of his officers.

"I speak," said I, "of that charred paper.  It was I who laid the candle
across it; but it was a virgin sheet I burned.  Vitelli's letter I had
first abstracted."

"You lie!" he almost screamed.

"To prove that I do not, I will tell you what it contained.  It held proof
that bribed by the Tyrant of Citta di Castello you had undertaken to pose
an arbalister to slay the Duke on the occasion of his coming visit to
Cesena."

He glared at me a moment in furious amazement.  Then he turned to his
officers.

"Do not heed him," he bade them.  "The dog lies to sow doubts in your
minds ere he goes out to hang.  It is a puerile revenge."

I laughed with amused confidence.  There was one among them had heard
Lampugnani's words touching the messenger's hat--words that had cost the
fellow his life.  But my concern was little with the effect my words might
produce upon his followers.

"By to-morrow you will know whether I have lied or not.  Nay, before then
shall you know it, for by midnight Cesare Borgia should be at Cesena.
Vitellozzo Vitelli's letter is in his hands by now."

At that Ramiro burst into a laugh.  So convinced was he of the
impossibility of my having got the letter to the Duke, even if what I had
said of its abstraction were true, that he gathered assurance from what
seemed to him so monstrous an exaggeration.

"By your own words are you confounded," said he.  "Out of your own mouth
have you proven your lies.  Assuming that all you say were true, how could
you, who since last night have been a prisoner, have got a messenger to
bear anything from you to Cesare Borgia?"

I looked at him with a contemptuous amusement that daunted him.

"Where is Mariani?" I asked quietly.  "Where is the father of the lad you
so brutally and wantonly slew yesternight?  Seek him throughout Cesena,
and when you find him not, perhaps you will realise that one who had seen
his own son suffer such an outrageous and cruel death at your brigand's
hands would be a willing and ready instrument in an act that should avenge
him."

Vergine santa!  What a consternation was his.  He must have missed Mariani
early in the day, for he took no measure, asked no questions that might
confirm or refute the thing I announced.  His face grew livid, and his
knees loosened.  He sank on to a chair and mopped the cold sweat from his
brow with his great brown hand.  No thought had he now for the eyes of his
officers or their opinions.  Fear, icy and horrid, such fear as in his
time he had inspired in a thousand hearts was now possessed of his.  Sweet
indeed was the flavour of my vengeance.

His officers instinctively drew away from him before the guilt so clearly
written on his face, and their eyes were full of doubt as to how they
should proceed and of some fear--for it must have been passing through
their minds that they stood, themselves, in danger of being involved with
him in the Duke's punishment of his disloyalty.

This was more than had ever entered into my calculations or found room in
my hopes.  By a brisk appeal to them, it almost seemed that I might work
my salvation in this eleventh hour.

Madonna watched the scene with eyes that suggested to me that the same
hope had arisen in her own mind.  My halberdiers and the carnifex alone
stood stolidly indifferent.  Ramiro was to them the man that hired them;
with his intriguing they had no concern.

For a moment or two there was a silence, and Ramiro sat staring before
him, his white face glistening with the sweat of fear.  A very coward at
heart was this overbearing ogre of Cesena, who for years had been the
terror and scourge of the countryside.  At last he mastered his emotion
and sprang to his feet.

"You have had the laugh of me," he snarled, fury now ringing in his voice.
"But ere you die you may regret it that you mocked me."

He turned to the executioner.

"Strip him," he commanded fiercely.  "He shall not hang as I intended--at
least not before we have torn every bone of his body from its socket.  To
the cord with him!"  And he pointed to the torture at the end of the hall.

The executioner made shift to obey him when suddenly Madonna Paola leapt
to her feet, her cheeks flushed and her eyes bright with a new excitement.

"Is there none here," he cried, appealing to Ramiro's officers, "that will
draw his sword in the service of his overlord, the Duca Valentino?  There
stands a traitor, and there one who has proven his loyalty to Cesare
Borgia.  The Duke is likely to demand a heavy price for the life of that
faithful one to whose warning he owes his escape of assassination.  Will
none of you side now with the right that anon you may stand well with
Cesare Borgia when he comes?  Or, by idly allowing this traitor to have
his way, will you participate in the punishment that must be his?"

It was the very spur they needed.  And scarce was that final question of
hers flung at those knaves, when the answer came from one of them.  It was
that same sturdy Lupone.

"I, for one, am for the Duke," said he, and his sword leapt from its
scabbard.  "I draw my iron for Valentino.  Let every loyal man do likewise
and seize this traitor."  And with his sword he pointed at Ramiro.

In an instant three others bared their weapons and ranged themselves
beside him.  The remaining two--of whom was Lucagnolo--folded their hands,
manifesting by that impassivity that they were minded to take neither one
side nor the other.

The carnifex paused in his labours of undressing me, and the affair
promised to grow interesting.  But Ramiro did not stand his ground.  Fury
swelling his veins and crimsoning his huge face, he sprang to the door and
bellowed to his guards.  Six men trooped in almost at once, and reinforced
by the halberdiers that had been guarding me, they made short work of the
resistance of those four officers.  In as little time as it takes me to
record it, they were disarmed and ranged against the wall behind those
guards and others that had come to their support--to be dealt with by
Ramiro after he had dealt with me.

His fear of Cesare's coming was put by for the moment in his fierce lust
to be avenged upon me who had betrayed him and the officers who had turned
against him.  Madonna sank back once more in her despair.  The little
spark that she had so bravely fanned to life had been quenched almost as
soon as it had shown itself.

"Now, Federigo," said Ramiro grimly, "I am waiting."

The executioner resumed his work, and in an instant I stood stripped of my
brigandine.  As the fellow led me, unresisting, to the torture--for what
resistance could have availed me now?--I tried to pray for strength to
endure what was to come.  I was done with life; for some portion of an
hour I must go through the cruellest of agonies; and then, when it pleased
God in His mercy that I should swoon, it would be to wake no more in this
world.  For they would bear out my unconscious body, and hang it by the
neck from that black beam they called Ramiro del' Orca's flagstaff.

I cast a last glance at Madonna.  She had fallen on her knees, and with
folded hands was praying intently, none heeding her.

Federigo halted me beneath the pulleys, and his horrid hands grew busy
adjusting the ropes to my wrists.

And then, when the last ray of hope had faded, but before the executioner
had completed his hideous task, a trumpet-blast, winding a challenge to
the gates of the Castle of Cesena, suddenly rang out upon the evening air,
and startled us all by its sudden and imperious note.


CHAPTER XXI

AVE CAESAR!


For just an instant I allowed myself to be tortured by the hope that a
miracle had happened, and here was Cesare Borgia come a good eight hours
before it was possible for Mariani to have fetched him from Faenza.  The
same doubt may have crossed Ramiro's mind, for he changed colour and
sprang to the door to bawl an order forbidding his men to lower the
bridge.

But he was too late.  Before he was answered by his followers, we heard
the creaking of the hinges and the rattle of the running chains, ending in
a thud that told us the drawbridge had dropped across the moat.  Then came
the loud continuous thunder of many hoofs upon its timbers.  Paralysed by
fear Ramiro stood where he had halted, turning his eyes wildly in this
direction and in that, but never moving one way or the other.

It must be Cesare, I swore to myself.  Who else could ride to Cessna with
such numbers?  But then, if it was Cesare, it could not be that he had
seen Mariani, for he could not have ridden from Faenza.  Madonna had risen
too, and with a white face and straining eyes she was looking towards the
door.

And then our doubts were at last ended.  There was a jangle of spurs and
the fall of feet, and through the open door stepped a straight, martial
figure in a doublet of deep crimson velvet, trimmed with costly lynx furs
and slashed with satin in the sleeves and shoulder-puffs; jewels gleamed
in the massive chain across his breast and at the marroquin girdle that
carried his bronze-hilted sword; his hose was of red silk, and his great
black boots were armed with golden spurs.  But to crown all this very
regal splendour was the beautiful, pale, cold face of Cesare Borgia, from
out of which two black eyes flashed and played like sword-points on the
company.

Behind him surged a press of mercenaries, in steel, their weapons naked in
their hands, so that no doubt was left of the character of this visit.

Collecting himself, and bethinking him that after all, he had best
dissemble a good countenance; Ramiro advanced respectfully to meet his
overlord.  But ere he had taken three steps the Duke stayed him.

"Stand where you are, traitor," was the imperious command.  "I'll trust
you no nearer to my person."  And to emphasise his words he raised his
gloved left hand, which had been resting on his sword-hilt, and in which I
now observed that he held a paper.

Whether Ramiro recognised it, or whether it was that the mere sight of a
paper reminded him of the letter which on my testimony should be in
Cesare's keeping, or whether again the word "traitor" with which Cesare
branded him drove the iron deeper into his soul, I cannot say; but to this
I can testify: that he turned a livid green, and stood there before his
formidable master in an attitude so stricken as to have aroused pity for
any man less a villain than was he.

And now Cesare's eye, travelling round, alighted on Madonna Paola,
standing back in the shadows to which she had instinctively withdrawn at
his coming.  At sight of her he recoiled a pace, deeming, no doubt, that
it was an apparition stood before him.  Then he looked again, and being a
man whose mind was above puerile superstitions, he assured himself that by
what miracle the thing was wrought, the figure before him was the living
body of Madonna Paola Sforza di Santafior.  He swept the velvet cap with
its jewelled plume from off his auburn locks, and bowed low before her.

"In God's name, Madonna, how are you come to life again, and how do I find
you here of all places?"

She made no ado about enlightening him.

"That villain," said she, and her finger pointed straight and firmly at
Ramiro, "put a sleeping-potion in my wine on the last night he dined with
us at Pesaro, and when all thought me dead he came to the Church of San
Domenico with his men to carry off my sleeping body.  He would have
succeeded in his fell design but that Lazzaro Biancomonte there, whom you
have stayed him in the act of torturing to death, was beforehand and saved
me from his clutches for a time.  This morning at Cattolica his searching
sbirri discovered me and brought me hither, where I have been for the past
three hours, and where, but for your Excellency's timely arrival, I
shudder to think of the indignities I might have suffered."

"I thank you, Madonna, for this clear succinctness," answered Cesare
coldly, as was his habit.  They say he was a passionate man, and such
indeed I do believe him to have been; but even in the hottest frenzy of
rage, outwardly he was ever the same--icily cold and tranquil.  And this,
no doubt, was the thing that made him terrible.

"Presently, Madonna," he pursued, "I shall ask you to tell me how it
chanced that, having saved you, Messer Biancomonte did not bear you to
your brother's house.  But first I have business with my Governor of
Cesena--a score which is rendered, if possible, heavier than it already
stood by this thing that you have told me."

"My lord," cried out Ramiro, finding his tongue at last, "Madonna has
misinformed you.  I know nothing of who administered the sleeping-potion.
Certainly it was not I.  I heard a rumour that her body had been stolen,
and--"

"Silence!" Cesare commanded sternly.  "Did I question you, dog?"

His beautiful, terrible eyes fastened upon Ramiro in a glance that defied
the man to answer him.  Cowed, like a hound at sight of the whip, Ramiro
whimpered into silence.

Cesare waved his hand in his direction, half-turning to the men-at-arms
behind him.

"Take and disarm him," was his passionless command.  And while they were
doing his bidding, he turned to me and ordered the executioner beside me
to unbind my hands and set me at liberty.

"I owe you a heavy debt, Messer Biancomonte," he said, without any warmth,
even now that his voice was laden with a message of gratitude.  "It shall
be discharged.  It is thanks to your daring and resource that the
seneschal Mariani was able to bring me this letter, this piece of
culminating proof against Ramiro del' Orca.  It is fortunate for you that
Mariani was not put to it to ride to Faenza to find me, or else I am
afraid we had not reached Cesena in time to save your life.  I met him
some leagues this side of Faenza, as I was on my way to Sinigaglia."

To what a depth of infamy men can descend!

The.
letter was from a man whom I had known at Hamburg, whom I had obliged,
whom I had employed as a spy. His epistle was a miracle of impudence.
After relating some extraordinary transactions which he said had
taken place between us, and which all bore the stamp of falsehood,
he requested me to send him by return of post the sum of 60,000
francs on account of what I had promised him for some business he
executed in England by the direction of M. de Talleyrand, General
Rapp, and myself.

Such miserable wretches are often caught in the snares they spread for
others.

This was the case in the present instance, for the fellow had
committed, the blunder of fixing upon the year 1802 as the period
of this pretended business in England, that is to say, two years
before my appointment as Minister-Plenipotentiary to the Hanse Towns.

This anachronism was not the only one I discovered in the letter.

I took a copy of the letter, and immediately carried the original
to the Duc de Rovigo, as had been agreed between us.

When I waited on the Minister he was just preparing to go to the Emperor.
He took with him the letter which I brought, and also the letter
which announced its arrival.

As the Duc de Rovigo entered the audience-chamber Napoleon advanced to meet
him, and apostrophised him thus: "Well, I have learned fine things
of your Bourrienne, whom you are always defending." The fact was, the
Emperor had already received a copy of the letter, which had been opened
at the Hamburg post-office. The Due de Rovigo told the Emperor
that he had long known what his Majesty had communicated to him.

From behind his men-at-arms a tall man, all dressed in black, stood
forward.  It was Cesare's Spanish captain, one whose name was as well
known and as well-dreaded in Italy as Cesare's own.  The Duke held out to
him the paper that he had produced.

"You heard the question that I asked Messer del' Orca?" he inquired.

"I heard, Illustrious" answered Miguel, with a bow.

"See that you obtain me an answer to it, as well as an account of the
other matters that I have noted on this list--concerning the
misappropriation of stores, the retention of taxes illicitly levied, and
the wanton cruelty towards my good citizens of Cesena.  Put him to the
question without delay, and record me his replies.  The implements are
yonder."

And with the same calm indifference which characterised his every word and
action Cesare pointed to the torture, and turned to Madonna Paola, as
though he gave the matter of Ramiro del' Orca and his misdeeds not another
thought.

"Mercy, my lord," rang now the voice of Ramiro, laden with horrid fear.
"I will speak."

"Then do so--to Don Miguel.  He will question you in my name."  Again he
turned to Madonna.  "Madonna Paola, may I conduct you hence?  Things may
perhaps occur which it is not seemly your gentle eyes should witness.
Messer Biancomonte, attend us."

Now, in spite of all that Ramiro had made me suffer, I should have been
loath to have remained and witnessed his examination.  That they would
torture him was now inevitable.  His chance of answering freely was gone.
Even if he returned meek replies to Don Miguel's questions, that gentleman
would, no doubt, still submit him to the cord by way of assuring himself
that such replies were true ones.

Gladly, then, did I turn to follow the Duke and Madonna Paola into the
adjoining chamber to which Cesare led the way, even as Don Miguel's voice
was raised to command his men to clear the hall, to the end that he might
conduct his examination in private.

The three of us stood in the anteroom.  A servant had lighted the tapers
and closed the doors, and the Duke turned to me.

"First, Messer Biancomonte, to discharge my debt.  You are, if I am not
misinformed, the lord by right of birth of certain lands that bear your
name, which suffered sequestration during the reign of the late Costanzo,
Tyrant of Pesaro, whose son Giovanni upheld that confiscation.  Am I
right?"

"Your Excellency is very well informed.  The Lord of Pesaro did make me
tardy restitution--so tardy, indeed, that the lands which he restored to
me had already virtually passed from his possession."

Cesare smiled.

"In recompense for the service you have rendered me this day," said he,
and my heart thrilled at the words and at the thought of the joy which I
was about to bear to my old mother, "I reinvest you in your lands of
Biancomonte for so long as you are content to recognise in me your
overlord, and to be loyal, true and faithful to my rule."

I bowed, murmuring something of the joy I felt and the devotion I should
entertain.

"Then that is done with.  You shall have the deed from my hand by morning.
And now, Madonna, will you grant me some explanation of your conduct in
leaving Pesaro in this man's company, instead of repairing to your
brother's house, when you awakened from the effects of the potion Ramiro
gave you, or must I seek the explanation from Messer Biancomonte?"

Her eyes fell before the scrutiny of his, and when they were raised again
it was to meet my glance, and if Cesare could not, for himself, read the
message of those eyes, why then, his penetration was by no means what the
world accounted it.

"My lord," I cried, "let me explain.  I love Madonna Paola.  It was love
of her that led me to the church and kept me there that night.  It was
love of her and the overmastering passion of my grief at her so sudden
death that led me, in a madness, to desire once more to look upon her face
ere they delivered it to earth's keeping.  Thus was it that I came to
discover that she lived; thus was it that I anticipated Ramiro del' Orca.
He came upon us almost before I had raised her from the coffin, yet love
lent me strength and craft to delude him.  We hid awhile in the sacristy,
and it was there, after Madonna had revived, that the pent-up passion of
years burst the bond with which reason had bidden me restrain it."

"By the Host!" cried Cesare, his brows drawn down in a frown.  "You are a
bold man to tell me this.  And you, Madonna," he cried, turning suddenly
to her, "what have you to say?"

"Only, my lord, that I have suffered more I think in these past few days
than has ever fallen to the life-time's share of another woman.  I think,
my lord, that I have suffered enough to have earned me a little peace and
a little happiness for the remainder of my days.  All my life have men
plagued me with marriages that were hateful to me, and this has culminated
in the brutal act of Ramiro del' Orca.  Do you not think that I have
endured enough?"

He stared at her for a moment.

"Then you love this fellow?" he gasped.  "You, Madonna Paola Sforza di
Santafior, one of the noblest ladies in all Italy, confess to love this
lordling of a few barren acres?"

"I loved him, Illustrious, when he was less, much less, than that.  I
loved him when he was little better than the Fool of the Court of Pesaro,
and not even the shame of the motley that disgraced him could stay the
impulse of my affections."

He laughed curiously.

"By my faith," said he, "I have gone through life complaining of the want
of frankness in the men and women I have met.  But you two seem to deal in
it liberally enough to satisfy the most ardent seeker after truth.  I
would that Pontius Pilate could have known you."  Then he grew sterner.
"But what account of this evening's adventure am I to bear to my cousin
Ignacio?"

She hung her head in silence, whilst my own spirit trembled.  Then
suddenly I spoke.

"My lord," said I, "if you take her back to Pesaro, you may keep the deed
of Biancomonte.  For unless Madonna Paola goes thither with me, your gift
is a barren one, your reward of no account or value to me."

"I would not have it so," said he, his head on one side and his fingers
toying with his auburn beard.  "You saved my life, and you must be
rewarded fittingly."

"Then, Illustrious, in payment for my preservation of your life, do you
render happy mine, and we shall thus be quits."

"My lord," cried Paola, putting forth her hands in supplication, "if you
have ever loved, befriend us now."

A shadow darkened his face for an instant, then it was gone, and his
expression was as inscrutable as ever.  Yet he took her hands in his and
looked down into her eyes.

"They say that I am hard, bloodthirsty and unfeeling," he said in tones
that were almost of complaint.  "But I am not proof against so much
appeal.  Ignacio must find him a bride in Spain; and if he is wise and
would taste the sweets of life, he will see to it that he finds him a
willing one."

"As for you two, Cesare Borgia shalt stand your friend.  He owes you no
less.  I will be godfather to your nuptials.  Thus shall the blame and
consequences rest on me.  Paola Sforza di Santafior is dead, men think.
We will leave them thinking it.  Filippo must know the truth.  But you can
trust me to make your brother take a reasonable view of what has come to
pass.  After all, there may be a disparity in your ranks.  But it is
purely adventitious, for noble though you may be, Madonna Paola, you are
wedding one who seems no less noble at heart, whatever the parts he may
have played in life."  He smiled inscrutably, as he added:  "I have in
mind that you once sought service with me Messer Biancomonte, and if a
martial life allures you still, I'll make you lord of something better far
than Biancomonte."

I thanked him, and Madonna joined me in that expression of gratitude--an
expression that fell very short of all that was in our hearts.  But
touching that offer of his that I should follow his fortunes, I begged him
not to insist.

"The possession of Biancomonte has from my cradle been the goal of all my
hopes.  It is patrimony enough for me, and there, with Madonna Paola, I'll
take a long farewell of ambition, which is but the seed of discontent."

"Why, as you will," he sighed.  And then, before more could be said, there
came from the adjoining room a piercing scream.

Cesare raised his head, and his lips parted in the faintest vestige of a
smile.

"They are exacting the truth from the Governor of Cesena," said he.  "I
think, Madonna, that we had better move a little farther off.  Ramiro's
voice makes indifferent music for a lady's ear."

She was white as death at the horrid noise and all the things of which it
may have reminded her, and so we passed from the antechamber and sought
the more distant places of the castle.

Here let me pause.  We were married on the morrow which was Christmas eve,
and in the grey dawn of the Christmas morning we set out for Biancomonte
with the escort which Cesare Borgia placed at our disposal.

As we rode out from the Citadel of Cesena, we saw the last of Ramiro del'
Orca.  Beyond the gates, in the centre of the public square, a block stood
planted in the snow.  On the side nearer the castle there was a dark mass
over which a rich mantle had been thrown; it was of purple colour, and in
the uncertain light it was not easy to tell where the cloak ended, and the
stain that embrued the snow began.  On the other side of the block a
decapitated head stood mounted on an upright pike, and the sightless eyes
of Ramiro del' Orca looked from his grinning face upon the town of Cesena,
which he had so wantonly misruled.

Madonna shuddered and turned her head aside as we rode past that dread
emblem of the Borgia justice.

To efface from her mind the memory of such a thing on such a day, I talked
to her, as we cantered out into the country, of the life to come, of the
mother that waited to welcome us, and of the glad tidings with which we
were to rejoice her on that Christmas day.

There is no moral to my story.  I may not end with one of those graceful
admonitions beloved of Messer Boccacci to whom in my jester's days I owed
so much.  Not mine is it to say with him "Wherefore, gentle ladies"--or
"noble sirs--beware of this, avoid that other thing."

Mine is a plain tale, written in the belief that some account of those old
happenings that befell me may offer you some measure of entertainment, and
written, too, in the support of certain truths which my contemporaries
have been shamefully inclined and simoniacally induced to suppress.  Many
chroniclers set forth how the Lord Vitellozzo Vitelli and his associates
were barbarously strangled by Cesare's orders at Sinigaglia, and
wilfully--for I cannot believe that it results from ignorance--are they
silent touching the reason, leaving you to imagine that it was done in
obedience to a ruthlessness of character beyond parallel, so that you may
come to consider Cesare Borgia as black as they were paid to paint him.

To confute them do I set down these facts of which my knowledge cannot be
called in question, and also that you may know the true story of Paola di
Santafior--and more particularly that part of it which lies beyond the
death she did not die.

The sun of that Christmas day was setting as we drew near to Biancomonte
and the humble dwelling of my old mother.  We fell into talk of her once
more.  Suddenly Paola turned in her saddle to confront me.

"Tell me, Lord of Biancomonte, will she love me a little, think you?" she
asked, to plague me.

"Who would not love you, Lady of Biancomonte?" counter-questioned I.