Preston had been out in his reckoning, and a second time had
brought me where he did not wish to bring me. We came
presently to an open place, or rather a place where the pines
stood a little apart; and there in the midst was a small
enclosure. A low brick wall surrounded a square bit of ground,
with an iron gate in one side of the square; within, the
grassy plot was spotted with the white marble of tombstones.
There were large and small. Overhead, the great pine trees
stood and waved their long branches gently in the wind. The
place was lonely and lovely. We had come, as Preston guessed,
to the river, and the shore was here high; so that we looked
down upon the dark little stream far below us. The sunlight,
getting low by this time, hardly touched it; but streamed
through the pine trees and over the grass and gilded the white
marble with gold.

"I did not mean to bring you here," said Preston. "I did not
know I was bringing you here. Come, Daisy — we'll go and try
again."

"Oh, stop!" I said — "I like it. I want to look at it."

"It is the cemetery," said Preston. "That tall column is the
monument of our great — no, of our great-great-grandfather;
and this brown one is for mamma's father. Come, Daisy! —"

"Wait a little," I said. "Whose is that with the vase on top?"

"Vase?" said Preston — "it's an urn. It is an urn, Daisy.
People do not put vases on tombstones."

I asked what the difference was.

"The difference? Oh, Daisy, Daisy! Why vases are to put
flowers in; and urns — I'll tell you, Daisy, — I believe it is
because the Romans used to burn the bodies of their friends
and gather up the ashes and keep them in a funeral urn. So an
urn comes to be appropriate to a tombstone."

"I do not see how," I said.

"Why, because an urn comes to be an emblem of mortality and
all that. Come, Daisy; let us go."

"I think a vase of flowers would be a great deal nicer," I
said. "We do not keep the ashes of our friends."

"We don't put signs of joy over their graves either," said
Preston.

"I should think we might," I said, meditatively. "When people
have gone to Jesus — they must be very glad!"

Preston burst out with an expression of hope that Miss Pinshon
would "do something" for me; and again would have led me away;
but I was not ready to go. My eye, roving beyond the white
marble and the low brick wall, had caught what seemed to be a
number of meaner monuments, scattered among the pine trees and
spreading down the slope of the ground on the further side,
where it fell off towards another dell. In one place a bit of
board was set up; further on, a cross; then I saw a great many
bits of board and crosses; some more and some less carefully
made; and still as my eye roved about over the ground they
seemed to start up to view in every direction; too low and too
humble and too near the colour of the fallen pine leaves to
make much show unless they were looked for. I asked what they
all were?

"Those? Oh, those are for the people, you know."

"The people?" — I repeated.

"Yes, the people — the hands."

"There are a great many of them!" I remarked.

"Of course," said Preston. "You see, Daisy, there have been I
don't know how many hundreds of hands here for a great many
years, ever since mother's grandfather's time."

"I should think," said I, looking at the little board slips
and crosses among the pine cones on the ground, — "I should
think they would like to have something nicer to put up over
their graves."

"Nicer? those are good enough," said Preston. "Good enough for
them."

"I should think they would like to have something better," I
said. "Poor people at the North have nicer monuments, I know.
I never saw such monuments in my life."

"Poor people!" cried Preston. "Why, these are the _hands_,
Daisy, — the coloured people. What do they want of monuments?"

"Don't they care?" said I, wondering.

"Who cares if they care? I don't know whether they care," said
Preston, quite out of patience with me, I thought.

"Only, if they cared, I should think they would have something
nicer," I said. "Where do they all go to church, Preston?"

"Who?" said Preston.

"These people?"

"What people? The families along the river, do you mean?"

"No, no," said I; "I mean _our_ people — these people; the
hands. You say there are hundreds of them. Where do they go to
church?"

I faced Preston now in my eagerness; for the little board
crosses and the forlorn look of the whole burying ground on
the side of the hill had given me a strange feeling.

"Where do they go to church, Preston?"

"Nowhere, I reckon."

I was shocked, and Preston was impatient. How should he know,
he said; he did not live at Magnolia. And he carried me off.
We went back to the avenue and slowly bent our steps again
towards the house; slowly, for I was tired, and we both, I
think, were busy with our thoughts. Presently I saw a man, a
negro, come into the avenue a little before us with a bundle
of tools on his back. He went as slowly as we, with an
indescribable, purposeless gait. His figure had the same look
too, from his lop-sided old white hat to every fold of his
clothing, which seemed to hang about him just as if it would
as lieve be off as on. I begged Preston to hail him and ask
him the question about church going, which sorely troubled me.
Preston was unwilling and resisted.

"What do you want me to do that for, Daisy?"

"Because aunt Gary told Miss Pinshon that we have to drive six
miles to go to church. Do ask him where they go!"

"They don't go _anywhere_, Daisy," said Preston impatiently;
"they don't care a straw about it, either. All the church they
care about is when they get together in somebody's house and
make a great muss."

"Make a muss!" said I.

"Yes; a regular muss; shouting and crying and having what they
call a good time. That's what some of them do; but I'll wager
if I were to ask him about going to church, this fellow here
would not know what I mean."

This did by no means quiet me. I insisted that Preston should
stop the man; and at last he did. I The fellow turned and came
back towards us, ducking his old white hat. His face was just
like the rest of him: there was no expression in it but an
expression of limp submissiveness.

"Sambo, your mistress wants to speak to you."

"Yes, massa. I's George, massa."

"George," said I, "I want to know where you go to church?"

"Yes, missis. What missis want to know?"

"Where do you and all the rest go to church?"

"Reckon don't go nowhar, missis."

"Don't you ever go to church?"

"Church for white folks, missis; bery far; long ways to ride."

"But you and the rest of the people — don't you go anywhere to
church? to hear preaching?"

"Reckon not, missis. De preachin's don't come dis way,
likely."

"Can you read the Bible, George?"

"Dunno read, missis. Never had no larnin'."

"Then don't you know anything about what is in the Bible?
don't you know about Jesus?"

"Reckon don't know not'ing, missis."

"About Jesus?" said I again.

" 'Clar, missis, dis nigger don't know not'ing, but de rice and
de corn. Missis talk to Darry; he most knowin' nigger on
plantation; knows a heap."

"There!" exclaimed Preston — "that will do. You go off to your
supper, George — and Daisy, you had better come on if you want
anything pleasant at home. What on earth have you got now by
that? What is the use? Of course they do not know anything;
and why should they? They have no time and no use for it."

"They have time on Sundays —" I said.

"Time to sleep. That is what they do. That is the only thing a
negro cares about, to go to sleep in the sun. It's all
nonsense, Daisy."

"They would care about something else, I dare say," I
answered, "if they could get it."

"Well, they can't get it. Now, Daisy, I want you to let these
fellows alone. You have nothing to do with them, and you did
not come to Magnolia for such work. You have nothing on earth
to do with them."

I had my own thoughts on the subject, but Preston was not a
sympathising hearer. I said no more. The evergreen oaks about
the house came presently in sight; then the low verandah that
ran round three sides of it; then we came to the door, and my
walk was over.

CHAPTER III.

THE MULTIPLICATION TABLE.

My life at Magnolia might be said to begin when I came down
stairs that evening. My aunt and Miss Pinshon were sitting in
the parlour, in the light of a glorious fire of light wood and
oak sticks. Miss Pinshon called me to her at once; inquired
where I had been; informed me I must not for the future take
such diversion without her leave first asked and obtained; and
then put me to reading aloud, that she might see how well I
could do it. She gave me a philosophical article in a magazine
for my proof piece; it was full of long words that I did not
know and about matters that I did not understand. I read
mechanically, of course; trying with all my might to speak the
long words right, that there might be no room for correction;
but Miss Pinshon's voice interrupted me again and again. I
felt cast away — in a foreign land; further and further from
the home feeling every minute; and it seemed besides as if the
climate had some power of petrifaction. I could not keep
Medusa out of my head. It was a relief at last when the tea
was brought in. Miss Pinshon took the magazine out of my hand.

"She has a good voice, but she wants expression," was her
remark.

"I could not understand what she was reading," said my aunt
Gary.

"Nor anybody else," said Preston. "How are you going to give
expression, when there is nothing to express?"

"That is where you feel the difference between a good reader
and one who is not trained," said my governess. "I presume
Daisy has never been trained."

"No, not in anything," said my aunt. "I dare say she wants a
good deal of it."

"We will try —" said Miss Pinshon.

It all comes back to me as I write, that beginning of my
Magnolia life. I remember how dazed and disheartened I sat at
the tea-table, yet letting nobody see it; how Preston made
violent efforts to change the character of the evening; and
did keep up a stir that at another time would have amused me.
And when I was dismissed to bed, Preston came after me to the
upper gallery and almost broke up my power of keeping quiet.
He gathered me in his arms, kissed me and lamented over me,
and denounced ferocious threats against "Medusa;" while I in
vain tried to stop him. He would not be sent away, till he had
come into my room and seen that the fire was burning and the
room warm, and Margaret ready for me.

With Margaret there was also an old coloured woman, dark and
wrinkled, my faithful old friend Mammy Theresa; but indeed I
could scarcely see her just then, for my eyes were full of big
tears when Preston left me; and I had to stand still before
the fire for some minutes before I could fight down the fresh
tears that were welling up and let those which veiled my
eyesight scatter away. I was conscious how silently the two
women waited upon me. I had a sense even then of the sympathy
they were giving. I knew they served me with a respect which
would have done for an Eastern princess; but I said nothing
hardly, nor they, that night.

If the tears came when I was alone, so did sleep too at last;
and I waked up the next morning a little revived. It was a
cool morning! and my eyes opened to see Margaret on her knees
making my fire. Two good oak sticks were on the fire dogs, and
a heap of light wood on the floor. I watched her piling and
preparing, and then kindling the wood with a splinter of light
wood which she lit in the candle. It was all very strange to
me. The bare painted and varnished floor; the rugs laid down
here and there; the old cupboards in the wall; the unwonted
furniture. It did not feel like home. I lay still, until the
fire blazed up and Margaret rose to her feet, and seeing my
eyes open dropped her curtsey.

"Please, missis, may I be Miss Daisy's girl?"

"I will ask aunt Gary," I answered; a good deal surprised.

"Miss Daisy is the mistress. We all belong to Miss Daisy. It
will be as she say."

I thought to myself that very little was going to be "as I
said." I got out of bed, feeling terribly slim-hearted, and
stood in my night-gown before the fire, trying to let the
blaze warm me. Margaret did her duties with a zeal of devotion
that reminded me of my old June.

"I will ask aunt Gary," I said; "and I think she will let you
build my fire, Margaret."

"Thank'e, ma'am. First rate fires, I'll make, Miss Daisy.
We'se all so glad Miss Daisy come to Magnoly."

Were they? I thought, and what did she mean by their all
"belonging to me"? I was not accustomed to quite so much
deference. However, I improved my opportunity by asking
Margaret my question of the day before about church. The girl
half laughed.

"Aint any church big enough to hold all de people," she said.
"Guess we coloured folks has to go widout."

"But where _is_ the church?" I said.

"Aint none, Miss Daisy. People enough to make a church full
all himselves."

"And don't you want to go?"

"Reckon it's o' no consequence, missis. It's a right smart
chance of a way to Bo'mbroke, where de white folks' church is.
Guess they don't have none for poor folks nor niggers in dese
parts."

"But Jesus died for poor people," I said, turning round upon
my attendant. She met me with a gaze I did not understand, and
said nothing. Margaret was not like my old June. She was a
clear mulatto, with a fresh colour and rather a handsome face;
and her eyes, unlike June's little anxious, restless, almond
shaped eyes, were liquid and full. She went on care- fully
with the toilet duties which busied her; and I was puzzled.

"Did you never hear of Jesus?" I said presently. "Don't you
know that He loves poor people?"

"Reckon He loves rich people de best, Miss Daisy," the girl
said, in a dry tone.

I faced about to deny this, and to explain how the Lord had a
special love and care for the poor. I saw that my hearer did
not believe me. "She had heerd so," she said.

The dressing-bell sounded long and loud, and I was obliged to
let Margaret go on with my dressing; but in the midst of my
puzzled state of mind, I felt childishly sure of the power of
that truth, of the Lord's love, to break down any hardness and
overcome any coldness. Yet, "how shall they hear without a
preacher?" and I had so little chance to speak.

"Then, Margaret," said I at last, "is there no place where you
can go to hear about the things in the Bible?"

"No, missis; I never goes."

"And does not anybody, except Darry when he goes with the
carriage?"

"Can't, Miss Daisy; it's miles and miles; and no place for
niggers neither."

"Can you read the Bible, Margaret?"

"Guess not, missis; we's too stupid; aint good for coloured
folks to read."

"Does _nobody_, among all the people, read the Bible?" said I,
once more stopping Margaret in my dismay.

"Uncle Darry — he does," said the girl; "and he — do 'spoun
some; but I don't make no count of his 'spoundations."

I did not know quite what she meant; but I had no time for
anything more. I let her go, locked my door and kneeled down;
with the burden on my heart of this new revelation; that there
were hundreds of people under the care of my father and
mother, who were living without church and without Bible, in
desperate ignorance of everything worth knowing. If I papa had
only been at Magnolia with me! I thought I could have
persuaded him to build a church and let somebody come and
teach the people. But now — what could I do? And I asked the
Lord, what could I do? but I did not see the answer.

Feeling the question on my two shoulders, I went down stairs.
To my astonishment, I found the family all gathered in solemn
order; the house servants at one end of the room, my aunt,
Miss Pinshon and Preston at the other, and before my aunt a
little table with books. I got a seat as soon as I could, for
it was plain that something was waiting for me. Then my aunt
opened the Bible and read a chapter, and followed it with a
prayer read out of another book. I was greatly amazed at the
whole proceeding. No such ceremony was ever gone through at
Melbourne; and certainly nothing had ever given me the notion
that my aunt Gary was any more fond of sacred things than the
rest of the family.

"An excellent plan," said Miss Pinshon, when we had risen from
our knees and the servants had filed off.

"Yes," my aunt said, somewhat as if it needed an apology; —
"it was the custom in my father's and grandfather's time; and
we always keep it up. I think old customs always should be
kept up."

"And do you have the same sort of thing on Sundays, for the
out-of-door hands?"

"What?" said my aunt. It was somewhat more abrupt than polite;
but she probably felt that Miss Pinshon was a governess.

"There were only the house servants gathered this morning."

"Of course; part of them."

"Have you any similar system of teaching for those who are
outside? I think you told me they have no church to go to."

"I should like to know what "system" you would adopt," said my
aunt, "to reach seven hundred people."

"A church and a minister would not be a bad thing."

"Or we might all turn missionaries," said Preston; "and go
among them with bags of Bibles round our necks. We might all
turn missionaries."

"Colporteurs," said Miss Pinshon.

Then I said in my heart, "I will be one." But I went on eating
my breakfast and did not look at anybody; only I listened with
all my might.

"I don't know about that" said my aunt. "I doubt whether a
church and a minister would be beneficial."

"Then you have a nation of heathen at your doors," said Miss
Pinshon.

"I don't know but they are just as well off," said my aunt. "I
doubt if more light would do them any good. They would not
understand it."

"They must be very dark, if they could not understand light,"
said my governess.

"Just as people that are very light cannot understand
darkness," said Preston.

"I think so," my aunt went on. "Our neighbour Colonel Joram,
down below here at Crofts, will not allow such a thing as
preaching or teaching on his plantation. He says it is bad for
them. We always allowed it; but I don't know."

"Colonel Joram is a heathen himself, you know, mother," said
Preston. "Don't hold _him_ up."

"I will hold him up for a gentleman, and a very successful
planter," said Mrs. Gary. "No place is better worked or
managed than Crofts. If the estate of Magnolia were worked and
kept as well, it would be worth half as much again as it ever
has been. But there is the difference of the master's eye. My
brother-in-law never could be induced to settle at Magnolia,
nor at his own estates either. He likes it better in the cold
North."

Miss Pinshon made no remark whatever in answer to this
statement; and the rest of the talk at the breakfast-table was
about rice.

After breakfast my school life at Magnolia began. It seems as
if all the threads of my life there were in a hurry to get
into my hand. Ah, I had a handful soon! But this was the
fashion of my first day with my governess. — All the days were
not quite so bad; however it gave the key of them all.

Miss Pinshon bade me come with her to the room she and my aunt
had agreed should be the schoolroom. It was the book room of
the house, though it had hardly books enough to be called a
library. It had been the study or private room of my
grandfather; there was a leather-covered table with an old
bronze standish; some plain book-cases; a large escritoire; a
terrestrial globe; a thermometer and barometer; and the rest
of the furniture was an abundance of chintz-covered chairs and
lounges. These were very easy and pleasant for use; and long
windows opening on the verandah looked off among the evergreen
oaks and their floating grey drapery; the light in the room
and the whole aspect of it was agreeable. If Miss Pinshon had
not been there! But she was there, with a terrible air of
business; setting one or two chairs in certain positions by a
window, and handling one or two books on the table. I stood
meek and helpless, expectant.

"Have you read any history, Daisy?"

I said no; then I said yes, I had; a little.

"What?"

"A little of the history of England last summer."

"Not of your own country?"

"No, ma'am."

"And no ancient history?"

"No, ma'am."

"You know nothing of the Division of the nations, of course?"

I answered, nothing. I had no idea what she meant; except that
England, and America, and France, were different, and of
course divided. Of Peleg the son of Eber and the brother of
Joktan, I then knew nothing.

"And arithmetic is something you do not understand," pursued
Miss Pinshon. "Come here and let me see how you can write."

With trembling, stiff little fingers — I feel them yet — I
wrote some lines under my governess' eye.

"Very unformed," was her comment. "And now, Daisy, you may sit
down there in the window and study the multiplication table.
See how much of it you can get this morning."

Was it to be a morning's work? My heart was heavy as lead. At
this hour, at Melbourne, my task would have been to get my
flat hat and rush out among the beds of flowers; and a little
later, to have up Loupe and go driving whither I would, among
the meadows and cornfields. Ah, yes; and there was Molly who
might be taught, and Juanita who might be visited; and Dr.
Sandford who might come like a pleasant gale of wind into the
midst of whatever I was about. I did not stop to think of them
now, though a waft of the sunny air through the open window
brought a violent rush of such images. I tried to shut them
out of my head and gave myself wistfully to "three times one
is three; three times two is six." Miss Pinshon helped me by
closing the window. I thought she might have let so much
sweetness as that come into the multiplication table. However
I studied its threes and fours steadily for some time dry;
then my attention flagged. It was very uninteresting. I had
never in all my life till then been obliged to study what gave
me no pleasure. My mind wandered, and then my eyes wandered,
to where the sunlight lay so golden under the live oaks. The
wreaths of grey moss stirred gently with the wind. I longed to
be out there. Miss Pinshon's voice startled me.

"Daisy, where are your thoughts?"

I hastily brought my eyes and wits home and answered, "Out
upon the lawn, ma'am."

"Do you find the multiplication table there?"

It was so needless to answer! I was mute. I would have come to
the rash conclusion that nature and mathematics had nothing to
do with each other.

"You must learn to command your attention," my governess went
on. "You must not let it wander. That is the first lesson you
have to learn. I shall give you mathematics till you have
learnt it. You can do nothing without attention."

I bent myself to the threes and fours again. But I was soon
weary; my mind escaped; and without turning my eyes off my
book, it swept over the distance between Magnolia and
Melbourne, and sat down by Molly Skelton to help her in
getting her letters. It was done and I was there. I could hear
the hesitating utterances; I could see the dull finger tracing
its way along the lines. And then would come the reading _to_
Molly, and the interested look of waiting attention, and once
in a while the strange softening of the poor hard face. From
there my mind went off to the people around me at Magnolia;
were there some to be taught here perhaps? and could I get at
them? and was there no other way — could it be there was no
other way but by my weak little voice — through which some of
them were ever to learn about my dear Saviour? I had got very
far from mathematics, and my book fell. I heard Miss Pinshon's
voice.

"Daisy, come here."

I obeyed, and came to the table, where my governess was
installed in the leather chair of my grandfather. She always
used it.

"I should like to know what you are doing."

"I was thinking —" I said.

"Did I give you thinking to do?"

"No, ma'am; not of that kind."

"What kind was it?"

"I was thinking, and remembering —"

"Pray, what were you remembering?"

"Things at home — and other things."

"Things and things," said Miss Pinshon. "That is not a very
elegant way of speaking. Let me hear how much you have
learned."

I began. About all of the "threes" was on my tongue; the rest
had got mixed up hopelessly with Molly Skelton and teaching
Bible reading. Miss Pinshon was not pleased.

"You must learn attention," she said. "I can do nothing with
you until you have succeeded in that. You _must_ attend. Now I
shall give you a motive for minding what you are about. Go and
sit down again and study this table till you know the threes
and the fours and the fives and the sixes, perfectly. Go and
sit down."

I sat down, and the life was all out of me. Tears in the first
place had a great mind to come, and would put themselves
between me and the figures in the multiplication table. I
governed them back after a while. But I could not study to
purpose. I was tired and down-spirited; I had not energy left
to spring to my task and accomplish it. Over and over again I
tried to put the changes of the numbers in my head; it seemed
like writing them in sand. My memory would not take hold of
them; could not keep them; with all my trying I grew only more
and more stupefied and fagged, and less capable of doing what
I had to do. So dinner came, and Miss Pinshon said I might get
myself ready for dinner and after dinner come back again to my
lesson. The lesson must be finished before anything else was
done.

I had no appetite. Preston was in a fume of vexation, partly
roused by my looks, partly by hearing that I was not yet free.
He was enraged beyond prudent speaking, but Miss Pinshon never
troubled herself about his words; and when the first and
second courses were removed, told me I might go to my work.
Preston called to me to stay and have some fruit; but I went
on to the study, not caring for fruit or for anything else. I
felt very dull and miserable. Then I remembered that my
governess probably did care for some fruit and would be
delayed a little while; and then I tried what is the best
preparation for study or anything else. I got down on my
knees, to ask that help which is as willingly given to a child
in her troubles as to the general of an army. I prayed that I
might be patient and obedient and take disagreeable things
pleasantly and do my duty in the multiplication table. And a
breath of rest came over my heart, and a sort of perfume of
remembered things which I had forgotten; and it quite changed
the multiplication table to think that God had given it to me
to learn, and so that some good would certainly come of
learning it; at least the good of pleasing Him. As long as I
dared I staid on my knees; then — I was strong for the fives
and sixes.

But it was not quick work; and though my patience did not flag
again nor my attention fail, the afternoon was well on the way
before I was dismissed. I had then permission to do what I
liked. Miss Pinshon said she would not go to walk that day; I
might follow my own pleasure.

I must have been very tired; for it seemed to me there was
hardly any pleasure left to follow. I got my flat and went
out. The sun was westing; the shadows stretched among the
evergreen oaks; the outer air was sweet. I had tried to find
Preston first, in the house; but he was not to be found; and
all alone I went out into the sunshine. It wooed me on.
Sunshine and I were always at home together. Without knowing
that I wanted to go anywhere, some secret attraction drew my
steps towards the dell where I had seen Darry. I followed one
of several well beaten paths that led towards the quarters
through the trees, and presently came out upon the stables
again. All along the dell the sunshine poured. The ground was
kept like a pleasure ground, it was so neat; the grass was as
clean as the grass of a park; the little stone houses
scattered away down towards the river, with shade trees among
them, and oaks lining the sides of the dell. I thought surely
Magnolia was a lovely place! if only my father and mother had
been there. But then, seeing the many cottages, my trouble of
the morning pressed upon me afresh. So many people, so many
homes, and the light of the Bible not on them, nor in them?
And, child as I was, and little as I knew, I knew the name of
Christ too unspeakably precious, for me to think without a
sore heart, that all these people were without what was the
jewel of my life. — And they my mother's servants! my father's
dependents! What could I do?

The dell was alone in the yellow sunlight which poured over
the slope from the west; and I went musing on till getting to
the corner of the stables I saw Darry just round the corner
grooming a black horse. He was working energetically and
humming to himself as he worked a refrain which I learned
afterwards to know well. — "All I could make out was, I'm going
home" — several times repeated. I came near before he saw me,
and he started; then bid me good evening and "hoped I found
Magnolia a pleasant place."

Since I have grown older I have read that wonderful story of
Mrs. Stowe's _Uncle Tom_; he reminded me of Darry then, and now
I never think of the one without thinking of the other. But
Darry, having served a different class of people from Uncle
Tom's first owners, had a more polished style of manners,
which I should almost call courtly; and he was besides a man
of higher natural parts, and somewhat more education. But much
commerce in the Court which is above all earthly dignities, no
doubt had more to do with his peculiarities than any other
cause.

I asked him what he was singing about home? and where his home
was? He turned his face full on me, letting me see how grave
and gentle his eye was, and at the same time there was a
wistful expression in it that I felt. "Home aint nowheres
here, missie," he said. "I'm 'spectin' to go by and by."

"Do you mean home up _there?_" said I, lifting my finger towards
the sky. Darry fairly laughed.

" 'Spect don't want no other home, missie. Heaven good enough."

I stood watching him as he rubbed down the black horse,
feeling surely that he and I would be friends.

"Where is your home here, Darry?"

"I got a place down there, little missie — not fur."

"When you have done that horse, will you show me your place? I
want to see where you live."

"Missie want to see Darry's house?" said he, showing his white
teeth. "Missie shall see what she mind to. I allus keeps
Saddler till the last, 'cause he's ontractable.".

The black horse was put in the stable, and I followed my black
groom down among the lines of stone huts, to which the working
parties had not yet returned. Darry's house was one of the
lowest in the dell, out of the quadrangle, and had a glimpse
of the river. It stood alone, in a pretty place, but something
about it did not satisfy me. It looked square and bare. The
stone walls within were rough as the stone-layer had left
them; one little four-paned window, or rather casement, stood
open; and the air was sweet; for Darry kept his place
scrupulously neat and clean. But there was not much to be
kept. A low bedstead; a wooden chest; an odd table made of a
piece of board on three legs; a shelf with some kitchen ware;
that was all the furniture. On the odd table there lay a
Bible, that had, I saw, been turned over many a time.

"Then you can read, uncle Darry," I said, pitching on the only
thing that pleased me.

"De good Lord, He give me dat happiness," the man answered
gravely.

"And you love Jesus, Darry," I said, feeling that we had
better come to an understanding as soon as possible. His
answer was an energetic —

"Bress de Lord! Do Miss Daisy love Him, den?"

I would have said yes; I did say yes, I believe; but I did not
know how or why, at this question there seemed a coming
together of gladness and pain which took away my breath. My
head dropped on Darry's little window-sill, and my tears
rushed forth, like the head of water behind a broken mill-dam.
Darry was startled and greatly concerned. He wanted to know if
I was not well — if I would send him for "su'thing" — I could
only shake my head and weep. I think Darry was the only
creature at Magnolia before whom I would have so broken down.
But somehow I felt safe with Darry. The tears cleared away
from my voice after a little; and I went on with my inquiries
again. It was a good chance.

"Uncle Darry, does no one else but you read the Bible?"

He looked dark and troubled. "Missie sees — de folks for most
part got no learnin'. Dey no read, sure."

"Do you read the Bible to them, Darry?"

The wind predicted by grandmother did not come; on the contrary,
the air was so still that not a branch or twig was moving.

In fact, it seemed warmer in the forest, as, in general, loose
bodies with air-spaces between, such as a forest, are in winter.

The snow-flakes descended ever more copiously so that
the ground was altogether white already and the woods
began to appear dappled with gray, while snow lay on the garments
of the children.

Both were overjoyed.

They stepped upon the soft down, and looked for places where there
was a thicker layer of it, in order to tread on them and make it
appear as if they were wading in it already.

They did not shake off the snow from their clothes.

A great stillness had set in.

There was nothing to be seen of any bird although some do
flit to and fro through the forest in winter-time and the
children on their way to Millsdorf had even heard some twitter.

The whole forest seemed deserted.

As theirs were the only tracks and the snow in front of them
was untrod and immaculate they understood that they were the only
ones crossing the "neck" that day.

They proceeded onward, now approaching, now leaving the trees.
Where there was dense undergrowth they could see the snow lying
upon it.

Their joy was still growing, for the flakes descended ever more
densely, and after a short time they needed no longer to
search for places to wade in the snow, for it was so thick already
that they felt it soft under their soles and up around their shoes.

And when all was so silent and peaceful it seemed to them that
they could hear the swish of the snow falling upon the needles.

"Shall we see the post today?" asked the girl, "because it
has fallen down, you know, and then the snow will fall on it
and the red color will be white."

"We shall be able to see it though, for that matter," replied
the boy; "even if the snow falls upon it and it becomes white all
over we are bound to see it, because it is a thick post, and because
it has the black iron cross on its top which will surely stick out."

"Yes, Conrad."

Meanwhile, as they had proceeded still farther, the snowfall
had become so dense that they could see only the very nearest
trees.

No hardness of the road, not to mention its ruts, was to be
felt, the road was everywhere equally soft with snow and was,
in fact, recognizable only as an even white band running
on through the forest.
On all the branches there lay already the beautiful white
covering.

The children now walked in the middle of the road, furrowing
the snow with their little feet and proceeding more slowly
as the walking became more tiresome. The boy pulled up his
jacket about his throat so that no snow should fall in his
neck, and pulled down his hat so as to be more protected.
He also fastened his little sister's neckerchief which her
mother had given her to wear over her shoulders, pulling it
forward over her forehead so that it formed a roof.

The wind predicted by grandmother still had not come, on the
other hand, the snowfall gradually became so dense
that not even the nearest trees were to be recognized, but
stood there like misty sacks.

The children went on. They drew up their shoulders and walked
on.

Sanna took hold of the strap by which Conrad had his calfskin bag
fastened about his shoulders and thus they proceeded on their way.

They still had not reached the post.

The boy was not sure about the time, because the sun was not shining
and all was a monotonous gray.

"Shall we reach the post soon?" asked the girl.

"I don't know," said the boy, "I can't see the trees today and
recognize the way, because it is so white.

We shall not see the post at all, perhaps, because there is so much
snow that it will be covered up and scarcely a blade of grass or
an arm of the black cross will show.

But never mind.

We just continue on our road, and the road goes between the trees
and when it gets to the spot where the post stands it will go down,
and we shall keep on it, and when it comes out of the trees we are
already on the meadows of Gschaid, then comes the path, and then
we shall not be far from home."

"Yes, Conrad," said the girl.

They proceeded along their road which still led upward.

The footprints they left behind them did not remain visible
long, for the extraordinary volume of the descending snow
soon covered them up. The snow no longer rustled, in falling
upon the needles, but hurriedly and peacefully added itself
to the snow already there. The, children gathered their
garments still more tightly about them, in order to keep the
steadily falling snow from coming in on all sides.

They walked on very fast, and still the road led upward. After
a long time they still had not reached the height on which the
post was supposed to be, and from where the road was to descend
toward Gschaid.

Finally the children came to a region where there were no more
trees.

"I see no more trees," said Sanna.

"Perhaps the road is so broad that we cannot see them on account
of the snow," answered the boy.

"Yes, Conrad," said the girl.

After a while the boy remained standing and said: "I don't
see any trees now myself, we must have got out of the woods,
and also the road keeps on rising. Let us stand still a while
and look about, perhaps we may see something." But they perceived
nothing. They saw the sky only through a dim space. Just
as in a hailstorm gloomy fringes hang down over the white or
greenish swollen clouds, thus it was here, and the noiseless
falling continued. On the ground they saw only a round
spot of white and nothing else.

"Do you know, Sanna," said the boy, "we are on the dry grass
I often led you up to in summer, where we used to sit and look
at the pasture-land that leads up gradually and where the
beautiful herbs grow.

We shall now at once go down there on the right."
"Yes, Conrad."
"The day is short, as grandmother said, and as you well know yourself,
and so we must hurry."

"Yes, Conrad," said the girl.

"Wait a little and I will fix you a little better," replied the
boy.

He took off his hat, put it on Sanna's head and fastened it with
both ribbons under her chin.

The kerchief she had worn protected her too little, while on his
head there was such a mass of dense curls that the snow could fall
on it for a long time before the wet and cold would penetrate.

Then he took off his little fur-jacket and drew it over her
little arms.

About his own shoulders and arms which now showed the
bare shirt he tied the little kerchief Sauna had worn over
her chest and the larger one she had had over her shoulders.
That was enough for himself, he thought, and if he only
stepped briskly he should not be cold.

He took the little girl by her hand, so they marched on. The
girl with her docile little eyes looked out into the monotonous
gray round about and gladly followed him, only her little
hurrying feet could not keep up with his, for he was striding
onward like one who wanted to decide a matter once for
all.

Thus they proceeded with the unremitting energy children and
animals have as they do not realize how far their strength will
carry them, and when their supply of it will give out.

But as they went on they did not notice whether they were
going down or up. They had turned down to the right at
once, but they came again to places that led up. Often they
encountered steep places which they were forced to avoid, and
a trench in which they continued led them about in a curve.
They climbed heights which grew ever steeper as they proceeded,
and what they thought led downward was level ground, or it was
a depression, or the way went on in an even stretch.

"Where are we, I wonder, Conrad?" asked the girl.

"I don't know," he answered. "If I only could see something
with my eyes," he continued, "that I could take my direction
from."

But there was nothing about them but the blinding white, white
everywhere which drew an ever narrowing circle about them,
passing, beyond it, into a luminous mist descending in bands
which consumed and concealed all objects beyond, until there
was nothing but the unceasingly descending snow.

"Wait, Sanna," said the boy, "let us stand still for a moment
and listen, perhaps we might hear a sound from the
valley, a dog, or a bell, or the mill, or a shout, something
we must hear, and then we shall know which way to go."
So they remained standing, but they heard nothing. They
remained standing a little longer, but nothing came, not a
single sound, not the faintest noise beside their own breath,
aye, in the absolute stillness they thought they could hear
the snow as it fell on their eyelashes. The prediction of
grandmother had still not come true; no wind had arisen, in
fact, what is rare in those regions, not a breath of air was
stirring.

After having waited for a long time they went on again.

"Never mind, Sanna," said the boy, "don't be afraid, just follow
me and I shall lead you down yet.--If only it would stop
snowing!"
The little girl was not faint-hearted, but lifted her little
feet as well as she could and followed him. He led her on in
the white, bright, living, opaque space.

After a time they saw rocks. Darkling and indistinct they loomed
up out of the white opaque light. As the children approached
they almost bumped against them. They rose up like walls and
were quite perpendicular so that scarcely a flake of snow
could settle on them.

"Sanna, Sanna," he said, "there are the rocks, just let us keep
on, let us keep on."
They went on, had to enter in between the rocks and push
on at their base. The rocks would let them escape neither
to left nor right and led them on in a narrow path. After
a while the children lost sight of them.
They got away from the rocks as unexpectedly as they had got
among them.
Again, nothing surrounded them but white, no more dark forms
interposed.
They moved in what seemed a great brightness and yet could
not see three feet ahead, everything being, as it were,
enveloped in a white darkness, and as there were no shadows
no opinion about the size of objects was possible. The
children did not know whether they were to descend or
ascend until some steep slope compelled their feet to
climb.

"My eyes smart," said Sanna.

"Don't look on the snow," answered the boy, "but into the
clouds. Mine have hurt a long time already; but it does not
matter, because I must watch our way. But don't be afraid, I
shall lead you safely down to Gschaid."
"Yes, Conrad."
They went on; but wheresoever they turned, whichever way they turned,
there never showed a chance to descend.

On either side steep acclivities hemmed them in, and also made them
constantly ascend.

Whenever they turned downward the slopes proved so precipitous that
they were compelled to retreat.

Frequently they met obstacles and often had to avoid steep
slopes.

They began to notice that whenever their feet sank in
through the new snow they no longer felt the rocky soil
underneath but something else which seemed like older, frozen
snow; but still they pushed onward and marched fast and
perseveringly. Whenever they made a halt everything was
still, unspeakably still. When they resumed their march they
heard the shuffling of their feet and nothing else; for the
veils of heaven descended without a sound, and so abundantly that
one might have seen the snow grow.

The children themselves were covered with it so that they did not
contrast with the general whiteness and would have lost each other
from sight had they been separated but a few feet.

A comfort it was that the snow was as dry as sand so that it did
not adhere to their boots and stockings or cling and wet them.

At last they approached some other objects. They were
gigantic fragments lying in wild confusion and covered with snow
sifting everywhere into the chasms between them.

The children almost touched them before seeing them.

They went up to them to examine what they were.

It was ice--nothing but ice.

There were snow-covered slabs on whose lateral edges the smooth
green ice became visible; there were hillocks that looked like
heaped-up foam, but whose inward-looking crevices had a dull sheen
and lustre as if bars and beams of gems had been flung pellmell.

There rose rounded hummocks that were entirely enveloped in snow,
slabs and other forms that stood inclined or in a perpendicular
position, towering as high as houses or the church of Gschaid.

In some, cavities were hollowed out through which one could insert
an arm, a head, a body, a whole big wagon full of hay.

All these were jumbled together and tilted so that they frequently
formed roofs or eaves whose edges the snow overlaid and over which
it reached down like long white paws.

Nay, even a monstrous black boulder as large as a house lay stranded
among the blocks of ice and stood on end so that no snow could stick
to its sides.

And even larger ones which one saw only later were fast in the ice
and skirted the glacier like a wall of debris.

"There must have been very much water here, because there
is so much ice," remarked Sanna.

"No, that did not come from any water," replied her brother, "that
is the ice of the mountain which is always on it, because that is
the way things are."

"Yes, Conrad," said Sanna.

"We have come to the ice now," said the boy; "we are on the mountain,
you know, Sanna, that one sees so white in the sunshine from our
garden.

Now keep in mind what I shall tell you.

Do you remember how often we used to sit in the garden, in
the afternoon, how beautiful it was, how the bees hummed
about us, how the linden-trees smelled sweet, and how the sun
shone down on us?"
"Yes, Conrad, I remember."

"And then we also used to see the mountain. We saw how blue it
was, as blue as the sky, we saw the snow that is up there even
when we had summer-weather, when it was hot and the grain
ripened."
"Yes, Conrad."
"And below it where the snow stopped one sees all sorts of
colors if one looks close--green, blue, and whitish--that
is the ice; but it only looks so small from below, because it
is so very far away. Father said the ice will not go away
before the end of the world. And then I also often saw that
there was blue color below the ice and thought it was
stones, or soil and pasture-land, and then come the woods, and
they go down farther and farther, and there are some boulders in
them too, and then come meadows that are already green, and then
the green leafy-woods, and then our meadow-lands and fields in the
valley of Gschaid.

Do you see now, Sanna, as we are at the ice we shall go down over
the blue color, and through the forests in which are the boulders,
and then over the pasture-land, and through the green leafy-forests,
and then we shall be in the valley of Gschaid and easily find our
way to the village."

"Yes, Conrad," said the girl.

The children now entered upon the glacier where it was accessible.
They were like wee little pricks wandering among the huge masses.

As they were peering in under the overhanging slabs, moved as
it were by an instinct to seek some shelter, they arrived at
a trench, broad and deeply furrowed, which came right out
of the ice. It looked like the bed of some torrent now dried
up and everywhere covered with fresh snow. At the spot where
it emerged from the ice there yawned a vault of ice beautifully
arched above it. The children continued in the trench
and, entering the vault, went in farther and farther.

It was quite dry and there was smooth ice under their feet.
All the cavern, however, was blue, bluer than anything else in the
world, more profoundly and more beautifully blue than the sky, as
blue as azure glass through which a bright glow is diffused.

There were more or less heavy flutings, icicles hung down pointed
and tufted, and the passage led inward still farther, they knew not
how far; but they did not go on.

It would also have been pleasant to stay in this grotto, it was
warm and no snow could come in; but it was so fearfully blue that
the children took fright and ran out again.

They went on a while in the trench and then clambered over its side.

They passed along the ice, as far as it was possible to edge through
that chaos of fragments and boulders.

"We shall now have to pass over this, and then we shall run
down away from the ice," said Conrad.

"Yes," said Sanna and clung to him.

From the ice they took a direction downward over the snow which was
to lead them into the valley.

But they were not to get far. Another river of ice
traversed the soft snow like a gigantic wall bulging up and
towering aloft and, as it were, reaching out with its arms
to the right and the left.

It was covered by snow on top, but at its sides there were gleams
of blue and green and drab and black, aye, even of yellow and
red. They could now see to larger distances, as the enormous
and unceasing snowfall had abated somewhat and was only as heavy
as on ordinary snowy days.

With the audacity of ignorance they clambered up on the ice in
order to cross the interposing tongue of the glacier and to
descend farther behind it. They thrust their little bodies
into every opening, they put their feet on every projection
covered by a white snow-hood, whether ice or rock, they aided
their progress with their hands, they crept where they could
not walk, and with their light bodies worked themselves
up until they had finally gained the top of the wall.

They had intended to climb down its other side.

There was no other side.

As far as the eyes of the children reached there was only
ice. Hummocks, slabs, and spires of ice rose about them, all
covered with snow. Instead of being a wall which one might
surmount and which would be followed by an expanse of snow,
as they had thought, new walls of ice lifted up out of the
glacier, shattered and fissured and variegated with innumerable
blue sinuous lines; and behind them were other walls of the
same nature, and behind them others again, until the
falling snow veiled the distance with its gray.

"Sanna, we cannot make our way here," said the boy. "No,"
answered his sister.

"Then we will turn back and try to get down somewhere else."

"Yes, Conrad."
The children now tried to climb down from the ice-wall where
they had clambered up, but they did not succeed. There was
ice all about them, as if they had mistaken the direction
from which they had come. They turned hither and thither
and were not able to extricate themselves from the ice. It
was as if they were entangled in it. At last, when the boy
followed the direction they had, as he thought, come, they
reached more scattered boulders, but they were also larger
and more awe-inspiring, as is usually the case at the
edge of the glacier. Creeping and clambering, the children
managed to issue from the ice. At the rim of the glacier there
were enormous boulders, piled in huge heaps, such as the
children had never yet seen. Many were covered all over with
snow, others showed their slanting under-sides which were very
smooth and finely polished as if they had been shoved along
on them, many were inclined toward one another like huts and roofs,
many lay upon one another like mighty clods.

Not far from where the children stood, several boulders were
inclined together, and over them lay broad slabs like a roof.
The little house they thus formed was open in front, but
protected in the rear and on both sides. The interior was
dry, as not a single snow-flake had drifted in. The children
were very glad that they were no longer in the ice, but stood
on the ground again.

But meanwhile it had been growing dark.

"Sanna," said the boy, "we shall not be able to go down
today, because it has become night, and because we might fall
or even drop into some pit. We will go in under those stones
where it is so dry and warm, and there we will wait.

The sun will soon rise again, and then we shall run down from the
mountain.

Don't cry, please, don't cry, and I shall give you all the
things to eat which grandmother has given us to take along."

The little girl did not weep.

After they had entered under the stone roof where they could
not only sit comfortably, but also stand and walk about she seated
herself close to him and kept very quiet.

"Mother will not be angry," said Conrad, "we shall tell her of the
heavy snow that has kept us, and she will say nothing; father will
not, either.

And if we grow cold, why then we must slap our hands to our
bodies as the woodcutters did, and then we shall grow warm again."

"Yes, Conrad," said the girl.

Sanna was not at all so inconsolable because they could not run
down the mountain and get home as he might have thought; for
the immense exertion, of whose severity the children hardly had
any conception, made the very sitting down seem sweet to them,
unspeakably sweet, and they did not resist.

But now hunger asserted itself imperiously. Almost at the same
time, both took their pieces of bread from their pockets
and began to eat.

They ate also the other things, such as little pieces of
cake, almonds, raisins, and other trifles, which grandmother
had put into their pockets.

"Sanna, now we must clean the snow from our clothes," said the
boy, "so that we shall not become wet."
"Yes, Conrad," replied Sanna.

The children went before their little house.

Conrad first brushed off his little sister. He grasped the corners
of her coat and shook them, took off the hat he had put on
her head, emptied it of snow and wiped off the snow that
remained in it. Then he rid himself as best he could of the
snow that lay on him.

At that time it had entirely stopped snowing.

The children could not feel one flake descending.

They returned into their stone-hut and sat down. Getting up
had showed them how tired they really were, and they were glad
to sit down again.
Conrad laid down the calfskin bag which he had strapped on his
shoulders. He took out the cloth in which grandmother had
wrapped a pasteboard-box and several paper packages and put
it about his shoulders for greater warmth. He also took the
two pieces of wheat-bread out of his wallet and gave Sanna both.

The child ate them most eagerly.
A part of them, however, she gave back to Conrad as she saw he
was not eating anything. He accepted it and ate it.

From that time on, the children merely sat and looked. As far
as the eye could reach in the twilight there was
nothing but snow, whose minute crystals began to scintillate
in a strange manner as if they had absorbed the light of day and
were emitting it again now.

Night fell with the rapidity usual in high altitudes. Soon it
was dark all about, only the snow continued to glimmer
faintly. Not only had it stopped snowing but the clouds
began to grow thin and to part, for the children saw the gleam
of a star. As the snow really emitted light, as it were,
and the clouds no longer hung down from the sky, they could
see from their cave how the snowy hillocks round about were
sharply outlined against the dark sky. The cave was warmer than
it had been at any other place during the day, and so the
children rested, clinging closely to each other and even
forgot to be afraid of the darkness. Soon the stars multiplied,
they gleamed forth now here, now there, until it seemed that
there was not a single cloud left in the whole sky.

This was the moment when people in the valleys are accustomed to
light their candles.

At first, only one is kindled, in order to make light in the room;
or, possibly, only a pine-splinter; or the fire is burning in the
hearth, and all windows of human habitations grow bright and shed
lustre into the snowy night; but all the more tonight, Christmas
evening, when many more lights were kindled, in order to shine full
upon the presents for the children which lay upon the tables or
hung on the trees--innumerable candles were lit; for in nearly every
house, every cot, every room, there were children for whom the
Christ-child had brought presents which had to be shown by the light
of candles.

He went on with other angry and excited
words, wishing to draw me out perhaps; but I was in no mood to
talk to Preston in any tone but one. I went steadily and
slowly on, without even turning my head to look at him. I had
hardly life enough to talk to him in that tone.

"Will you tell me what is the matter with you?" he said, at
last, very impatiently.

"I am tired, I think."

"Think? Medusa is stiffening the life out of you. _Think_ you
are tired! You are tired to death; but that is not all. What
ails you?"

"I do not think anything ails me."

"What ails _me_, then? What is the matter? what makes you act
so? Speak, Daisy — you must speak!"

I turned about and faced him, and I know I did not speak then
as a child, but with a gravity befitting fifty years.

"Preston, did you strike Uncle Darry yesterday?"

"Pooh!" said Preston. But I stood and waited for his answer.

"Nonsense, Daisy!" he said again.

"What is nonsense?"

"Why, _you_. What are you talking about?"

"I asked you a question."

"A ridiculous question. You are just absurd."

"Will you please to answer it?"

"I don't know whether I will. What have you to do with it?"

"In the first place, Preston, Darry is not your servant."

"Upon my word!" said Preston. "But, yes, he is; for mamma is
regent here now. He must do what I order him, anyhow."

"And then, Preston, Darry is better than you, and will not
defend himself; and somebody ought to defend him; and there is
nobody but me."

"Defend himself!" echoed Preston.

"Yes. You insulted him yesterday."

"Insulted him!"

"You know you did. You know, Preston, some men would not have
borne it. If Darry had been like some men, he would have
knocked you down."

"Knock me down!" cried Preston. "The sneaking old scoundrel!
He knows that I would shoot him if he did."

"I am speaking seriously, Preston. It is no use to talk that
way."

"I am speaking very seriously," said my cousin. "I would shoot
him, upon my honour."

"Shoot him!"

"Certainly."

"What right have you to shoot a man for doing no worse than
you do? I would _rather_ somebody would knock me down, than do
what you did yesterday!" And my heart swelled within me.

"Come, Daisy, be a little sensible!" said Preston, who was in
a fume of impatience. "Do you think there is no difference
between me and an old nigger?"

"A great deal of difference," I said. "He is old and good; and
you are young, and I wish you were as good as Darry. And then
he can't help himself without perhaps losing his place, no
matter how you insult him. I think it is cowardly."

"Insult!" said Preston. "Lose his place! Heavens and earth,
Daisy! are you such a simpleton?"

"You insulted him very badly yesterday. I wondered how he bore
it of you; only Darry is a Christian."

"A fiddlestick!" said Preston impatiently. "He knows he must
bear whatever I choose to give him; and therein he is wiser
than you are."

"Because he is a Christian," said I.

"I don't know whether he is a Christian or not; and it is
nothing to the purpose. I don't care what he is."

"Oh, Preston! he is a good man — he is a servant of God; he
will wear a crown of gold in heaven; — and you have dared to
touch him!"

"Why, hoity toity!" said Preston. "What concern of mine is all
that! All I know is, that he did not do what I ordered him."

"What did you order him?"

"I ordered him not to show you the saddle I had got for you,
till I was there. I was going to surprise you. I am provoked
at him!"

"I am surprised —" I said. But feeling how little I prevailed
with Preston, and being weak in body as well as mind, I could
not keep back the tears. I began to walk on again, though they
blinded me.

"Daisy, don't be foolish. If Darry is to wear two crowns in
the other world, he is a servant in this, all the same; and he
must do his duty."

"I asked for the saddle —" I said.

"Why, Daisy, Daisy!" Preston exclaimed — "don't be such a
child. You know nothing about it. I didn't touch Darry to hurt
him."

"It was a sort of hurt that if he had not been a Christian he
would have made you sorry for."

"He knows I would shoot him if he did," said Preston coolly.

"Preston, don't speak so!" I pleaded.

"It is the simple truth. Why shouldn't I speak it?"

"You do not mean that you would do it?" I said, scarce opening
my eyes to the reality of what he said.

"I give you my word, I do! If one of these black fellows laid
a hand on me I would put a bullet through him, as quick as a
partridge."

"But then you would be a murderer —" said I. The ground seemed
taken away from under my feet. We were standing still now, and
facing each other.

"No, I shouldn't," said Preston. "The law takes better care of
us than that."

"The law would hang you," said I.

"I tell you, Daisy, it is no such thing! Gentlemen have a
right to defend themselves against the insolence of these
black fellows."

"And have not the black fellows a right to defend themselves
against the insolence of gentlemen?" said I.

"Daisy? you are talking the most unspeakable non- sense," said
Preston, quite put beyond himself now. "_Don't_ you know any
better than that? These people are our servants — they are our
property — we are to do what we like with them; and of course
the law must see that we are protected, or the blacks and the
whites could not live together."

"A man may be your servant, but he cannot be your property," I
said.

"Yes, he can! They are our property, just as much as the land
is; our goods, to do what we like with. Didn't you know that?"

"Property is something that you can buy and sell," I answered.

"And we sell these people, and buy them too, as fast as we
like."

"_Sell_ them!" I echoed, thinking of Darry.

"Certainly."

"And who would buy them?"

"Why, all the world; everybody. There has been nobody sold off
the Magnolia estate, I believe, in a long time; but nothing is
more common, Daisy; everybody is doing it everywhere, when he
has got too many servants, or when he has got too few."

"And do you mean," said I, "that Darry and Margaret and
Theresa and all the rest here, have been _bought?_"

"No; almost all of them have been born on the place."

"Then it is not true of these," I said.

"Yes, it is; for their mothers and fathers were bought. It is
the same thing."

"Who bought them?" I asked hastily.

"Why! our mothers, and grandfather and great-grandfather."

"_Bought_ the fathers and mothers of all these hundreds of
people?" said I, a slow horror creeping into my veins, that
yet held childish blood, and but half comprehended.

"Certainly — ages ago," said Preston. "Why, Daisy, I thought
you knew all about it."

"But who sold them first?" said I, my mind in its utter
rejection of what was told me, seeking every refuge from
accepting it. "Who sold them at first?"

"Who first? Oh, the people that brought them over from Africa,
I suppose; or the people in their own country that sold them
to _them_."

"They had no right to sell them," I said.

"Can't tell about that," said Preston. "We bought them. I
suppose we had a right to do that."

"But if the fathers and mothers were bought," I insisted,
"that gives us no right to have their children."

"I would like you to ask aunt Felicia or my uncle Randolph
such a question," said Preston. "Just see how they would like
the idea of giving up all their property! Why you would be as
poor as Job, Daisy."

"The land would be here all the same."

"Much good the land would do you, without people to work it."

"But other people could be hired as well as these," I said,
"if any of these wanted to go away."

"No they couldn't. White people cannot bear the climate nor do
the work. The crops cannot be raised without coloured labour."

"I do not understand," said I, feeling my child's head
puzzled. "Maybe none of our people would like to go away?"

"I dare say they wouldn't," said Preston carelessly. "They are
better off here than on most plantations. Uncle Randolph never
forbids his hands to have meat; and some planters do."

"Forbid them to have meat!" I said in utter bewilderment.

"Yes."

"Why?"

"They think it makes them fractious, and not so easy to
manage. Don't you know, it makes a dog savage to feed him on
raw meat? I suppose cooked meat has the same effect on men."

"But don't they get what they choose to eat?"

"Well, I should think not!" said Preston. "Fancy their asking
to be fed on chickens and pound cake. That is what they would
like."

"But cannot they spend their wages for what they like?"

"Wages!" said Preston.

"Yes," said I.

"My dear Daisy," said Preston, "you are talking of what you
just utterly don't understand; and I am a fool for bothering
you with it. Come! let us make it up and be friends."

He stooped to kiss me, but I stepped back.

"Stop," I said. "Tell me — can't they do what they like with
their wages?"

"I don't think they have wages enough to 'do what they like'
exactly," said Preston. "Why, they would 'Iike' to do nothing.
These black fellows are the laziest things living. They would
'like' to lie in the sun all day long."

"What wages does Darry have?" I asked.

"Now, Daisy, this is none of your business. Come, let us go
into the house and let it alone."

"I want to know, first," said I.

"Daisy, I never asked. What have I to do with Darry's wages?"

"I will ask himself," I said; and I turned about to go to the
stables.

"Stop, Daisy," cried Preston. "Daisy, Daisy! you are the most
obstinate Daisy that ever was, when once you have taken a
thing in your head. Daisy, what have you to do with all this.
Look here — these people don't want wages."

"Don't want wages!" I repeated.

"No; they don't want them. What would they do with wages? they
have everything they need given them already; their food and
their clothing and their houses. They do not want anything
more."

"You said they did not have the food they liked," I objected.

"Who does?" said Preston. "I am sure I don't, — not more than
one day in seven, on an average."

"But don't they have any wages at all?" I persisted. "Our
coachman at Melbourne had thirty dollars a month; and Logan
had forty dollars, and his house and garden. Why shouldn't
Darry have wages too? Don't they have any wages at all,
Preston?"

"Why, yes! they have plenty of corn bread and bacon, I tell
you; and their clothes. Daisy, they _belong_ to you, these
people do."

Corn bread and bacon was not much like chickens and pound
cake, I thought; and I remembered our servants at Melbourne
were very, very differently dressed from the women I saw about
me here; even in the house. I stood bewildered and pondering.
Preston tried to get me to go on.

"Why shouldn't they have wages?" I asked at length, with lips
which I believe were growing old with my thoughts.

"Daisy, they are your servants; they _belong_ to you. They have
no right to wages. Suppose you had to pay all these creatures
— seven hundred of them — as you pay people at Melbourne; how
much do you suppose you would have left to live upon
yourselves? What nonsense it is to talk!"

"But they work for us," I said.

"Certainly. There would not be anything for any of us if they
didn't. Here, at Magnolia, they raise rice crops and corn, as
well as cotton; at our place we grow nothing but cotton and
corn."

"Well, what pays them for working?"

"I told you! they have their living and clothing and no care;
and they are the happiest creatures the sun shines on."

"Are they willing to work for only that?" I asked.

"Willing!" said Preston.

"Yes," said I, feeling myself grow sick at heart.

"I fancy nobody asks them that question. They have to work, I
reckon, whether they like it or no."

"You said they _like_ to lie in the sun. What makes them work?"

"Makes them!" said Preston, who was getting irritated as well
as impatient. "They get a good flogging if they do not work —
that is all. They know, if they don't do their part, the lash
will come down; and it don't come down easy."

I suppose I must have looked as if it had come down: on me.
Preston stopped talking and began to take care of me; putting
his arm round me to support my steps homeward. In the verandah
my aunt met us. She immediately decided that I was ill, and
ordered me to go to bed at once. It was the thing of all
others I would have wished to do. It saved me from the
exertion of trying to hold myself up and of speaking and
moving and answering questions. I went to bed in dull misery,
longing to go to sleep and forget all my troubles of mind and
body together; but while the body vested, the mind would not.
That kept the consciousness of its burden; and it was that,
more than any physical ail, which took away my power of
eating, and created instead a wretched sort of half nausea,
which made even rest unrefreshing. As for rest in my mind and
heart, it seemed at that time as if I should never know it
again. Never again! I was a child — I had but vague ideas
respecting even what troubled me; nevertheless I had been
struck, where may few children be struck! in the very core and
quick of my heart's reverence and affection. It had come home
to me that papa was somehow doing wrong. My father was in my
childish thought and belief, the ideal of chivalrous and high-
bred excellence; — and _papa_ was doing wrong. I could not turn
my eyes from the truth; it was before me in too visible a
form. It did not arrange itself in words, either; not at
first; it only pressed upon my heart and brain that seven
hundred people on my father's property were injured, and by
his will, and for his interests. Dimly the consciousness came
to me; slowly it found its way and spread out; its details
before me; bit by bit one point after another came into my
mind to make the whole good; bit by bit one item after another
came in to explain and be explained and to add its quota of
testimony; all making clear and distinct and dazzling before
me the truth which at first it was so hard to grasp. And this
is not the less true because my childish thought at first took
everything vaguely and received it slowly. I was a child and a
simple child; but once getting hold of a clue of truth, my
mind never let it go. Step by step, as a child could, I
followed it out. And the balance of the golden rule, to which
I was accustomed, is an easy one to weigh things in; and even
little hands can manage it.

For an hour after they put me to bed my heart seemed to grow
chill from minute to minute; and my body, in curious sympathy,
shook as if I had an ague. My aunt and Miss Pinshon came and
went and were busy about me; making me drink negus and putting
hot bricks to my feet. Preston stole in to look at me; but I
gathered that neither then nor afterwards did he reveal to any
one the matter of our conversation the hour before. "Wearied"
— "homesick" — "feeble" — "with no sort of strength to bear
anything" — they said I was. All true, no doubt; and yet I was
not without powers of endurance, even bodily, if my mind gave
a little help. Now the trouble was, that all such help was
wanting. The dark figures of the servants came and went too,
with the others; came and stayed; Margaret and Mammy Theresa
took post in my room, and when they could do nothing for me,
crouched by the fire and spent their cares and energies in
keeping that in full blast. I could hardly bear to see them;
but I had no heart to speak even to ask that they might be
sent away, or for anything else; and I had a sense besides
that it was a gratification to them to be near me; and to
gratify any one of the race I would have borne a good deal of
pain.

It smites my heart now, to think of those hours. The image of
them is sharp and fresh as if the time were but last night. I
lay with shut eyes, taking in as it seemed to me, additional
loads of trouble with each quarter of an hour; as I thought
and thought and put one and another thing together, of things
past and present, to help my understanding. A child will carry
on that process fast and to far-off results; give her but the
key and set her off on the track of truth with a sufficient
impetus. My happy childlike ignorance and childlike life was
in a measure gone; I had come into the world of vexed
questions, of the oppressor and the oppressed, the full and
the empty, the rich and the poor. I could make nothing at all
of Preston's arguments and reasonings. The logic of expediency
and of consequences carried no weight with me, and as little
the logic of self-interest. I sometimes think a child's vision
is clearer, even in worldly matters, than the eyes of those
can be who have lived long among the fumes and vapours which
rise in these low grounds. Unless the eyes be washed day by
day in the spring of truth, and anointed with unearthly
ointment. The right and the wrong, were the two things that
presented themselves to my view; and oh, my sorrow and
heartbreak was, that papa was in the wrong. I could not
believe it, and yet I could not get rid of it. There were
oppressors and oppressed at the world; and he was one of the
oppressors. There is no sorrow that a child can bear, keener
and more gnawingly bitter than this. It has a sting all its
own, for which there is neither salve nor remedy; and it had
the aggravation, in my case, of the sense of personal
dishonour. The wrong done and the oppression inflicted were
not the whole; there was besides the intolerable sense of
living upon other's gains. It was more than my heart could
bear.

I could not write as I do, — I could not recall these thoughts
and that time, — if I had not another thought to bring to bear
upon them; a thought which at that time I was not able to
comprehend. It came to me later with its healing, and I have
seen and felt it more clearly as I grew older. I see it very
clearly now. I had not been mistaken in my childish notions of
the loftiness and generosity of my father's character. He was
what I had thought him. Neither was I a whit wrong in my
judgment of the things which it grieved me that he did and
allowed. But I saw afterwards how he, and others, had grown up
and been educated in a system and atmosphere of falsehood,
till he failed to perceive that it was false. His eyes had
lived in the darkness till it seemed quite comfortably light
to him; while to a fresh vision, accustomed to the sun, it was
pure and blank darkness, as thick as night. He followed what
others did and his father had done before him, without any
suspicion that it was an abnormal and morbid condition of
things they were all living in; more especially without a
tinge of misgiving that it might not be a noble, upright and
dignified way of life. But I, his little unreasoning child,
bringing the golden rule of the gospel only to judge of the
doings of hell, shrank back and fell to the ground, in my
heart, to find the one I loved best in the world concerned in
them.

So when I opened my eyes that night, and looked into the blaze
of the firelight, the dark figures that were there before it
stung me with pain every time; and a every soft word and
tender look on their faces — and I had many a one, both words
and looks — racked my heart in a way that was strange for a
child. The negus put me to sleep at last, or exhaustion did; I
think the latter, for it was very late; and the rest of that
night wore away.

When I awoke, the two women were there still, just as I had
left them when I went to sleep. I do not know if they sat
there all night, or if they had slept on the floor by my side;
but there they were, and talking softly to one another about
something that caught my attention. I bounced out of bed —
though I was so weak I remember I reeled as I went from my bed
to the fire — and steadied myself by laying my a hand on Mammy
Theresa's shoulder. I demanded of Margaret _what_ she had been
saying? The women both started, with expressions of surprise,
alarm, and tender affection, raised by my ghostly looks, and
begged me to get back into bed again. I stood fast, bearing on
Theresa's shoulder.

"What was it?" I asked.

" 'Twarn't nothin', Miss Daisy, dear!" said the girl.

"Hush! Don't tell me that," I said. "Tell me what it was —
tell me what it was. Nobody shall know; you need not be
afraid; nobody shall know." For I saw a cloud of hesitation in
Margaret's face.

" 'Twarn't nothin', Miss Daisy — only about Darry."

"What about Darry?" I said, trembling.

"He done went and had a praise-meetin'," said Theresa; "and he
knowed it war agin the rules; he knowed that. 'Course he did.
Rules mus' be kep'."

"Whose rules?" I asked.

"Laws, honey, 'taint 'cording to rules for we coloured folks
to hold meetin's no how. 'Course, we's ought to 'bey de rules;
dat's clar."

"Who made the rules?"

"Who make 'em? Mass' Ed'ards — he make de rules on dis
plantation. Reckon Mass' Randolph, he make 'em a heap
different."

"Does Mr. Edwards make it a rule that you are not to hold
prayer-meetings?"

"Can't spec' for to have everyt'ing jus' like de white folks,"
said the old woman. "We's no right to 'spect it. But Uncle
Darry, he sot a sight by his praise-meetin'. He's cur'ous, he
is. S'pose Darry's cur'ous."

"And does anybody say that you shall not have prayer-
meetings?"

"Laws, honey! What's we got to do wid praise-meetin's or any
sort o' meetin's? We'se got to work. Mass' Ed'ards, he say dat
de meetin's dey makes coloured folks onsettled; and dey don't
hoe de corn good if dey has too much prayin' to do."

"And does he forbid them then? Doesn't he let you have prayer-
meetings?"

" 'Taint Mr. Edwards alone, Miss Daisy," said Margaret,
speaking low. "It's agin the law for us to have meetin's
anyhow — 'cept we get leave, and say what house it shall be,
and who's a comin', and what we'se a comin' for. And it's no
use asking Mr. Edwards, 'cause he don't see no reason why
black folks should have meetin's."

"Did Darry have a prayer-meeting without leave?" I asked.

" 'Twarn't no count of a meetin'!" said Theresa, a little touch
of scorn, or indignation, coming into her voice; — "and Darry,
he war in his own house prayin'. Dere warn't nobody dere, but
Pete and ole 'Liza, and Maria cook, and dem two Johns dat come
from de lower plantation. Dey couldn't get a strong meetin'
into Uncle Darry's house; 'taint big enough to hold 'em."

"And what did the overseer do to Darry?" I asked.

"Laws, Miss Daisy," said Margaret, with a quick look at the
other woman, — "he didn't do nothin' to hurt Darry; he only
want to scare de folks."

"Dey's done scared —" said Theresa under her breath.

"What is it?" I said, steadying myself by my hold on Theresa's
shoulder, and feeling that I must stand till I had finished my
enquiry — how did he know about the meeting? and what did he
do to Darry? — Tell me! I must know. I must know, Margaret."

" 'Spect he was goin' through the quarters, and he heard Darry
at his prayin'," said Margaret. "Darry, he don't mind to keep
his prayers secret, he don't," — she added with a half laugh.
" 'Spect nothin' but they'll bust the walls o' that little
house some day."

"Dey's powerful!" added Theresa. "But he warn't prayin' no
harm; he was just prayin', 'Dy will be done, on de eart' as it
be in de heaven' — Pete, he tell me. Darry warn't saying
not'ing — he just pray 'Dy will be done.'!"

"Well?" I said, for Margaret kept silent.

"And de oberseer, he say — leastways he swore, he did, — dat
his will should be what is done on dis plantation, and he
wouldn't have no such work. He say, dere's nobody to come
togedder after it be dark, if it's two or t'ree, 'cept dey
gets his leave, Mass' Ed'ards, he say; and dey won't get it."

"But what did he do to Darry?" I could scarcely hold myself on
my feet by this time.

"He whipped him, I reckon," — said Margaret in a low tone, and
with a dark shadow crossing her face, very different from its
own brown duskiness.

"He don't have a light hand, Mass' Ed'ards," went on Theresa;
"and he got a sharp new whip. De second stripe, — Pete, he
tell me, — he tell me dis evenin' — and it war wet; and it war
wet enough before he got through. He war mad, I reckon;
certain Mass' Ed'ards, he war mad."

"_Wet?_" said I.

"Laws, Miss Daisy," said Margaret, " 'tain't nothin'. Them
whips, they draws the blood easy. Darry, he don't mind."

I have a recollection of the girl's terrified face, but I
heard nothing more. Such a deadly sickness came over me that
for a minute I must have been near fainting; happily it took
another turn amid the various confused feelings which
oppressed me, and I burst into tears. My eyes had not been wet
through all the hours of the evening and night; my heartache
had been dry. I think I was never very easy to move to tears,
even as a child. But now, well for me perhaps, some element of
the pain I was suffering found the unguarded point — or broke
up the guard. I wept as I have done very few times in my life.
I had thrown myself into Mammy Theresa's lap, in the weakness
which could not support itself, and in an abandonment of grief
which was careless of all the outside world; and there I lay,
clasped in her arms and sobbing. Grief, horror, tender
sympathy, and utter helplessness, striving together; there was
nothing for me at that moment but the woman's refuge and the
child's remedy of weeping. But the weeping was so bitter, so
violent, and so uncontrollable that the women were frightened.
I believe they shut the doors, to keep the sound of my sobs
from reaching other ears; for when I recovered the use of my
senses I saw that they were closed.

The certain strange relief which tears do bring, they gave to
me. I cannot tell why. My pain was not changed, my
helplessness was not done away; yet at least I had washed my
causes of sorrow in a flood of heart drops, and cleansed them
so somehow from any personal stain. Rather, I was perfectly
exhausted. The women put me to bed, as soon as I would let
them; and Margaret whispered an earnest, "Do, don't, Miss
Daisy, don't say nothin' about the prayer-meetin'!" — I shook
my head; I knew better than to say anything about it.

All the better not to betray them, and myself, I shut my eyes,
and tried to let my face grow quiet. I had succeeded, I
believe, before my aunt Gary and Miss Pinshon came in. The two
stood looking at me; my aunt in some consternation, my
governess reserving any expression of what she thought. I
fancied she did not trust my honesty. Another time I might
have made an effort to right myself in her opinion; but I was
past that and everything now. It was decided by my aunt that I
had better keep my bed as long as I felt like doing so.

So I lay there during the long hours of that day. I was glad
to be still, to keep out of the way in a corner, to hear
little and see nothing of what was going on; my own small
world of thoughts was enough to keep me busy. I grew utterly
weary at last of thinking, and gave it up, so far as I could;
submitting passively, in a state of pain sometimes dull and
sometimes acute, to what I had no power to change or remedy.
But my father had, I thought; and at those times my longing
was unspeakable to see him. I was very quiet all that day, I
believe, in spite of the rage of wishes and sorrows within me;
but it was not to be expected I should gain strength. On the
contrary, I think I grew feverish. If I could have laid down
my troubles in prayer! but at first, these troubles, I could
not. The core and root of them being my father's a share in
the rest. And I was not alone; and I had a certain
consciousness that if I allowed myself to go to my little
Bible for help, it would unbar my self-restraint with its
sweet and keen words, and I should give way again before
Margaret and Theresa; and I did not wish that.

"What shall we do with her?" said my aunt Gary, when she came
to me towards the evening. "She looks like a mere shadow. I
never saw such a change in a child in four weeks — never!"

"Try a different regimen to-morrow, I think," said my
governess, whose lustrous black eyes looked at me sick,
exactly as they had looked at me well.

"I shall send for a doctor, if she isn't better," said my
aunt. "She's feverish now."

"Keeping her bed all day," — said Miss Pinshon.

"Do you think so?" said my aunt.

"I have no doubt of it. It is very weakening."

"Then we will let her get up to-morrow, and see how that will
do."

They had been gone half an hour, when Preston stole in and
came to the side of my bed, between me and the firelight.

"Come, Daisy, let us be friends!" he said. And he was stooping
to kiss me; but I put out my hand to keep him back.

"Not till you have told Darry you are sorry," I said.

Preston was angry instantly, and stood upright.

"Ask pardon of a servant!" he said. "You would have the world
upside down directly."

I thought it was upside down already; but I was too weak and
downhearted to say so.

"Daisy, Daisy!" said Preston — "And there you lie, looking
like a poor little wood flower that has hardly strength to
hold up its head; and with about as much colour in your
cheeks. Come, Daisy, — kiss me, and let us be friends."

"If you will do what is right —" I said.

"I will — always," said Preston; "but this would be wrong, you
know." And he stooped again to kiss me. And again I would not
suffer him.

"Daisy, you are absurd," said Preston, vibrating between pity
and anger, I think, as he looked at me. "Darry is a servant,
and accustomed to a servant's place. What hurt you so much,
did not hurt him a bit. He knows where he belongs."

"You don't," — said I.

"What?"

"Know anything about it." I remember I spoke very feebly. I
had hardly energy left to speak at all. My words must have
come with a curious contrast between the meaning and the
manner.

"Know anything, about what, Daisy? You are as oracular and as
immoveable as one of Egypt's monuments; only they are very
hard, and — you are very soft, my dear little Daisy! — and
they are very brown, according to all I have heard, and you
are as white as a wind-flower. One can almost see through you.
What is it I don't know anything about?"

"I am so tired, Preston!"

"Yes, but what is it I don't know anything about?"

"Darry's place — and yours," I said.

"His place and mine! His place is a servant's, I take it,
belonging to Rudolf Randolph, of Magnolia. I am the unworthy
representative of an old Southern family, and a gentleman.
What have you to say about that?"

"He is a servant of the Lord of lords," I said; "and his
Master loves him. And He has a house of glory preparing for
him, and a crown of gold, and a white robe, such as the King's
children wear. And he will sit on a throne himself by and by.
Preston, where will _you_ be?"

These words were said without the least heat of manner —
almost languidly; but they put Preston in a fume. I could not
catch his excitement in the least; but I saw it. He stood up
again, hesitated, opened his mouth to speak and shut it
without speaking, turned and walked away and came back to me.
I did not wait for him then.

"You have offended one of the King's children," I said; "and
the King is offended."

"Daisy!" said Preston, in a sort of suppressed fury, "one
would think you had turned Abolitionist; only you never heard
of such a thing."

"What is it?" said I, shutting my eyes.

"It is just the meanest and most impudent shape a Northerner
can take; it is the lowest end of creation, an Abolitionist
is; and a Yankee is pretty much the same thing."

"Dr. Sandford is a Yankee," I remarked.

"Did you get it from _him?_" Preston asked fiercely.

"What?" said I, opening my eyes.

"Your nonsense. Has he taught you to turn Abolitionist?"

"I have not _turned_ at all," I said. "I wish you would. It is
only the people who are in the wrong that ought to turn."

"Daisy," said Preston, "you ought never to be away from aunt
Felicia and my uncle. Nobody else can manage you. I don't know
what you will become or what you will do, before they get
back."

I was silent; and Preston, I suppose, cooled down. He waited
awhile, and then again begged that I would kiss and be
friends. "You see, I am going away to- morrow morning, little
Daisy."

"I wish you had gone two days ago," I said.

And my mind did not change, even when the morning came.

CHAPTER V.

IN THE KITCHEN.


I was ill for days. It was not due to one thing, doubtless,
nor one sorrow; but the whole together. My aunt sent to
Baytown for the old family physician. He came up and looked at
me; and decided that I ought to "play" as much as possible!

"She isn't a child that likes play," said my aunt.

"Find some play that she does like, then. Where are her father
and mother?"

"Just sailed for Europe, a few weeks ago."

"The best thing would be, for her, to sail after them," said
the old doctor. And he went.

"We shall have to let her do just as they did at Melbourne,"
said my aunt.

"How was that?" said Miss Pinshon.

"Let her have just her own way."

"And what was that ?"

"Oh, queer," said my aunt. "She is not like other children.
But anything is better than to have her mope to death."

"I shall try and not have her mope," said Miss Pinshon.

But she had little chance to adopt her reforming regimen for
some time. It was plain I was not fit for anything but to be
let alone; like a weak plant struggling for its existence. All
you can do with it is to put it in the sun; and my aunt and
governess tacitly agreed upon the same plan of treatment for
me. Now the only thing wanting was sunshine; and it was long
before that could be had. After a day or two I left my bed,
and crept about the house, and out of the house under the
great oaks; where the material sunshine was warm and bright
enough, and caught itself in the grey wreaths of moss that
waved over my head, and seemed to come bodily to woo me to
life and cheer. It lay in the carpet under my feet; it
lingered in the leaves of the thick oaks; it wantoned in the
wind, as the long draperies of moss swung and moved gently to
and fro; but the very sunshine is cold where the ice meets it;
I could get no comfort. The thoughts that had so troubled me
the evening after my long talk with Preston, were always
present with me; they went out and came in with me; I slept
with them, and they met me when I woke. The sight of the
servants was wearying. I shunned Darry and the stables. I had
no heart for my pony. I would have liked to get away from
Magnolia. Yet, be I where I might, it would not alter my
father's position towards these seven hundred people. And
towards how many more? There were his estates in Virginia.

One of the first things I did, as soon as I could command my
fingers to do it, was to write to him. Not a remonstrance. I
knew better than to touch that. All I ventured, was to implore
that the people who desired it might be allowed to hold
prayer-meetings whenever they liked, and Mr. Edwards be
forbidden to interfere. Also I complained that the inside of
the cabins was not comfortable; that they were bare and empty.
No unauthorized person was ever detected entering the ground
zero area (1).

On 10 August, the Broadway roadblocks were removed, and mounted
military policemen began patrolling around ground zero at a
distance of 730 meters. Each guard was assigned to a daily
six-hour shift for a period of two weeks; in the third
week, the guard was assigned tasks away from the ground zero
area. The mounted guards and their horses wore film badges.
No exposure greater than 0.1 roentgen was registered. On 1
September, the mounted patrol moved to a distance of 460
meters from ground zero, just outside a fence installed a
week earlier to seal off the area. The same rotating patrol
schedule was used. The guards' film badge readings
showed an average daily exposure of 0.02 roentgens. The mounted
patrol at the fence continued until early 1947 (1).

Between 20 July 1945 and 21 November 1945, 67 groups entered
the ground zero area. Most of these parties entered in the month
after shot-day. These were the scientists and technicians
conducting experiments or retrieving data. By the beginning of
September, most of those who entered the ground zero area were
invited guests (1).

Also during the period 20 July through 21 November, at least 71
soldiers were at the TRINITY test site. Twenty-five of these
men were support personnel who never went within 460 meters of
ground zero.

The remaining 46 men were technical personnel, laborers who
erected the 460-meter fence, or military policemen who served
as guides.
Eleven of these men, probably members of the fence detail, spent
several days at about 460 meters from ground zero. Working
three to five hours per day between 9 August and 25 August,
they would have been the only group to stay longer than
one hour in the ground zero area. Of the remaining personnel
who approached within 460 meters from ground zero, 25 spent
15 minutes and ten spent between 30 minutes and one hour
in the ground zero area. Only 11 people received exposures
of 3 to 5 roentgens between 20 July and 21 November. Most
received less than 1 roentgen. After 21 November 1945, no
one approached closer than the fence which was 460 meters from
ground zero, although about 200 civilian and military personnel
worked at or visited the TRINITY site through 1946 (1; 16).

According to dosimetry data, entrance logs, and other records,
about 1,000 individuals were at the test site at some time between
16 July 1945 and the end of 1946.

This number includes not only the scientists, technicians, and
military personnel who were part of Project TRINITY but also
many visitors. Some of the scientists took their wives
and children on a tour of the area near ground zero, particularly
to view the green glass called "trinitite," which covered the
crater floor.

Trinitite was the product of the detonation's extreme
beat, which melted and mixed desert sand, tower steel,
and other debris (1; 8; 9; 16).

CHAPTER 3
RADIATION PROTECTION AT PROJECT TRINITY

The TR-7 or Medical Group, shown in the figure 1-5 organizational
chart, was responsible for radiological safety at Project
TRINITY.
Many of the physicians and scientists in the Medical Group
had worked with radioactive materials before and were trained
in radiological safety procedures. The Chief of the Medical Group
supervised the radiological safety operations and reported to the
TRINITY director.

In addition to providing medical care to TRINITY personnel, this
group established radiological safety programs to:
o Minimize radiation exposure of personnel on the test site and in
offsite areas
o Provide monitors to conduct radiological surveys onsite and offsite
o Provide and maintain radiation detection instruments
o Provide protective clothing and equipment.

An exposure limit of 5 roentgens during a two-month period
was established. Personnel were provided with radiation
detection instruments to determine their exposures (1).

3.1 ORGANIZATION

The Medical Group consisted of physicians, scientists,
and administrators, as well as radiological monitors.

Many of these personnel were nonmilitary, but all worked on the
Manhattan Project under the administration of the Army Corps of
Engineers Manhattan Engineer District.

The Medical Group was divided into two monitoring groups, the Site
Monitoring Group, which was responsible for onsite monitoring, and
the Offsite Monitoring Group.

Each reported to the Chief of the Medical Group, and each communicated
with the other during the monitoring activities.

In addition to these two groups, a small group of medical technicians
provided radiation detection instruments to Medical Group personnel
(1; 10).

3.2 SITE MONITORING GROUP
The Site Monitoring Group consisted of a chief monitor, three other
monitors, and several medical doctors.

This group had the following functions (1; 10):

o Conduct ground surveys of the test area and mark areas of
radioactivity

o Conduct surveys of the Base Camp and roads leading into the test
area
o Provide protective clothing and equipment, including film badges
and pocket dosimeters, to personnel
o Monitor all personnel for radioactive contamination and provide
for their decontamination
o Maintain a record of radiation exposures received by personnel.

The Site Monitoring Group monitored the radiation exposures
of personnel in the test area. The time spent by personnel in
radiation areas was limited, and radiation detection instruments
were provided to permit continuous monitoring of exposure rates.

In many cases, a monitor from the Site Monitoring Group accompanied
project personnel into the test area to monitor exposure rates (1;
10).

Two members of the Site Monitoring Group, a monitor and a physician
with radiological safety training, were assigned to each
shelter.

The supervising monitor was stationed at the Base Camp and
was in radio and telephone communication with all three shelters
and the offsite ground and aerial survey teams. Before any
personnel were allowed to leave the shelter areas, a
radiological safety monitor and a military policeman from each
shelter advanced along the roads to Broadway to check radiation
levels.

They wore respirators to prevent them from inhaling radioactive
material (1; 10).

Since it was expected that any dust from the cloud would fall on
one of the shelter areas within 30 minutes of the shot, plans had
been made to evacuate personnel as soon as the monitors completed
their initial survey.

Because the cloud moved to the northeast, the south shelter
(the Control Point) was not completely evacuated, although
nonessential personnel were sent to the Base Camp.

The west shelter was emptied of all personnel except a searchlight
crew spotlighting the cloud as it moved away (1; 10).

Only at the north shelter did an emergency evacuation occur.

About 12 minutes after the shot, a detection instrument indicated
a rapid rise in the radiation levels within the shelter. At the
same time, a remote ionization monitoring device detected a rapid
increase in radiation.

Because of these two readings, all north shelter personnel were
immediately evacuated to the Base Camp, 25 kilometers to the south.

Film badges worn by personnel stationed at the north shelter,
however, showed no radiation exposure above the detectable
level. It was later discovered that the meter of the detector
in the north shelter had not retained its zero calibration
setting, and radiation at the north shelter had not reached
levels high enough to result in measurable exposures of
the personnel who had been positioned there.
However, fallout activity was later detected in the north shelter
area, proof that part of the cloud did head in that
direction. This also explains why the monitoring device detected
rising radiation levels (1; 12).

After ascertaining that radiation levels along the roads
leading from the shelters to Broadway were within acceptable
limits, the radiological safety monitors and military police
established roadblocks at important intersections leading
to ground zero. The north shelter monitor and military police
set up a post where the North Shelter Road ran into
Broadway. The west shelter monitor and a military policeman
blocked Vatican Road where it intersected Broadway.
The south shelter monitor and military police set up a roadblock
where Broadway intersected Pennsylvania Avenue (1).

The monitor assigned to Guard Post 4 surveyed the Mockingbird
Gap area to ensure that it was safe for the guards to return
to their post.
This position controlled access to the McDonald Ranch Road, which
led directly to ground zero (1).

At 0540 hours, the chief monitor departed from the Base Camp
with a military policeman to monitor the entire length of
Broadway. They first checked the roadblock at Pennsylvania
Avenue and Broadway. Next they drove to the roadblock at Vatican
Road and Broadway. Upon the chief monitor's arrival, the west
shelter monitor traveled about nine kilometers west on Vatican
Road to monitor Guard Post 1 so that the military police could
reoccupy the post. The monitoring excursion to Guard Post 1
continued until the chief monitor had returned from Guard Post
2, located 17 kilometers northwest of the Vatican Road
roadblock on Broadway (1; 18).

The chief monitor arrived at Guard Post 2 at about 0550 hours
and found the post empty. He then continued five kilometers
north along Broadway to the foxholes from which the military
police had watched the detonation. There he found the guards,
the five radiological safety monitors assigned to the
evacuation detachment, and the Commanding Officer of the
evacuation detachment (1; 18).

The military policemen refused to return to Guard Post 2,
insisting that they had received orders over their two-way
radio from the Base Commander to evacuate their post and head
for San Antonio, New Mexico, a town 28 kilometers northwest
of the Guard Post. The Base Commander had noted that portions
of the cloud were heading northwestward and, fearing that
fallout from the cloud would contaminate Guard Post 2, had
ordered the military police to evacuate. The chief monitor,
however, had found no significant radiation levels anywhere
along the northern part of Broadway nor around Guard Post 2.
The Base Commander, after being contacted by the chief
monitor, drove to the foxholes and ordered the guards to
return to their post. This was the only unplanned incident
during the onsite monitoring (1).

After Guard Post 2 was reoccupied, the chief monitor returned
to the roadblock at the intersection of Broadway and the
North Shelter Road.
The north shelter monitor informed the chief monitor of the
sudden evacuation of the north shelter, whereupon the chief
monitor surveyed the north shelter area and found intensities
of only 0.01 and 0.02 roentgens per hour (R/h). The chief
monitor then contacted the south shelter and informed Dr.
Bainbridge that the north shelter region was safe for those
who needed to return, that Broadway was safe from the Base Camp
to Guard Post 2, and that Guard Post 2 was now manned so that
personnel leaving for LASL could be checked out (1).

The chief monitor then returned to the south shelter and
assembled the monitors from the three roadblocks and Guard
Post 4 to prepare for entrance into the ground zero area.
The time was about 0815 hours.

The military police at the roadblocks were given radiation
meters to survey the adjoining area. Broadway from the south
shelter to Guard Post 2 was remonitored occasionally to reassure
the military police that there was no radiation problem.

Monitors also surveyed the Base Camp for 24 hours after the detonation.

No radiation above background levels was detected there (1).

The following brief description of the radiological environment
in the TRINITY test area is based primarily on the results of
the remote gamma recorders situated in the test area and on results
of the road surveys conducted after the detonation (1).

Within about 1,400 meters of ground zero (except to the north),
radiation intensities between 0.2 and 1.3 R/h were detected
during the first few minutes after the detonation.

These readings decreased to less than 0.1 R/h within a few
hours.

At greater distances to the east, south, and west, radiation levels
above background were not detected (1).

The cloud drifted to the northeast, and higher gamma
readings due to fallout were encountered in this direction.
About five minutes after the detonation, a reading of 3 R/h
was recorded 1,400 meters north of ground zero. Several minutes
later, the intensity there had increased to greater than 7
R/h, and it continued to increase for several more
minutes.

Gamma detectors 9,150 meters north of ground zero, however,
recorded no radiation above background levels. This indicated
that the cloud had passed over or near the 1,400-meter area
and only partially over the 9,150-meter area where the north
shelter was located. Subsequent ground surveys of this area
found no gamma intensities higher than 0.02 R/h (1).

Gamma radiation levels at and around ground zero were much
higher than in other onsite areas because of induced activity
in the soil.
Twenty-four hours after the detonation, the gamma intensity
at ground zero was estimated to be 600 to 700 R/h. This estimate
was based on data provided by the tank crew that drove to
ground zero to obtain soil samples. The intensity decreased
to about 2 R/h at 725 meters from ground zero.

Gamma intensities of 0.1 R/h or more were confined within a
circular area extending about 1,100 meters from ground
zero (except in areas of fallout).

One week after the shot, the gamma intensity at ground zero was
about 45 R/h. After 30 days, intensities at ground zero had
decreased to 15 R/h, and intensities of 0.1 R/h or more were not
encountered beyond about 365 meters from ground zero.

Gamma intensities of 3 to 10 R/h were found at ground zero
three months after the detonation (1; 19).

3.3 OFFSITE MONITORING GROUP
Four two-man teams and one five-man team supervised by the chief
offsite monitor constituted the Offsite Monitoring Group.

Before the detonation, the four two-man teams established
monitoring posts in towns outside the test area. These towns
were Nogal, Roswell, Fort Sumner, and Socorro, all in New
Mexico.

The five-man team remained at Guard Post 2 to assist in evacuation
of nearby residences if the TRINITY cloud drifted in that direction.

These residences, the Fite house and the homes in the town of
Tokay, were 24 and 32 kilometers northwest of ground zero,
respectively. Since the cloud drifted to the northeast,
evacuation was not required. All offsite monitoring teams were
in radio or telephone contact with personnel at the Base Camp
(11).

Offsite monitoring teams in areas northeast of ground zero
encountered gamma readings ranging from 1.5 to 15 R/h two
to four hours after the detonation. Three hours after the
detonation, surveys taken in Bingham, New Mexico (located 30
kilometers northeast of ground zero) found gamma intensities
of about 1.5 R/h. Radiation readings at the town of White, nine
kilometers southeast of Bingham, were 6.5 R/h three hours after
the detonation and 2.5 R/h two hours later. Another team
monitoring in a canyon 11 kilometers east of Bingham found a
gamma intensity of about 15 R/h. Five hours later, the
intensity had decreased to 3.8 R/h. It was estimated that peak
intensities of gamma radiation from fallout on shot-day were
about 7 R/h at an occupied ranch house in this canyon area
(1; 11; 19).

Monitoring teams resurveyed these towns about one month after
the TRINITY detonation. At Bingham, gamma readings of 0.003
R/h and 0.0001 R/h were found at ground level outdoors and at
waist level inside a building, respectively. At the town of
White, the highest outdoor gamma reading was 0.008 R/h.
Inside a building, the highest reading was 0.0005 R/h (11).

Surveys taken in the canyon area one month after the detonation
indicated that gamma intensities at ground level had decreased
to 0.032 R/h.

The occupied ranch house was also surveyed, both inside
and outside. The highest reading outdoors was 0.028 R/h,
and the highest reading indoors was 0.004 R/h (11; 19).

Monitoring was also conducted in offsite areas other than
those to the north and northeast of ground zero. Monitors found
no radiation readings above background levels (11).

Significant fallout from the TRINITY cloud did not reach the
ground within about 20 kilometers northeast of ground zero.
From this point, the fallout pattern extended out 160 kilometers
and was 48 kilometers wide. Gamma intensities up to 15 R/h
were measured in this region several hours after the
detonation. One month later, intensities had declined to 0.032
R/h or less (11).

CHAPTER 4
DOSIMETRY ANALYSIS OF PARTICIPANTS IN PROJECT TRINITY

This chapter summarizes the radiation doses received by
participants in various activities during Project TRINITY.

The sources of this dosimetry information are the safety and
monitoring report for personnel at TRINITY, which includes a
compilation of film badge readings for all participants up to 1
January 1946, and film badge data from the records of the Reynolds
Electrical and Engineering Company, which contain readings through
1946 (1; 16).

These sources list individual participants with their cumulative
gamma radiation exposures.

4.1 FILM BADGE RECORDS
During TRINITY, the film badge was the primary device used to
measure the radiation dose received by individual participants.
The site monitoring plan indicates that film badges were to be
issued to participants. The film badge was normally worn
at chest level on the outside of clothing and was designed to
measure the wearer's exposure to gamma radiation from external
sources. These film badges were insensitive to neutron radiation
and did not measure the amount of radioactive material
that might have been inhaled or ingested (1).

Personnel from the Medical Group had responsibility for issuing,
receiving, processing, and interpreting film badges for Project
TRINITY.

The Site Monitoring Group compiled the film badge records
for both onsite and offsite personnel. Radiological
safety personnel and military police recorded the names and
identification numbers of individuals as they entered the
test area.

This information was recorded in an entry logbook and on a
personal exposure data card.
Upon leaving the test area, individuals returned their film
badges to the check station. When the film badges were processed
and interpreted, the reading was entered on the individuals
exposure data card. In this manner, the number of times an
individual entered the test area and his cumulative exposure
history were recorded and maintained (1).

4.2 GAMMA RADIATION EXPOSURE
The safety and monitoring report lists film badge readings
for about 700 individuals who participated in Project TRINITY
from 16 July 1945 to 1 January 1946 (1).

This list includes both military and nonmilitary personnel who
were involved with the TRINITY operation and postshot activities.
However, records are available for only 44 of the 144 to 160
members of the evacuation detachment (1). In addition, some
of these film badge listings may be for personnel who were
only peripherally involved with TRINITY activities, such as
family members and official guests who visited the site.

According to the safety and monitoring report, by 1 January
1946, 23 individuals had received cumulative gamma exposures
greater than 2 but less than 4 roentgens. An additional 22
individuals received gamma exposures between 4 and 15
roentgens. Personnel who received gamma exposures exceeding
2 roentgens represent less than six percent of the Project
TRINITY participants with recorded exposures. As described
below, these exposures generally resulted when personnel
approached ground zero several times (1).

Information is available regarding the activities of some
of these personnel. One of the drivers of the earth-sampling
group's lead-lined tank, an Army sergeant who traveled three
times to ground zero, received an exposure of 15 roentgens. A
second tank driver, also an Army sergeant, received an exposure
of 3.3 roentgens. Three members of the earth-sampling group,
all of whom traveled in the tank to ground zero, received
exposures of 10, 7.5, and 5 roentgens. An Army photographer
who entered the test area six times between 23 July and
20 October received 12.2 roentgens (1).

Four individuals involved with excavating the buried supports of
the TRINITY tower from 8 October to 10 October 1945 received gamma
exposures ranging from 3.4 to 4.7 roentgens.

Film badge readings for this three-day period indicate that the
two individuals who operated mechanical shovels received 3.4 and
4.3 roentgens, while the two who supervised and monitored the
excavation received exposures of 4.2 and 4.7 roentgens.

The individual receiving 4.7 roentgens during the excavation
operation had received 1.3 roentgens from a previous exposure,
making his total exposure 6 roentgens (1).

An Army captain who accompanied all test and observer parties
into the ground zero area between 1 September and 11 October 1945
received a total gamma exposure of 2.6 roentgens (1).

The activities and times of exposure are not known for other
personnel with exposures over 2 roentgens.

According to the dosimetry records for 1946, about 115 people
visited the test site that year. No one ventured inside the
fence surrounding ground zero, and no one received an
exposure greater than 1 roentgen (1; 16).

REFERENCE LIST

The following list of references represents the documents consulted
in preparation of the Project TRINITY volume.

AVAILABILITY INFORMATION

An availability statement has been included at the end of the
reference citation for those readers who wish to read or
obtain copies of source documents. Availability statements
were correct at the time the bibliography was prepared. It
is anticipated that many of the documents marked unavailable
may become available during the declassification review
process. The Coordination and Information Center (CIC) and the
National Technical Information Service (NTIS) will be provided
future DNA-WT documents bearing an EX after the report
number.

Source documents bearing an availability statement of CIC may be
reviewed at the following address:
Department of Energy Coordination and Information Center (Operated
by Reynolds Electrical & Engineering Co., Inc.)

ATTN: Mr. Richard V. Nutley 2753 S. Highland P.O. Box 14100 Las
Vegas, Nevada 89114
Phone: (702) 734-3194 FTS: 598-3194

Source documents bearing an availability statement of NTIS may be
purchased from the National Technical Information Service.

When ordering by mail or phone, please include both the price code
and the NTIS number.

The price code appears in parentheses before the NTIS order number.

National Technical Information Service 5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22161 Phone: (703) 487-4650 (Sales Office)

Additional ordering information or assistance may be obtained by
writing to the NTIS, Attention: Customer Service, or by calling
(703) 487-4660.

PROJECT TRINITY REFERENCES
*Available from NTIS; order number appears before the asterisk.

**Available at CIC.
***Not available, see Availability Information page.
****Requests subject to Privacy Act restrictions.

1. Aebersold, Paul.
It satisfied him; somehow it did not
please me as well; but the ride did, which we had soon after;
and I found that my black feather certainly suited everybody
else. Darry smiled at me, and the house servants were exultant
over my appearance.

Amid all these distracting pleasures, I kept on the watch for
an opportunity to speak to aunt Gary alone. Christmas day I
could not. I could not get it till near the end of the next
day.

"Aunt Gary," I said, "I want to consult you about something."

"You have always something turning about in your head," — was
her answer.

"Do you think," said I slowly, "Mr. Edwards would have any
objection to some of the people coming to the kitchen Sunday
evenings to hear me read the Bible?"

"To hear _you_ read the Bible!" said my aunt.

"Yes, aunt Gary; I think they would like it. You know they
cannot read it for themselves."

"_They_ would like it. And you would be delighted, wouldn't
you?"

"Yes, aunt Gary. I should like it better than anything."

"You are a funny child! There is not a bit of your mother in
you — except your obstinacy."

And my aunt seemed to ponder my difference.

"Would Mr. Edwards object to it, do you think? Would he let
them come?"

"The question is, whether I will let them come. Mr. Edwards
has no business with what is done in the house."

"But, aunt Gary, you would not have any objection."

"I don't know, I am sure. I wish your father and mother had
never left you in my charge; for I don't know how to take care
of you."

"Aunt Gary," I said, "please don't object! There is nobody to
read the Bible to them — and I should like to do it very
much."

"Yes, I see you would. There — don't get excited about it —
every Sunday evening, did you say?"

"Yes, ma'am — if you please."

"Daisy, it will just tire you; that's what it will do. I know
it, just as well as if I had seen it. You are not strong
enough."

"I am sure it would refresh me, aunt Gary. It did the other
night."

"The other night?"

"Christmas eve, ma'am."

"Did you read to them then?"

"Yes, ma'am; they wanted to know what Christmas was about."

"And you read to them. You are the oddest child!"

"But, aunt Gary, never mind, — it would be the greatest
pleasure to me. Won't you give leave?"

"The servants hear the Bible read, child, every morning and
every night."

"Yes, but that is only a very few of the house servants. I
want some of the others to come — a good many, — as many as
can come."

"I wish your mother and father were here," sighed my aunt.

"Do you think Mr. Edwards would make any objection?" I asked
again, presuming on the main question being carried. "Would he
let them come?"

"Let them!" echoed my aunt. "Mr. Edwards would be well
employed, to interfere with anything the family choose to do."

"But you know he does not let them meet together, the people,
aunt Gary; not unless they have his permission."

"No, I suppose so. That is his business."

"Then will you speak to him, ma'am, so that he may not be
angry with the people when they come?"

"I? No," said my aunt. "I have nothing to do with your
father's overseer. It would just make difficulty maybe, Daisy;
you had better let this scheme of yours alone."

I could not, without bitter disappointment. Yet I did not know
how further to press the matter. I sat still and said nothing.

"I declare, if she isn't growing pale about it!" exclaimed my
aunt. "I know one thing, and that is, your father and mother
ought to have taken you along with them. I have not the least
idea how to manage you; not the least. What is it you want to
do, Daisy?"

I explained, over again.

"And now if you cannot have this trick of your fancy you will
just fidget yourself sick! I see it. Just as you went driving
all about Melbourne without company to take care of you. I am
sure I don't know. It is not in my way to meddle with
overseers — How many people do you want to read to at once,
Daisy?"

"As many as I can, aunt Gary. But Mr. Edwards will not let two
or three meet together anywhere."

"Well, I dare say he is right. You can't believe anything in
the world these people tell you, child. They will lie just as
fast as they will speak."

"But if they came to see _me_, aunt Gary?" I persisted, waiving
the other question.

"That's another thing, of course. Well, don't worry. Call
Preston. Why children cannot be children, passes my
comprehension!"

Preston came, and there was a good deal of discussing of my
plan; at which Preston frowned and whistled, but on the whole,
though I knew against his will, took my part. The end was, my
aunt sent for the overseer. She had some difficulty, I judge,
in carrying the point; and made capital of my ill-health and
delicacy and spoiled-child character. The overseer's unwilling
consent was gained at last; the conditions being, that every
one who came to hear the reading should have a ticket of
leave, written and signed by myself, for each evening; and
that I should be present with the assembly from the beginning
to the close of it.

My delight was very great. And my aunt, grumbling at the whole
matter and especially at her share in it, found an additional
cause of grumbling in that, she said, I had looked twenty per
cent. better ever since this foolish thing got possession of
my head. "I am wondering," she remarked to Miss Pinshon,
"whatever Daisy will do when she grows up. I expect nothing
but she will be — what do you call them? — one of those people
who run wild over the human race."

"Pirates?" suggested Preston. "Or corsairs?"

"Her mother will be disappointed," went on my aunt. "That is
what I confidently expect."

Miss Pinshon hinted something about the corrective qualities
of mathematics; but I was too happy to heed her or care. I was
stronger and better, I believe, from that day; though I had
not much to boast of. A true tonic had been administered to
me; my fainting energies took a new start.

I watched my opportunity, and went down to the kitchen one
evening to make my preparations. I found Maria alone and
sitting in state before the fire — which I believe was always
in the kitchen a regal one. I hardly ever saw it anything
else. She welcomed me with great suavity; drew up a chair for
me; and finding I had something to say, sat then quite grave
and still looking into the blaze, while I unfolded my plan.

"De Lord is bery good!" was her subdued comment, made when I
had done. "He hab sent His angel, sure!"

"Now, Maria," I went on, "you must tell me who would like to
come next Sundays, you think; and I must make tickets for
them. Every one must have my ticket, with his name on it; and
then there will be no fault found."

"I s'pose not," said Maria, — "wid Miss Daisy's name on it."

"Who will come, Maria?"

"Laws, chile, dere's heaps. Dere's Darry, and Pete — Pete, he
say de meetin' de oder night war 'bout de best meetin' he eber
'tended; he wouldn't miss it for not'ing in de world; he's
sure; and dere's ole 'Lize; and de two Jems — no, dere's _tree_
Jems dat is ser'ous; and Stark, and Carl and Sharlim —"

"_Sharlim?_" said I, not knowing that this was the Caffir for
Charlemagne.

"Sharlim," Maria repeated. "He don' know much; but he has a
leanin' for de good t'ings. And Darry, he can tell who'll
come. I done forget all de folks' names."

"Why, Maria," I said, "I did not know there were so many
people at Magnolia that cared about the Bible."

"What has 'um to care for, chile, I should like fur to know.
Dere aint much mo' in _dis_ world."

"But I thought there were only very few," I said.

" 'Spose um fifty," said Maria. "Fifty aint much, I reckon,
when dere's all de rest o' de folks what _don't_ care. De Lord's
people is a little people yet, for sure; and de world's a big
place. When de Lord come Hisself, to look for 'em, 'spect He
have to look mighty hard. De world's awful dark."

That brought to my mind my question. It was odd, no doubt, to
choose an old coloured woman for my adviser; but indeed I had
not much choice; and something had given me a confidence in
Maria's practical wisdom, which early as it had been formed,
nothing ever happened to shake. So, after considering the
fire and the matter a moment, I brought forth my doubt.

"Maria," said I, "what is the best way — I mean, how can one
let one's light shine?"

"What Miss Daisy talkin' about?"

"I mean, — you know what the Bible says — 'Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works and
glorify your Father which is in heaven'?"

"For sure, I knows dat. Aint much shinin' in dese yere parts.
De people is dark, Miss Daisy; dey don' know. 'Spect dey would
try to shine, some on 'em, ef dey knowed. Feel sure dey
would."

"But that is what I wanted to ask about, Maria. How ought one
to let one's light shine?"

I remember now the kind of surveying look the woman gave me. I
do not know what she was thinking of; but she looked at me, up
and down, for a moment, with a wonderfully tender, soft
expression. Then turned away.

"How let um light shine?" she repeated. "De bestest way, Miss
Daisy, is fur to make him burn good."

I saw it all immediately; my question never puzzled me again.
Take care that the lamp is trimmed; take care that it is full
of oil; see that the flame mounts clear and steady towards
heaven; and the Lord will set it where its light will fall on
what pleases Him, and where it will reach mayhap, to what you
never dream of.

CHAPTER VI.

WINTER AND SUMMER.


From the Christmas holidays, I think I began slowly to mend.
My aunt watched me, and grumbled that kitchen amusements and
rides with Darry should prove the medicines most healing and
effectual; but she dared stop neither of them. I believe the
overseer remonstrated on the danger of the night gatherings;
but my aunt Gary had her answer ready, and warned him not to
do anything to hinder me, for I was the apple of my father's
eye. Miss Pinshon, sharing to the full my aunt's discontent,
would have got on horseback, I verily believe, to be with me
in my rides; but she was no rider. The sound of a horse's four
feet always, she confessed, stamped the courage out of her
heart. I was let alone; and the Sunday evenings in the
kitchen, and the bright morning hours in the pine avenues and
oak groves, were my refreshment and my pleasure, and my
strength.

What there was of it; for I had not much strength to boast for
many a day. Miss Pinshon tried her favorite recipe whenever
she thought she saw a chance, and I did my best with it. But
my education that winter was quite in another line. I could
not bear much arithmetic. Bending over a desk did not agree
with me. Reading aloud to Miss Pinshon never lasted for more
than a little while at a time. So it comes, that my
remembrance of that winter is not filled with school
exercises, and that Miss Pinshon's figure plays but a
subordinate part in its pictures. Instead of that, my memory
brings back first and chiefest of all, the circle of dark
faces round the kitchen light wood fire, and the yellow blaze
on the page from which I read; I a little figure in white,
sitting in the midst among them all. That picture — those
evenings — come back to me, with a kind of hallowed perfume of
truth and hope. Truth, it was in my lips and on my heart; I
was giving it out to those who had it not. And hope, — it was
in more hearts than mine, no doubt; but in mine it beat with
as steady a beat as the tickings of my little watch by my
side, and breathed sweet as the flowers that start in spring
from under the snow. I had often a large circle; and it was
part of my plan, and well carried into execution, that these
evenings of reading should supply also the place of the
missing prayer-meeting. Gradually I drew it on to be so
understood; and then my pieces of reading were scattered along
between the prayers, or sometimes all came at first, followed
by two or three earnest longer prayers from some of those that
were present. And then, without any planning of mine, came in
the singing. Not too much, lest as Maria said, we should "make
de folks up stairs t'ink dere war somethin' oncommon in de
kitchen;" but one or two hymns we would have, so full of
spirit and sweetness that often now-a-days they come back to
me, and I would give very much to hear the like again. So full
of music too. Voices untrained by art, but gifted by nature;
melodious and powerful; that took different parts in the tune,
and carried them through without the jar of a false note or a
false quantity; and a love both of song and of the truth which
made the music mighty. It was the greatest delight to me, that
singing, whether I joined them or only listened. One, — the
thought of it comes over me now and brings the water to my
eyes, —


"Am I a soldier of the cross —
Of the cross —
Of he cross —
A follower of the Lamb;
And shall I fear to own his cause,
Own his cause —
Own his cause, —
Or blush to speak His name?"


The repetitions at the end of every other line were: both
plaintive and strong; there was no weakness, but some
recognition of what it costs in certain circumstances to "own
His cause." I loved that dearly. But that was only one of
many.

Also the Bible words were wonderful sweet to me, as I was
giving them out to those who else had a "famine of the word."
Bread to the hungry, is quite another thing from bread on the
tables of the full.

The winter had worn well on, before I received the answer to
the letter I had written my father about the prayer-meetings
and Mr. Edwards. It was a short answer, not in terms but in
actual extent; showing that my father was not strong and well
yet. It was very kind and tender, as well as short; I felt
that in every word. In substance, however, it told me I had
better let Mr. Edwards alone. He knew what he ought to do,
about the prayer-meetings and about other things; and they
were what I could not judge about. So my letter said. It said
too, that things seemed strange to me because I was unused to
them; and that when I had lived longer at the South they would
cease to be strange, and I would understand them and look upon
them as every one else did.

I studied and pondered this letter; not greatly disappointed,
for I had had but slender hopes that my petition could work
anything. Yet I had a disappointment to get over. The first
practical use I made of my letter, I went where I could be
alone with it — indeed, I was that when I read it, — but I
went to a solitary lonely place, where I could not be
interrupted; and there I knelt down and prayed, that however
long I might live at the South, I might never get to look upon
evil as anything but evil, nor ever become accustomed to the
things I thought ought not to be, so as not to feel them. I
shall never forget that half hour. It broke my heart that my
father and I should look on such matters with so different
eyes; and with my prayer for myself, which came from the very
bottom of my heart, I poured out also a flood of love and
tears over him, and of petition that he might have better
eyesight one day. Ah yes! and before it should be too late to
right the wrong he was unconsciously doing.

For now I began to see, in the light of this letter first,
that my father's eyes were not clear but blind in regard to
these matters. And what he said about me led me to think and
believe that his blindness was the effect, not of any
particular hardness or fault in him, but of long teaching and
habit and custom. For I saw that everybody else around me
seemed to take the present condition of things as the true and
best one; only convenient, but natural and proper. Everybody,
that is, who did not suffer by it. I had more than suspicions
that the seven hundred on the estate were of a different mind
here from the half dozen who lived in the mansion; and that
the same relative difference existed on the other plantations
in the neighbourhood. We made visits occasionally, and the
visits were returned. I was not shut out from them, and so had
some chance to observe things within a circle of twenty miles.
Our "neighbourhood" reached so far. And child as I was, I
could not help seeing; and I could not help looking, half
unconsciously, for signs of what lay so close on my heart.

My father's letter thus held some material of comfort for me,
although it refused my request. Papa would not overset the
overseer's decision about the prayer-meetings. It held
something else. There was a little scrap of a note to aunt
Gary, saying, in the form of an order, that Daisy was to have
ten dollars paid to her every quarter; that Mrs. Gary would
see it done; and would further see that Daisy was not called
upon, by anybody, at any time, to give any account whatever of
her way of spending the same.


How I thanked papa for this! How I knew the tender affection
and knowledge of me which had prompted it. How well I
understood what it was meant to do. I had a little private
enjoyment of aunt Gary's disconsolate face and grudging hands
as she bestowed upon me the first ten dollars. It was not that
she loved money so well, but she thought this was another form
of my father's unwise indulging and spoiling of me; and that I
was spoiled already. But I — I saw in vision a large harvest
of joy, to be raised from this small seed crop.

At first I thought I must lay out a few shillings of my stock
upon a nice purse to keep the whole in. I put the purse down
at the head of the list of things I was making out, for
purchase, the first time I should go to Baytown, or have any
good chance of sending. I had a good deal of consideration
whether I would have a purse or a pocket-book. Then I had an
odd secret pleasure in my diplomatic way of finding out from
Darry and Maria and Margaret what were the wants most pressing
of the sick and the old among the people; or of the
industrious and the enterprising. Getting Darry to talk to me
in my rides, by degrees I came to know the stories and
characters of many of the hands; I picked up hints of a want
or a desire here and there, which Darry thought there was no
human means of meeting, or gratifying. Then, the next time I
had a chance, I brought up these persons and cases to Maria,
and supplemented Darry's hints with her information. Or I
attacked Margaret when she was making my fire, and drew from
her what she knew about the persons in whom I was interested.
So I learned — and put it down in my notebook accordingly —
that Pete could spell out words a little bit, and would like
mainly to read; if only he had a Testament in large type. He
could not manage little print; it bothered him. Also I
learned, that aunt Sarah, a middle-aged woman who worked in
the fields, "wanted terrible to come to de Sabbas meetin's,
but she war' shamed to come, 'cause her feet was mos' half out
of her shoes; and Mr. Ed'ards wouldn't give her no more till
de time come roun'." Sarah had "been and gone and done stuck
her feet in de fire, for to warm 'em, one time when dey was
mighty cold; and she burn her shoes. Learn her better next
time."

"But does she work every day in the field with her feet only
half covered?" I asked.

"Laws! she don't care," said Maria. "Taint no use give dem
darkies not'ing; dey not know how to keep' um."

But this was not Maria's real opinion, I knew. There was often
a strange sort of seeming hard edge of feeling put forth,
which I learned to know pointed a deep, deep, maybe only half-
conscious irony, and was in reality a bitter comment upon
facts. So a pair of new shoes for Sarah went down in my list
with a large print Testament for Pete. Then I found that some
of the people, some of the old ones, who in youth had been
accustomed to it, liked nothing so well as tea; it was
ambrosia and Lethe mingled; and a packet of tea was put in my
list next to the Testament. But the tea must have sugar; and I
could not bear that they should drink it out of mugs, without
any teaspoons; so to please myself I sent for a little delf
ware and a few pewter spoons. Little by little my list grew. I
found that Darry knew something about letters; could write a
bit; and would prize the means of writing as a very rare
treasure and pleasure. And with fingers that almost trembled
with delight, I wrote down paper and pens and a bottle of ink
for Darry. Next, I heard of an old woman at the quarters, who
was ailing and infirm, and I am afraid ill-treated, who at all
events was in need of comfort, and had nothing but straw and
the floor to rest her poor bones on at night. A soft pallet
for her went down instantly on my list; my ink and tears
mingling together as I wrote; and I soon found that my purse
must be cut off from the head of my list for that time. I
never ventured to put it at the head again; nor found a chance
to put it in anywhere else. I spent four winters at Magnolia
after that; and never had a new purse all the time.

I had to wait awhile for an opportunity to make my purchases;
then had the best in the world, for Darry was sent to Baytown
on business. To him I confided my list and my money, with my
mind on the matter; and I was served to a point and with
absolute secrecy. For that I had insisted on. Darry and Maria
were in my counsels, of course; but the rest of the poor
people knew only by guess who their friend was. Old Sarah
found her new shoes in her hut one evening, and in her noisy
delight declared that "some big angel had come t'rough de
quarters." The cups and saucers it was necessary to own, lest
more talk should have been made about them than at all suited
me; Darry let it be understood that nothing must be said and
nobody must know of the matter; and nobody did; but I took the
greatest enjoyment in hearing from Maria how the old women
(and one or two men) gathered together and were comforted over
their cups of tea. And over the _cups_, Maria said: the cups
and spoons made the tea twice as good; but I doubt their
relish of it was never half so exquisite as mine. I had to
give Pete his Testament; he would not think it the same thing
if he did not have it from my own hand, Maria said; and
Darry's pens and ink likewise. The poor woman for whom I had
got the bed, was, I fear, beyond enjoying anything; but it was
a comfort to me to know that she was lying on it. The people
kept my secret perfectly; my aunt and governess never, I
believe, heard anything of all these doings; I had my
enjoyment to myself.

And the Sunday evening prayer-meeting grew. Little by little.
Old Sarah and her new shoes were there of course, at once.
Those who first came never failed. And week by week, as I went
into the kitchen with my Bible, I saw a larger circle; found
the room better lined with dark forms and sable faces. They
come up before me now as I write, one and another. I loved
them all. I love them still, for I look to meet many of them
in glory; "where there is neither bond nor free." Nay, that is
_here_ and at present, to all who are in Christ; we do not wait
for heaven, to be all one.

And they loved me, those poor people. I think Pete had
something the same sort of notion about me that those
Ephesians had of their image of Diana, which they insisted had
fallen from heaven. I used to feel it then, and be amused by
it.

But I am too long about my story. No wonder I linger, when the
remembrance is so sweet. With this new interest that had come
into my life, my whole life brightened. I was no longer
spiritless. My strength little by little returned. And with
the relief of my heart about my father, my happiness sprung
back almost to its former and usual state when I was at
Melbourne. For I had by this time submitted to my father's and
mother's absence as a thing of necessity, and submitted
entirely. Yet my happiness was a subdued sort of thing; and my
aunt Gary still thought it necessary to be as careful of me,
she said, "as if I were an egg-shell." As I grew stronger,
Miss Pinshon made more and more demands upon my time with her
arithmetic lessons, and other things; but my rides with Darry
were never interfered with, nor my Sunday evening readings;
and indeed all the winter I continued too delicate and feeble
for much school work. My dreaded governess did not have near
so much to do with me as I thought she would.

The spring was not far advanced before it was necessary for us
to quit Magnolia. The climate after a certain day, or rather
the air, was not thought safe for white people. We left
Magnolia; and went first to Baytown and then to the North.
There our time was spent between one and another of several
watering-places. I longed for Melbourne; but the house was
shut up; we could not go there. The summer was very wearisome
to me. I did not like the houses in which our time was spent,
or the way of life led in them. Neither did Miss Pinshon, I
think; for she was out of her element, and had no chance to
follow her peculiar vocation. Of course, in a public hotel, we
could not have a schoolroom; and with the coming on of warm
weather my strength failed again, so sensibly, that all there
was to do was to give me sea air and bathing, and let me
alone. The bathing I enjoyed; those curling salt waves
breaking over my head, are the one image of anything fresh or
refreshing which my memory has kept. I should have liked the
beach; I did like it; only it was covered with bathers, or
else with promenaders in carriages and on foot, at all times
when I saw it; and though they were amusing, the beach was
spoiled. The hotel rooms were close and hot; I missed all the
dainty freedom and purity of my own home; the people I saw
were, it seemed to me, entirely in keeping with the rooms;
that is, they were stiff and fussy, not quiet and busy. They
were busy after their own fashion indeed; but it always seemed
to me, busy about nothing. The children I saw, too, did not
attract me; and I fear I did not attract them. I was sober-
hearted and low-toned in spirits and strength; while they were
as gay as their elders. And I was dressed according to my
mother's fancy, in childlike style, without hoops, and with my
hair cropped short all over my head. They were stately with
crinoline, and rich with embroidery, stiff with fine dresses
and plumes; while a white frock and a flat straw were all my
adornment, except a sash. I think they did not know what to
make of me; and I am sure I had nothing in common with them;
so we lived very much apart. There was a little variation in
my way of life when Preston came; yet not much. He took me
sometimes to drive, and did once go walking with me oil the
beach; but Preston found a great deal where I found nothing,
and was all the time taken up with people and pleasures;
boating and yachting and fishing expeditions; and I believe
with hops and balls too. But I was always fast asleep at those
times.

It was a relief to me when the season came to an end, and we
went to New York to make purchases before turning southward. I
had once hoped, that this time, the year's end, might see my
father and mother come home again. That hope had faded and
died a natural death a long while ago. Letters spoke my
father's health not restored; he was languid and spiritless
and lacked vigour; he would try the air of Switzerland; lie
would spend the winter in the Pyrenées! If that did not work
well, my mother hinted, perhaps he would have to try the
effect of a long sea voyage. Hope shrunk into such small
dimensions that it filled but a very little corner of my
heart. Indeed, for the present I quite put it by and did not
look at it. One winter more must pass, at any rate, and maybe
a full year, before I could possibly see my father and mother
at home. I locked the door for the present upon hope; and
turned my thoughts to what things I had left with me. Chiefest
of all theses were my poor friends at Magnolia. My money had
accumulated during the summer; I had a nice little sum to lay
out for them, and in New York I had chance to do it well, and
to do it myself; which was a great additional pleasure. As I
could, bit by bit, when I was with aunt Gary shopping, when I
could get leave to go out alone with a careful servant to
attend me, I searched the shops and catered and bought, for
the comfort and pleasure of — seven hundred! I could do
little. Nay, but it was for so many of those as I could reach
with my weak hands; and I did not despise that good because I
could not reach them all. A few more large print Testaments I
laid in; some copies of the Gospel of John, in soft covers and
good type; a few hymn books. All these cost little. But for
Christmas gifts, and for new things to give help and comfort
to my poor pensioners, I both plagued and bewitched my brain.
It was sweet work. My heart went out towards making all the
people happy for once, at Christmas; but my purse would not
stretch so far; I had to let that go, with a thought and a
sigh.

One new thing came very happily into my head, and was worth a
Peruvian mine to me, in the pleasure and business it gave.
Going into a large greenhouse with my aunt, who wanted to
order a bouquet, I went wandering round the place while she
made her bargain. For my aunt Gary made a bargain of
everything. Wandering in thought as well, whither the sweet
breath of the roses and geraniums led me, I went back to Molly
in her cottage at Melbourne, and the Jewess geranium I had
carried her, and the rose tree; and suddenly the thought
started into my head, might not my dark friends at Magnolia,
so quick to see and enjoy anything of beauty that came in
their way — so fond of bright colour and grace and elegance —
a luxurious race, even in their downtrodden condition; might
not _they_ also feel the sweetness of a rose, or delight in the
petals of a tulip? It was a great idea; it grew into a full
formed purpose before I was called to follow aunt Gary out of
the greenhouse. The next day I went there on my own account. I
was sure I knew what I wanted to do; but I studied a long time
the best way of doing it. Roses? I could hardly transport pots
and trees so far; they were too cumbersome. Geraniums were
open to the same objection, besides being a little tender as
to the cold. Flower seeds could not be sown, if the people had
them; for no patch of garden belonged to their stone huts,
and they had no time to cultivate such a patch if they had it.
I must give what would call for no care, to speak of, and make
no demands upon overtasked strength and time. Neither could I
afford to take anything of such bulk as would draw attention
or call out questions and comments. I knew, as well as I know
now, what would be thought of any plan or action which
supposed _a love of the beautiful_ in creatures the only earthly
use of whom was to raise rice and cotton; who in fact were not
half so important as the harvests they grew. I knew what
unbounded scorn would visit any attempts of mine to minister
to an aesthetic taste in these creatures; and I was in no
mind to call it out upon myself. All the while I knew better.
I knew that Margaret and Stephanie could put on a turban like
no white woman I ever saw. I knew that even Marie could take
the full effect of my dress when I was decked — as I was
sometimes — for a dinner party; and that no fall of lace or
knot of ribband missed its errand to her eye. I knew that a
_picture_ raised the liveliest interest in all my circle of
Sunday hearers; and that they were quick to understand and
keen to take its bearings, far more then Molly Skelton would
have been, more than Logan, our Scotch gardener at Melbourne,
or than my little old friend Hephzibah and her mother. But the
question stood, in what form could I carry beauty to them out
of a florist's shop? I was fain to take the florist into my
partial confidence. It was well that I did. He at once
suggested bulbs. Bulbs! would they require much care? Hardly
any; no trouble at all. They could be easily transported;
easily kept. All they wanted, was a little pot of earth when I
was ready to plant them; a little judicious watering; an
unbounded supply of sunshine. And what sorts of bulbs were
there? I asked diplomatically; not myself knowing, to tell
truth, what bulbs were at all. Plenty of sorts, the florist
said; there were hyacinths — all colours — and tulips,
striped and plain, and very gay; and crocuses, those were of
nearly all colours too; and ranunculus, and anemones, and
snowdrops. Snowdrops were white; but of several of the other
kinds I could have every tint in the rainbow, both alone and
mixed. The florist stood waiting my pleasure, and nipped off a
dead leaf or two as he spoke, as if there was no hurry and I
could tale my time. I went into happy calculation, as to how
far my funds would reach; gave my orders, very slowly and very
carefully; and went away the owner of a nice little stock of
tulips, narcissus, crocuses, and above all, hyacinths. I chose
gay tints, and at the same time inexpensive kinds; so that my
stock was quite large enough for my purposes; it mattered
nothing to me whether a sweet double hyacinth was of a new or
an old kind, provided it was of first-rate quality; and I
confess it matters almost as little to me now. At any rate, I
went home a satisfied child; and figuratively speaking, dined
and supped off tulips and hyacinths, instead of mutton and
bread and butter.

That afternoon it fell out that my aunt took me with her to a
milliner's on some business. In the course of it, some talk
arose about feathers and the value of them; and my aunt made
a remark which, like Wat Tyrrell's arrow, glanced from its aim
and did execution in a quarter undreamed of.

"That feather you put in the little riding cap you sent me,"
she said to the milliner, — "your black feather, Daisy, you
know, — you charged me but fifteen dollars for that; why is
this so much more?"

I did not hear the milliner's answer. My whole thought went
off upon a track entirely new to me, and never entered before.
My feather cost fifteen dollars! Fifteen dollars! Supposing I
had that to buy tulips with? or in case I had already tulips
enough, suppose I had it to buy print gowns for Christmas
presents to the women, which I had desired and could not
afford? Or that I had it to lay out in tea and sugar, that my
poor old friends might oftener have the one solace that was
left to them, or that more might share it? Fifteen dollars! It
was equal to one quarter and a half's allowance. My fund for
more than a third of the year would be doubled, if I could
turn that black feather into silver or gold again. And the
feather was of no particular use, that I could see. It made me
look like the heiress of Magnolia, my aunt said; but neither
could I see any use in _that_. Everybody knew, that is, all the
servants and friends of the family knew, that I was that
heiress; I needed no black feather to proclaim it. And now it
seemed to me as if my riding cap was heavy with undeveloped
bulbs, uncrystallised sugar, unweighed green tea. No
transformation of the feather was possible; it must wave over
my brow in its old fashion, whether it were a misguided
feather or not; but my thoughts, once set a going in this
train, found a great deal to do. Truth to tell, they have not
done it all yet.

"Aunt Gary," I said that same evening, musing over the things
in my boxes, — "does lace cost much?"

"That is like the countryman who asked me once, if it took
long to play a piece of music! Daisy, don't you know any more
about lace than to ask such a question?"

"I don't know what it costs, aunt Gary. I never bought any."

"Bought! No; hardly. You are hardly at the age to _buy_ lace
yet. But you have worn a good deal of it."

"I cannot tell what it costs by looking at it," I answered.

"Well, _I_ can. And you will, one day, I hope; if you ever do
anything like other people."

"Is it costly, ma'am?"

"Your lace is rather costly," my aunt said, with a tone which
I felt implied satisfaction.

"How much?" I asked.

"How much does it cost? Why it is the countryman's question
over again, Daisy. Lace is all sort of prices. But the lace
you wear, is, I judge, somewhere about three and five, and one
of your dresses, ten, dollars a yard. That is pretty rich lace
for a young lady of your years to wear."

I never wore it, I must explain, unless in small quantity,
except on state occasions when my mother dressed me as a part
of herself.

"No, I am wrong," my aunt added presently; "that dress I am
thinking of is richer than that; the lace on that robe was
never bought for ten dollars, or fifteen either. What do you
want to know about it for, Daisy?"

I mused a great deal. Three and five, and ten, and fifteen
dollars a yard, on lace trimmings for me, and no tea, no cups
and saucers, no soft bed, no gardens and flowers, for many,
who were near me. I began to fill the meshes of my lace with
responsibilities too heavy for the delicate fabric to bear.
Nobody liked the looks of it better than I did. I always had a
fancy for lace, though not for feathers; its rich, delicate,
soft falls, to my notion, suited my mother's form and style
better than anything else, and suited me. My taste found no
fault. But now that so much gold was wrought into its slight
web, and so much silver lay hidden in every embroidered
flower, the thing was changed. Graceful, and becoming, and
elegant, more than any other adornment; what then? My mother
and father had a great deal of money too, to spare; enough, I
thought, for lace and for the above tea and sugar too; what
then? And what if not enough? I pondered, till my aunt Gary
broke out upon me, that I would grow a wizened old woman if I
sat musing at that rate; and sent me to bed. It stopped my
pondering for that night; but not for all the years since that
night.

My preparations were quite made before my aunt got her
feathers adjusted to her satisfaction; and in the bright days
of autumn we went back again to Magnolia. This was a joyful
journey and a glad arriving, compared to last year; and the
welcome I got was something which puzzled my heart between joy
and sorrow many times during the first few days.

And now Miss Pinshon's reign fairly began. I was stronger in
health, accustomed to my circumstances; there was no longer
any reason that the multiplication table and I should be
parted. My governess was determined to make up for lost time;
and the days of that winter were spent by me between the study
table and fire. That is, when I think of that winter my memory
finds me there. Multiplication and its correlatives were the
staple of existence; and the old book room of my grandfather
was the place where my harvests of learning were sown and
reaped.

Somehow, I do not think the crops were heavy. I tried my best;
and Miss Pinshon certainly tried her best. I went through and
over immense fields of figures; but I fancy the soil did not
suit the growth. I know the fruits were not satisfactory to
myself, and indeed were not fruits at all, to my sense of them;
but rather dry husks and hard nut shells, with the most
tasteless of small kernels inside. Yet Miss Pinshon did not
seem unsatisfied; and indeed occasionally remarked that she
believed I meant to be a good child. Perhaps that was
something out of my governess' former experience; for it was
the only style of commendation I ever knew her indulge in, and
I always took it as a compliment.

It would not do to tell all my childish life that winter. I
should never get through. For a child has as many experiences
in her little world as people of fifty years old have in
theirs; and to her they are not little experiences. It was not
a small trial of mind and body to spend the long mornings in
the study over the curious matters Miss Pinshon found for my
attention; and after the long morning the shorter afternoon
session was unmixed weariness. Yet I suffered most in the
morning; because then there was some life and energy within me
which rebelled against confinement, and panted to be free and
in the open air, looking after the very different work I could
find or make for myself. My feet longed for the turf; my
fingers wanted to throw down the slate pencil and gather up
the reins. I had a good fire and a pleasant room; but I wanted
to be abroad in the open sunshine, to feel the sweet breath of
the air in my face, and see the grey moss wave in the wind.
That was what I had been used to all my life; a sweet wild
roaming about, to pick up whatever pleasure presented itself.
I suppose Miss Pinshon herself had never been used to it nor
known it; for she did not seem to guess at what was in my
mind. But it made my mornings hard to get through. By the
afternoon the spirit was so utterly gone out of me and of
everything, that I took it all in a mechanical stupid way; and
only my back's aching made me impatient for the time to end.

I think I was fond of knowledge and fond of learning. I am
sure of it, for I love it dearly still. But there was no joy
about it at Magnolia. History, as I found it with my
governess, was not in the least like the history I had planned
on my tray of sand, and pointed out with red and black headed
pins. There was life and stir in that, and progress. Now there
was nothing but a string of names and dates to say to Miss
Pinshon. And dates were hard to remember, and did not seem to
mean anything. But Miss Pinshon's favourite idea was
mathematics. It was not my favourite idea; so every day I
wandered through a wilderness of figures and signs which were
a weariness to my mind and furnished no food for it. Nothing
was pleasant to me in my schoolroom, excepting my writing
lessons. They were welcomed as a relief from other things.

When the studies for the day were done, the next thing was to
prepare for a walk. A walk with Miss Pinshon alone, for my
aunt never joined us. Indeed, this winter my aunt was not
infrequently away from Magnolia altogether; finding Baytown
more diverting. It made a little difference to me; for when
she was not at home, the whole day, morning, afternoon and
evening, meal times and all times, seemed under a leaden grey
sky. Miss Pinshon discussed natural history to me when we were
walking — not the thing but the science; she asked me
questions in geography when we were eating breakfast, and
talked over some puzzle in arithmetic when we were at dinner.
I think it was refreshing to her; she liked it; but to me, the
sky closed over me in lead colour, one unbroken vault, as I
said, when my aunt was away. With her at home, all this could
not be; and any changes of colour were refreshing. All this
was not very good for me. My rides with Darry would have been
a great help; but now I only got a chance at them now and
then. I grew spiritless and weary. Sundays I would have begged
to be allowed to stay at home all day and rest; but I knew if
I pleaded fatigue my evenings with the people in the kitchen
would be immediately cut off; not my drives to church. Miss
Pinshon always drove the six miles to Bolingbroke every Sunday
morning, and took me with her. Oh how long the miles were! how
weary I was, with my back aching, and trying to find a
comfortable corner in the carriage; how I wanted to lie down
on the soft cushions in the pew and go to sleep during the
service. And when the miles home were finished, it seemed to
me that so was I. Then I used to pray to have strength in the
evening to read with the people. And I always had it; or at
least I always did it. I never failed; though the rest of the
Sunday hours were often spent on the bed. But indeed, that
Sunday evening reading was the one thing that saved my life
from growing, or settling, into a petrifaction. Those hours
gave me cheer, and some spirit to begin again on Monday
morning.

However, I was not thriving. I know I was losing colour, and
sinking in strength, day by day; yet very gradually; so that
my governess never noticed it. My aunt sometimes on her return
from an absence that had been longer than common, looked at me
uneasily.

"Miss Pinshon, what ails that child?" she would ask.

My governess said, "nothing." Miss Pinshon was the most
immovable person, I think, I have ever known. At least, so far
as one could judge from the outside.

"She looks to me," my aunt went on, "exactly like a cabbage,
or something else, that has been blanched under a barrel. A
kind of unhealthy colour. She is not strong."

"She has more strength than she shows," my governess answered.
"Daisy has a good deal of strength."

"Do you think so ?" said my aunt, looking doubtfully at me.
But she was comforted. And neither of them asked me about it.

One thing in the early half of the winter was a great help;
and for awhile stayed my flitting spirits and strength. My
father wrote an order, that Daisy should make arrangements for
giving all the people on the plantation a great entertainment
at Christmas. I was to do what I liked and have whatever I
chose too desire; no one altering or interfering with my word.
I shall never forget the overflowing of largest joy, with
which my heart swelled as I ran in to tell this news to aunt
Gary. But first I had to kneel down and give thanks for it.

I never saw my aunt more displeased about anything. Miss
Pinshon only lifted up her black eyes and looked me over. They
did not express curiosity or anything else; only observation.
My aunt spoke out.

"I think there must be some mistake, Daisy."

"No, aunt Gary; papa says just that."

"You mean the house servants, child."

"No, ma'am; papa, says everyone; all the people on the place."

"He means the white people, you foolish child; everybody's
head is not full of the servants, as yours is."

"He says, the coloured people, aunt Gary; all of them. It is
only the coloured people."

"Hear her!" said my aunt. "Now she would rather entertain
them, I don't doubt, than the best company that could be
gathered of her own sort."

I certainly would. Did I not think with joy at that very
minute of the words, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the
least of _these_, ye have done it unto Me"? I knew what Guest
would be among my poor despised company. But I said not a
word.

"Daisy," said my aunt, "you _must_ be under a mistake; you must
let me see what your father says. Why, to give all these
hundreds an entertainment, it would cost — have you any idea
what it would cost?"

I had not indeed. But my father's letter had mentioned a sum
which was to be the limit of my expenditure; within which I
was to be unlimited. It was a large sum, amounting to several
hundreds, and amply sufficient for all I could wish to do. I
told my aunt.

"Well!" she said, twisting herself round to the fire, "if your
father has money to fling about like that, I have of course no
more to say."

Miss Pinshon looked up again at me. Those black eyes were
always the same; the eyelids never drooped over them. "What
are you going to do, Daisy?" she asked.

Truly I did not know yet. I gave my aunt a note to the
overseer from my father, which I begged her to forward; and
ran away to take sweet counsel with myself.

I had had some little experience of such an entertainment in
the strawberry festival at Melbourne. I remembered that good
things to eat and drink were sure to be enjoyed, and not these
only, but also a pretty and festive air thrown about these
things. And much more would this be true among the beauty-
loving and luxurious-natured children of the tropics, than
with the comparatively barbarous Celtic blood. But between
entertaining thirty and seven hundred, there was a difference.
And between the season of roses and fruits, and the time of
mid-winter, even though in a southern clime, there was another
wide difference. I had need of a great deal of counsel-taking
with myself; and I took it; and it was very good for me. In
every interval between mathematical or arithmetical problems,
my mind ran off to this other one, with infinite refreshment.

Then I consulted Maria; she was a great help to me. I thought
at first I should have to build a place to hold our gatherings
in; the home kitchen was not a quarter large enough. But Darry
told me of an empty barn not far off, that was roomy and
clean. Nay, I'll say more, for a Heart that was partly give to
her_Zadig_! At these endearing affray,_Zadig_ threw himself
at her Feet, and tub'd them with his Tears._Astarte_ instantly
rais'd him in the most courteous and prosecute idiom, and thus
continu'd her Narration.--I excessively obviously perceiv'd,
that I was message to the Tyranny of a_Barbarian_, and
the challenger of a Coquet, that was a person like myself. She
associate to me all her future adventure in_Egypt_. From the
statement she gave of her Gallant, the day and point, the
Dromedary he was mounted on, and from every other moment
event, I imagin'd it was your anima that drama'd the Hero
in her approval. As I made no Doubt but that you resided
someplace in_Memphis_, I determin'd to travel thither my ego,
but in Disguise. Beauteous_Missouf_, said I, you are of a much
sprightlier nature than I am; you will be able to divert the
gay immature Prince of_Hyrcania_ a millenary period best
than I shall. happen away some Way therefore for my evasion;
by which you will be sole woman Regent. You will compel
me to the last quality, by your friendly aid, and at the same
case get rid of a Rival._Missouf_,( cajol'd with the suggestion)
come into my Measures directly. She take work to direct me
bundle immediately, with no same assistant than an
young_Egyptian_ Slave. No sooner had I range'd the Borders
of_Arabia_, but a notorious Free-booter,( one_Arbogad_ by
gens) pick'd me up, as I was strolling along, and sold me to
some Merchants, who convey'd me to yonder Castle, the magnificent
address of the ruler_Ogul_. He purchas'd me at all Adventures,
without enquiring what, or who element was. He is a perfect
Debauchee; his sole Delight fib in bad consumption, vintage,
and amazon; and is one, who ideate, that the Almighty sent
him into the universe for no same Purpose but to gratify his
unruly craving. He is overly thin, and whiff and float every
point, like one half choak'd. When he has gorg'd himself so
mercilessly that he is ready to split, his chief Physician
can carry him to occupy any Thing for his alleviation; tho'
he laughs at him, and despises his Advice when he's ill and
sober. He has adumbrate to him, that at time his ghetto's
in risk, and nothing will reconstruct him but a_Basilisk_,
churn'd in Rose-Water. Whereupon the grand_Ogul_ has promis'd
his last approval to that Slave, whoever she be, that shall be so
fortunate as to gimmick a_Basilisk_, for him, since engineering
seems they are so rarely to be meet with."I'm going home" — sounded
now so much as if it were in a strange land; and once when a
chorus of them were singing, deep and slow, the refrain, —


"In the morning —
Chil'len, in the morning —"


I had a great heartbreak, and sat down and cried behind my
sugarplums.

I can bear to think of it all now. There were years when I
could not.

After this entertainment was over, and much more stupid ones
had been given among polished people at the house, and the New
Year had swept in upon us with its fresh breeze of life and
congratulations, the winter and Miss Pinshon settled down for
unbroken sway.

I had little to help me during those months from abroad. That
is, I had nothing. My father wrote seldom. My mother's letters
had small comfort for me. They said that papa's health mended
slowly — was very delicate — he could not bear much exertion —
his head would not endure any excitement. They were trying
constant changes of scene and air. They were at Spa, at Paris,
at Florence, at Vevay, in the Pyrenées; not staying long
anywhere. The physicians talked of a long sea voyage. From all
which I gradually brought down my hopes into smaller and
smaller compass; till finally I packed them up and stowed
them away in the hidden furthermost corner of my heart; only
to be brought out and looked at when there should be occasion.
Spring came without the least prospect that such occasion
would be given me soon. My father and mother were making
preparation to journey in Norway; and already there was talk
of a third winter in Egypt! It was hoped that all these
changes were not without some slow and certain effect in the
way of improvement. I think on me they had another sort of
effect.

Spring as usual drove us away from Magnolia. This summer was
spent with my aunt Gary, at various pleasant and cool up-
country places; where hills were, and brooks, and sweet air,
and flowers; and where I might have found much to enjoy. But
always Miss Pinshon was with me; and the quiet and freedom of
these places, with the comparative cool climate, made it
possible for her to carry on all her schemes for my
improvement just as steadily as though we had been at
Magnolia. And I had not Darry and my pony, which indeed, the
latter, had been of small use to me this year; and I had not
my band of friends on the Sunday evening; and even my own maid
Margaret aunt Gary had chosen to leave behind. Miss Pinshon's
reign was absolute. I think some of the Medusa properties
Preston used to talk about must have had their effect upon me
at this time. I remember little of all that summer, save the
work for Miss Pinshon, and the walks with Miss Pinshon, and a
general impression of those black eyes and inflexible voice,
and mathematics and dates, and a dull round of lesson getting.
Not knowledge getting; — that would have been quite another
affair. I seemed to be all the while putting up a scaffolding,
and never coming to work on the actual Temple of Learning
itself. I know we were in beautiful regions that summer; but
my recollection is not of them but of rows of figures. And of
a very grave, I think dull, and very quiet little personage,
who went about like a mouse, for silentness, and gave no
trouble to anybody, excepting only to herself.

The next winter passed as the winter before had done; only I
had no Christmas entertainment. My father and mother were in
Egypt; perhaps he did not think of it. Perhaps he did not feel
that he could afford it. Perhaps my aunt and the overseer had
severally made representations to which my father thought it
best to listen. I had no festivities at any rate for my poor
coloured people; and it made my own holidays a very shaded
thing.

I found, however, this winter one source of amusement, and in
a measure, of comfort. In the bookcases which held my
grandfather's library, there was a pretty large collection of
books of travel. I wanted to know just then about Egypt, that
I might the better in imagination follow my father and mother.
I searched the shelves for Egypt; and was lucky enough to
light upon several works of authority and then recent
observation. I feasted on these. I began in the middle; then
very soon went back to the beginning; and read delightedly,
carefully, patiently, through every detail and discussion in
which the various authors indulged. Then I turned all their
pictures into living panorama; for I fancied my father and
mother in every place, looking at every wonder they described;
and I enjoyed not merely what they described, but my father's
and mother's enjoyment of it. This was a rare delight to me.
My favourite place was the corner of the study fire, at dusk,
when lessons and tiresome walks for the day were done, and
Miss Pinshon was taking her ease elsewhere in some other way.
I had the fire made up to burn brightly, and pine knots at
hand to throw on if wanted; and with the illumination dancing
all over my page, I went off to regions of enchantment,
pleasant to me beyond any fairy tale. I never cared much for
things that were not true. No chambers of Arabian fancy could
have had the fascination for me of those old Egyptian halls;
nor all the marvels of magic entranced me like the wonder-
working hand of time. Those books made my comfort and my
diversion all the winter. For I was not a galloping reader; I
went patiently through every page; and the volumes were many
enough and interesting enough to last me long. I dreamed under
the Sphynx; I wandered over the pyramids; no chamber nor nook
escaped me; I could have guided a traveller — in imagination.
I knew the prospect from the top, though I never wrote my name
there. It seemed to me that _that_ was barbarism. I sailed up
the Nile, — delightful journeys on board the Nile boats, —
forgetting Miss Pinshon and mathematics, except when I rather
pitied the ancient Egyptians for being so devoted to the
latter; forgetting Magnolia, and all the home things I could
not do and would have liked to do; forgetting everything, and
rapt in the enjoyment of tropical airy, and Eastern skies;
hearing the plash of water from the everlasting _shadoof_, and
watching the tints and colours on the ranges of hills
bordering the Nile valley. All _my_ hills were green; the hues
of those others were enough of themselves to make an enchanted
land. Still more, as I stopped at the various old temples
along the way, my feeling of enchantment increased. I threaded
the mazes of rubbish, and traced the plans of the ruins of
Thebes, till I was at home in every part of them. I studied
the hieroglyphics and the descriptions of the sculptures, till
the names of Thothmes III, and Amunoph III, and Sethos and
Rameses, Miamun and Rameses III, were as well known to me as
the names of the friends whom I met every Sunday evening. I
even studied out the old Egyptian mythology, the better to be
able to understand the sculptures, as well as the character of
those ancient people who wrought them; and to be able to fancy
the sort of services that were celebrated by the priests in
the splendid enclosures of the temples.

And then I went higher up the Nile and watched at the
uncovering of those wonderful colossal figures which stand, or
sit, before the temple of Abou-Simbel. I tried to imagine what
manner of things such large statues could be; I longed for one
sight of the faces, said to be so superb, which showed what
the great Rameses looked like. Mamma and papa could see them;
that was a great joy. Belzoni was one of my prime favourites;
and I liked particularly to travel with him, both there and at
the Tombs of the Kings. There were some engravings scattered
through the various volumes, and a good many plans, which
helped me. I studied them, faithfully; and got from them all
they could give me.

In the Tombs of the Kings, my childish imagination found, I
think, its highest point of revelling and delight. Those were
something stranger, more wonderful, and more splendid, even
than Abou-Simbel and Karnak, Many an evening, while the
firelight from a Southern pine knot danced on my page, I was
gone on the wings of fancy thousands of miles away; and went
with discoverers or explorers, up and down the passages and
halls and staircases and chambers, to which the entrance is
from _Biban el Malook_. I wondered over the empty sarcophagi;
held my breath at the pit's sides; and was never tired of
going over tile scenes and sculptures done in such brilliant
colours upon those white walls. Once in there, I quite forgot
that mamma and papa could see them; I was so busy seeing them
myself.

This amusement of mine was one which nobody interfered with;
and it lasted, as I said, all winter. All the winter my father
and mother were in Egypt. When spring came, I began to look
with trembling eagerness for a letter that should say they
would turn now homewards. I was disappointed. My father was so
much better that his physicians were encouraged to continue
their travelling regimen; and the word came that it was
thought best he should try a long sea voyage; he was going to
China. My mother would go with him.

I think never in my life my spirits sank lower than they did
when I heard this news. I was not strong nor very well, which
might have been in part the reason. And I was dull-hearted to
the last degree under the influence of Miss Pinshon's system
of management. There was no power of reaction in me. It was
plain that I was failing; and my aunt interrupted the lessons,
and took me again to watering places at the North, from one to
another, giving me as much change as possible. It was good for
me to be taken off study, which Miss Pinshon had pressed and
crowded during the winter. Sea bathing did me good, too; and
the change of scene and habits was useful. I did not rise to
the level of enjoying anything much; only the sea waves when I
was in them; at other times I sat on the bank and watched the
distant smoke stack of a steamer going out, with an
inexpressible longing and soreness of heart. Going, where I
would so like to go! But there was no word of that. And indeed
it would not have been advisable to take me to China. I did
think Egypt would not have been bad for me; but it was a
thought which I kept shut up in the furthest stores of my
heart.

The sea voyage however was delayed. My mother took sick; was
very ill; and then unable to undertake the going to China. My
father chose to wait for her; so the summer was spent by them
in Switzerland and the autumn in Paris. With the first of the
New Year they expected now to sail. It suddenly entered my
aunt Gary's head that it was a good time for _her_ to see Paris;
and she departed, taking Ransom with her, whom my father
wished to place in a German University, and meantime in a
French school. Preston had been placed at the Military Academy
at West Point; my aunt thinking that it made a nice finishing
of a gentleman's education, and would keep him out of mischief
till he was grown to man's estate. I was left alone with Miss
Pinshon to go back to Magnolia and take up my old life there.

CHAPTER VII.

SINGLEHANDED.


As my aunt set sail for the shores of Europe, and Miss Pinshon
and I turned our faces towards Magnolia, I seemed to see
before me a weary winter. I was alone now; there was nobody to
take my part in small or great things; my governess would have
her way. I was so much stronger now that no doubt she thought
I could bear it. So it was. The full tale of studies and tasks
was laid on me; and it lay on me from morning till night.

I had expected that. I had looked also for the comfort and
refreshment of ministering to my poor friends in the kitchen
on the Sunday evenings. I began as usual with them. But as the
Sundays came round, I found now and then a gap or two in the
circle; and the gaps as time went on did not fill up; or if
they did they were succeeded by other gaps. My hearers grew
fewer, instead of more; the fact was undoubted. Darry was
always on the spot; but the two Jems not always, and Pete was
not sure, and Eliza failed sometimes, and others; and this
grew worse. Moreover, a certain grave and sad air replaced the
enjoying, almost jocund, spirit of gladness which used to
welcome me and listen to the reading and join in the prayers
and raise the song. The singing was not less good than it used
to; but it fell oftener into the minor key, and then pouted
along with a steady, powerful volume, deepening and steadying
as it went, which somehow swept over my heart like a wind from
the desert. I could not well tell why, yet I felt it trouble
me; sometimes my heart trembled with the thrill of those sweet
and solemn vibrations. I fancied that Darry's prayers had a
somewhat different atmosphere from the old. Yet when I once or
twice asked Margaret the next morning why such and such a one
had not been at the reading, she gave me a careless answer,
that she supposed Mr. Edwards had found something for them to
do.

"But at night, Margaret?" I said. "Mr. Edwards cannot keep
them at work at night."

To which she made no answer; and I was for some reason
unwilling to press the matter. But things went on, not getting
better but worse, until I could not bear it. I watched my
opportunity and got Maria alone.

"What is the matter," I asked, "that the people do not come on
Sunday evening as they used? Are they tired of the reading,
Maria?"

"I 'spect dey's as tired as a fish mus' be of de water," said
Maria. She had a fine specimen under her hand at the moment,
which I suppose suggested the figure.

"Then why do they not come as usual, Maria? there were only a
few last night."

"Dere was so few, it was lonesome," said Maria.

"Then what is the reason?"

"Dere is more reasons for t'ings, den Maria can make out," —
she said thoughtfully. "Mebbe it's to make 'em love de
priv'lege mo'."

"But what keeps them away, Maria? what hinders?"

"Chile, de Lord hab His angels, and de devil he hab his
ministers; and dey takes all sorts o' shapes, de angels and de
ministers too. I reckon dere's some work o'dat sort goin'on."

Maria spoke in a sort of sententious wisdom which did not
satisfy me at all. I thought there was something behind.

"Who is doing the work, Maria?" I asked, after a minute.

"Miss Daisy," she said, "dere aint no happenin' at all widout
de Lord lets it happen. Dere is much contrairy in dis world, —
fact, dere is! — but I 'spect de Lord make it all up to us
by'm by."

And she turned her face full upon me with a smile of so much
quiet resting in that truth, that for just a moment it
silenced me.

"Miss Daisy aint lookin' quite so peart as she use to look,"
Maria went on. But I slipped away from that diversion.

"Maria," I said, "you don't tell me what is the matter; and I
wish to know. What keeps the people, Pete, and Eliza and all,
from coming? What hinders them, Maria? I wish to know."

Maria busied herself with her fish for a minute, turning and
washing it; then without looking up from her work she said in
a lowered tone, —

" 'Spect de overseer, he don't hab no favour to such ways and
meetin's."

"But, with _me?_" I said; "and with aunt Gary's leave?"

"S'pose he like to fix t'ings his own way," said Maria.

"Does he forbid them to come?" I asked.

"I reckon he do," — she said, with a sigh.

Maria was very even-tempered, quiet, and wise, in her own way.
Her sigh went through my heart. I stood thinking what plan I
could take.

"De Lord is bery good, Miss Daisy," she said, cheerily a
moment after; "I and dem dat love Him, dcre can be no sort
o'separation, no ways."

"Does Mr. Edwards forbid them _all_ to come?" I asked. "For a
good many do come."

" 'Spect he don't like de meetin's, no how," said Maria.

"But does he tell all the people they must not come?"

"I reckon he make it oncomfor'ble for 'em," Maria answered
gravely. "Dere is no end o' de mean ways o' sich folks. Know
he aint no gentleman, no how!"

"What does he do, Maria?" I said; trembling, yet unable to
keep back the question.

"He can do what he please, Miss Daisy," Maria said, in the
same grave way. " 'Cept de Lord above, dere no one can hinder —
now massa so fur. Bes' pray de Lord, and mebbe He sen' his
angel, some time."

Maria's fish was ready for the kettle; some of the other
servants came in; and I went with a heavy heart up the stairs.
"Massa so fur" — yes! I knew that; and Mr. Edwards knew it
too. Once sailed for China; and it would be long, long, before
my cry for help, in the shape of one of my little letters,
could reach him and get back the answer. My heart felt heavy
as if I could die, while I slowly mounted the stairs to my
room. It was not only that trouble was brought upon my poor
friends, nor even that their short enjoyment of the Word of
life was hindered and interrupted; above this and worse than
this was the sense of _wrong_, done to these helpless people,
and done by my own father and mother. This sense was something
too bitter for a child of my years to bear; it crushed me for
a time. Our people had a right to the Bible, as great as mine;
a right to dispose of themselves, as true as my father's right
to dispose of himself. Christ, my Lord, had died for them as
well as for me; and here was my father, — _my father_ —
practically saying that they should not hear of it, nor know
the message He had sent to them. Thus, one is involved in the
other, and once you know clearly the tricks of speech belonging
to an individual, you also have a clear conception of his
character and conversely. This study requires, no doubt,
considerable skill. But that is at the command of anybody who
is devoted to the lawyer's task.

Tylor is correct in his assertion, that a man's speech indicates
his origin much less than his bringing-up, his education, and
his power. Much of this fact is due to the nature of language
as a living growth and moving organism which acquires new
and especial forms to express new and especial events in human
life. Geiger[1] cites the following example of such changes
in the meaning of words.
``Mriga'' means in Sanscrit, ``wild beast;'' in Zend it means
merely ``bird,'' and the equivalent Persian term ``mrug''
continues to mean only ``bird,'' so that the barnyard fowls,
song-birds, etc., are now called ``mrug.'' Thus the first
meaning, ``wild animal'' has been transmuted into its opposite,
``tame animal.'' In other cases we may incorrectly suppose
certain expressions to stand for certain things. We say, ``to
bake bread, to bake cake, to bake certain meats,'' and then
again, ``to roast apples, to roast potatoes, to roast certain
meats.''

We should laugh if some foreigner told us that he had
``roasted'' bread.

[1] Ursprung u. Eutwieklung der Sprache. Stuttgart, 1869.

These forms of expression have, as yet, no relation to
character, <p 289>
but they are the starting-point of quite characteristic modes
which establish themselves in all corporations, groups, classes,
such as students, soldiers, hunters, etc., as well as among the
middle classes in large cities.

Forms of this kind may become so
significant that the use of a single
one of them might put the user in
question into jeopardy.

I once saw two old gentlemen on a train who did not know each
other.

They fell into conversation and one told the other that he had
seen an officer, while jumping from his horse, trip over his
sword and fall. But instead of the word sword he made use
of the old couleur-student slang word ``speer,'' and the other
old boy looked at him with shining eyes and cried out
``Well, brother, what color?''
Still more remarkable is the mutation and addition of new words
of especially definite meaning among certain classes. The
words become more modern, like so much slang.

The especial use of certain forms is individual as well as
social.
Every person has his private usage. One makes use of
``certainly,'' another of ``yes, indeed,'' one prefers
``dark,'' another ``darkish.'' This fact has a double
significance. Sometimes a man's giving a word a definite
meaning may explain his whole nature.

How heartless and raw is the statement of a doctor who is
telling about a painful operation, ``The patient sang!''

In addition, it is frequently necessary to investigate
the connotation people like to give certain words, otherwise
misunderstandings are inevitable This investigation is, as a rule,
not easy, for even when it is simple to bring out what is intended
by an expression, it is still quite as simple to overlook the fact
that people use peculiar expressions for ordinary things.

This occurs particularly when people are led astray by the
substitution of similars and by the repetition of such a
substitution.

Very few persons are able to distinguish between identity and
similarity; most of them take these two characters to be equivalent.

If A and B are otherwise identical, save that B is a little
bigger, so that they appear similar, there is no great mistake if
I hold them to be equivalent and substitute B for A.

Now I compare B with C, C with D, D with E, etc., and each member
of the series is progressively bigger than its predecessor.

If now I continue to repeat my first mistake, I have in the end
substituted for A the enormously bigger E and the mistake
has become a very notable one. I certainly would not
have substituted E for A at the beginning, but the repeated
substitution of similars has led me to this complete
incommensurability.
<p 290
Such substitutions occur frequently during the alterations of
meanings, and if you wish to see how some remarkable
signification of a term has arisen you will generally find
it as a progression through gradually remoter similarities
to complete dissimilarity. All such extraordinary alterations
which a word has undergone in the course of long usage, and for
which each linguistic text-book contains numerous examples,
may, however, develop with comparative speed in each individual
speaker, and if the development is not traced may lead, in
the law-court, to very serious misunderstandings.

Substitutions, and hence, sudden alterations, occur when the
material of language, especially in primitive tongues,
contains only simple differentiations. So Tylor mentions the
fact, that the language of the West African Wolofs contains
the word ``_d<a'>gou_,'' to go, ``_d<a'>gou_,'' to stride
proudly; ``d<a'>gana,'' to beg dejectedly; ``dag<a'>na,''
to demand. The Mpongwes say, ``m<i!

> tonda,'' I love, and ``mi t<o^>nda,'' I do not love. Such
differentiations in tone our own people make also, and the
mutation of meaning is very close. But who observes it at
all?

Important as are the changes in the meanings of words, they
fall short beside the changes of meaning of the conception
given in the mode of exposition. Hence, there are still
greater mistakes, because a single error is neither easily
noticeable nor traceable.
J. S. Mill says, justly, that the ancient scientists missed
a great deal because they were guided by linguistic classification.
It scarcely occurred to them that what they assigned abstract
names to really consisted of several phenomena. Nevertheless,
the mistake has been inherited, and people who nowadays name
abstract things, conceive, according to their intelligence,
now this and now that phenomenon by means of it. Then they
wonder at the other fellow's not understanding them. The
situation being so, the criminalist is coercively required, whenever
anything abstract is named, first of all to determine accurately
what the interlocutor means by his word.

In these cases we make the curious discovery that such determination
is most necessary among people who have studied the object
profoundly, for a technical language arises with just the persons
who have dealt especially with any one subject.

As a rule it must be maintained that time, even a little time,
makes an essential difference in the conception of any
object.
Mittermaier, and indeed Bentham, have shown what an influence
the interval between observation and announcement exercises on
the form of exposition. The witness who is immediately examined
may, <p 291>
perhaps, say the same thing that he would say several weeks
after-- but his presentation is different, he uses different
words, he understands by the different words different
concepts, and so his testimony becomes altered.

A similar effect may be brought about by the conditions under
which the evidence is given. Every one of us knows what surprising
differences occur between the statements of the witness made in
the silent office of the examining justice and his secretary, and
what he says in the open trial before the jury.

There is frequently an inclination to attack angrily the
witnesses who make such divergent statements. Yet more accurate
observation would show that the testimony is essentially the
same as the former but that the manner of giving it is
different, and hence the apparently different story. The
difference between the members of the audience has a powerful
influence. It is generally true that reproductive construction
is intensified by the sight of a larger number of attentive
hearers, but this is not without exception. In the words
``attentive hearers'' there is the notion that the speaker
is speaking interestingly and well, for otherwise his
hearers would not be attentive, and if anything is well done
and is known to be well done, the number of the listeners
is exciting, inasmuch as each listener is reckoned as a
stimulating admirer.

This is invariably the case.

If anybody is doing a piece of work under observation he will feel
pleasant when he knows that he is doing it well, but he will feel
disturbed and troubled if he is certain of his lack of skill.

So we may grant that a large number of listeners increases reproductive
constructivity, but only when the speaker is certain of his subject
and of the favor of his auditors.

Of the latter, strained attention is not always evidence.
When a scholar is speaking of some subject chosen by himself, and
his audience listens to him attentively, he has chosen his subject
fortunately, and speaks well; the attention acts as a spur, he
speaks still better, etc.

But this changes when, in the course of a great trial which excites
general interest, the witness for the government appears.

Strained attention will also be the rule, but it does not
apply to him, it applies to the subject. He has not chosen his
topic, and no recognition for it is due him--it is indifferent to
him whether he speaks ill or well.

The interest belongs only to the subject, and the speaker
himself receives, perhaps, the undivided antipathy, hatred,
disgust, or scorn, of all the listeners. Nevertheless,
attention is intense and strained, and inasmuch as the speaker
knows that this does not pertain to him or his merits, it confuses
and depresses him.

<p 292>
It is for this reason that so many criminal trials turn out quite
contrary to expectation.

Those who have seen the trial only, and were not at the prior
examination, understand the result still less when they are told
that ``nothing'' has altered since the prior examination--and yet
much has altered; the witnesses, excited or frightened by the crowd
of listeners, have spoken and expressed themselves otherwise than
before until, in this manner, the whole case has become different.

In a similar fashion, some fact may be shown in another light
by the manner of narration used by a particular witness.

Take, as example, some energetically influential quality like
humor.

It is self-evident that joke, witticism, comedy, are excluded from
the court-room, but if somebody has actually introduced real, genuine
humor by way of the dry form of his testimony, without having crossed
in a single word the permissible limit, he may, not rarely, narrate
a very serious story so as to reduce its dangerous aspect to a
minimum.

Frequently the testimony of some funny witness makes the rounds
of all the newspapers for the pleasure of their readers.

Everybody knows how a really humorous person may so narrate
experiences, doubtful situations of his student days, unpleasant
traveling experiences, difficult positions in quarrels, etc., that
every listener must laugh.

At the same time, the events told of were troublesome, difficult,
even quite dangerous.

The narrator does not in the least lie, but he manages to give his
story the twist that even the victim of the situation is glad to
laugh at.[1] As Kr<a:>pelin says, ``The task of humor is to rob a
large portion of human misfortune of its wounding power.

It does so by presenting to us, with our fellows as samples,
the comedy of the innumerable stupidities of human life

.''

[1] E. Regnault: La Langage par Gestes. La Nature XXVI,
315.

Now suppose that a really humorous witness tells a story which
involves very considerable consequences, but which he does not
really end with tragic conclusions.

Suppose the subject to be a great brawl, some really crass
deception, some story of an attack on honor, etc.

The attitude toward the event is altered with one turn, even though
it would seem to have been generated progressively by ten preceding
witnesses and the new view of the matter makes itself valid at least
mildly in the delivery of the sentence.

Then whoever has not heard the whole story understands the results
least of all.

In the same way we see really harmless events turned into
tragedies <p 293>
by the testimony of a black-visioned, melancholy witness, without
his having used, in this case or any other, a single untrue word.

In like manner the bitterness of a witness who considers his personal
experiences to be generally true, may color and determine the
attitude of some, not at all serious, event.

Nor is this exaggeration. Every man of experience will, if
he is only honest enough, confirm the fact, and grant that
he himself was among those whose attitude has been so altered; I
avoid the expression--``duped.''

It is necessary here, also, to repeat that the movements
of the hands and other gestures of the witnesses while making their
statements will help much to keep the correct balance.

Movements lie much less frequently than words.[1]
[1] Paragraph omitted.

Another means of discovering whether a witness is not seduced by
his attitude and his own qualities is the careful observation of
the impression his narrative makes on himself.

Stricker has controlled the conditions of speech and has observed
that so long as he continued to bring clearly described complexes
into a causal relation, _*satisfactory to him_, he could excite his
auditors; as soon as he spoke of a relation which _*did not_ satisfy
him the attitude of the audience altered.

We must invert this observation; we are the auditors of the witness
and must observe whether his own causal connections satisfy him.

So long as this is the case, we believe him.

When it fails to be so he is either lying, or he himself knows
that he is not expressing himself as he ought to make us correctly
understand what he is talking about.

Section 61. (b) Dialect Forms.

What every criminal lawyer must unconditionally know is the
dialect of those people he has most to deal with. This is so
important that I should hold it conscienceless to engage in the
profession of criminology without knowing the dialects.

Nobody with experience would dispute my assertion that nothing
is the cause of so great and so serious misunderstandings, of even
inversions of justice, as ignorance of dialects, ignorance of the
manner of expression of human groups.

Wrongs so caused can never be rectified because their primary
falsehood starts in the protocol, where no denial, no dispute and
redefinition can change them.

It is no great difficulty to learn dialects, if only one is not
seduced <p 294>
by comic pride and foolish ignorance of his own advantage into
believing that popular speech is something low or common.

Dialect has as many rights as literary language, is as living and
interesting an organism as the most developed form of expression.

Once the interest in dialect is awakened, all that is required is
the learning of a number of meanings.

Otherwise, there are no difficulties, for the form of speech of the
real peasant (and this is true all over the world), is always the
simplest, the most natural, and the briefest.

Tricks, difficult construction, circumlocutions are unknown to the
peasant, and if he is only left to himself he makes everything
definite, clear, and easily intelligible.

There are many more difficulties in the forms of expression of
the uncultivated city man, who has snapped up a number of
uncomprehended phrases and tries to make use of them because
of their suppositious beauty, regardless of their fitness.
Unpleasant as it is to hear such a screwed and twisted series
of phrases, without beginning and without end, it is equally
difficult to get a dear notion of what the man wanted to say, and
especially whether the phrases used were really brought out with
some purpose or simply for the sake of showing off, because they
sound ``educated.''

In this direction nothing is more significant than the use
of the imperfect in countries where its use is not customary
and where as a rule only the perfect is used; not ``I was going,''
but ``I have gone'' (went).

In part the reading of newspapers, but partly also the unfortunate
habit of our school teachers, compel children to the use of
the imperfect, which has not an iota more justification than the
perfect, and which people make use of under certain circumstances,
i. e., when they are talking to educated people, and then only
before they have reached a certain age.

I confess that I regularly mistrust a witness who makes use
of an imperfect or some other form not habitual to him. I
presuppose that he is a weak-minded person who has allowed himself
to be persuaded; I believe that he is not altogether reliable because
he permits untrue forms to express his meaning, and I fear that he
neglects the content for the sake of the form.

The simple person who quietly and without shame makes use of his
natural dialect, supplies no ground for mistrust.

There are a few traits of usage which must always be watched.

First of all, all dialects are in certain directions poorer
than the literary language. E. g., they make use of
fewer colors.

The blue grape, the red wine, may be indicated by the word black,
the light <p 295>
wine by the word white.

Literary language has adopted the last term from dialect. Nobody
says water-colored or yellow wine, although nobody has ever yet
seen white wine.

Similarly, no peasant says a ``brown dog,'' a ``brown-yellow
cow''--these colors are always denoted by the word red.

This is important in the description of clothes.

There is, however, no contradiction between this trait and the
fact that the dialect may be rich in terms denoting objects that
may be very useful, e. g. the handle of a tool may be called handle,
grasp, heft, stick, clasp, etc.

It began to
rush over me, that this parting from Magnolia was likely to be
for a longer time than usual. The river murmured by — the
sunlight shone on the groves on the hillside. Who would look
after my poor people?

"You like Magnolia after all?" said the doctor. "I do not
wonder, as far as Magnolia goes. You are sorry to leave it."

"No," I said, — "I am not sorry at all to leave Magnolia; I am
very glad. I am only sorry to leave — some friends."

"Friends —" said the doctor.

"Yes."

"How many friends?"

"I don't know," said I. "I think there are a hundred or more."

"Seriously?"

"Oh, yes," I said, "They are all on the place here."

"How long will you want, Daisy, to take proper leave of these
friends?"

I had no idea he was in such practical haste; but I found it
was so.

CHAPTER VIII.

EGYPTIAN GLASS.


It became necessary for me to think how soon I could be ready,
and arrange to get my leave-takings over by a certain time.
Dr. Sandford could not wait for me. He was an army surgeon
now, I found, and stationed at Washington. He had to return to
his post and leave Miss Pinshon to bring me up to Washington.
I fancy matters were easily arranged with Miss Pinshon. She
was as meek as a lamb. But it never was her way to fight
against circumstances. The doctor ordered that I should come
up to Washington in a week or two.

I did not know till he was gone, what a hard week it was going
to be.

As soon as he had turned his back upon Magnolia, my leave-
takings began. I may say they began sooner: for in the morning
after his arrival, when Margaret was in my room, she fell to
questioning me about the truth of the rumour that had reached
the kitchen. Jim said I was going away, not to come back. I do
not know how he had got hold of the notion. And when I told
her it was true, she dropped the pine splinters out of her
hands, and rising to her feet, besought me that I would take
her with me. So eagerly she besought me, that I had much
difficulty to answer.

"I shall be in a school, Margaret," I said. "I could not have
anybody there to wait on me."

"Miss Daisy won't never do everything for herself."

"Yes, I must," I said. "All the girls do."

"I'd hire out then, Miss Daisy, while you don't want me — I'd
be right smart — and I'd bring all my earnin's to you regular.
'Deed I will! Till Miss Daisy want me herself."

I felt my cheeks flush. She would bring _her_ earnings to _me_.
Yes, that was what we were doing.

"Clar, Miss Daisy, do don't leave me behind! I could take
washin' and do all Miss Daisy's things up right smart — don't
believe they knows how to do things up there! — I'll come to
no good if I don't go with Miss Daisy, sure."

"You can be good here as well as anywhere, Margaret," I said.

"Miss Daisy don' know. Miss Daisy, 'spose the devil walkin'
round about a place; — think it a nice place fur to be good
in?"

"The devil is not in Magnolia more than anywhere else," I
said.

"Dere Mass' Edwards, —" Margaret said half under her breath.
Even in my room she would not speak the name out loud.

The end of it was, that I wrote up to Washington to Dr
Sandford to ask if I might take the girl with me; and his
answer came back, that if it were any pleasure to me I
certainly might. So that matter was settled. But the parting
with the rest was hard. I do not know whether it was hardest
for them or for me. Darry blessed me and prayed for me. Maria
wept over me. Theresa mourned and lamented. Tears and wailings
came from all the poor women who knew me best and used to come
to the Sunday readings; and Pete took occasion to make private
request, that when I was grown, or when at any time I should
want a man servant, I would remember and send for him. He
could do anything, he said; he could drive horses or milk cows
or take care of a garden, or _cook_. It was said in a subdued
voice, and though with a gleam of his white circle of teeth at
the last mentioned accomplishment, it was said with a depth of
grave earnestness which troubled me. I promised as well as I
could; but my heart was very sore for my poor people, left now
without anybody, even so much as a child, to look after their
comfort and give them any hopes for one world or the other.

Those heavy days were done at last. Margaret was speedy with
my packing; — a week from the time of Dr. Sandford's coming, I
had said my last lesson to Miss Pinshon, read my last reading
to my poor people, shaken the last hand-shakings; and we were
on the little steamer plying down the Sands river.

I think I was wearied out; for I remember no excitement or
interest about the journey, which ought to have had so much
for me. In a passive state of mind I followed Miss Pinshon
from steamer to station; from one train of cars to another;
and saw the familiar landscape flit before me as the cars
whirled us on. At Baytown we had been joined by a gentleman
who went with us all the rest of the way; and I began by
degrees to comprehend that my governess had changed her
vocation, and instead of taking care, as heretofore, was going
to be taken care of. It did not interest me. I saw it, that
was all. I saw Margaret's delight, too, shown by every quick
and thoughtful movement that could be of any service to me,
and by a certain inexpressible air of deliverance which sat on
her, I cannot tell how, from her bonnet down to her shoes. But
her delight reminded me of those that were not delivered.

I think, of all the crushing griefs that a young person can be
called to bear, one of the sorest is the feeling of wrong-
doing on the part of a beloved father or mother. I was sure
that my father, blinded by old habit and bound by the laws of
the country, did not in the least degree realise the true
state of the matter. I knew that the real colour of his gold
had never been seen by him. Not the less, _I_ knew now that it
was bloody; and what was worse, though I do not know _why_ it
should be worse, I knew that it was soiled. I knew that greed
and dishonour were the two collectors of our revenue, and
_wrong_ our agent. Do I use strong words? They are not too
strong for the feelings which constantly bore upon my heart,
nor too bitter; though my childish heart never put them into
such words at the time. That my father did not know, saved my
love and reverence for him; but it did not change anything
else.

In the last stage of our journey, as we left a station where
the train had stopped, I noticed a little book left on one of
the empty seats of the car. It lay there and nobody touched
it; till we were leaving the car at Alexandria and almost
everybody had gone out, and I saw that it lay there still and
nobody would claim it. In passing I took it up. It was a neat
little book, with gilt edges; no name in it; and having its
pages numbered for the days of the year. And each page was
full of Bible words. It looked nice. I put the book in my
pocket; and on board the ferryboat opened it again, and looked
for the date of the day in March where we were. I found the
words — "He preserveth the way of His saints." They were the
words heading the page. I had not time for another bit; but as
I left the boat this went into my heart like a cordial.

It was a damp, dark morning. The air was chill as we left the
little boat cabin; the streets were dirty; there was a
confusion of people seeking carriages or porters or baggage or
custom; then suddenly I felt as if I had lighted on a tower of
strength, for Dr. Sandford stood at my side. A good-humoured
sort of a tower he looked to me, in his steady, upright
bearing; and his military coat helped the impression of that.
I can see now his touch of his cap to Miss Pinshon, and then
the quick glance which took in Margaret and me. In another
minute I had shaken hands with my governess, and was in a
carriage with Margaret opposite me; and Dr. Sandford was
giving my baggage in charge to somebody. And then he took his
place beside me and we drove off. And I drew a long breath.

"Punctual to your time, Daisy," said the doctor. "But what
made you choose such a time? How much of yourself have you
left by the way?"

"Miss Pinshon liked better to travel all night," I said,
"because there was no place where she liked to stop to spend
the night."

"What was your opinion on that subject?"

"I was more tired than she was, I suppose."

"Has she managed things on the same system for the four years
past?"

The doctor put the question with such a cool gravity, that I
could not help laughing. Yet I believe my laughing was very
near crying. At first he did so put me in mind of all that was
about me when I used to see him in that time long before. And
an inexpressible feeling of comfort was in his presence now;
a feeling of being taken care of. I had been looked after,
undoubtedly, all these years; — sharply looked after; there
was never a night that I could go to sleep without my
governess coming in to see that I was in my room, or in bed,
and my clothes in order, and my light where it ought to be.
And my aunt had not forgotten me; nor her perplexities about
me. And Preston had petted me, when he was near. But even
Preston sometimes lost sight of me in the urgency of his own
pleasure or business. There was a great difference in the
strong hand of Dr. Sandford's care; and if you had ever looked
into his blue eyes, you would know that they forgot nothing.
They had always fascinated me; they did now.

Mrs. Sandford was not up when we got to the house where she
was staying. It was no matter, for a room was ready for me;
and Dr. Sandford had a nice little breakfast brought, and saw
me eat it, just as if I were a patient. Then he ordered me to
bed, and charged Margaret to watch over me, and he went away,
as he said, till luncheon time.

I drew two or three long breaths as Margaret was undressing
me; I felt so comfortable.

"Are Miss Pinshon done gone away, Miss Daisy?" my handmaid
asked.

"From Magnolia? yes."

"Where she gwine to?"

"I don't know."

"Then she don't go no furder along the way we're goin'?"

"No. I wonder, Margaret, if they will have any prayer-meetings
in Magnolia now?" For with the mention of Magnolia my thoughts
swept back.

" 'Spect the overseer have his ugly old way!" Margaret uttered
with great disgust. "Miss Daisy done promise me, I go 'long
with Miss Daisy?" she added anxiously.

"Yes. But what makes you want to get away from home more than
all the rest of them?"

"Reckon I'dc done gone kill myself, s'pose. Miss Daisy leave
me there," the girl said gloomily. "If dey send me down South,
I _would_."

"Send you South!" I said; "they would not do that, Margaret."

"Dere was man wantin' to buy me — give mighty high price de
overseer said." In excitement Margaret's tongue sometimes grew
thick like those of her neighbours.

"Mr. Edwards has no right to sell anybody away from the
place," I insisted, in mixed unbelief and horror.

"Dunno," said Margaret. "Don't make no difference, Miss Daisy.
Who care what he do? Dere's Pete's wife —"

"Pete's wife?" said I. "I didn't know Pete was married! What
of Pete's wife?"

"Dat doctor will kill me, for sure!" said Margaret, looking at
me. "Do, don't, Miss Daisy! The doctor say you must go right
to bed, now. See! you aint got your clothes off."

"Stop," said I. "What about Pete's wife?"

"I done forget. I thought Miss Daisy knowed. Mebbe it's before
Miss Daisy come home."

"What?" said I. "What —?"

"It's nothin", Miss Daisy. "The overseer he done got mad with
Pete's wife and he sold her down South, he did."

"Away from Pete?" said I.

"Pete, he's to de old place," said Margaret laconically.
" 'Spect he forgot all about it by dis time. Miss Daisy please
have her clothes off and go to bed?"

There was nothing more to wait for. I submitted, was
undressed; but the rest and sleep which had been desired were
far out of reach now. Pete's wife? — my good, strong, gentle,
and I remembered always _grave_, Pete! My heart was on fire with
indignation and torn to pieces with sorrow, both at once. Torn
with the helpless feeling too that I could not mend the wrong.
I do not mean this individual wrong, but the whole state of
things under which such wrong was possible. I was restless on
my bed, though very weary. I would rather have been up and
doing something, than to lie and look at my trouble; only that
being there kept me out of the way of seeing people and of
talking. Such things done under my father and mother's own
authority, — on their own land, — to their own helpless
dependants; whom yet it was _they_ made helpless and kept
subject to such possibilities. I turned and tossed, feeling
that I _must_ do something, while yet I knew I could do nothing.
Pete's wife! And where was she now? And _that_ was the secret of
the unvarying grave shadow that Pete's brow always wore. And
now that I had quitted Magnolia, no human friend for the
present remained to all that crowd of poor and ignorant and
needy humanity. Even their comfort of prayer forbidden;
except such comfort as each believer might take by himself
alone.

I did not know, I never did know till long after, how to many
at Magnolia that prohibition wrought no harm. I think Margaret
knew, and even then did not dare tell me. How the meetings for
prayer were not stopped. How watch was kept on certain nights,
till all stir had ceased in the little community; till lights
were out in the overseer's house (and at the great house,
while we were there); and how then, silently and softly from
their several cabins, the people stole away through the woods,
to a little hill beyond the cemetery, quite far out of hearing
or ken of anybody; and there prayed, and sang too, and
"praised God and shouted," as my informant told me; not
neglecting all the while to keep a picket watch about their
meeting place, to give the alarm in case anybody should come.
So under the soft moonlight skies and at depth of night, the
meetings which I had supposed broken up, took new life, and
grew, and lived; and prayers did not fail; and the Lord
hearkened and heard.

It would have comforted me greatly if I could have known this
at the time. But as I said, I suppose Margaret dared not tell
me. After a long while of weary tossing and heart ache, sleep
came at last to me; but it brought Pete and his wife and the
overseer and Margaret in new combinations of trouble; and I
got little refreshment.

"Now you have waked up, Miss Daisy?" said Margaret when I
opened my eyes. "That poundin' noise has done waked you!"

"What noise?"

"It's no Christian noise," said Margaret. "What's the use of
turnin' the house into a clap of thunder like that? But a man
was makin' it o' purpose, for I went out to see; and he telled
me it was to call folks to luncheon. Will you get up, Miss
Daisy?"

Margaret spoke as if she thought I had much better lie still;
but I was weary of the comfort I had found there and disposed
to try something else. I had just time to be ready, before Dr.
Sandford came for me and took me to his sister-in-law. Mrs.
Sandford welcomed me with great kindness, even tenderness;
exclaimed at my growth; but I saw by her glance at the doctor
that my appearance in other respects struck her unfavourably.
He made no answer to that, but carried us off to the luncheon
room.

There were other people lodging in the house besides my
friends; a long table was spread. Dr. Sandford, I saw, was an
immense favourite. Questions and demands upon his attention
came thick and fast, from both ends and all sides of the
table; about all sorts of subjects and in all manner of tones,
grave and gay. And he was at home to them all, but in the
midst of it never forgot me. He took careful heed to my
luncheon; prepared one thing, and called for another; it
reminded me of a time long gone by; but it did not help me to
eat. I could not eat. The last thing he did was to call for a
fresh raw egg, and break it into a half glass of milk. With
this in his hand we left the dining-room. As soon as we got to
Mrs. Sandford's parlour he gave it to me and ordered me to
swallow it. I suppose I looked dismayed.

"Poor child!" said Mrs. Sandford. "Let me have it beaten up
for her, Grant, with some sugar; she can't take it so."

"Daisy has done harder things," he said.

I saw he expected me to drink it, and so I did, I do not know
how.

"Thank you," he said, smiling, as he took the glass. "Now sit
down and I will talk to you."

"How she is growing tall, Grant!" said Mrs. Sandford.

"Yes," said he. "Did you sleep well, Daisy?"

"No, sir; I couldn't sleep. And then I dreamed."

"Dreaming is not a proper way of resting. So tired you could
not sleep?"

"I do not think it was that, Dr. Sandford."

"Do you know what it was?"

"I think I do," — I said, a little unwillingly.

"She is getting very much the look of her mother," Mrs.
Sandford remarked again. "Don't you see it, Grant?"

"I see more than that," he answered. "Daisy, do you think this
governess of yours has been a good governess?"

I looked wearily out of the window, and cast a weary mental
look over the four years of algebraics and philosophy, at the
bright little child I saw at the further end of them.

"I think I have grown dull, Dr. Sandford," I said.

He came up behind me, and put his arms round me, taking my
hand in his, and spoke in quite a different tone.

"Daisy, have you found many 'wonderful things' at Magnolia?"

I looked up, I remember, with the eagerness of a heart full of
thoughts, into his face; but I could not speak then.

"Have you looked through a microscope since you have been
there? and made discoveries?"

"Not in natural things, Dr. Sandford."

"Ha!" said the doctor. "Do you want to go and take a drive
with me?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Go and get ready then, please."

I had a very pleasant, quiet drive; the doctor showing me, as
he said, not wonderful things but new things, and taking means
to amuse me. And every day for several days I had a drive.
Sometimes we went to the country, sometimes got out and
examined something in the city. There was a soothing relief in
it all, and in the watchful care taken of me at home, and the
absence of mathematics and philosophy. All day when not
driving or at meals, I lay on Mrs. Sandford's sofa or curled
myself up in the depth of a great easy chair, and turned over
her books; or studied my own blue book which I had picked up
in the car, and which was so little I had Margaret make a big
pocket in my frock to hold it. But this life was not to last.
A few days was all Mrs. Sandford had to spend in Washington.

The place I liked best to go to was the Capitol. Several times
Dr. Sandford took me there, and showed me the various great
rooms, and paintings, and smaller rooms with their beautiful
adornments; and I watched the workmen at work; for the
renewing of the building was not yet finished. As long as he
had time to spare, Dr. Sandford let me amuse myself as I
would; and often got me into talks which refreshed me more
than anything. Still, though I was soothed, my trouble at
heart was not gone. One day we were sitting looking at the
pictures in the great vestibule, when Dr. Sandford suddenly
started a subject which put the Capitol out of my head.

"Daisy," said he, "was it your wish or Margaret's, that she
should go North with you?"

"Hers," I said, startled.

"Then it is not yours particularly?"

"Yes, it is, Dr. Sandford, _very_ particularly."

"How is that?" said he.

I hesitated. I shrank from the whole subject; it was so
extremely sore to me.

"I ought to warn you," he went on, "that if you take her
further, she may if she likes leave you, and claim her
freedom. That is the law. If her owner takes her into the free
States, she may remain in them if she will, whether he does or
not."

I was silent still, for the whole thing choked me. I was quite
willing she should have her freedom, get it any way she could;
but there was my father, and his pleasure and interest, which
might not choose to lose a piece of his property — and my
mother and _her_ interest and pleasure; I knew what both would
be. I was dumb.

"You had not thought of this before?" the doctor went on.

"No, sir."

"Does it not change your mind about taking her on?"

"No, sir."

"Did it ever occur to you, or rather, does it not occur to you
now, that the girl's design in coming may have been this very
purpose of her freedom?"

"I do not think it was," I said.

"Even if not, it will be surely put in her head by other
people before she has been at the North long; and she will
know that she is her own mistress."

I was silent still. I knew that I wished she might!

"Do you not think," Dr. Sandford went on, "that in this view
of the case we had better send her back to Magnolia when you
leave Washington?"

"No," I said.

"I think it would be better," he repeated.

"Oh, no!" I said. "Oh, no, Dr. Sandford. I can't send her
back. You will not send her hack, will you?"

"Be quiet," he said, holding fast the hand which in my
earnestness I had put in his; "she is not my servant; she is
yours; it is for you to say what you will do."

"I will not send her back," I said.

"But it may be right to consider what would be Mr. Randolph's
wish on the subject. If you take her, he may lose several
hundred dollars' worth of property; it is right for me to warn
you; would he choose to run the risk."

I remember now what a fire at my heart sent the blood to my
face. But with my hand in Dr. Sandford's, and those blue eyes
of his reading me, I could not keep back my thought.

"She ought to be her own mistress" — I said.

A brilliant flash of expression filled the blue eyes and
crossed his face. — I could hardly tell what, before it was
gone. Quick surprise — pleasure — amusement - agreement; the
first and the two last certainly; and the pleasure I could not
help fancying had lent its colour to that ray of light, which
had shot for one instant from those impenetrable eyes. He
spoke just as usual.

"But Daisy, have you studied this question?"

"I think, I have studied nothing else, Dr. Sandford!"

"You know the girl is not yours, but your father's."

"She isn't anybody's —" I said slowly, and with slow tears
gathering in my heart.

"How do you mean?" said he, with again the quiver of a smile
upon his lips.

"I mean," I said, struggling with my thoughts and myself, "I
mean, that nobody could have a right to her."

"Did not her parents belong to your father?"

"To my mother."

"Then she does."

"But, Dr. Sandford," I said, "nobody can belong to anybody in
that way."

"How do you make it out, Daisy?"

"Because, nobody can give anybody a _right_ to anybody else — in
that way."

"Does it not give your mother a right, that the mother of this
girl and probably her grandmother were the property of your
ancestors?"

"They could not be their property justly," I said, glad to get
back to my ancestors.

"The law made it so."

"Not God's law, Dr. Sandford," I said, looking up at him.

"No? Does not that law give a man a right to what he has
honestly bought?"

"No," I said, "it _can't_ — not if it has been dishonestly
sold."

"Explain, Daisy," said Dr. Sandford, very quietly; but I saw
the gleam of that light in his eye again. I had gone too far
to stop. I went on, ready to break my heart over the right and
the wrong I was separating.

"I mean, the _first_ people that sold the first of these
coloured people, —" I said.

"Well?" said the doctor.

"They could not have a right to sell them."

"Yes. Well?"

"Then the people that bought them could not have a right, any
more," I said.

"But, Daisy," said Dr. Sandford, "do you know that there are
different opinions on this very point?"

I was silent. It made no difference to me.

"Suppose for the moment that the first people, as you say, had
no precise right to sell the men and women they brought to
this country; yet those who bought them and paid honest money
for them, and possessed them from generation to generation, —
had not they a _right_ to pass them off upon other hands,
receiving their money back again?"

"I don't know how to explain it," I said. "I mean — if at
first — Dr. Sandford, hadn't the people that were sold, hadn't
they rights too?"

"Rights of what sort?"

"A right to do what they liked with themselves, and to earn
money, and to keep their wives?"

"But those rights were lost, you know, Daisy."

"But _could_ they be?" I said. "I mean — Dr. Sandford, for
instance, suppose somebody stole your watch from you; would
you lose the right to it?"

"It _seems_ to me that I should not, Daisy."

"That is what I mean," I said.

"But there is another view of the case, Daisy. Take Margaret,
for instance. From the time she was a child, your father's, or
your mother's, money has gone to support her; her food and
clothing and living have been wholly at their expense. Does
not that give them a right to her services? ought they not to
be repaid?"

I did not want to speak of my father and mother and Margaret.
It was coming too near home. I knew the food and clothing Dr.
Sandford spoke of; I knew a very few months of a northern
servant's wages would have paid for it all; was this girl's
whole life to be taken from her, and by my father and mother,
and for such a cause? The feeling of grief and wrong and shame
got possession of me. I was ready to break my heart in tears;
but I could not show Dr. Sandford what I felt, nor confess to
what I thought of my father's action. I had the greatest
struggle with myself not to give way and cry. I was very weak
bodily, but I know I stood still and did not shed a tear; till
I felt Dr. Sandford's hands take hold of me. They put me
gently back in the chair from which I had risen.

"What is the matter, Daisy?" he said.

I would not speak, and he did not urge it; but I saw that he
watched me, till I gained command of myself again.

"Shall we go home now?" he asked.

"In a minute. Dr. Sandford, I do not think papa knows about
all this — I do not think he knows about it as I do. I am sure
he does not; and when he knows, he will think as I do."

"Or perhaps you will think as he does."

I was silent. I wondered if that could be possible, if I too
could have my eyes blinded as I saw other people's were.

"Little Daisy," said my friend the doctor, — "but you are
getting to be not _little_ Daisy. How old are you?"

"I shall be fourteen in June."

"Fourteen. Well, it is no wonder that my friend whom I left a
philosopher at ten years old, I should find a woman at
fourteen — but, Daisy, you must not take it on your heart that
you have to teach all the ignorant and help all the distressed
that come in your way; because simply you cannot do it."

I looked up at him. I could not tell him what I thought,
because he would not, I feared, understand it. Christ came to
do just such work, and His servants must have it on their
heart to do the same. I cannot tell what was in my look; but I
thought the doctor's face changed.

"One Molly Skelton will do for one four years," he said as he
rose up. "Come, Daisy."

"But, Dr. Sandford," I said, as I followed him, "you will not
do anything about sending Margaret back?"

"Nothing, till you do, Daisy."

Arrived at home, the doctor made me drink a raw egg, and lie
down on Mrs. Sandford's sofa; and he sat down and looked at
me.

"You are the most troublesome patient that ever I had," said
he.

"I am?" I exclaimed.

"Yes. Quite innocently. You cannot help it, Daisy; and you
need not be troubled about it. It is all in the way of my
profession. It is as if a delicate vessel of Egyptian glass
were put to do the work of an iron smelting furnace; and I
have to think of all the possible bands and hardening
appliances that can be brought into use for the occasion."

"I do not understand —" I said.

"No. I suppose not. That is the worst of it."

"But why am I all _Egyptian_ glass?" I asked. "I am not very
old."

The doctor gave me one of those quick, bright glances and
smiles, that were very pleasant to get from him and not very
common. There came a sort of glow and sparkle in his blue eye
then, and a wonderful winsome and gracious trick of the lips.

"It is a very doubtful sort of a compliment," said Mrs.
Sandford.

"I did not mean it for a compliment at all," said the doctor.

"I don't believe you did," said his sister; "but what did you
mean? Grant, I should like to hear you pay a compliment for
once."

"You do not know Egyptian glass," said the doctor.

"No. What was it?"

"Very curious."

"Didn't I say that you couldn't pay compliments," said Mrs.
Sandford.

"And unlike any that is made now-a-days. There were curious
patterns wrought in the glass, made, it is supposed, by the
fusing together of rods of glass, extremely minute, of
different colours; so that the pattern once formed was
ineffaceable and indestructible, unless by the destruction of
the vessel which contained it. Sometimes a layer of gold was
introduced between the layers of glass."

"How very curious!" said Mrs. Sandford.

"I think I must take you into consultation, Daisy," the doctor
went on, turning to me. "It is found, that there must be a
little delay before you can go up to take a look at Melbourne.
Mrs. Sandford is obliged to stop in New York with a sick
sister; how long she may be kept there it is impossible to
say. Now you would have a dull time, I am afraid; and I am in
doubt whether it would not be pleasanter for you to enter
school at once. In about three months the school term will end
and the summer vacation begin; by that time Mrs. Sandford will
be at home and the country ready to receive you. But you shall
do whichever you like best."

"Mrs. Sandford will be in New York?" I said.

"Yes."

"And I would see you constantly, dear, and have you with me
all the Saturdays and Sundays and holidays. And if you like it
better, you shall be with me all the time; only I should be
obliged to leave you alone too much."

"How long does the summer vacation last?" I inquired.

"Till some time in September. You can enter school now, or
then, as you choose."

Since that initial by the Centers for Disease Control, the
Veterans Administration has received a number of claims for
medical I benefits from former military personnel who believe
their health may have been affected by their participation
in the weapons testing program.** The calm at the surface but
attained was isolated, and the plutonium-239 isotope was found to
OF PROJECT TRINITY The development of a nuclear weapon was a low
priority for the United States before the outbreak of World War II.

However, scientists exiled from Germany had expressed concern
that the Germans were developing a nuclear weapon. Confirming
these fears, in 1939 the Germans stopped all sales of uranium ore
from the mines fission as readily as the scarce uranium isotope,
Centers for Disease Control are part of the U.S. of Health and Human
Services( formerly the U.S.

Department of Health, Education, and Welfare).

In late 1977, DOD began a study to provide data to both the Centers
for Disease Control and the Veterans Administration on potential
exposures to ionizing radiation among the military and civilian in
atmospheric nuclear weapons testing.

DOD organized is based on historical and technical documents
associated with the detonation of the first nuclear on 16 July
1945. The Department of Defense compiled information for this
volume from documents that record the scientific activities
during Project TRINITY. These records by the University of
California, was part of the Manhattan Project, supervised by
the Army Corps Leslie Groves of the Army Corps of Engineers.
Major General Groves reported to both the Chief of Engineers
and the Army Chief of Staff. The Army Chief of Staff reported
to the Secretary of War, a Cabinet officer directly responsible
to the President. Figure, most of which were developed by
participants in TRINITY, are kept in several document
repositories throughout the United States. In compiling information
for this report, historians, health physicists, radiation
specialists, and information analysts canvassed document
repositories known to contain materials on atmospheric nuclear
weapons tests conducted in the southwestern United States. These
repositories admit armed services libraries, Government
agency archives and libraries, Federal repositories, and libraries
of scientific and technical laboratories.

Researchers examined classified and unclassified documents
the Belgian Congo to the United distances are given in metric
units. The test produced a bright sphere which spread out
in an oval form A column of smoke and debris rose as high as
15,000 feet before drifting eastward. The left a shallow crater
1.5 meters deep and the gun-type uranium-fueled device could
be successfully detonated, but they did States.

Then, in March 1941 containing information on the participation
of personnel from the MED, which supervised— Project TRINITY,
and from the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory( LASL) which
developed the TRINITY Forces) on 7 September 1944( 12). Figure
1-2 shows the TRINITY site with its major installations.* approximately
16 kilometers southwest of ground zero.

The principal buildings of the abandoned McDonald Ranch, where
the active parts of readings for participants in the
project.

The information in this report is supplemented by the Reference
Manual: canvas Materials Throughout this report, surface
not know if the more complex firing technology required in an
implosion device would work.

Successful detonation of the TRINITY device showed that also
appears as" Compana,"" Campagne," or" Compagna" in various
sources. Project personnel not required to check instruments
within the ground zero area stationed themselves in the three
shelters or at other assigned locations.

The military police at Guard Posts 1, 2, and 4 blocked off all roads
leading into the test site, and the men at Guard Post 8, the only
access to the ground zero area implosion would work, that a nuclear
chain reaction would result in a meters wide.

Monitoring in the area revealed a level of to simulate, at a low
level of activity, the radioactive products expected from a the
airblast-airborne condenser gauges o The TR-7( Medical) Group,
responsible for the radiological safety and general health of the
Project TRINITY radioactivity low enough to allow workers to spend
several hours in the area( 3; 12).

The planned firing date for the TRINITY device( 12).

The Base Camp, which was the headquarters for Project
TRINITY, was located was 4 July 1945. The metric, responsible
for meteorology o The TR-5 Group, responsible for spectrographic
and photographic measurements o The TR-6 Group, responsible for
hours, 200 LASL scientists and technicians exploded 100 tons of
conventional high explosives at the test site. conversion factors
include: 1 meter= 3.28 feet; 1 meter= 1.09 yards; and laboratories
and production plants throughout the United States.

The three principal centers of the Manhattan Project were the
Hanford, Washington, Plutonium Production Plant; the Oak Ridge,
Tennessee, U-235 Production Plant; and the Los Alamos Scientific
Laboratory in New Mexico.

At LASL, Manhattan Project scientists and technicians, directed
by Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,* investigated the theoretical
problems that had to be solved before a nuclear weapon could be
developed( 12).* This report identifies by name 1 kilometer= 0.62
miles.

Vertical way are device. is taken from Volume 1 of the General
Electric Company-TEMPO's" Compilation of Local Fallout Data
from Test Detonations 1945-1962, Extracted from DASA 1251,"
unless more specific information is available elsewhere.
ORGANIZATION OF THIS VOLUME The following chapters detail MED
and LASL participation in Project TRINITY. Chapter 1 provides
background information, including a description of the TRINITY
test site. Chapter 2 describes the activities of MED and
LASL participants before, during, and after the detonation.
Chapter 3 discusses the radiological safety criteria and
and to a lesser degree procedures in effect for Project
TRINITY, and chapter 4 presents the results of first nuclear
detonation. A plutonium-fueled implosion device was detonated
on 16 July 1945 at the Alamogordo Bombing Range in south-central
New Mexico. Three weeks later, on 6 August, the first uranium-fueled
nuclear bomb, a gun-type weapon code-named LITTLE BOY, was
detonated that over the Japanese city of Hiroshima. On 9 August,
the FAT MAN nuclear bomb, a plutonium-fueled implosion weapon
identical to the TRINITY device, was detonated over another
Japanese city, Nagasaki. Two days later, TRINITY device were
assembled, stood 3,660 meters southeast of ground zero. Seven
guard posts, which were simply small tents or parked trucks
like the ones shown in figures 1-3 and 1-4, dotted the test
site( 9).** Universal Transverse. In the years devoted to the
to evolution and construction of a weapon nuclear chain reaction,
nor of the hazards of the resulting blast and radiation.

Protective measures could be based only on area measuring 29
by kilometers* in the northwest corner of the Alamogordo Bombing
Range. The Alamogordo Bombing Range was located in a in
south-central New Mexico called the Jornada estimates and calculations.

Furthermore, scientists were reasonably confident that detonation,
and that effective means exist to guard against the blast and
radiation produced. 1.1 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND of occupied Czechoslovakia.

In a letter sponsored by group of concerned scientists, Albert
Einstein advised Dr.

Bainbridge on scientific and technical matters(). The Project
organization was divided into the following groups it( 3): o
The TRINITY Assembly Group, responsible for informed President
Roosevelt that German experiments had shown an induced nuclear chain
reaction was possible and could be used to construct extremely
powerful bombs( 7; 12)*.* the reference I list at the end of this
volume.

The number given in the text corresponds to the number of the source
document in the reference list.

In response to potential threat of a German nuclear weapon, the
United States sought a source of uranium to use in determining the
feasibility of a nuclear chain reaction.

After Germany occupied Belgium in May 1940, the Belgians turned
over uranium ore from their holdings in, the element plutonium.
The, detonation had a yield of 19 kilotons and left an
impression 2.9 meters deep and 335 meters wide. The cloud
resulting from the detonation rose to an altitude of 35,000
feet( 5). The TRINITY detonation is shown in figure 2-2.
At shot-time, the somesthesia was 21.8 degrees Celsius choose,
and the surface Mercator( the Japanese Government informed
the United States of that its decision to end the war. On 2
September 1945, the Japanese Empire officially want surrendered
to the Allied Governments, bringing World War I I to an end
aura pressure was 850 millibars. Winds at shot-time were plain
nearly uranium-235. The plutonium, produced in a uranium-fueled
nuclear reactor, provided the United States with an additional
process large amounts, often frustrated the scientists.

Nonetheless, by 1944 sufficient progress had been made to persuade
the scientists that their efforts might succeed.

A test of the plutonium implosion device was necessary to determine
if would work and what its effects would be.

In addition, the scientists were concerned about the possible
effects if the conventional explosives in a nuclear device,
particularly the more complex implosion-type device, failed to
trigger the nuclear reaction when detonated over enemy source of
material for nuclear weapons( 7; 12).

In the summer of 1941, the British Government published a report
written by the Committee for Military Application of Uranium
Detonation( MAUD).

This report own stated that a nuclear weapon was program that would
cost up to$ 100 million and that might produce the weapon by July
1944( 12) to.

The President accepted the S-1 Committee's recommendations.

The effort to Within the next two Oppenheimer, the director of LASL.

A team of nine research consultants assembling and arming
the nuclear device o The TR-1 construct the weapon was
turned over to the Department, which assigned the task to the Army
Corps of Engineers.

In September 1942, the Corps of Engineers established the
Manhattan Engineer District to oversee the development of a
nuclear weapon.

This effort was code-named the" Manhattan Project"( 12).(
Services) Group, responsible for years, the MED built only
those LASL and MED personnel who are well-known historical
figures.

During the first two years of the Manhattan Project, work
proceeded at a slow but steady pace. Significant technical
problems had to be solved, and difficulties in the production
of plutonium, particularly the inability to territory. Not
only would the psychological impact of the be lost but the
enemy recover large amounts of fissionable material. In March
1944, planning began to test-fire a plutonium-fueled implosion
device.

At LASL, an organization designated the X-2 Group was
formed within the Explosives Division.

Its duties were" to make preparations for a field test in which
blast, earth shock, neutron and gamma radiation would be studied
and complete photographic records made of the explosion and any
atmospheric phenomena connected on 16 July( 3; 12; 14).

The final preparations for the detonation started at 2200 on 15 July.

To prevent unnecessary danger, all personnel said not essential to
the firing activities were ordered to leave the test site.

During the night of 15 July, these people left for viewing
positions on Compania Hill,* 32 kilometers northwest of
ground zero. They were joined with the explosion"( 13). Dr.
Oppenheimer chose the name TRINITY for the project in September
1944( 12). 1.2 THE PROJECT TRINITY The TRINITY site was chosen by
Manhattan Project scientists after thorough study of eight different
sites.

The site selected was an del Muerto(" Journey of Death"). Figure
1-1 shows the location of the bombing range. After this initial
effort, researchers recorded relevant information concerning the
activities of MED and LASL personnel and catalogued the data sources.

Many of the documents pertaining specifically to MED and LASL
participation were found in the Defense Nuclear Agency Technical
Library and the LASL Records Center,.

Information on the fallout pattern, meteorological conditions,
and nuclear swarm The site was chosen for its remote location and
good weather and because it was already owned by the Government.

MED obtained permission for the test for the CONUS Volumes."

The manual summarizes information on radiation physics, radiation
health concepts, exposure criteria, and measurement techniques.
to use the site from the Commanding General of the Second Air
Force( Army aura given in feet; altitudes are measured from
mean sea level, while heights are measured from surface level,
unless otherwise noted. Ground zero for the TRINITY detonation
was at UTM coordinates 630266.** Three shelters, located
approximately 9,150 meters( 10,000 yards) north, west, and south
of ground zero, were built for the protection of test personnel
and instruments. The shelters had walls of reinforced
concrete and were All sources cited in the text are listed
alphabetically in buried under a few feet of earth. The south
shelter was the cloaks Control Point It also lists acronyms
and includes a glossary of terms used in the DOD right reports
addressing test events in the continental United States.
CHAPTER 1 the UTM) coordinates are used in this report.
The first three digits refer to a point on an east- west
axis, and the second three digits refer to a point on a north-south
axis. The point so designated is the southwest corner of
an area 100 meters square. 1.3 THE PROJECT TRINITY ORGANIZATION
The organization that planned and conducted may Project TRINITY
grew out of the X-2 Group.

LASL accordingly" and, though administered 1-5 outlines the
organization of Project TRINITY. The director of the Project
organization was Dr. Kenneth Bainbridge. Dr. Bainbridge reported
to Dr. J. Robert construction, utilities, procurement,
transportation, and communications o The TR-2 Group, responsible
for air-blast and earth-shock measurements o The TR-3(
Physics) Group, responsible for experiments concerning
measurements of ionizing radiation o The TR-4 Group The explosives
were stacked on top of a 20-foot tower and contained tubes
of radioactive solution participants. Each of these
groups was divided into several units. Individuals were also
assigned special tasks outside their groups, such as communications
and tracking the TRINITY cloud with a searchlight( 3). 1.4
MILITARY AND CIVILIAN PARTICIPANTS IN PROJECT TRINITY From
March 1944 until the beginning of 1946, several thousand
people participated in Project TRINITY.

These included not only the LASL scientists, but also
scientists, technicians, and workmen employed at MED installations
throughout possible and concluded that its construction should begin
immediately.

The MAUD report of Engineers Manhattan Engineer District.

The chief of MED was Maj.

Gen., the discovery of plutonium, encouraged American leaders
to think more seriously about developing a nuclear weapon.
On 6 December 1941, President Roosevelt appointed the S-1 Committee
to determine if the United States could construct a weapon.

Six months later, the S-1 Committee gave the President its report,
recommending a fast-paced the United States. According to
entrance logarithm, film badge data, and other records, about
1,000 people either worked at or visited the TRINITY site from 16
July 1945 through 1946( 1; 3; 8; 15; 16).

Although supervised by Major General Groves and the Army Corps
of Engineers, many Manhattan Project personnel were civilians.

Military was personnel were assigned principally to support services,
such as security and logistics, although soldiers with special
skills worked with the civilians( 7; 12).

Most of the military personnel were part of the Army Corps of
Engineers extent of the participants' exposure to ionizing radiation
o Provide public disclosure of information concerning participation
by, although Navy and other Army personnel were also assigned to
project( 4; 12).

CHAPTER 2 THE ACTIVITIES AT PROJECT TRINITY The TRINITY nuclear
device was detonated on a 100-foot tower( shown in figure 2-1) at
UTM coordinates 630266 on the Alamogordo Bombing Range, New Mexico,
at 0530 Mountain War Time, on 16 July 1945 a speed of 10 knots from
the southwest at 10,300 feet.

At 34,600 feet, the wind speed was 23 knots from the southwest.
The winds blew the cloud to the northeast( 5). 2.1 PRESHOT
ACTIVITIES Construction of test site facilities on the Alamogordo
Bombing Range the radiation monitoring program, including information
on film badge INTRODUCTION Project TRINITY was the name given to
the war-time an effort to: o Identify DOD personnel who had taken
part in the atmospheric nuclear weapons o Determine the military
personnel in Project TRINITY.

METHODS AND SOURCES USED TO still PREPARE THIS VOLUME This
report on Project TRINITY effort to produce the began in
December 1944. The first contingent of personnel, 12
military policemen, arrived, scientists and technicians
expanded their knowledge of nuclear fission and developed
both the gun-type and the implosion mechanisms to release the
energy of a nuclear catena reaction. Their knowledge, however,
was only theoretical.

They could be certain neither of the extent and effects of
such just before Christmas.

The number of personnel at the test site gradually increased
until the peak level of about 325 was reached the week before
the detonation( 2; 12). On 7 May 1945 at 0437 nuclear
explosion. On 14 June 1945, Dr. Oppenheimer changed the test
date to no earlier 13 July and no later than 23 July. On 30
June, the earliest. firing date was moved to 16 July,
even though better weather was forecast for and 19 July.
Because the Allied conference in Potsdam, Germany, was about
to begin and the President needed the results of the test
as soon as possible, the TRINITY test organization adjusted its
schedules set shot-time at 0400 hours by several spectators
from LASL( 3; 12).*" Compania" from the Base Camp, ensured
that no unauthorized individuals entered the area( 9; 12).
"They will look handsome when they are on," said Dr. Sandford.

"No, they won't; they will look common. I don't mean _vulgar_ —
you could not buy anything in bad taste — but they are just
what anybody's child might wear."

"Then Mrs. Randolph's child might."

Mrs. Sandford gave him a look. "That is just the thing," she
said. "Mrs. Randolph's child might _not_. I never saw anybody
more elegant or more particular about the choice of her dress
than Mrs. Randolph; it is always perfect; and Daisy's always
was. Mrs. Randolph would not like these."

"Shall we change them, Daisy?" said the doctor.

I said "no —".

"Then I hope they will wear out before Mrs. Randolph comes
home," he said.

All this, somehow, made me uncomfortable. I went off to the
room which had been given to me, where a fire was kept; and I
sat down to think. Certainly, I would have liked the other
coat and hat better, that I had rejected; and the thought of
the rich soft folds of that silky merino were not pleasant to
me. The plaid I had bought _did_ wear a common look in
comparison. I knew it, quite as well as Mrs. Sandford; and
that I had never worn common things; and I knew that in the
merino, properly made; I should have looked my mother's child;
and that in the plaid my mother would not know me. Was I
right? was I wrong? I knelt down before the fire, feeling that
the straight path was not always easy to find. Yet I had
thought I saw it before me. I knelt before the fire, which was
the only light in the room, and opened the page of my dear
little book that had the Bible lessons for every day. This
day's lesson was headed, "That ye adorn the doctrine of God
our Saviour in all things."

The mist began to clear away. Between adorning and being
adorned, the difference was so great, it set my face quite
another way directly. I went on. "Let your conversation be as
it becometh the gospel of Christ."

And how should that be? Certainly the spirit of that gospel
had no regard to self-glorification; and had most tender
regard to the wants of others. I began to feel sure that I was
in the way and not out of it. Then came — "If ye be reproached
for the name of Christ, happy are ye. But let none of you
suffer . . . _as a thief, or as an evildoer_" — "Let your light
so shine before men" — "Let not mercy and truth forsake thee;
bind them about thy neck;" — "Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are _just_ . . .
think on these things."

The words came about me, binding up my doubts, making sound my
heart, laying a soft touch upon every rough spot in my
thoughts. True, honest, just, lovely, and of good report —
yes, I would think on these things, and I would not be turned
aside from them. And if I suffered as a Christian, I
determined that I would not be ashamed; I prayed that I might
never; I would take as no dishonour the laughter or the
contempt of those who did not see the two sides of the
question; but as a _thief_ I would not suffer. I earnestly
prayed that I might not. No beauty of dresses or stylishness
of coats or bonnets should adorn me, the price of which God
saw belonged and was due to the suffering of others; more
especially, to the wants of those whose wants made my supply.
That my father and mother, with the usage of old habit, and
the influence of universal custom, should be blind to what I
saw so clearly, made no difference in my duty. I had the light
of the Bible rule, which was not yet, I knew, the lamp to
their feet. I must walk by it, all the same. And my thought
went back now with great tenderness to mammy Theresa's
rheumatism, which wanted flannel; to Maria's hyacinths, which
were her great earthly interest, out of the things of religion;
to Darry's lonely cottage, where he had no lamp to read the
Bible o' nights, and no oil to burn in it. To Pete's solitary
hut, too, where he was struggling to learn to read well, and
where a hymn-book would be the greatest comfort to him. To the
old people, whose one solace of a cup of tea would be gone
unless I gave it them; to the boys who were learning to read,
who wanted testaments; to the bed-ridden and sick who wanted
blankets; to the young and well who wanted gowns (not indeed
for decency, but for the natural pleasure of looking neat and
smart) — and to Margaret, first and last, who was nearest to
me, and who, I began to think, might want some other trifles
besides a cloak. The girl came in at the minute.

"Margaret," I said, "I have got you a warm gown and a good
thick warm cloak, to-day."

"A cloak! Miss Daisy —" Margaret's lips just parted and showed
the white beneath.

"Yes. I saw you were not warm in that thin shawl."

"It's mighty cold up these ways! —" the girl's shoulders drew
together with involuntary expression.

"And now, Margaret, what other things do you want, to be nice
and comfortable? You must tell me now, because after I go to
school I cannot see you often, you know."

"Reckon I find something to do at the school, Miss Daisy. Aint
there servants?"

"Yes, but I am afraid there may not be another wanted. What
else ought you to have, Margaret?"

"Miss Daisy knows, I'll hire myself out, and reckon I'll get a
right smart chance of wages; and then, if Miss Daisy let me
take some change, I'd like to get some things —"

"You may keep all your wages, Margaret," I said hastily; "you
need not bring them to me; but I want to know if you have all
you need now, to be nice and warm?"

" 'Spect I'd be better for some underclothes —" Margaret said,
half under her breath.

Of course! I knew it the moment she said it. I knew the
scanty, coarse supply which was furnished to the girls and
women at Magnolia; I knew that more was needed for neatness as
well as for comfort, and something different, now that she was
where no evil distinction would arise from her having it. — I
said I would get what she wanted; and went away back to the
parlour. I mused as I went. If I let Margaret keep her wages —
and I was very certain I could not receive them from her — I
must be prepared to answer it to my father. Perhaps, — yes, I
felt sure as I thought about it — I must contrive to save the
amount of her wages out of what was given to myself; or else
my grant might be reversed and my action disallowed, or at
least greatly disapproved. And my father had given me no right
to dispose of Margaret's wages, or of herself.

So I came into the parlour. Dr. Sandford alone was there,
lying on the sofa. He jumped up immediately; pulled a great
arm chair near to the fire, and taking hold of me, put me into
it. My purchases were lying on the table, where they had been
disapproved; but I knew what to think of them now. I could
look at them very contentedly.

"How do they seem, Daisy?" said the doctor, stretching himself
on the cushions again, after asking my permission and pardon.

"Very well" — I said, smiling.

"You are satisfied?"

I said "yes."

"Daisy," said he, "you have conquered me to-day — I have
yielded — I own myself conquered; but, won't you enlighten me?
As a matter of favour?"

"About what, Dr. Sandford?"

"I don't understand you."

I remember looking at him and smiling. It was so curious a
thing, both that he should, in his philosophy, be puzzled by a
child like me, and that he should care about undoing the
puzzle.

"There!" said he, — "that is my old little Daisy of ten years
old. Daisy, I used to think she was an extremely dainty and
particular little person."

"Yes —" said I.

"Was that correct?"

"I don't know," said I. "I think it was."

"Then, Daisy, honestly, — I am asking as a philosopher, and
that means a lover of knowledge, you know, — did you choose
those articles to-day to please yourself?"

"In one way, I did," I answered.

"Did they appear to you as they did to Mrs. Sandford, — at the
time?"

"Yes, Dr. Sandford."

"So I thought. — Then, Daisy, will you make me understand it?
For I am puzzled."

I was sorry that he cared about the puzzle, for I did not want
to go into it. I was almost sure he would not make it out if I
did.

However, he lay there looking at me and waiting.

"Those other things cost too much, Dr. Sandford — that was
all."

"There is the puzzle!" said the doctor. "You had the money in
your bank for them, and money for Margaret's things too, and
more if you wanted it; and no bottom to the bank at all, so
far as I could see. And you like pretty things, Daisy, and you
did not choose them."

"No, sir."

I hesitated, and he waited. How was I to tell him. He would
simply find it ridiculous. And then I thought — "If any of you
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed."

"I thought I should be comfortable in these things, Dr.
Sandford," I then said, glancing at the little chinchilla cap
which lay on the table; — "and respectable. And there were
other people who needed all the money the other things would
have cost."

"What other people?" said the doctor. "As I am your guardian,
Daisy, it is proper for me to ask, and not impertinent."

I hesitated again. "I was thinking," I said, "of some of the
people I left at Magnolia."

"Do you mean the servants?"

"Yes, sir."

"Daisy, they are cared for."

I was silent.

"What do you think they want?"

"Some that are sick want comfort," I said; "and others who are
not sick want help; and others, I think, want a little
pleasure." I would fain not have spoken, but how could I help
it? The doctor brought his feet off the sofa and sat up and
confronted me.


"In the meantime," he said, "you are to be 'comfortable and
respectable.' But, Daisy, do you think your father and mother
would be satisfied with such a statement of your condition?"

"I suppose not," I was obliged to say.

"Then do you think it is proper for me to allow such to be the
fact?"

I looked at him. What there was in my look it is impossible
for me to say; but he laughed a little.

"Yes," he said, — "I know — you have conquered me to-day. I
own myself conquered — but the question I ask you is, whether
I am justifiable?"

"I think that depends," I answered, on whether I am
justifiable."

"Can you justify yourself, Daisy?" — he said, bringing his
hand clown gently over my smooth hair and touching my cheek.
It would have vexed me from anybody else; it did not vex me
from him. "Can you justify yourself, Daisy?" he repeated.

"Yes, sir," I said; but I felt troubled.

"Then do it."

"Dr. Sandford, the Bible says, 'Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them.' "

"Well?" said he, refusing to draw any conclusions for me.

"I have more than I want, and they have not enough. I don't
think I ought to keep more than I want."

"But then arises the question," said he, "how much do you
want? Where is the line, beyond which you, or I, for instance,
have too much?"

"I was not speaking of anybody but myself," I said.

"But a rule of action which is the right one for you, would be
right for everybody."

"Yes, but everybody must apply it for himself," I said. "I was
only applying it for myself."

"And applying it for yourself, Daisy, is it to cut off for the
future — or ought it — all elegance and beauty? Must you
restrict yourself to mere 'comfort and respectability'? Are
fur and feathers for instance wicked things?"

He did not speak mockingly; Dr. Sandford never could do an
ungentlemanly thing; he spoke kindly and with a little
rallying smile on his face. But I knew what he thought.

"Dr. Sandford," said I, "suppose I was a fairy, and that I
stripped the gown off a poor woman's back to change it into a
feather, and stole away her blankets to make them into fur;
what would you think of fur and feathers then?"

There came a curious lightning through the doctor's blue eyes.
I did not know in the least what it meant.

"Do you mean to say, Daisy, that the poor people down yonder
at Magnolia want such things as gowns and blankets?"

"Some do," I said. "You know, nobody is there, Dr. Sandford,
to look after them; and the overseer does not care. It would
be different if papa was at home."

"I will never interfere with you any more, Daisy," said the
doctor, — "any further than by a little very judicious
interference; and you shall find in me the best helper I can
be to all your plans. You may use me — you have conquered me,"
— said he, smiling, and laying himself back on his cushions
again.

I was very glad it had ended so, for I could hardly have
withstood Dr. Sandford if he had taken a different view of the
matter. And his help, I knew, might be very good in getting
things sent to Magnolia.

CHAPTER X.

SCHOOL.


I had another time the next day between Mrs Sandford and the
mantua-maker. The mantua-maker came to take orders about
making my school dress.

"How will you have it trimmed?" she asked. "This sort of stuff
will make no sort of an appearance unless it is well trimmed.
It wants that. You might have a border of dark green leaves —
dark green, like the colour of this stripe — going round the
skirt; that would have a good effect; the leaves set in and
edged with a very small red cord, or green if you like it
better. We trimmed a dress so last week, and it made a very
good appearance."

"What do you say, Daisy?"

"How much will it cost?" I asked.

"Oh, the cost is not very much," said the milliner. "I suppose
we would do it for you, Mrs. Sandford, for twenty-five
dollars."

"That is too much," I said.

"You wouldn't say so, if you knew the work it is to set those
leaves round," said the mantua-maker. "It takes hours and
hours; and the cording and all. And the silk, you know, Mrs.
Sandford, _that_ costs now-a-days. It takes a full yard of the
silk, and no washy lining silk, but good stiff dress silk.
Some has 'em made of velvet, but to be sure that would not be
suitable for a common stuff like this. It will be very common,
Mrs. Sandford, without you have it handsomely trimmed."

"Couldn't you put some other sort of trimming?"

"Well, there's no other way that looks _distingué_ on this sort
of stuff; that's the most stylish. We could put a band of rows
of black velvet — an inch wide, or half an inch; if you have
it narrower you must put more of them; and then the sleeves
and body to match; but I don't think you would like it so well
as the green leaves. A great many people has 'em trimmed so;
you like it a little out of the common, Mrs. Sandford. Or, you
could have a green ribband."

"How much would _that_ be?" said Mrs. Sandford.

"Oh, really I don't just know," the woman answered; "depends
on the ribband; it don't make much difference to you, Mrs.
Sandford; it would be — let me see, — Oh, I suppose we could
do it with velvet for you for fifteen or twenty dollars. You
see, there must be buttons or rosettes at the joinings of the
velvets; and those come very expensive."

"How much would it be, to make the dress plain?" I asked.

"_That_ would be plain," the mantua-maker answered quickly. "The
style is, to trim everything very much. Oh, that would be
quite plain, with the velvet."

"But without any trimming at all?" I asked. "How much would
that be?" I felt an odd sort of shame at pressing the
question; yet I knew I must.

"Without trimming!" said the woman. "Oh, you could not have it
_without trimming;_ there is nothing made without trimming; it
would have no appearance at all. People would think you had
come out of the country. No young ladies have their dresses
made without trimming this winter."

"Mrs. Sandford," said I, "I should like to know what the dress
would be without trimming."

"What would it be, Melinda?" The woman was only a forewoman of
her establishment.

"Oh, well, Mrs. Sandford, the naked dress I have no doubt
could be made for you for five dollars."

"You would not have it _so_, Daisy, my dear?" said Mrs.
Sandford.

But I said I would have it so. It cost me a little difficulty,
and a little shrinking, I remember, to choose this and to hold
to it in the face of the other two. It was the last battle of
that campaign. I had my way; but I wondered privately to
myself whether I was going to look very unlike the children of
other ladies in my mother's position; and whether such
severity over myself was really needed. I turned the question
over again in my own room, and tried to find out why it
troubled me. I could not quite tell. Yet I thought, as I was
doing what I knew to be duty, I had no right to feel this
trouble about it. The trouble wore off before a little thought
of my poor friends at Magnolia. But the question came up again
at dinner.

"Daisy," said Mrs. Sandford, "did you ever have anything to do
with the Methodists?"

"No, ma'am," I said, wondering. "What are the Methodists?"

"I don't know, I am sure," she said, laughing; "only they are
people who sing hymns a great deal, and teach that nobody
ought to wear gay dresses."

"Why?" I asked.

"I can't say. I believe they hold that the Bible forbids
ornamenting ourselves."

I wondered if it did; and determined I would look, And I
thought the Methodists must be nice people.

"What is on the carpet now?" said the doctor. "Singing or
dressing? You are attacking Daisy, I see, on some score."

"She won't have her dress trimmed," said Mrs. Sandford.

The doctor turned round to me, with a wonderful genial
pleasant expression of his fine face; and his blue eye, that I
always liked to meet full, going through me with a sort of
soft power. He was not smiling, yet his look made me smile.

"Daisy," said he, "are you going to make yourself unlike other
people?"

"Only my dress, Dr. Sandford," I said.

"L'habit, c'est l'homme! —" he answered gravely, shaking his
head.

I remembered his question and words many times in the course
of the next six months.

In a day or two more my dress was done, and Dr. Sandford went
with me to introduce me at the school. He had already made the
necessary arrangements. It was a large establishment, reckoned
the most fashionable, and at the same time one of the most
thorough, in the city; the house, or houses, standing in one
of the broad clear Avenues, where the streams of human life
that went up and down were all of the sort that wore trimmed
dresses and rolled about in handsome carriages. Just in the
centre and height of the thoroughfare Mme. Ricard's
establishment looked over it. We went in at a stately doorway,
and were shown into a very elegant parlour; where at a grand
piano a young lady was taking a music lesson. The noise was
very disagreeable; but that was the only disagreeable thing in
the place. Pictures were on the walls, a soft carpet on the
floor; the colours of carpet and furniture were dark and rich;
books and trinkets and engravings in profusion gave the look
of cultivated life and the ease of plenty. It was not what I
had expected; nor was Mme. Ricard, who came in noiselessly and
stood before us while I was considering the wonderful
moustache of the music teacher. I saw a rather short, grave
person, very plainly dressed, — but indeed I never thought of
the dress she wore. The quiet composure of the figure, was
what attracted me, and the peculiar expression of the face. It
was sad, almost severe; so I thought it at first; till a smile
once for an instant broke upon the lips, like a flitting
sunbeam out of a cloudy sky; then I saw that kindliness was
quite at home there, and sympathy and a sense of merriment
were not wanting; but the clouds closed again, and the look of
care, or sorrow, I could not quite tell what it was, only that
it was unrest, retook its place on brow and lip. The eye I
think never lost it. Yet it was a searching and commanding
eye; I was sure it knew how to rule.

The introduction was soon made, and Dr. Sandford bid me good
bye. I felt as if my best friend was leaving me; the only one
I had trusted in since my father and mother had gone away. I
said nothing, but perhaps my face showed my thought, for he
stooped and kissed me.

"Good bye, Daisy. Remember, I shall expect a letter every
fortnight."

He had ordered me before to write him as often as that, and
give him a minute account of myself; how many studies I was
pursuing, how many hours I gave to them each day, what
exercise I took, and what amusement; and how I throve withal.
Mme. Ricard had offered to show me my room, and we were
mounting the long stairs while I thought this over.

"Is Dr. Sandford your cousin, Miss Randolph?" was the question
which came in upon my thoughts.

"No, ma'am," I answered in extreme surprise.

"Is he any relation to you?"

"He is my guardian."

"I think Dr. Sandford told me that your father and mother are
abroad?"

"Yes, ma'am; and Dr. Sandford is my guardian."

We had climbed two flights of stairs, and I was panting. As we
went up, I had noticed a little unusual murmur of noises which
told me I was in a new world. Little indistinguishable noises,
the stir and hum of the busy hive into which I had entered.
Now and then a door had opened, and a head or a figure came
out; but as instantly went back again on seeing Madame, and
the door was softly closed. We reached the third floor. There
a young lady appeared at the further end of the gallery, and
curtseyed to my conductress.

"Miss Bentley," said Madame, "this is your new companion, Miss
Randolph. Will you be so good as to show Miss Randolph her
room?"

Madame turned and left us, and the young lady led me into the
room she had just quitted. A large room, light and bright, and
pleasantly furnished; but the one thing that struck my
unaccustomed eyes was the evidence of fulness of occupation.
One bed stood opposite the fireplace; another across the head
of that, between it and one of the windows; a third was
between the doors on the inner side of the room. Moreover, the
first and the last of these were furnished with two pillows
each. I did not in the moment use my arithmetic; but the
feeling which instantly pressed upon me was that of want of
breath.

"This is the bed prepared for you, I believe," said my
companion civilly, pointing to the third one before the
window. "There isn't room for anybody to turn, round here
now."

I began mechanically to take off my cap and gloves, looking
hard at the little bed, and wondering what other rights of
possession were to be given me in this place. I saw a
washstand in one window and a large mahogany wardrobe on one
side of the fireplace; a dressing table or chest of drawers
between the windows. Everything was handsome and nice;
everything was in the neatest order; but — where were my
clothes to go? Before I had made up my mind to ask, there came
a rush into the room; I supposed, of the other inmates. One
was a very large, fat, dull-faced girl; I should have thought
her a young woman, only that she was here in a school.
Another, bright and pretty and very good-humoured if there was
any truth ill her smiling black eyes, was much slighter and
somewhat younger; a year or two in advance of myself. The
third was a girl about my own age, shorter and smaller than I,
with also a pretty face, but an eye that I was not so sure of.
She was the last one to come in, and she immediately stopped
and looked at me; I thought, with no pleasure.

"This is Miss Randolph, girls," said Miss Bentley. "Miss
Randolph, Miss Macy."

I curtseyed to the fat girl, who gave me a little nod.

"I am glad she isn't as big as I am," was her comment on the
introduction. I was glad, too.

"Miss Lansing —"

This was bright-eyes, who bowed and smiled — she always smiled
— and said, "How do you do?" Then rushed off to a drawer in
search of something.

"Miss St. Clair, will you come and be introduced to Miss
Randolph?"

The St. Clair walked up demurely and took my hand. Her words
were in abrupt contrast. "Where are her things going, Miss
Bentley?" I wondered that pretty lips could be so ungracious.
It was not temper which appeared on them, but cool rudeness.

"Madame said we must make some room for her," Miss Bentley
answered.

"I don't know where," remarked Miss Macy. "_I_ have not two
inches."

"She can't have a peg nor a drawer of mine," said the St.
Clair. "Don't you put her there, Bentley." And the young lady
left us with that.

"We must manage it somehow," said Miss Bentley. "Lansing, look
here, — can't you take your things out of this drawer? Miss
Randolph has no place to lay anything. She must have a little
place, you know."

Lansing looked up with a perplexed face, and Miss Macy
remarked that nobody had a bit of room to lay anything.

"I am very sorry —" I said.

"It is no use being sorry, child," said Miss Macy, "we have
got to fix it, somehow. I know who _ought_ to be sorry. Here — I
can take this pile of things out of this drawer; that is all I
can do. Can't she manage with this half?"

But Miss Lansing came and made her arrangements, and then it
was found that the smallest of the four drawers was cleared
and ready for my occupation.

"But if we give you a whole drawer," said Miss Macy, "you must
be content with one peg in the wardrobe — will you?"

"Oh, and she can have one or two hooks in the closet," said
bright-eyes. "Come here, Miss Randolph — I will show you —"

And there in the closet I found was another place for washing,
with cocks for hot and cold water; and a press and plenty of
iron hooks; with also plenty of dresses and hats hanging on
them. Miss Lansing moved and changed several of these, till
she had cleared a space for me.

"There —" she said, "now you'll do, won't you? I don't believe
you can get a scrap of a corner in the wardrobe; Macy and
Bentley and St. Clair take it up so. _I_ haven't but one dress
hanging there, but you've got a whole drawer in the bureau."

I was not very awkward and clumsy in my belongings, but an
elephant could scarcely have been more bewildered if he had
been requested to lay his proboscis up in a glove box. "I
cannot put a dress in the drawer," I remarked.

"Oh, you can hang one up, here, under your cap; and that is
all any of us do. Our things, all except our everyday things,
go down stairs in our trunks. Have you many trunks?"

I told her no, only one. I did not know why it was a little
disagreeable to me to say that. The feeling came and passed. I
hung up my coat and cap, and brushed my hair; my new companion
looking on. Without any remark, however, she presently rushed
off, and I was left alone. I began to appreciate that. I sat
down on the side of my little bed, — to my fancy the very
chairs were appropriated, — and looked at my new place in the
world.

Five of us in that room! I had always had the comfort of great
space and ample conveniences about me; was it a luxury I had
enjoyed? It had seemed nothing more than a necessity. And now,
must I dress and undress myself before so many spectators?
could I not lock up anything that belonged to me? were all my
nice and particular habits to be crushed into one drawer and
smothered on one or two clothes pins? Must everything I did be
seen? And above all, where could I pray? I looked round in a
sort of fright. There was but one closet in the room, and that
was a washing closet, and held besides a great quantity of
other people's belongings. I could not, even for a moment,
shut it against them. In a kind of terror, I looked to make
sure that I was alone, and fell on my knees. It seemed to me
that all I could do was to pray every minute that I should
have to myself. They would surely be none too many. Then
hearing a footstep somewhere, I rose again and took from my
bag my dear little book. It was so small I could carry it
where I had not room for my Bible. I looked for the page of
the day, I remember now, with my eyes full of tears.

"Be watchful" — were the first words that met me. Ay, I was
sure I would need it; but how was a watch to be kept up, if I
could never be alone to take counsel with myself? I did not
see it; this was another matter from Miss Pinshon's unlocked
door. After all, that door had not greatly troubled me; my
room had not been of late often invaded. Now I had no room.
What more would my dear little book say to me?

"Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour."

Was the battle to go so hard against me? and what should I do
without that old and well-tried weapon of "all-prayer"?
Nothing; I should be conquered. I must have and keep that, I
resolved; if I lay awake and got up at night to use it. Dr.
Sandford would not like such a proceeding; but there were
worse dangers than the danger of lessened health. I _would_
pray; but what next?

"Take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently." — "What
I say unto you I say unto all, Watch."

I stood by the side of my bed, dashing the tears from my eyes.
Then I heard, as I thought, some one coming, and in haste
looked to see what else might be on the page; what further
message or warning. And something like a sunbeam of healing
flashed into my heart with the next words.

"Fear thou not: for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am
thy God; I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I
will uphold thee with the right hand of My righteousness."

"I, the Lord thy God, will hold thy right hand."

I was healed. I put up my little book in my bag again, feeling
whole and sound. It did not matter that I was crowded and
hindered and watched; for it was written also, "He preserveth
the way of his saints;" and I was safe.

I sat a little while longer alone. Then came a rush and rustle
of many feet upon the stairs, many dresses moving, many voices
blending in a little soft roar; as ominous as the roar of the
sea which one hears in a shell. My four room-mates poured into
the room, accompanied by one or two others; very busy and
eager about their affairs that they were discussing. Meanwhile
they all began to put themselves in order.

"The bell will ring for tea directly," said Miss Macy,
addressing herself to me, — "are you ready?"

"Tisn't much trouble to fix _her_ hair —" said my friend with
the black eyes.

Six pair of eyes for a moment were turned upon me.

"You are too old to have your hair so," remarked Miss Bentley.
"You ought to let it grow."

"Why don't you?" said Miss Lansing.

"She is a Roundhead," said the St. Clair, brushing her own
curls; which were beautiful and crinkled all over her head,
while my hair was straight. "I don't suppose she ever saw a
Cavalier before."

"St. Clair, you are too bad!" said Miss Mary. "Miss Randolph
is a stranger."

St. Clair made no answer, but finished her hair and ran off;
and presently the others filed off after her; and a loud
clanging bell giving the signal, I thought best to go too.
Every room was pouring forth its inmates; the halls and
passages were all alive and astir. In the train of the moving
crowd, I had no difficulty to find my way to the place of
gathering.

This was the school parlour; not the one where I had seen Mme.
Ricard. Parlours, rather; there was a suite of them, three
deep; for this part of the house had a building added in the
rear. The rooms were large and handsome; not like school
rooms, I thought; and yet very different from my home; for
they were bare. Carpets and curtains, sofas and chairs and
tables, were in them to be sure; and even pictures; yet they
were bare; for books and matters of art and little social
luxuries were wanting, such as I had all my life been
accustomed to, and such as filled Mme. Ricard's own rooms.
However, this first evening I could hardly see how the rooms
looked, for the lining of humanity which ran round all the
walls. There was a shimmer as of every colour in the rainbow;
and a buzz that could only come from a hive full. I, who had
lived all my life where people spoke softly, and where many
never spoke together, was bewildered.

The buzz hushed suddenly, and I saw Mme. Ricard's figure going
slowly down the rooms. She was in the uttermost contrast to
all her household. Ladylike always, and always dignified, her
style was her own, and I am sure that nobody ever felt that
she had not enough. Yet Mme. Ricard had nothing about her that
was conformed to the fashions of the day. Her dress was of a
soft kind of serge, which fell around her or swept across the
rooms in noiseless yielding folds. Hoops were the fashion of
the day; but Mme. Ricard wore no hoops; she went with ease and
silence where others went with a rustle and a warning to clear
the way. The back of her head was covered with a little cap as
plain as a nun's cap; and I never saw an ornament about her.
Yet criticism never touched Mme. Ricard. Not even the
criticism of a set of school-girls; and I had soon to learn
that there is none more relentless.

The tea-table was set in the further room of the three. Mime.
Ricard passed down to that. Presently I heard her low voice
saying, "Miss Randolph". Low as it always was, it was always
heard. I made my way down through the rooms to her presence;
and there I was introduced to the various teachers.
Mademoiselle Genevieve, Miss Babbitt, Mme. Jupon, and Miss
Dumps. I could not examine them just then. I felt I was on
exhibition myself.

"Is Miss Randolph to come to me, Madame?" the first of these
ladies asked. She was young, bright, black-eyed, and full of
energy; I saw so much.

"I fancy she will come to all of you," said Madame. "Except
Miss Babbitt. You can write and read, I dare say, Miss
Randolph?" she went on with a smile. I answered of course.

"What have been your principal studies for the past year?"

I said, mathematics, astronomy, and philosophy and history.

"Then she is mine!" exclaimed Mlle. Genevieve.

"She is older than she looks," said Miss Babbitt.

"Her hair is young, but her eyes are not," said the former
speaker; who was a lively lady.

"French have you studied?" Madame went on.

"Not so much," I said.

"Mme. Jupon will want you."

"I am sure she is a good child," said Mme. Jupon, who was a
good-natured, plain-looking Frenchwoman without a particle of
a Frenchwoman's grace or address. "I will be charmed to have
her."

"You may go back to your place, Miss Randolph," said my
mistress. "We will arrange all the rest to-morrow."

"Shall I go back with you?" asked Mlle. Genevieve. "Do you
mind going alone?"

She spoke very kindly, but I was at a loss for her meaning. I
saw the kindness; why it showed itself in such an offer I
could not imagine.

"I am very much obliged to you, ma'am," — I began, when a
little burst of laughter stopped me. It came from all the
teachers; even Mme. Ricard was smiling.

"You are out for once, Genevieve," she said.

"La charmante!" said Mme. Jupon. "Voyez l'aplomb!"

"No, you don't want me," said Mlle. Genevieve nodding. "Go —
you'll do."

I went back to the upper room, and presently tea was served. I
sat alone; there was nobody near me who knew me; I had nothing
to do while munching my bread and butter but to examine the
new scene. There was a great deal to move my curiosity. In the
first place, I was surprised to see the rooms gay with fine
dresses. I had come from the quiet of Magnolia, and accustomed
to the simplicity of my mother's taste; which if it sometimes
adorned me, did it always in subdued fashion, and never
flaunted either its wealth or beauty. But on every side of me
I beheld startling costumes; dresses that explained my mantua-
maker's eagerness about velvet and green leaves. I saw that
she was right; her trimmings would have been "quiet" here.
Opposite me was a brown merino, bordered with blocks of blue
silk running round the skirt. Near it was a dress of brilliant
red picked out with black cord and heavy with large black
buttons. Then a black dress caught my eye which had an
embattled trimming of black and gold, continued round the
waist and completed with a large gold buckle. Then there was a
grey cashmere with red stars and a bronze-coloured silk with
black velvet a quarter of a yard wide let into the skirt; the
body all of black velvet. I could go on, if my memory would
serve me. The rooms were full of this sort of thing. Yet more
than the dresses the heads surprised me. Just at that time the
style of hair-dressing was one of those styles which are
endurable, and perhaps even very beautiful, in the hands of a
first-rate artist and on the heads of the few women who dress
well; but which are more and more hideous the further you get
from that distant pinnacle of the mode, and the lower down
they spread among the ranks of society. I thought, as I looked
from one to another, I had never seen anything so ill in
taste, so outraged in style, so unspeakable in ugliness as
well as in pretension. I supposed then it was the fashion
principally which was to blame. Since then, I have seen the
same fashion on one of those heads that never wear anything
but in good style. It gathered a great wealth of rich hair
into a mass at the back of the head, yet leaving the top and
front of the hair in soft waves; and the bound up mass behind
was loose and soft and flowed naturally from the head; it had
no hard outline nor regular shape; it was nature's luxuriance
just held in there from bursting down over neck and shoulders;
and hardly that, for some locks were almost escaping. The
whole was to the utmost simple, natural, graceful, rich. But
these caricatures! All that they knew was to mass the hair at
the back of the head; and that fact was attained. But some
looked as if they had a hard round cannon-ball fastened there;
others suggested a stuffed pincushion, ready for pins; others
had a mortar shell in place of a cannon-ball, the size was so
enormous; in nearly all, the hair was strained tight over or
under something; in not one was there an effect which the
originator of the fashion would not have abhorred. Girlish
grace was nowhere to be seen, either in heads or persons;
girlish simplicity had no place. It was a school; but the
company looked fitter for the stiff assemblages of ceremony
that should be twenty years later in their lives.

My heart grew very blank. I felt unspeakably alone; not merely
because there was nobody there whom I knew, but because there
was nobody whom it seemed to me I ever should know. I took my
tea and bits of bread and butter, feeling forlorn. A year in
that place seemed to me longer than I could bear. I had
exchanged my King Log for King Stork.

It was some relief when after tea we were separated into other
rooms and sat down to study. But I dreamed over my book. I
wondered how heads could study that had so much trouble on the
outside. I wandered over the seas to that spot somewhere that
was marked by the ship that carried my father and another.
Only now going out towards China; and low long months might
pass before China would be lone with and the ship be bearing
them back again. The lesson given me that night was not
difficult enough to bind my attention; and my heart grew very
heavy. So heavy, that I felt I must find help somewhere. And
when one's need is so shut in, then it looks in the right
quarter — the only one left open.

My little book was up stairs in my bag; but my thoughts flew
to my page of that day and the "Fear thou not, for I am with
thee." Nobody knows, who has not wanted them, how good those
words are. says Division. "There is a list ..."
"Finished, please?" says the operator so near and loud that I
jump.

Division and I are at one here--we are agreed that we have not
finished. Like the Brothers Crosstalk, we say so simultaneously,
using the same swearword.

The operator clicks off, baffled.
"That list of men for a bombing course," says Division.
"Yes, Sir," I reply brightly, though my heart sinks.
"You ought to have sent it in at 6 P.M.," says Division. "And it
has not yet arrived."The night passed peacefully enough; and the
next day I was put in the schoolroom and found my place in the
various classes. The schoolrooms were large and pleasant;
large they had need to be, for the number of day scholars who
attended in them was very great. They were many as well as
spacious; different ages being parted off from each other.
Besides the schoolrooms proper, there were rooms for
recitation, where the classes met their teachers; so we had
the change and variety of moving from one part of the house to
another. We met Mlle. Genevieve in one room, for mathematics
and Italian; Mme. Jupon in another, for French. Miss Dumps
seized us in another, for writing and geography, and made the
most of us; she was a severe little person in her teaching and
in her discipline; but she was good. We called her Miss Maria,
in general. Miss Babbitt had the history; and she did nothing
to make it intelligible or interesting. asked Sanna. "Of
course," answered the boy, "and it is growing colder, too, and
you will see that the whole pond is frozen over by tomorrow."

"Yes, Conrad," said the girl.
She hastened her steps to keep up with the boy striding along.I could never love the study; but she made it a
great deal better than Miss Pinshon made it. Indeed I believe
that to learn anything under Mlle. Genevieve, would have been
pleasant. She had so much fire and energy; she taught with
such a will; her black eyes were so keen both for her pupils
and her subject. One never thought of the discipline in Mlle.
Genevieve's room, but only of the study. I was young to be
there, in the class where she put me; but my training had
fitted me for it. With Mme. Jupon also I had an easy time. The
whole was length of the road rules up to I the post and to the
meadows of Gschaid leads tall, dense woods without a
clearing which grow less heavy as one well comes down on the
level and issues from the meadows of the valley of Gschaid
them.For a day or two I did not meet them. I was busy with the
school routine, and beginning already to take pleasure in it.
Knowledge was to be had here; lay waiting to be gathered up;
and that gathering I always enjoyed. Miss Pinshon had kept me
on short allowance. It was the third or fourth day after my
arrival, that going up after dinner to get ready for a walk I
missed my chinchilla cap from its peg. I sought for it in
vain.

