Miss Todd, who knew everything that went on in Littlebath, and was
_au fait_ at every bit of scandal and tittle-tattle in the place,
had probably heard more of the fashion of Sir Lionel's life than he
was aware. In places such as Littlebath, ladies such as Miss Todd do
have sources of information which are almost miraculous. But still
she said nothing. She merely thought that Sir Lionel was a good deal
mistaken in the opinion which he had last expressed.

"I am not a young man," continued Sir Lionel. "My brother, you know,
is a very old man, and there are but fifteen years' difference
between us." This was a mistake of Sir Lionel's; the real difference
being ten years. "And you, I know, are hardly yet past your youth."

"I was forty-five last Guy Fawkes' day," said Miss Todd.

"Then there are fifteen years difference between us." The reader will
please to read "twenty." "Can you look over that difference, and take
me, old as I am, for your companion for life? Shall we not both be
happier if we have such a companion? As to money--"

"Oh, Sir Lionel, don't trouble about that; nor yet about your age.
If I wanted to marry, I'd as lief have an old man as a young one;
perhaps liefer: and as to money, I've got enough for myself, and I
have no doubt you have too"--nevertheless, Miss Todd did know of that
heavy over-due bill at the livery stables, and had heard that the
very natty groom who never left Sir Lionel's phaëton for a moment was
a sworn bailiff; sworn to bring the carriage and horses back to the
livery-stable yard--"but the fact is, I don't want to marry."

"Do you mean, Miss Todd, that you will prefer to live in solitude for
ever?"

"Oh, as for solitude, I'm not much of a Robinson Crusoe, nor yet an
Alexander Selkirk. I never found any of its charms. But, Lord bless
you, Sir Lionel, people never leave me in solitude. I'm never alone.
My sister Patty has fifteen children. I could have half of them to
live with me if I liked it." This view of the case did throw some
cold water on Sir Lionel's ardour.

"And you are quite resolved on this?" he said, with a dash of
expiring sentiment in his tone.

"What! to have Patty's children? No, I find it more convenient to pay
for their schooling."

"But you are quite resolved to--to--to give me no other, no more
favourable answer?"

"Oh! about marrying. On that subject, Sir Lionel, my mind is
altogether made up. Miss Todd I am, and Miss Todd I mean to remain.
To tell the truth plainly, I like to be number one in my own house.
Lady Bertram, I am quite sure, will be a fortunate and happy woman;
but then, she'll be number two, I take it. Eh, Sir Lionel?"

Sir Lionel smiled and laughed, and looked at the ground, and then
looked up again; but he did not deny the imputation. "Well," said he,
"I trust we shall still remain friends."

"Oh, certainly; why not?" replied Miss Todd.

And so they parted. Sir Lionel took his hat and stick, and went his
way.


CHAPTER II.

HE TRIES HIS HAND AGAIN.


Miss Todd shook hands with him as he went, and then, putting on her
bonnet and cloak, got into her fly.

She felt some little triumph at her heart in thinking that Sir Lionel
had wished to marry her. Had she not, she would hardly have been a
woman. But by far her strongest feeling was one of dislike to him for
not having wished to marry Miss Baker. She had watched the gallant
soldier closely for the last year, and well knew how tenderly he had
been used to squeeze Miss Baker's hand. He had squeezed her own hand
too; but what was that? She made others the subject of jokes, and
was prepared to be joked upon herself. Whatever Oliver Sir Lionel,
or other person, might give her, she would give back to him or to
her--always excepting Mrs. Leake--a Rowland that should be quite as
good. But Miss Baker was no subject for a joke, and Sir Lionel was in
duty bound to have proposed to her.

