Edited by Charles Aldarondo Aldarondo@yahoo.com


LOST IN THE FOG

by

JAMES DE MILLE


1870


I.

Old Acquaintances gather around old Scenes.--Antelope, ahoy!--How
are you, Solomon?--Round-about Plan of a round about Voyage.--The
Doctor warns, rebukes, and remonstrates, but, alas! in vain.--It
must be done.--Beginning of a highly eventful Voyage.


It was a beautiful morning, in the month of July, when a crowd of
boys assembled on the wharf of Grand Pre.  The tide was high, the
turbid waters of Mud Creek flowed around, a fresh breeze blew, and
if any craft was going to sea she could not have found a better
time.  The crowd consisted chiefly of boys, though a few men were
mingled with them.  These boys were from Grand Pre School, and are
all old acquaintances.  There was the stalwart frame of Bruce, the
Roman face of Arthur, the bright eyes of Bart, the slender frame of
Phil, and the earnest glance of Tom.  There, too, was Pat's merry
smile, and the stolid look of Bogud, and the meditative solemnity
of Jiggins, not to speak of others whose names need not be
mentioned.  Amid the crowd the face of Captain Corbet was
conspicuous, and the dark visage of Solomon, while that of the
mate was distinguishable in the distance.  To all these the good
schooner Antelope formed the centre of attraction, and also of
action.  It was on board of her that the chief bustle took place,
and towards her that all eyes were turned.

The good schooner Antelope had made several voyages during the past
few months, and now presented herself to the eye of the spectator
not much changed from her former self.  A fine fresh coat of coal
tar had but recently ornamented her fair exterior, while a coat of
whitewash inside the hold had done much to drive away the odor of
the fragrant potato.  Rigging and sails had been repaired as well
as circumstances would permit, and in the opinion of her gallant
captain she was eminently seaworthy.

On the present occasion things bore the appearance of a voyage.
Trunks were passed on board and put below, together with coats,
cloaks, bedding, and baskets of provisions.  The deck was strewn
about with the multifarious requisites of a ship's company.  The
Antelope, at that time, seemed in part an emigrant vessel, with a
dash of the yacht and the coasting schooner.

In the midst of all this, two gentlemen worked their way through
the crowd to the edge of the wharf.

"Well, boys," said one, "well, captain, what's the meaning of all
this?"

Captain Corbet started at this, and looked up from a desperate
effort to secure the end of one of the sails.

"Why, Dr. Porter!" said he; "why, doctor!--how d'ye do?--and Mr.
Long, too!--why, railly!"

The boys also stopped their work, and looked towards their teachers
with a little uneasiness.

"What's all this?" said Dr. Porter, looking around with a smile;
"are you getting up another expedition?"

"Wal, no," said Captain Corbet, "not 'xactly; fact is, we're kine
o' goin to take a vyge deoun the bay."

"Down the bay?"

"Yes.  You see the boys kine o' want to go home by water, rayther
than by land."

"By water!  Home by water!" repeated Mr. Long, doubtfully.

"Yes," said Captain Corbet; "an bein as the schewner was in good
repair, an corked, an coal-tarred, an whitewashed up fust rate, I
kine o' thought it would redound to our mootooil benefit if we went
off on sich a excursion,--bein pleasanter, cheaper, comfortabler,
an every way preferable to a land tower."

"Hem," said Dr. Porter, looking uneasily about.  "I don't altogether
like it.  Boys, what does it all mean?"

Thus appealed to, Bart became spokesman for the boys.

"Why, sir," said he, "we thought we'd like to go home by water--
that's all."

"Go home by water!" repeated the doctor once more, with a curious
smile.

"Yes, sir."

"What? by the Bay of Fundy?"

"Yes, sir."

"Who are going?"

"Well, sir, there are only a few of us.  Bruce, and Arthur, and
Tom, and Phil, and Pat, besides myself."

"Bruce and Arthur?" said the doctor; "are they going home by the
Bay of Fundy?"

"Yes, sir," said Bart, with a smile.

"I don't see how they can get to the Gulf of St. Lawrence and
Prince Edward's Island from the Bay of Fundy," said the doctor,
"without going round Nova Scotia, and that will be a journey of
many hundred miles."

"O, no, sir," said Bruce; "we are going first to Moncton."

"O, is that the idea?"

"Yes, sir."

"And where will you go from Moncton?"

"To Shediac, and then home."

"And are you going to Newfoundland by that route, Tom?" asked the
doctor.

"Yes, sir," said Tom, gravely.

"From Shediac?"

"Yes, sir."

"I never knew before that there were vessels going from Shediac to
Newfoundland."

"O, I'm going to Prince Edward's Island first, sir, with Bruce and
Arthur," said Tom.  "I'll find my way home from there."

The doctor smiled.

"I'm afraid you'll find it a long journey before you reach home.
Won't your friends be anxious?"

"O, no, sir.  I wrote that I wanted to visit Bruce and Arthur, and
they gave me leave."

"And you, Phil, are you going home by the Antelope?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are going exactly in a straight line away from it."

"Am I, sir?"

"Of course you are.  This isn't the way to Chester."

"Well, sir, you see I'm going to visit Bart at St. John."

"O,  I understand.  And that is your plan, then?"

"Yes, sir," said Bart.  "Pat is going too."

"Where are you going first?"

"First, sir, we will sail to the Petitcodiac River, and go up it as
far as Moncton, where Bruce, and Arthur, and Tom will leave us."

"And then?"

"Then we will go to St. John, where Phil, and Pat, and I will leave
her.  Solomon, too, will leave her there."

"Solomon!" cried the doctor.  "What!  Solomon!  Is Solomon going?
Why, what can I do without Solomon?  Here!  Hallo!--Solomon!  What
in the world's the meaning of all this?"

Thus summoned, Solomon came forth from the cabin, into which he had
dived at the first appearance of the doctor.  His eyes were
downcast, his face was demure, his attitude and manner were abject.

"Solomon," said the doctor, "what's this I hear?  Are you going to
St. John?"

"Ony temp'ly, sah--jist a leetle visit, sah," said Solomon, very
humbly, stealing looks at the boys from his downcast eyes.

"But what makes you go off this way without asking, or letting me
know?"

"Did I, sah?" said Solomon, rolling his eyes up as though horrified
at his own wickedness; "the sakes now!  Declar, I clean forgot it."

"What are you going away for?"

"Why, sah, for de good oh my helf.  Docta vises sea vyge; sides, I
got frens in St. John, an business dar, what muss be tended to."

"Well, well," said the doctor, "I suppose if you want to go you'll
find reasons enough; but at the same time you ought to have let me
known before."

"Darsn't, sah," said Solomon.

"Why not?"

"Fraid you'd not let me go," said Solomon, with a broad grin, that
instantly was suppressed by a demure cough.

"Nonsense," said the doctor; and then turning away, he spoke a few
words apart with Mr. Long.

"Well, boys," said the doctor, at last, "this project of yours
doesn't seem to me to be altogether safe, and I don't like to trust
you in this way without anybody as a responsible guardian."

Bart smiled.

"O, sir," said he, "you need not be at all uneasy.  All of us are
accustomed to take care of ourselves; and besides, if you wanted a
responsible guardian for us, what better one could be found than
Captain Corbet?"

The doctor and Mr. Long both shook their heads.   Evidently neither
of them attached any great importance to Captain Corbet's
guardianship.

"Did you tell your father how you were going?" asked the doctor,
after a few further words with Mr. Long.

"O, yes, sir; and he told me I might go.  What's more, he promised
to charter a schooner for me to cruise about with Phil and Pat
after I arrived home."

"And we got permission, too," said Bruce.

"Indeed!" said the doctor.  "That changes the appearance of things.
I was afraid that it was a whim of your own.  And now, one thing
more,--how are you off for provisions?"

"Wal, sir," said Captain Corbet, "I've made my calculations, an I
think I've got enough.  What I might fail in, the boys and Solomon
have made up."

"How is it, Solomon?" asked the doctor.

Solomon grinned.

"You sleep in the hold, I see," continued the doctor.

"Yes, sir," said Bruce.  "It's whitewashed, and quite sweet now.
We'll only be on board two or three days at the farthest, and so it
really doesn't much matter how we go."

"Well, boys, I have no more to say; only take care of yourselves."

With these words the doctor and Mr. Long bade them good by, and
then walked away.

The other boys, however, stood on the wharf waiting to see the
vessel off.  They themselves were all going to start for home in a
few minutes, and were only waiting for the departure of the
Antelope.

This could not now be long delayed.  The tide was high.  The wind
fresh and fair.  The luggage, and provisions, and stores were all
on board.  Captain Corbet was at the helm.  All was ready.  At
length the word was given, the lines were cast off; and the
Antelope moved slowly round, and left the wharf amid the cheers of
the boys.  Farther and farther it moved away, then down the
tortuous channel of Mud Creek, until at last the broad expanse of
Minas Basin received them.

For this voyage the preparations had been complete.  It had first
been thought of several weeks before, and then the plan and the
details had been slowly elaborated.  It was thought to be an
excellent idea, and one which was in every respect worthy of the
"B. O. W. C."  Captain Corbet embraced the proposal with enthusiasm.
Letters home, requesting permission, received favorable answers.
Solomon at first resisted, but finally, on being solemnly appealed
to as Grand Panjandrum, he found himself unable to withstand, and
thus everything was gradually prepared.  Other details were
satisfactorily arranged, though not without much serious and earnest
debate.  The question of costume received very careful attention,
and it was decided to adopt and wear the weather-beaten uniforms
that had done service amidst mud and water on a former occasion.
Solomon's presence was felt to be a security against any menacing
famine; and that assurance was made doubly sure by the presence of a
cooking stove, which Captain Corbet, mindful of former hardships,
had thoughtfully procured and set up in the hold.  Finally, it was
decided that the flag which had formerly flaunted the breeze should
again wave over them; and so it was, that as the Antelope moved
through Mud Creek, like a thing of life, the black flag of the
"B. O. W. C." floated on high, with its blazonry of a skull, which
now, worn by time, looked more than ever like the face of some mild,
venerable, and paternal monitor.

Some time was taken up in arranging the hold.  Considerable
confusion was manifest in that important locality.  Tin pans were
intermingled with bedding, provisions with wearing apparel, books
with knives and forks, while amid the scene the cooking stove
towered aloft prominent.  To tell the truth, the scene was rather
free and easy than elegant; nor could an unprejudiced observer have
called it altogether comfortable.  In fact, to one who looked at it
with a philosophic mind, an air of squalor might possibly have been
detected.  Yet what of that?  The philosophic mind just alluded to
would have overlooked the squalor, and regarded rather the health,
the buoyant animal spirits, and the determined habit of enjoyment,
which all the ship's company evinced, without exception.  The first
thing which they did in the way of preparation for the voyage was
to doff the garments of civilized life, and to don the costume of
the "B. O. W. C."  Those red shirts, decorated with a huge white
cross on the back, had been washed and mended, and completely
reconstructed, so that the rents and patches which were here and
there visible on their fair exteriors, served as mementos of former
exploits, and called up associations of the past without at all
deteriorating from the striking effect of the present.  Glengary
bonnets adorned their heads, and served to complete the costume.

The labor of dressing was followed by a hurried arrangement of the
trunks and bedding; after which they all emerged from the hold and
ascending to the deck, looked around upon the scene.  Above, the
sky was blue and cloudless, and between them and the blue sky
floated the flag, from whose folds the face looked benignantly
down.  The tide was now on the ebb, and as the wind was fair, both
wind and tide united to bear them rapidly onward.  Before them was
Blomidon, while all around was the circling sweep of the shores of
Minas Bay.  A better day for a start could not have been found, and
everything promised a rapid and pleasant run.

"I must say," remarked Captain Corbet, who had for some time been
standing buried in his own meditations at the helm,--"I must say,
boys, that I don't altogether regret bein once more on the briny
deep.  There was a time," he continued, meditatively, "when I kine
o' anticipated givin up this here occypation, an stayin to hum a
nourishin of the infant.  But man proposes, an woman disposes, as
the sayin is,--an you see what I'm druv to.  It's a great thing for
a man to have a companion of sperrit, same as I have, that keeps a'
drivin an a drivin at him, and makes him be up an doin.  An now, I
declar, if I ain't gittin to be a confirmed wanderer agin, same as
I was in the days of my halcyon an shinin youth.  Besides, I have a
kine o' feelin as if I'd be a continewin this here the rest of all
my born days."

"I hope you won't feel homesick," remarked Bart, sympathetically.

"Homesick," repeated the captain.  "Wal, you see thar's a good deal
to be said about it.  In my hum thar's a attraction, but thar's
also a repulsion.  The infant drors me hum, the wife of my buzzum
drives me away, an so thar it is, an I've got to knock under to the
strongest power.  An that's the identical individool thing that
makes the aged Corbet a foogitive an a vagabond on the face of the
mighty deep.  Still I have my consolations."

The captain paused for a few moments, and then resumed.

"Yes," he continued, "I have my consolations.  Surroundins like
these here air a consolation.  I like your young faces, an gay an
airy ways, boys.  I like to see you enjoy life.  So, go in.  Pitch
in.  Go ahead.  Sing.  Shout.  Go on like mad.  Carry on like all
possessed, an you'll find the aged Corbet smilin amid the din, an a
flutterin of his venerable locks triumphant amid the ragin an
riotin elements."

"It's a comfort to know that, at any rate," said Tom.  "We'll give
you enough of that before we leave, especially as we know it don't
annoy you."

"I don't know how it is," said the captain, solemnly, "but I begin
to feel a sort of somethin towards you youngsters that's very
absorbin.  It's a kine o' anxious fondness, with a mixtoor of
indulgent tenderness.  How ever I got to contract sech a feelin
beats me.  I s'pose it's bein deprived of my babby, an exiled from
home, an so my vacant buzzom craves to be filled.  I've got a
dreadful talent for doin the pariential, an what's more, not only
for doin the pariential, but for feelin of it.  So you boys, ef
ever you see me a doin of the pariential towards youns, please
remember that when I act like an anxious an too indulgent parient
towards youns, it's because I feel like one."

For some hours they traversed the waters, carried swiftly on by the
united forces of the wind and tide.  At last they found themselves
close by Blomidon, and under his mighty shadow they sailed for some
time.  Then they doubled the cape, and there, before them, lay a
long channel--the Straits of Minas, through which the waters pour
at every ebb and flood.  Their course now lay through this to the
Bay of Fundy outside; and as it was within two hours of the low
tide, the current ran swiftly, hurrying them rapidly past the land.
Here the scene was grand and impressive in the extreme.  On one
side arose a lofty, precipitous cliff, which extended for miles,
its sides scarred and tempest-torn, its crest fringed with trees,
towering overhead many hundreds of feet, black, and menacing, and
formidable.  At its base was a steep beach, disclosed by the
retreating tide, which had been formed by the accumulated masses of
rock that had fallen in past ages from the cliffs above.  These
now, from the margin of the water up to high-water mark, were
covered with a vast growth of sea-weed, which luxuriated here, and
ran parallel to the line of vegetation on the summit of the cliff.
On the other side of the strait the scene was different.  Here the
shores were more varied; in one place, rising high on steep
precipices, in others, thrusting forth black, rocky promontories
into the deep channel; in others again, retreating far back, and
forming bays, round whose sloping shores appeared places fit for
human habitation, and in whose still waters the storm-tossed bark
might find a secure haven.

As they drifted on, borne along by the impetuous tide, the shores
on either side changed, and new vistas opened before them.  At last
they reached the termination of the strait, the outer portal of
this long avenue, which here was marked by the mighty hand of
Nature in conspicuous characters.  For here was the termination of
that long extent of precipitous cliff which forms the outline of
Blomidon; and this termination, abrupt, and stern, and black,
shows, in a concentrated form, the power of wind and wave.  The
cliff ends abrupt, broken off short, and beyond this arise from the
water several giant fragments of rock, the first of which, shaped
like an irregular pyramid, rivals the cliff itself in height, and
is surrounded by other rocky fragments, all of which form a
colossal group, whose aggregated effect never fails to overawe the
mind of the spectator.  Such is Cape Split, the terminus of Cape
Blomidon, on the side of the Bay of Fundy.  Over its shaggy summits
now fluttered hundreds of sea-gulls; round its black base the waves
foamed and thundered, while the swift tide poured between the
interstices of the rugged rocks.

"Behind that thar rock," said Captain Corbet, pointing to Cape
Split," is a place they call Scott's Bay.  Perhaps some of you have
heard tell of it."

"I have a faint recollection of such a place," said Bart.  "Scott's
Bay, do you call it?  Yes, that must be the place that I've heard
of; and is it behind this cape?"

"It's a bay that runs up thar," said the captain.  "We'll see it
soon arter we get further down.  It's a fishin and ship-buildin
place.  They catch a dreadful lot of shad thar sometimes."

Swiftly the Antelope passed on, hurried on by the tide, and no
longer feeling much of the wind; swiftly she passed by the cliffs,
and by the cape, and onward by the sloping shores, till at length
the broad bosom of the Bay of Fundy extended before their eyes.
Here the wind ceased altogether, the water was smooth and calm, but
the tide still swept them along, and the shores on each side
receded, until at length they were fairly in the bay.  Here, on one
side, the coast of Nova Scotia spread away, until it faded from
view in the distance, while on the other side the coast of New
Brunswick extended.  Between the schooner and this latter coast a
long cape projected, while immediately in front arose a lofty
island of rock, whose summit was crowned with trees.

"What island is that?" asked Tom.

"That," said Captain Corbet, "is Isle o' Holt."

"I think I've heard it called Ile Haute," said Bart.

"All the same," said Captain Corbet, "ony I believe it was named
after the man that diskivered it fust, an his name was Holt."

"But it's a French name," said Tom; "Ile Haute means high island."

"Wal, mebbe he was a Frenchman," said Captain Corbet.  "I won't
argufy--I dare say he was.  There used to be a heap o' Frenchmen
about these parts, afore we got red of 'em."

"It's a black, gloomy, dismal, and wretched-looking place," said
Tom, after some minutes of silent survey.


II.

First Sight of a Place destined to be better known.--A Fog Mill.--
Navigation without Wind.--Fishing.--Boarding.--Under Arrest.--
Captain Corbet defiant.--The Revenue Officials frowned down.--
Corbet triumphant.


The Antelope had left the wharf at about seven in the morning.  It
was now one o'clock.  For the last two or three hours there had
been but little wind, and it was the tide which had carried her
along.  Drifting on in this way, they had come to within a mile of
Ile Haute, and had an opportunity of inspecting the place which Tom
had declared to be so gloomy.  In truth, Tom's judgment was not
undeserved.  Ile Haute arose like a solid, unbroken rock out of the
deep waters of the Bay of Fundy, its sides precipitous, and scarred
by tempest, and shattered by frost.  On its summit were trees, at
its base lay masses of rock that had fallen.  The low tide
disclosed here, as at the base of Blomidon, a vast growth of black
sea-weed, which covered all that rocky shore.  The upper end of the
island, which was nearest them, was lower, however, and went down
sloping to the shore, forming a place where a landing could easily
be effected.  From this shore mud flats extended into the water.

"This end looks as though it had been cleared," said Bart.

"I believe it was," said the captain.

"Does anybody live here?"

"No."

"Did any one ever live here?"

"Yes, once, some one tried it, I believe, but gave it up."

"Does it belong to anybody, or is it public property?"

"O, I dare say it belongs to somebody, if you could only get him to
claim it."

"I say, captain," said Bruce, "how much longer are we going to
drift?"

"O, not much longer.  The tide's about on the turn, and we'll have
a leetle change."

"What! will we drift back again?"

"O, I shouldn't wonder if we had a leetle wind afore long."

"But if we don't, will we drift back again into the Basin of
Minas?"

"O, dear, no.  We can anchor hereabouts somewhar."

"You won't anchor by this island,--will you?"

"O, dear, no.  We'll have a leetle driftin first."  As the captain
spoke, he looked earnestly out upon the water.

"Thar she comes," he cried at last, pointing over the water.  The
boys looked, and saw the surface of the bay all rippled over.  They
knew the signs of wind, and waited for the result.  Soon a faint
puff came up the bay, which filled the languid sails, and another
puff came up more strongly, and yet another, until at length a
moderate breeze was blowing.  The tide no longer dragged them on.
It was on the turn; and as the vessel caught the wind, it yielded
to the impetus, and moved through the water, heading across the bay
towards the New Brunswick shore, in such a line as to pass near to
that cape which has already been spoken of.

"If the wind holds out," said Captain Corbet, "so as to carry us
past Cape d'Or, we can drift up with this tide."

"Where's Cape d'Or?"

"That there," said Captain Corbet, pointing to the long cape which
stretched between them and the New Brunswick shore.  "An if it goes
down, an we can't get by the cape, we'll be able, at any rate, to
drop anchor there, an hold on till the next tide."

The returning tide, and the fresh breeze that blew now, bore them
onward rapidly, and they soon approached Cape d'Or.  They saw that
it terminated in a rocky cliff, with rocky edges jutting forth, and
that all the country adjoining was wild and rugged.  But the wind,
having done this much for them, now began to seem tired of favoring
them, and once more fell off.

"I don't like this," said Captain Corbet, looking around.

"What?"

"All this here," said he, pointing to the shore.

It was about a mile away, and the schooner, borne along now by the
tide, was slowly drifting on to an unpleasant proximity to the
rocky shore.

"I guess we've got to anchor," said Captain Corbet; "there's no
help for it."

"To anchor?" said Bruce, in a tone of disappointment.

"Yes, anchor; we've got to do it," repeated the captain, in a
decided tone.  The boys saw that there was no help for it, for the
vessel was every moment drawing in closer to the rocks; and though
it would not have been very dangerous for her to run ashore in that
calm water, yet it would not have been pleasant.  So they
suppressed their disappointment, and in a few minutes the anchor
was down, and the schooner's progress was stopped.

"Thar's one secret," said the captain, "of navigatin in these here
waters, an that is, to use your anchor.  My last anchor I used for
nigh on thirty year, till it got cracked.  I mayn't be much on
land, but put me anywhars on old Fundy, an I'm to hum.  I know
every current on these here waters, an can foller my nose through
the thickest fog that they ever ground out at old Manan."

"What's that?" asked Bart.  "What did you say about grinding out
fog?"

"O, nothin, ony thar's an island down the bay, you know, called
Grand Manan, an seafarin men say that they've got a fog mill down
thar, whar they grind out all the fog for the Bay of Fundy.  I
can't say as ever I've seen that thar mill, but I've allus found
the fog so mighty thick down thar that I think thar's a good deal
in the story."

"I suppose we'll lose this tide," said Phil.

"Yes, I'm afeard so," said the captain, looking around over the
water.  "This here wind ain't much, any way; you never can reckon
on winds in this bay.  I don't care much about them.  I'd a most
just as soon go about the bay without sails as with them.  What I
brag on is the tides, an a jodgmatical use of the anchor."

"You're not in earnest?"

"Course I am."

"Could you get to St. John from Grand Pre without sails?"

"Course I could."

"I don't see how you could manage to do it."

"Do it?  Easy enough," said the captain.  "You see I'd leave with
the ebb tide, and get out into the bay.  Then I'd anchor an wait
till the next ebb, an so on.  Bless your hearts, I've often done
it."

"But you couldn't get across the bay by drifting."

"Course I could.  I'd work my way by short drifts over as far as
this, an then I'd gradually move along till I kine o' canted over
to the New Brunswick shore.  It takes time to do it, course it
does; but what I mean to say is this--it CAN be done."

"Well, I wouldn't like to be on board while you were trying to do
it."

"Mebbe not.  I ain't invitin you to do it, either.  All I was sayin
is, it CAN be done.  Sails air very good in their way, course they
air, an who's objectin to 'em?  I'm only sayin that in this here
bay thar's things that's more important than sails, by a long
chalk--such as tides, an anchors in particular.  Give me them thar,
an I don't care a hooter what wind thar is."

Lying thus at anchor, under the hot sun, was soon found to be
rather dull, and the boys sought in vain for some way of passing
the time.  Different amusements were invented for the occasion.
The first amusement consisted in paper boats, with which they ran
races, and the drift of these frail vessels over the water afforded
some excitement.  Then they made wooden boats with huge paper
sails.  In this last Bart showed a superiority to the others; for,
by means of a piece of iron hoop, which he inserted as a keel, he
produced a boat which was able to carry an immense press of sail,
and in the faint and scarce perceptible breeze, easily distanced
the others.  This accomplishment Bart owed to his training in a
seaport town.

At length one of them proposed that they should try to catch fish.
Captain Corbet, in answer to their eager inquiries, informed them
that there were fish everywhere about the bay; on learning which
they became eager to try their skill.  Some herring were on board,
forming part of the stores, and these were taken for bait.  Among
the miscellaneous contents of the cabin a few hooks were found,
which were somewhat rusty, it is true, yet still good enough for
the purpose before them.  Lines, of course, were easily procured,
and soon a half dozen baited hooks were down in the water, while a
half dozen boys, eager with suspense, watched the surface of the
water.

For a half hour they held their lines suspended without any result;
but at the end of that time, a cry from Phil roused them, and on
looking round they saw him clinging with all his might to his line,
which was tugged at tightly by something in the water.  Bruce ran
to help him, and soon their united efforts succeeded in landing on
the deck of the vessel a codfish of very respectable size.  The
sight of this was greeted with cheers by the others, and served to
stimulate them to their work.

After this others were caught, and before half an hour more some
twenty codfish, of various sizes, lay about the deck, as trophies
of their piscatory skill.  They were now more excited than ever,
and all had their hooks in the water, and were waiting eagerly for
a bite, when an exclamation from Captain Corbet roused them.

On turning their heads, and looking in the direction where he was
pointing, they saw a steamboat approaching them.  It was coming
from the head of the bay on the New Brunswick side, and had
hitherto been concealed by the projecting cape.

"What's that?" said Bart.  "Is it the St. John steamer?"

"No, SIR," said the captain.  She's a man-o'-war steamer--the
revenoo cutter, I do believe."

"How do you know?"

"Why, by her shape."

"She seems to be coming this way."

"Yes, bound to Minas Bay, I s'pose.  Wal, wal, wal! strange too,--
how singoolarly calm an onterrified I feel in'ardly.  Why, boys,
I've seen the time when the sight of a approachin revenoo vessel
would make me shiver an shake from stem to starn.  But now how
changed!  Such, my friends, is the mootability of human life!"

The boys looked at the steamer for a few moments, but at length
went back to their fishing.  The approaching steamer had nothing in
it to excite curiosity: such an object was too familiar to withdraw
their thoughts from the excitement of their lines and hooks, and
the hope which each had of surpassing the other in the number of
catches animated them to new trials.  So they soon forgot all about
the approaching steamer.

But Captain Corbet had nothing else to do, and so, whether it was
on account of his lack of employment, or because of the sake of old
associations, he kept his eyes fixed on the steamer.  Time passed
on, and in the space of another half hour she had drawn very near
to the Antelope.

Suddenly Captain Corbet slapped his hand against his thigh.

"Declar, if they ain't a goin to overhaul us!" he cried.

At this the boys all turned again to look at the steamer.

"Declar, if that fellow in the gold hat ain't a squintin at us
through his spy-glass!" cried the captain.

As the boys looked, they saw that the Antelope had become an object
of singular attention and interest to those on board of the
steamer.  Men were on the forecastle, others on the main deck, the
officers were on the quarter-deck, and all were earnestly
scrutinizing the Antelope.  One of them was looking at her through
his glass.  The Antelope, as she lay at anchor, was now turned with
her stern towards the steamer, and her sails flapping idly against
the masts.  In a few moments the paddles of the steamer stopped,
and at the same instant a gun was fired.

"Highly honored, kind sir," said Captain Corbet, with a grin.

"What's the matter?" asked Bart.

"Matter?  Why that thar steamer feels kine o' interested in us, an
that thar gun means, HEAVE TO."

"Are you going to heave to?"

"Nary heave."

"Why not?"

"Can't come it no how; cos why, I'm hove to, with the anchor hard
and fast, ony they can't see that we're anchored."

Suddenly a cry came over the water from a man on the quarter-deck.

"Ship aho-o-o-o-o-oy!"

"Hel-lo-o-o-o-o!"

Such was the informal reply of Captain Corbet.

"Heave to-o-o-o, till I send a boat aboard."

"Hoo-r-a-a-a-a-ay!"

Such was again Captain Corbet's cheerful and informal answer.

"Wal! wal wal!" he exclaimed, "it does beat my grandmother--they're
goin to send a boat aboard."

"What for?"

Captain Corbet grinned, and shook his head, and chuckled very
vehemently, but said nothing.  He appeared to be excessively amused
with his own thoughts.  The boys looked at the steamer, and then at
Captain Corbet, in some wonder; but as he said nothing, they were
silent, and waited to see what was going to happen.  Meanwhile
Solomon, roused from some mysterious culinary duties by the report
of the gun, had scrambled upon the deck, and stood with the others
looking out over the water at the steamer.

In a few moments the steamer's boat was launched, and a half dozen
sailors got in, followed by an officer.  Then they put off, and
rowed with vigorous strokes towards the schooner.

Captain Corbet watched the boat for some time in silence.

"Cur'ouser an cur'ouser," he said, at length.  "I've knowed the
time, boys, when sech an incident as this, on the briny deep, would
have fairly keeled me over, an made me moot, an riz every har o' my
head; but look at me now.  Do I tremble? do I shake?  Here, feel my
pulse."

Phil, who stood nearest, put his finger on the outstretched wrist
of the captain.

"Doos it beat?"

"No," said Phil.

"Course it beats; but then it ony beats nateral.  You ain't feelin
the right spot--the humane pulse not bein sitooated on the BACK of
the hand," he added mildly, "but here;" and he removed Phil's
inexperienced finger to the place where the pulse lies.  "Thar,
now," he added, "as that pulse beats now, even so it beat a half
hour ago, before that thar steamer hev in sight.  Why, boys, I've
knowed the time when this humane pulse bet like all possessed.  You
see, I've lived a life of adventoor, in spite of my meek and quiet
natoor, an hev dabbled at odd times in the smugglin business.  But
they don't catch me this time--I've retired from that thar, an the
Antelope lets the revenoo rest in peace."

The boat drew nearer and nearer, and the officer at the stern
looked scrutinizingly at the Antelope.  There was an air of
perplexity about his face, which was very visible to those on
board, and the perplexity deepened and intensified as his eyes
rested on the flag of the "B. O. W. C."

"Leave him to me," said Captain Corbet.  "Leave that thar young man
to me.  I enjy havin to do with a revenoo officer jest now; so
don't go an put in your oars, but jest leave him to me."

"All right, captain; we won't say a word," said Bruce.  "We'll go
on with our fishing quietly.  Come, boys--look sharp, and down with
your lines."

The interest which they had felt in these new proceedings had
caused the boys to pull up their hooks; but now, at Bruce's word,
they put them in the water once more, and resumed their fishing,
only casting sidelong glances at the approaching boat.

In a few minutes the boat was alongside, and the officer leaped on
board.  He looked all around, at the fish lying about the deck, at
the boys engaged in fishing, at Captain Corbet, at Solomon, at the
mysterious flag aloft, and finally at the boys.  These all took no
notice of him, but appeared to be intent on their task.

"What schooner is this?" he asked, abruptly.

The train was crowded with excursionists.

In Grünau he immediately went to the sports and behind the rows of
the audience along with him so well known Auskleidestellen, where
clothes were hanging everywhere.

He sought the freedom of the remotest corner and moved slowly.

It was four clock.

Five, the 600-meter race barely started.

When he was the jersey over his glowing limbs moved, he was still
all alone in this corner up here.

This jersey he had for his current single swimmer swimming as it
can, and for weeks he had thought about what he should and could
choose.

Finally he decided: all white, just on the edge with a golden stripe,
and also the trunks: all white with golden stripes and narrow front
with a simple gold star.

The colors were not clubs, this was not a badge, that was still no
one has ever been elected - it should be self-colors, in which he
is now all alone wanted to win today, this one time before - before
He again wanted to fight for others.

Lightweight and streamlined set of thin, almost transparent fabric
around his body, only the arms and legs freely leaving, nowhere
beengend, each yielding movement, as the jerseys of athletes and
acrobats.

Fields would have no simpler and more modest, yet challenging,
meaningful fuller colors than these two: white and gold - still no
one came, and he was already ready.

From this spot he could from not only all sports among themselves,
but largely overlook the whole area.

Before he fell under the trees, the long benches stepped up to the
low water level, densely filled with spectators, the denser the
closer to the battlefield, all is as comfortable as possible, making
the women in light summer dresses, the men often in shirt sleeves
, drinking, laughing, the sweat drying and again the attention the
games turn ...

Children who are bored and balgten, between the ...

Further down the colors of the clubs, the black skirts and Fräcke
the official participants, the invited guests, the judges, the
organizers ... then the bare, bright shapes of the fighters ...
finally defined the place with his fahnengeschmückten scaffolding,
based on tonnes swam ... the springboard to the fast outgoing and
incoming characters, strange shapes in the air and through water
in the Application vanishingly ...

Life, moving everywhere, everywhere coming and going: the excited
and yet restrained Ernst, the tight focus of the festival, only
interrupted by the temporary, thunderous cheering of the spectators,
but all spellbound, little paralyzed by the threat of sultriness
this July day ...

And Moreover, the entire, vast landscape, the bright pool of water,
the lake here is widening, and there, against the West, in sluggish
rivers verengernd to its shores menschenüberfüllten summer the
gardens, of which music herüberschallte, seeding with boats and
vehicles, the sodden happy sunday and metropolitan arbeitsmüden
people to drift left, then over there and the simple in its uniformity
but so deep picture of the dark pines and white sand the Mark: the
gentle lines of the Müggelberge, broke through on the sharp horizon
line a viewing tower, but otherwise quiet and wavy then moving into
their more mild-friendliness created for the quiet seriousness of
the autumn, as for this bright sun, the straight trunks motionless,
without a tremble, as stunned, stand ...

Fields knew nothing of the beauty and the monotony of this area.

He had never known anything other than they, and the images of his
travels he had seen it for ten other penny machines saw.

He saw only water.

And it sparkled and shone and cried, and drew, and he eagerly grabbed
his towel.

This was his home water, this water was his country .-- Koepke had
exactly the agreed date on which it collected should be: at the end
of the sixth competition, the obstacle swimming, at the latest
before the start of the seventh: the jumping around the
Germany-Championship, the eight then the large main swimming should
follow.

Time enough.

And fields had already been done.

He knew that would come Koepke.

Here. The impatience seized him.

Because that was the springboard there never empty?

- Always again appeared Springer. And with impatience, the anxiety
about him, who fear that he only ever felt in his life: then, before
his first major victory, on that gray winter days, in the dim
corner of the winter the water bath friends, when he was just as
Today, waiting, that he should get.

But how could he _heute_ afraid! - And yet he felt it as a threat,
about himself, and he breathed easier, as there a movement through
the ranks was the end of the race indicated.

Then rushed up wet figures, without having to worry about him, tore
itself, laughing and noisy and even schweratmend from work, the
jerseys of his body, according to multi-shirt and trousers, and he
seemed at once too - just in time for the second - Koepke .

Because of the unrest was Felder's chest, and head hocherhobenen
the towel casually around the shoulders beaten, he climbed slowly
and without a look around, through the rows of the audience down
and step on the train.

Even there, he avoided, anyone with eyes to roam, but leaned quietly
on the railings, waiting for the next race, and when it began to
draw attention to him with eyes following.

But he felt like that was it from all sides, he knew that in this
moment all eyes rested on him.

Not now, he wanted to meet them.

After the victory - and then - only once he saw and measured with
the eyes, the long train, you can set for the 6oo-meter race had
been special.

Which of the seven numbers was probably his - his dignity in the
middle or at the side?

- The oppressive heat has always been important, and the sky was not
so pure, like at lunch, but turned gray, and light Clouds camped here
and there. He was charged with tension, and a thunderstorm was
gonna break loose any minute.

Air and water were fixed, and the leaves of the trees hung limp down.
It was unbearable, but considered all the expectation on the
Upcoming upright.

Then there was also this race to end, and anyone that he did not
know, said something about boxes, what this does not quite understand.

Oh, it should go before the start of the competition, the usual
picture will be. And he turned on the designated space, but not
erwußte who stood beside him. Was it the young or Scarpetta Seubert?
He just looked straight ahead, his eyes had a very rigid expression,
and in that moment saw everyone who knew him previously and it
is now for the first time since months, again, how much he had
changed. It was not that soft , round, good-natured face Franz
Felder's how it knew from previous times, and so many images, the
face of the boy's carefree and happy radiant youth, which was
no longer the trusting, friendly gaze that these trains will still
remained was than the last few years been the line of determination
up to the hardness had deepened: it was the early-old, bitter face
of a man in which the passions have left their mark, and in these
eyes, about everything in a distant eyes, burned only the sombre
fire a will, was determined to prevail, and it was dead on ...

And how his face, it was Felder's figure also lost all the
softness, now saw clearly the power in this lean and sinewy in
these tight, iron muscles was.

The picture was taken. Any other known him his voice into the
ears proposed, the fields were black hat and called him the number
of his place - the second left. But Fields saw and heard nothing
more than just this one figure, and while he was with her durchdrängte,
blurred all these faces around him completely into a whole - the
starters, the festival participants, the sports people, the
audience -- and only when he was in the water with his hand on his
point was, he came back to contemplation.

Now he looked around: on the left next to him as number one was
the young Georg Bauer with his smiling face, as if this is a game
swimming, right next to him, and totenblaß with aufeinandergebissenen
teeth Riesecker, then, as he bent his head back and looked up,
whether the character has not yet been recognized among the faces
up there on him, like flies, but quite clearly four, five faces of
his old friends from S.

-CB 1879, among them the serious face nail.

But he was now only one thought, and when he, like nothing more to
see his hot face for a brief second in the water appeared,
was the sign above him where. The others had already rejected. With
one stroke, he was among them ...

The first lengths he swam under the spell of the sole thought,
as his style does not stop and spend useless.

He had to rein in, so great was the profusion of force in him. Over
the short distance - always his favorite territory - he had already
been able to win.

Then he came in the third against the stream length to both sides
back to the opponents. He held, however, his style inne, without
getting überhasten, and only one of the next - it had to its
calculation of the fifth - the restlessness took him him to give
up, since he believed that would otherwise not be able to claim
.

A length, with the stream, at least, he wanted to still try,
before he then lost his final sprint around recoup had.

He was now no more. He swam and he knew how good and safe ... Now he
swam a length, and then another one. And while this one, which he
held for the second, he was not going on the enemy.

He felt that it was impossible in this way. He had to abandon his
style and through the target, so it went well.

He proposed to. And again he came from.

And now - he felt it as he reached the end of its force. He would
also have this length to an end, which is endless as it was
before, but like the other no more.

Who was still beside him because ...

He looked to the side. Nobody - This gave him new courage, and he
brought new impacts. At the same time but it was him, as if you
were him, and when he again brought involuntarily to look, he
saw, as shown on the web page a gentleman next to him herlief,
with their hands and wave to him continually zuschrie: - Enough!

- Enough - it is too late - Too late? - What? - That was no longer
beside him. He turned around and went ashore. The music blew always
from a new ink, the whole crowd had collected as a man and
screamed and waved scarves and hats, and Fields came in a
confused melee of confused and muddled ongoing speaking people. But
who was it that you zujubelte? - Who was all this excitement?
- Who was the winner? - One could it just be. No one seemed to
know. _er_ only that it was not that he saw - No one came to him,
nobody took care of him. As he walked slowly along the shore
and on the side of the fence up to his place. Mechanically, he
dressed, and his eyes had returned to the rigid, absent expression.
He was shattered. He understood nothing. Nothing, as the one, that
he was unsuccessful - Mechanically he grazed the broad band of
honorary membership of the "Life Saving Society" around the neck,
the highest award ever given to him had become, and the only one
that, in addition the great golden medal of Europe championship in
this meaningful whole days had created.

He stressed it is still below the smooth rock, as in the highest
excitement Koepke heraufstürmte. - man, he called him from afar
at, what are you waiting for because it was not! -- -Na, because the
bottom is nice to ... But what will they do - you were there ...
but now once fields stared at him.

The Small repeated only ever in a continued: - Hooray! - But really
great! - Ah, what the upset down there, that is quite a spectacle
for gods! Fields notion still nothing.

He grabbed him by his arms. He wanted to know at least, against
whom he had been unsuccessful. - Who has won?

- He exclaimed. - Who has triumphed.? - Screamed as the other .-- Who
has triumphed, he asks, and it is even With a jerk pulled the
jacket notes fields, drove his hand through his hair and was
directed at.

With a gaze overlooked it, as earlier, the picture at his feet.

It had totally changed. From the sky fell, denser every minute, the
first drops, and a part of the audience had already left the seats.

The other sent to flee to the women rafften their clothes together,
and the men slipped into their skirts.

Just down there in the fight place stood close together, the excited
group.

Even from up here one could see that something extraordinary had
happened.

Slowly followed by his friends, the straw hat in hand, climbed down
the slope fields.

He was transformed. He smiled.

Now was his field day ...

          And he had only one thought:
           to appear as calm, wild, unbridled joy, as it neugeschenktes life
durchrann not allow too much to remember.

But he could not hide it: it was on his lips, she seemed out of his
eyes, and his careworn face covered weak ruddiness.

He came to the first group, which was violently thrown screaming -
it was fields, as if some recognized him, silent and made him place
as he went past them.

The next was the "Borussia". He saw the familiar Schwimmwart of the
association: the turned away, and the others made him the place.
He hesitated a moment.

Then he went to the water along side of the square, where the table
was the organizer and the committee of judges to sit. They were
all busy, and nobody cared for him. He stood in front of a large
table, on the just the last of the three winners was angekreidet.

He read his own first name: 1 Fields. . . . . 10:48 then: 2 Bauer. .
. . . 11:12 2 / 5 3. Riegler. . . . . 11:20 The writers turned
around when he did his work, smiled when he saw fields, and walked
away, without him them.

Fields breathed hard. He felt the damp does not drop, the denser
and denser fell, he felt the oppressive heat of this day as
never before. So Bauer and Riegler - Which victory: he had the
famous masters Austria-Hungary equally beaten, as the hopeful power
of youth .

He knew he had excellent geschwommen. If the achieved times were
so close - an extravagance in a race over such a long distance -
so he was the only point, because he certainly had maintained his
style. Without this addition would be superfluous, he may still break
the world record over 600 meters - 10: 05 1/2--verbessern can.

It was a victory like none. Perhaps its greatest. Why it seemed not
to understand? - What should be all about hot? - Why did you not
because of him? - On the left, the water side, towards the shore,
were responsible for the club and invited guests reserved seats.
We sat there no longer, but everything was tight confused, came
and went. Only club teams have formed individual groups. They saw
the fields of blue and white colors. And with a sudden decision,
he pushed through the people and chairs without having someone
noticed him. In his eyes all the light was extinguished and he
smiled no more. After a few steps, he stood still. He could not
continue. He waited. He was now so close to the group that he
then had to see. Now, they would come to him ... He stood there
and waited, and Koepke, who had followed him, without knowing where
Fields wanted to stand next to him. He heard the voices, familiar
voices, and he knew who spoke. That was the chairman, and that - was
quiet nail, secure voice. Nobody came. Nobody seemed to look after
him. Nobody spoke to him. What should it mean - what could it mean?
- He bore it no more. And he went on, and close to the members of
S. 1879-CB over. He looked at her and she looked at him.

But no one greeted him, nobody made a move on him. He went further.
He is still not understood.

But he felt a pain like he never felt in his life.

He went on and stayed somewhere near the railings are among the
members of the "Neptune", of which he knew almost no.

The big pike dive was in progress.

It has rained heavily.

A fighter after another appeared at the start: went into the water,
appeared there with his back half, but the face is still under
water, are blurred, it is felt most engaging, swam straight, went
ashore, was beklatscht - Fields was always on the water in front
of you and still not understood.

He waited and waited and knew not even what actually ....

Then was also the pike diving to an end, and the bystanders, which
- like it - their eyes only on the still water surface stapled had
_unter_ the Victory was erfochten came new movement. führ As well
fields.

Something had to happen.

He had to reassure them.

What was going on around here before him? - either something was
going against him, which he knew nothing, or an incomprehensible
misunderstanding - perhaps on its own page - deceived and confused
him. In any event, had made an end. And again he went to his old
club over.

But this time, he looked not to himself, but firmly and decisively,
he saw from man to man - without first to greet the hat still in
hand - but waiting - waiting ... what?

- And, while he also saw that his gaze is important, not brusque
and unfriendly, but here in manifest embarrassment, then in a
conscious intention, and usually as surprised.

His feet were heavy and heavier. But he went further. At the next
group, the "Poseidon", were his views of individual replies. But
it's not friendly, but challenging, with the manifest hostility,
as he hardly expect otherwise.

He could not be fooled.

The words: "megalomania !"--" Crazy!" - "The Master Springer" - and
repeatedly mocking the betönte "Individual swimmers" sounded too
audible to his ear. He heard it and went on. Next, and continue
along the bridge. And wherever he came, saw and noticed he was either
not, or you made him the place.

Only when he was the "pike" came closer, it seemed as if one or
other of mine made there to meet him to come.

But as he turned quickly and progressively to the now almost
completely empty rows of seats.

Apart from the clubs was now almost no one present.

He looked at the representatives of the newspapers, but they had
already gone to. Only Koepke was suddenly beside him. As he led
him to: "What do you need? - What you run after me ever since? -
So leave me in peace for once!"

It was even for the small businessman overpaid.

With hurt mine and without a reply, he went away. Fields was now
all alone. Again, he overlooked the whole area. It was almost
completely empty, and the dense rain beating through the leaves
of the trees. Any interest seemed to wane and we drove to the beer
and other entertainment.

Down below were the last races to an end.

The judges sat under umbrellas, and only the Buntbemützten wait to
end.

Since fields turned to go.

He did not think his price in to take delivery.

He no longer fought for prizes. To his name to honor his fight he
said.

No, they can not do it. To be _Leben_ today, he had campaigned for
his entire past and future life. Never had he won it as it is
today. And yet he was unsuccessful! 8 He saw very clearly. He
suddenly understood everything. He deceived no longer.

He saw everything in a different light, the bright, sober
light of reality .-- He had been a fool. A fool, as he believed
that he could conquer the world with his victories. A fool, as
he mentioned, henceforth, they turned to him only after seeing
these victories.

A fool, when he einbildete that he is almighty and unbezwingliche
winner. And the greatest of all fools, when he was from that
date an outrageous turn of events is expected. He knew but the
float life and knew how he received it in! - How in the life of
the day, so there anywhere mutual envy and hatred! Had he not read
in all eyes? - Never would he forget this victory. The fact that
he risked his own way to go, was an offense against the habit of
coming, but that he as an individual swimmer the big prize to be
torn, but by the law should include a club, that was a crime that
can would never forgive him.

And how he had also only one minute believe that his old club to
reopen, so first come to him and he even honorary membership would
indicate? - It is the 79er, it was yet to whom at least nor by
all clubs in the price was - that he knew best - he was gone from
them, and that was all too late was between him and the comrades
of his youth. That's it been, which he suffered more, than he
ever allowed himself.

The pain, as he passed them and his eyes remained unrequited, he
felt, how much in this past few years does internally.

He knew it now: not about the honor, not about the price, not his
name, he had fought, but to his old club.

To his old love, to the return of those fortunate hours in circles
of friends to the beautiful and confidential meetings with them at
all hours to ensure their respect and friendship ...

To everything that his life for years of heat and light award - for
his life, he had fought.

But he had hoped to win. He had won. And he had lost.

They would not take him even if he himself wanted them to return
and if they would take him, then everything was changed .-- What now?

- How it went no further. He deceived no longer, and he knew now,
as he suffered terribly in this last time. So he could not continue
to live. He could simply not the loneliness anymore. Certainly
it was his other, the best clubs open. Nothing was before, which
prevented his entry, and after today's victory would soon even the
venomous transform into friendly faces and hands him over to prevent
stretch where he just wanted to take.

But it would never again be as it was was. He would be the
case, as in "Pike": a stranger among strangers. But what should
be for now - he started to gray for the future, because now he saw
in all, very clear. He realized how much he initially in relation
to themselves deceived. Gradually over the last few years, more
and more, he had become accustomed, only to see his only victory,
only his triumphs. So he then came the successes of other attached
no importance, to overlook, as far as were concerned. Certainly,
it was no doubt his name was the most famous of all, its unprecedented
success, his fame continue to squat when the fame of any German
swimmer so far ... But how many other names were not even apart,
not together with his called, if one of the masters said of
swimming: old and new names, new every day ... He was not the
only one who was master. There were a lot of championships, even
in Germany, who were in other hands, in which he is not involved
had not had to participate, if only because time and space
distance and statutes are prohibited.
His only response was a long and emphatic whistle.

"Whe-e-e-ew! what!  Blow the fog away?  This wind?  Why, this wind
brings the fog.  The sou-wester is the one wind that seafarin men
dread in the Bay of Fundy.  About the wust kine of a storm is that
thar very identical wind blowin in these here very identical
waters."

Captain Corbet's words were confirmed by the appearance of sea and
sky.  Outside was the very blackness of darkness.  Nothing whatever
was visible.  Sea and sky were alike hidden from view.  The waves
were rising, and though they were not yet of any size, still they
made noise enough to suggest the idea of a considerable storm, and
the wind, as it whistled through the rigging, carried in its sound
a menace which would have been altogether wanting in a bright
night.  The boys all felt convinced that a storm was rising, and
looked forward to a dismal experience of the pangs of seasickness.
To fight this off now became their chief aim, and with this
intention they all hurried below once more to their beds.

But the water was not rough, the motion of the schooner was gentle,
and though there was much noise above, yet they did not notice any
approach of the dreaded sea-sickness, and so in a short time they
all fell asleep once more.

But they were destined to have further interruptions.  The
interruption came this time in a loud cry from Solomon, which waked
them all at once.

"Get up, chil'en! get up!  It's all over!"

"What, what!" cried the boys; "what's the matter?" and springing up
in the first moment of alarm, they stood listening.

As they stood, there came to their ears the roaring of the wind
through the rigging, the flapping of the sails, the dashing and
roaring of the waters, in the midst of which there came also a
shrill, penetrating sound, which seemed almost overhead--the sound
of some steam whistle.

"Dar, dar!" cried Solomon, in a tone of deadly fear.  "It's a
comin!  I knowed it.  We're all lost an gone.  It's a steamer.
We're all run down an drownded."

Without a word of response, the boys once more clambered on deck.
All was as dark as before, the fog as thick, the scene around as
impenetrable, the wind as strong.  From a distance there came over
the water, as they listened, the rapid beat of a steamboat's
paddles, and soon there arose again the long, shrill yell of the
steam whistle.  They looked all around, but saw no sign of any
steamer; nor could they tell exactly in which direction the sound
arose.  One thought it came from one side, another thought it came
from the opposite quarter, while the others differed from these.
As for Captain Corbet, he said nothing, while the boys were
expressing their opinions loudly and confidently.

At last Bart appealed to Captain Corbet.

"Where is the steamer?"

"Down thar," said the captain, waving his hand over the stern.

"What steamer is it? the revenue steamer?"

"Not her.  That revenoo steamer is up to Windsor by this time.
No; this is the St. John steamer coming up the bay, an I ony wish
she'd take us an give us a tow up."

"She seems to be close by."

"She is close by."

"Isn't there some danger that we'll be run down?"

As those words were spoken, another yell, louder, shriller, and
nearer than before, burst upon their ears.  It seemed to be close
astern.  The beat of the paddles was also near them.

"Pooty close!" said the captain.

"Isn't there some danger that we'll be run down?"

To this question, thus anxiously repeated, the captain answered
slowly,--

"Wal, thar may be, an then again thar mayn't.  Ef a man tries to
dodge every possible danger in life, he'll have a precious hard
time of it.  Why, men air killed in walkin the streets, or knocked
over by sun-strokes, as well as run down at sea.  So what air we to
do?  Do?  Why, I jest do what I've allus ben a doin; I jest keep
right straight on my own course, and mind my own biz.  Ten chances
to one they'll never come nigh us.  I've heard steamers howlin
round me like all possessed, but I've never ben run down yet, an I
ain't goin to be at my time o' life.  I don't blieve you'll see a
sign o' that thar steamer.  You'll only hear her yellin--that's
all."

As he spoke another yell sounded.

"She's a passin us, over thar," said the captain, waving his hand
over the side.  "Her whistle'll contenoo fainter till it stops.  So
you better go below and take your sleep out."

The boys waited a little longer, and hearing the next whistle
sounding fainter, as Captain Corbet said, they followed his advice,
and were soon asleep, as before.

This time there was no further interruption, and they did not wake
till about eight in the morning, when they were summoned to
breakfast by Solomon.

On reaching the deck and looking around, a cry of joy went forth
from all.  The fog was no longer to be seen, no longer did there
extend around them the wall of gloomy gray, shutting out all things
with its misty folds.  No longer was the broad bay visible.  They
found themselves now in a wide river, whose muddy waters bore them
slowly along.  On one side was a shore, close by them, well wooded
in some places, and in others well cultivated, while on the other
side was another shore, equally fertile, extending far along.

"Here we air," cried Captain Corbet.  "That wind served us well.
We've had a fust-rate run.  I calc'lated we'd be three or four
days, but instead of that we've walked over in twenty-four hours.
Good agin!"

"Will we be able to land at Moncton soon?"

"Wal, no; not till the next tide."

"Why not?"

"Wal, this tide won't last long enough to carry us up thar, an so
we'll have to wait here.  This is the best place thar is."

"What place is this?"

"Hillsborough."

"Hillsborough?"

"Yes.  Do you see that thar pint?" and Captain Corbet waved his arm
towards a high, well-wooded promontory that jutted out into the
river.

"Yes."

"Wal, I'm goin in behind that, and I'll wait thar till the tide
turns.  We'll get up to Moncton some time before evenin."

In a few minutes the Antelope was heading towards the promontory;
and soon she passed it, and advanced towards the shore.  On passing
the promontory a sight appeared which at once attracted the whole
attention of the boys.

Immediately in front of them, in the sheltered place which was
formed by the promontory, was a little settlement, and on the bank
of the river was a ship-yard.  Here there arose the stately outline
of a large ship.  Her lower masts were in, she was decorated with
flags and streamers, and a large crowd was assembled in the yard
around her.

"There's going to be a launch!" cried Bart, to whom a scene like
this was familiar.

"A launch!" cried Bruce.  "Hurrah!  We'll be able to see it.  I've
never seen one in my life.  Now's the time."

"Can't we get ashore?" said Arthur.

"Of course," said Phil; "and perhaps they'll let us go on board and
be launched in her."

The very mention of such a thing increased the general excitement.
Captain Corbet was at once appealed to.

"O, thar's lots of time," said he.  "Tain't quite high tide yet.
You'll have time to get ashore before she moves.  Hullo, Wade!
Whar's that oar?"

The boys were all full of the wildest excitement, in the midst of
which Solomon appeared with the announcement that breakfast was
waiting.

To which Bart replied,--

"O, bother breakfast!"

"I don't want any," said Bruce.

"I have no appetite," said Arthur.

"Nor I," said Pat.

"I want to be on board that ship," said Phil.

"We can easily eat breakfast afterwards," said Tom.

At this manifest neglect of his cooking, poor Solomon looked quite
heart-broken; but Captain Corbet told him that he might bring the
things ashore, and this in some measure assuaged his grief.

It did not take long to get ready.  The oar was flung on board the
boat, which had thus far been floating behind the schooner; and
though the boat had a little too much water on board to be
comfortable, yet no complaints were made, and in a few minutes they
were landed.

"How much time have we yet?" asked Bart, "before high tide?"

"O, you've got fifteen or twenty minutes," said Captain Corbet.

"Hurrah, boys!  Come along," said Bart; and leading the way, he
went straight to the office.

As he approached it he uttered suddenly a cry of joy.

"What's the matter, Bart?"

Bart said nothing, but hurried forward, and the astonished boys saw
him shaking hands very vigorously with a gentleman who seemed like
the chief man on the place.  He was an old acquaintance, evidently.
In a few minutes all was explained.  As the boys came up, Bart
introduced them as his friends, and they were all warmly greeted;
after which the gentleman said,--

"Why, what a crowd of you there is!  Follow me, now.  There's
plenty of room for you, I imagine, in a ship of fifteen hundred
tons; and you've just come in time."

With these words he hurried off, followed by all the boys.  He led
the way up an inclined plane which ran up to the bows of the ship,
and on reaching this place they went along a staging, and finally,
coming to a ladder, they clambered up, and found themselves on the
deck of the ship.

"I must leave you now, Bart, my boy," said the gentleman; "you go
to the quarter-deck and take care of yourselves.  I must go down
again."

"Who in the world is he, Bart?" asked the boys, as they all stood
on the quarter-deck.

"Was there ever such luck!" cried Bart, joyously.  "This is the
ship Sylph, and that is Mr. Watson, and he has built this ship for
my father.  Isn't it odd that we should come to this place at this
particular time?"

"Why, it's as good as a play."

"Of course it is.  I've known Mr. Watson all my life, and he's one
of the best men I ever met with.  He was as glad to see me as I was
to see him."

But now the boys stopped talking, for the scene around them began
to grow exciting.  In front of them was the settlement, and in the
yard below was a crowd who had assembled to see the launch.  Behind
them was the broad expanse of the Petitcodiac River, beyond which
lay the opposite shore, which went back till it terminated in
wooded hills.  Overhead arose the masts, adorned with a hundred
flags and streamers.  The deck showed a steep slope from bow to
stern.  But the scene around was nothing, compared with the
excitement of suspense, and expectation.  In a few minutes the
hammers were to sound.  In a few minutes the mighty fabric on which
they were standing would move, and take its plunge into the water.

The suspense made them hold their breath, and wait in perfect
silence.

Around them were a few men, who were talking in a commonplace way.
They were accustomed to launches, and an incident like this was as
nothing in their lives, though to the boys it was sufficient to
make their hearts throb violently, and deprive them of the power of
speech.

A few minutes passed.

"We ought to start soon," said Bart, in a whisper; for there was
something in the scene which made them feel grave and solemn.

The other boys nodded in silence.

A few minutes more passed.

Then there arose a cry.

And then suddenly there came to their excited ears the rattle of a
hundred hammers.  Stroke after stroke, in quick succession, was
dealt upon the wedges, which thus raised the vast structure from
her resting-place.  For a moment she stood motionless, and then--

Then with a slow motion, at first scarce perceptible, but which
every instant grew quicker, she moved down her ways, and plunged
like lightning into the water.  The stern sank deep, then rose, and
then the ship darted through the water across the river.  Then
suddenly the anchor was let go, and with the loud, sharp rattle of
chains, rushed to the bed of the river.  With a slight jerk the
ship stopped.

The launch was over.

A boat now came from the shore, bringing the builder, Mr. Watson;
and at the same time a steamer appeared, rounding a point up the
river, and approaching them.

"Do you want to go to St. John, Bart?"

"Not just yet, sir," said Bart.

"Because if you do you can go down in the ship.  The steamer is
going to take her in tow at once.  But if you don't want to go, you
may go ashore in the boat.  I'm sorry I can't stay here to show you
the country, my boy; but I have to go down in the ship, and at
once, for we can't lie here in the river, unless we want to be left
high and dry at low tide.  So good by.  Go to the house.  Mrs.
Watson'll make you comfortable as long as you like; and if you want
to take a drive you may consider my horses your own."

With these words he shook hands with all the boys for good by, and
after seeing them safely on board the boat, he waited for the
steamer which was to tow the Sylph down the bay.  The boys then
were rowed ashore.  By the time they landed, the steamer had
reached the ship, a stout cable was passed on board and secured,
her anchor was weighed, and then, borne on by steam, and by the
tide, too, which had already turned, the Sylph, in tow of the
steamer, passed down the river, and was soon out of sight.

Bart then went to see Mrs. Watson, with all the boys.  That lady,
like her husband, was an old acquaintance, and in the true spirit
of hospitality insisted on every one of them taking up their abode
with her for an indefinite period.  Finding that they could not do
this, she prepared for them a bounteous breakfast, and then
persuaded them to go off for a drive through the country.  This
invitation they eagerly accepted.

Before starting, they encountered Captain Corbet.

"Don't hurry back, boys," said he, "unless you very pertik'l'ry
wish to go up to Moncton by the arternoon tide.  Don't mind me.  I
got several things to occoopy me here."

"What time could we start up river?"

"Not before four."

"O, we'll be back by that time."

"Wal.  Ony don't hurry back unless you like.  I got to buy some
ship-bread, an I got to fix some things about the boat.  It'll take
some time; so jest do as you like."

Being thus left to their own devices, and feeling quite unlimited
with regard to time, the boys started off in two wagons, and took a
long drive through the country.  The time passed quickly, and they
enjoyed themselves so much that they did not get back until dusk.

"It's too late now, boys, to go up," said the captain, as he met
them on their return.  "We've got to wait till next tide.  It's
nearly high tide now."

"All right, captain; it'll do just as well to go up river to-
night."

"Amen," said the captain.

But now Mrs. Watson insisted on their staying to tea, and so it
happened that it was after nine o'clock before they were ready to
go on board the Antelope.  Going down to the shore, they found the
boat ready, with some articles which Captain Corbet had procured.

"I've been fixing the gunwales," said he; "an here's a box of
pilot-bread.  We were gettin out of provisions, an I've got in a
supply, an I've bought a bit of an old sail that'll do for a jib.
I'm afeard thar won't be room for all of us.  Some of you better
stay ashore, an I'll come back."

"I'll wait," said Bart, taking his seat on a stick of timber.

"An I'll wait, too," said Bruce.

The other boys objected in a friendly way, but Bart and Bruce
insisted on waiting, and so the boat at length started, leaving
them behind.

In a short time it reached the schooner.

Captain Corbet secured the boat's painter to the stem, and threw
the oar on board.

"Now, boys, one of you stay in the boat, an pass up them things to
me--will you?"

"All right," said Tom.  "I'll pass them up."

On this Captain Corbet got on board the schooner, followed by
Arthur, and Phil, and Pat.  Tom waited in the boat.

"Now," said Captain Corbet, "lift up that thar box of pilot-bread
fust.  'Tain't heavy.  We'll get these things out afore we go
ashore for the others."

"All right," said Tom.

He stooped, and took the box of biscuit in his arms.

At that time the tide was running down very fast, and the boat,
caught by the tide, was forced out from the schooner with such a
pressure that the rope was stiffened out straight.

Tom made one step forward.  The next instant he fell down in the
bottom of the boat, and those on board of the schooner who were
looking at him saw, to their horror, that the boat was sweeping
away with the tide, far down the river.


V.

A Cry of Horror.--What shall we do?--Hard and fast.--Bart and
Bruce.--Gloomy Intelligence.--The Promontory.--The Bore of the
Petitcodiac.--A Night of Misery.--A mournful Waking.--Taking
Counsel.


A cry of horror escaped those on board, and for some time they
stood silent in utter dismay.

"The rope wasn't tied," groaned Arthur.

"Yes, it was," said Captain Corbet; "it bruk; catch me not tyin it.
It bruk; see here!" and he held up in the dim light the end of the
rope which still was fastened to the schooner.  "I didn't know it
was rotten," he moaned; "'tain't over ten year old, that bit o'
rope, an I've had it an used it a thousand times without its ever
thinkin o' breakin."

"What can we do?" cried Arthur.  "We must do something to save
him."

Captain Corbet shook his head.

"We've got no boat," said he.

"Boat!  Who wants a boat?"

"What can we do without a boat?"

"Why, up anchor, and go after him with the schooner."

"The schooner's hard and fast," said Captain Corbet, mournfully.

"Hard and fast?"

"Yes; don't you notice how she leans?  It's only a little, but
that's a sign that her keel's in the mud."

"I don't believe it!  I won't believe it!" cried Arthur.  "Come,
boys, up with the anchor."

As the boys rushed to the windlass, Captain Corbet went there, too,
followed by the mate, and they worked at it for some time, until at
last the anchor rose to the surface.

But the Antelope did not move.  On the contrary, a still greater
list to one side, which was now unmistakable, showed that the
captain was right, and that she was actually, as he said, hard and
fast.  This fact had to be recognized, but Arthur would not be
satisfied until he had actually seen the anchor, and then he knew
that the vessel was really aground.

"Do you mean to say," he cried at last, "that there is nothing to
be done?"

"I don't see," said Captain Corbet, "what thar is to be done till
the schewner muves."

"When will that be?"

"Not till to-morrow mornin."

"How early?"

"Not before eight o'clock."

"Eight o'clock!" cried Arthur, in horror.

"Yes, eight o'clock.  You see we had to come in pooty nigh to the
shore, an it'll be eight o'clock before we're floated."

"And what'll become of poor Tom?" groaned Arthur.

"Wal," said the captain, "don't look on the wust.  He may get
ashore."

"He has no oar.  The oar was thrown aboard of the schooner."

"Still he may be carried ashore."

"Is there any chance?"

"Wal, not much, to tell the truth.  Thar's no use of buo-oyin of
ourselves up with false hopes; not a mite.  Thar's a better chance
of his bein picked up.  That thar's likely now, an not unnatooral.
Let's all don't give up.  If thar's no fog outside, I'd say his
chances air good."

"But it may be foggy."

"Then, in that case, he'll have to drift a while--sure."

"Then there's no hope."

"Hope?  Who's a sayin thar's no hope?  Why, look here; he's got
provisions on board, an needn't starve; so if he does float for a
day or two, whar's the harm?  He invited the boy, with
him a little walk, and the poor boy, starved for weeks after a
convivial gathering, was charmed by this proposal.

Unwisely he chatted all from what his new friend with a small,
random questions as wanted to elicit.

Soon the Baron knew everything about the family, especially that
Edgar is the only son of a Viennese lawyer was apparently from the
wealthy Jewish bourgeoisie. And he skillfully surveys explored
quickly, that the parent about the stay at Semmering not thrilled
and expressed the lack of sympathetic complained that, yes, he even
believed, from the evasive way in which Edgar replied the question
whether the Mama the dad was very happy, to be able to see
that not everything would be the best. Almost ashamed he is, how
easy it was, the boys all these unsuspecting young family secrets
to elicit, because Edgar, very proud that something of what he had
to tell an adult could be interested, urged his confidence to the
new friends is virtually inevitable.

His infantile heart beat with pride - the Baron had him walking his
arm around the shoulder laid - in such public intimacy with an adult
to be seen, and gradually he forgot his own childhood, schnatterte
free and relaxed as a peer .

Edgar was, as his talk show, very clever, a bit precocious as most
sickly children who are much together with adults, and by a strange
overwrought passion of affection or hostility.

Nothing seemed to calm his relationship to have, by any person or
thing he said, either in or with a rapture Hasse, who was so violently
that he distorted his face unpleasant and it almost made vicious
and ugly.

Something wild and erratic, perhaps due to the recently about illness,
gave up his fanatical speeches fire, and it seemed that his only
difficulty Linkischsein suppressed fear of one's own passion was.

The Baron has won his confidence with ease.

A mere half hour, and he had this hot and restless heart jerking
in the hand.

It is so easy unutterable children to cheat, this innocent, whose
love is so rarely advertised.

He took himself only in the past to be forgotten, and so natural,
so relaxed, he was the child's conversation that the boy all over
him as his equal and felt after a few minutes each distance feeling
lost.

He was saved only by good fortune, here in this lonely place
suddenly found a friend to have, and what a friend!

Remember, they were all in Vienna, the young boy with thin voices,
their inexperienced chatter, as their pictures were washed away by
this new hour!

His entire shoals entrepreneurial passion now this new one, his
great friends, and his heart expanded with pride, as it it now
invited to leave again, come back tomorrow morning, and the new
friend he now zuwinkte from afar, like a brother.

This minute was perhaps the finest of his life.

It is so easy for kids to cheat. - The Baron Of Stürm smiled the
ends under.

The mediator was now won.

The boy would be now that he knew his mother with stories to
exhaustion torment, every single word again - and he remembered
with pleasure, as he skillfully some compliments on their address
inserted, as he always only by Edgars »beautiful Mama "had spoken.

It was off thing for him, that the communicative boy would not rest
earlier, before his mom and him together would have led.

He himself is now no need to touch fingers to the distance between
himself and the beautiful unknowns to reduce could now sweet dreams
and look over the landscape, because he knew a couple of hot
children's hands he built the bridge to her heart.

Terzett The plan was how an hour later revealed splendidly until
the last details done.

When the young Baron, with the intention somewhat belatedly, entered
the dining room, jerked from his chair to Edgar, eagerly greeted
with a happy smile and waved him on.

At the same time plucking his mother on the sleeve, and said hastily
aroused in them, with eye-catching gestures against them, the Baron.

She embarrassed him and his blushing too keen behavior, but it could
not be avoided, once hinüberzusehen to the boys to do his will,
which the baron immediately cause a respectful bow adopted.

The acquaintance was made.
"What is the use
of looking on the dark side?  Come, Bart, cheer up.  I'll look on
the bright side.  Hope for the best.  Set out on the search with
hope, and a good heart.  I'm confident that he will be safe.  You
will pick him up yourselves, or else you will hear of his escape
somewhere.  I remember two men, a few years ago, that went adrift
and were saved."

"Ay," said one of the men, "I mind that well.  They were Tom
Furlong and Jim Spencer.  But that there boat was a good-sized
fishing boat; an such a boat as that might ride out a gale."

"Nonsense," said Mrs. Watson.  "You're all a set of confirmed
croakers.  Why, Bart, you've read enough shipwreck books to know
that little boats have floated in safety for hundreds of miles.  So
hope for the best; don't be down-hearted.  I'll send two or three
men down now to get the boat ready for you.  You can't do anything
till the morning, you know.  Won't you stay here?  You had better
go to bed at once."

But Bart and Bruce could not think of bed.

"Well, come back any time, and a bed will be ready for you," said
Mrs. Watson.  "If you want to see about the boat now, the men are
ready to go with you."

With those words she led the way out to the kitchen, where a couple
of men were waiting.  Bart and Bruce followed them down to a boat-
house on the river bank, and saw the boat there which Mrs. Watson
had offered them.  This boat could be launched at any time, and as
there was nothing more to be done, the boys strolled disconsolately
about, and finally went to the end of the promontory, and spent a
long time looking out over the water, and conversing sadly about
poor Tom's chances.

There they sat late in the night, until midnight came, and so on
into the morning.  At last the scene before them changed from a
sheet of water to a broad expanse of mud.  The water had all
retired, leaving the bed of the river exposed.

Of all the rivers that flow into the Bay of Fundy none is more
remarkable than the Petitcodiac.  At high tide it is full--a mighty
stream; at low tide it is empty--a channel of mud forty miles long;
and the intervening periods are marked by the furious flow of
ascending or descending waters.

And now, as the boys sat there looking out upon the expanse of mud
before them, they became aware of a dull, low, booming sound, that
came up from a far distant point, and seemed like the voice of many
waters sounding from the storm-vexed bay outside.  There was no
moon, but the light was sufficient to enable them to see the
exposed riverbed, far over to the shadowy outline of the opposite
shore.  Here, where in the morning a mighty ship had floated,
nothing could now float; but the noise that broke upon their ears
told them of the return of the waters that now were about to pour
onward with resistless might into the empty channel, and send
successive waves far along into the heart of the land.

"What is that noise?" asked Bruce.  "It grows louder and louder."

"That," said bart, "is the Bore of the Petitcodiac."

"Have you ever seen it?"

"Never.  I've heard of it often, but have never seen it."

But their words were interrupted now by the deepening thunder of
the approaching waters.  Towards the quarter whence the sound arose
they turned their heads involuntarily.  At first they could see
nothing through the gloom of night; but at length, as they strained
their eyes looking down the river, they saw in the distance a
faint, white, phosphorescent gleam, and as it appeared the roar
grew louder, and rounder, and more all-pervading.  On it came,
carrying with it the hoarse cadence of some vast surf flung ashore
from the workings of a distant storm, or the thunder of some mighty
cataract tumbling over a rocky precipice.

And now, as they looked, the white, phosphorescent glow grew
brighter, and then whiter, like snow; every minute it approached
nearer, until at last, full before them and beneath them, there
rolled a giant wave, extending across the bed of the river,
crescent-shaped, with its convex side advancing forwards, and its
ends following after within short distance from the shore.  The
great wave rolled on, one mass of snow-white foam, behind which
gleamed a broad line of phosphorescent lustre from the agitated
waters, which, in the gloom of night, had a certain baleful
radiance.  As it passed on its path, the roar came up more
majestically from the foremost wave; and behind that came the roar
of other billows that followed in its wake.  By daylight the scene
would have been grand and impressive; but now, amid the gloom, the
grandeur became indescribable.  The force of those mighty waters
seemed indeed resistless, and it was with a feeling of relief that
the boys reflected that the schooner was out of the reach of its
sweep.  Its passage was swift, and soon it had passed beyond them;
and afar up the river, long after it had passed from sight, they
heard the distant thunder of its mighty march.

By the time the wave had passed, the boys found themselves
excessively weary with their long wakefulness.

"Bart, my boy," said Bruce, "we must get some rest, or we won't be
worth anything to-morrow.  What do you say?  Shall we go back to
Mrs. Watson's?"

"It's too late--isn't it?"

"Well, it's pretty late, no doubt.  I dare say it's half past two;
but that's all the more reason why we should go to bed."

"Well."

"What do you say?  Do you think we had better disturb Mrs. Watson,
or not?"

"O, no; let's go into the barn, and lie down in the hay."

"Very well.  Hay makes a capital bed.  For my part, I could sleep
on stones."

"So could I."

"I'm determined to hope for the best about Tom," said Bruce, rising
and walking off, followed by Bart.  "Mrs. Watson was right.
There's no use letting ourselves be downcast by a lot of croakers--
is there?"

"No," said Bart.

The boys then walked on, and in a few minutes reached the ship-
yard.

Here a man came up to them.

"We've been looking for you everywhere," said the man.  "Mrs.
Watson is anxious about you."

"Mrs. Watson?"

"Yes.  She won't go to bed till you get back to the house.  There's
another man out for you, up the river."

"O, I'm sorry we have given you all so much trouble," said Bart;
"but we didn't think that anybody would bother themselves about
us."

"Well, you don't know Mrs. Watson that's all," said the man,
walking along with them.  "She's been a worrytin herself to death
about you; and the sooner she sees you, the better for her and for
you."

On reaching the house the boys were received by Mrs. Watson.  One
look at her was enough to show them that the man's account of her
was true.  Her face was pale, her manner was agitated, and her
voice trembled as she spoke to them, and asked them where they had
been.

Bart expressed sorrow at having been the cause of so much trouble,
and assured her he thought that she had gone to bed.

"No," said she; "I've been too excited and agitated about your
friend and about you.  But I'm glad that you've been found; and as
it's too late to talk now, you had better go to bed, and try to
sleep."

With these words she gently urged them to their bedroom; and the
boys, utterly worn out, did not attempt to withstand her.  They
went to bed, and scarcely had their heads touched the pillows
before they were fast asleep.

Meanwhile the boys on board the Antelope had been no less anxious;
and, unable to sleep, they had talked solemnly with each other over
the possible fate of poor Tom.  Chafing from their forced inaction,
they looked impatiently upon the ebbing water, which was leaving
them aground, when they were longing to be floating on its bosom
after their friend, and could scarcely endure the thought of the
suspense to which they would be condemned while waiting for the
following morning.

Captain Corbet also was no less anxious, though much less agitated.
He acknowledged, with pain, that it was all his fault, but,
appealed to all the boys, one by one, asking them how he should
know that the rope was rotten.  He informed them that the rope was
an old favorite of his, and that he would have willingly risked his
life on it.  He blamed himself chiefly, however, for not staying in
the boat himself, instead of leaving Tom in it.  To all his remarks
the boys said but little, and contented themselves with putting
questions to him about the coast, the tides, the wind, the
currents, and the fog.

The boys on board went to sleep about one o'clock, and waked at
sunrise.  Then they watched the shore wistfully, and wondered why
Bart and Bruce did not make their appearance.  But Bart and Bruce,
worn out by their long watch, did not wake till nearly eight
o'clock.  Then they hastily dressed themselves, and after a very
hurried breakfast they bade good by to good Mrs. Watson.

"I shall be dreadfully anxious about that poor boy," said she,
sadly.  "Promise me to telegraph as soon as you can about the
result."

Bart promised.

Then they hurried down to the beach.  The tide was yet a
considerable distance out; but a half dozen stout fellows, whose
sympathies were fully enlisted in their favor, shoved the boat down
over the mud, and launched her.

Then Bart and Bruce took the oars, and soon reached the schooner,
where the boys awaited their arrival in mournful silence.


VI.

Tom adrift.--The receding Shores.--The Paddle.--The Roar of Surf--
The Fog Horn.--The Thunder of the unseen Breakers.--A Horror of
great Darkness.--Adrift in Fog and Night.


When the boat in which Tom was darted down the stream, he at first
felt paralyzed by utter terror; but at length rousing himself, he
looked around.  As the boat drifted on, his first impulse was to
stop it; and in order to do this it was necessary to find an oar.
The oar which Captain Corbet had used to scull the boat to the
schooner had been thrown on board of the latter, so that the
contents of the boat might be passed up the more conveniently.  Tom
knew this, but he thought that there might be another oar on board.
A brief examination sufficed to show him that there was nothing of
the kind.  A few loose articles lay at the bottom; over these was
the sail which Captain Corbet had bought in the ship-yard, and on
this was the box of pilot-bread.  That was all.  There was not a
sign of an oar, or a board, or anything of the kind.

No sooner had he found out this than he tried to tear off one of
the seats of the boat, in the hope of using this as a paddle.  But
the seats were too firmly fixed to be loosened by his hands, and,
after a few frantic but ineffectual efforts, he gave up the
attempt.

But he could not so quickly give up his efforts to save himself.
There was the box of biscuit yet.  Taking his knife from his
pocket, he succeeded in detaching the cover of the box, and then,
using this as a paddle, he sought with frantic efforts to force the
boat nearer to the shore.  But the tide was running very swiftly,
and the cover was only a small bit of board, so that his efforts
seemed to have but little result.  He did indeed succeed in turning
the boat's head around; but this act, which was not accomplished
without the severest labor, did not seem to bring her nearer to the
shore to any perceptible extent.  What he sought to do was to
achieve some definite motion to the boat, which might drag her out
of the grasp of the swift current; but that was the very thing
which he could not do, for so strong was that grasp, and so swift
was that current, that even an oar would have scarcely accomplished
what he wished.  The bit of board, small, and thin, and frail, and
wielded with great difficulty and at a fearful disadvantage, was
almost useless.

But, though he saw that he was accomplishing little or nothing, he
could not bring himself to give up this work.  It seemed his only
hope; and so he labored on, sometimes working with both hands at
the board, sometimes plying his frail paddle with one hand, and
using the other hand at a vain endeavor to paddle in the water.  In
his desperation he kept on, and thought that if he gained ever so
little, still, by keeping hard at work, the little that he gained
might finally tell upon the direction of the boat--at any rate, so
long as it might be in the river.  He knew that the river ran for
some miles yet, and that some time still remained before he would
reach the bay.

Thus Tom toiled on, half despairing, and nearly fainting with his
frenzied exertion, yet still refusing to give up, but plying his
frail paddle until his nerveless arms seemed like weights of lead,
and could scarce carry the board through the water.  But the
result, which at the outset, and in the very freshness of his
strength, had been but trifling, grew less and less against the
advance of his own weakness and the force of that tremendous tide,
until at last his feeble exertions ceased to have any appreciable
effect whatever.

There was no moon, but it was light enough for him to see the
shores--to see that he was in the very centre of that rapid
current, and to perceive that he was being borne past those dim
shores with fearful velocity.  The sight filled him with despair,
but his arms gained a fresh energy, from time to time, out of the
very desperation of his soul.  He was one of those natures which
are too obstinate to give up even in the presence of despair
itself; and which, even when hope is dead, still forces hope to
linger, and struggles on while a particle of life or of strength
remains.  So, as he toiled on, and fought on, against this fate
which had suddenly fixed itself upon him, he saw the shores on
either side recede, and knew that every passing moment was bearing
him on to a wide, a cruel, and a perilous sea.  He took one hasty
glance behind him, and saw what he knew to be the mouth of the
river close at hand; and beyond this a waste of waters was hidden
in the gloom of night.  The sight lent new energy to his fainting
limbs.  He called aloud for help.  Shriek after shriek burst from
him, and rang wildly, piercingly, thrillingly upon the air of
night.  But those despairing shrieks came to no human ear, and met
with no response.  They died away upon the wind and the waters; and
the fierce tide, with swifter flow, bore him onward.

The last headland swept past him; the river and the river bank were
now lost to him.  Around him the expanse of water grew darker, and
broader, and more terrible.  Above him the stars glimmered more
faintly from the sky.  But the very habit of exertion still
remained, and his faint plunges still dipped the little board into
the water; and a vague idea of saving himself was still uppermost
in his mind.  Deep down in that stout heart of his was a desperate
resolution never to give up while strength lasted; and well he
sustained that determination.  Over him the mist came floating,
borne along by the wind which sighed around him; and that mist
gradually overspread the scene upon which his straining eyes were
fastened.  It shut out the overhanging sky.  It extinguished the
glimmering stars.  It threw a veil over the receding shores.  It
drew its folds around him closer and closer, until at last
everything was hidden from view.  Closer and still closer came the
mist, and thicker and ever thicker grew its dense folds, until at
last even the water, into which he still thrust his frail paddle,
was invisible.  At length his strength failed utterly.  His hands
refused any longer to perform their duty.  The strong, indomitable
will remained, but the power of performing the dictates of that
will was gone.  Reinhold got their hands on the altar, and continuously,
even later, when he was appointed to Kiel was followed, there was
between him and Wieland unspoilt Freundschaftsverhältniß an.

Wieland's father delights were increased when he was also its other
adult daughters were happily married. The preacher SCHORCHT and
love child, the latter known as the author of Herder's "palm leaves"
and as an assistant to Wieland's "Dschinnistan" had with Caroline
Amalie and Wieland verheirathet.

Julie was the wife of the Chamber Raths stickleback in Weimar has
become, and Charlotte, the 1794 with the poet Baggesen and his
wife traveled to Switzerland was established there an unexpected
Ehebündniß. Wieland wrote about the 17th April 1795: "If ever a
marriage in heaven has been closed, it is certainly that, based on
an almost miraculous nature, and yet again through the course
firmly sympathy of hearts, Gemüthsart, inclinations, habits -
between the son of Solomon Gessner, my dearest and only friend and
a young daughter of his friend Wieland has - a connection that
is in each account according to the innermost desires of my heart
is that I can not help, the beautiful illusion of noble Solomon
Geßnerschen Wittwer Area to give, and with it, to believe that the
spirit of my friend immortalized himself had made this marriage.
"In his own marriage remained Wieland always taken the early
principles loyal, in his effort never by its location and its
relationship to prescribed limits to pass. Simple and austere, like
his lifestyle, was Wieland's apartment and clothes. Nothing
reminded environments in its pomp and splendor, and luxury
items he knew almost none. Everywhere but revealed in his Budget
the utmost cleanliness and order. His lunch was simple, and absolutely
every opulence and waste him completely alien.

He saw that, the rest with him, as his own, his forces through an
excess of expenses could easily be jeopardized. His thrift artete
never from greed. It was a harmless game, when he sometimes
received with pleasure gold pieces looked like, or silver coins
against einwechselte money. He had to say it but he could not
keep, and he willingly gave it to Nöthiger and necessary expenses.
Quite strange character was Wieland's any kind of greed and
selfishness. His poetic sense made him indifferent to the
acquisition, so he Purchased the wasted.

Already hausväterlichen his duties he believed the guilty Seyn.
But he practiced hospitality in the finest sense of the word. His
friends were always with him the warm reception to him even in his
youth years in Bodmer Theil home had become. So far it's allowed
some forces, he helped anyone who turned on him, like with Rath and
That. To budding talents to support, he awarded for contributions
to his "German Mercury" is sometimes a higher fee than he received.
For himself, he Gutmüthigkeit manuscript, which he had never print,
not back, but was ready to pay - a liberal, by which the
profit to him from his journal abwarf never could be significant.
Basically, Wieland was in regards itself more efficient than
against others. It was also perhaps the reason why he during his
stay in Weimar a few trips made, although he initiated for recovery
from mental work probably would have been needed. His own
speech, that he "was a man of rare snails from his house crawl out,"
seemed to him to want to prove. In a letter to Gleim, he addressed
the reasons why he accepted an invitation by Halberstadt to come,
not could follow. "A thousand silken bands," he wrote, "captivate
me at Weimar. I am deep into the ground and only one to say,
how can I or how could my wife with me, from the children
separated? Our house is a small world has become for us. But you,
dearest Gleim, you have no such obstacles. Come to us and try again,
how's living in my home, where all the moments from any angle or
another Bübchen girls, on the we had not envisaged, hervorgekrochen
comes. "A number of years passed before Wieland, not just the
love of leisureliness, but also the manifold with the publication
of the" German Mercury "affiliated transactions tied to his
house, with busy travel schedules. To strengthen his health,
he decided on a 1794 trip to Leipzig and Dresden. According to the
latter city drew him there Paintings Gallery. He wished the
strictest in Dresden Incognito observed. To his friend and
publisher Göschen he wrote about it: "I do not know why Ms.
Fama grill so is liable to in advance with such a minor thing,
but my excursion to Dresden, so much to make thun. It is my
opinion do not know me in Dresden Allen, who helped me in fittings
should be followed to disclose.

Neither my health nor my diet, I mentioned in my years at an
extremely delicate and irritability Constitution had to observe,
nor my intention, my time in Dresden to consideration of its
splendid collection of paintings to use, could be waiting many,
visits, dinners and Soupee's tolerated, and I wanted to travel to
completely give up rather than the freedom, also in Dresden (where
admittedly no freedom trees so you can easily take root) to my own
spirit and will to live. "This request was not quite true. Wieland
also so happy every opportunity to celebrate seeing avoided had it
but can not avoid, in the Churchill Pillnitz prince to be presented.
Some interesting acquaintances which he made in Dresden, but let him
not regret his trip. With the major obstacles he had to struggle
before it the idea that the country again to see where his
youth verlebt, realisirte. Not only for the "German Mercury", but
also for the uninterrupted continuation of the pressure of
his whole of works he must ensure, before a six-monthly stay in
Switzerland could imagine, from which he, after his own speech,
"for his inner voice and promised a lot of good people.

"Not just the longing, the bookseller at his Gessner in Zurich
verheirathete daughter Charlotte again, that prompted him to travel.

His suffering health had to tell him that his recovery was very
Nöthiger. "I needed," said Wieland, "of such a wound inside my
watch, and the joys of the heart, to my family in the Geßnerschen
expect will be a draft from the Fontaine de = = Juvence Seyn for
me." A touch of hypochondria, as he himself confessed, made
all sorts of doubts in Wieland lively before he decided to travel
to Switzerland to stand.

"One speaks and writes," he said in one of his former letters,
"even as much of the insecurity of the roads in Franconia and
Swabia, where numerous bands of robbers is nestled have that in the
That I do not know if I am right Thue, such a dangerous
trip with wife and children to dare. About Main Germany comes to
me now not much better before, as it did in the times of the
Thirty Years' War, and I confess that I trust everything to the
people lost, and in each unknown a thief and murderer to think. "
His son, the bookseller Gessner, Wieland wrote soon afterwards:
"I should certainly, if I only had so much faith, as the tenth
Theil a mustard seed, put more trust in the love angel who will
guide us. But that is just the misery that I have less faith than
Sancte St. Thomas, and not much more heart than faith. Since lob
'I have my honest housewife, your mother! This is so delicate, as
if they were made from Postpapierschnitzeln, and has the heart and
intrepidity and Heldenmuth, despite the bravest of all Marfisen and
Bradamante. "On 24 Wieland was in May 1795 with his wife and
three children, Caroline, William and Louisa, in a comfortable car,
which he owed to the Duchess Amalia of Weimar departed. The friendly
reception it on in several places, especially in Nuremberg found,
nor was surpassed by the many proofs of love and kindness to him
by older and younger friends at his entrance into Switzerland
received.

At Göschen Wieland wrote the 8th August 1795. "You get this leaflet
is not - as you could cheaply hypothesis - from the banks of the
river Lethe, whose residents a sweet oblivion of all things on earth
have eingesogen, but from the right bank of the Zürchersees in whose
neighborhood like I have a small house have been approximately
eight weeks inhabit, and probably find me as if I am now in my early
years traveled 63sten new account should start to live. You know the
country and the place and lovely people with whom I live. You have
himself, if I am not mistaken, for several days in the home
Geßnerschen delayed, and if you now think of the pleasure, in
which I by one of my favorite children came to the same bin, so you
can easily imagine that days and weeks with a barely understood
myself speed, fly over my head, and how long my stay local while
also could he give me the surprising Days Parting but always only
a short morning will seem a dream. " Due to some concerns that the
course of political events in his wake, Wieland felt prompted to
accelerate his departure.

"The war," he wrote, "has now shifted from the banks of the
Rhine and Neckar to the heart of Germany's withdrawn. Everything
is different with the unstoppable power, and it's missing here is
not to rumors, we also for the great deal of Thuringia and
Saxony distressed might wofern the West francs perhaps Ernst Seyn
should all voluntary as well as Theil forced policyholders to the
gods and people hated wars their heavy hand feel for you. Was now
the time to delight me the circumstances of days that I
have from my stay here promised not so pure can enjoy, as I
probably would have wished, it is one of the main purposes of my
trip met.

I am extremely well, and if the good genius of my journey
from Weimar to Zurich favored me from Zurich to Weimar back,
may I hope that the good consequences of that for my health and
the cheerfulness of my mind for several years to try. "On 15 September
1795 Wieland reported that he letztverwichenen two clock Sunday
afternoon with his love travel company healthy and safe in Weimar
had arrived. "His good genius," he wrote, "have managed it so
that it is based on the entire route over Stuttgart, Heilbronn,
Schwäbisch-Hall, Anspach, Nuremberg, Bamberg, Coburg, and
Saalfeld no Frenchmen to face, even imperial troops encountered
nowhere to post no longer than an hour was up, that his caution
taken from German and French passports and not once had Nöthiger,
and with a word so quiet and comfortable travel was as if peace
would be everywhere. "His stay in Switzerland had given him the
life of a country so anmuthigen page shows that he who, after his
own confessions, "as like Horace, through life's weggeschlichen
would be, and hated nothing more than urban, farm and world turmoil,"
is often full of yearning desire aufdrang in rural seclusion,
nature, themselves and those with him to be able to live. Respect
and tilt princely patrons, the friendship of some excellent men,
who at that time in Weimar is gathered, had him in that decision
making can be shaky. Often, however, spilled Wieland in bitter
complaints that he is at leisure all but a very disjointed
life, by intermittent visits by locals and foreigners. His decorous
Zartgefühl for staggered him in a very unmuthige mood, if it from
strangers in a dressing gown and night cap was surprised. Trostlos
made him especially the idea that his guileless hingeworfenen
utterances of such visitors to be collected and made publicly
available could be. All 'this inconvenience, he believed in a rural
retreat to escape to him überdieß some favorite plan, which
employed his mind, allowed to execute. Seriously he thought a longer
period of time due to his previous residence in Weimar with a friendly
country house in High Town, near Grimma to confuse. Much atractive
had the idea for him, then his friend Göschen neighboring them.

His relationship with the Weimar court nöthigten him, however, to
abandon this plan again. The stay in the manor located near Weimar
Tannrode Wieland's poetry is painted with the brightest colors.
About the purchase of this good to the family of Egloffstein belonged,
he pflog Negotiations. He called it in one of his letters a
genuine Horace Sabinum. "I flatterer me," he wrote, "if I am only
in my old castle Tannrode etablirt Seyn will, in the beautiful air
and the beautiful nature that surrounded me there is new vivacity
and force my mind to work."

This idea, however, gave Wieland again. He decided on the purchase
of the goods located near Weimar Osmanstädt for the sum of
22000 Thales. This sum he believed some of them by selling his house
in Weimar, and some number of years by a rate and gradually
abzutragendes Capital, duty which he, through his friend Göschen
hoped to receive.

With Wieland had some obstacles, as Göschen's negative response
modest, yet struggled before his favorite realisiren could desire.

His Credit in Weimar, he wanted to not use it. "I am quite convinced,"
he wrote, "if all others should pull cords, the duke would not be
me stuck in the North.

But I have more than one cause for this heroic means, only in the
extreme Nothfall to concurriren.

In a letter to Wieland Göschen said: "Listen, my dear friend, I
believe that my affair, without you or me woe is happening arrangirt
could be entirely because I can not from the game, so I's also very
thun you wish.

You are now, because it would have even so, my publisher, and
it must Seyn and remain, this is not a harbor. " - After Wieland
now the fee for the new edition of his works to 7000 Thaler had
set, he closed his letter with the words Göschen.

"Why, I ask you, is that I am at future Michaelistag 4000 Thaler
of you could expect to receive." Wieland As might be felt
in his "Osmantinum" or his "Superior Municipal Mercy," as his country
of asylum are sometimes called, described several of his former
letters. On 25 April 1797, he had there, after completing the purchase,
its for some time now. A quarter later, 25 July, he wrote: "I
feel as if no other way to exist for me was possible, and the
Weimar prophets who foresaw as a whole is infallible, that I did
miserably in the countryside and = vis à vis de moi même = bored
would exist with shame. Also they lock their eyes on more
powerful that I was so bright and cheerful look, and that
phenomenon can not explain. But I understand the miracle is very
good, and in the uneven That better than how I the four and twenty
years that I lived in Weimar, nor did it reasonably can sustain.

Country air, unverkünstelte nature, lots of grass and beautiful
trees, external peace and freedom of disposition over myself and my
time - this all together, so to say, my element, as well as the air
of the bird and the water element is the fish, and it is therefore
quite naturally that I was to flourish. "Wieland was inexhaustible
in praise of country life, which, as he believed very wohlthätig
to its health impact.

He wrote about 19 December 1797 to a friend: "It is pleasant, that
I am in this variable, dull and schlackrigen winter over all the
people waiting outside of my physical specimen Constitution do.

In the city I would be in these verwichenen eight weeks is probably
fairly poor have found here in my home Osmanstädt I am well and
hearty continuously, working at my desk with Success, have, whatever
I do not come to the door, good appetite, and sleep much
better than formerly. All these decisions, at least in my case, the
preference of rural life before the city life, none of the negative
and passive virtues to remember what the country mouse at Horace
against her friend, the town mouse, argues. alongside me does
Bewußtseyn also well aware that my garden is already in a significantly
better condition have moved. About three hundred trees I planted,
of which more Theil, if they are well through this winter, I at
least the first fruits can hope to experience, and what I cultivation
and improvement of various, gradually through neglect in Come
decrease the part already, but did and still be used, is already
in future years so strikingly Seyn that who visited me again, in a
small paradise offset is to see to believe.

"Among the aforementioned rural occupations was Wieland's literary
work is not become unfaithful, although some including him
so much discomfort and annoyances prepared, that he eagerly wanted
to be able to discard her. The "German Mercury" would he, if he gain
the moderate to him this journal abwarf, would have deprived may
have abandoned first.

Very unwillingly he was sometimes on the abundant Zusendungen bad
verses, and other mediocre products. Especially was dismembered
by Wieland's time to answer numerous letters from all parts of Germany
came to him. In answering this, he was admittedly sometimes
dilatoriness so that he made the allegations so he probably deserves
to have believed, and even sometimes even sharper censured .
Wieland's humor, which never quite left him, he once gave a public
statement, through which it is to be frequent and worth-less
Manuscriptsendungen wanted to prevent. "Miscellaneous, which I
am," he wrote, "with all sorts of Theilmann versificirten and some
prosaic-poetic essays , idylls and the like for Merkur to Treat the
weighted had put me in a kind of embarrassment, which I like to
always be überhoben Seyn wish. inclined will deserve your thanks,
but it is a tiresome Collision of obligations whose effects, neither
they nor I can Seyn pleasant.

Some seem from the goodness of their Products to Seyn so convinced
that they are, without insult, neither say nor to understand the
question, you had a different opinion. Others are more modest, to
give just for beginners to ask for leniency, or that their Lectiones
corrigiren, or at least say whether they were appointed to
Dichterei or not. But they bring with such an apparent expectation
of a courteous, di love flattering their own decision before that
one's little heart's can bring them by an honest answer to woe thun.

This is more, that our one - of such a young candidate of
Musenpriesterthums asked: Master, what shall I thun? and after him
his conscience can be the answer: Everything, my dear friend, do
not make verses! - Sure, that the young aspirant that answer even
for a professional answer is, now's the case on making verses to
lay. After all - he says to himself - my verses must surely
good Seyn because Wieland is afraid that I will cut him, and I am
so close to the threshold of the temple, like the Muses would
like to shrink. - How could the poor author of the winter and
Sommermährchens under stand, such a rival, something unpleasant
to say? The young man would naturally think, they just bore Wieland,
in light of the verses and a good way to tell than to see. I
will also because the young poet, without refutation hereby permitted
have. Only Mercury is not a worthy venue for such original works.
My Rath is irrelevant, particularly, and for the sake Effects
on magnificent Dutch paper, with copper by Chodowiecky, print
it. The author is in effect to see miracles! Now is precisely the
right moment when the nation for such work has sense, because
it looks so, how well they Oberon, which is only on bad paper, and
without copper from anyone, his advancement in the world was
looking for.

"Another inconvenience what Wieland often bitterly complained, came
to him from the time-consuming Correcturen the twenty years
he worried through it alone, and until 1793 to a cooperative
house, a candidate of theology, Lütke Mueller named, had transferred.
With Unmuth expressed Wieland on the often illegible manuscript.
Each scholar and writer, said he should write a legible hand, which
could rightly call for, otherwise he must be printed by an
experienced writer of his hand well copiren leave. moroseness
Likewise, against the through long habit, he would be indifferent,
even produced in him the idea of handing over the "German Mercury"
abandon, regardless of this journal for him has not been a negligible
source of, and talented minds, among others Since 1785 by Reinhold,
and since 1788 Schiller by substantial contributions had been
supported.

On November 26, 1798 theilte Wieland Göschen his friends with the
message that the "German Mercury" with the December will stop.

Fourteen days later, however, he revoked this decision, and stated
that for the continuation of his journal, at least until the end
of the century. The Rath of his friends liked him to have this
decision, from which it take a look at the then state of the
German literature had shrunk. The Kantian philosophy to him
by Reinhold's efforts, their Principi more generally, to distribute,
was not able to remain unknown, said its influence on all scientific
research.

Unmistakably was particularly the influence of that philosophy to
the newer aesthetics, in their place now a Geschmackscritik should
occur. On the other hand, Wieland had essentially nothing. But
the new philosophical school, stemming from the Kantian formed
seemed to him a complete redesign to bring about the aesthetics,
since we had started them on the fundamental ideas of science
teaching Fichte'schen Reducir. This was especially of Schiller in
the "Listen" to happen. With growing concerns Wieland looked at
the place quiet investigations a new storm and stress period,
kick, and as in the political world, it seemed even in the
aesthetics a kind of terrorism to want to be prevalent.'

s On was aroused violent passion of the various Partheien by in the
Schiller's Muses almanac of 1797 printed "Xenien." The author of
this Epigrams, Goethe and Schiller, Wieland were friends. His
devotion to Goethe's has previously been thought. Schiller's talent
but did not initially Wieland full justice to be in a pretty harsh
and almost unreasonable determination of some Scenes of "Don
Carlos," Schiller in which the "Thalia" mitgetheilt had. Wieland
Urtheil contained a letter dated March 6, 1785.
He now began to feel a little thirsty, but manfully
struggled against this feeling.  Gradually the darkness grew
deeper, until at last it assumed the intense character of the
preceding night.  But still Tom sat up, and the boat went on.  The
wind did not slacken, nor did the boat's progress cease.  Hours
passed by in this way.  As to the tides, Tom could not tell now
very well whether they were rising or falling, and, in fact, he was
quite indifferent, being satisfied fully with his progress.  As
long as the wind distended his sail, and bore the boat onward, he
cared not whether the tide favored or opposed.

Hours passed, but such was Tom's excitement that he still bore up,
and thought nothing of rest or of sleep.  His attention was needed,
too, and so he kept wide awake, and his ears were ever on the
stretch to hear the slightest sound.  But at last the intense
excitement and the long fatigue began to overpower him.  Still he
struggled against his weakness, and still he watched and listened.

Hours passed on, and the wind never ceased to fill the sail, and
the boat never ceased to go onward in a course of which Tom could
have no idea.  It was a course totally different from the one which
be intended--a course which depended on the chance of the wind; and
one, too, which was varied by the sweep of the tide as it rose or
fell; but the course, such as it was, continued on, and Tom watched
and waited until, at last, from sheer exhaustion, he fell sound
asleep.

His dreams were much disturbed, but he slept on soundly, and when
he awaked it was broad day.  He looked around in deep disappointment.
Fog was everywhere, as before, and nothing could be seen.  Whether
he was near any shore or not he could not tell. Suddenly he noticed
that the wind was blowing from an opposite direction.  How to
account for this was at first a mystery, for the fog still
prevailed, and the opposite wind could not bring fog.  Was it
possible that the boat had turned during his sleep?  He knew that it
was quite possible.  Indeed, he believed that this was the case.
With this impression he determined to act on the theory that the
boat had turned, and not that the wind had changed.  The latter idea
seemed impossible.  The wind was the chill, damp fog wind--the
sou-wester.  Convinced of this, Tom turned the boat, and felt
satisfied that he had resumed his true course.

After a time the wind went down, and the sail flapped idly against
the mast.  Tom was in a fever of impatience, but could do nothing.
He felt himself to be once more at the mercy of the tides.  The
wind had failed him, and nothing was left but to drift.  All that
day he drifted, and night came on.  Still it continued calm.  Tom
was weary and worn out, but so intense was his excitement that he
could not think of sleep.  At midnight the wind sprung up a little;
and now Tom determined to keep awake, so that the boat might not
again double on her track.  He blamed himself for sleeping on the
previous night, and losing so much progress.  Now he was determined
to keep awake.

His resolution was carried out.  His intense eagerness to reach
some shore, no matter where, and his fear of again losing what he
had gained, kept sleep from his eyes.  All that night he watched
his boat.  The wind blew fitfully, sometimes carrying the boat on
rapidly, again dying down.

So the next morning came.

It was Thursday.

It was Monday night when he had drifted out, and all that time he
had been on the deep, lost in the fog.

And now, wearied, dejected, and utterly worn out, he looked around
in despair, and wondered where this would end.  Fog was everywhere,
as before, and, as before, not a thing could be seen.

Hours passed on; the wind had sprang up fresh, and the boat went on
rapidly.

Suddenly Tom sprang upright, and uttered a loud cry.

There full before him he saw a giant cliff, towering far overhead,
towards which the boat was sailing.  At its base the waves were
dashing.  Over its brow trees were bending.  In the air far above
he heard the hoarse cries of sea-gulls.

In his madness he let the boat drive straight on, and was close to
it before he thought of his danger.  He could not avoid it now,
however, for he did not know how to turn the boat.  On it went, and
in a few moments struck the beach at the base of the cliff.

The tide was high; the breeze was moderate, and there was but
little sun.  The boat was not injured by running ashore there.  Tom
jumped out, and, taking the rope in his hands, walked along the
rough and stony beach for about a hundred yards, pulling the boat
after him.  There the cliff was succeeded by a steep slope, beyond
which was a gentle, grass-grown declivity.  Towards this he bent
his now feeble steps, still tugging at the boat, and drawing it
after him.

At length he reached the grassy slope, and found here a rough
beach.  He fastened the boat securely to the trunk of a tree that
grew near.

Then he lifted out the box of biscuit, and over this he threw the
sail.

He stood for a few moments on the bank, and looked all around for
signs of some human habitation; but no signs appeared.  Tom was too
exhausted to go in search of one.  He had not slept for more than
thirty hours.  The country that he saw was cleared.  Hills were at
a little distance, but the fog which hung all around concealed
everything from view.  One look was enough.

Overwhelmed with gratitude, he fell upon his knees, and offered up
a fervent prayer of thankfulness for his astonishing escape.

Then fatigue overpowered him, and, rolling himself up in the sail,
he went to sleep.


VIII.

Off in Search.--Eager Outlook.--Nothing but Fog.--Speaking a
Schooner.--Pleasant Anecdotes.--Cheer up.--The Heart of Corbet.


After the arrival of Bruce and Bart, Captain Corbet did not delay
his departure much longer.  The vessel was already afloat, and
though the tide was still rising, yet the wind was sufficiently
favorable to enable her to go on her way.  The sails were soon set,
and, with the new boat in tow, the Antelope weighed anchor, and
took her departure.  For about two hours but little progress was
made against the strong opposing current; yet they had the
satisfaction of reaching the mouth of the river, and by ten
o'clock, when the tide turned and began to fall, they were fairly
in the bay.  The wind here was ahead, but the strong tide was now
in their favor, and they hoped for some hours to make respectable
progress.

During this time they had all kept an anxious lookout, but without
any result.  No floating craft of any kind appeared upon the
surface of the water.  Coming down the river, the sky was
unclouded, and all the surrounding scene was fully visible; but on
reaching the bay, they saw before them, a few miles down, a lofty
wall of light-gray cloud.  Captain Corbet waved his hand towards
this.

"We're in for it," said he, "or we precious soon will be."

"What's that?" asked Phil.

"Our old friend--a fog bank.  You'd ought to know it by this time,
sure."

There it lay, a few miles off, and every minute brought them
nearer.  The appearance of the fog threw an additional gloom over
the minds of all, for they saw the hopeless character of their
search.  Of what avail would it be to traverse the seas if they
were all covered by such thick mists?  Still nothing else was to be
done, and they tried to hope for the best.

"Any how," said Captain Corbet, "thar's one comfort.  That thar fog
may go as quick as it come.  It ony needs a change of wind.  Why,
I've knowed it all vanish in half an hour, an the fog as thick as
it is now."

"But sometimes it lasts long--don't it?"

"I should think it did.  I've knowed it hang on for weeks."

At this gloomy statement the boys said not a word.

Soon after the schooner approached the fog bank, and in a little
while it had plunged into the midst of its misty folds.  The chill
of the damp clouds, as they enveloped them, struck additional chill
to their hearts.  It was into the midst of this that poor Tom had
drifted, they thought, and over these seas, amidst this impenetrable
atmosphere, he might even now be drifting.  In the midst of the deep
dejection consequent upon such thoughts, it was difficult for them
to find any solid ground for hope.

The wind was moderate, yet adverse, and the schooner had to beat
against it.  As she went on each tack, they came in sight of the
shores; but as time passed, the bay widened, and Captain Corbet
kept away from the land as much as possible.  All the time the boys
never ceased to maintain their forlorn lookout, and watched over
the sides, and peered anxiously through the mist, in the hope that
the gloomy waters might suddenly disclose to their longing eyes the
form of the drifting boat and their lost companion.

"I tell you what it is, boys," said Captain Corbet, after a long
and thoughtful silence; "the best plan of acting in a biz of this
kind is to pluck up sperrit an go on.  Why, look at me.  You mind
the time when that boat, that thar i-dentical, individdle boat,
drifted away onst afore, with youns in it.  You remember all about
that,--course.  Well, look at me.  Did I mourn?  Did I fret?  Was I
cast down?  Nary down; not me.  I cheered up.  I cheered up Mr.
Long.  I kep everybody in good sperrits.  An what was the result?
Result was, you all turned up in prime order and condition, a
enjyin of yourselves like all possessed, along with old O'Rafferty.

"Again, my friends," he continued, as the boys made no remark,
"consider this life air short an full of vycissitoods.  Ups an
downs air the lot of pore fallen hoomanity.  But if at the fust
blast of misforten we give up an throw up the game, what's the good
of us?  The question now, an the chief pint, is this--Who air we,
an whar air we goin, an what air we purposin to do?  Fust, we air
hooman beins; secondly, we air a traversin the vast an briny main;
and thirdly, we hope to find a certain friend of ourn, who was
borne away from us by the swellin tide.  Thar's a aim for us--a
high an holy aim; an now I ask you, as feller-critters, how had we
ought to go about it?  Had we ought to peek, an pine, an fret, an
whine?  Had we ought to snivel, and give it up at the fust?  Or had
we ought, rayther, to be up an doin,--pluck up our sperrits like
men, and go about our important work with energy?  Which of these
two, my friends?  I pause for a reply."

This was quite a speech for Captain Corbet, and the effort seemed
quite an exhaustive one.  He paused some time for a reply; but as
no reply was forthcoming, he continued his remarks.

"Now, see here," said he; "this here whole business reminds me of a
story I once read in a noospaper, about a man up in this here
identical river, the Petticoat Jack, who, like a fool, pulled up
his boat on the bank, and wont off to sleep in her.  Wal, as a
matter of course, he floated off,--for the tide happened to be
risin,--an when he woke up out of his cool an refreshin slumbers,
he found himself afar on the briny deep, a boundin like 'a thing of
life,' o'er the deep heavin sea.  Besides, it was precious foggy,--
jest as it is now,--an the man couldn't see any more'n we can.
Wal, the story went on to say, how that thar man, in that thar
boat, went a driftin in that thar fashion, in that thar fog; an he
drifted, an drifted, an derifted, for days an days, up an down, on
one side an t'other side, an round every way,--an, mind you, he
hadn't a bit to eat, or to drink either, for that matter,--'t any
rate, the paper didn't mention no such thing; an so, you know, he
drifted, an d-e-e-e-rifted,--until at last he druv ashore.  An now,
whar d'ye think he druv?"

The boys couldn't think.

"Guess, now."

The boys couldn't guess.

"D'ye guv it up?"

They did.

"Wal, the paper said, he druv ashore at Grand Manan; but I've my
doubts about it."

The captain paused, looked all around through the fog, and stood
for a moment as though listening to some sound.

"I kine o' thought," said he, "that I detected the dash of water on
the shore.  I rayther think it's time to bring her round."

The vessel was brought round on another tack, and the captain
resumed his conversation.

"What I was jest sayin," he continued, "reminds me of a story I
onst heard, or read, I forget which (all the same, though), about
two boys which went adrift on a raft.  It took place up in Scott's
Bay, I think, at a ship-yard in that thar locality.

"These two unfortunate children, it seems, had made a raft in a
playful mude, an embarkin on it they had been amoosin theirselves
with paddlin about by pushin it with poles.  At length they came to
a pint where poles were useless; the tide got holt of the raft, an
the ferrail structoor was speedily swept onward by the foorus
current.  Very well.  Time rolled on, an that thar raft rolled on
too,--far over the deep bellew sea,--beaten by the howlin storm, an
acted upon by the remorseless tides.  I leave you to pictoor to
yourselves the sorrow of them thar two infant unfortunits, thus
severed from their hum an parients, an borne afar, an scarce enough
close on to keep 'em from the inclemency of the weather.  So they
drifted, an drifted, an de-e-rifted, until at last they druv
ashore; an now, whar do you think it was that they druv?"

The boys couldn't say.

"Guess now."

The boys declined.

"Try."

They couldn't.

"Name some place."

They couldn't think of any.

"D'ye guv it up?" asked the captain, excitedly.

They did.

"Well, then," said he, in a triumphant tone, "they druv ashore on
Brier Island; an ef that thar ain't pooty tall driftin, then I'm a
Injine."

To this the boys had no reply to make.

"From all this," continued the captain, "you must perceive that
this here driftin is very much more commoner than you hev ben
inclined to bleeve it to be.  You also must see that thar's every
reason for hope.  So up with your gizzards!  Pluck up your
sperrits!  Rise and look fortin an the footoor squar in the face.
Squar off at fortin, an hav it out with her on the spot.  I don't
want to hev you go mopin an whinin about this way.  Hello!"

Captain Corbet suddenly interrupted his remarks by an exclamation.
The exclamation was caused by the sudden appearance of a sail
immediately to windward.  She was coming up the bay before the
wind, and came swiftly through the fog towards them.  In passing on
her way, she came astern of the Antelope.

"Schooner, ahoy!" cried Captain Corbet; and some conversation took
place, in which they learned that the stranger was the schooner
Wave, from St. John, and that she had not seen any signs whatever
of any drifting boat.

This news was received sadly by the boys, and Captain Corbet had to
exert his utmost to rouse them from their depression, but without
much effect.

"I don't know how it is," said he, plaintively, "but somehow your
blues air contiguous, an I feel as ef I was descendin into a
depression as deep as yourn.  I don't remember when I felt so
depressed, cept last May--time I had to go off in the Antelope with
taters, arter I thought I'd done with seafarin for the rest of my
life.  But that thar vessel war wonderously resussutated, an the
speouse of my buzzum druv me away to traverse the sea.  An I had to
tar myself away from the clingin gerasp of my weepin infant,--the
tender bud an bulossum of an old man's life--tar myself away, an
feel myself a outcast.  Over me hovered contennooly the image of
the pinin infant, an my heart quivered with responsive sympathy.
An I yearned--an I pined--an I groaned--an I felt that life would
be intoll'ble till I got back to the babby.  An so it was that I
passed away, an had scace the heart to acknowledge your youthful
cheers.  Wal, time rolled on, an what's the result?  Here I air.
Do I pine now?  Do I peek?  Not a pine!  Not a peek!  As tender a
heart as ever bet still beats in this aged frame; but I am no
longer a purray to sich tender reminiscinsuz of the babby as onst
used to consume my vitals."

Thus it was that the venerable captain talked with the boys, and it
was thus that he sought, by every possible means, to cheer them up.
In this way the day passed on, and after five or six hours they
began to look for a turn of tide.  During this time the schooner
had been beating; and as the fog was as thick as ever, it was
impossible for the boys to tell where they were.  Indeed, it did
not seem as though they had been making any progress.

"We'll have to anchor soon," said the captain, closing his eyes and
turning his face meditatively to the quarter whence the wind came.

"Anchor?"

"Yes."

"What for?"

"Wal, you see it'll soon be dead low tide, an we can't go on any
further when it turns.  We'll have wind an tide both agin us."

"How far have we come now?"

"Wal, we've come a pooty considerable of a lick now--mind I tell
you.  'Tain't, of course, as good as ef the wind had ben favorable,
but arter all, that thar tide was a pooty considerable of a tide,
now."

"How long will you anchor?"

"Why, till the next tarn of tide,--course."

"When will that be?"

"Wal, somewhar about eleven o'clock."

"Eleven o'clock?"

"Yes."

"Why, that's almost midnight."

"Course it is."

"Wouldn't it be better to cruise off in the bay?  It seems to me
anything is better than keeping still."

"No, young sir; it seems to me that jest now anythin is better than
tryin to cruise in the bay, with a flood tide a comin up.  Why,
whar d'ye think we'd be?  It would ony take an hour or two to put
us on Cape Chignecto, or Cape d'Or, onto a place that we wouldn't
git away from in a hurry,--mind I tell you."

To this, of course, the boys had nothing to say.  So, after a half
hour's further sail, the anchor was dropped, and the Antelope
stopped her wanderings for a time.

Tedious as the day had been, it was now worse.  The fog was as
thick as ever, the scene was monotonous, and there was nothing to
do.  Even Solomon's repasts had, in a great measure, lost their
attractions.  He had spread a dinner for them, which at other
times, and under happier circumstances, would have been greeted
with uproarious enthusiasm; but at the present time it was viewed
with comparative indifference.  It was the fog that threw this
gloom over them.  Had the sky been clear, and the sun shining, they
would have viewed the situation with comparative equanimity; but
the fog threw terror all its own around Tom's position; and by
shutting them in on every side, it forced them to think of him who
was imprisoned in the same way--their lost companion, who now was
drifting in the dark.  Besides, as long as they were in motion,
they had the consciousness that they were doing something, and that
of itself was a comfort; but now, even that consolation was taken
away from them, and in their forced inaction they fell back again
into the same despondency which they had felt at Petitcodiac.

"It's all this fog, I do believe," said Captain Corbet.  "If it
want for this you'd all cheer up, an be as merry as crickets."

"Is there any prospect of its going away?"

"Wal, not jest yet.  You can't reckon on it.  When it chooses to go
away, it does so.  It may hang on for weeks, an p'aps months.
Thar's no tellin.  I don't mind it, bein as I've passed my hull
life in the middle of fog banks; but I dare say it's a leetle tryin
to youns."

The repast that Solomon spread for them on that evening was scarce
tasted, and to all his coaxings and remonstrances the boys made no
reply.  After the tea was over, they went on deck, and stared
silently into the surrounding gloom.  The sight gave them no
relief, and gave no hope.  In that dense fog twilight came on soon,
and with the twilight came the shadows of the night more rapidly.
At last it grew quite dark, and finally there arose all around them
the very blackness of darkness.

"The best thing to do," said Captain Corbet, "is to go to sleep.
In all kinds of darkness, whether intunnel or extunnel, I've allus
found the best plan to be to sleep it off.  An I've knowed great
men who war of my opinion.  Sleep, then, young sirs, while yet you
may, while yer young blood is warm, an life is fresh an fair, an
don't put it off to old age, like me, for you mayn't be able to do
it.  Look at me!  How much d'ye think I've slep sence I left Mud
Creek?  Precious little.  I don't know how it is, but bein alone
with you, an havin the respons'bility of you all, I kine o' don't
feel altogether able to sleep as I used to do; an sence our late
loss--I--wal, I feel as though I'd never sleep agin.  I'm talkin an
talkin, boys, but it's a solemn time with me.  On me, boys, rests
the fate of that lad, an I'll scour these here seas till he turns
up, ef I hev to do it till I die.  Anxious?  Yes, I am.  I'm that
anxious that the diskivery of the lost boy is now the one idee of
my life, for which I forget all else; but allow me to say, at the
same time, that I fully, furmly, an conshuentiously bleve an affum,
that my conviction is, that that thar lad is bound to turn up all
right in the end--right side up--with care--sound in every respect,
in good order an condition, jest as when fust shipped on board the
good schooner Antelope, Corbet master, for Petticoat Jack, as per
bill ladin."

The captain's tones were mournful.  He heaved a deep sigh as he
concluded, and relapsed into a profound and melancholy silence.

The boys waited on deck for some time longer, and finally followed
his advice, and sought refuge below.  They were young and strong,
and the fatigue which they felt brought on drowsiness, which, in
spite of their anxiety, soon deepened into sleep.  All slept, and
at length Captain Corbet only was awake.  It was true enough, as he
had said, the fate of the lost boy rested upon him, and he felt it.
His exhortations to the boys about keeping up their courage, and
his stories about lost men who had drifted to a final rescue, were
all spoken more with reference to himself than to them.  He sought
to keep up his own courage by these words.  Yet, in spite of his
efforts, a profound depression came over him, and well nigh subdued
him.  No one knew better than he the many perils which beset the
drifting boat in these dangerous waters--the perils of storm, the
perils of fog, the perils of thick darkness, the perils of furious
tides, the perils of sunken rocks, of shoals, and of iron-bound
coasts.  The boys had gone to sleep, but there was no sleep for
him.  He wandered restlessly about, and heavy sighs escaped him.
Thus the time passed with him until near midnight.  Then he roused
the mate, and they raised the anchor and hoisted the sails.  It was
now the turn of tide, and the waters were falling again, and the
current once more ran down the bay.  To this current he trusted the
vessel again, beating, as before, against the head wind, which was
still blowing; and thus the Antelope worked her way onward through
all that dark and dismal night, until at last the faint streaks of
light in the east proclaimed the dawn of another day.

Through all that night the boys slept soundly.  The wind blew, the
waves dashed, but they did not awake.  The anchor was hoisted, and
the sails were set, but the noise failed to rouse them.  Weariness
of body and anxiety of mind both conspired to make their sleep
profound.  Yet in that profound sleep the anxiety of their minds
made itself manifest; and in their dreams their thoughts turned to
their lost companion.  They saw him drifting over the stormy
waters, enveloped in midnight darkness, chilled through with the
damp night air, pierced to the bone by the cold night wind;
drifting on amid a thousand dangers, now swept on by furious tides
towards rocky shores, and again drawn back by refluent currents
over vast sunken sea-ledges, white with foam.  Thus through all the
night they slept, and as they slept the Antelope dashed on through
the waters, whose foaming waves, as they tumbled against her sides
and over her bows, sent forth sounds that mingled with their
dreams, and became intermingled with poor Tom's mournful cries.


IX.

Awake once more.--Where are we?--The giant cliff.--Out to Sea.--
Anchoring and Drifting.--The Harbor.--The Search.--No Answer.--
Where's Solomon?


Scarce had the streaks of light greeted Captain Corbet's eyes, and
given him the grateful prospect of another day, when the boys
awaked and hurried up on deck.  Their first act was to take a
hurried look all around.  The same gloomy and dismal prospect
appeared--black water and thick, impenetrable fog.

"Where are we now, Captain?" asked Bruce.

"Wal, a con-siderable distance down the bay."

"What are you going to do?"

"Wal--I've about made up my mind whar to go."

"Where?"

"I'm thinkin of puttin into Quaco."

"Quaco?"

"Yes."

"How far is it from here?"

"Not very fur, 'cordin to my calc'lations.  My idee is, that the
boat may have drifted down along here and got ashore.  Ef so, he
may have made for Quaco, an its jest possible that we may hear
about him."

"Is this the most likely place for a boat to go ashore?"

"Wal, all things considered, a boat is more likely to go ashore on
the New Brunswick side, driftin from Petticoat Jack; but at the
same time 'tain't at all certain.  Thar's ony a ghost of a chance,
mind.  I don't feel over certain about it."

"Will we get to Quaco this tide?"

"Scacely."

"Do you intend to anchor again?"

"Wal, I rayther think I'll hev to do it.  But we'd ought to get to
Quaco by noon, I calc'late.   I'm a thinkin--Hello!  Good
gracious!"

The captain's sudden exclamation interrupted his words, and made
all turn to look at the object that had called it forth.  One
glance showed an object which might well have elicited even a
stronger expression of amazement and alarm.

Immediately in front of them arose a vast cliff,--black, rocky,
frowning,--that ascended straight up from the deep water, its
summit lost in the thick fog, its base white with the foaming waves
that thundered there.  A hoarse roar came up from those breaking
waves, which blended fearfully with the whistle of the wind through
the rigging, and seemed like the warning sound of some dark, drear
fate.  The cliff was close by, and the schooner had been steering
straight towards it.  So near was it that it seemed as though one
could have easily tossed a biscuit ashore.

But though surprised, Captain Corbet was not in the least confused,
and did not lose his presence of mind for a moment.  Putting the
helm hard up, he issued the necessary commands in a cool, quiet
manner; the vessel went round, and in a few moments the danger was
passed.  Yet so close were they, that in wearing round it seemed as
though one could almost have jumped from the stern upon the rocky
shelves which appeared in the face of the lofty cliff.

Captain Corbet drew a long breath.

"That's about the nighest scratch I remember ever havin had," was
his remark, as the Antelope went away from the land.  "Cur'ous,
too; I don't see how it happened.  I lost my reckonin a little.
I'm a mile further down than I calc'lated on bein."

"Do you know that place?" asked Bart.

"Course I know it."

"It's lucky for us we didn't go there at night."

"Yes, it is rayther lucky; but then there wan't any danger o' that,
cos, you see, I kep the vessel off by night, an the danger couldn't
hev riz.  I thought we were a mile further up the bay; we've been a
doin better than I thought for."

"Shall we be able to get into Quaco any sooner?"

"Wal, not much."

"I thought from what you said that we were a mile nearer."

"So we air, but that don't make any very great difference."

"Why, we ought to get in all the sooner, I should think."

"No; not much."

"Why not?  I don't understand that."

"Wal, you see it's low tide now."

"The tides again!"

"Yes; it's allus the tides that you must consider here.  Wal, it's
low tide now, an the tide's already on the turn, an risin.  We've
got to anchor."

"Anchor!"

"Yes."

"What, again?"

"Yes, agin.  Even so.  Ef we didn't anchor we'd only be drifted up
again, ever so far, an lose all that we've ben a gainin.  We're not
more'n a mile above Quaco Harbor, but we can't fetch it with wind
an tide agin us; so we've got to put out some distance an anchor.
It's my firm belief that we'll be in Quaco by noon.  The next
fallin tide will carry us thar as slick as a whistle, an then we
can pursue our investigations."

The schooner now held on her course for about a mile away from the
shore, and then came to anchor.  The boys had for a moment lost
sight of this unpleasant necessity, and had forgotten that they had
been using up the hours of the ebb tide while asleep.  There was no
help for it, however, and they found, to their disgust, another day
of fog, and of inaction.

Time passed, and breakfast came.  Solomon now had the satisfaction
of seeing them eat more, and gave manifest signs of that
satisfaction by the twinkle of his eye and the lustre of his ebony
brow.  After this the time passed on slowly and heavily; but at
length eleven o'clock came, and passed, and in a short time they
were once more under way.

"We're going to Quaco now--arn't we?" asked Phil.

"Yes; right straight on into Quaco Harbor, fair an squar."

"I don't see how it's possible for you to know so perfectly where
you are."

"Young sir, there ain't a nook, nor a corner, nor a hole, nor a
stun, in all the outlinin an configoortion of this here bay but
what's mapped out an laid down all c'rect in this here brain.  I'd
undertake to navigate these waters from year's end to year's end,
ef I was never to see the sun at all, an even ef I was to be
perpetooly surrounded by all the fogs that ever riz.  Yea, verily,
and moreover, not only this here bay, but the hull coast all along
to Bosting.  Why, I'm at home here on the rollin biller.  I'm the
man for Mount Desert, an Quoddy Head, an Grand Manan, an all other
places that air ticklish to the ginrality of seafarin men.  Why,
young sir, you see before you, in the humble an unassumin person of
the aged Corbet, a livin, muvin, and sea-goin edition of Blunt's
Coast Pilot, revised and improved to a precious sight better
condition than it's ever possible for them fellers in Bosting to
get out.  By Blunt's Coast Pilot, young sir, I allude to a
celebrated book, as big as a pork bar'l, that every skipper has in
his locker, to guide him on his wanderin way--ony me.  I don't have
no call to use sech, being myself a edition of useful information
techin all coastin matters."

The Antelope now proceeded quickly on her way.  Several miles were
traversed.

"Now, boys, look sharp," said the captain; "you'll soon see the
settlement."

They looked sharp.

For a few moments they went onward through the water, and at length
there was visible just before them what seemed like a dark cloud
extending all along.  A few minutes further progress made the dark
cloud still darker, and, advancing further, the dark cloud finally
disclosed itself as a line of coast.  It was close by them, and,
even while they were recognizing it as land, they saw before them
the outline of a wharf.

"Good agin!" cried the captain.  "I didn't come to the wharf I
wanted, but this here'll do as well as any other, an I don't know
but what it'll do better.  Here we air, boys.  Stand by thar, mate,
to let fall the jib."

On they went, and in a few minutes more the Antelope wore round,
and her side just grazed the wharf.  The mate jumped ashore, lines
were secured, and the Antelope lay in safety.

"An now, boys, we may all go ashore, an see if we can hear anything
about the boat."

With these words Captain Corbet stepped upon the wharf, followed by
all the boys, and they all went up together, till they found
themselves on a road.  There they saw a shop, and into this they
entered.  No time was to be lost; the captain at once told his
story, and asked his question.

The answer was soon made.

Nothing whatever was known there about any boat.  Two or three
schooners had arrived within two days, and the shopkeeper had seen
the skippers, but they had not mentioned any boat.  No boat had
drifted ashore anywhere near, nor had any strange lad arrived at
the settlement.

This intelligence depressed them all.

"Wal, wal," said the captain, "I didn't have much hopes; it's jest
as I feared; but, at the same time, I'll ask further.  An first and
foremost I'll go an see them schooners."

He then went off with the boys in search of the schooners just
mentioned.  These were found without difficulty.  One had come from
up the bay, another from St. John, and a third from Eastport.  None
of them had encountered anything like a drilling boat.  The one
from up the bay afforded them the greatest puzzle.  She must have
come down the very night of Tom's accident.  If he did drift down
the bay in his boat, he must have been not very far from the
schooner.  In clear weather he could not have escaped notice; but
the skipper had seen nothing, and heard nothing.  He had to beat
down against the wind, and anchor when the tide was rising; but,
though he thus traversed so great an extent of water, nothing
whatever attracted his attention.

"This sets me thinkin," said the captain, "that, perhaps, he mayn't
have drifted down at all.  He may have run ashore up thar.  Thar's
a chance of it, an we must all try to think of that, and cheer up,
as long as we can."

Leaving the schooners, the captain now went through the settlement,
and made a few inquiries, with no further result.  Nothing had been
heard by any one about any drifting boat, and they were at last
compelled to see that in Quaco there was no further hope of gaining
any information whatever about Tom.

After this, the captain informed the boys that he was going back to
the schooner to sleep.

"I haven't slep a wink," said he, "sence we left Grand Pre, and
that's more'n human natur can ginrally stand; so now I'm bound to
have my sleep out, an prepare for the next trip.  You boys had
better emply yourselves in inspectin this here village."

"When shall we leave Quaco?"

"Wal, I'll think that over.  I haven't yet made up my mind as to
what's best to be done next.  One thing seems certain.  There ain't
no use goin out in this fog, an I've half a mind to wait here till
to-morrow."

"To-morrow!"

"Yes,--an then go down to St. John."

"But what'll poor Tom be doing?"

"It's my firm belief that he's all right," said Captain Corbet,
confidently.  "At any rate, you'd better walk about now, an I'll
try an git some sleep."

As there was nothing better to be done, the boys did as he
proposed, and wandered about the village.  It was about two miles
long, with houses scattered at intervals along the single street of
which it was composed, with here, and there a ship-yard.  At one
end was a long, projecting ledge, with a light-house; at the other
there was a romantic valley, through which a stream ran into the
bay.  On the other side of this stream were cliffs of sandstone
rocks, in which were deep, cavernous hollows, worn by the waves;
beyond this, again, was a long line of a precipitous shore, in
whose sides were curious shelves, along which it was possible to
walk for a great distance, with the sea thundering on the rocks
beneath.  At any other time they would have taken an intense
enjoyment in a place like this, where there were so many varied
scenes; but now their sense of enjoyment was blunted, for they
carried in their minds a perpetual anxiety.  None the less, however,
did they wander about, penetrating up the valley, exploring the
caverns, and traversing the cliffs.

They did not return to the schooner till dusk.  It would not be
high tide till midnight, and so they prolonged their excursion
purposely, so as to use up the time.  On reaching the schooner they
were welcomed by Captain Corbet.

"I declar, boys," said he, "I'm getting to be a leetle the biggest
old fool that ever lived.  It's all this accident.  It's onmanned
me.  I had a nap for two or three hours, but waked at six, an ever
sence I've been a worretin an a frettin about youns.  Sence that
thar accident, I can't bar to have you out of my sight, for I fear
all the time that you ar gettin into mischief.  An now I've been
skeart for two mortal hours, a fancyin you all tumblin down from
the cliffs, or a strugglin in the waters."

"O, we can take care of ourselves, captain," said Bart

"No, you can't--not you.  I wouldn't trust one of you.  I'm getting
to be a feeble creetur too,--so don't go away agin."

"Well, I don't think we'll have a chance in Quaco.  Arn't we going
to leave to-night?"

"Wal, that thar is jest the pint that I've been moosin on.  You see
it's thick; the fog's as bad as ever.  What's the use of going out
to-night?  Now, ef we wait till to-morrow, it may be clear, an then
we can decide what to do."

At this proposal, the boys were silent for a time.  The experience
which they had formed of the bay and its fogs showed them how
useless would be any search by night, and the prospect of a clear
day, and, possibly, a more favorable wind on the morrow, was very
attractive.  The question was debated by all, and considered in all
its bearings, and the discussion went on until late, when it was
finally decided that it would be, on the whole, the wisest course
to wait until the following day.  Not the least influential of the
many considerations that occurred was their regard for Captain
Corbet.  They saw that he was utterly worn out for want of sleep,
and perceived how much he needed one night's rest.  This finally
decided them.

Early on the following morning they were all up, and eager to see
if there was any change in the weather.  The first glance around
elicited a cry of admiration from all of them.  Above, all was
clear and bright.  The sun was shining with dazzling lustre; the
sky was of a deep blue, and without a cloud on its whole expanse;
while the wide extent of the bay spread out before them, blue like
the sky above, which it mirrored, and throwing up its waves to
catch the sunlight.  A fresh north wind was blowing, and all the
air and all the sea was full of light and joy.

The scene around was in every respect magnificent.  The tide was
low, and the broad beach, which now was uncovered by the waters,
spread afar to the right and left in a long crescent that extended
for miles.  On its lower extremity it was terminated by a ledge of
black rocks, with the light-house before spoken of, while its upper
end was bounded by cavernous cliffs of red sandstone, which were
crowned with tufted trees.  Behind them were the white houses of
the village, straggling irregularly on the borders of the long
road, with here and there the unfinished fabric of some huge ship;
while in the background were wooded hills and green sloping fields.
Out on the bay a grander scene appeared.  Far down arose a white
wall, which marked the place where the fog clouds were sullenly
retreating; immediately opposite, and forty miles away over the
water, arose the long line of the Nova Scotia coast, which bounded
the horizon; while far up arose Cape Chignecto, and beside it
towered up the dark form of a lonely island, which they knew, in
spite of the evident distortion of its shape, to be no other than
Ile Haute.

The wondrous effects which can be produced by the atmosphere were
never more visible to their eyes than now.  The coast of Nova
Scotia rose high in the air, dark in color, apparently only half
its actual distance away, while the summit of that coast seemed as
level as a table.  It seemed like some vast structure which had
been raised out of the water during the night by some magic power.
Ile Haute arose to an extraordinary height, its summit perfectly
level, its sides perfectly perpendicular, and its color a dark
purple hue.  Nor was Cape Chignecto less changed.  The rugged cliff
arose with magnified proportions to a majestic height, and took
upon itself the same sombre color, which pervaded the whole of the
opposite coast.

Another discussion was now begun as to their best plan of action.
After talking it all over, it was finally decided to go to St.
John.  There they would have a better opportunity of hearing about
Tom; and there, too, if they did hear, they could send messages to
him, or receive them from him.  So it was decided to leave at about
eleven o'clock, without waiting for high tide; for, as the wind was
fair, they could go on without difficulty.  After coming to this
conclusion, and learning that the tide would not be high enough to
float the schooner until eleven, they all took breakfast, and
stimulated by the exhilarating atmosphere and the bright sunshine,
they dispersed down the village towards the light-house.

By ten o'clock they were back again.  The tide was not yet up, and
they waited patiently.

"By the way, captain," asked Bart, "what's become of Solomon?"

"Solomon?  O, he took a basket an went off on a kine o' foragin
tower."

"Foraging?"

"Yes.  He said he'd go along the shore, and hunt for lobsters."

"The shore?  What shore?"

"Why, away up thar," said the captain, pointing towards the
headland at the upper end of the village.

"How long since?"

"Wal, jest arter breakfast.  It must hev ben afore seven."

"It's strange that he hasn't got back."

"Yes; he'd ought to be back by this time."

"He can't get any lobsters now; the tide is too high."

"That's a fact."

They waited half an hour.  The rising tide already touched the
Antelope's keel.

"Solomon ought to be back," cried Bart, starting up.

"That's so," said Captain Corbet.

"I'm afraid something's happened.  He's been gone too long.  Two
hours were enough."

The boys all looked at one another with anxious faces.

"If he went up that shore," said Bart, "he may have got caught by
the tide.  It's a very dangerous place for anybody--let alone an
old man like him."

"Wal, he did go up thar; he said partic'lar that he wanted to find
somethin of a relish, an would hunt up thar.  He said, too, he'd be
back by nine."

"I'm certain something's happened," cried Bart, more anxiously
than before.  "If he's gone up there, he's been caught by the
tide."

Captain Corbet stared, and looked uneasy.

"Wal, I must say, that thar's not onlikely.  It's a bad place, a
dreadful bad place,--an him an old man,--a dreadful bad place.
He'd be down here by this time, ef he was alive."

"I won't wait any longer," cried Bart.  "I must go and see.  Come
along, boys.  Don't let's leave poor old Solomon in danger.  Depend
upon it, he's caught up there somewhere."

"Wal, I think you're right," said Captain Corbet, "an I'll go too.
But ef we do go, we'd better go with some preparations."

"Preparations?  What kind of preparations?"

"O, ony a rope or two," said Captain Corbet; and taking a coil of
rope over his arm, he stepped ashore, and all the boys hurried
after him.

"I feel kine o' safer with a kile o' rope,--bein a seafarin man,"
he remarked.  "Give a seafarin man a rope, an he'll go anywhar an
do anythin.  He's like a spider onto a web."


X.

Tom ashore.--Storm at Night.--Up in the Morning.--The Cliffs and
the Beach.--A startling Discovery.--A desert Island.--A desperate
Effort.--Afloat again.


Tom slept soundly for a long time in the spot where he had flung
himself.  The sense of security came to the assistance of his
wearied limbs, and lulled him into profounder slumbers.  There was
nothing here that might rudely awaken him--no sudden boat shocks,
no tossings and heavings of waves, no hoarse, menacing thunders of
wrathful surges from rocky shores; nor were there distressing
dreams to harass him, or any anxieties carried from his waking
hours into the land of slumbers to annoy and to arouse.  From
Monday night until this time on Thursday, he had known but little
sleep, and much fatigue and sorrow.  Now the fatigue and the sorrow
were all forgotten, and the sleep was all his own.  Not a thought
had he given to the land which he had reached so strangely.  It was
enough for him that he felt the solid ground beneath his feet.

For hours he slept there, lying there like a log, wrapped in the
old sail, moving not a limb, but given up altogether to his
refreshing slumber.  At length he waked, and, uncovering his head,
looked around.  At first he thought that he was in the boat, then
he grew bewildered, and it was only after a persistent effort of
memory that he could recollect his position.

He looked all around, but nothing was visible.  There was nothing
around him but darkness, intense and utter.  It was like the
impenetrable veil that had enshrouded him during the night of his
memorable voyage.  He could not see where his boat was.  A vague
idea which he had of examining its fastening was dismissed.  He
felt hungry, and found the biscuit box lying under one corner of
the sail.  A few of these were sufficient to gratify his hunger.
Nothing more could be done, and he saw plainly that it would be
necessary for him to wait there patiently until morning.  Once
more, therefore, he rolled himself up in the sail, and tried to go
to sleep.  But at first his efforts were vain.  The first fatigue
had passed away, and now that he had been refreshed by sleep, his
mind was too much occupied by thoughts of his past voyage to be
readily lulled to sleep again.  He could not help wondering what
Captain Corbet and the boys were doing.  On his friend, the Professor
Riedel, Wieland limited its use. With the other teachers of
Erfurt University, he came in contact a few. The joys of social
life that are never special attraction for him had, in
Erfurt almost entirely to deprive him was not difficult. Substitute
for it offered him a friendly garden apartment in the Gasthof zum
Schwan, bulkhead behind the monastery. This asylum satisfied in
all respects to moderate its demands. He felt happy, his family,
himself and the Muses to be able to live undisturbed, as it continues
its conditions had allowed in Biberach.

His Teacher, he opened with presentations on the history of
mankind, according to a well-known works of Iselin on this subject.
Later, he delivered lectures on the history of philosophy, read on
the general theory of the fine arts, and explained some
comedies of Aristophanes and the letters of Horace. Also, he gave a
historical and critical overview of the best Greek, Latin, Italian,
French and English writers. On lovable showed Wieland in his
family circles.

In a letter to his girlfriend Sophie la Roche, he confessed that
he had "the pleasure of working with his young children to play,
all pleasures of the world prefer." That said, he owes to the
Graces, which has for him "very important deities" would. For
overnight shipment under the name of this poem drafted him that
he had completed in 1770, Wieland said: "The Graces thun infinitely
good to me, they give my poems charm, serenity and I sometimes even
more often satisfied with my conclusion, in short, they are my
protective goddesses, and I will them to the last moments of life
to serve.

"Nothing less than the ideal of a wise man, the" Diogenes of
Sinope "Seyn, whose" dialogues "Wieland, even during the summer
of 1770 was released.

Even without a predilection for this Lucian Sonderling, Wieland had
been for the study of interest, as a man probably would have
Seyn _können_, on the so strange and contradictory rumors prevailed.
His heroes were less Wieland Cynismus outlaw life and more wisdom
than he previously had usually allowed. The small factory, in which
serious and comic, sentimental and satirical portrayals alternated,
is particularly recommended by a basic philosophy of Socrates.
In a letter to his girlfriend Sophie la Roche Wieland confessed
that he has some things that affect the moral Theil human
nature did not think so, as formerly, and as the Clarisse'n, Carl
Grandison's and similar works is not love, for the sole reason,
because it would be perfect. "Maybe I wrong," he wrote, "but I
should be right, so I do not scoff about their way of thinking. I
think rather that the diversity of views on the nature of things
comes, and it is under no less, than the difference in their
faces, in temperament, and in all makes of what it is in relationship,
and wofern the public peace and general well-being does not suffer,
I say it should be allowed Seyn that for A holy think what the
others will appear as a very profane, that the one with _dem_ driving
his game, what the other is very serious and important notes, etc.

So looking to Wieland as humorous writer, what he wanted to apply,
and after his plants are also well could be from the shackles imposed
upon flight hindered his mind, and at the same time on in his
writings angestimmten sound to justify the public opinion with the
dignity of a professor of philosophy is not tolerated seemed to
hold.

He spoke about with the words: "It is believed here, the spirit
gravity, gravity is usually called, is an essential property of
an academic teacher, and one can or will not see that an author
who for the audience and for people of spirit writing, not as a
schoolmaster must write. "These comments notwithstanding, Wieland,
but believed his job as a professor in literary terms to justify
them. The draft, a" history of the human spirit "to write, he
presented to the Prince of Chur Mainz zueignen wanted, although
remained unexecuted. But fragments of such a history were somehow
all works Wieland, in the years 1770-1772 arose. The study of human
nature was his pressing business. In the essay, "What is truth?"
and "What is the purpose of philosophy?"

he had two important questions, but are not einzubilden that he and
the short answers he gave to his subject had been exhausted.

His "Reflections on Rousseau's original state of man," said Wieland,
in a sense as a complement, in an essay: "On the allegation that
unchecked human genus training night is sacred."

The contrast between the ideas expressed by Rousseau and the nature
of human nature to Wieland through illustrative examples still do.

To this Behuf except he wrote a novel, "Koxkox or Kikequetzel"
titled, the "Travel and Confessions of a priest Abulfauaris."

Entschieden Wieland's attention was directed to a monarch at the
time, represent a powerful hand the chains seemed to want to break
that up to now the intellectual freedom was paralyzed.

By the Emperor Joseph II both were with the Jesuits, most monasteries
in the Austrian states repealed and thus the violence of Mönchthums
in many ways been limited. At that time (1773) Wieland wrote his
novel "The Golden Mirror", which he as the dramatic poet, not
unknown Kaiserl.

Staatsrath v.

Gebler in Vienna zueignete. In one of his letters to his former
girlfriend Sophie la Roche Wieland said that he had in his novel
with a non-habitual intrepidity the Great of the Earth accused
had a mirror, they truly do not flatterers. "But why Seyn without
fear," he wrote. "I fear neither Bastille, nor lion pit, yet
fiery furnace. Have I not the conviction that the princes and
ministers to me in my book will be more love, I am sure that they
probably want to watch me a Miene evil about it. "Without his
almost total seclusion and the continued hard work would Wieland
during his three-year stay in Erfurt as much as a writer can not
afford, as he really made.

Moreover, he was often interrupted in his literary pursuits by Theil
work chur for him by the main government transferred hissing and
some by requests to appropriate proposals, such as the University
of Flor Seyn wants to promote.

Among these numerous operations, he was not the concern überhoben,
with his family can live decently. His salary was modest, and by
his lectures, so many of them also had been visited, he had
little income. Even without the inner drive, he would have access
to spring. Only by his persistent hard work, not at the mercy of his
lord, hoping Wieland, according to his own statements, to
improve its situation. Individual Trips to Weimar he had to substitute
for a bigger trip that neither his limited time, yet his
pecunia conditions allowed . As he once worked in Weimar Lessing's'
Emilie Galotti "fell into the hands, loving him this tragedy
into a praise of Lessing letters to overflowing. "It was," said
Wieland, "the first letter which I addressed this great man."
Literärische tie connections and acquaintances, and to pursue
literary purposes to maintain an exchange of letters, Wieland felt
no needs.

He had so many plans literärische again have to give up, because
he lacked time to export them. The circle of foreign friends,
with whom he was in correspondence, was therefore very limited. He
wrote to a few, usually only to those who initially had turned
to him. In a closer Freundschaftsverhältniß he was with Gleim and
Jacobi underfoot. "Both," Wieland wrote to Sophie la Roche, "belong
to the small number of fine spirits, with a beautiful soul, to the
envy and jealousy Seyn capable, and you know that those are the white
ravens. " To the poet Wieland Jacobi felt through a kind of mental
kinship drawn. He used him to call _eigenen_ poet, and heartily
rejoiced over his friend's quest in poetry the ideal of perfection
to reach the soul before it floated.

In a Jacobi's letters, which Wieland in March 1771 in honor
Breitenstein, where he was staying, a visit made, a description
of Wieland's outer and his personality in that period of his life
preserved.

"At first sight," said Jacobi, "seemed to me his physiognomy
is not very significant. His eyes are small and somewhat dull,
and the quantity of leaf scars, making his skin is covered, to
the fact that its trains will not stand out enough to be duly reward
them. Nothing less is expressed in all its Gebehrde the fire of
his spirit and character of his Empfindungsart to an extraordinary
and peculiar way. If he is emotionally strong, geräth his whole
body, but an almost imperceptible manner, moving his muscles stretch
out, and his eyes are brighter and shinier, his mouth open
slightly, and so he remains in a kind of torpor, until he pronounced
some words, or his friend's hand has pressed. This expression in
Wieland person is so fine that it should remain mostly unnoticed,
but I am more than once until the mark has been shaken. Wieland
goes quickly from one accusation to another over, because he
in an instant a number of thoughts or a situation is perceived
and understood. For him, it would Zeitverderbniß Seyn if he stayed
in longer. "Among the properties, according to Jacobi's
expression," Wieland's character is so charming and worthy of
veneration made as his genius, "Jacobi expected" the natural,
beautiful and masculine sensitivity of its soul, and the unspoiled
goodness of his heart, his warm, selfless, to envy and jealousy
made him incapable of true love and beauty; ungeheuchelte his
incredible modesty and sincerity. "So deep, as his friendship with
federal Jacobi, was not one of the acquaintances, Wieland, who
during a stay in Leipzig was held, while in the short time he had
traveled. One of the few to whom he was closer, was among whites
and Garve, Gellert both friends, he is no longer among the living
was held, but not minor annoyances had to hear how young and old
are tried, the celebrated poet by matt Lobgesänge glorifying.

"It was," said Wieland, "an appalling Gesing, Geplärre,
Geseufze and howl." White's affectionate nature is attracted to
him. He was which, said Wieland, with whom he wants to spend his
life. In Garve he admired the philosopher and penetrating thinker.
Only in small, he came into contact with Clodius, who through
his talent for pleasing interessirte deal more than its
Geistesvorzüge. A certain kinship chained him Oeser, he's in the
Winkler Gallery paintings had learned. In one of his former letters
Wieland confessed: "Of all the men, whose acquaintance I made in
Leipzig, Oeser is the one I am most in my heart found have a beautiful
soul, a great heart, with all the simplicity of the outside,
which is to find the true genius. "Crucial to Wieland's later life
was a trip to Weimar. there adequate follow through acquaintance
with the Count of Gorizia, he was Fortunately, widow of the Duchess
Anna Amalia of Saxony-Weimar, to be presented.

His personality and witty entertainment, combined with the
literary reputation that preceded him, made the best impression
on those who befriended the princess muses. The Duchess Amalia
gave him an education of the post and then Erbprinzen Duke Carl
August.

Not long before, Wieland prospects had to Vienna to be called.
His hope was based on the fairly widespread rumor: Joseph II
intended the finest minds of the German nation in the capital
of the German Empire to unite. The hope, to come to Vienna, gave
Wieland also as yet not quite, as he is already a post of Instructors
of Erbprinzen of Saxony-Weimar, had adopted. "I'm standing now,"
he wrote, "in my fortieth years, and when the goddess Fortuna
something for me thun wants, it's high time; = = en attendant, and
because of this I Humoristin not dare, I try, = ne ipse mihi desim
=. "The new situation in which he was joined in the expressions,
it is not entirely überhoben of concern for the future, actual or,
to put his family. Their situation was uncertain, since Wieland's
death, went out with the life pension of 600 Thlrn. which he had
been assured when he is no longer the instructor would Erbprinzen
Seyn. Until that time, with the September 3, 1775 approaches,
he moved into one years salary in 1000 Thlrn. His income was
only for a few years. Through his job as he saw Prince educators,
however, a early favorite cherished wish fulfilled, which he had
arrived during his stay in Switzerland had often employs vividly.
The court life was Wieland, at least initially, to offer no taste,
although the shackles, which he landed, his confessions are after
nothing less than were oppressive. had little good news for him but
by the close of a great mind and heart princess whose versatile
educated taste for everything big and beautiful, for science
and art in the broadest sense of the word, was receptive. So they
gathered in a circle like feingebildeter men and women living
with him, and every talent was in their vicinity so as to develop
free, because humanity and condescension to the main lines of its
nature were, giving them a general love and reverence acquired.
At his princely pupil, the Erbprinzen Carl August, by the excellent
facilities and gracious properties to the most legitimate hopes,
Wieland was soon replaced by a bond of mutual affection always
intimately linked. The interest for the true, good and beauty
in his royal pupil to awaken and nurture was the main task,
which Wieland when he was teaching. A certificate of which he
gave when he was the birthday of the Erbprinzen by an allegorical
poetry in dramatic form, "the choice of Hercules" titled,
celebrated. Wieland's interest in the dramatic poetry was nurtured
by the actor Seylersche society whose members, including the famous
Eckhof belonged, then gave performances in Weimar, where no stage
was standing.

Neither the dramas, even the comic operettas, mostly French designs
reproduced, Wieland could actually be interesting taste, if he does
not even those Producten Werth virtually all agreements. A greater
effect, he hoped by the previously neglected entirely serious opera.

Already in Erfurt had him this subject and it employs some explanations
abgenöthigt, his friend since he Jacobi Cantate and especially its
"Elysium" was read.

The applause, which a then sealed by Wieland singspiel "Aurora"
was, as it, by Swiss componirt , was listed, ermuthigte him to a
larger musical and dramatic trials. Thus Wieland's opera "Alceste,"
in May 1773 for the first time was listed. At the same time
he wrote his "Essay on the Musical." Wieland's joy at the favorable
reception of his "Alceste" was propagated as the famous Gluck
him calling for him a similar opera to write. Wieland was distracted
by the dramatic poetry of a literary undertaking, his time and
almost excessive forces claiming are threatened. The very popular
= = Mercure de France gave him the idea to publish a similar
magazine, which under the title: "The German Mercury" should appear.
Wieland hoped by this journal a widespread effect on his contemporaries,
and promised to them for the future an economically secure position.
After his plane should be in that magazine in poems and prose essays
of general interest with a critical overview of the latest phenomena
in the field of philosophy, history, politics, literature and
beautiful alternate.

The record review should especially be used biased and unfair Urtheile
writings about the benefits to be corrected. Wieland began the
publication of the "German Mercury," but soon came to unforeseen
obstacles. "Without the Beihülfe of our best writers I can not,"
he confessed in one of his letters.

By keeping it within a distance of from three to six
yards, he thought he would, for the present at least, be able to
keep afloat, and yet avoid the sweep of the tides.  He did not
expect to remain in this particular spot all the time, but expected
to find some place which would be out of the way of the tide, where
he could float comfortably without being forced to keep in too
close to the land.

But suddenly Tom's thoughts and speculations were rudely interrupted.

It appeared to him that there was a very unusual feeling about the
boat.  She did not seem as high out of the water as she ought to
have been, and her bows seemed to be lower than they had been.
There was also a slight vibration in her, which he had never
noticed before, and which struck him now as very peculiar.  In the
midst of this there came to his ears a low, faint, and scarcely
perceptible sound, made up of peculiar bubbling and gurgling
noises, which sounded from the boat.

One brief examination showed him that the boat was certainly very
much deeper in the water than she had been.

Five seconds later her bows had sunk farther.

Two seconds more, and Tom's feet were surrounded by water up to his
ankles.

The boat was filling!

Scarce had he made this discovery than the water rose swiftly up,
the boat sank quickly down, the sea rolled over her sides, and the
boat went to the bottom.

Very fortunate was it for Tom, at that moment, that he had not
pushed out farther from the shore.  When the boat went down he was
not more than three or four yards off, and he did not sink lower
than up to his neck.  But the shock was a sudden one, and for a
moment almost paralyzed him.  The next instant, however, he
recovered from it; and looking round, he saw the box of biscuit
floating within his reach.  Making a wild dash at this, he secured
it, and waded ashore with it in safety.  He then turned mournfully
to look after the boat, and found that it was visible, floating on
the surface.  As he left it, it had floated up, his weight being
the only thing that had sent it below.  The tide was still coming
in, so that it did not float away.  Tom flung off his coat and
waistcoat, and hurrying into the water, soon caught and dragged it
as near as he could to the beach.  Then he secured it once more,
and waited.  Standing there, he looked gloomily at the vessel,
wherein such precious hopes had been freighted only to be lost.
What had happened?  Why could not the boat float?  What was the
matter with her?  These were the wondering questions which occurred
to him without his being able to give any answer.

One thing he saw plainly, and that was, that he had lost this tide.
The next high tide would be after midnight, and the next would be
between one and two on the following day.  If he could find out
what was the matter with the boat, and fix it, he would have to
wait till the next day, unless he chose to watch for his chance
after midnight, and make the journey then.

He was not a boy who could be long inactive; so now, after a brief
period, in which he gave up to the natural despondency of his soul,
he stirred himself up once more, and sought comfort in occupation.
The box of biscuit did not seem much injured, it had not floated
long enough for the sea-water to penetrate it.  Assuring himself of
this, he next turned to the boat and took out its contents.  These
were the old sail, the coil of rope, and the baling dipper.

By this time the tide had reached its height, and after the usual
time of delay, began to fall once more.  The boat was secured to
the shore, and after a time the water began to leave her.  Tom sat
at a little distance, wondering what could be the matter with her,
and deferring his examination until the boat should be left
aground.  It was a mystery to him how this sudden change had
occurred, and why the boat, which had floated so well during his
long drift, should now, all of a sudden, begin to leak with such
astonishing rapidity.  Something must have happened--something
serious, too; but what it was, or how it had happened, he could
not, for the life of him, conjecture.

As Tom sat there, the tide gradually left the boat; and as the tide
left, the water ran out, keeping at just the same level inside as
the water outside.  This showed, even to his inexperienced eyes,
that the leak must be a very large one, since it admitted of such a
ready flow of water in and out.  The water descended lower and
lower as he sat, until, at last, the boat was left by the
retreating waves.  The water had all run out.

Tom now advanced, and proceeded to examine her.  When he was
arranging her cargo before, the coil of rope had been in the bows.
This had prevented him from detecting anything wrong in the boat.
But now, since everything had been taken out, one glance only was
quite sufficient to make known to him instantly the whole
difficulty.  There, in the bows, underneath the very place where
the coil of rope had lain, was a huge aperture.  The planks had
been beaten in, and one side of the bow was destroyed beyond hope
of remedy.

The sight of such an irremediable calamity as this renewed for a
time the despondency which he had felt at the first sinking of the
boat.  Full of depression, he turned away, and tried to account for
it all.  It was on the previous day that he had landed--about
twenty-four hours ago.  How had he passed the time since then, and
what had happened?  This he tried to remember.

In the first place, up to the moment of landing the boat was
perfectly sound, and far from all injury.  It had not been hurt
during the drift.  It had struck at one place, but the long voyage
that had followed showed that no damage had resulted.  Finally, it
had not been harmed by landing on Quaco Ledge.  Since that time he
had drifted in safety far across the bay, without meeting with any
accident.  All this proved clearly that the damage must have been
done to the boat since his landing on the island.

He found it very difficult to recall anything that had happened
since then.  On his first arrival he was worn out and exhausted.
He remembered vaguely how he came in sight of the giant cliff, how
he dragged the boat along, how he secured it to a tree, and then
how he flung himself down on the grass and fell asleep.  After that
all was obscure to his memory; but he could recall his waking at
midnight and listening to the roar of the wind and the dash of the
surf.  Evidently there must have been a heavier sea on the beach at
that time than when he landed, and this was sufficient to account
for the accident to the boat.  She had been beating on the rough
rocks at high tide, exposed to the full sweep of the surf, and her
bows had been stove in.

The melancholy spectacle of the ruined boat made Tom see that his
stay on the island might be prolonged even beyond the following
day.  No sooner had this thought occurred to him than he went over
to the articles which he had taken out of the boat, and passed them
all in review before him, as though he were anxious to know the
full extent of his resources.  He spread out the wet sail in the
sun.  He spread out his coat and waistcoat.  In the pocket of the
latter he found a card of matches, which were a little damp.  These
he seized eagerly and laid on the top of a stone, exposed to the
rays of the sun, so as to dry them.  The clothes which he kept on
were wet through, of course, but he allowed them to dry on him.

He had been working now pretty industriously all the morning, first
at searching after a piece of wood, then in cutting down the pole,
then in searching among the drift-wood, and finally at the boat.
He felt, at length, hungry; and as he could not yet decide upon
what was to be done next, he determined to satisfy his desires, and
kill the time by taking his dinner.  The repast was a frugal one,
consisting as before, of biscuit, which were washed down by cold
water; but Tom did not complain.  The presence of food of any sort
was a cause for thankfulness to one in his position, and it was
with a feeling of this sort, in spite of his general depression of
spirits, that he ate his meal.

After this he felt much more refreshed, and began to consider what
he had better do next.  Of course, the centre of interest to him
was the boat, and he could not give up that hope of escape without
a struggle.  As long as there was a hope of making his way from the
island by means of that, so long might he keep up his heart; but if
the damage that had been done should prove irreparable, how would
he be able to endure his situation?  Whatever it was, it would be
best to know the worst once for all.  Perhaps he might stop the
leak.  He had material around which seemed to be the right sort of
thing to stop a leak with.  He had the piece of sail, which could
be cut up into small pieces, and used to stop the leak.  If he had
possessed a hatchet and some nails, he would have made an effort to
repair the fracture in the planks of the boat; but as he had
nothing of that sort, he tried to devise some method by which the
water might be kept out.  As he thought, there gradually grew up in
his mind the rude outline of a plan which promised something, and
seemed to him to be certainly worth trying.  At any rate, he
thought, it will serve to give me an occupation; and any
occupation, even if it proves to be of no practical value, is
better than sitting here doing nothing at all.

Having something to do once more quickened Tom's energies anew, and
starting to his feet, he prepared to put his plan into execution.
First of all, in order to carry out that plan, it was necessary for
him to get a number of blocks and boards of different sizes.
These, he knew, could easily be found among the driftwood on the
beach.  Over there he hurried, and after a moderate search he
succeeded, at length, in finding bits of wood that seemed suited to
the purpose which he had in view.  With these he came back to the
boat; but as there was a large number of them, he had to make
several journeys before the whole collection was brought over.

Then he took his pole, and, putting a block under it, used it as a
lever to raise up the boat.  By dexterous management he succeeded
in doing this, and at the same time he ran a board underneath the
bow of the boat as it was slightly raised.  This manoeuvre he
repeated several times, each time raising his lever higher, by
means of a higher fulcrum, and thus constantly raising the bow of
the boat; while after each elevation the bow was secured in its new
position by running an additional board underneath it, over the
other preceding boards.  By carefully and perseveringly pursuing
this course, he at length succeeded in raising the bow of the boat
about a foot in the air.  This gave him an opportunity to examine
it thoroughly outside as well as inside, and to see the whole
extent of the damage that had been done.

It has already been said that the damage was serious.  Tom's
examination now convinced him that it was in every respect as
serious as he had supposed, if not still more so.  Even if he did
possess a hatchet and nails, or a whole box full of tools, he
doubted whether it would be in his power to do anything whatever in
the way of repairing it.  No less than three of the lower planks of
the bows, down to the very keel, were beaten in and broken so badly
that they seemed actually crushed and mangled.  It must have been a
fearful beating, and pounding, and grinding on the rocks which had
caused this.  The planks, though thus broken, still held together;
but it seemed to Tom that with a blow of his fist he could easily
beat it all in; and as he looked at it he could not help wondering
how it had happened that the work which the rocks had thus so
nearly effected had not been completely finished.  However, the
planks did hold together yet; and now the question was, Could any
thing be done?

In answer to this question, Tom thought of the old sail and the
coil of rope.  Already he had conceived the rude outline of a plan
whereby the entrance of the water might be checked.  The plan was
worth trying, and he determined to set about it at once, and use up
the hours before him as long as he could, without any further delay.
If by any possibility he could stop that leak, he determined to
start off at the next high tide, that very night, and run the risk.
It was a daring, even a foolhardy thought; but Tom was desperate,
and the only idea which he had was, to escape as soon as possible.

He now made some measurements, after which he went to the old sail,
and cut a piece from the end of it.  This he divided into smaller
pieces, each about a yard square.  Each of these pieces he folded
up in three folds, so as to make them about a foot wide and
eighteen inches long.  Others he folded into six folds, making them
about half the size of the larger pieces.  All this took up much
time, for he measured and planned very carefully, and his
calculations and measurements had to be done slowly and cautiously.
Returning to the boat with these bits of folded canvas, he put one
of the larger pieces on the inside, against the bow, right over the
broken place.  Another large piece was placed carefully over this,
and then the smaller pieces were laid against these.  In this way
he adjusted all the pieces of canvas in such a way as to cover up
the whole place where the leak was.

Then he went over to the drift-wood, and spent a long time
searching after some bits of wood.  He at length found a half dozen
pieces of board, about a foot long, and from six to eight inches in
width.  He also found some bits of scantling, and palings, which
were only a foot or so in length.  All these he brought back, and
laid them down on the beach near the boat.

He now proceeded to place these bits of wood in the bows, in such a
way as to keep the canvas in a firm position.  His idea was, that
the canvas, by being pressed against the opening, might keep out
the water, and the wood, by being properly arranged, might keep the
canvas secure in its place.  The arrangement of the wood required
the greatest care.  First of all, he took the smallest bits, and
stood these up against the canvas, so that they might correspond as
nearly as possible with the curve of the bows.  A few more pieces
were placed in the hollow part of this curve, and outside these the
larger pieces were placed.  Between the outside pieces and the
inner ones he thrust some of the smallest pieces which he could
find.  After thus arranging all his boards, he found that there lay
between the outside board and the first seat of the boat a space of
about one foot.  Selecting a piece of wood of about that length, he
put one end against the board, and the other against the seat, and
pressed it into a position where it served to keep the board tight
in its place.  Then he took other pieces of about the same length,
and arranged them in the same way, so that, by being fixed between
the board and the seat, they might keep the whole mass of boards
and canvas pressed tight against the opening in the bows.  After
placing as many blocks in position as he conveniently could, his
next work was to secure them all.  In order to effect this, another
journey to the drift-wood was necessary, and another search.  This
time he selected carefully a number of sticks, not more than half
an inch in thickness, some of them being much thinner.  He found
pieces of paling, and laths, and shingles which suited his ideas.
Returning with these to the boat, he proceeded to thrust them, one
by one, into the interstices of the boards, using a stone to drive
them into their places.

At last the work was finished as far as he could accomplish it, and
there remained nothing more to be done.  As far as he could see, by
shaking, and pulling, and pushing at the collection of sticks and
canvas, it was very firm and secure.  Every stick seemed to be
tight, and the pressure which they maintained against the aperture
was so strong that the wood-work now was forced out a little
distance beyond the outline of the boat.  He examined most
carefully all about the bows on the outside, but saw no place which
did not seem to be fully protected.  It seemed to him now as though
that piled-up canvas ought to resist the entrance of the water, or,
if not, at least that it ought not to allow it to enter so rapidly
but that he could easily keep the boat baled out.

He was not altogether confident, yet he was hopeful, and as
determined as ever to make a trial.


XII.

Waiting for high Water.--A Trial.--A new Discovery.--Total
Failure.--Down again.--Overboard.--A Struggle for Life.


Tom's work was thus, at length, accomplished, and it remained now
to get the boat in readiness and wait.  Slowly and carefully he
raised the bow by means of the lever, and one by one he withdrew
the boards which held it up.  At last the boat lay on the beach,
ready to receive the uplifting arms of the returning tide whenever
it should make its appearance again.  Tom saw with satisfaction
that the boat was about three yards down below high-water mark, on
the spot to which he had dragged it after the failure of his last
experiment.  This, of course, would be so much in his favor, for it
would thus be able to float before the water should reach its
height.

He had worked hard all the afternoon, and it was already dark.  The
tide, which had been falling, had some time ago reached its lowest
point, and was now returning.  Between him and the lowest point was
a great distance, for the tides here rise to a perpendicular height
of over forty feet; but Tom knew that the time required to traverse
the long space that here intervened between high and low-water mark
was precisely the same as if it had only to rise a few feet.

He was very hungry, but some things had yet to be done.  He had to
put on board the boat the articles that he had taken ashore.  His
matches were now quite dry, and he put them in his pocket with a
deep sense of their value to him in his present position.  His
clothes also were dry, and these he put on.  The sail, the coil of
rope, and the box of biscuit were put on board the boat.  Tom had
still to make his frugal repast; but this was soon accomplished,
and he felt again a sense of exceeding thankfulness at the
possession of the box of biscuit.  At length his evening meal was
over, and by the time that he had finished it, it had grown quite
dark.  He now went to the boat, and tied up the sail around the
mast.  There was nothing to which he could fasten the boat; but it
was not necessary, as he was on the watch.  The water continued
smooth, the wind was from the north, as before, and there was no
sign of fog.  Overhead the sky was free from clouds, and the stars
twinkled pleasantly to his upturned eyes, as if to encourage him.
There was no moon, however, and though it was not very dark, yet it
was sufficiently so to veil the nearest shores in gloom, and
finally to withdraw them altogether from his view.  Still it was
not a matter of necessity that he should see the opposite shores,
for he knew that his chief, and indeed his only reliance must be
upon the tide; and this would bear him in its upward course on the
morrow.  The night was only needed to float the boat down as far as
low-water mark.  The process of floating her would serve to test
the security of the fastenings, and show whether he could venture
to make the attempt.

For hours Tom waited, sometimes seated in the boat, at other times
walking along the beach down to the water.  He found it difficult
to keep himself awake, and therefore did not venture to sit down
long.  Wearied with his long work through the day, the necessity of
constant exertion wearied him still more, until at length he could
scarce draw his legs after him.  But all things have an end, and so
it was with Tom's dreary watch; for at length the waters came up,
and touched the boat, and surrounded it, until at last, to his
great joy, Tom found himself afloat.  He seized his stick, and
pushed the boat into deeper water, a few yards off, with the
intention of keeping her at about that distance from the shore.

The one thought that was now in his mind referred exclusively to
his work in the boat.  Was it firm?  Would it hold?  Did it leak?
The boat was floating, certainly.  How long would if continue to do
so?  For a few minutes he waited anxiously, as he floated there in
deep water, with his eyes fixed on the work in the bow, and his
ears listening intently to detect any sign of that warning,
gurgling sound, which had struck terror to his heart on his last
embarkation.  But no sign came of any sound of that sort, and he
heard nothing but the gentle dash of the water against the sides of
the boat.  Thus about five minutes passed.  At the end of that
time, he raised the sail, which he had laid along the bottom of the
boat, and examined underneath it.  The first touch of his fingers
at the bottom lessened very largely the hope that was in him, and
at once chased away the feeling of exultation that was rising.  For
there, in the bottom of the boat, he felt as much as an inch of
water.  After the first shock, he tried to believe that it was only
the water that was in the boat before; and so, taking comfort in
this thought, he waited for further developments, but at the same
time took the dipper, so as to be ready to bale out the water, and
have a struggle for it in case the worst should happen.

Another minute assured him that this was not the water which had
been in the boat before.  A new supply was entering, and in the
space of that short time of waiting it had risen to the height of
another inch.  Tom felt a sudden pang of dismay, but his stout
heart did not quail, nor did his obstinate resolution falter.
Since it was the sea water that was coming in, he determined to
have a fight with it for the possession of the boat.  So he set to
work bravely, and began to bale.  He pulled up the sail, so as to
have plenty of elbow-room, and worked away, dipping out the water;
but, as he dipped, he perceived that it was gradually getting
deeper.  He dipped faster, but without any visible improvement,
indeed, his efforts seemed to have but very little effect in
retarding the entrance of the water.  It grew deeper and deeper.
One inch of water soon deepened to two inches, and thence to three.
Soon after four inches were felt.

And now the water came in more rapidly.  It seemed to Tom as though
it had been delayed at first, for a little time, in finding an
entrance, but that now, after the entrance was found, it came
pouring in with ever-accelerated speed.  Tom struggled on, hoping
against hope, and keeping up his efforts long after they were
proved to be useless.  But the water came in faster and faster,
until at length Tom began to see that he must seek his safety in
another way.  Flinging down his dipper, then, with a cry of
vexation, he started up, and, seizing his bit of board, he looked
around for the shore.

He had been caught by some side current, and had been carried along
in such a way that he was about a hundred yards from the island,
and seemed to be drifting up the bay.  The dark, shadowy shores
were much farther away than he had suspected.  While struggling to
bale out the boat, he had forgotten how necessary it was to keep
near to the shore.  He now saw his mistake, and strove to paddle
the boat back again.  With such a clumsy oar it is not likely that
he could have achieved his desire at all, had the flood tide been
stronger; but now it was about at its height, and would soon turn,
if it was not turning already.  The current, therefore, was but a
weak one, and Tom found himself able to move slowly back; but his
progress was very slow, and working at such a disadvantage was
excessively fatiguing.  At last he saw that if he trusted to
paddling he could never reach the shore.  In a moment another idea
suggested itself; there was no time to lose, and he at once acted
on it.  Darting forward, he loosed the sail.  The wind was still
blowing from the north; at once the sail was filled, and, yielding
to this new power, the boat began to move more rapidly.  Tom tied
the sheet astern, and, seizing his paddle, tried to scull the boat.
For some minutes he kept up this work, and the boat moved steadily
forward, nearer and still nearer, until the land was at length not
more than thirty or forty yards off.

But by this time the danger had come nearer, and the boat was
already half full of water.  Tom began to see that it could not
float as far as the shore.  What was he to do?  He waited a little
longer.  He looked around.  The boat was drawing nearer, yet soon
it must go down.  To ease it, it would be necessary to relieve it
of his own weight.  He did not lose his presence of mind for a
moment, but determined at once to jump overboard.  In his perfect
coolness he thought of one or two things which were of importance
to him, and performed them swiftly and promptly.  First he took the
box of biscuit, and placed it on the heap of boards and canvas in
the bows, so that it might remain as long as possible out of reach
of the water.  Then he took the card of matches out of his
waistcoat pocket, and put them in his hat, which he replaced on his
head.  To secure thus from damage the two necessaries of food and
fire was but the work of a few seconds.  To throw off his coat,
waistcoat, and trousers, and hang them over the top of the short
mast, was the work of a few seconds more.  By the time this had
been done, the water was nearly up to the gunwales.  In five
seconds more the boat would have gone down; but, so well had Tom's
work been done, and so promptly, that these five seconds were
saved.  Having done what he wished, he let himself down into the
water; and, holding on by the stern of the boat, he allowed himself
to float after it, kicking out at the same time, so as to assist,
rather than retard, its progress.

By this time the land was not more than twenty yards away.  The
boat did not sink so rapidly now, but kept afloat much better;
still the water rose to a level with the gunwales, and Tom was too
much rejoiced to find that it kept afloat at all to find fault with
this.  The wind still blew, and the sail was still up; so that the
water-logged vessel went on at a very respectable rate, until at
length half the distance which Tom had noticed on going overboard
was traversed.  The boat seemed to float now, though full of water,
and Tom saw that his precious biscuit, at any rate, would not be
very much harmed.  Nearer and nearer now he came until at last,
letting himself down, his feet touched bottom.  A cry of delight
escaped him; and now, bracing himself firmly against the solid land
below, he urged the boat on faster, until at length her deep-sunk
bows grated against the gravel of the beach.

He hurried up to the box of biscuit, and put this ashore in a safe
place; after which he secured the boat to a jagged rock on the
bank.  He found now that he had come to a different part of the
beach altogether, for his boat was lying at the spot where the
little brook ran into the sea.  Well was it for him, in that rash
and hazardous experiment, that he had floated off before the tide
was high.  It had led to his drifting up the bay, instead of down,
and by a weak current, instead of a strong one.  The wind had thus
brought him back.  Had it been full tide, he would have drifted out
from the shore, and then have been carried down the bay by the
falling water to swift and sure destruction.

Tom now took off his wet shirt, and put on the dry clothes which he
had so prudently hung on the top of the mast.  He perceived that he
had not a very pleasant lookout for the night, for the sail which
he had formerly used to envelop himself with was now completely
saturated.  It was also too dark to go to the woods in search of
ferns or mosses on which to sleep.  However, the night was a
pleasant one, and the grass around would not be so bad a resting-
place as he had been forced to use while drifting in the boat.  He
had now become accustomed to hardship by bitter experience, and so
he looked forward to the night without care.

The day had been an eventful one, indeed, for him, and his last
adventure had been full of peril, from which he had been most
wonderfully rescued.

These thoughts were in his mind, and he did not fail to offer up
prayers of heartfelt gratitude to that good and merciful Being who
had thus far so wonderfully preserved him.  With such feelings in
his heart, he sought out a sleeping-place, and after some search he
found a mossy knoll.  Seating himself here, he reclined his back
against it, and in a few minutes the worn-out boy was buried in a
deep sleep.

He slept until late on the following day, and on waking looked
around to see if there were any sails in view.  None were visible.
The tide was about half way up, and the wide waters spread before
him without any vessel in sight.  He then began his preparations
for the day.  He hung his shirt upon a bush, and spread out the wet
sail on the grass.  An examination of the biscuit showed him that
they had scarcely been injured at all, the water having penetrated
only the lower part of the box.  He removed the lower layer of
biscuit, and spread them out on a rock in the sun to dry.  After
this he breakfasted, and wandered about for a time.  He then took a
swim, and felt much refreshed.  By the time that his swim was over,
he found that the hot sun had dried his shirt, so that he could
once more assume that very important article of clothing.

The sun climbed high towards the zenith, and the tide came up
higher, as Tom sat there alone on his desert island, looking out
upon the sea.  The boat from which he had hoped so much had proved
false to those hopes, and all the labors of the previous day had
proved useless.  His attempt to escape had nearly resulted in his
destruction.  He had learned from that experiment that no efforts
of his could now effect his rescue.  He had done the very best he
could, and it would not be possible for him, with his present
resources, to contrive anything better than that which had so
miserably failed.  If he could only procure some tar, he might then
stop up the interstices; but as it was, nothing of his construction
would avail to keep back the treacherous entrance of the water.  It
seemed now to him that his stay on the island was destined to be
prolonged to a much greater extent than he had first thought of,
and there did not seem any longer a hope of saving himself by his
own exertions.

Alone on a desert island!

It was a dreadful fact which now forced itself more and more upon
Tom's mind, until at length he could think of nothing else.
Hitherto he had fought off the idea whenever it presented itself,
and so long as he had been able to indulge in any hope of freeing
himself by his own exertions, he prevented himself from sinking
into the gloom of utter despair.  But now he could no longer save
himself from that gloom, and the thought grew darker and drearier
before him--the one fact of his present situation.

Alone on a desert island!

A very interesting thing to read about, no doubt; and Tom, like all
boys, had revelled in the portrayals of such a situation which he
had encountered in his reading.  No one had entered with more zest
than he into the pages of Robinson Crusoe, and no one had enjoyed
more than he the talks which boys love to have about their possible
doings under such circumstances.  But now, to be here, and find
himself in such a place,--to be brought face to face with the hard,
stern, dismal fact,--was another thing altogether.  What oppressed
him most was not the hardships of his position.  These he could
have withstood if there had been nothing worse.  The worst part of
his present life was its solitude.  If Bart had been here with him,
or Bruce, or Arthur, or Phil, or Pat, how different it would have
been!  Even old Solomon would have enabled him to pass the time
contentedly.  But to be alone,--all alone,--without a soul to speak
to,--that was terrible.

Tom soon found that the very way to deepen his misery was to sit
still and brood over it.  He was not inclined to give way to
trouble.  It has already been seen that he was a boy of obstinate
courage, resolute will, and invincible determination.  He was
capable of struggling to the last against any adversity; and even
if he had to lose, he knew how to lose without sinking into
complete despair.  These moods of depression, or even of despair,
which now and then did come, were not permanent.  In time he shook
them off, and looked about for some new way of carrying on the
struggle with evil fortune.

So now he shook off this fit of depression, and starting up he
determined not to sit idle any longer.

"I won't stand it," he muttered.  "There's lots of things to be
seen, and to be done.  And first of all I've got to explore this
island.  Come, Tom, my boy; cheer up, old fellow.  You've pretended
to admire Robinson Crusoe; act up to your profession.  And first of
all, my boy, you've got to explore Juan Fernandez."

The sound of his own voice had the effect of encouraging and
inspiriting him, while the purpose which he thus assigned to
himself was sufficient to awaken his prostrated energies.  There
was something in the plan which roused all his curiosity, and
turned his thoughts and feelings into a totally new direction.  No
sooner, then, had this thought occurred to him, than he at once set
out to put it into execution.

First of all he took one parting look at the scene around him.  The
sun had now passed its meridian, and it seemed to be one o'clock or
after.  The tide was high.  The boat, which had at first floated,
was now nearly full of water.  Tom threw a melancholy glance at
this fresh proof of the utter futility of all his labor, and then
examined the fastenings, so that it might not drift away during his
absence.  Then he searched among the drift-wood until he found a
stout stick to assist him in climbing, and to serve as a companion
in his walk, after which he started.

The sun was bright, but over the sky some clouds were gathering,
and the opposite shores seemed to have grown darker than they were
a few hours ago, having assumed a hue like olive green.  The wind
had also died away, and the water was as smooth as glass.


XIII.

Where's Solomon?--An anxious Search.--The Beach.--The cavernous
Cliffs.--Up the Precipice.--Along the Shore.--Back for Boats.


The loss of Solomon had filled the boys with anxiety, and even
Captain Corbet shared in the common feeling.  He had preferred to
set out, as he said, with a coil of rope; but the sight of this
seemed to make Solomon's fate appear darker, and looked as though
he might have fallen over a precipice, or into a deep pool of
water.  They all knew that a serious accident was not at all
improbable.  They had seen the lofty and rugged cliffs that lined
the bay shore, and knew that the rising waters, as they dashed over
them, might form the grave of a man far younger and more active
than the aged Solomon.  He was weak and rheumatic; he was also
timid and easily confused.  If the water had overtaken him
anywhere, he might easily fall a prey.  In his efforts to escape,
he would soon become so terrified that his limbs would be
paralyzed.  He might then stumble over the rocks, and break some of
his bones, or he might be intrapped in some recess of the cliffs,
from which escape might be impossible without external help.

Full of thoughts like these, the boys went on, with Captain Corbet,
up through the village, looking carefully around as they went on,
and making inquiries of every one whom they met.  No one, however,
could give them any information.  At last they reached the end of
the village.  Here, on the left, there arose a high hill.  The road
wound round this, and descended into a valley, through which a
stream ran to the bay.  In this valley there was a ship-yard, where
the half-finished fabric of a large ship stood before them, and
from which the rattle of a hundred axes rose into the air.  The
valley itself was a beautiful place, running up among steep hills,
till it was lost to view among a mass of evergreen trees and rich
foliage.  Below the shipyard was a cove of no very great depth, but
of extreme beauty.  Beyond this was a broad beach, which, at the
farthest end, was bounded by the projecting headland before alluded
to.  The headland was a precipitous cliff of red sandstone, crowned
at the summit with a fringe of forest trees, white at its base were
two or three hollow caverns, worn into the solid rock by the action
of the surf.  One of these was about thirty feet in height at its
mouth, and ran back for sixty or seventy feet, narrowing all the
way, like a funnel, from its entrance to its farthest extremity.

The tide was now nearly at its height, and progress down the beach
and along the cliff was impossible.  The caves were cut off also,
and the water penetrated them for some distance.  At low tide one
could easily walk down to the extreme point of the headland, and
rounding this, he would find it possible to go along in front of
the cliffs for an immense distance, either by walking along the
rough beach at their foot, or, if the water should rise again, by
going along rocky shelves, which projected for miles from the
surface of the cliff.

Reaching the head of the beach, Captain Corbet paused, and looked
around.

"Before goin any further," said he, "we'd better ask the folks at
this ship-yard.  It ain't possible to tell whether he's gone by the
beach or not.  He may have gone up the valley."

"O," said Bart, dolefully, "he must have gone by the beach."

"I rayther think I'll ask, at any rate," said the captain.

So saying, he walked up towards a house that was not far off, and
accosted some men who were standing there.  On hearing his
question, they were silent for a few moments; and at last one of
them recollected seeing an aged colored man passing by early in the
morning.  He had a basket on his arm, and in every way corresponded
to the description of Solomon.  He was on his way up the shore.

"Did he go down to the pint," asked Captain Corbet, "or up to the
top of the cliff?"

The man couldn't say for certain; but as far as he could recollect,
it seemed to him that he went down to the pint.

"About what time?"

"Between eight and nine o'clock--in fact, about eight--not much
later."

"Did he speak to any one here?"

"No; he walked past without stoppin.  An do you say he ain't got
back?"

"Not yet."

"Wal," said the man, "for an old feller, an a feller what don't
know the country hereabouts, he's gone on a dangerous journey; an
ef he's tried to get back, he's found it a pooty hard road to
travel."

"Isn't there any chance of his gettin back by the cliff?"

"Not with the water risin onto his path."

"Is there any way of gettin up to the top of the cliff?"

"Wal, fur a active young feller it wouldn't be hard, but for a pore
old critter like that thar, it couldn't be done--no how."

"Wal, boys," said Captain Corbet, sorrowfully, "I guess we'd better
get on, an not lose any more time."

They walked away in silence for some time, until at last they
reached the foot of the cliff.  A path here ran up in a winding
direction so as to reach the top.

"It seems too bad," said Captain Corbet, "not to be able to get to
the beach.  I wish I'd come in the boat.  What a fool I was not to
think of it!"

"O, I dare say the top of the cliff will do," said Bruce.

"Wal, it'll have to do.  At any rate I've got the kile of rope."

"We shall be able to see him from the top just as well, and perhaps
better."

"Wal, I hope so; but we'll be a leetle too far above him for my
fancy,--ony we can use the rope, I s'pose.  Can any of you
youngsters climb?"

"O, yes," said Bart, "all of us."

"What kind of heads have you got--stiddy?"

"Yes, good enough," said Bruce.  "I'll engage to go anywhere that I
can find a foothold; and here's Bart, that'll go certainly as far,
and perhaps farther.  And here's Phil, that can do his share.  As
for Pat, he can beat us all; he can travel like a fly, upside down,
or in any direction."

"Wal, I'm glad to hear that, boys, for it's likely you'll be wanted
to do some climbin afore we get back.  I used to do somethin in
that way; but since I've growed old, an rheumatic, I've got kine o'
out o' the way of it, an don't scacely feel sech confidence in
myself as I used to onst.  But come, we mustn't be waitin here all
day."

At this they started up the path, and soon reached the top of the
cliff.

Arriving here, they found themselves in a cultivated meadow,
passing through which they reached a pasture field.  After a walk
of about a quarter of a mile, they came to the cliff that ran along
the shore of the bay, and on reaching this, the whole bay burst
upon their view.

It was still a beautiful day; the sun was shining brilliantly, and
his rays were reflected in a path of dazzling lustre from the face
of the sea.  The wind was fresh, and the little waves tossed up
their heads across where the sunlight fell, flashing back the rays
of the sun in perpetually changing light, and presenting to the eye
the appearance of innumerable dazzling stars.  Far away rose the
Nova Scotia shore as they had seen it in the morning, while up the
bay, in the distance, abrupt, dark, and precipitous, arose the
solitary Ile Haute.

Beneath them the waters of the bay foamed and splashed; and though
there was not much surf, yet the waters came rolling among the
rocks, seething and boiling, and extending as far as the eye could
reach, up and down, in a long line of foam.

Reaching the edge, they all looked down.  At the bottom there were
visible the heads of black rocks, which arose above the waves at
times, but which, however, at intervals, were covered with the
rolling waters that tossed around them in foam and spray.  Nearer
and higher up there were rocks which projected like shelves from
the face of the cliff, and seemed capable of affording a foothold
to any climber; but their projection served also to conceal from
view what lay immediately beneath.

Along the whole beach, however, up and down, there appeared no sign
of human life.  Anxiously they looked, hoping to see some human
form, in some part of that long line of rock; but none was visible,
and they looked at one another in silence.

"Wal, he don't turn up yet; that's clar," said Captain Corbet.

"We can see a great deal from here, too," said Bart, in a
despondent tone.

"Ay, an that's jest what makes the wust of it.  I thought that one
look from a commandin pint would reveal the wanderer to our eyes."

"Perhaps he is crouching in among the rocks down there."

"Wal, I rayther think he'd manage to git up a leetle further out of
the reach of the surf than all that."

"He may be farther on."

"True; an I dare say he is, too."

"There don't seem to be any place below these rocks, where he would
be likely to be."

"No; I think that jest here he could climb up, as fur as that thar
shelf, certain.  He may be old an rheumatic, but he's able enough
to climb that fur."

"I don't think anything could have happened to him here, or we
should see some signs of him."

"Course we would--we'd see his remains--we'd see his basket, or his
hat, floatin and driftin about.  But thar's not a basket or a hat
anywhar to be seen."

"The cliff is long here, and runs in so from that point, that if he
went up any distance, it would be easy for him to be caught by the
rising tide."

"Course it would.  O, yes, course.  That's the very thing that
struck me.  It's very dangerous for an ole inexperienced man.  But
come, we mustn't stand talkin, we must hurry on, or we may as well
go back agin, at onst."

Starting forward, they walked on for some time in silence.  For
about a hundred yards they were able to keep close to the edge of
the cliff, so as to look over; but after that they encountered a
dense alder thicket.  In order to traverse this, they had to go
farther inland, where there was some sort of an opening.  There
they came to a wood where the underbrush was thick, and the walking
difficult.  This they traversed, and at length worked their way
once more to the edge of the cliff.  Looking down here, they found
the scene very much like what it had been farther back.  The waves
were dashing beneath them among rocks whose black crests were at
times visible among the foam, while from the cliffs there were the
same projecting shelves which they had noticed before.

"See there!" cried Bart, pointing to a place behind them.  "Do you
see how the cliff seems to go in there--just where the alder bushes
grow?  That looks like a place where a man might be caught.  I
wonder if he isn't there."

"Can't we go and see?"

"I don't think you can git thar."

"O, it isn't far," said Bart.  "I'll run back and look down.  The
rest of you had better go on; I'll join you soon."

"I'll go with you," said Bruce.

"Very well."

Bruce and Bart then set out, and forced their way through the dense
alder bushes, until at length they found themselves near the place.
Here there was a chasm in the line of cliff, reaching from the top
to the bottom.  The sides were precipitous, and they could see
perfectly well all the way down.  At the bottom the water was
rolling and tossing; and this, together with the precipitous
cliffs, showed them plainly that no one could have found shelter
here.

Sadly and silently they returned, and rejoined the others, who had
been walking along in advance.

"Wal?" said Captain Corbet, interrogatively.

Bart shook his head.

They then walked on for some time in silence.  "Come," said Captain
Corbet; "we've been makin one mistake ever sence we started."

"What's that?"

"We've kep altogether too still.  How do we know but we've passed
him somewhar along down thar.  We can't see behind all them
corners."

"Let's shout now--the rest of the way."

"Yes; that's it; yell like all possessed."

The cries of the boys now burst forth in shrill screams and yells,
which were echoed among the woods and rocks around.

"Now," cried Captain Corbet, "all together!"

The boys shouted all together.

"That'll fetch him," said the captain, "ef anythin doos.  It's a
pity we didn't think of this afore.  What an ole fool I must ha ben
to forgit that!"

The boys now walked on shouting, and screaming, and yelling
incessantly, and waiting, from time to time, to listen for an
answer.

But no answer came.

At times Captain Corbet's voice sounded forth.  His cry was a very
peculiar one.  It was high pitched, shrill, and penetrating, and
seemed as though it ought to be heard for miles.  But the united
voices of the boys, and the far-piercing yell of the captain, all
sounded equally in vain.  No response came, and at last, after
standing still and listening for a longer time than usual, they all
looked despondingly at one another, as though each were waiting for
the other to suggest some new plan of action.

Captain Corbet stood and looked musingly out upon the sea, as
though the sight of the rolling waters assisted his meditations.
It was some time before he spoke.

"I tell you what it is, boys," said he at last.  "We've ben makin
another mistake."

"How so?"

"We've gone to work wrong."

"Well, what can we do now?"

"Wal, fust an foremost, I muve we go back on our tracks."

"Go back?"

"Yas."

"Why?"

"Wal, you see, one thing,--Solomon can't hev come further than this
by no possibility, onless he started straight off to walk all the
way up the bay agin, back to Petticoat Jack by the shore route,--an
as that's too rough a route for an ole man, why, I calc'late it's
not to be thought of.  Ef, on the contrairy, he only kem out to
hunt for fish, 'tain't likely he come as fur as this, an in my
pinion he didn't come nigh as fur.  You see we're a good piece on,
and Solomon wouldn't hev come so fur if he'd cal'lated to get back
to the schewner.  What d'ye say to that?"

"I've thought of that already," said Bruce, sadly.  "We've
certainly gone as far as he could possibly have gone."

"Terrew," said Captain Corbet, solemnly.

"But what can we do now?" asked Bart.

"Fust of all, go back."

"What! give him up?"

"I didn't say that.  I said to go back, an keep a good lookout
along the shore."

"But we've done that already."

"Yes, I know; but then we didn't begin to yell till quite lately,
whereas we'd ought to hev yelled from the time of fust startin.
Now, I think ef we went back yellin all the way, we'd have a chance
of turnin him up somewhar back thar whar we fust came in sight of
the cliff.  Very likely, if he ain't already drownded, he's a
twisted himself up in some holler in the cliff back thar.  He
couldn't hev got this fur, certain,--unless he'd ben a runnin
away."

All this seemed so certain to the boys that they had nothing to say
in opposition to it.  In fact, as Bruce said, they had already gone
as far as Solomon could possibly have gone, and this thought had
occurred to them all.  Captain Corbet's proposition, therefore,
seemed to them the only course to follow.  So they all turned and
went back again.

"What I was a goin to say," remarked Captain Corbet, after walking
a few paces,--"what I was a goin to say was this.  The mistake I
made was in not gettin a boat."

"A boat?  Why we've traced the coast from the cliff well enough--
haven't we?"

"No, not well enough.  We'd ought to have planned this here
expedition more kerfully.  It wan't enough to go along the top of
the cliff this here way.  You see, we've not been able to take in
the lower part of the cliff underneath.  We'd ought to hev got a
boat.  Some of us could hev gone along the cliff, jest as we hev
ben doin, and the others could have pulled along the shore an kep
up a sharp lookout that way.  We've lost any quantity o' time that
way, but that's no reason why we should lose any more; so I muve
that some of us go back, right straight off, an get a boat at the
ship-yard, an come back.  I'll go, unless some o' youns think
yourselfes smarter, which ain't onlikely."

"O, you can't run, captain," said Bart.  "Bruce and I will go, and
we'll run all the way."

"Wal, that's the very best thing that you could do.  You're both
young, an actyve.  As for me, my days of youth an actyvity air
over, an I'm in the sere an yaller leaf, with spells o' rheumatics.
Meanwhile, he took what he could get. As often as he could, he went
again into the large Volksbad, whose large, warm hall, the whole
year only to the second closed on public holidays and less visited,
the colder it was outside .

It was not the same, said Franz to himself, such as bathing
outdoors. But it was at least a water where you could swim.
As he is so one evening with his mates in the pool tummelte and they
are in a small race at 50 meters was easily beaten, a gentleman
came up to him, he already often seen, and asked him if he did not
want to engage in a swimming club to enter.

It was not the first time in recent times that the boy was asked
this question, and already he wanted to say that he temporarily
would wait a little longer when he heard what the Lord further
said: - You must know, we do not take everyone in our youth
department, but only forces, of which we have something for our
club promise.

And suddenly it shot through the head Franz: the Lord indeed
belonged to the "Swim Club Berlin of 1879" - the oldest and most
respected swimming club in Berlin, which so many swimmers are
responsible for mastery of the great feasts were, and in the way
at all seemed an impossibility ... and slightly out of breath and
very hochrot he asked almost in disbelief: - Swim Club of 1879
Berlin - The Lord smiled. - Yep.

You may know that our contributions are to be slightly higher than
in the other clubs, but we are not rigorous in this relationship,
and the good will of one here, even if it is not so.

Incidentally, you have so many other advantages for us,
especially if you swim a lot that can already do is ... When he
saw that Francis had still not replied, he smiled again and made
a motion: - I want you Incidentally, do not talk about ...

You can be the cause so superior - but because Franz said hastily,
as if his unexpected good fortune again miss: - No, no, I do
not want like - The Lord pulled out his notebook: - Well, the name.
.. - Franz Fields - - Address - Berlin O, Münchebergerstraße 102,
and a bit slower: - farm - in the basement - the others wrote on
everything.

Then, he handed him the obvious: - Our practice sessions for the
youth department know you well? - Every Tuesday and Friday evening,
eight clock. Franz took the Samaritans hand, made a deep and respectful
bow, as he before his pastor and his rector had made, saw how the
Lord went away, and felt both a friendly Rippenstoß in the page:
- You know, wat is because of you jewollt?

He looked at his friends and said only from the top down: - I am
invited was the "Berlin 1879 Swimming Club" to join, and let it
stand.

Now that he had, he believed it himself, and an unbridled joy seized
him.

Oh, he wanted to honor lodge!

- And which lasted seventy cents monthly fee to he's already up and
pay on time so that he can never make an allegation, if he also
meanwhile still not knowing how they were to obtain. In the
spirit he saw in the blaugesäumten jersey and trunks, in the blue
embroidered first letter and the number was 1879, and he made from
a springboard jump joy, but so clumsily in his excitement that only
a turn looking at the last moment before it preserved, flat
aufzuschlagen.

The fact that he never considered as a special treat was
published, a club membership that he had the compulsion of the
hour, the need to swim some lengths, while under constant surveillance
and fiercest criticism, because it the whole club life, as far
as he knew, in a word: the "official swimming" never was attracted
to all this he thought no more.

His ambition was spurred. They had noticed him, and so awarded him
for membership in the first and oldest swimming club in Berlin it.

He was one of today from the "Swimming Club Berlin 1879" and all
that it wanted to hear, and very many who do not want to hear he
told him the selbstunglaublich published fact deeply indignant about
the indifference with which she generally has been. 2 There was
not a youthful member of the Association, the timely exercise of
the evening would come, and none that are willing and enthusiastic
everyone in this arrangement evenings have been added, as Franz
fields.

We realized it soon, and he acquired some acquaintance of the club
is also such that the introduction of members, and still so promising
that, as they called, "other public", strange yes antagonists.

Almost all of them acquired the new arrival respect and sympathy,
one due to the passionate, almost comical PONDS full seriousness
with which he operated the thing, and then because of the modesty
and honesty of his nature, which was never vordrängte.

They soon put great hopes on him and did not let him out of
sight.

The next major event that his entry into the club to good, it was
an apprenticeship in a large mechanical workshop to him by his new
Sportfreunde there were gains.

He should be the same from the beginning to a week's wages
received and received the assurance of careful and complete training.
Because under his also his brothers were in better positions,
and the consecration of a younger imminent, he joined the body.

He remained with his parents and most of his weekly earnings
wandered still in their hands. What he kept for himself, he needed
to order on Sunday outings to the club with his comrades a glass
of beer to drink, and for the first few marks, it was not necessary,
he is a faultless jersey to a sports cap and the club badge a
small sign, the impact on the Rock was born.

He was now completely in the life of the association. The pleasures
of the club were his recreations, his work to his. Sports comrades
were his friends, with whom he shared everything. The work of the
day in the factory did it because they had to be done, and he did
it well and diligently.

His family, he saw only when it was absolutely necessary, the
requisite birthday and other celebrations, with the few friends of
his childhood he almost wrong no more.

His gratitude to his club gradually grew into unmeasured. He could
only temporarily by complete devotion prove. But time and again
he swore himself to his club to glory in every respect, honor at
any price.

He should not undignified to have him. He knew that he had a force,
which it perhaps could lead to victories, when he stählte and
practiced.

Not for himself, he wanted to win this victory, he thought not. But
he dreamed of them already in quiet, to the old name of the
association to new laurels twine, which he himself in hot battle
erfechten would. He swam not only on his pleasure, he swam to
a goal, and none of the pans avid sports cap , nobody screamed
louder, if the "Good Wet!

- Hurray! Hurray! Hurray!" yell as the French 3 of his progress
was rapid and continued even his new teacher in amazement. For all
his skills and all his incomparable love for the thing it was a raw
material that is here in training has been made. This latest member
of the youth department - to which the young people mostly from
the boys' department, with its fourteenth year, and in them around
until their seventeenth remained - with his admission was a good
swimmer, but nothing else.

Style and form swimming got its only now under the constant and
strict surveillance on the exercise evenings. But as soon as the
form was beautiful and certainly his style!

- After a few weeks already been acknowledged as the best fields
of the float his department.

On the internal contest of the club, which every year in winter in
the swimming pool of the nation and held on, with the exception a
host of friendly swimming club members swam only club, Francis
picked up his first prize: the junior swimming about 50 meters.

There was a small, simple laurel wreath with a printed ribbon, which
he wore at home.

It was not the first time that he was swimming, because he was often
in recent times to such board and had a deep, inner arousal watching
the races, where he is still not allowed to participate.

Now he swam for the first time with. He knew he would win, because
he knew that all his opponents and had each of the exercises again
and again beaten.

Nevertheless, he was excited and rejoiced when it was over. Uneasy,
as when he received the Rector, the emergency sign tacked to the
chest, he took his first small prize winner receives.

But in fact he was very proud when he the wreath at home in the
bedroom community on the narrow bed aufhing, in which he and a
younger brother, the solid, dreamless sleep of healthy youth asleep
and at immense punishment beatings he forbade the whole society,
even just touching a leaf.

The Kranz was angestaunt, remained hanging on and was then richer
and higher honors forgotten, dusty and dried up, and was but the
first bay of this young face had touched. 4 recovery was followed
for Franz fields on his first small victory one years serious
aspirations.

There was now no longer with his comrades attach club, but his
forces to other, external goals dare.

He was shot in the height and the slenderness of his body betrayed
not how big the force was that it was.

The stocky, thick young with the comfortable, slightly unwieldy
limbs soon became a sinewy young man is only the face remained quite
the same: the blue, honesty eyes, full red lips and cheeks and the
distinctive forehead, over which the black hair is now in a niederfiel
bushes so that it all had to be zurückgestrichen moments were the
same - the innocent, trusting face of a child who still lives from
nothing had experienced.

And the same was also the view of these eyes.

It was thoughtless, somewhat dreamy gaze of a man in whose brain
with a stubborn toughness over and over again just an idea returns
- an idea that lives in the future, a future full of large fulfillment
secretive, yet unspoken, not even detected wishes .-- mistake was
now completely divided.

He came from the work of the day, so the evening was always
something going on: either there were practice sessions held, or
meetings, or it was preparing for some celebration to meet - always
took him at his club fitting. Even Sundays are still belonged
exclusively to the marketing of the sport comrades - the visit of
foreign swimming and other sporting events, social associations:
music and dance, in summer trips into the surrounding, Kahn and,
above all, lots of long baths (everywhere where water was) and
filled them out were his delight and his recreation.

Franz fields remained silent, as he already had as a child and
has been involved in the talks no more than about swimming sporting
issues.

They were also the only ones that interested him.

For no other sport, he had the slightest interest in any other thought
he just out to try. He knew only one, beside which all others faded
and appeared indifferent. It took a long time until he is at home
in the new circles felt. If he never liked the dogs and noisy
entertainment of his former classmates and peers had had, so it was
but the traffic and the sound of his new friend to a stranger than
that he would have it so easy to find them. But these new friends
had really liked him and did their best by taking him everywhere,
and now entirely yours as viewed. Gradually a change came after
the other in him. Even in its outward appearance. He was no longer
the poor boy in patched clothes and with the open shirt,
but a clean, often with quite tasteful elegance dressed
young man, whose regular, albeit only temporarily low income permitted
him something to hold on. He could never a certain clumsiness
and slowness to overcome, so affected him in all the good tone
of his clubs for good. He learned in life forms fugue, which he had
hitherto remained unknown to him casually and do one and the other
could leave - things to which he has absolutely no thought.

Those inevitable disputes of the sports life with seriousness and
friendliness simple, even in noisy cheerfulness never quarrel, and
savagery to degenerate, and especially the principle of life as a
fine art, human through and through and finishing refreshing sport,
to keep up -- that was traditionally the task of this association
with the simple name and the proud past of more than any other
helped had the interest for one thing to awaken, which has until
recently not as art, but only as an almost universally Central to
the temporary, necessary cleaning of the body was considered.

War - perhaps not least due to the strict observance of this
principle, the more generally for the cause of swimming tried to
act as a great success at breeding and names associated with them
out - the "Swim Club Berlin 1879" in the last few years, something
in the background and number of members and external significance
of one or other of the newer club surpassed, but he was not willing
to his old reputation, excellent swimmers and Springer hinauszusenden
to renounce and always ready to accept new laurels to the old to add.

The coming years should also outwardly again show that the club
is in no way was left behind - there were the wishes of the
members unanimously. They should demonstrate that you can not sleep
if you can not always mitschrie.

We sat, as I said, great, yet unspoken hopes of Franz fields.

If any, so it was he who made the club to lead to exceptional
successes promised.

The same Lord, the first implication of the strong attention of
boys had to deal with security so amazing and so irrepressible
delight in the water herumwälzte, was and remained his loyal adviser.

He woke up with almost fearful of care over his pupil.

Bernhard Nagel, a chemist by profession, had been two years of
Schwimmwart "S.

-CB 1879. Even in earlier years, a famous swimmer, long the undisputed
holder of many championship, an excellent gymnasts and still
allbeliebtes always been a club member who had - just the right
time, at its height - for each active and retired business His name
appeared no longer in the public swimming programs.

But this was his interest in his club for nothing less.

His character belonged now more than ever the progress of the case,
and its activity was mainly on the training of the youth division .

Like his sharp eye in the same carefree, wasserfrohen the boys-born
swimmer was detected, so he is now its from the first hour to help.

He was a strict teacher, watching the sharp and so easy to go
through was nothing.

In fields, however, he had actually more to rein in a spur,
because his main mistake was that he always equal to the violent
stuff was around then at the end of a race to the efforts which
his body had not yet grown, and thus experienced and experienced
swimmers compared to subject.

But that was from week to week, and gradually learned to Franz
with his power house. He vergalt the interest of his Schwimmwarts
with unlimited gratitude.

Not only that he had this man to enter the club and for him in a
whole new life, and the position owed to him the need for his
daily bread relieved - it felt very good that the hopes placed on
him; and again he swore quietly to him one day his gratitude also
to show by deeds. Therefore, he listened to every word of reproof
and encouragement, as to a bid, and one could equally Beseler him,
as the other niederzudrücken managed.

In the inaccessibility of his being and his silence, which is rarely
the first word was to express, he is difficult and slow in his
other comrades, and she prefers to be coming in that he take them
from themselves would have approached.

So it was that he had with the most friendly and in good standing
agreement, but no close friendships closed.

Among the youth members, his peers, he had many enemies - even
now, where there are no specific successes were to be envied.

Of noted Franz now still nothing.

His happy nonchalance, his pure joy in the matter or überhörte
understood the inevitable comments that have already been made,
as it was not yet publicly geschwommen had.

He could not think that it was him. What was even the person -
if only the club won!

- On the other hand fell to him two friendships to which it is in
no way tried.

When he stepped into the club, he found among the many strange
faces a well-known - that of peers, which for a time in the same
home as usual and Franz with him during this time often had spoken.

Koepke has since become a merchant, almost with his apprenticeship
in a large factory magazine articles to an end and already saw his
appointment as Commission wohlbestallter self esteem opposite.

As he writes in the 1897 Swim Club Berlin came, that was many of
the younger ones a mystery, for he swam like a block and was
apparently in the countryside far more comfortable than in water.

But the older members of the club knew it because a relative had to
take that many years ago the club great service and made his
entrance urgently wanted.

It was not even him even reluctantly recorded. There was in any
swimming club members, who - if they are also practicing for nothing
did - is quite good but could use to in the "management" to operate
where there is always enough be expected to write and gave, and
which very probably felt when they write their stuff from the
interests of the club with passion and not allowed to exercise in
the water needed.

Koepke was to the right person. Full zeal, he fell on him every
zugeschanzte work.
He also noticed mountain ash and willow.  Beneath
him all the ground was covered with soft moss, in which he sank to
his ankles, while on every side were luxuriant ferns and evergreen
trailers.  Tom recognized all these with great satisfaction, for
they showed him the means of furnishing for himself a soft couch,
that might be envied by many a man in better circumstances.
Progress soon grew more difficult, for there were numerous mounds,
and dense underbrush, through which he could only force his way by
extreme effort.  Windfalls also lay around in all directions, and
no sooner would he have fairly surmounted one of them, than another
would appear.  Thus his progress was exceedingly slow and
laborious.

After about a half an hour of strenuous exertion, Tom found himself
in the midst of an almost impassable jungle of tangled, stunted fir
trees.  He tried to avoid these by making a detour, but found that
they extended so far that he could only pass them by going along
close to the edge of the cliff.  This last path he chose, and
clinging to the branches, he passed for more than a hundred yards
along the crest of a frightful precipice, where far down there
yawned an abyss, at whose bottom was the sea; while abreast of him
in the air there floated great flocks of gulls, uttering their
hoarse yells, and fluttering fiercely about, as though trying to
drive back this intruder upon their domains.  Once or twice Tom was
compelled to stop, and turn away his face from the abyss, and
thrust himself in among the trees; but each time he regained his
courage, after a little rest, and went on as before.

At length he passed the thick spruce underbrush, and found the
woods less dense.  He could now work his way among them without
being compelled to go so close to the edge of the cliff; and the
dizzy height and the shrieks of the gulls no longer disturbed his
senses.  The trees here were not so high as those at the other end
of the island, but were of much smaller size, and seemed stunted.
There were no maples or other forest trees, but only scraggy fir,
that seemed too exposed to the winds from the sea to have much
health or verdure.  The underbrush was wanting to a great extent,
but moss was here in large quantities, and thick clusters of alder
bushes.  Wild shrubs also--such as raspberries and blueberries--
were frequently met with; while ledges of weather-beaten rock
jutted out from amid thick coverings of moss.

Walking here was not at all difficult, and he went on without any
interruption, until, at last, he found any farther progress barred
by a precipice.  He was at the lower or western end of the island.

He looked down, and found beneath him a great precipice, while
rocks jutted out from the sea, and ledges projected beyond.  The
gulls were present here, as elsewhere, in great flocks, and still
kept up their noisy screams.

Tom looked out over the sea, and saw its waters spread far away
till it was lost in the horizon.  On the line of that horizon he
saw a faint gray cloud, that looked like a fog bank.  It had, to
his eyes, a certain gloomy menace, and seemed to say to him that he
had not seen the last of it yet.  On the left of the broad sea, the
Nova Scotia Coast ran along till it was lost in the distance; and
on the right was the long line of the New Brunswick shore, both of
which had now that dark hue of olive green which he had noticed on
the land opposite before he had started.

Suddenly, while he was looking, his eyes caught sight of something
white that glistened brightly from the blue water.  It was about
midway between the two coasts, and he knew it at once to be some
sailing vessel.  He could not make out more than one sail, and that
showed that the vessel was either coming up the bay or going down;
for if it had been crossing, she would, of course, have lain
broadside on to his present locality, and would have thus displayed
two sails to his view.  The sight of this vessel agitated him
exceedingly; and the question about her probable course now entered
his mind, and drove away all other thoughts.  Whether that vessel
were going up or down became of exclusive importance to him now, if
she were coming up, she might approach him, and hear his hail, or
catch sight of his signals.  Suddenly he reflected that he had no
way of attracting attention, and a wild desire of running back and
setting up the longest pole or board that he could find came into
his mind; but such was the intensity of his curiosity, and the
weight of his suspense, that he could not move from the spot where
he was until he had satisfied himself as to the vessel's course.

He sat down not far from the edge of the precipice, and, leaning
forward with his hands supporting his chin, he strained his eyes
over the intervening distance, as he tried to make out in which way
the vessel was going.  It seemed fully ten miles away, and her hull
was not visible.  It was only the white of her sails that he saw;
and as the sunlight played on these from time to time, or fell off
from the angle of reflection, the vessel was alternately more or
less visible, and thus seemed by turns to draw nearer and depart
farther from his sight.

Thus for a long time he sat, alternately hoping and desponding, at
every play of those sails in the sunlight.  The calm of the water
showed him that, even if the vessel were coming up, he could not
expect any very rapid progress.  There was now no wind, and the
surface of the water was perfectly unruffled.  Besides, he knew
that the tide was falling rapidly.  How, then, could he expect that
the vessel could come any nearer, even if she were trying to?
Thoughts like these at last made him only anxious to keep the
vessel in sight.  If her destination lay up the bay, she would
probably anchor; if it lay down the bay, she would drift with the
tide.  He thought, then, that if she only would remain in sight, it
would be a sufficient proof of her course.

Thus he sat, watching and waiting, with all his soul intent upon
those flashing sails, and all his thoughts taken up with the
question as to the course of that solitary bark.  It seemed a long
time to him, in his suspense; but suspense always makes time seem
long.  At last, however, even though he hoped so persistently for
the best, his hope began to die within him.  Fainter and fainter
grew those sails; at intervals rarer and rarer did their flash come
to his eyes, until at length the sight of them was lost altogether,
and nothing met his eyes but the gloomy gray of the fog cloud on
the far horizon.

Even after he had lost hope, and become convinced that she was
gone, Tom sat there for a long time, in a fixed attitude, looking
at that one spot.  He would have sat there longer, but suddenly
there came to his ears a peculiar sound, which made him start to
his feet in a moment, and filled him with a new excitement.

He listened.

The sound came again.

A flush of joy spread over his face, his heart beat faster and
faster, and he listened as though he could scarce believe his
senses.

As he listened, the sounds came again, and this time much louder.

There was now no mistake about it.  It was a regular boat, which
Tom knew well to be the peculiar sound made by the floats of a
steamer's paddles.  He had often heard it.  He had but recently
heard it, when the revenue steamer was approaching the Antelope,
and again during the foggy night, when the whistle roused them, and
the same beat of the paddles came over the midnight waters.

And now, too, he heard it.

He gave a shout of joy, and started off to catch sight of her.

For a few paces only he ran, and then stopped.

He was puzzled.  He did not know in which direction it was best to
go.  He was at the west end of the island, but could not make out
very well the direction of the sounds.  He tried to think whether
the steamer would pass the island on the north side or the south.
He did not know, but it seemed to him that she would certainly go
to the north of it.  To identify the various species used in
breeding, I Bouillon, on agar, serum, gelatin plates, and
microscopic examination of all Kolonieen both grown in hanging
drops as after previous staining with methylene blue, Karbolfuchsin,
malachite, or Gramfärbung and better representation of the spores
the spores after staining _Möller_ with the diphtheria germs of
similar _Loeffler_ modified Neissersche Polkörnchenfärbung to which
any further necessary action as Verimpfung in grape and Milchzuckerhaltige
agars, specific Typhusnährböden etc. followed.

To decide on the pathogenicity was used in each case of the animal.
Hereafter I came to the following result: The types of crops by
the panel to the telephone micro-organisms are detected in nearly
every case the same. The bacterial flora of the listener differed
qualitatively in nothing from that of the Bechers sound, so after
a series of separate investigations, the procedure was
abandoned. Far most, on each plate several times, there are Kolonieen
round, Mikrokokken Gram positive (Staphylococcus). The Kolonieen
are in most cases already macroscopically as staphylococci Kolonieen
to recognize. They are mostly round, glattrandig, highly glossy and
form quite thick deposits. Frequently observed after a long time
the formation of concentré rings and dents in the center of
Kolonieen, so that the fringe-like wall appears raised. In color,
they all Nüancierungen back of a dark orange to bright
Citronengelb by a shining white on pink to red color tones also
change colors after a long period is observed: Kolonieen, which
were initially recorded as white deposits, will take later eg a
gelblichorangen Farbenton to. The other is found in one colony of
more pronounced staining of the Center or in accordance with
the concentré rings, while the peripheral zone often paler color
tones aufweist. It is not always the reason is to find that
the blunt conical colony from the periphery by the center increases,
ie at the periphery of thin stratified.

The proportions of Kolonieen are also different at the same age:
there are Kolonieen in diameter from 1 -- 20 mm.

The consistency of the Kolonieen is very soft, the material for
the investigations with the Platinöse always easy to see. The
shape of the cocci in the majority of cases, around and in general
we meet at the same colony of cocci of the same size.

They lie in heaps together, grapes pronounced form is not rare.
They are often isolated and then often impress as Diplokokken.
As for the size of each Kokkenarten, we find all transitions from
tiny to quite respectable cocci. The Agarstrichkulturen show
the same characteristics as regards the color and texture as the
plate cultures. They are thick, juicy appearing deposits along
the stroke, usually growing out of him. The condensation is
diffusely clouded. The gelatin is used by the various different
types of liquefied late. Kokkenarten Some liquefy rapidly, while
others reflected only after a few days a weak liquefaction zone
around the colony, others liquefy garnicht.

According to those characteristics, I no concerns, most of the
species found coloring, depending on their education as _Staphylococcus
albus_, _aureus_, _citreus_, _rosaceus etc._ to identify them.
The Staphylococcus albus, aureus, citreus is so often regarded
as the most common pathogens viewed pus, and it lies close to the
idea that we are in with representatives of those species of
pathogenic bacteria have to do. However, it is not only the
shape and nature of the growth of microorganisms to draw
conclusions on their virulence make. I have therefore in all these
cases the animal can decide.

From pure cultures were 2-4 Platinösen guinea pigs under the
skin is applied: in spite of the abundant quantity of the animals
showed no stove or public appearances, the pathological processes
could lead to the conclusion.
He saw, by the passage of these vessels, what he had for a time
lost sight of, namely, that this island, though uninhabited, was
still in the middle of a bay which was constantly traversed by
sailing vessels and steamboats.  The latter ran regularly up to
the Basin of Minas from St. John.  As to the former, they were
constantly passing to and fro, from the large ship down to the
small fishing vessel.  Inhabited countries surrounded him on every
side, between the coasts of which there was a constant communication.
If he only kept patient, the time must come, and that, too, before
very long, when he would be delivered.

In order to secure this delivery, however, he saw that it would be
necessary to arrange some way by which he might attract the notice
of passing vessels.  On this subject he meditated for a long time.
It would be necessary, he thought, to have some sort of a signal in
some conspicuous place.  Among the drift-wood he might, perhaps, be
able to find some sort of a pole or staff which he could set up.
One might not be enough, but in that case he could put up two, or
three, or half a dozen.

The next thing to decide about was the choice of a place.  There
was the east end, and the west end--which was the better?  The west
end, where he was standing, was high; but then it was surrounded by
trees, and unless he could set up a very tall staff, it could
scarcely be noticed.  The east end, on the contrary, was lower; but
then it was bare, and any kind of a signal which might be set up
there could hardly fail to attract attention.  He could also pile
up a heap of drift-wood, and set fire to it, and, by this means, if
a vessel were passing by, he could be certain of securing
attention.  It did not make much difference which end the signals
were placed upon, as far as referred to the passing of vessels; for
all that passed by would go along the island, so that both ends
would be visible to them.

As to the signals, he felt confident that he could find a staff,
or, if one would not be long enough, several could be fastened
together.  The coil of rope in the boat would enable him to do
this.  The sail would afford material for a flag.

All these plans came to his mind as he stood there; and the
prospect of once more doing something which was to help him to
escape from his prison drove away the last vestige of his grief.
His courage again arose, hope revived, and he burst forth into a
light and joyous song.  Very different was he now from the
despairing lad who, but a short time before, had been pouring forth
his tears of sorrow; and yet but a few minutes had passed since
then.  The steamer was yet in sight down the bay, but Tom, who had
lately been so frantic in his efforts to attract her attention, now
cast a glance after her of perfect indifference.

And now it was necessary for him to return to the east end of the
island, and look about for the means of putting into execution his
plan for making a signal.

He started off on his return without any further delay.  The path
back was as rough and toilsome as the way down had been; but Tom
was now full of hope, and his elastic spirits had revived so
thoroughly that he cared but little for the fatigue of the journey.
It was traversed at last, and he descended the slope to the place
from which he had started.

His exploration of the island had been quite complete.  It seemed
to him to be about a mile and a half in length, and a half a mile
or so in width.  The east end, where he had first arrived, was the
only place where it was at all desirable to stay.

Immediately on his arrival he examined the boat, and found it
secure.  To his surprise it was now about sunset.  He had forgotten
the lapse of time.  He was hungry; so he sat down, ate his biscuit,
drank his water, and rested from the toils of the day.


XVI.

A Sign for the outer World.--A Shelter for the Outcast's Head.--
Tom's Camp and Camp-bed.--A Search after Something to vary a too
monotonous Diet.--Brilliant Success.


Tom sat down after his eventful day, and took his evening meal, as
has been said.  He rested then for some time.  His excessive labors
had fatigued him less than the great excitement which he had
undergone, and now he felt disinclined to exert himself.  But the
sun had set, and darkness was coming on rapidly; so he rose, at
last, and went over to the drift-wood.  Here, after a search of
about half an hour, he found something which was very well suited
to his purpose.  It was a piece of scantling about twenty feet
long, and not very thick; and to this he saw that he could fasten
the pole that he had made up in the woods.  These two pieces would
make, when joined, a very good flag-staff.  These he brought up to
the bank.  Then he collected an armful of dry chips and sticks,
which he carried over to a spot near where the boat lay.  A rock
was there, and against one side of this he built a pile of the
chips.  He then tried a match, and found that it was quite dry, and
lighted it without any difficulty.  With this he kindled the fire,
and soon saw, with great satisfaction, a bright and cheerful blaze.

He himself, what did you say to him? Edgar. Put your sword, so if
my question offended a noble heart, your right arm you could
give. Here is mine. I Thue what my knightly status, my profession
and my Eyd of me calling.
He did this by winding the rope around in a close
and even wind; and, finally, on concluding his task, he found that
it was bound firmly enough to stand any breeze.  It took a long
time to finish this; but Tom had slept late in the morning, and,
though fatigued, he was not sleepy.  After this he sat down in
front of the fire, and enjoyed its friendly light and its genial
glow.  He kept heaping on the fuel, and the bright flames danced
up, giving to him the first approach to anything like the feeling
of comfort that he had known since he had drifted away from the
Antelope.  Nor was it comfort only that he was mindful of while he
watched and fed the fire.  He saw in this fire, as it shone out
over the water, the best kind of a signal, and had some hope of
being seen and hailed by some passing vessel.  In this hope he sat
up till midnight, looking out from time to time over the water, and
expecting every instant to see the shadow of some approaching
vessel.

But midnight came, and Tom at length thought of sleep.  The sail
had dried thoroughly through the day; so now he used it once more
as a coverlet, and, folding himself in it, he reclined, as before,
against the mossy bank, and slept.

On awaking the next day, he arose and looked around.  To his deep
disappointment, he could see nothing.  There was a fog over all the
scene.  The wind had changed, and his old enemy was once more
besieging him.  It was not so thick, indeed, as it had been, being
light and dry, so that the ground was not at all moistened; but
still the view was obscured, so that no vessel could be seen unless
it came within half a mile; and that was rather closer than most
vessels would care to come to his island.

This day was Sunday, and all Tom's plans had to be deferred until
the following day.  However, it was not at all disagreeable to him
to get rid of the necessity of work; and, indeed, never before did
he fully appreciate the nature of the Day of Rest.  The rest was
sweet indeed to his exhausted and overworn frame, and he did not go
far away from his fire.  He had found some embers still glowing in
the morning, and had kindled the fire anew from these, without
drawing any more upon his precious store of matches.  He resolved
now to keep the coals alive all the time, by feeding the fire
during the day, and covering it up with ashes by night.

It was Sunday,--the Day of Rest,--and Tom felt all the blessedness
of rest.  On the whole, it turned out to be the pleasantest day
which he had known since he left the schooner.  Left now to quiet
reflection, he recalled the events of the last week, and had more
leisure to feel thankful over the wonderful safety which he had met
with.  Even now on the island he was not without his comforts.  He
had food and warmth.  So, on the whole, though he had his moments
of sadness, yet the sadness was driven out by cheerfulness.  It was
not all dismal.  The words of that poem which is familiar to every
school-boy rang in his ears:--


      "O, Solitude, where are the charms
          That sages have seen in thy face?
       Better dwell in the midst of alarms
          Than reign in this horrible place."


Yet these words were accompanied and counterbalanced by the more
pleasing and consoling sentiments of others, which on this day
accorded better with Tom's mood:--


      "There's mercy in every place;
          And mercy--encouraging thought!--
       Gives even affliction a grace,
          And reconciles man to his lot."


Nothing occurred during the day to disturb the quiet of the island,
and Tom went to bed early that night, so as to have a long sleep,
and fortify himself for the labors of the morrow.  The ashes were
raked carefully round the coals, which, when Tom waked in the
morning, were easily kindled again.

He was up early on that Monday morning.  He saw, with deep
disappointment, that the fog still covered every thing, and that
the wind was blowing quite brisk from the south-west, and raising
rather a heavy sea.  But he had a great deal to do now, and to this
he turned his attention.

First of all, he had to finish his signal-staff and set it up.  He
was very much troubled about the proper material for a flag.  The
canvas was rather too heavy; but as he had nothing else, he had to
take this.  He fastened a bit of the rope to the head of the staff,
so as to form a loop, and through this he ran a piece which was
long enough to serve for halyards.  Thus far he had not used up
more than a quarter of the coil of rope; but he needed all that was
left for other purposes.  The next thing was to set up his staff.
To do this required much labor.  He had already selected the place
which seemed most suitable.  It was at the extreme point of a
tongue of land which projected beside the brook, and only a little
distance from his resting-place.  Here the ground was soft; and
choosing a sharp stone, he worked diligently for about a couple of
hours, until at length he succeeded in digging a hole which was
about eighteen inches in depth.  Then he fastened ropes to the
staff, where the pole joined it, so that four lines came down far
enough to serve as stays.  Having done this, he inserted the end of
the staff in the hole, and thrust in the earth all around it,
trampling it in, and beating it down as tight as he could with a
stone.  After this he procured some sticks from the drift-wood,
and, sharpening the ends, he secured the stays by fastening them to
these sticks, which he drove into the ground.  The staff then
seemed to be as secure as was necessary.  It only remained now to
hoist up his flag; and this he did without any difficulty, securing
it at half mast, so that it might serve unmistakably as a signal of
distress.

Upon completing this, Tom rested on the mound, and from that
distance he contemplated the signal with a great deal of calm and
quiet satisfaction.  It was his own device, and his own handiwork,
and he was very proud of it.  But he did not allow himself a long
rest.  There yet remained much to be done, and to this he now
directed his attention.

He had been thinking, during his last employment, upon the
necessity which he had of some shelter.  A plan had suggested
itself which he felt confident that he could carry into execution
without any very great trouble.  The fog that now prevailed, and
which was far different from the light mist of the previous day,
accompanied also, as it was, by the damp south-west wind, made some
sort of a shelter imperatively necessary, and that, too, before
another night.  To pass this night in the fog would be bad enough;
but if it should happen to rain also, his situation would be
miserable indeed.

He now set out for the beach, and found, without much difficulty,
some pieces of wood which were necessary to his purpose.  Bringing
these back, he next looked about for a good situation.  There was a
rock not far from the fire, and in front of this was a smooth spot,
where the land was flat, and covered with short grass.  On the left
it sloped to the brook.  This seemed to him to be the best place on
the island.  It was sufficiently sheltered.  It was dry, and in
case of rain the water would not be likely to flood it.  With all
these it also possessed the advantage of being sufficiently
conspicuous to any passing vessel which might be attracted by the
signal-staff.  Here, then, Tom determined to erect his place of
residence.

His first work was to select two long and slender pieces of wood,
and sharpen the ends of them.  Then he drove each of them into the
ground in such a way that their tops crossed one another.  These he
bound fast together.  Two other stakes were driven into the ground,
and secured in the same way, about six or seven feet off.  Another
long piece of scantling was then placed so as to pass from one to
the other of the two crossed sticks, so that it rested upon them.
This last was bound tight to the crossed sticks, and thus the whole
structure formed a camp-shaped frame.

Over this Tom now threw the sail, and brought it down to the ground
on either side, securing it there with pegs.  At the back of the
camp a piece of the sail was folded over and secured so as to cover
it in; while in front another piece of the sail hung down until it
nearly reached the ground.  This could hang down at night, and be
folded over the top by day.  Tom now tore up some sods, and laid
them over the edge of the canvas on each side, where it touched the
ground, and placed on these heavy stones, until at length it seemed
sufficiently protected from the entrance of any rain that might
flow down the roof.  His last task consisted in collecting a large
quantity of moss and ferns from the woods, which he strewed over
the ground inside, and heaped up at one end, so as to form a soft
and fragrant bed.  When this was accomplished the camp was
finished.

It had taken a long time, and when at last the work was done, it
began to grow dark.  Tom noticed this with surprise.  He had been
working so incessantly that he was not mindful of the flight of
time, and now the day was done, and the evening was upon him before
he was aware.  But there were other things still for him to do
before he could rest from his labors.  His fire was just flickering
around its last embers, and if he wished to have a pleasant light
to cheer the solitude and the darkness of his evening hours, it
would be necessary to prepare a supply of fuel.  To this he
attended at once, and brought up several armfuls of drift-wood from
the beach.  Placing these near the fire, he kindled it up afresh,
and flung upon the rising flames a generous supply of fuel.  The
fires caught at it, and crackled as they spread through the dry
wood, and tossed up their forked tongues on high, till in the dusk
of evening they illuminated the surrounding scene with a pleasant
light.  A few more armfuls were added, and then the work for the
day was over.  That work had been very extensive and very
important.  It had secured a means of communication with the outer
world, and had also formed a shelter from the chill night air, the
fog, and the storm.  It was with a very natural pride that Tom cast
his eyes around, and surveyed the results of his ingenuity and his
industry.

The camp opened towards the fire, from which it was not so far
distant but that Tom could attend to it without any very great
inconvenience.  The fire shone pleasantly before him as he sat down
at his evening repast.  As the darkness increased, it threw a
ruddier glow upon all the scene around, lighting up field and hill,
and sending long streams of radiance into the fog that overhung the
sea.  Tom had prepared an unusually large supply of fuel, this
evening, for the express purpose of burning it all up; partly for
his own amusement, and partly in the hope that it might meet the
eyes of some passing navigator.  It was his only hope.  To keep his
signals going by night and day was the surest plan of effecting a
speedy escape.  Who could tell what might be out on the neighboring
sea?  How did he know but that the Antelope might be somewhere near
at hand, with his companions on board, cruising anxiously about in
search after the missing boat?  He never ceased to think that they
were following after him somewhere, and to believe that, in the
course of their wanderings, they might come somewhere within sight
of him.  He knew that they would never give him up till they
assuredly knew his fate, but would follow after him, and set other
vessels on the search, till the whole bay, with all its shores and
islands, should be thoroughly ransacked.

Fortunate was it for him, he thought, that there was so large a
supply of drift-wood at hand on the beach, dry, portable, and in
every way convenient for use.  Thanks to this, he might now
disperse the gloom of dark and foggy nights, and keep up a better
signal in the dark than he could do in the light.  Thus the fuel
was heaped on, and the fire flamed up, and Tom sat near, looking
complacently upon the brilliant glow.

Thus far, for nearly a week, he had fed on biscuit only; but now,
as he ate his repast, he began to think that it was a very
monotonous fare, and to wonder whether it might not be possible to
find something which could give a zest to his repasts.  The biscuit
were holding out well, but still he felt a desire to husband his
resources, and if any additional food could in any way be procured,
it would not only be a relish, but would also lessen his demand
upon his one sole source of supply.  He thought earnestly upon the
subject of fish.  He turned his thoughts very seriously to the
subject of fish-hooks, and tried to think of some way by which he
could capture some of the fish with which these waters abounded.
But this idea did not seem to promise much.  In the first place, he
could think of no possible way in which he could procure any
serviceable hook; in the second place, even if he had a hook and
line all ready and baited, he did not see how he would be able to
cast it within reach of any fish.  His boat would not float him
even for the little distance that was required to get into the
places where fish might be.  He could only stand upon the beach out
of their reach.

But, in the course of his thoughts, he soon perceived that other
sources of food were possible to him besides the fish that were
caught by hook and line.  His mind reverted to the populous realm
of shell-fish.  These were all before him.  Round the rocks and
amid the sea-weed there certainly must be mussels.  At low tide,
amid the ledges and the sand, there surely must be some lobsters.
Before him there was an extensive mud flat, where there ought to be
clams.  Here was his fire, always ready, by night and by day.  Why
should he not be able to make use of that fire, not only for
cheering his mind, and giving him warmth, and signaling to passers-
by, but also for cooking his meals?

This was the question that he asked himself as he ate his biscuit.
He could not see why he should not be able to accomplish this.  As
far as he could see, there ought to be plenty of shell-fish of
various kinds on these shores.  The more he thought of it, the more
probable it seemed.  He determined to solve the difficulty as soon
as possible.  On former occasions he had arranged his work on the
evening for the succeeding day.  On this evening he marked out this
work for the morrow, and arranged in his mind a comprehensive and
most diligent search for shell-fish, which should embrace the whole
circuit of the island.

With this in his mind, he arranged the fire as usual, so as to keep
it alive, and then retired to his camp for the night.  The presence
of a roof over his head was grateful in the extreme.  He let down
the canvas folds over the entrance, and felt a peculiar sense of
security and comfort.  The moss and ferns which he had heaped up
were luxuriously soft and deliciously fragrant.  Over these he
stretched his wearied limbs with a sigh of relief, and soon was
asleep.

So comfortable was his bed, and so secure his shelter, that he
slept longer than usual.  It was late when he awaked.  He hurried
forth and looked around.  The fog still rested over everything.  If
possible it was thicker and more dismal than even on the preceding
day.  To his surprise, he soon noticed that it had been raining
quite heavily through the night.  Around, in many places, he saw
pools of water, and in the hollows of the rocks he saw the same.
This could only have been done by the rain.  Going back to his
camp, he saw that the canvas was quite wet.  And yet the rain had
all rolled off.  Not a drop had entered.  The moss and the fern
inside were perfectly dry, and he had not the slightest feeling of
dampness about him.  His camp was a complete success.

He now went off to search for clams.  The tide had been high at
about six in the morning.  It was now, as he judged, about ten or
eleven, and the water was quite low.  Selecting a piece of shingle
from his wood-pile, he walked down over the mud flat that extended
from the point, and, after going a little distance, he noticed the
holes that give indications of the presence of clams beneath.
Turning up the sand, he soon threw out some of them.  He now dug in
several different places, and obtained sufficient for the day.
These he carried back to the bank in triumph.  Then he stirred up
his fire, heaped on plenty of wood, and arranged his clams in front
so as to roast them.

In spite of Mrs. Pratt's theories, the clams were found by Tom to
be delicious, and gave such relish to the biscuit, that he began to
think whether he could not make use of the baling dipper, and make
a clam chowder.

This breakfast was a great success, and Tom now confidently
expected to find other shell-fish, by means of which his resources
might be enlarged and improved.


XVII.

Solomon's solemn Tale.--A costly Lobster.--Off again.--Steam
Whistles of all Sizes.--A noisy Harbor.--Arrival Home.--No News.


The shout of joy uttered by those on the top of the cliff at seeing
old Solomon safe was responded to by those in the boat; and then,
as the latter went on her way, Captain Corbet set out to return to
the beach, followed by Phil and Pat.  Soon they were all reunited,
and, the boat being landed, they returned in triumph to the
Antelope.

On their way back, Solomon told them the story of his adventures.

"Went out," said he, "on a splorin scursion, cos I was termined to
try an skewer somethin to make a dinnah to keep up de sperrit ob
dis yah party.  Ben trouble nuff, an dat's no reason why we should
all starb.  I tought by de looks ob tings dar was lobstas somewhar
long dis yah sho, an if I got a chance, I knowed I could get 'em.
Dar was lots ob time too, ef it hadn't ben fur dat ar pint; dat's
what knocked me.  Lots o' lobstas--could hab picked up a barl full,
ony hadn't any barl to pick up."

"Well, but how did you happen to get caught?"

"Dat ar's jes what I'm a comin to.  You see, I didn't tink ob dat
ar pint when I went up de sho,--but knowed I had lots ob time; so I
jes tought I'd make sure ob de best ob de lobstas.  Wan't goin to
take back any common lobstas,--bet you dat,--notin for me but de
best,--de bery best ones dar.  Dat ar's what kep me.  It takes a
heap ob time an car to get de best ones, when dar's a crowd lyin
about ob all sizes, an de water comin in too."

"But didn't you see that the tide was coming up to the point?"

"Nebber see a see,--not a see; lookin ober de lobstas all de time,
an mos stracted wid plexity cos I couldn't cide bout de best ones.
Dar was lots an lots up dar at one place, dough I didn't go fur,--
but ef I'd gone fur, I'd hab got better ones."

"How far did you go?"

"Not fur,--ony short distance,--didn't want to go too fur away for
feah ob not gittin back in time.  An so I started to come back
pooty soon, an walked, an walked.  Las, jes as I got to de pint, I
rose my ole head, an looked straight afore me, an thar, clar ef I
didn't fine myself shut in,--reglar prison,--mind I tell you,--an
all round me a reglar cumferince ob water an rock, widout any way
ob scape.  Tell you what, if dar ebber was a ole rat in a trap, I
was at dat ar casion."

"Couldn't you have waded through it before it got too high?"

"Waded?  Not a wade; de water was rough an deep, an de bottom was
stones dat I'd slipped oba an almost broke my ole head, sides bein
drownded as dead as a herrin.  Why, what you tink dis ole nigga's
made ob?  I'm not a steam injine, nor a mowin machine, nor a life
boat.  I'm ony a ole man, an shaky in de legs too,--mind I tell
you."

"Well, how did you manage it?"

"Manage!  Why, I didn't manage at all."

"How did you find that place where you were sitting?"

"Wasn't settin.  I was tied up in a knot, or rolled up into a ball.
Any way, I wasn't settin."

"Well, how did you find the place?"

"Wal, I jes got up dar.  I stood on de sho till de water drobe me,
an I kep out ob its way till at las I found myself tied up de way
you saw me."

"Why didn't you halloo?"

"Hollar?  Didn't I hollar like all possessed?"

"We didn't hear you."

"Wal, dat ar's dredful sterious.  An me a hollarin an a yellin like
mad.  Tell you what, I felt as ef I'd bust my ole head open, I did
yell that hard."

"Couldn't you manage to climb up that cliff?"

"Dat cliff?  Climb up?  Me?  What! me climb up a cliff? an dat
cliff?  Why, I couldn't no more climb up dat ar cliff dan I could
fly to de moon.  No, sah.  Much as I could do to keep whar I was,
out ob de water.  Dat was enough."

"Don't you know that we walked two miles up the shore?"

"Two miles!  Two!  De sakes, now, chil'en! did you, railly?  Ef I'd
a ony knowed you war a comin so near, wouldn't I a yelled?  I bet I
would."

"Why, you didn't think we'd have left you."

"Lef me?  Nebber.  But den I didn't tink you'd magine anyting was
wrong till too late.  What I wanted was help, den an dar.  De
trouble was, when you did come, you all made dat ar circumbendibus,
an trabelled clean an clar away from me."

"We thought at first you could not be so near the point."

"But de pint was de whole difficulty.  Dat's de pint."

"Well, at any rate, you've saved the lobsters."

"Yah! yah! yah!  Yes.  Bound to sabe dem dar.  Loss my ole hat, an
nearly loss my ole self; but still I hung on to dem dar lobstas.
Tell you what it is now, dey come nigh onto bein de dearest lobstas
you ebber eat.  I'be done a good deal in de way ob puttin myself
out to get a dinna at odd times for you, chil'en; but dis time I
almost put myself out ob dis mortial life.  So when you get your
dinnas to-day, you may tink on what dat ar dinna come nigh to
costin."

"I wonder that you held on to them so tight, when they brought you
into such danger."

"Hole on?  Why, dat ar's de berry reason why I did hole on.  What,
let go ob dem arter all my trouble on dat count?  No.  I was bound
to hab somethin to show whenebber I got back, if I ebber did get
back; and so here I am, all alibe, an a bringin my lobstas wid me."

"Well, Solomon," said Bart, in a kindly tone, "old man, the
lobsters have come near costing us pretty dear, and we felt bad
enough, I can tell you, when we went up there along the shore
calling for you and getting no answer."

"What, you did car for de ole man, Mas'r Bart--did you?" said
Solomon, in a tremulous voice.  Tears started to his eyes as he
said it, and all power of saying anything more seemed to depart
from him.  He fell back behind the others, and walked on for the
rest of the way in silence, but at times casting upon Bart glances
that spoke volumes, and talking to himself in inaudible tones.

In this way they soon reached the wharf where the schooner was
lying.

The first thing that they noticed was, that the schooner was
aground.  The tide had gone out too far for her to float away, and
consequently there was no hope of resuming their voyage for that
day.

"We're in for it, captain," said Bruce

"Yes; I felt afeard of it," said the captain.  "We've got to wait
here till the next tide."

"We'll leave to-night, of course."

"O, yes.  We must get off at the night's tide, and drop down the
bay."

"How far had we better go?"

"Wal, I ben a thinkin it all over, an it's my opinion that we'd
better go to St. John next.  We may hear of him there, an ef he
don't turn up we can send out some more vessels, an give warnin
that he's astray on the briny biller."

"At what time will we be able to leave?"

"Wal, it'll not be high tide till near one o'clock, but we can git
off ef thar's a wind a leetle before midnight."

"Do you think the wind will hold on?"

The captain raised his head, and looked at the sky; then he looked
out to sea, and then he remained silent for a few minutes.

"Wal," said he, at last, slowly and thoughtfully, "it'll take a man
with a head as long as a hoss to answer that thar.  It mought hold
on, an then agin it moughtn't."

"At any rate, I suppose we can drift."

"O, yes; an of the wind doosn't come round too strong, we can git
nigh down pooty close to St. John by mornin."

"We'll run down with the tide."

"Percisely."

"Well, I suppose we'll have to put the time through the best way we
can, and try to be patient.  Only it seems hard to be delayed so
much.  First there was the fog, which made our search useless; and
now, when there comes a bright day, when we can see where we're
going, here we are tied up in Quaco all day and all night."

"It doos seem hard," said Captain Corbet, gravely, "terrible hard;
an ef I owned a balloon that could rise this here vessel off the
ground, an convey her through the air to her nat'ral element, I'd
hev it done in five minutes, an we'd all proceed to walk the waters
like things of life.  But I don't happen to own a balloon, an so
thar you air.

"But, boys," continued the captain, in a solemn voice, elevating
his venerable chin, and regarding them with a patriarchal smile,--
"boys, don't begin to go on in that thar old despondent strain.
Methinks I hear some on you a repinin, an a frettin, cos we're
stuck here hard an fast.  Don't do it, boys; take my advice, an
don't do it.  Bear in mind the stirrin an memiorable events of this
here mornin.  See what a calamity was a threatenin us.  Why, I
declare to you all, thar was a time when I expected to see our aged
friend Solomon no more in the flesh.  You could not tell it by my
manner, for I presarved a calm an collected dumeanour; but yet, I
tell you, underneath all that icy calm an startlin good-natur of my
attitood, I concealed a heart that bet with dark despair.  At that
moment, when we in our wanderins had reached the furthest extremity
that we attained onto, I tell you my blood friz, an my har riz in
horror!  Methought it were all up with Solomon; and when I see his
hat, it seemed to me jest as though I was a regardin with despairin
eye his tumestun whereon war graven by no mortial hand the solemn
an despairin epigram, 'Hic jacet!'

"So now, my friends," continued the captain, as he brushed a tear-
drop from his eye, "let us conterrol our feelins.  Let us be calm,
and hope for the best.  When Solomon took his departoor, an was
among the missin, I thought that an evil fortin was a berroodin
over us, and about to consume us.  But that derream air past.
Solomon is onst more among the eatables.  He cooks agin the mortial
repast.  He lives!  So it will be with our young friend who has so
mysteriously drifted away from our midst.  Cheer up, I say!  Them's
my sentiment.  He'll come to, an turn up, all alive--right side up--
with care,--C. O. D.,--O. K.,--to be shaken before taken,--marked
and numbered as per margin,--jest as when shipped, in good order
an condition, on board the schooner Antelope, Corbet master, of
Grand Pre."

These words of Captain Corbet had a very good effect upon the boys.
They had already felt very much cheered by the escape of Solomon,
and it seemed to them to be a good omen.  If Solomon had escaped,
so also might Tom.  And, as their anxiety on Solomon's account had
all been dispelled by his restoration, so also might they hope that
their anxiety about Tom would be dispelled.  True, he had been lost
to them for a much longer time, and his absence was certainly
surrounded by a more terrible obscurity than any which had been
connected with that of Solomon.  Yet this one favorable
circumstance served to show them that all might not be so dark as
they had feared.  Thus, therefore, they began to be more sanguine,
and to hope that when they reached St. John, some tidings of the
lost boy might be brought to them.

Solomon's exertions towards giving them a dinner were on this day
crowned with greater success than had been experienced for some
days past.  Their exertions had given them an appetite, and they
were able to eat heartily for the first time since Tom's departure.

The rest of the day passed very slowly with them.  They retired
early, and slept until midnight.  At that time they waked, and went
on deck, when they had the extreme satisfaction of seeing the
vessel get under way.  A moderate breeze was blowing, which was
favorable, and though the tide was not yet in their favor, yet the
wind was sufficient to bear them out into the bay.  Then the boys
all went below again, full of hope.  The night passed away quietly,
and without any incident whatever.  They all slept soundly, and the
dreams that came to them were pleasant rather than otherwise.

Awaking in the morning by daylight, they all hurried up on deck,
and encountered there a new disappointment; for all around them
they saw again the hated presence of the fog.  The wind also had
died away, and the vessel's sails flapped idly against her masts.

"Where are we now?" asked Bruce, in a despondent tone.

When he went into the water, saw him after all. But only in the older
generation still living the memory of those terrible swimmers,
with the phenomenal power and force of its achievements simply
everything else was killed.

Brüning himself had no great regret its successes Lebewohl said,
is the sport life in general, and had turned to run now.

Incidentally, he understood nothing about horses.

Sometimes, even, but rarely, he appeared at a practice or evening
at an event of his old clubs.

When he came, brought a general cheer, for he was universally
popular, because he is a noble guy was funny and always open, always
ready to help with money and the Council and the enormous generosity,
if it was mine to pay.

When he was younger, only the "champagne uncle", but the elders
were large pieces to be tested and unbeeinflußbares verdict.

When he was one evening in the swimming pool next to the nail
Schwimmwart was, this made him a member of the new attention to the
just for stillvergnügt hundred meters to swim.

Brüning trick the eye something together, like it was their own,
if he did what he thought was called, but still said nothing.

When Francis came out of the water, he mustered him, as he considered
his horses.

The result was very satisfactory.

He congratulated nail on his acquisition, companionable Franz shook
hands, and this was from the day of his outspoken to enjoy protection.

With time Brüning declared him under four eyes than the one in the
whole club, perhaps one day his successor could be equal, "if
he did what he promised." The interest vergalt Franz nail with
indelible gratitude, and the friendship he Koepke that has fallen
to the benevolence Brünings but he thought a long time.

When he saw how steady and warm it was, he was very pleased, and
he always remained one of the few, the generosity of champagne uncle
never abused. 5 The art of swimming is a young art.

You can by it as such until the last century speak, and really only
in its last half. The swimming as physical exercise is traditionally
practiced, although it is never again to the general need, which
existed in those days of antiquity was , whose beauty joy today
Thermenhotel gigantic rubble of the Old in silence eloquently
testify.

In Germany they first came back into recording, as on the Spree by
the initiative of one of the great Prussian general's Institute
was established, which still bears his name.

Does the name of Pfuel such a reawakening langverlernter exercise,
it can be an art of swimming although still hardly talk, as in the
sixties, the first indoor swimming pools open in Germany, but right
then, when the first float together their forces and against each
measure.

Only sparse and almost unnoticed - one of the first among them the
"S.

CB-1879" - to grow and multiply the swimming clubs have been slow,
probably already struggling in the early eighties, their
Championships to reach only around half of this decade
Wettschwimmbestimmungen general, to which they agree.

But from then on it is faster. With the winter pools in many cities
throughout including swimming clubs, which are only among themselves
and then in the large associations together, which is aimed at
all clubs and organizations under a common aspiration for the new
thing to unite. A decade later, and also the art of diving has
found their scoring form. Man has triumphed. The most recent
step-child of the sport has gained attention and respect. Far
longer than any other sport to certain conditions, he kühnlich
next to each other, and one he has before each advance, he celebrated
his summer and winter festivals.

In summer, under a blue sky, and in any water, which allows
expansion in winter under the high arches of iron and glass.

Of course, the summer peak season and the biggest and most important
festivals fall in his time.

But it was also proposed that the most important internal events
or individual clubs united in the winter fell, since the summer of
too much foreign interest is claimed. Now there is no longer just
isolated clubs in various cities. As the mushrooms grow the club
from the earth - their name with fondness the old gods of water
and all kinds of water creatures borrow - and unite - fight
among themselves, fiercely and passionately, now crowd the small
and large celebrations Sunday to Sunday and hardly any in the year
is free of such festivals in a city like Berlin.

It is the richest time of growth and hence the rapid fermentation
of the old "S. 1879-CB" almost alone quietly and watch, because
both are already behind him, and it is the time when Franz in his
fields in continuous training to his first victory wrestles .-- The
history of swimming in general is a fairly equal, and they differ
significantly only in their expansion.

From the small, internal events at the club at the Sunday afternoon
started covering it with the large national and international
meetings often over two days.

On three species will be fought at all: in the swimming, jumping in
and diving. Geschwommen to be shorter or longer distances, and
the style is either free or as a chest, side and backstroke
prescribed. Geschwommen can be stromfreiem in water, artificial
lakes and pools, or even in rivers with flow to overcoming resistance.

The number of jumps is inherently limited. The jump table of the
German Swimming Federation from 1891 shows the thirty-five on the
basis of the points 0-5 and 1-6 degrees of difficulty, therefore.
From a simple drop and the Abrenner, the simple and difficult
jumps, they head slowly to the Pike and final jumps in their
various rotations of the body.

But there is a great diversity among them. The height of the jump
board switches from one to three and six meters. Many cracks
can be as much of the state, starting with how to be; and occurs
with many added that they are both pre-as well as since or even
backwards can be performed.

It is the office of a judge for the price jump is not easy and
requires langgeübte and intimate knowledge of the various jumps
and its values.

At the festivals, there is as much competition for duty, as for
Kürsprünge. The diving is easy. Man plunges into the depths after
candidates (winner is who in the shortest time the greatest number
hervorholt), or in the length, the pike dive - it swims under the
water, and then in a straight line reached the meter number is
rash. Festivities will take place on each a Mehrkampf instead,
the most interesting is: will be fought in all three species, and
remains champion, who on average in all the highest score achieved.

The prices are either the property of the winner or go into the
possession of his club over .

They consist for the major championships often in valuable goods,
the organizer or the city of confusion, or medals, honorary
certificates and the simple laurel with colored loops, in golden
letters the glory of the heißerrungenen tell - unforgettable memories!

- There are prizes to the winners immediately fall, but there are
also hiking prices, after several severe kicks victory erringbar
and several years in a row ausgefochten be before they come into
possession of the winner or go on club property.

What else festivals show still serves more to enrich their physical
and decoration.

Swimming "older gentlemen", the time of the highest education of
their strength already behind him, as the opening of the boys
swimming and juniors, they have not yet reached this consolation
and encouragement can swim far from the interest, the young people
before or after their years in the twentieth highest power efficiency
of their offer, and whose names therefore right in the middle of
all programs.

Grotesque and funny Wasserpantomimen patient should be some viewers
who have little or nothing about the non-connoisseur understands
struggles often monotonous, indemnify, and einlautes, keen water
polo, the club against club attaches itself lacks today than at
any conclusion.

The prize distribution will be held on the evening of the festival
instead. Music and dancing keep the participants together for a
long time, "as it is always at the end of all the reports states.
- Wet Well - Hurray! Hurray! Hurray! 6 on the Entry of the "Swim
Club Berlin 1879" for this great contest of the Berlin Federal
swimmers stood for the first time the name of Franz fields.

The holder of this name was registered for the swim for the
championship of the city of Berlin. It was Brünings weighty word,
which, for the young member of the Wagschal put them in the long
counseling favor Felder finally let fall. Franz never forgot it. He
was only almost shocked when he heard of the decision, but
otherwise, they hardly could have wanted the club to ever participate.

Then it took just a happy frenzy. His club _ihn_ sent out on the great
swimming in the winter, with him to a championship, for the
championship of the city of Berlin over the short distance of 100
meters to wrestle!

- It should be based on the annual contest of the great Berlin
German swimmers with the first swimmers - including former winners
- in the battle for the silver medal measure! It was just the
championship to a city, not a country or even to a continent, but
it was still the championship to the capital, as in no other the
world of the sport of swimming green and flourishing, which
everywhere the best and most feared forces presented, where it
was, began to achieve.

One championship Swimmers in the Berlin league, the greatest part of
the Berlin swimming clubs involved in the German Swimming Federation,
the first rise, was a great victory - a victory in the first
rank, vielumstritten and heißbegehrt ... And _sein_ club sent him,
the young, unknown Franz fields, also, to win this championship! -
His club, many years ago, the first initiative to set up the same
federal swimmers had given his club, the oldest and most prestigious
Berlin, with its simple and yet so famous the names of so many
first swimmer in the world were indelibly linked, not only for
itself and its members, but for the whole thing of swimming always
been a unique example was - the "S.

-CB 1879" seconded _ihn_ to this year's competition, if he young
member in this way all the other preferred, so he knew what
he was doing. Then it was without doubt his best swimmer. But what
was more, than this outward recognition of his power, was internal:
the club had never been a member hinausgesandt, whose internal
togetherness with the aspirations and objectives of the club - and
they were in of the most important thing - not convinced he would
have been.

He had many years of the festivals can hold back, proud of the successes
and unconcernedly old with new when the old forces that had to
pull back, not immediately by new of the same strength could
be replaced, and he would have time to provide the necessary case
once again wait for years, because not a single artificial
breeding sizes and obtaining louder triumphs, but to the general
uplift of the thing he was always primarily been to do. We therefore
decided today to new active participation, so we had quite sure of
the victory - and not just this one victory, but a new fame in
the old leaf wreath ... fields was about all this is not clear. He
felt just how much he excelled not only as a swimmer, but also as
a man by his name as a representative of his club for the first
time publicly said he knew you trusted him the honor of the club,
not only a new success. Next, he saw yet. So, his entire ambition
meanwhile meantime, this victory, on which it arrived, for his
club erfechten.

He felt that he _mußte_ him win! He was very proud and very happy.
But he was scared, real scared - for the first time in his life.
He knew not what fear was. Never had he felt. But now they took
him. It was the cannon fever of soldiers, for the first time in
the battle goes.

Because if he was subject - if he just a second, third or no prize
was awarded - he knew his opponent well.

Almost all, he had repeatedly seen the swimming and admired. But no,
he had ever been measured .-- In addition to its stand just a
new name among the messages. And he was the youngest of all - well,
he has the elders of his clubs on the short route.

But his club had, as long as he was in it, no more championships
record.

What did it say that he, Francis Fields, was his best swimmer? - Not
too much. Nagel, his inner agitation saw him repeatedly talked
seriously.

He was worried about his pupil - not because he feared that he might
be subject to, but because he saw how consuming restlessness umherging
and he practiced.

He warned him, too much emphasis on this race to be. What was
it because, when he also underwent? - What defeat today could be
tomorrow for the victory, and vice versa. He had the mitangesehen,
many times, and it is experienced, and also Franz would experience.
That was not the first and last swim, certainly not - and always
repeated the good and experienced friend: - swim as good as you can.

You care about nothing, as to your goal.

More you can not do than what your character allows you to do.
This was satisfied ...

Fields heard for the first time his friend to be only half.

His club had _ihn_ hinausgesandt. In his hands was his honor.
He could not provide him with shame, he had to win - he _mußte!

_ - 7 Thus came the Sunday of the festival approached. Franz had
in the last week of the work of the day or night trains.

Yesterday he went to bed early, but he had little sleep can.
Preferably in the morning he would again stretch geschwommen -
only once ... but of course he was not allowed. So passed the morning
in inactivity impatience.

He ate and drank moderately almost nothing. It was in the restaurant
of the club premises in the Lindenstrasse eaten now and played in
the cozy sitting rooms have a Kaffeeskat at different tables.

Franz, not the card touched, looked, as usual, but there he was
this time not easy to remain calm. He went from table to table,
until a sudden fatigue him and he attacked in front hindruselte. -
Leg 'dich doch out, we want you already awake when it is time! Called
him Brüning and Franz rolled behind the big table on the old, creaking
sofa together in the otherwise solemn deliberations among the
president sat.

After two minutes he slept like a dead man. Gradually emptied the
tables, you went to the festival. The "nail in the Brüning sat
and played calmly. Threw around half past three Brüning the cards
together and pulled his golden clock: Mass detention time yet -
but rather want to go and nail ... He stood in front of the sofa,
on the Franz still asleep. He stood there like a child, and
his breathing went quietly and peacefully through the slightly
open lips.

Surely now he dreamed of no defeat. Brüning looked at him with
almost gentle smile. - As a young god, what?

- And yet the mere child! - But we raise our young winners! - It
is still not Nagel said, and touched the sleeping on the shoulder.
Franz led to the heights, and his first was under control of the
clock. - But we missed the swimming, except that he cried when he
saw that they already showed half past three.

The others laughed it off, grabbed him in a cab and drove with
him to the feast .-- The huge hall of the large swimming pools
of water Buddies was festively decorated. The wide space with the
high Gothic arches was up in the last corner by the large
electric arc lamps lit, because the colorful window urge only the
light of a cloudy winter day frühdunklen.

The otherwise bare hall was beyond recognition.
an ef I did, wouldn't I make a pile to leave and bequeath
to the infant when his aged parient air buried beneath the cold
ground?"

While Captain Corbet was speaking, the schooner sailed past the
light-house, and the thick fog closed around her once more.  On one
side, however, they could see the dim outline of the shore on their
right.  On they sailed for about a quarter of a mile, when suddenly
the fog vanished, and, with scarce a moment's notice, there burst
upon them a blaze of sunlight, while overhead appeared the glory of
the blue sky.  The suddenness of that transition forced a cry of
astonishment from all.  They had shot forth so quickly from the fog
into the sunlight that it seemed like magic.

They found themselves sailing along a strait about a mile in width,
with shores on each side that were as high as Blomidon.  On the
right the heights sloped up steep, and were covered with trees of
rich dark verdure, while on the other side the slope was bolder and
wilder.  Houses appeared upon the shore, and roads, and cultivated
trees.  This strait was several miles in length, and led into a
broad and magnificent basin.

Here, in this basin, appeared an enchanting view.  A sheet of water
extended before their eyes about sixteen miles in length and five
in breadth.  All around were lofty shores, fertile, well tilled,
covered with verdurous trees and luxuriant vegetation.  The green
of the shores was dotted with white houses, while the blue of the
water was flecked with snowy sails.  Immediately on the right there
appeared a circular sweep of shore, on which arose a village whose
houses were intermingled with green trees.

Into this beautiful basin came the old French navigators more than
two centuries ago, and at its head they found a place which seemed
to them the best spot in Acadie to become the capital of the new
colony which they were going to found here.  So they established
their little town, and these placid waters became the scene of
commercial activity and of warlike enterprise, till generations
passed away, and the little French town of Port Royal, after many
strange vicissitudes, with its wonderful basin, remained in the
possession of the English conqueror.

"Now," said Captain Corbet, "boys, look round on that thar, an tell
me of you ever see a beautifuller place than this.  Thar's ony one
place that can be compared with this here, an that's Grand Pre.
But for the life o' me, I never can tell which o' the two is the
pootiest.  It's strange, too, how them French fellers managed to
pick out the best places in the hull province.  But it shows their
taste an judgment--it doos, railly."

It was not long before the Antelope had dropped anchor in front of
the town of Digby, and Captain Corbet landed with the boys as soon
as possible.  There was as good a chance of Tom being heard of here
as anywhere; since this place lay down the bay, in one sense, and
if by any chance Tom had drifted over to the Nova Scotia shore, as
now seemed probable, he would be not unlikely to go to Digby, so as
to resume his journey, so rudely interrupted, and make his way
thence to his friends.

Digby is a quiet little place, that was finished long ago.  It was
first settled by the Tory refugees, who came here after the
revolutionary war, and received land grants from the British
government.  At first it had some activity, but its business soon
languished.  The first settlers had such bright hopes of its future
that they regularly laid out a town, with streets and squares.  But
these have never been used to any extent, and now appear grown over
with grass.  Digby, however, has so much beauty of scenery around
it, that it may yet attract a large population.  On landing here,
Captain Corbet pursued the same course as at other places.  He went
first to one of the principal shops, or the post office, and told
his story, and afterwards went to the schooners at the wharves.
But at Digby there was precisely the same result to their inquiries
as there had been at other places.  No news had come to the place
of any one adrift, nor had any skipper of any schooner noticed
anything of the kind during his last trip.

"What had we better do next?"

"Wal," said Captain Corbet, "we can ony finish our cruise."

"Shall we go on?"

"Yes."

"Up the bay?"

"Yes.  I'll keep on past Ile Haute, an I'll cruise around Minas.
You see these drifts may take him in a'most any direction.  I don't
see why he shouldn't hev drifted up thar as well as down here."

It was Wednesday when they reached Digby.

On the evening of that day the Antelope weighed anchor, and sailed
out into the Bay of Fundy.

It was bright sunshine, with a perfectly cloudless sky inside, but
outside the Antelope plunged into the midst of a dense and heavy
fog.


XIX.

Tom's Devices.--Rising superior to Circumstances.--Roast Clams.--
Baked Lobster.--Boiled Mussels.--Boiled Shrimps.--Roast Eggs.--
Dandelions.--Ditto, with Eggs.--Roast Dulse.--Strawberries.--Pilot-
bread.--Strawberry Cordial.


Meanwhile another day had passed away on Ile Haute.

When we last saw Tom he had succeeded in finding some clams, which
he roasted in front of his fire, and made thus a very acceptable
relish.  This not only gratified his palate for the time, but it
also stimulated him to fresh exertions, since it showed him that
his resources were much more extensive than he had supposed them to
be.  If he had ever dreaded getting out of all his provisions, he
saw now that the fear was an unfounded one.  Here, before his eyes,
and close beside his dwelling-place, there extended a broad field
full of food.  In that mud flat there were clams enough to feed him
for all the rest of his life, if that were necessary.  But what was
more, he saw by this the possibility that other articles of food
might be reckoned on, by means of which he would be able to relieve
his diet from that monotony which had thus far been its chief
characteristic.  If he could find something else besides clams and
biscuit, the tedium of his existence here would be alleviated to a
still greater degree.

He spent some time in considering this subject, and in thinking
over all the possible kinds of food which he might hope to obtain.
Sea and land might both be relied on to furnish food for his table
in the desert.  The sea, he knew, ought to supply the following:--

1.  Clams,
2.  Lobsters,
3.  Mussels,

in addition to other things which he had in his mind.  The land, on
the other hand, ought to furnish something.  Now that his attention
was fairly directed to this important subject, he could think of
several things which would be likely to be found even on this
island, and the search for which would afford an agreeable
amusement.

The more he thought of all this, the more astonished he was at the
number of things which he could think of as being likely to exist
here around him.  It was not so much for the sake of gratifying his
appetite, as to find some occupation, that he now entered eagerly
upon putting this new project into execution.  Fish, flesh, and
fowl now offered themselves to his endeavors, and these were to be
supplied by land, sea, and sky.  This sudden enlargement of his
resources, and also of his sphere of operations, caused him to feel
additional satisfaction, together with a natural self-complacency.
To the ordinary mind Ile Haute appeared utterly deserted and
forlorn--a place where one might starve to death, if he had to
remain for any length of time; but Tom now determined to test to
the utmost the actual resources of the island, so as to prove, to
himself what one unaided boy could do, when thus thrown upon his
own intelligent efforts, with dire necessity to act as a stimulus
to his ingenuity.

First of all, then, there was his box of biscuit, which he had
brought with him.

To this must be added his first discovery on the island, namely,
the clams.  Nothing could be of greater importance than this, since
it afforded not merely a relish, but also actual food.

The next thing that he sought after was lobsters, and he went off
in search of these as soon as he could on the following day.

He waited till the tide was low, which was at about twelve o'clock,
and then went down along the beach.  At high tide, the water came
close up to the foot of the lofty cliff; but at ebb, it descended
for some distance, so that there was some sort of a beach even in
places that did not promise any.

The beach nearest to where Tom had taken up his abode was an
expanse of mud and sand; but passing along beyond this, on the
north side, it became gravelly.  About a hundred yards to the west,
on this side of the island, he came to the place where he had tied
his boat, on that eventful time when he had drifted here.  Below
this, the beach extended down for a long distance, and at the
lowest point there were rocks, and sharp stones, and pebbles of
every size.  Here Tom began his search, and before he had looked
five minutes, he found several lobsters of good size.  A little
farther search showed him that there was a large supply of these,
so that, in fact, sufficient support might have been obtained for a
whole ship's company.  By the time that he had found a half dozen
of these, and had brought them back to his hearth-stone, it had
grown too dark to search for any more.  Because the delicate Wiseli
in the house to know where it is much crudity and feel needed to
hear, did her very tired. But even they would have known no advice,
and now was nothing more to do than to accept the case and from
time to time in order to take care of the child. As the morning
to Otto and Miezchen heard, as it is with Wiseli since broke yet
once a storm starts. Otto said Wiseli would now like Daniel in
the lion pit, and tried his thumb while on the table - apparently
with the secret desire them to Chäppis back niedersausen it.

The Miezchen noise and cried a little, partly out of compassion
for Wiseli, partly for itself and its thwarted hopes for a happy
escape from the daily detention bed. But this excitement lay
as any other, and the days went back as usual. Wiseli meanwhile
had gradually settled a little in the house of the uncle. His bed
had arrived. It no longer slept on the Ofenbank, but as the uncle
had said, in a shed in the narrow passage between the chamber of
the couple and that of boys.

In the shed had just crossed his bed space and a small box, reflecting
his clothes and beaten on the rise it had to be in bed, because
otherwise there was no more room. In order to wash in the morning,
it had to go to the fountain, and when it was cold, so my aunt said
that it could stay up and then another day to wash, when it was
warmer. But it was not accustomed Wiseli. His mother had
taught it to legally be kept clean, and Wiseli would prefer to
freeze as it look like the mother would be reluctant to see. Daheim,
it was different, if it is morning in the mother in the room itself
was ready to make and they are always so friendly words with him
had, then the coffee on the table and put them both sitting side
by side, when it happily ate his bread, before it had to go to
school.

It was now quite different, and everything was so different, his
whole life from morning until evening, so different that often
when remembering the mother and the days that it had spent with
her, the Wiseli the water in the eye shot .

And it schnürte him as the heart together, that it felt it could no
longer continue to live. But it fought bravely, as the reluctant
uncle saw it when it cried, or was sad.

And the aunt railed then more than ever, they could not
suffer. Wiseli My favorite was the moment when it all away alone
in his shed and grow quite to the parent to think and say was his
song. Then came a great consolation in his heart. It is thought then
to his beautiful dream, and was quite sure that God him a path
search, as it showed the mother had. Sometimes it is considered
how many people in the world live, for the love of God to uphold
and ways willing to make. And then he climbed the doubt on whether
he might forget about all the many. But there came to him
like the good consolation to the heart, so that the mother was up
there in heaven, and certainly the love God would ask his way not
to forget.

Wiseli That made the then very confident and happy, and it has
never been so unhappy as on the first evening on the Ofenbank.
it slept every night with the happy confidence in the heart: ( "He
will also find a way where you can walk.")

So the winter passed, and the sunny spring came. The trees were
green, and all the meadows were full of flowers and white keys
anemones. And in the forest called the cuckoo funny, and beautiful,
warm air moved through the country and made all merry heart, so that
everyone wants to live like again. Wiselis also pleased the hearts
of the flowers and sunshine, if it is in the morning went
to school and then back to Buchenrain returned. Otherwise it was
no time to rejoice in it, because it now had to work hard. Each
moment that remains next to the school, had some work to be
used. And some half-day of the week had to stay at home and could
not go to school, because as much need to do, as the uncle and
aunt mainly said. The spring field work had begun, and the garden
was all hand to do. Because it had to help, and when the aunt was
outside, had to cook and wash the dishes afterwards, the pig trough
for the trim and into the barn carrying across.
He soon filled his pan, and brought these
also to his camping-place.  These he deposited in a little pool,
which was on the surface of some rocks that lay not far from the
shore.  Over these he also laid some sea-weed.

The tide was now coming up, but Tom made a further journey to the
beach, so as to secure something which he had noticed during his
previous expedition.  This was a marine plant called dulse, which,
in these waters, grows very plentifully, and is gathered and dried
by the people in large quantities.  It was a substance of which Tom
was very fond, and he determined to gather some, and dry it in the
sun.  Collecting an armful of this, he took it to the shore, and
spread it out over the grass, though, in that damp and foggy
atmosphere, there was not much prospect of its drying.

It was now about three o'clock in the afternoon, and Tom's
researches along the shore were successfully terminated.  He had
found all the different articles that he had thought of and his new
acquisitions were now lying about him.

These were,--

Clams,
Lobsters,
Mussels,
Shrimps,
Dulse.

As he murmured to himself the list of things, he smiled triumphantly.

But still there was work to be done.  Tom intended to keep
fashionable hours, and dine late, with only a lunch in the middle
of the day.  His explorations of the afternoon were to be
important, and he hoped that they would be crowned with a portion
of that success which had attended the work of the morning.  He
took, therefore, a hasty lunch of biscuit and cold lobster, washed
down with water, and then set forth.

This time he turned away from the shore, and went to the top of the
island.  He carried in his hand a bit of rope, about a dozen feet
in length, and went along the edge of the cliff as far as he could,
turning aside at times to avoid any clumps of trees or bushes that
grew too thickly.  In front of him the line of cliff extended for
some distance, and he walked along, until, at last, he came to a
place where the gulls flew about in larger flocks than usual,
almost on a line with the top of the rock.  He had not noticed them
particularly on his former walk along here; but now he watched them
very attentively, and finally stood still, so as to see their
actions to better advantage.

Tom, in fact, had made up his mind to procure some gulls' eggs,
thinking that these would make an addition to his repast of great
importance; and he now watched the motions of these birds, so as to
detect the most accessible of their nests.  He did not have to
watch long.  A little observation showed him a place, just under
the cliff, not far away from him.  Hastening forward, he bent over,
and, looking down, he saw a large number of nests.  They had been
constructed on a shelf of rock immediately below the edge of the
cliff, and the eggs were within easy reach.  The gulls flew about
wildly, as the intruder reached down his hands towards their nests,
and screamed and shrieked, while some of them rushed towards him,
within a few feet of his head, as though they would assail him and
beat him off.  But Tom's determination did not falter.  He cared no
more for the gulls than if they were so many pigeons, but secured
as many eggs as he could carry.  These he took with him back to his
camp.

But he was not yet satisfied.  He was anxious to have some
vegetables; and over the open ground, among the grass, he had seen
plants which were very familiar to him.  There were dandelions; and
Tom saw in them something that seemed worth more than any of his
other acquisitions.  Going forth in search of these, he managed to
get his pan full of them.  These he washed, and after cutting off
the roots, he put them in the pan with water, and then set them
over the fire to boil.

While they were boiling Tom went off once more, and found some wild
strawberries.  They were quite plentiful about here, and this was
the season for them.  He stripped a piece of bark from a birch
tree, as the country people do, and formed from this a dish which
would hold about a quart.  This he filled after a moderate search.

He took the strawberries to his camp, and then, going back to the
woods, he procured some more birch bark, out of which he made a
half dozen dishes.  It was now about five o'clock, and Tom thought
it was time for him to begin to cook his dinner.

The dandelions were not quite cooked as yet; so Tom had to wait;
but while doing so, he heated some stones in the fire.  By the time
they were heated, the dandelions were cooked; and Tom, removing the
pan, put some shrimps and mussels in it, to boil over the fire.  He
then removed the stones, and placed one of the lobsters among them
in such a way, that it was surrounded on every side in a hot oven.
He then buried a few clams among the hot ashes, and did the same
with three or four of the gulls' eggs.

One of the hot stones was reserved for another purpose.  It was the
largest of them, and was red hot when he drew it from the fire, but
soon cooled down enough to resume its natural color, although it
retained an intense heat.

Over this he spread some of the wet dulse, which soon crackled and
shrivelled up, sending forth a rich and fragrant steam.  In
roasting this dulse, a large piece would shrink to very small
proportions, so that half of Tom's armful, when thus roasted, was
reduced to but a small handful.

After finishing this, he drew the gulls' eggs from the fire, and
taking off the shells, he cut them in slices, and put them with the
dandelions.  Then he took the shrimps and mussels from the fire,
and removing them from the pan, he separated them, and put them
into different bark dishes.  The clams were next drawn forth, and
though rather overdone, they were, nevertheless, of tempting
appearance and appetizing odor.  Finally, the lobster was removed,
and Tom contented himself with one of the claws, which he placed on
a dish, reserving the remainder for another time.

And now the articles were all cooked, and Tom's repast was ready.
And as if the strength of his muscles should obey his will, it
happened, what he wanted. He won. He proposed the famous Dutchman,
the dreaded Austrians, he smote the giant Norwegians, a giant
in the shape and strength, he suggested the best his own homeland
for the second and third times, and he won on his own time from
previous years with more than three minutes. An indescribable
tumult arose when he anschlug.

The spectators raced. His friends almost squeezing him. Completely
strangers hugged him.

They carried him
more than he went
through the ranks
of people who had
left their seats.
Germany had won.
And in Germany Berlin -
Berlin And this
cool, so like
always inclined to diminish the criticism and so abhold each
Gefühlsüberschwänglichkeit, were hardly to recognize in the jubilation
and the joy over the victory of their city.

Incredibly, these fields - heard you everywhere, what will that he
can. And the enthusiasm did not want to put ... were still on the
quiet fields, and even - nail. The long said nothing more,
and only a handshake revealed that he mitfühlte at this moment.
He thought to himself: Now, now, it will show - that, as he
endures this victory .-- Brüning ran around and screamed as
obsessed after champagne, and Koepke was totally unsoundness.

He spoke only in hyperbolas.

Felder at rest, which is also much more a physical than an interior,
had a certain way, mental as physical bracing their main reason.

Now, when everything was over, he remarked, as he is in the
last few weeks had consumed internally - and such a desire. In the
same garden, where in previous years championship his statement
was made in Germany, he was now the highest of all Honors received,
and the respectful silence of many hundreds he took the champion
prize ...!

warm summer night, the whole round again took the celebration
around him. He lived in these very hours. He did not return.
He thought not even in the future. The voices fell silent in him.
For perhaps the first time in his life, she remained silent
throughout. He had achieved, not what he wanted: no, much more
than that you had to be silent today, these voices, because they
were of the unanimous overpowers cheering for him. The silent star
shone down, the soft breath of the night played by the
hot-heads, and water came from the fresh coolness, all of these
people do not tire of him, to talk, to drink, to inebriate
alive to joy and of personal power. And Fields drank - drank - drank
- everything you gave him: champagne, beer and wine, but
it tasted sweet at the heady potion of success. Everything
else, he had forgotten. Even when he was in the midst his wildest
admirers as intoxicated finally went to the station, was also not
a memory in his tired and confused thoughts to him a white dress,
a young bodyguard or a warm mouth would have been awakened.

Müde he sat in a corner and a coupe while the others around him are
still around on this day ereiferten, he slept, and the winner on his
victories forgetting, thought they only come back to him and awoke
him, when the train in the dawn lit hall of the station Görlizer
import ...

The first newspapers were published. They grabbed the still damp
sheets and read the short lines, the name Franz Felder, the
triumph in Berlin, Germany, the victory - in this hour of world
proclaimed. He himself, the winner was unable to read them. The
letters and ranzten flickered before his eyes. 12 The glory of this
day was the journey itself, the fields a few weeks later took to
England, where in the promised land of the sport's European
Championship against former champion their first to say that hardly
increases .

The journey was never planned. It was never thought of it. She was
simply a natural consequence of this last victory. While the sports
newspapers of the continent were united in the recognition of this
victory, the British behaved, in numbers and importance in the same
tone and always superior to the victory against skeptical and raised
the objection that England not participated, but that Sport England
in property (as in other things) of Europe, and that fields only
one with English swimmers should have measured before it really the
only man-made title of European Champion paid.

Of course, we rejected this accusation against and declared them
ridiculous. It was the first swimmer of Europe invited the Englishman.
They had not come because they just never came. And because they
were haughty fool who einbildeten that we should come to them.
It was not until again some voices against the rice paddies to
England. A concession of this kind was a concession, a humiliation.
But others said: We must show them! - Now is the opportunity there,
and appropriated only imagined superiority to break. If we take any
excuse, so they will have to be comfortable, herabzusteigen from
its pedestal on which they stood for far too long, then participation
in continental festivals or definitive renunciation the inevitable
result.

When the last argument: the to the high cost was cut short by that
Brüning, which is now even his horses no longer cared, offered it
to all fields and contribute to England to accompany his participation
was decided. When fields later in this trip to England thought back,
so she came to him like a dream. A confused jumble of images of
all kinds was at his eye over. First, wide landscapes, which flew
in the dahinrasenden part vorbeizogen. The dark rainy night on the
ship: the sea, which he saw for the first time - a water, as he
never guessed it, a force of waves against the mighty ship rang,
rang as his body against the quiet of his native river flood , and
at the individual human force needed to break like a matchstick
under the blow of a hammer.

Water, only water, the same water, which he knew and loved like
no other - and yet a completely different element. Not that he
was familiar with youth, but a strange, eerie power with which to
measure, he never would have dared, before it dawned, as it weaker,
was a nothing in front of her ... that was the sea ... Misery,
completely crushed by the ridiculous and yet so mighty sick
of the sea, until he breathed, when he again land beneath our feet
felt - he who would otherwise only reluctantly entered because his
beloved had to leave the water - and only he thought with a shudder
at the roar, the hostility, all the terrible nature of the foreign
return, which had treated him as the first best, a cat which had
become a tiger, a friend suddenly turns into an enemy of the mask
fall niedergeworfen and left him in order to murder him ... Then,
still fear that - rescued - life in the terms, the immensity of
the Ode and haze wrapped in eternal city, before whose immensity
him to Berlin as a village appeared.

Finally, in sharpest contrast to the days of racing at the
breastfeeding, umbuschten the banks of the Thames, where the sky
again laughed and peace back into the hidden white houses seemed
zuwohnen, where he was again his courage, the courage to take out
to remember why he came here, and the strength to triumph, is really
the first prize to get, because he finally felt at home again,
at home in the water ... And the pictures after the victory.

The cheering him this only so seriously, it appeared stiff people,
against the applause of Grünau was like a murmur. In his whole
life he had not so many people shaking hands as at that date. Man
renkte him almost from the arm.

And then we dragged him for two days by a celebration to
another, crossed in rows of twenty Cabs - in which only one was
allowed to sit - as in a procession, the endless streets of
London, treated him like a prince, and overwhelmed him in
unprecedented generosity and hospitality with gifts of any kind on
the last days gave him someone whose name he did not even knew an
honorary gift of 150 pounds because you had heard that he is
completely on the work of his hands was instructed. It was with
so much respect and offered self-evident, that Fields was able to
turn it impossible. He was very touched. He had thought that England
would be huge übelnehmen if a foreigner and they daherkam on their
land was, and now he saw and felt nothing anywhere as ungrudging
admiration and reverence, as he is in such forms are still
unknown was. And yet - it was the foreign language, or what was
it? - so comfortable as in Germany or even in Vienna these days
were not.

Everything went into perpetual haste, from one to another. Never
one to put a glass of beer together in peace to discuss everything.
While drunk enough - and what not all the time - but all in flight,
standing, and from one source, he went into the other, almost like
a case in which anyone had a right. Everyone wanted to shake his
hand and drank with him ... And again he had to shake hands and
drink until the evening he was so tired that he is no longer the
right of the left to distinguish knew.

No, that cozy at home, it was not, and Fields was almost glad when
it went to the home. Actually he does not need to feel strange,
because Brüning club and another comrade were always with him,
and the former was the best trip Marschall, one could imagine: at
home, in all languages equitable, practical and experienced,
while in inexhaustible good humor and the cumbersome boxes of
any embarrassment playfully carrying across. It came from laughing
with him not out. But Fields was never quite happy. Because without
it himself to admit he was afraid to return home before this. Again
it should be - and this time a whole day - to the terrible element
entrust him to impotent and pitiful face and in front of this
wretched impotence water curve, which otherwise he grabbed a winner
wherever he is ... He could have met does not need to fear. When
they last for a half durchjubelten and durchtrunkenen night on
the morning of Queensborough dissipation, he was so tired
that his friends on the ship almost wore on him and barely arrived,
he slept like a dead man up to the moments when it in Flushing
again reawaken. That was his trip to England. Everything was
wonderful, glorious, only been. But he was glad when he returned
to Berlin was to re-establish the native sounds heard around him
the bogeyman and forgot that he had angegrinst like death incarnate.
For he had now made clear: the sea was the sea, and the Water was
water. But both were not the same - he never wanted the sea again.
Had he seen it lying deep blue splendor, quiet, secretive, enticing,
like a deep lake, and just quietly erzitternd under the rays of the
sun, as it Liebreich and reconciles the winner heimtrug on his broad
back, he would have recognized it as his element and not rested
until he entrusted his salty tide and the delights enjoyed his hug.
13 This was Franz Felder trip to England, whose triumph now Newspapers
reported: a confused jumble of images of all kinds, and only the
bright memory of his victory to him only through these reports quite
clearly was aware - the victory over the first opponents in the
world, none of the side for the first more contentious Championship
of Europe, the highest achievable awards, and fame, which takes its
name from that day for all times to unforgettable in the annals of
swimming eingrub.

He had achieved what he wanted. What he longs, was fulfilling become.
He could something no other man could save it. He was the master
of the water. He had his club to help his old reputation. More:
he had his own name with the famous far beyond the previous
limits. His debt was paid. The poor boy was a young man, with all
the pride and admiration saw no need to suffer longer needed, so
many were the helpful hands, which he entgegenstreckten. No, it was
not right that he achieved what he wanted. Never had he so
highly desired.

He was then taken, but he never dared to yearn. And so he was taken
that he had to ask: where to now? - So much had he reached him
that nothing more remained to be desired. What path led yet also
on the level at which he stood - because there appeared to him to
say of course.

The world called his name. He only forgot two things: that the world
he so called it, only an infinitely small part of the real world was
- if it was also the world in which he lived, and that even this
small part of people who have it today anstaunten and celebrated,
perhaps in his mind tomorrow, but it sure tomorrow would have
forgotten. But as he his cause has always been alone as the only key
was released, so the world he could never really measure it because
everyone else has always had lacked scale. So he gradually came
to be interpreted as meaning that it only under a single point of
view to see now and then, logically, as its center of view.

The only thing he still really did was that he is now the height
of his power had reached . Beyond them he could no longer. Surpassed
him, yes it was only some other, so it was made. It was, therefore,
to maintain this level. It was now his next target. But it was no
longer objective, which fascinated him. Therefore, he was now,
at the height, no longer as happy as he was when he climbed it and
each of its movements of a thousand eyes looked prosecuted.

But he was happy still. That one day, had liked it long enough to
even say where he had to descend to another place to do that he knew.
Moreover, there was no deception. That was as safe as death. But
he never thought to this day. He did not want to - He stood up and
looked down on the way that he made. And from the depth to him
heraufklang heady jubilation and envy the same heavily in his
ears .-- During this period that brought the largest and most
prestigious sports newspaper of the world, the name "World Sport"
does not have resulted in injustice, yet his picture and told
its readers with the simple story of his life and the story of his
unprecedented success.

The biography could not be more than the simple reproduction of
plain facts. The picture was a reproduction of exquisite
photography. She showed the champion of Europe in the chest image,
clothed, and in addition to the very highest honors only a small,
simple - and perhaps the highest of all - barely recognizable
next to the heavy medals of gold and silver, the small coin, the
he was honored as the first once, many years ago, brought by a
person's life saved. The picture even showed a serious, beautiful
and proud face. It was no longer the face of the boy. That was
only the strange train of determination around the mouth, and was
unchanged or slightly low, defiant face. But the softness, the
rounding of the cheeks and chin, and especially the
good-natured, trusting view of the blue eyes were gone and a serious
expression of early genres, so that the face gained in importance,
which it had lost kindness.

It was the face of a man has become the calm, confident and
determined in constant vigilance and to look into the distance, so
that no one is too close to him come, and the expression of a defense
is always ready, in his fearless audacity superseded what the
face of lack of deeper spiritual intelligence. At the moment
the recording was so vivid he become that he is peculiarly lively
and interesting.

It was still a friendly face, but the gracious, good face of the
boy was not there anymore. A different picture, however - from
the same time - which the champion swimmer in full figure and the
Jersey shoreline, and on the face of the body resigned disturbed in
any line. It was a picture of a wonderfully secure and evenly
developed, the life still completely untouched, very single force
in the security of their youth victory. 14 With heavy feet, we go
through the heavy soil.

Is eternal in us the desire to let us know they can collect, and even
in death, we ask that they let us be easy. Because it is difficult
to us as life itself. But we can not fly. Envied the birds we see
after that are in the air, which for us is too easy. Difficult to
earth, the air is too easy. But we can swim. Between Heaven and
Earth weighs us the water. Semi pulls us down, it helps us halfway
up.

We are still not up, but we are no longer below. It gives us
forgetting: forgetting the earth, and the idea in the sky, when it
carries us. We do not have wings, but we feel the gravity of the
earth no more.

Wunderbares Element - Why have we made thee that all of our
homeland and the cradle was, fled to the earth? - Why are we not
in your quiet, dream-free, blissful depths stayed, instead of the
noise, the dust and the struggle of the soil to occur?

- Why we wheeze from severe lung, rather effortlessly from gills to
breathe easy? - Because we heat, light and life needed? - Oh, the
warmth of the earth is burning embers, light dazzles our eyes,
and most of us is unbearable life.
At about nine on the following morning, the Antelope reached a
little place called Wilmot Landing, where they went on shore and
made the usual inquiries with the usual result.  Embarking again,
they sailed on for the remainder of that day, and stopped at one or
two places along the coast.

On the next morning (Friday) they dropped anchor in front of Hall's
Harbor--a little place whose name had become familiar to them
during their memorable excursion to Blomidon.  Here they met with
the same discouraging answer to their question.

"Wal," said Captain Corbet, "we don't seem to meet with much
success to speak of--do we?"

"No," said Bart, gloomily.

"I suppose your pa'll be sendin schooners over this here same
ground.  'Tain't no use, though."

"Where shall we go next?"

"Wal, we've ben over the hull bay mostly; but thar's one place,
yet, an that we'll go to next."

"What place is that?"

"Scott's Bay.

"My idee is this," continued Captain Corbet:  "We'll finish our
tower of inspection round the Bay of Fundy at Scott's Bay.  Thar
won't be nothin more to do; thar won't remain one single settlement
but what we've called at, 'cept one or two triflin places of no
'count.  So, after Scott's Bay, my idee is to go right straight off
to old Minas.  Who knows but what he's got on thar somewhar?"

"I don't see much chance of that."

"Why not?"

"Because, if he had drifted into the Straits of Minas, he'd manage
to get ashore."

"I don't see that."

"Why, it's so narrow."

"Narrer?  O, it's wider'n you think for; besides, ef he got stuck
into the middle of that thar curn't, how's he to get to the shore?
an him without any oars?  Answer me that.  No, sir; the boat
that'll drift down Petticoat Jack into the bay, without gettin
ashore, 'll drift up them straits into Minas jest the same."

"Well, there does seem something in that.  I didn't think of his
drifting down the Petitcodiac."

"Somethin?  Bless your heart! ain't that everythin?"

"But do you think there's really a chance yet?"

"A chance?  Course thar is.  While thar's life thar's hope."

"But how could he live so long?"

"Why shouldn't he?"

"He might starve."

"Not he.  Didn't he carry off my box o' biscuit?"

"Think of this fog."

"O, fog ain't much.  It's snow an cold that tries a man.  He's
tough, too."

"But he's been so exposed."

"Exposed?  What to?  Not he.  Didn't he go an carry off that ole
sail?"

"I cannot help thinking that it's all over with him?"

"Don't give him up; keep up; cheer up.  Think how we got hold of
ole Solomon after givin him up.  I tell you that thar was a good
sign."

"He's been gone too long.  Why, it's going on a fortnight?"

"Wal, what o' that ef he's goin to turn up all right in the end?  I
tell you he's somewhar.  Ef he ain't in the Bay of Fundy, he may be
driftin off the coast o' Maine, an picked up long ago, an on his
way home now per steamer."

Bart shook his head, and turned away in deep despondency, in which
feeling all the other boys joined him.  They had but little hope
now.  The time that had elapsed seemed to be too long, and their
disappointments had been too many.  The sadness which they had felt
all along was now deeper than ever, and they looked forward without
a ray of hope.

On Friday evening they landed at Scott's Bay, and, as old Bennie
Griggs's house was nearest, they went there.  They found both the
old people at home, and were received with an outburst of welcome.
Captain Corbet was an old acquaintance, and made himself at home at
once.  Soon his errand was announced.

Bennie had the usual answer, and that was, that nothing whatever
had been heard of any drifting boat.  But he listened with intense
interest to Captain Corbet's story, and made him tell it over and
over again, down to the smallest particular.  He also questioned
all the boys very closely.

After the questioning was over, he sat in silence for a long time.
At last he looked keenly at Captain Corbet.

"He's not ben heard tell of for about twelve days?"

"No."

"An it's ben ony moderate weather?"

"Ony moderate, but foggy."

"O, of course.  Wal, in my 'pinion, fust an foremust, he ain't
likely to hev gone down."

"That thar's jest what I say."

"An he had them biscuit?"

"Yes--a hull box."

"An the sail for shelter?"

"Yes."

"Wal; it's queer.  He can't hev got down by the State o' Maine;
for, ef he'd got thar, he'd hev sent word home before this."

"Course he would."

Old Bennie thought over this for a long time again, and the boys
watched him closely, as though some result of vital importance hung
upon his final decision.

"Wal," said Bennie at last, "s'posin that he's alive,--an it's very
likely,--thar's ony two ways to account for his onnat'ral silence.
Them air these:--

"Fust, he may hev got picked up by a timber ship, outward bound to
the old country.  In that case he may be carried the hull way
acrost.  I've knowed one or two sech cases, an hev heerd of
severial more.

"Second.  He may hev drifted onto a oninhabited island."

"An oninhabited island?" repeated Captain Corbet.

"Yea."

"Wal," said Captain Corbet; after a pause, "I've knowed things
stranger than that."

"So hev I."

"Air thar any isle of the ocean in particular that you happen to
hev in your mind's eye now?"

"Thar air."

"Which?"

"Ile Haute."

"Wal, now, railly, I declar--ef I wan't thinkin o' that very spot
myself.  An I war thinkin, as I war a comin up the bay, that that
thar isle of the ocean was about the only spot belongin to this
here bay that hadn't been heerd from.  An it ain't onlikely that
them shores could a tale onfold that mought astonish some on us.
I shouldn't wonder a mite."

"Nor me," said Bennie, gravely.

"It's either a timber ship, or a desert island, as you say,--that's
sartin," said Captain Corbet, after further thought, speaking with
strong emphasis.  "Thar ain't a mite o' doubt about it; an which o'
them it is air a very even question.  For my part, I'd as soon bet
on one as t'other."

"I've heerd tell o' several seafarin men that's got adrift, an lit
on that thar isle," said Bennie, solemnly.

"Wal, so hev I; an though our lad went all the way from Petticoat
Jack, yet the currents in thar wandorins to an fro could
effectooate that thar pooty mighty quick, an in the course of two
or three days it could land him high an dry on them thar
sequestrated shores."

"Do you think there is any chance of it?" asked Bruce, eagerly,
directing his question to Bennie.

"Do I think?  Why, sartin," said Bennie, regarding Bruce's anxious
face with a calm smile.  "Hain't I ben a expoundin to you the
actool facts?"

"Well, then," cried Bart, starting to his feet, "let's go at once."

"Let's what?" asked Captain Corbet.

"Why, hurry off at once, and get to him as soon as we can."

"An pray, young sir, how could we get to him by leavin here jest
now?"

"Can't we go straight to Ile Haute?"

"Scacely.  The tide'll be agin us, an the wind too, till nigh
eleven."

Bart gave a deep sigh.

"But don't be alarmed.  We'll go thar next, an as soon as we can.
You see we've got to go on into Minas Basin.  Now we want to leave
here so as to drop down with the tide, an then drop up with the
flood tide into Minas Bay.  I've about concluded to wait here till
about three in the mornin.  We'll drop down to the island in about
a couple of hours, and'll hev time to run ashore, look round, and
catch the flood tide."

"Well, you know best," said Bart, sadly.

"I think that's the only true an rational idee," said Bennie.  "I
do, railly; an meantime you can all get beds here with me, an you
can hev a good bit o' sleep before startin."

This conversation took place not long after their arrival.  The
company were sitting in the big old kitchen, and Mrs. Bennie was
spreading her most generous repast on the table.

After a bounteous supper the two old men talked over the situation
until bedtime.  They told many stories about drifting boats and
rafts, compared notes about the direction of certain currents, and
argued about the best course to pursue under certain very difficult
circumstances, such, for example, as a thick snow-storm, midnight,
a heavy sea, and a strong current setting upon a lee shore, the
ship's anchor being broken also.  It was generally considered that
the situation was likely to be unpleasant.

At ten o'clock Bennie hurried his guests to their beds, where they
slept soundly in spite of their anxiety.  Before three in the
morning he awaked them, and they were soon ready to reembark.

It was dim morning twilight as they bade adieu to their hospitable
entertainers, and but little could be seen.  Captain Corbet raised
his head, and peered into the sky above, and sniffed the sea air.

"Wal, railly," said he, "I do declar ef it don't railly seem as ef
it railly is a change o' weather--it railly doos.  Why, ain't this
rich?  We're ben favored at last.  We're agoin to hev a clar day.
Hooray!"

The boys could not make out whether the captain's words were
justified or not by the facts, but thought that they detected in
the air rather the fragrance of the land than the savor of the salt
sea.  There was no wind, however, and they could not see far enough
out on the water to know whether there was any fog or not.

Bennie accompanied them to the boat, and urged them to come back if
they found the boys and let him rest in Scott's Bay.  But the fate
of that boy was so uncertain, that they could not make any promise
about it.

It was a little after three when the Antelope weighed anchor, and
dropped down the bay.

There was no wind whatever.  It was the tide only that carried them
down to their destination.  Soon it began to grow lighter, and by
the time that they were half way, they saw before them the dark
outline of the island, as it rose from the black water with its
frowning cliffs.

The boys looked at it in silence.  It seemed, indeed, a hopeless
place to search in for signs of poor Tom.  How could he ever get
ashore in such a place as this, so far out of the line of his
drift; or if he had gone ashore there, how could he have lived till
now?  Such were the gloomy and despondent thoughts that filled the
minds of all, as they saw the vessel drawing nearer and still
nearer to those frowning cliffs.

As they went on the wind grew stronger, and they found that it was
their old friend--the sou-wester.  The light increased, and they
saw a fog cloud on the horizon, a little beyond Ile Haute.  Captain
Corbet would not acknowledge that he had been mistaken in his
impressions about a change of weather, but assured the boys that
this was only the last gasp of the sou-wester, and that a change
was bound to take place before evening.  But though the fog was
visible below Ile Haute, it did not seem to come any nearer, and at
length the schooner approached the island, and dropped anchor.

It was about half past four in the morning, and the light of day
was beginning to be diffused around, when they reached their
destination.  As it was low tide, they could not approach very
near, but kept well off the precipitous shores on the south side of
the island.  In the course of her drift, while letting go the
anchor, she went off to a point about half way down, opposite the
shore.  Scarce had her anchor touched bottom, than the impatient
boys were all in the boat, calling on Captain Corbet to come along.
The captain and Wade took the oars.

It was a long pull to the shore, and, when they reached it, the
tide was so low that there remained a long walk over the beach.
They had landed about half way down the island, and, as they
directed their steps to the open ground at the east end, they had a
much greater distance to traverse than they had anticipated.  As
they walked on, they did not speak a word.  But already they began
to doubt whether there was any hope left.  They had been bitterly
disappointed as they came near and saw no sign of life.  They had
half expected to see some figure on the beach waiting to receive
them.  But there was no figure and no shout of joy.

At length, as they drew nearer to the east end, and the light grew
brighter, Bart, who was in advance, gave a shout.

They all hurried forward.

Bart was pointing towards something.

It was a signal-staff, with something that looked like a flag
hoisted half mast high.

Every heart beat faster, and at once the wildest hopes arose.  They
hurried on over the rough beach as fast as possible.  They
clambered over rocks, and sea-weed, and drift-wood, and at length
reached the bank.  And still, as they drew nearer, the signal-staff
rose before them, and the flag at half mast became more and more
visible.

Rushing up the bank towards this place, each trying to outstrip the
others, they hurried forward, full of hope now that some signs of
Tom might be here.  At length they reached the place where Tom had
been so long, and here their steps were arrested by the scene
before them.

On the point arose the signal-staff, with its heavy flag hanging
down.  The wind was now blowing, but it needed almost a gale to
hold out that cumbrous canvas.  Close by were the smouldering
remains of what had been a huge fire, and all around this were
chips and sticks.  In the immediate neighborhood were some bark
dishes, in some of which were shrimps and mussels.  Clams and
lobsters lay around, with shells of both.

Not far off was a canvas tent, which looked singularly comfortable
and cosy.

Captain Corbet looked at all this, and shook his head.

"Bad--bad--bad," he murmured, in a doleful tone.  "My last hope,
or, rayther, one of my last hopes, dies away inside of me.  This is
wuss than findin' a desert place."

"Why?  Hasn't he been here?  He must have been here," cried Bart.
"These are his marks.  I dare say he's here now--perhaps asleep--in
the camp.  I'll go--"

"Don't go--don't--you needn't," said Captain Corbet, with a groan.
"You don't understand.  It's ben no pore castaway that's come here--
no pore driftin lad that fell upon these lone and desolate coasts.
No--never did he set foot here.  All this is not the work o'
shipwracked people.  It's some festive picnickers, engaged in
whilin away a few pleasant summer days.  All around you may
perceive the signs of luxoorious feastin.  Here you may see all the
different kind o' shellfish that the sea produces.  Yonder is a
luxoorious camp.  But don't mind what I say.  Go an call the
occoopant, an satisfy yourselves."

Captain Corbet walked with the boys over to the tent.  His words
had thrown a fresh dejection over all.  They felt the truth of what
he said.  These remains spoke not of shipwreck, but of pleasure,
and of picnicking.  It now only remained to rouse the slumbering
owner of the tent, and put the usual questions.

Bart was there first, and tapped at the post.

No answer.

He tapped again.

Still there was no answer.

He raised the canvas and looked in.  He saw the mossy interior, but
perceived that it was empty.  All the others looked in.  On
learning this they turned away puzzled.

"Wal, I thought so," said Captain Corbet.  "They jest come an go as
the fancy takes 'em.  They're off on Cape d'Or to-day, an back here
to-morrer."

As he said this he seated himself near the tent, and the boys
looked around with sad and sombre faces.

It was now about half past five, and the day had dawned for some
time.  In the east the fog had lifted, and the sun was shining
brightly.

"I told you thar'd be a change, boys," said the captain.

As he spoke there came a long succession of sharp, shrill blasts
from the fog horn of the Antelope, which started every one, and
made them run to the rising ground to find out the cause.


XXII.

Astounding Discovery.--The whole Party of Explorers overwhelmed.--
Meeting with the Lost.--Captain Corbet improves the Occasion.--
Conclusion.


At the sound from the Antelope they had all started for the rising
ground, to see what it might mean.  None of them had any idea what
might be the cause, but all of them felt startled and excited at
hearing it under such peculiar circumstances.  Nor was their
excitement lessened by the sight that met their eyes as they
reached the rising ground and looked towards the schooner.

A change had taken place.  When they had left, Solomon only had
remained behind.  But now there were two figures on the deck.  One
was amidships.  The schooner was too far away for them to see
distinctly, but this one was undoubtedly Solomon; yet his gestures
were so extraordinary that it was difficult to identify him.  He it
was by whom the blasts on the fog horn were produced.  Standing
amidships, he held the fog horn in one hand, and in the other he
held a battered old cap which supplied the place of the old straw
hat lost at Quaco.  After letting off a series of blasts from the
horn, he brandished his cap wildly in the air, and then proceeded
to dance a sort of complex double-shuffle, diversified by wild
leaps in the air, and accompanied by brandishings of his hat and
fresh blasts of the horn.  But if Solomon's appearance was somewhat
bewildering, still more so was that of the other one.  This one
stood astern.  Suddenly as they looked they saw him hoist a flag,
and, wonder of wonders, a black flag,--no other, in short, than the
well-known flag of the "B. O. W. C."  That flag had been mournfully
lowered and put away on Tom's disappearance, but now it was hoisted
once more; and as they looked, the new comer hoisted it and lowered
it, causing it to rise and fall rapidly before their eyes.

Nor did the wonder end here.  They had taken away the only boat
that the schooner possessed in order to come ashore, leaving
Solomon alone.  They had noticed no boat whatever as they rowed to
land.  But now they saw a boat floating astern of the Antelope,
with a small and peculiarly shaped sail, that now was flapping in
the breeze.  Evidently this boat belonged to the new comer.  But
who was he?  How had he come there?  What was the meaning of those
signals with that peculiar flag, and what could be the reason of
Solomon's joy?

They stood dumb with astonishment, confused, and almost afraid to
think of the one cause that each one felt to be the real
explanation of all this.  Too long had they searched in vain for
Tom,--too often had they sunk from hope to despair,--too confident
and sanguine had they been; and now, at this unexpected sight, in
spite of the assurance which it must have given them that this
could be no other than Tom, they scarce dared to believe in such
great happiness, and were afraid that even this might end in a
disappointment like the others.

But, though they stood motionless and mute, the two figures on
board the Antelope were neither one nor the other.  Solomon danced
more and more madly, and brandished his arms more and more
excitedly, and there came forth from his fog horn wilder and still
wilder peals, and the flag rose and fell more and more quickly,
until at last the spectators on the shore could resist no longer.

"G-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-d ger-ra-a-a-cious!"

This cry burst from Captain Corbet.

It was enough.  The spell was broken.  A wild cry burst forth from
the boys, and with loud, long shouts of joy they rushed down the
bank, and over the beach, back to their boat.  The captain was as
quick as any of them.  In his enthusiasm he forgot his rheumatism.
There was a race, and though he was not even with Bruce and Bart,
he kept ahead of Pat, and Arthur, and Phil, and old Wade.

Hurrah!

And hurrah again!

Yes, and hurrah over and over; and many were the hurrahs that burst
from them as they raced over the rocky beach.

Then to tumble into the boat, one after another, to grasp the oars,
to push her off, to head her for the schooner, and to dash through
the water on their way back, was but the work of a few minutes.

The row to the schooner was a tedious one to those impatient young
hearts.  But as they drew nearer, they feasted their eyes on the
figure of the new comer, and the last particle of doubt and fear
died away.  First, they recognized the dress--the familiar red
shirt.  Tom had worn a coat and waistcoat ashore at Hillsborough on
that eventful day; but on reaching the schooner, he had flung them
off, and appeared now in the costume of the "B. O. W. C."  This
they recognized first, and then his face was revealed--a face that
bore no particular indication of suffering or privation, which
seemed certainly more sunburnt than formerly, but no thinner.

Soon they reached the vessel, and clambered up; and then with what
shouts and almost shrieks of joy they seized Tom!  With what cries
and cheers of delight they welcomed him back again, by turns
overwhelming him with questions, and then pouring forth a torrent
of description of their own long search!

Captain Corbet stood a little aloof.  His face was not so radiant
as the faces of the boys.  His features were twitching, and his
hands were clasped tight behind his back.  He stood leaning against
the mainmast, his eyes fixed on Tom.  It was thus that he stood
when Tom caught sight of him, and rushed up to shake hands.

Captain Corbet grasped Tom's hand in both of his.  He trembled, and
Tom felt that his hands were cold and clammy.

"My dear boys," he faltered, "let us rejice--and--be glad--for this
my son--that was dead--is alive agin--"

A shudder passed through him, and he stopped, and pressed Tom's
hand convulsively.

Then he gave a great gasp, and, "Thar, thar," he murmured, "it's
too much!  I'm onmanned.  I've suffered--an agonized--an this--
air--too much!"

And with these words he burst into tears.

Then he dropped Tom's hand, and retreated into the cabin, where he
remained for a long time, but at last reappeared, restored to
calmness, and with a smile of sweet and inexpressible peace
wreathing his venerable countenance.

By this time the boys had told Tom all about their long search; and
when Captain Corbet reappeared, Tom had completed the story of his
adventures, and had just reached that part, in his wanderings,
where he had left the island, and found himself drifting down the
bay.  As that was the point at which Tom was last lost sight of in
these pages, his story may be given here in his own words.

"Yes," said he, "you see I found myself drifting down.  There was
no help for it.  The wind was slight, and the tide was strong.  I
was swept down into a fog bank, and lost sight of Ile Haute
altogether.  Well, it didn't matter very much, and I wasn't a bit
anxious.  I knew that the tide would turn soon, and then I'd come
up, and fetch the land somewhere; so I waited patiently.  At last,
after about--well, nearly an hour, the tide must have turned, and I
drifted back, and there was wind enough to give me quite a lift;
and so all of a sudden I shot out of the fog, and saw Ile Haute
before me.  I was coming in such a way that my course lay on the
south side of the island, and in a short time I came in sight of
the schooner.  I tell you what it is, I nearly went into fits--I
knew her at once.  A little farther on, and I saw you all cutting
like mad over the beach to my camp.  I was going to put after you
at first; but the fact is, I hated the island so that I couldn't
bear to touch it again, and so I concluded I'd go on board and
signal.  So I came up alongside, and got on board.  Solomon was
down below; so I just stepped forward, and put my head over the
hatchway, and spoke to him.  I declare I thought he'd explode.  He
didn't think I was a ghost at all.  It wasn't fear, you know--it
was nothing but delight, and all that sort of thing, you know.
Well, you know, then we went to work signaling to you, and he took
the fog horn, and I went to the flag, and so it was."

"I don't know how we happened not to see your boat," said Bruce.

"O, that's easy enough to account for," said Tom.  "I was hid by
the east point of the island.  I didn't see the schooner till I got
round, and you must have been just getting ashore at that time."

During all this time Solomon had been wandering about in a
mysterious manner; now diving below into the hold, and rattling the
pots and pans; again emerging upon deck, and standing to listen to
Tom and look at him.  His face shone like a polished boot; there
was a grin on his face that showed every tooth in his head, and his
little twinkling black beads of eyes shone, and sparkled, and
rolled about till the winking black pupils were eclipsed by the
whites.  At times he would stand still, and whisper solemnly and
mysteriously to himself, and then, without a moment's warning, he
would bring his hands down on his thighs, and burst into a loud,
long, obstreperous, and deafening peal of uncontrollable laughter.

"Solomon," said Tom, at last, "Solomon, my son, won't you burst if
you go on so?  I'm afraid you may."

At this Solomon went off again, and dived into the hold.  But in a
minute or two he was back again, and giggling, and glancing, and
whispering to himself, as before.  Solomon and Captain Corbet thus
had each a different way of exhibiting the same emotion, for the
feeling that was thus variously displayed was nothing but the
purest and most unfeigned joy.

"See yah, Mas'r Tom--and chil'n all," said Solomon, at last.  "Ise
gwine to pose dat we all go an tend to sometin ob de fust portance.
Hyah's Mas'r Tom habn't had notin to eat more'n a mont; an hyah's
de res ob de blubbed breddern ob de Bee see double what been a
fastin since dey riz at free clock dis shinin and spicious morn.
Dis yah's great an shinin casium, an should be honnad by great and
strorny stivities.  Now, dar ain't no stivity dat can begin to hole
a can'l to a good dinna, or suppa, or sometin in de eatin line.  So
Ise gwine to pose to honna de cobbery ob de Probable Son by a rale
ole-fashioned, stunnin breakfuss.  Don't be fraid dar'll be any
ficiency hyah.  I got tings aboard dat I ben a savin for dis
spicious an lightful cobbery.  Ben no eatin in dis vessel ebber
sence de loss chile took his parter an drifted off.  Couldn't get
no pusson to tetch nuffin.  Got 'em all now; an so, blubbed
breddern, let's sem'l once more, an ole Solomon'll now ficiate in
de pressive pacity ob Gran Pandledrum.  An I pose dat we rect a
tent on de sho oh dis yah island, and hab de banket come off in
fust chop style."

"The island!" cried Tom, in horror.  "What! the island?  Breakfast
on the island?  What a horrible proposal!  Look here, captain.
Can't we get away from this?"

"Get away from this?" repeated the captain, in mild surprise.

"Yes," said Tom.  "You see, the fact is, when a fellow's gone
through what I have, he isn't over fond of the place where he's had
that to go through.  And so this island is a horrible place to me,
and I can't feel comfortable till I get away out of sight of it.
Breakfast!  Why, the very thought of eating is abominable as long
as that island is in sight."

"Wal, railly, now," said Captain Corbet, "I shouldn't wonder if
thar was a good deal in that, though I didn't think of it afore.
Course it's natral you shouldn't be over fond of sech, when you've
had sech an oncommon tough time.  An now, bein' as thar's no uthly
occasion for the Antelope to be a lingerin' round this here isle of
the ocean, I muve that we histe anchor an resume our vyge.  It's
nigh onto a fortnight sence we fust started for Petticoat Jack, and
sence that time we've had rare and strikin vycissitoods.  It may
jest happen that some on ye may be tired of the briny deep, an may
wish no more to see the billers bound and scatter their foamin
spray; some on ye likewise may be out o' sperrits about the fog.
In sech a case, all I got to say is, that this here schooner'll be
very happy to land you at the nighest port, Scott's Bay, frincense,
from which you may work your way by land to your desired haven.
Sorry would I be to part with ye, specially in this here moment of
jy; but ef ye've got tired of the Antelope, tain't no more'n's
natral.  Wal, now,--what d'ye say--shall we go up to Scott's Bay,
or will ye contenoo on to Petticoat Jack, an accomplitch the
riginal vyge as per charter party?"

The boys said nothing, but looked at Tom as though referring the
question to him.

"As far as I am concerned," said Tom, who noticed this reference to
him, "it's a matter of indifference where we go, so long as we go
out of sight of this island.  If the rest prefer landing at Scott's
Bay, I'm agreed; at the same time, I'd just as soon go on to
Petitcodiac."

"An what do the rest o' ye say?" asked the captain, somewhat
anxiously.

"For my part," said Bruce, "I think it's about the best thing we
can do."

The others all expressed similar sentiments, and Captain Corbet
listened to this with evident delight.

"All right," said he, "and hooray!  Solomon, my aged friend, we
will have our breakfast on board, as we glide past them thar
historic shores.  Pile on what you have, and make haste."

In a few minutes more the anchor was up, and the Antelope was under
way.

In about half an hour Solomon summoned them below, where he laid
before them a breakfast that cast into the shade Tom's most
elaborate meal on the island.  With appetites that seemed to have
been growing during the whole period of Tom's absence, the joyous
company sat down to that repast, while Solomon moved around, his
eyes glistening, his face shining, his teeth grinning, and his hips
moving, as, after his fashion, he whispered little Solomonian
pleasantries to his own affectionate heart.  At this repast the
boys began a fresh series of questions, and drew from Tom a full,
complete, and exhaustive history of his island life, more
particularly with regard to his experience in house-building, and
housekeeping; and with each one, without exception, it was a matter
of sincere regret that it had not been his lot to be Tom's
companion in the boat and on the island.

After breakfast they came up on deck.  The wind had at length
changed, as Captain Corbet had prophesied in the morning, and the
sky overhead was clear.  Down the bay still might be seen the fog
banks, but near at hand all was bright.  Behind them Ile Haute was
already at a respectful distance, and Cape Chignecto was near.

"My Christian friends," said Captain Corbet, solemnly,--"my
Christian friends, an dear boys.  Agin we resoom the thread of our
eventfool vyge, that was brok of a suddent in so onparld a manner.
Agin we gullide o'er the foamin biller like a arrer shot from a
cross-bow, an culleave the briny main.  We have lived, an we have
suffered, but now our sufferins seem to be over.  At last we have a
fair wind, with a tide to favor us, an we'll be off Hillsborough
before daybreak to-morrer.  An now I ask you all, young sirs, do
you feel any regretses over the eventfool past?  I answer, no.  An
wan't I right?  Didn't I say that that thar lad would onst more
show his shinin face amongst us, right side up, with care, in good
order an condition, as when shipped on board the Antelope, Corbet
master, from Grand Pre, an bound for Petticoat Jack?  Methinks I
did.  Hence the vally of a lofty sperrit in the face of
difficulties.  An now, young sirs, in after life take warnin by
this here vyge.  Never say die.  Don't give up the ship.  No
surrender.  England expects every man to do his dooty.  For him
that rises superior to succumstances is terewly great; an by
presarvin a magnanumous mind you'll be able to hold up your heads
and smile amid the kerrash of misfortin.  It came soon after, the
boy's hand, scrolls in passing among the journals, showed the child
a few pictures. But as the Baron, as by chance, came to the table,
apparently to include a journal search for the truth to
penetrate deeper into the wet gleam of their eyes to penetrate,
perhaps even start a conversation, she turned away, knocked her son
lightly on the shoulder: '= Viens, Edgar! Au lit!

= "Cool and swept past him. A little disappointed, saw her after
the Baron.After this the captain dropped the lofty part of a Mentor, and
mingled with the boys as an equal.

This time the voyage passed without any accident.  Before daybreak
on the following morning they reached Hillsborough, where Mrs.
Watson received them with the utmost joy.  In a few days more the
boys had scattered, and Bart arrived home with the story of Tom's
rescue.