When Calshot Castle was abreast, speed was increased to 30 knots.
There was an easterly breeze blowing against the ebb-tide, with the
result that quite a choppy sea was met with outside Southampton Water.
Like a knife, the sharp cutwater of the _Capella_ cleft the waves,
sending up showers of white spray; but such was her speed that, before
the wind could carry the spindrift on deck, the swift vessel was beyond
the cascade of foam.  She hardly felt the motion of the waves; indeed,
she was so steady that it was possible to place a pail of water on deck
without any of the contents being spilt by the "lift" of the ship.

Under the guidance of Noel Fox, the midshipmen made the round of the
vessel, the Sub explaining everything to them in detail.  Already the
lads had taken a great fancy to the Sub, and Fox reciprocated the
sentiment.  He had a way about him that enabled him to give particulars
of the most intricate mechanism without having to resort to dry,
parrot-like instruction.

By the time he had explained the ingenious devices used to entrap the
German unterseebooten, Ross and Vernon felt inclined to marvel how it
was they found themselves on board the _Capella_, since only sheer good
luck had saved U75 from being doomed during every hour of their brief
and involuntary detention.

"Yes, we can mop up the German submarines quicker than they can turn
them out," said the Sub.  "Of course I don't mean to say that a few of
them won't get a smack at some of our ships for some time to come; but
all the same we are giving them beans.  From a strictly professional
point of view we would be sorry if Old Turps abandoned his 'effectual'
blockade.  Our chances of having a high old game with the
unterseebooten would be considerably reduced."

"There are still some in the English Channel," hazarded Vernon.

"Yes, a few; but have you noticed how those fellows fight shy of Dover?
They shun it like the plague.  It's horribly unhealthy for them.  D'ye
know why?  Perhaps you wouldn't have paid much attention to it, but
some months ago the Admiralty issued a 'Notice to Mariners', stating
that the Straits of Dover were heavily mined, and that all shipping was
to pass through the Downs within three miles of the Kentish coast.

"So it's fairly safe to assume that the few stray unterseebooten that
are still lurking in the Channel have made the passage round the north
coast of Scotland.  It's only a matter of time before we bag the lot, I
fancy."

"And our submarines?" enquired Ross.

"Have fewer opportunities since the Hun battleships and cruisers have
such a decided inclination to remain in harbour," rejoined Fox.  "When
there's a chance, you can bet your bottom dollar that our fellows seize
it.  Quite recently one of our submarines found herself alone and
disabled in the Bight of Heligoland.  Undismayed, her
lieutenant-commander signalled to a passing German trawler, covered her
with his guns, and made the Hun tow the crippled submarine into British
waters.  Then he released his involuntary benefactor, but before so
doing can you guess what he did?"

"No," replied both lads.

"Made the Huns line up on deck and sing the 'Hymn of Hate'.  You can
imagine the surprise of the trawler's men, who, judging by the
treatment meted out to our fishermen by the German submarines, expected
nothing less than imprisonment and the loss of their boat.  But it's
close on one bell," remarked Fox at length.  "You're messing with the
skipper to-day, I believe.  He's quite a decent sort when you know him
properly, but it takes a bit of doing."

A seaman strode up to the bell and gave it a sharp stroke.  Just then a
messenger hurried from the diminutive "wireless" room abaft the
chart-house and, leaping down the ladder at a single bound, knocked at
the door of the Captain's cabin.

"Stow those things away, Sparkes," exclaimed Captain Syllenger.  "Lunch
will have to wait."

He dashed out of his cabin.  On the way to the bridge he passed Fox and
the two midshipmen.

"You'll have to tighten your belts, my lads," he announced.  "We've
just had a message through.  A strafed unterseeboot has been spotted
trying to get into Spithead.  If we don't nab her within half an hour,
I'll eat my hat!"


CHAPTER XVII

A Double Bag

It was a sea-plane, flying at fifteen hundred feet above the Warner and
The Nab Lightships, that had detected an elongated shadow creeping
stealthily over the shingly bottom close to the Dean Tail Buoy.  The
shadow was that of a German unterseeboot, since none of the British
submarines were known to be in the eastern approaches to Spithead.
Evidently she had gone out of her course, for instead of being in the
main channel she was well to the north of it.  More than likely the
strong east-going tide, which hereabout surges at such a rate that it
causes the shingle 30 or 40 feet beneath the surface to emit a deep
rumble, had taken the unterseeboot in its grip.

Promptly the sea-plane wirelessed the news, and quickly a "general
call" was sent to the patrol vessels in the vicinity.  The _Capella_
was one of the craft that picked up the welcome order.

She was now only seven sea miles distant from the Dean Tail Buoy.
Within ten minutes of the receipt of the wireless she was on the
spot--one of the very first of a regular hornet flotilla bent upon
adding yet another of Von Tirpitz's pets to the "bag".

For the next quarter of an hour it looked as if a novel kind of marine
waltz was in progress.  Nearly a score of swift vessels were executing
fantastic movements at full speed, circling and interchanging positions
until it seemed as if collisions were impossible to avoid.

Their object was to thoroughly bewilder the already doomed U-boat, for,
if possible, her capture in a practically intact condition was desired.
In very deep water, salvage of a sunken submarine was out of the
question; here, in a comparatively shallow depth, and close to an
important naval base, to which the prize could be taken with little
trouble, the opportunity for capture rather than instant destruction
was too good to be missed.

Suddenly a cloud of white smoke shot up from the sea.  Its appearance
was greeted by hearty cheers from the patrol vessels.  It was a signal
that the U-boat, in her attempt to find deep water, had floundered
blindly into the trap.  Over and over again the hunters passed, towing
non-explosive grapnels, until it was certain that the prey was helpless
in their toils.

Then, in obedience to an order from the senior officer, the swift
vessels withdrew for nearly three cables' length from the spot where
the boat lay.  Two slow but powerfully engined trawlers approached at a
cable's length abreast, towing the bight of a massive steel hawser
between.  Doing little more than drift with the tide they crept past
the submerged U-boat, one on either side of the mark-buoy that
indicated her position.

Presently the strain on the hawser increased.  It was only by making
full use of the twin-screws that the trawlers were able to prevent
themselves from swinging together.  The steel rope stretched until it
resembled two metal bars which bore silent testimony to the strain.

Just then the two vessels shot ahead.  Although the hawser was still
intact, it no longer took any strain.  But its work was done.  The
bight, engaging the conning-tower of the unterseeboot, had turned the
submarine on its side.  In the space of a few seconds the deadly fumes
from the capsized batteries had almost painlessly accounted for the
crew of the U-boat, who themselves had neither pity nor consideration
for the hapless victims, men, women, and children, massacred against
all dictates of humanity and convention of civilized warfare.

"A bit of work for the dockyard lighters to-morrow," commented
Sub-lieutenant Barry, as the _Capella_ parted company to resume her run
up-Channel.  "They'll raise the U-boat, and take her into dry dock,
before the sulphuric acid has had time to do much damage to her
mechanism."

"I shouldn't be surprised if there were another U-boat knocking
around," remarked Vernon.  "From our limited experience we know that
they work either in pairs or threes."

"Then the worse for them," rejoined Barry.  "It would be a great wheeze
to bag two of them in one day.  Desperate diseases need desperate
remedies, you know."

Therein the Sub voiced the unanimous opinion of the British Navy.  At
the commencement of the war, the torpedoing of several battleships and
cruisers by German submarines aroused no enmity within the hearts of
the British tars.  They realized that a warship is "fair sport" to the
submarines of the opposing side.  To run the risk of being blown up was
one of the excitements to undergo in the course of duty.  But when it
came to torpedoing helpless merchantmen, and jeering at the
death-struggles of the unfortunate crews, Jack Tar began to regard the
unterseebooten in the light of pirates and murderers.  The wanton
destruction of the _Lusitania_, accompanied by the appalling death-roll
of non-combatants, women and children, literally sounded the
death-knell of the crews of von Tirpitz's jolly-Roger-flying
submarines.  In their methods of "frightfulness" they had overreached
themselves.  They had sown a wind: they were now reaping a whirlwind
with a vengeance.

And now the great silent Navy was paying back von Tirpitz in almost,
but not quite, his own coin.  While the much-advertised blockade of
Great Britain was petering out, British submarines were playing havoc
with German shipping in the Baltic--a sea which the Teutons regarded as
being almost their very own.  Yet what a difference marked the methods
adopted by the humane commanders of our submarines when dealing with
German mercantile shipping.  A punctilious regard for the safety of the
crews of overhauled merchantmen won admiration even from the seamen of
the destroyed vessels.  Humiliation and reproach seemed to haunt the
white-bearded dotard, whose hands had sought in vain to wrest the
trident from Britannia's virile grasp.

At about five in the afternoon the _Capella_ arrived at her station off
Beachy Head, relieving her sister ship the _Markab_, that, with three
other motor-driven craft, had been engaged in a vigorous, but for the
most part uneventful, patrol.

Day and night for a fortnight at a stretch, unless anything unforeseen
took place, the _Capella_ was to cruise up and down, keeping a smart
look-out for any sign of an object resembling a hostile periscope.  In
order to economize her fuel supply her speed was reduced to 10 knots.
It was then that her bad qualities showed themselves.  With her shallow
draught and high freeboard she rolled like a barrel, since speed was
essential to impart steadiness.  The motion was certainly
disconcerting, although it did not imply that the _Capella_ was
unseaworthy.

"'Fraid our chances of bagging another U-boat to-day are off," remarked
Barry to Ross.

It was within half an hour of sunset.  The chums had been temporarily
separated.  It was Vernon's "watch below".  The senior Sub and young
Trefusis were on the bridge.  In spite of the still-prevailing east
wind it was a grand evening.  Three miles away, broad on the starboard
beam, the chalk cliffs known as the Seven Sisters were beginning to be
tinted by the crimson hues of the western sky.  To seaward, three large
vessels were in sight.  One, a liner bound down-Channel, was pelting
along at such a pace with the wind that the smoke from her funnels was
rising almost perpendicularly.  Forging ahead in the opposite direction
were two big tramps, the smoke from their funnels, beaten down by the
strong breeze, trailing across the surface of the water for a couple of
miles in their wake.

"An object lesson," remarked Barry.  "The arteries of the Empire.  Hang
it all!  The blockade reminds me of a pigmy treacherously stealing up
behind a giant and trying to cut his jugular vein.  Instead, he merely
scratched a comparatively unimportant capillary, and feels mighty sorry
for himself when the giant turns and scruffs him by the neck."

Leaning over the bridge-rails, the Sub startled his companion by
bellowing in a voice loud enough to be heard a mile away:

"On look-outs!  Stand by bow and stern lights!"

The _Capella_ was making preparations for the night.  Unlike the armed
merchantmen that are compelled to scour the North Sea, summer and
winter alike, without showing the faintest glimmer of a lamp, the
_Capella_ observed the rules and regulations for preventing collision
at sea.  Her port, starboard, and bow lamps were lighted by
electricity, but, in order to guard against possible break-down of
current, oil lamps had also to be trimmed and lighted, ready, should
occasion serve, to take their places.

It was part of Ross's duty to report to the officer of the watch that
these lamps were in order, and also, at regular intervals, that the
navigation lights were burning brightly.

Presently the Sub prepared to take a cross-bearing.  He was fairly
certain that the _Capella_ had reached the westernmost limit of her
patrol-ground.  From that point she was to proceed due south for 10 sea
miles, and then due east for 20 miles until she fell in with her
"opposite number".

While Barry was thus engaged, Ross noticed a sail about 2 miles distant
on the starboard quarter.

"By Jove!" he muttered as he brought his glass to bear upon the
stranger.  "That's a funny rig."

The craft was a "two-sticker".  She was square-rigged on the foremast,
carrying fore-topsail and fore-course.  No jibs were set; neither, as
far as he could see, was any sail set on the mainmast.  The vessel's
sides were painted green with a broad red band.

Even as he kept the craft under observation she starboarded her helm,
shaping a course that would converge upon that of the rearmost of the
two tramps.  By so doing she exposed a considerable portion of her
broadside.

Ross gave an exclamation of astonishment.  Above the green sides
appeared what was undoubtedly the conning-tower and housed periscope of
a submarine.  "Submarine on the starboard quarter, sir!" he reported.

"What!" exclaimed Barry, levelling his telescope.  "By Jove, yes!  What
luck!"

The unterseeboot had, of course, noticed the _Capella_, and had
mistaken her for a trawler.  She realized that she ran a risk in case
the latter might be armed, but, trusting to her disguise, she hoped to
get within torpedo range of the tramp--a vessel of over 3000 tons--sink
her, and make her escape in the confusion that was bound to ensue.  On
the other hand, her Kapitan had good reasons for thinking that the
supposed trawler was not one of the armed patrol, since they usually
worked in company.  By rigging canvas bulwarks and setting sail upon
dummy masts, he was able to approach with little fear of detection.

"Action!"

Quickly the _Capella's_ crew were at their stations.  The quick-firers
were loaded, and their screens lowered so as not to impede their arc of
fire.  Until these preparations were complete the vessel still held on
her course.

Then Captain Syllenger, who had come on deck, telegraphed for full
speed ahead.  Like a racehorse the _Capella_ leapt forward.

A double, converging line of white foam marked the track of a torpedo
from the doomed U-boat.  By a slight alteration of helm the _Capella_
avoided it.  The action was hardly necessary: it was merely a matter of
precaution, since the _Capella's_ peculiarities of construction made
her practically immune from torpedo attack.

Captain Syllenger had no intention of ramming his opponent.  Ramming
with a lightly built vessel, such as the _Capella_, would only be
employed as a last resource.

At an almost point-blank range of 400 yards both bow guns were fired
simultaneously.  There was no need for another shot.  One of the
projectiles, hitting the U-boat at the base of the conning-tower, tore
a jagged hole a couple of feet in diameter.  The other shell hit her
about 10 feet from the bows, and, with an erratic peculiarity that such
missiles have after the first impact, was deflected downward, expending
the full force of its explosive charge in the submarine's bow
torpedo-room.

In a moment the luckless U-boat was done for.  A huge column of smoke
marked the spot where she had disappeared like a stone, while flying
pieces of metal hurtled far and wide through the air.  Several of the
fragments clattered upon the _Capella's_ deck as she swung round to
avoid any possibility of fouling debris.  Of the crew not a man was to
be seen.  Those who had not been killed by the shell-fire had been
wiped out by the explosion of their own torpedoes.

"We've pulled off a double event to-day, after all," remarked
Sub-lieutenant Fox as he disappeared down the companion-ladder to
resume his interrupted "watch below".  "Barry has got his wish."


CHAPTER XVIII

The Smoke-signals

For the next ten days nothing occurred beyond the ordinary routine.
Even Ross and Vernon, to whom everything was at first a novelty, began
to feel the irksomeness of the constant and vigilant patrol.  No
hostile submarines made their appearance; there were not even any
reports, true or otherwise, that they had been sighted.  It was the
same all along the English Channel--"nothin' doing".  It seemed as if
the unterseebooten had finally given up these waters as a "bad egg".

Yet it would be most injudicious for the naval authorities to relax
their watchfulness.  Areas of strategic importance must still be
closely guarded, since it was just possible that the wily Teuton would
refrain from submarine warfare in the Channel until the patrol-boats'
crews were lulled into a sense of false optimism.

The only break in the monotony was the occasional and welcome
appearance of a motor-boat from Shoreham, bringing off fresh supplies,
newspapers and letters for the patrol vessels.

Amongst Ross's correspondence was a letter from his father.  Admiral
Trefusis gave no indication of what he was doing, merely a brief
statement that he was still "somewhere in the North Sea".  He
congratulated his son upon his escape, and mentioned that he had heard
from the captain of H.M.S. _Tremendous_ with reference to his son's
action in warning the battleship.  But although the Admiral did not
express himself very enthusiastically on paper, he was as pleased as
only a proud father can be at his boy's display of gallantry and
resource.  "Under the circumstances," he wrote, "I think you did right
in temporarily abandoning your preparation for Sandhurst.  No doubt you
will acquit yourself in your present position as a Trefusis should do.
I was certainly surprised to hear about that fellow Ramblethorne.  He
always appeared to be a really decent man.  It only shows how careful
one has to be when dealing with a highly organized enemy."

Amongst Vernon's batch of correspondence was a letter from
Detective-inspector Hawke.  It was couched in semi-official language, a
survival of days long ago when the Inspector was a budding constable
and had to submit countless written reports to his superiors.

There was, he wrote, no definite news concerning Ramblethorne,
otherwise von Hauptwald.  The local police had taken up the case, and,
assisted by the military, were still scouring the country.  As usual,
there were inaccurate and misleading reports from various parts of the
country.  It was generally accepted that the spy was being hidden by
some of his compatriots who, by indulgence of the British Government,
were still at large in the country, or else that he had succeeded in
getting away on board a neutral ship.

The inquest on von Ruhle had taken place, with the anticipated result,
a verdict of _felo de se_ being returned by the jury.  No evidence had
been submitted as to the dead man's real occupation.  Under the name of
Cornelius Vanderhuit his body was handed over to the authorities for
interment.

But the case did not end there.  It remained for the competent
Authorities to decide the steps to be taken with reference to the
papers that had been found in von Ruhle's possession.

"I am keeping von Ruhle's 'malacca' as a memento," concluded Hawke.
"It may help me to discriminate between it and a portable metal tripod,
and save me from being placed under arrest by the military.
Fortunately, upon the last occasion, I did not meet with my Waterloo."

"The old chap feels a bit sore about it, I can see," remarked Ross.
"He's written a good deal more than he evidently intended.  However, he
looks like 'making good' this time."

"It's a pity Ramblethorne slipped through the detectives' fingers,"
said Vernon, as he prepared to go on deck.  "That fellow's bound to
cause trouble until he's laid by the heels."

It was Noel Fox's "trick".  The Sub was standing on the bridge with his
eye glued to his telescope.  A mile or so inland, on the summit of the
South Downs where they approach Beachy Head, three columns of smoke
were rising in the still air.  There was nothing extraordinary in that.
It might be a farmer burning rubbish on his fields; but what attracted
the Sub's attention was the remarkable and systematic changes in the
density of the smoke.  At one moment the two outside pillars were
heavy, the centre one being little more than a thin haze; at another
the conditions would be reversed.

Fox decided to take action.  Rapidly the _Capella_ closed with the
shore, until she was within signalling distance of a coast-guard
station.

The station in question was not manned by coast-guards.  Not considered
important, its complement was depleted at the outbreak of hostilities,
most of the men joining the large armoured cruisers.  A chief officer
and a boatman alone remained.  These were at a later period augmented
by a party of Sea Scouts.

As soon as the _Capella_ had "made her number", a signaller took up his
position on the roof of the chart-house.

"Fires burning one mile inland to north-west of coast-guard station,"
he semaphored.  "Suspect smoke-signals.  Investigate and report."

Keeping his telescope bearing on shore, Vernon watched the result of
the signal.  Promptly half a dozen Scouts, mounted on bicycles, set off
to the position indicated.  Their progress was hidden by an intervening
clump of trees, but in less than a quarter of an hour they returned.
By this time the smoke had disappeared.  One of their number worked the
semaphore attached to the station.

"Fires made with damp straw.  Found old blankets apparently used to
stifle smoke.  Saw large car stationary; made towards Lewes on
approach; number known; have informed police."

"Smart youngsters!" exclaimed Captain Syllenger.  "They've helped to
nip some little plan in the bud.  We'll have to be jolly careful for
the next few days, I expect.  Did you make a note of the fog-signals,
Mr. Fox?"

"I did, sir," replied the Sub, producing a leaf of a notebook covered
with an unintelligible number of lines.  "Each of these strokes
represents a column of smoke according to its position."

"I can make nothing of it," remarked Syllenger.  "At any rate I'll send
your result to the Admiralty with the utmost dispatch.  Take her in,
Mr. Fox, and bring up where you find the two-fathom mark."

The _Capella_ headed nearer towards the shore, a leads-man sounding
until the required depth was found.  One of the boats was lowered,
manned, and rowed to the coast-guard station, Sub-lieutenant Barry
being in charge, with Ross as his immediate subordinate.

"I want this to be forwarded to the Admiralty with the least possible
delay," he announced, addressing the chief officer.  "How long do you
think it will take to get through?"

"Too late for the eleven something train from Brighton, sir," was the
reply.  "There's a gentleman in the village who has a big car.  He's a
member of the Volunteer Training Corps.  No doubt he'll take it as far
as Lewes.  Why, sir, here's the gent himself!  Mr. Hyde's his name."

The newcomer was a sparely built man of below medium height.  He looked
about thirty years of age.  In reality he was nearly fifty.  Having
vainly attempted to obtain a commission in the R.N.R. and the Army, he
had joined the V.T.C. in the hope that, perhaps, some day his services
might be utilized in a very practical form.  Now his chance was at hand.

He had strolled down to the beach on noticing a boat putting off from
the patrol vessel.

"Lewes?  Certainly," he replied in answer to Barry's question.  "I
doubt whether you'll save much.  Why not let me take the message right
to the Admiralty?  I'd like to do it, 'pon my word I would."

The Sub hesitated.  Perhaps the stranger might be all right; but he
might be all wrong.  One had to be very careful in these times.  Yet
the offer was a tempting one.  If possible, it was most desirable to be
able to decipher the transcription of these mysterious columns of smoke.

"I say, Trefusis," he said, "you've had a fairly long time afloat; what
do you say to a run up to town?  I'm sure this gentleman would make no
objection to giving you a seat in his car."

"With the greatest pleasure," declared Mr. Hyde.

"Thanks!" rejoined Barry.  "Of course the honour of delivering the
letter will be yours, sir.  Mr. Trefusis accompanies you merely as a
passenger.  We'll stand by to pick you up, Trefusis.  I'll make it all
right with the skipper."

The Sub accompanied Mr. Hyde and the midshipman to the garage, which
was about four minutes' walk from the coast-guard station.  While the
man was getting out the car (he was his own chauffeur), Barry seized
the opportunity of telling Ross to be on his guard, in case anything
suspicious occurred.

With a terrific bound the powerful car started on its sixty-mile
journey.  Between the sea and Lewes the needle of the speed-indicator
never fell below 40 miles an hour, until at times the car was running
at 60.  Village after village was passed at almost break-neck speed.
In vain, sleepy rural constables sought to hold up the reckless driver.
Discretion was the better part of valour, so they stood aside and
attempted to note the number on the identification plate of the car.
Again in vain.  All they could see and swallow was a cloud of white,
chalky dust that hung thickly on the sultry air long after the car was
out of sight and hearing.

The hills around East Grinstead it surmounted at 40 miles an hour,
dashing down the inclines at the speed of an express train, and
swerving time after time to avoid lumbering farm wagons.

At Croydon Mr. Hyde wisely slowed down.  He had covered 49 miles in
exactly fifty-five minutes, but twenty-eight minutes later the car drew
up under the Admiralty Arch.

"Room 445 is the one I want," he explained to Ross.  "I know my way
about here, you know.  I've several relations at the Admiralty.  Come
along: the car won't hurt where she is."

"Your pass, sir," demanded a Metropolitan policeman who, with a naval
pensioned petty officer, was stationed at the door.

"Haven't one," replied Mr. Hyde.  "Urgent business--see?" and he
produced the envelope, bearing the words "On His Majesty's Service", in
which was enclosed Captain Syllenger's communication.

The policeman was the essence of imperturbable dignity.

"No use, sir; you must have a pass.  They are obtainable across the
road there."

"It will mean at least twenty minutes' delay," muttered the motorist
savagely, as he turned away.  "Come on, Mr. Trefusis, let's try our
luck across the way."

As Ross descended the short flight of stone steps leading from the
lobby to the street, he nearly cannoned into a couple of naval officers
who were about to enter the building.  Suddenly remembering that he was
in uniform, the midshipman brought his right hand smartly to the peak
of his cap.  As he did so, he recognized that one of the naval men was
his father.

The recognition was mutual.

"Hullo, pater!"

"Hullo, Ross!  What brings you here?  Duty, eh?  It's the same in my
case.  Sorry I can't have you to lunch, but must catch the first train
north.  This is the first time I've come up to town since the war
started.  In any case I'm not sorry that I am not stopping the night
here.  Judging by reports, it's a jolly sight too dangerous for me.
Don't fancy being run over by a taxi in a dark main thoroughfare.  Give
me the North Sea any day.  Well, I must be moving.  Can't keep My Lords
waiting, you know.  Good-bye, Ross!"

It was Admiral Paul Trefusis' way.  Whenever he had any business on
hand that kept him from his ship, he invariably spoke in short, jerky
sentences.  Ross knew his parent's little mannerism.

"One moment, pater," he exclaimed.  "We're in an awful hurry too----"

"Don't look like it," growled the Admiral good-naturedly.  "You were
ambling out like an old shellback.  Always execute orders at the
double: that's my advice to budding midshipmen.  Well, what is it?"

As briefly as possible, Ross told his parent of the rebuff Mr. Hyde and
he had received, and of the matter that brought them at 50 miles an
hour from a remote Sussex coast-guard station.

Making a hurried excuse to his companion, the Admiral skipped up the
steps into the lobby, Ross and his fellow-traveller following closely.

The policeman naturally asked for no pass from a Flag officer in
uniform, but he was on the point of stopping his companions when the
messenger recognized the Admiral as his former captain.  His apologies
surprised even the stolid policeman.

"Don't apologize for doing your duty, my man," remarked Admiral
Trefusis.  "Hope you're fit.  Must have a yarn with you when I've more
time.  Come along, Ross."

Having seen Mr. Hyde and Ross safely to the outside of the door of Room
445, the Admiral abruptly took his departure.

In reply to a knock the door was opened by a very tired-looking clerk,
who was bravely bearing up under the strain of having to work ninety
hours a week, including Sundays.  Having explained his business, Mr.
Hyde was shown into the presence of an official whose talent was little
short of miraculous.

A dozen precise and pointed questions put him in full possession of all
the facts bearing upon the document that he required.  He touched an
electric bell.  An assistant hurried to his desk.

"Bring me the papers on the von Ruhle case," he ordered in an undertone.

In less than half an hour the transcription was completed, although the
_Capella's_ officer of the watch had not taken down the actual
commencement of the smoke-signal.  Then, having "pressed" the paper in
order to obtain a duplicate copy, the official placed it in an
envelope, which he secured with an imposing wax seal.

"No mistake about it, the war has bucked the civilian staff at the
Admiralty," observed Mr. Hyde to Ross as they gained the street.  "I
can remember a time when all you had to do was to mention someone's
name, and you had practically a free entry.  Your particular pal could
always contrive to have an hour's yarn with you, and perhaps an
interval for refreshment.  They know what working at high pressure
means now."

Hyde was more cautious on the return journey.  He was well within the
limit that he had set himself.  An hour and forty minutes later, the
car drew up outside the coast-guard station.

"Captain Syllenger presents his compliments, Mr. Hyde, and requests
your company on board," said Sub-lieutenant Barry when the _Capella's_
boat arrived to take off the midshipman.  "Ton my word, you haven't
been long.  We didn't expect you back before six o'clock."

Having received his guest, Captain Syllenger led the way to his cabin,
Barry and Ross being included in the party.  The skipper's face glowed
with satisfaction when he had opened the envelope, for the signal as
decoded was as follows:

"(words missing) closely patrolled.  Unable to provide stores here.
Will attempt removal of (word missing) from Station 123 on Friday
night.  Will signal from Station 125 at 1 a.m. on Saturday if possible.
Transports leaving by Needles Channel at daybreak."

Following this was an explanatory note.

"Station 123 is stated to be in Keyhaven Marshes.  Station 125 one mile
west of white house at Milford-on-Sea."

"Humph!" ejaculated Captain Syllenger.  "It looks as if there's trouble
in store for some gentlemen of marked Teutonic sympathies.  I only hope
we'll have a chance of being off Station 125."


CHAPTER XIX

That Friday Night

Three hours later H.M.S. _Capella_ received the following order by
wireless:--

"Await relief by _Taurus_, then proceed to Rendezvous Y, Portsmouth
Command.  _Capella_ to be temporarily attached to Western Inner Patrol."

The meaning of the message was plain to all on board.  The _Capella_
was to proceed to Rendezvous Y, which according to Admiralty
instructions was off Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, where a flotilla of small
craft was patrolling day and night, as a precautionary measure in the
unlikely event of any hostile craft forcing the formidable defences of
the western entrance to the Solent.

At eight on the following morning the _Taurus_ arrived on the station,
and with the least possible delay the _Capella_ made for the west'ard.

Only one incident marked the run.  A few miles from the Royal Sovereign
Lightship, the _Capella_ sighted a number of submarines running on the
surface.  They were on Particular Service, and although opportunities
for torpedoing a hostile surface craft were very remote, the submarines
were constantly rendering yeoman service by keeping the approaches to
the German North Sea ports under close observation.  On rare occasions,
when a German light-cruiser or destroyer did venture beyond the
protection of the mine-fields and guns of the land-batteries, British
submarines were not backward in seizing their chance of letting loose
"tinfish" against their quarry.

Having arrived off Yarmouth, Captain Syllenger reported himself to the
senior officer.  He came back beaming.  The _Capella_ was to take part
in combined sea and land operations for the capture of the German
agents, who were supplying petrol to one of the submarines, and also
for the capture of the U-boat.

The eventful Friday evening came at last.  The _Capella_, in company
with four first-class torpedo-boats, was to be ready at a signal from
Hurst to make a dash through the North Channel.  A fleet of armed
trawlers from the Poole base was to operate farther out to sea, in
order to cut off the U-boat's retreat should she be lucky enough to
escape the attentions of the _Capella_ and her consorts.

At ten o'clock the east-going tidal stream began to set through the
Needles Channel.  Half an hour later it ran with a velocity exceeding
five knots.  The _Capella_, moving at a rate equal to that of the tide,
kept about half a mile from the Isle of Wight shore, with the white,
occulting light of the Needles just visible to the north of Cliff End
Fort.

