Bridgie stared aghast.  Her brain was still reeling from the shock of
hearing Pixie refer to the subject of lovers at all, and here was yet
another problem looming ahead.  With a loving grasp of her sister's
character, she realised that the protestations to which she had just
listened embodied a real danger.  Pixie had always been "the
soft-heartedest creature," who had never from her earliest years been
known to refuse a plea for help.  It would only be in keeping with her
character if she accepted a suitor out of pure politeness and
unwillingness to hurt his feelings.  Bridgie was a happy wife, and for
that very reason was determined that if care and guidance, if authority,
and persuasion, and precept, and a judicious amount of influence could
do it, Pixie should never be married, unless it were to the right man.
She therefore adopted her elderly attitude once more, and said firmly--

"It's very wicked and misguided even to talk in such a way.  When the
time comes that a man asks you to marry him--if it ever comes--it will
be your first and foremost duty to examine your own heart and see if you
love him enough to live with him all his life, whether he is ill or
well, or rich or poor, or happy or sad.  You will have to decide whether
you would be happier with him in trouble or free by yourself, and you'd
have to remember that it's not always too easy managing a house, and--
and walking about half the night with a teething baby, and darning
socks, when you want to go out, and wearing the same dress three years
running, even if you love the man you've married.  Of course, some girls
marry rich husbands--like Esmeralda; but that's rare.  Far more young
couples begin as we did, with having to be careful about every shilling;
and that, my dear, is _not_ agreeable!  You need to be _very_ fond of a
man to make it worth while to go on short commons all your life.  You
need to think things over very carefully, before you accept an offer of
marriage."

Pixie sat listening, her head cocked to one side, with the air of a
bright, intelligent bird.  When Bridgie had finished speaking she sighed
and knitted her brows, and stared thoughtfully into the fire.  It was
obvious that she was pondering over what had been said, and did not find
herself altogether in agreement with the rules laid down.

"You mean," she said slowly, "that I should have to think altogether of
_myself_ and what would suit _Me_ and make _me_ happy?  That's strange,
now; that's very strange!  To bring a girl up all her life to believe
it's her duty in every small thing that comes along to put herself last
and her family in front, and then when she's a grown-up woman, and a man
comes along who believes, poor thing! that she could help him and make
him happy, _then_ just at that moment you tell her to be selfish and
think only of herself. ...  'Tis not that way I'll conduct my love
affairs!" cried Pixie O'Shaughnessy.  Her eyes met Bridgie's, and
flashed defiance.  "When I meet a man who needs me I'll find my own
happiness in helping _him_!"

"Bless you, darling!" said Bridgie softly.  "I am quite sure you will.
...  It's a very, very serious time for a woman when the question of
marriage comes into her life.  You can't treat it _too_ seriously.  I
have not thought of it so far in connection with you, but now that I do
I'll pray about it, Pixie!  I'll pray for you, that you may be guided to
a right choice.  You'll pray that for yourself, won't you, dear?"

"I will," said Pixie quietly.  "I do.  And for him--the man I may marry.
I've prayed for him quite a long time."

"The ... the _man_!"  Bridgie was so surprised as to appear almost
shocked.  "My dear, you don't know him!"

"But he is alive, isn't he?  He must be, if I'm going to marry him.
Alive, and grown-up, and living, perhaps, not so far away.  Perhaps he's
an orphan, Bridgie; or if he has a home, perhaps he's had to leave it
and live in a strange town. ...  Perhaps he's in lodgings, going home
every night to sit alone in a room.  Perhaps he's trying to be good, and
finding it very hard.  Perhaps there's no one in all the world to pray
for him but just me.  _Bridgie_!  If I'm going to love him how can I
_not_ pray?"

Mrs Victor rose hurriedly from her seat, and busied herself with the
arrangement of the curtains.  They were heavy velvet curtains, which at
night-time drew round the whole of the large bay window which formed the
end of the pretty, cosy room.  Bridgie took especial pleasure in the
effect of a great brass vase which, on its oaken pedestal, stood sharply
outlined against the rich, dark folds.  She moved its position now,
moved it back into its original place, and touched the leaves of the
chrysanthemum which stood therein with a caressing hand.  Six years'
residence in a town had not sufficed to teach the one-time mistress of
Knock Castle to be economical when purchasing flowers.  "I can't live
without them.  It's not my fault if they are dear!" she would protest to
her own conscience at the sight of the florist's bill.

And in truth, who could expect a girl to be content with a few scant
blossoms when she had lived all her early age in the midst of prodigal
plenty!  In spring the fields had been white with snowdrops.  Sylvia
sent over small packing-cases every February, filled with hundreds and
hundreds of little tight bunches of the spotless white flowers, and
almost every woman of Bridgie's acquaintance rejoiced with her on their
arrival.  After the snowdrops came on the wild daffodils and bluebells
and primroses.  They arrived in cases also, fragrant with the scent
which was really no scent at all, but just the incarnation of everything
fresh, and pure, and rural.  Then came the blossoming of trees.  Bridgie
sighed whenever she thought of blossom, for that was one thing which
would _not_ pack; and the want of greenery too, that was another cross
to the city dweller.  She longed to break off great branches of trees,
and place them in corners of the room; she longed to wander into the
fields and pick handfuls of grasses, and honeysuckle, and prickly briar
sprays.  Who could blame her for taking advantage of what compensation
lay within reach?

This afternoon, however, the contemplation of the tawny chrysanthemums
displayed in the brass vase failed to inspire the usual joy.  Bridgie's
eyes were bright indeed as she turned back into the room, but it was the
sort of brightness which betokens tears repressed.  She laid her hand on
the little sister's shoulders, and spoke in the deepest tone of her
tender Irish voice--

"What has been happening to you, my Pixie, all this time when I've been
treating you as a child?  Have you been growing up quietly into a little
woman?"

Pixie smiled up into her face--a bright, unclouded smile.

"Faith," she said, radiantly, "I believe.  I have!"


CHAPTER THREE.

NEARLY TWENTY-ONE!

Bridgie rang the bell to have the tea-things removed and a message sent
to the nursery that the children might descend without further delay.
It was still a few minutes before the orthodox hour, but the
conversation had reached a point when a distraction would be welcome,
and Jack and Patsie were invariably prancing with impatience from the
moment when the smell of hot potato cakes ascended from below.

They came with a rush, pattering down the staircase with a speed which
made Bridgie gasp and groan, and bursting open the door entered the room
at the double.  Jack was five, and wore a blue tunic with an exceedingly
long-waisted belt, beneath which could be discerned the hems of
abbreviated knickers.  Patricia was three, and wore a limp white frock
reaching to the tips of little red shoes.  She had long brown locks, and
eyes of the true O'Shaughnessy grey, and was proudly supposed to
resemble her beautiful aunt Joan.  Jack was fair, with linty locks and a
jolly brown face.  His mouth might have been smaller and still attained
a fair average in size, but for the time being his pretty baby teeth
filled the cavern so satisfactorily, that no one could complain.

Both children made straight for their mother, smothered her with
"Bunnie" hugs, and then from the shelter of her arms cast quick,
questioning glances across the fireplace.  There was in their glance a
keenness, a curiosity, almost amounting to _awe_, which would at once
have arrested the attention of an onlooker.  It was not in the least the
smiling glance of recognition which is accorded to a member of the
household on meeting again after one of the short separations of the
day; it resembled far more the half-nervous, half-pleasurable shrinking
from an introduction to a stranger, about whom was wrapped a cloak of
deepest mystery.  As for Pixie herself she sat bolt upright in her seat,
staring fixedly into space, and apparently unconscious of the children's
presence.

Presently Jack took a tentative step forward, and Patsie followed in his
wake.  Half a yard from Pixie's chair they stopped short with eager,
craning faces, with bodies braced in readiness for a flying retreat.

"Pixie!"

No answer.  Still the rigid, immovable figure.  Still the fixed and
staring eye.

"P-ixie!"

The eyes rolled; a deep, hollow voice boomed forth--

"I'm _not_ Pixie!"

The expected had happened.  They had known it was coming; would have
been bitterly disappointed if it had failed, nevertheless they writhed
and capered as though overcome with amazement.

"P-ixie, Pixie, Who--Are--You--Now?"

"I'm a wild buffalo of the plains!" answered Pixie unexpectedly, and as
a wild buffalo she comported herself for the next half-hour, ambling on
hands and knees round the room, while the children wreathed her neck
with impromptu garlands made of wools from their mother's work-basket,
and made votive offerings of sofa cushions, footstools, and india-rubber
toys.

In the midst of the uproar Bridgie jumped from her seat and flew to the
door, her ears sharp as ever to hear the click of her husband's
latch-key.  The greeting in the narrow hall was delightfully lover-like
for a married couple of six years' standing, and they entered the
drawing-room arm-in-arm, smiling with a contentment charming to witness.
Captain Victor was satisfied that no one in the world possessed such an
altogether delightful specimen of womanhood as his "bride."  She was so
sweet, so good, so unselfish, and in addition to these sterling
qualities, she was so cheerful, so spontaneous, so unexpected, that it
was impossible for life to grow dull and monotonous while she was at the
head of the household.

He acknowledged tenderly, and with a shrug of the shoulders to express
resignation, that she _might_ have been a cleverer housekeeper and just
a thought more economical in expenditure! but considering her
happy-go-lucky upbringing under the most thriftless of fathers, the
darling really deserved more praise for what she accomplished than blame
for what was left undone.

Bridgie, on the contrary, considered that Dick worried his head
ridiculously about ways and means.  Not for the world and all that it
contained would she have accused him of being _mean_: she merely
shrugged _her_ shoulders and reminded herself that he was English, poor
thing!  English people had a preference for seeing money visibly in
their purses before they spent it, while she herself had been brought up
in a cheerful confidence that it would "turn up" somehow to pay the
bills which had been incurred in faith.

Captain Victor displayed not the faintest astonishment at discovering
his sister-in-law on all fours, nor did he appear overcome to be
introduced to her as a buffalo of the plains.  He smiled at her almost
as tenderly as at his own babies, and said--

"How do, Buff!  Pleased to have met you.  So kind of you to make hay in
my drawing-room," which reproof brought Pixie quickly to her rightful
position.  That was another English characteristic of Dick Victor--he
hated disorder, and was not appreciative of uproar on his return from a
day's work.  Therefore there were picture-books in waiting for his
return, and after a few minutes parleying Pixie cajoled the children
into the dining-room on the plea of a bigger and more convenient table
for the display of their treasures, leaving the husband and wife alone.

Dick lay back in his easy chair, and stretched himself with an
involuntary sigh of relief.  He was devoted to his children, but a quiet
chat with Bridgie was the treat _par excellence_ at this hour of the day
when he was tired and in need of rest.  He stretched out a hand towards
her, and she stroked it with gentle fingers.

"Ye're tired, dear.  Will I get you a cup of tea?  It's not long since
it went out.  If I poured some hot-water in the pot..."

Dick shuddered.

"Thank you, ma'am, _no_!  If I have any, I'll have it fresh, but I don't
care about it to-day.  It's nice just to rest and talk.  Anything
happened to you to-day?"

"There always does.  It's the most exciting thing in the world to be the
mistress of a household," said Bridgie, with relish.  There were few
days when Captain Victor was not treated to a history of accidents and
contretemps on his return home, but unlike most husbands he rather
anticipated than dreaded the recital, for Bridgie so evidently enjoyed
it herself, taking a keen retrospective joy over past discomfitures.

The Victor household had its own share of vicissitudes, more than its
share perhaps, but through them all there survived a spirit of
kindliness and good fellowship which took away more than half the
strain.  Maidservants arriving in moods of suspicion and antagonism
found themselves unconsciously unarmed by the cheery, kindly young
mistress, who administered praise more readily than blame, and so far
from "giving herself airs" treated them with friendly kindliness and
consideration.  On the very rare occasions when a girl was poor-spirited
enough to persist in her antagonism, off she went with a month's money
in her pocket, for the peace of her little home was the greatest
treasure in the world to Bridgie Victor, and no hireling could be
allowed to disturb it.  The service in the little house might not be as
mechanically perfect as in some others, the meals might vary in
excellence, but that was a secondary affair.  "If a bad temper is a
necessary accompaniment of a good cook, then--give me herbs!" she would
cry, shrugging her pretty shoulders, and her husband agreed--with
reservations!

He was a very happy, a very contented man, and every day of his life he
thanked God afresh for his happy home, for his children, for the
greatest treasure of all, sweet Bridget, his wife!

To-day, however, the disclosure had nothing to do with domestic
revolutions, and Bridgie's tone in making her announcement held an
unusual note of tragedy.

"Dick, guess what!  You'll never guess!  Pixie's grown-up!"

For a moment Captain Victor looked as was expected of him--utterly
bewildered.  He lay back in his chair, his handsome face blank and
expressionless, the while he stared steadily at his wife, and Bridgie
stared back, her distress palpably mingled with complacence.  Speak she
would not, until Dick had given expression to his surprise.  She sat
still, therefore, shaking her head in a melancholy mandarin fashion,
which had the undesired effect of restoring his complacence.

"My darling, what unnecessary woe!  It's astounding, I grant you; one
never expected such a feat of Pixie; but the years _will_ pass--there's
no holding them, unfortunately.  How old is she, by the way?  Seventeen,
I suppose--eighteen?"

"_Twenty_--nearly twenty-one!"

Bridgie's tone was tragic, and Dick Victor in his turn looked startled
and grave.  He frowned, bit his lip, and stared thoughtfully across the
room.

"Twenty-one?  Is it possible?  Grown-up, indeed!  Bridgie, we should
have realised this before.  We have been so content with things as they
were that we've been selfishly blind.  If Pixie is over twenty we have
not been treating her fairly.  We have treated her too much as a child.
We ought to have entertained for her, taken her about."

Bridgie sighed, and dropped her eyelids to hide the twinkle in her eyes.
Like most husbands Dick preferred a quiet domestic evening at the end
of a day abroad: like most wives Bridgie would have enjoyed a little
diversion at the end of a day at home.  Sweetly and silently for nearly
half a dozen years she had subdued her preferences to his, feeling it at
once her pleasure and her duty to do so, but now, if duty suddenly
assumed the guise of a gayer, more sociable life, then most cheerfully
would Irish Bridgie accept the change.

"I think, dear," she said primly, "it _would_ be wise.  Esmeralda has
said so many a time, but I took no notice.  I never did take any notice
of Esmeralda, but she was right this time, it appears, and I was wrong.
Imagine it!  Pixie began bemoaning that she was not pretty, and it was
not herself she was grieving for, or you, or _Me_!"--Bridgie's voice
sounded a crescendo of amazement over that last pronoun--"but whom do
you suppose?  You'll never guess!  Her future _lovers_!"

It was just another instance of the provokingness of man that at this
horrible disclosure Dick threw himself back in his chair in a peal of
laughter; he laughed and laughed till the tears stood in his eyes, and
Bridgie, despite herself, joined in the chorus.  The juxtaposition of
Pixie and lovers had proved just as startling to him as to his wife, but
while she had been scandalised, he was frankly, whole-heartedly amused.

"Pixie!" he cried.  "Pixie with a lover!  It would be about as easy to
think of Patsie.  Dear, quaint little Pixie!  Who dares to say she isn't
pretty?  Her funny little nose, her big, generous mouth are a hundred
times more charming than the ordinary pretty face.  I'll tell you what
it is, darling,"--he sobered suddenly;--"Pixie's lover, whoever he may
be, will be an uncommonly lucky fellow!"

Husband and wife sat in silence for some moments after this, hand in
hand, as their custom was in hours of privacy, while the thoughts of
each pursued the same subject--Pixie's opening life and their own duty
towards it.

On both minds was borne the unwilling realisation that their own home
was not the ideal abode to afford the experience of life, the open
intercourse with young people of her own age which it was desirable that
the girl should now enjoy.  As a means of adding to his income Captain
Victor had accepted the position of adjutant to a volunteer corps in a
northern city, and, as comparatively new residents, his list of
acquaintances was but small.

Esmeralda, or to speak more correctly, Joan, the second daughter of the
O'Shaughnessy family, as the wife of the millionaire, Geoffrey Hilliard,
possessed a beautiful country seat not sixty miles from town, while
Jack, the eldest brother, had returned to the home of his fathers, Knock
Castle, in Ireland, on the money which his wife had inherited from her
father, after he had become engaged to her in her character of a
penniless damsel.  Jack was thankful all his life to remember that fact,
though his easy-going Irish nature found nothing to worry about in the
fact that the money was legally his wife's, and not his own.

