[Clark, August 25, 1804]
Augt. 25th Satturday 1804 This morning Capt Lewis & my Self G D. Sjt.
Ouderway Shields J. Fields colter Bratten Cane Labeeche corp Wovington
Frasure & York Set out to Visit this mountain of evel Spirits, we Set
out from the mouth of the White Stone Creek, at 8 oClock, at 4 miles
Cross the Creek in an open plain, at 7 ms. the dog gave out & we Sent
him back to the Creek at 12 oClock we rose the hill Some time before we
got to the hill we obsevd. great numbers of Birds hovering about the
top of this Mound when I got on the top those Birds flw off. I
discovered that they wer Cetechig a kind of flying ant which were in
great numbers abought the top of this hill, those insects lit on our
hats & necks, Several of them bit me verry Shart on the neck, near the
top of this nole I observed three holes which I Supposed to be Prarie
Wolves or Braroes, which are numerous in those Plains. this hill is
about 70 foot high in an emince Prarie or leavel plain from the top I
could not observe any woods except in the Missourie Points and a few
Scattering trees on the three Rivers in view. i e the Soues River
below, the River Jacque above & the one we have crossed from the top of
this Mound we observed Several large gangus of Buffalow & Elk feeding
upwards of 800 in number Capt Lewis being much fatigued and verry
thursty obliged us to go to the neares water which we Could See, which
was the W Stone Creek at right angles from the Course we came out, and
we got water in three miles in the Creek above whre the beaver had
darned it up after a Delay of about one hour & a half we Set out for
our boat, Cross the Creek three times wast deep, passing down an
ellgent bottom of about a mile in width bordered by a ridge of about 50
feet from the top of which it was leavel to the river, we proceeded on
by a Circular Derection to the place we Crossed this Creek going out
where we delayed for the men to rest themselves about 40 minits in a
small grove here we got Great quantities of the best largest grapes I
ever tasted, Some Blue Currents still on the bushes, and two kind of
Plumbs, one the Common wild Plumb the other a large Yellow Plumb
growing on a Small bush, this blumb is about double the Size of the
Common and Deliscously flavoured- Those plains are leavel without much
water and no timber all the timber on the Stone River would not thickly
timber 100 acres of land- we returned to the boat at Sunset, my Servent
nearly exosted with heat thurst and fatigue, he being fat and un
accustomed to walk as fast as I went was the Cause- we Set fire to the
Praries in two Places to let the Sons know we were on the river and as
a Signal for them to Come to the river above, our Party in the Boat &
one Perogue undr. the Comd of Sergt. Pryor answered us by firing a
prarie near them. we proceeded on to the place we Camped last night,
and as it began to rain and verry dark, we Concluded to Stay all night,
our boys prepared us a Supper of jurked meet and two Prarie Larks
(which are about the Size of a Pigeon and Peculier to this country) and
on a Buffalow roabe we Slept verry well in the morning we proceeded on
and joined the boat at 6 miles, they had camped & were Jurking an Elk &
5 Deer which R. Fields & Shannon had brough in. from the Mound to the
Hill S. S. mo. of R. Soues S 70° E. to the opsd. Hills S. 45° E. and to the
woods near River au Jacque is West

[Clark, August 25, 1804]
Augt. 25th Satturday wind S E The Boat under Serjt Pryor after drying
some goods which got wet in the french Perogue & jurking the meet
killed yesterday Set out at 12 oClock and proceeded on Six miles and
Camped on the L. S. passed a Bluff of blue earth at 3 miles and a large
Sand Island in a bend to the S. S. at 5 miles, R Fields brought in 5
Deer, G Shannon an Elk this eveng. rain at 3 oClock Murcky. 86 abo 0,

[Clark, August 25, 1804]
25th August Satturday 1804
a Cloudy morning Capt Lewis & my Self Concluded to go and See the Mound
which was viewed with Such turrow by all the different Nation in this
quarter, we Selected Shields J. Fields, W Bratten, Sergt. Ordway, J
Colter, Can, and Corp Worbington & Frasure, also G. Drewyer and droped
down to the mouth of White Stone River where we left the Perogue with
two men and at 200 yards we assended a riseing ground of about Sixty
feet, from the top of this High land the Countrey is leavel & open as
far as Can be Seen, except Some few rises at a Great Distance, and the
Mound which the Indians Call Mountain of little people or Spirits this
mound appears of a Conic form & is N. 20° W. from the mouth of the Creek,
we left the river at 8 oClock, at 4 miles we Crossed the Creek 23 yards
wide in an extensive Valley and continued on at two miles further our
Dog was So Heeted & fatigued we was obliged Send him back to the Creek,
at 12 oClock we arrived at the hill Capt Lewis much fatigued from heat
the day it being verry hot & he being in a debilitated State from the
Precautions he was obliged to take to provent the affects of the
Cobalt, & Mini. Substance which had like to have poisoned him two days
ago, his want of water, and Several of the men complaining of Great
thirst, deturmined us to make for the first water which was the Creek
in a bend N. E. from the mound about 3 miles- aftr a Delay of about 1
hour & a half to recrut our party we Set out on our return down the
Creek thro the bottom of about 1 mile in width, Crossed the Creek 3
times to the place we first Struck it, where we geathered Some
delisious froot Such as Grapes Plumbs, & Blue Currents after a Delay of
an hour we Set out on our back trail & arrived at the Perogue at Sun
Set we proceedd on to the place we Campd. last night and Stayed all
night.

This Mound is Situated on an elivated plain in a leavel and extensive
prarie, bearing N. 20° W. from the mouth of White Stone Creek Nine Miles,
the base of the Mound is a regular parallelagram the long Side of which
is about 300 yards in length the Shorter 60 or 70 yards- from the
longer Side of the Base it rises from the North & South with a Steep
assent to the hight of 65 or 70 feet, leaveing a leavel Plain on the
top of 12 feet in width & 90 in length. the North & South part of this
mound is joins by two regular rises, each in Oval forms of half its
hight forming three regular rises from the Plain the assent of each
elivated part is as Suden as the principal mound at the narrower Sides
of its Bass

The reagular form of this hill would in Some measure justify a belief
that it owed its Orrigin to the hand of man; but as the earth and loos
pebbles and other Substances of which it was Composed, bare an exact
resemblance to the Steep Ground which border on the Creek in its
neighbourhood we Concluded it was most probably the production of
nature-.

The only remarkable Charactoristic of this hill admiting it to be a
naturial production is that it is insulated or Seperated a considerable
distance from any other, which is verry unusial in the naturul order or
disposition of the hills.

The Surrounding Plains is open void of Timber and leavel to a great
extent; hence the wind from whatever quarter it may blow, drives with
unusial force over the naked Plains and against this hill; the insects
of various kinds are thus involuntaryly driven to the mound by the
force of the wind, or fly to its Leward Side for Shelter; the Small
Birds whoes food they are, Consequently resort in great numbers to this
place in Surch of them; Perticularly the Small brown Martin of which we
saw a vast number hovering on the Leward Side of the hill, when we
approached it in the act of Catching those insects; they were So gentle
that they did not quit the place untill we had arrivd. within a fiew
feet of them-

One evidence which the Inds Give for believeing this place to be the
residence of Some unusial Spirits is that they frequently discover a
large assemblage of Birds about this mound- is in my opinion a Suffient
proof to produce in the Savage mind a Confident belief of all the
properties which they ascribe it.

from the top of this Mound we beheld a most butifull landscape;
Numerous herds of buffalow were Seen feeding in various directions, the
Plain to North N. W & N E extends without interuption as far as Can be
Seen From the Mound to the mouth of Stone River is S. 20° E 9 miles.

to the woods near the mouth of River Jacque is West

to the High land near the mouth of Souis River is S. 70 E.

to the high land opposit Side or near the Maha Town is S. 45 E.

Some high lands to be Seen from the mound at a Great distance to the N.
E Some Nearer to the N W. no woods except on the Missouris Points

if all the timber which is on the Stone Creek was on 100 acres it would
not be thickly timbered, the Soil of those Plains are delightfull Great
numbers of Birds are Seen in those Plains, Such as black bird, Ren or
Prarie burd a kind of larke about the Sise of a Partridge with a Short
tail &c. &.

25th Augt the Boat under the Comd. of Sergt. Pryor proceeded on in our
absence (after jurking the Elk I Killed yesterday) Six Miles and Camped
on the Larboard Side R Fields brought in five Deer. George Shannon
Killed an Elk Buck Some rain this evening.

we Set the Praries on fire as a Signal for the Soues to Come to the
river.

[Lewis, August 25, 1804]
August the 25th
on our return from the mound of sperits saw the first bats that we had
observed since we began to ascend the Missouri

also saw on our return on the Creek that passes this mound about 2 M.
distant S. a bird of heron kind as large as the Cormorant short tale
long leggs of a colour on the back and wings deep copper brown with a
shade of red. we could not kill it therefore I can not describe it more
particularly.

[Clark, August 26, 1804]
26th August Sunday 1804 arrived at the boat at 9 oClock A.M. Set out at
10 oClock after Jurking the meet & Cutting the Elk Skins for a Toe Roap
and proceeded, leaveing G. Drewyer & Shannon to hunt the horses, the
river verry full of Sand bars and Wide Course S. 66° W. 2 mes. to a Sand
bar Makeing out from the S. S. N. 82° W. 7 mes. to a pt. of willows S S
passd. a Island & large Sand bars on both sides river wide and a Clift
of White earth on the L. S of 2 ms. in length to a point of Willows on
the S. S opposit Arch Creek above the mouth of this Creek a Chief of
the Maha nataton displeased with the Conduct of Black bird the main
Chief came to this place and built a Town which was called by his name
Petite Arch (or Little Bow) this Town was at the foot of a Hill in a
handsom Plain fronting the river and Contained about 100 huts & 200
men, the remains of this tribe Since the Death of Petite arch has
joined the remaining part of the nation This Creek is Small- we apt.
Pat Gass Sergeant Vice Floyd Dicesed, Geathered great quantites of
Grapes & three Kinds of Plumbs, one yellow round, & one ovel, & the
Common wild Plumb. Misquetors bad to night- I have apt. you

[Clark, August 26, 1804]
26th August Sunday 1804
(Joined the Boat at 9 oClock A M) after Jurking the meat Killed
yesterday and prepareing the Elk Skins for a Toe Roape we Set out
Leaveing Drewyer & Shannon to hunt the horses which was lost with
directions to follow us Keeping on the high lands.

proceeded on passed a Clift of White & Blue or Dark earths of 2 miles
in extent on the L. S. and Camped on a Sand bar opposed the old village
Called Pitite Arc a Small Creek falls into the river 15 yds wide below
the Village on the Same Side L. S this village was built by a Indian
Chief of the Maha nation by the name of Pitite arc (or little Bow)
displeasd. with the Great Chief of that nation (Black Bird) Seperated
with 200 men and built a village at this place. after his death the two
villages joined, apt. Pat Gass a Sergt. Vice Floyd Deceased

Great qts. of Grape, Plumbs of three Kinds 2 yellow and large of one of
which is long and a 3rd kind round & red all well flavored.
perticularly the yellow Sort.

[Lewis, August 26, 1804]
Orders August 26th 1804.
The commanding officers have thought it proper to appoint Patric Gass,
a Sergeant in the corps of volunteers for North Western Discovery, he
is therefore to be obeyed and respected accordingly.

Sergt. Gass is directed to take charge of the late Sergt. Floyd's mess,
and immediately to enter on the discharge of such other duties, as by
their previous orders been prescribed for the government of the
Sergeants of this corps.

The Commanding officers have every reason to hope from the previous
faithfull services of Sergt. Gass, that this expression of their
approbation will be still further confirmed, by his vigilent attention
in future to his duties as a Sergeant. the Commanding officers are
still further confirmed in the high opinion they had previously formed
of the capacity, deligence and integrety of Sergt. Gass, from the wish
expresssed by a large majority of his comrades for his appointment as
Sergeant.

Meriwether Lewis
Capt. 1st U.S. Regt Infty.
Wm Clark
Cpt &.

[Clark, August 27, 1804]
27th August Monday, this morning the Morning Star was observed to be
very large, G Drewyer Came up and informed that he Could neither find
Shannon or the horses, he had walked all night- we Sent Shields & J.
Fields back to look for Shannon & the horses and to Come up with us on
the river above at the grand Callemet or River KaCure & we Set out
under a Gentle Breeze from the S. E. proceeded on passed a Bluff at 7
mes. Several mile in extent of white Clay Marl or Chalk, under this
bank we discovered Large Stone resembling lime incrusted with a
Substanc like Glass which I take to be Cabolt, also ore, three mes
above this Bluff we Set the Prarie on fire, to let the Soues Know, we
wished to see them at two oClock an Indian Swam to the Perogue, we
landed & two other Came they were boys, they informed us that the Souex
were Camped near, on the R Jacke one Maha boy informed us his nation
was gorn to make a peace with the Pania's we Send Sjt. Pryor & a
frenchman with the Interptr. Mr. Durion to the Camp to See & invite
their Great Chiefs to Come and Counsel with us at the Callemet Bluffs
____ Mile abov on L. S.- we proceed on 11/2 miles farther & Camped S S.

[Clark, August 27, 1804]
27th August Monday 1804
This morning the Star Calld. the morning Star much larger than Common
G. Drewyer Came up and informed that he Could neither find Shannon nor
horses, we Sent Shields & J Fields, back to hunt Shannon & the horses,
with derections to Keep on the Hills to the Grand Calumet above on
River Ka cure.

We Set Sail under a gentle Breeze from the S. E. at 7 miles passed a
white Clay marl or Chalk Bluff under this Bluff is extensive I
discovered large Stone much like lime incrusted with a Clear Substance
which I believe to be Cabalt, also ore is imbeded in the Dark earth,
resembling Slate much Softer- above this Bluff we had the Prarie Set on
fire to let the Souix See that we were on the river, & as a Signal for
them to Come to it.

at 2 oClock passed the mouth of River Jacque, or Yeankton one Indian at
the mouth of this river Swam to the Perogue, we landed and two others
came to us, those Inds. informed that a large Camp of Soues, were on R.
Jacque near the mouth. we Sent Sergt. Pryor & a Frenchman with Mr.
Durioin the Souls interpeter to the Camp with derections to invite the
Principal Chiefs to councel with us at a Bluff above Called the
Calumet- two of those Indians accompanied them and the third continued
in the Boat Showing an inclination to Continue, this boy is a Mahar,
and inform that his nation, were gorn to the Parnias to make a peace
with that nation.

We proceeded on about one and a half miles and in Camped on a bar
makeing out from the S. S. the wind blew hard from the South. a Cool &
Pleasent evening, The river has fallen verry Slowly and is now low.

[Lewis, August 27, 1804]
Monday August 27th
On the Stard. shore, opposite to the lower point, or commencement of
the white Calk Bluff-

[Clark, August 28, 1804]
28th August Tuesday, 1804 The wind blew hard last night one Indian
Stayed with us all night, Set out under a Stiff Breeze from S and
proceedd on passe a Willow Island at two miles Several Sand bars the
river here is wide & Shallow full of Sand bars- The High land appear to
be getting nearer to each other passed a Bluff containing Some white
earth on the L. S. below this Bluff for Some mile the Plain rises
gradually to the hight of the Bluff which is 70 or 80 foot, here the
Indian boy left us for his Camp- Capt Lewis & my Self much indisposed-
I think from the Homney we Substitute in place of bread, (or Plumbs) we
proceeded on about 3 Miles higher and Camped below the Calumet Bluff in
a Plain on the L. S. to waite the return of Sergt Pryor & Mr. Durioun,
who we Sent to the Soues Camp from the mouth of R. Jacque, before we
landed the French rund a Snag thro their Perogue, and like to have
Sunk, we had her on loaded, from an examonation found that this Perogue
was unfit for Service, & Deturmined to Send her back by the Party
intended to Send back and take their Perogue, accordingly Changed the
loads, Some of the loading was wet wind blows hard from the South. J
Shields & J. Fields joined they did not overtake Shannon with the
horses who is a head of us.

[Clark, August 28, 1804]
28th August Tuesday 1804.
Set out under a Stiff Breeze from the South and proceeded on passd. a
willow Island at 2 miles Several Sand bars, the river wide & Shallow at
4 Miles passed a Short White Bluff of about 70 or 80 feet high, below
this Bluff the Prarie rises gradually from the water back to the Hight
of the Bluff which is on the Larboard Side here the Indian who was in
the boat returned to the Sisouex Camp on the R Jacque, Capt. Lewis & my
Self much indisposed owing to Some Cause for which we cannot account
one of the Perogues run a Snag thro her and was near Sinking in the
opinions of the Crew- we came too below the Calumet Bluff and formed a
camp in a Butifull Plain near the foot of the high land which rises
with a gradual assent near this Bluff I observe more timber in the
valey & on the points than usial- The Perogue which was injurd I had
unloaded and the Loading put into the other Perogue which we intended
to Send back, the Perogue & changed the Crew after examoning her &
finding that She was unfit for Service deturmined to Send her back by
the party Some load which was in the Perogue much inju'd

The wind blew hard this after noon from the South- J. Shields & J.
Fields who was Sent back to look for Shannon & the Horses joined us &
informed that Shannon had the horses a head and that they Could not
over take him This man not being a first rate Hunter, we deturmined to
Send one man in pursute of him with Some Provisions.-

[Lewis, August 28, 1804]
Orders August 28th 1804.
The commanding officers direct that the two messes who form the crews
of the perogues shall scelect each one man from their mess for the
purpose of cooking and that these cooks as well as those previously
appointed to the messes of the Barge crew, shall in future be exempted
from mounting guard, or any detail for that duty; they are therefore no
longer to be held on the royaster.

M. Lewis Capt.
1st US. Regt. Infty.
Win Clark Cpt. &.

[Clark, August 29, 1804]
29th August Wednesday 1804- rained last night and Some this morning
verry cloudy Set Some men to work to make a Toe rope of Elk Skin, and
my Self to write, Sent one man to pursue Shannon a head with Some
provisions, I am much engaged writeing a Speech at 4 oClock Sergt.
Pryor & Mr. Durion the Soues interpeter with about 70 Soues arrived on
the opposit Side of the river we Sent over for them, who came over Mr.
D. & his Son who was tradeing with the Indians Came over Mr. Durion
informed that three Chiefs were of the Party, we Sent over Serjt. Pryor
with young Mr. Durion, Six Kettles for the Indians to Cook the meat
they Killed on the way from their Camp (2 Elk & 6 Deer) a bout a bucket
of Corn & 2 twists of Tobacco to Smoke intending to Speak to them
tomorrow- G. Drewyer Killed a Deer-. Sergt. Pryor informs that when he
approached the Indian Camp they Came to meet them Supposeing Cap Lewis
or my Self to be of the party intending to take us in a roabe to their
Camp-he approached the Camp which was handsum made of Buffalow Skins
Painted different Colour, their Camps formed of a Conic form Containing
about 12 or 15 persons each and 40 in number, on the River Jacque of
100 yds wide & Deep Containing but little wood, They had a fat dog
Cooked as a feest; for them, and a Snug aptmt for them to lodge on
their march they passed thro plains Covd. with game &. &. &.

[Clark, August 29, 1804]
29th August Wednesday 1804
Some rain last night & this morning, Sent on Colter with Provisions in
pursute of Shannon, had a Toe roap made of Elk Skin, I am much engaged
reriteing- at 4 oClock P M. Sergt. Pryor & Mr. Dorion with 5 Chiefs and
about 70 men &c. arrived on the opposite Side we Sent over a Perogue &
Mr. Dorrion & his Son who was tradeing with the Indians Came over with
Serjt Pryer, and informed us that the Chiefs were there we Sent Serjt.
Pryor & yound Mr. Dorion with Som Tobacco, Corn & a few Kitties for
them to Cook in, with directions to inform the Chiefs that we would
Speek to them tomorrow. Those Indians brought with them for their own
use 2 Elk & 6 Deer which the young men Killed on the way from their
Camp 12 miles distant.

Serjt. Pryor informs me that when Came near the Indian Camp they were
met by men with a Buffalow roabe to Carry them, Mr. Dorion informed
"they were not the Owners of the Boats & did not wish to be Carried"-
the Sceouex Camps are handson of a Conic form Covered with Buffalow
Roabs Painted different Colours and all Compact & hand Somly arranged,
covered all round an orpen part in the Center for the fire, with
Buffalow roabs each Lodg has a place for Cooking detached, the lodges
contain 10 to 15 persons- a Fat Dog was presented as a mark of their
Great respect for the party of which they partook hartily and thought
it good & well flavored

The River Jacque is Deep & is navagable for Perogues a long distance up
at the mouth it is Shallow & narrow but above it is 80 or 90 yards wide
passing thro rich Praries with but little timber this river passes the
Souex River and heads with the St Peters and a branch of Red river
which which falls into Lake Winepik to the North

