He swallowed some wine and then sat up, leaning against me as I sat
at the bottom of the stairs, quite himself again, and assuring us
that he was not hurt; Perrault never touched him--"Threatened you,
then," said Fulk.

"No," said Alured, as if he hadn't spirit to be indignant; "I meant
him to get off."

"Lord Trevorsham!" cried a voice in great displeasure, and I saw that
Mr. Halsted, the nearest magistrate, was standing over us.

"He told me--Trevor did"--said Alured.

"Told you to assist the murderer to escape!" exclaimed Mr. Halsted.

Alured let his head fall back, and would not answer, and Fulk said,
"There is no need for him to speak at present, is there?  The
constable and the rest are gone after Perrault, but I do not yet know
what has directed the suspicion against him."

And then at the stair foot, for there was no other place to go to, we
came to an understanding, the two gentlemen and Brand the keeper
standing, and I seated on the step with my boy lying against me.  I
could not trust him out of my sight, nor, indeed, was he fit to be
left.

It seems that Brand had been uneasy about the number of shooters whom
the report of the swans had attracted; and though the bank of the
river was not Trevorsham ground, he had kept along on the border of
the covers higher up the hill, to guard his hares and pheasants.

Thus he had seen everything distinctly in the moonlight against the
snowy bank below; and he had observed one figure in particular,
moving stealthily along, in a parallel line with that which he knew
our party would take, though they were in shadow, and he could not
see them.

Suddenly, a chance shot fired somewhere made all the ducks fly up.
A head and shoulders that Brand took for his young lord's, appeared
beyond the shadow, beside Fulk's; and, at the same moment, he saw the
man whom he had been watching level his gun from behind, and fire.
Then came the cry, and Brand running down in horror himself, was
amazed to see this person doing the same, and when they came up with
the group, he recognised Perrault; and found, at the same time, that
Trevor was the sufferer, and that Lord Trevorsham was safe.  He then
would have thought it an accident, but for Perrault's own needless
wonder, whence the shot came, and that same remark, that Billy Blake,
the half-witted son of a farmer, was about that night.

Brand, a shrewd fellow, restrained his reply, that Mr. Perrault knew
most about it himself.  He saw that the most pressing need was to
obey Fulk in fetching necessaries from our house, and that Perrault
meant to disarm suspicion by treating it as an accident, so he
thought it best to go off to a magistrate with his story, before
giving any alarm; feeling certain, as he said, that the shot had been
meant for the Earl; as indeed, Perrault's first exclamation on coming
up showed that he too had expected to find Trevorsham the wounded
one.

Mr. Halsted had sent for the constable and came at once, though even
then inclined to doubt whether Brand had not imputed accident to
malice.  But Perrault's flight had settled that question.  During the
confusion, while Hester was being carried upstairs, the miscreant had
the opportunity of speaking to the child.

"Drowned!  No, she is not drowned; but she may be the other thing if
you don't get me off!  What, don't you understand?  Let the law lay a
finger on me, and what is to hinder me from telling how your sweet
sister has been plotting to get you--yes, you, out of the way of her
darling.  No, you needn't fear, there's nothing to get by it now.
Lucky for you you brought the poor boy out, when I thought him safe
by the fire nursing his chilblain.  But mind this, if I am arrested,
all the story shall come out.  I'll not swing alone.  If I fired, she
pointed the gun!  And you may judge if that was what poor Trevor
meant by his mutterings to you about 'mother.'"

"But what do you want?" Alured asked.  He had backed up against the
wall; he was past being frightened, but he felt numb and sick with
horror, and ready to do anything to get the wretch out of his sight.

"I want a clear way out of the house and all the cash you can get
together.  What! no more than that?  I'd not be a lord to be kept so
short.  Find me some more."

Alured knew I should forgive him, and he took my key from my basket,
unlocked the escritoire, and gave him my purse of household money,
undid the shutters, and helped Perrault to squeeze himself through
the little parlour window; and then, as he said, something came over
him, and he just reached the sofa, and knew no more.

He did not tell all this about Hester before Mr. Halsted; only when
Fulk, finding how shaken he was, had carried him upstairs, and we had
taken him to his room, he asked anxiously whether anyone had heard
Hester say that dreadful thing, and added, "Then if Mr. Perrault gets
away no one will know--about her."

"Was that why you helped him?" we asked.

"Trevor told me to take care of her," he said; and then he told us of
Perrault's arguments, but we ought not to have let him talk of them
that night, for it brought back the shuddering and sobbing, and the
horror seemed to come upon him, so that there was no soothing him or
getting him calm till the doctor mixed an anodyne draught; and let it
go as it would with Hester, I never left my boy till I had crooned
him to sleep, as in the old times.


CHAPTER 9.  TREVOR'S LEGACY.


Jaquetta bore the brunt of that night, and showed the stuff she was
made of, for poor Hester had only revived to fall into a most
frightful state of delirium, raving and struggling so that the doctor
and Arthur could hardly hold her.

So it went on for hours, Alured the only creature asleep in the
house, and we not daring to send for any help from without, poor
Hester's exclamations were so dreadful.

Poor Alured! his waking was sad enough!  He had loved Trevor with all
his heart, and the wonder that anyone could be so wicked oppressed
him almost as much as the grief.  The remnants of the opiate hung
upon him, too, and he lay about all day, hardly rousing himself to
speak or look, but giddily and drowsy.

Not till the inquest was it perceived how cleverly Perrault had taken
his measures, so that had he not made the mistake between the two
boys, he would scarcely have been suspected: certainly not but for
Brand's having watched him.

The report of the wild swans was traced to him.  No doubt it was as
an excuse for a heavier charge, for poor Trevor was wounded with shot
that would not have been used merely for ducks, and besides, the
other shooters it attracted would be likely to make detection less
easy.  Indeed, Fulk had seen that there were enough men about to
spoil their sport, and but for the boys' eagerness, would have turned
back.

Moreover it was proved that Perrault had in the course of the morning
met Billy Blake, and asked him if he meant to bag the swan--if he
followed the young lord's party and fired when they did, he would be
sure to bring something down.  He did not know that the Blakes never
let the poor fellow load his old gun with anything but powder.

Then his joining the horrified group, as if he had been merely after
the ducks, and had been attracted by the cry, had entirely deceived
us; and but for Hester's accusation, Brand's evidence, and his own
flight, together with all the past, might have continued to do so.

He had gone to his own house, as it afterwards turned out, entered so
quietly that the listening, watching servants never heard him,
collected all the valuables he could easily carry away, changed his
dress, and gone off before the search had followed him thither.

A verdict of wilful murder was returned against him at the inquest,
but it is very doubtful whether he could have been convicted of
anything but manslaughter; for even if the intention could have been
proved, without his wife, whose evidence was inadmissible, the malice
was not directed against his victim, but against Trevorsham.  We
could not but feel it a relief day by day, that nothing was heard of
him; for who could tell what disclosures there might be about the
poor thing who lay, delirious, needing perpetual watchfulness.
Arthur devoted himself to the care of her, and never left us, or I do
not see how we could have gone through it all.

Alured was well again, but inert and crushed, and heartless about
doing anything, except that he walked over to Spinney Lawn, and
brought home Trevor's dog, to which he gave himself up all day, and
insisted on having it in his room at night.

The burial was in the vault--nobody attended but Fulk and Alured, not
even Arthur, for though the poor mother was not aware of what was
going on, it was such a dreadful day with her, that he durst not
leave us alone to the watch.  It was enough to break one's heart to
stand by the window and hear her wandering on about her Trevor coming
to his place, and not being kept from his position; while we watched
the little coffin carried across the field by the labouring men, with
those two walking after it.  Our boy's first funeral was that of the
friend who had died in his stead.

We were glad to send him back to Eton, out of the sound of his poor
sister's voice; though he went off very mournfully, declaring that he
should be even more wretched there without Trevor than he was at
home; and that he never should do any good without him.  But there he
was wrong, I am thankful to say.  Dear Trevor was more a guide to him
dead than living.  Trevor's chief Eton friend, young Maitland, a
good, high-principled, clever boy, a little older, who had valued him
for what he was, while passing Alured by as a foolish, idle little
swell, took pity upon him in the grief and dejection of his loss--did
for him all and more than Trevor could do, and has been the friend
and blessing of his life, aiding the depth and earnestness that
seemed to pass into our dear child as he hung over the dying lad.
Yes, Trevor Lea and John Maitland did for our Trevorsham what all our
love and care had never been able to do.

Meantime Hester's illness took its course.  The chill of that icy
water had done great harm, and there was much inflammation at first,
leaving such oppression of breath that permanent injury to the lungs
was expected, and therefore it was all the sadder to see the dumb
despair with which she returned to understanding, I can hardly say to
memory, for I believe she had never lost it for a moment.

Hopeless, heedless, reckless, speechless, she was a passive weight,
lying or sitting, eating or drinking as she was bidden, but not
making any manifestation of preference or dislike, save that she
turned rigidly and sullenly away from any attempt to read prayers to
her.

She asked no questions, attempted no employment, but seemed to care
for nothing, and for weeks uttering nothing but a "yes," "no," or a
mechanical "thank you."  Jaquetta tried to caress her, by force of
nursing and pity.  Jaquetta really had come to a warm tender love for
her, but she sullenly pushed away the sweet face, and turned aside.

We never ventured to leave her alone, and this, after a time, began
to vex her.  She bade us go down once or twice, and tried to send
away Mrs. Rowe; and at last, when she found it was never permitted,
she broke out angrily one day, "You are very absurd to take so much
trouble to hinder what cannot make any difference."

