Fortunately, he was a man admirably qualified by largeness of
statesman-like views and a most conciliatory disposition for such a post
at such a time; and he strictly carried out the scheme which was implied
by the bill of Lord John Russell, and to a certain extent inaugurated by
Lord Sydenham, selecting his advisers from the party which had the
confidence of the Legislative Assembly, and generally directing his
policy in harmony with their counsels; so that under his government the
working of the colonial constitution was a nearly faithful reproduction
of the parliamentary constitution at home. Such a policy was in reality
only a development of the principle laid down by Pitt half a century
before, and warmly approved by his great rival, that "the only method of
retaining distant colonies with advantage is to enable them to govern
themselves."[255] And since that day similar constitutions have been
established in our other distant dependencies as they have become ripe
for them--in New Zealand, the Cape, and the Australian colonies--almost
the only powers reserved to the home government in those colonies in
which such constitutions have been established being that of appointing
the governors; that of ratifying or, if necessary, disallowing measures
adopted by the colonial government; and, in cases of necessity, that of
prescribing measures for the adoption of the local Legislatures, and
even of compelling such adoption, in the event of any persevering
opposition. The act of 1850, which established a constitution in
Victoria, went even farther in the privileges it conferred on the
colonists, inasmuch as it gave power to the Legislative Council to alter
some of its provisions, and even to remodel the Legislative Council and
Assembly. It may be doubted whether this last concession did not go too
far, since in more than one important instance the government of that
great colony has availed itself of it so liberally as to render it
necessary to pass a fresh act of Parliament to enable her Majesty to
give her royal assent to some of the changes which the Assembly had
enacted.[256] Indeed, it cannot be said that the system has worked in
every part or on every occasion quite as well as might have been hoped;
nor can it be denied that the colonies have occasionally claimed a power
of independent action in opposition to the home Parliament in a way to
try severely the patience of the home government. After the British
Parliament had adopted the policy and system of free-trade, the Canadian
Assembly adhered to the doctrine of protection so obstinately that it
actually established a tariff of import duties injurious to the commerce
of the mother country, and apparently intended as a condemnation of its
principles. But its contumacy showed how wholly different was the spirit
of the British government from that which had prevailed in the last
century; for though the home government had unquestionably the right of
disallowing the offensive tariff, it forbore to exercise it; and,
probably, by this striking proof that it considered a complete
recognition of the principle of local self-government more important
than any trifling financial or commercial advantage, contributed greatly
to implant in Canada and all the colonies that confidence in the
affectionate moderation of the home government which must be the
strongest, if not the only indissoluble, bond of union.

On the whole, it is hardly too much to say that no more statesman-like,
and (if sentiment may be allowed a share in influencing the conduct of
governments) no more amiable spirit animates any act of our modern
legislation than is displayed in these arrangements for the management
of our colonies. They are a practical exemplification of the idea
embodied in the expression, "the mother country." A hundred years ago,
Burke sought to impress on the existing ministers and Parliament the
conviction that, "so long as our Colonies kept the idea of their civil
rights associated with our government, they would cling and grapple to
us, and no force under heaven would be of power to tear them from their
allegiance." In the case of which he was speaking his warning, as we
have seen, fell on deaf ears; but the policy of the present reign is a
willing and full adoption of them, on a far larger scale than even his
farseeing vision could then contemplate. Within the century which has
elapsed since his time the enterprise of Britain has sent forth her sons
to people another hemisphere; and they, her children still, cling to the
parent state with filial affection, because they feel that, though
parted from her by thousands of miles and more than one ocean, they are
still indissolubly united to her by their participation in all the
blessings of her constitution, her generous toleration, her equal laws,
her universal freedom.

On one transaction of these years the leaders of the Opposition were
found acting in close agreement with the ministers. We have seen how, in
the early part of the reign of George III., the House of Commons threw
the sheriffs of London into prison, on account of their performance of
what they conceived to be their duty as magistrates; and in 1840 it
subjected the same officials to the same treatment on a question of the
same character--the extent of the privilege of the House of Commons to
overrule the authority of the courts of law. The question was in
appearance complicated by the institution of several suits at law, and
by the fact that the House was not consistent in its conduct, but
allowed its servants to plead to the first action, and refused the same
permission in the second, when the result of the first trial had proved
adverse to them. The case was this: some inspectors of prisons has
presented a report to Parliament, in which they alleged that they had
found in Newgate a book of disgusting and obscene character, published
by a London publisher named Stockdale. The House of Commons had ordered
the report to be printed and sold by Messrs. Hansard, the Parliamentary
publishers, and Stockdale brought an action against Messrs. Hansard for
libel. Chief-justice Denman charged the jury that "the fact of the House
of Commons having directed Messrs. Hansard to publish their reports was
no justification to them for publishing a Parliamentary report
containing a libel;" and Stockdale obtained damages, which were duly
paid. Stockdale, encouraged by this success, when, in spite of the
result of the late trial, Hansard continued to sell the report, brought
a fresh action; but now the House forbade the publishers to plead to it;
and, as they obeyed the prohibition, and forbore to plead, the case
eventually came before the Sheriff's Court; fresh damages were given,
and, in obedience to the writ of the Queen's Bench, the sheriffs seized
Hansard's goods, and sold them to satisfy the judgment. Lord John
Russell, as leader of the House, moved to bring to the Bar of the House
all the parties concerned in the action--the plaintiff, his attorney,
the sheriffs, and the under-sheriffs. He was opposed by nearly all the
legal members of the House except the crown lawyers, Sir Edward Sugden
especially warning the House that "a resolution of the House was of no
avail in a court of justice;" while others taunted the House with want
of courage in not proceeding against the judges themselves, rather than
against their officers, which in this case the sheriffs were.

There could be no doubt of the importance of the question, since it was
no less, as the Attorney-general, Sir J. Campbell, put it, than a
question whether Parliament or the courts of law had the superiority;
and now Sir Robert Peel, as leader of the Opposition, came to the
support of Lord John Russell, declaring his opinion to be, first, that
"the House possessed every privilege necessary for the proper and
effectual discharge of its functions;" secondly, that "the publication
of evidence which had led the House to adopt any course was frequently
essential to justify that course to the nation;" and thirdly, that "to
judge of the extent of their privileges, and to vindicate them by their
own laws, belonged to the House alone." And he pressed strongly on the
House that it was "the duty of the House to fight the battle to the
last," though he confessed that "it was with pain that he had come to
the determination of entering into a contest with the courts of law." On
one point the judges agreed with the House of Commons. The House
committed the sheriffs; but, when they sued out their _habeas corpus_,
the judges decided that the return of the Sergeant-at-arms that they
were committed by the House for breach of privilege was a sufficient
return. Stockdale brought fresh actions. But meantime the case was
arousing a strong excitement in the country.[257] The singular hardship
of the position of the sheriffs excited general sympathy: if they obeyed
the House of Commons, which prohibited them from paying over to
Stockdale the damages which they had received for him, the Court of
Queen's Bench would be bound to attach them for disobedience to its
order. If they obeyed the Queen's Bench, the House would imprison them
for breach of privilege. And the national feeling is always in favor of
the strictly defined authority of the courts of law, rather than of the
somewhat indefinite claims of Parliament to interpret, and even to make,
privilege. Another consideration, probably, weighed a little with the
champions of the House--that their power of imprisonment ended with the
session. As matters went on, it was found that even the Attorney and
Solicitor-general differed as to the course to be pursued; and
eventually Lord John Russell consented to adopt the advice which had
been given by a former Attorney-general, Sir F. Pollock, and to bring in
a bill to legalize all similar proceedings of Parliament in future, by
enacting that a certificate that the publication of any document had
been ordered by either House should be a sufficient defence against any
action. The introduction of such a bill was in some degree an
acknowledgment of defeat; but it can hardly be denied to have been not
only a judicious step, but the only one practicable, if the contest
between Parliament and the courts of law were not to be everlasting; and
it met with general approval. If it was a compromise, it was one that
satisfied both parties and both ends. It upheld the authority of the
courts of law, and at the same time it practically asserted the
reasonableness of the claim advanced by the House of Commons, by giving
it for the future the power which it had claimed. Nor were people in
this day inclined to be jealous of the privileges of Parliament, so long
as they were accurately defined. They felt that it was for the advantage
and dignity of the nation that its powers and privileges should be
large; what they regarded with distrust was, a claim of power of which
no one knew the precise bounds, and which might, therefore, be expanded
as the occasion served.

Notes:

[Footnote 245: Fifty-two mills and 30,000 persons were thrown out of
employment for ten weeks at Ashton in 1830 by the turning out of 3000
"coarse spinners," who could clear at the time from 28s. to 31s. per
week. The following passage is extracted from an oath said to have been
administered by the combined spinners in Scotland in 1823: "I, A B, do
voluntarily swear, in the awful presence of God Almighty, and before
these witnesses, that I will execute with zeal and alacrity, as far as
in me lies, every task or injunction which the majority of my brethren
shall impose upon me in furtherance of our common welfare, as the
chastisement of _knobs_, the assassination of oppressive and tyrannical
masters, or the demolition of shops that shall be deemed
incorrigible."--_Annual Register_, 1838, pp. 204-207.]

[Footnote 246: See page 221.]

[Footnote 247: The question was examined with great minuteness by Lord
Brougham a fortnight after the ministerial explanation. See
"Parliamentary Debates," 3d series, xlvii., 1164.]

[Footnote 248: It is stated on good authority that Lord Melbourne, in
private conversation, justified or explained the line he had taken by
his consideration for his friends, scores of whom would have had their
hopes blighted by his retirement.]

[Footnote 249: See "Life of the Prince Consort," i., 55.]

[Footnote 250: "Life of the Prince Consort," i., 57.]

[Footnote 251: Macaulay's "History of England," i., 386.]

[Footnote 252: This is the name which the Liberal historian of the time,
Miss Martineau, gives it. "The so-called Registration Bill was, in fact,
an unannounced new Reform Bill for Ireland."--_History of the Peace_,
book v., c. vi.]

[Footnote 253: See _ante_, p. 127.]

[Footnote 254: In one instance the rebels were aided by a party of
citizens of the United States, who, without any sanction from their own
government, seized an island on the St. Lawrence belonging to us, and
attacked some of the Canadian villages. And this led to the discussion
of a question of international combined with constitutional law, which
Lord Campbell thus describes: "'Whether, if the subjects or citizens of
a foreign state with which we are at peace, without commission or
authority from their own or any other government, invade the English
territory in a hostile manner, and levy war against the Queen in her
realm, we are entitled to treat them as traitors?' The Canadian courts
held that we could not, as they had never acknowledged even a temporary
allegiance to our sovereign. And of this opinion was Sir William
Follett. But, after reading all that is to be found on the subject, I
come to the conclusion that they owed allegiance when, as private
individuals, they voluntarily crossed the English frontier; that it was
no defence for them to say that they then had arms in their hands and
intended to murder the Queen's subjects."--_Life of Lord Campbell_,
ii.,119. It certainly would have been no _defence_; but would it not
have taken their conduct from under the definition of _treason_, and
made it an act of _piracy_?]

[Footnote 255: See Fox's words, quoted by Lord Stanhope.--_Life of
Pitt_, ii., 90.]

[Footnote 256: A couple of years after the period which is the boundary
of the present work, this Canadian constitution of 1841 was superseded
by a measure uniting Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick in one
federal government, with, as the act recites, "a constitution similar in
principle to that of the United Kingdom." The act farther provided for
the admission of other dependencies of the crown in North America,
Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, British Columbia, and Rupert's Land
into the union, and established as the constitution of the whole one
scarcely differing from that of 1841, with the exception that both the
Houses of the Legislature--called in the act the Senate and the House of
Commons--were to be representative bodies, and that powers were
conferred on them so absolutely free and independent, that it was
thought necessary to add a clause providing that their "privileges,
immunities, and powers were never to exceed those at the passing of the
act held, enjoyed, and exercised by the Commons House of Parliament of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and by the members
thereof."]

[Footnote 257: Lord Campbell, in his autobiography, puts the
transaction, in the phase at which it had now arrived, in a very serious
light: "Next came a proceeding which placed me in a most difficult
position; and the public never knew the danger which then existed of a
convulsion unexampled in our history. The sheriffs sued out a writ of
_habeas corpus_, directed to the Sergeant-at-arms, commanding him to
produce before the Court of Queen's Bench the sheriffs of Middlesex,
alleged to be illegally in custody, with the cause of their detention.
Wilde, the Solicitor-general, was strong for refusing to make any return
to the writ, and for setting the Court of Queen's Bench at defiance. Had
I concurred in this opinion it would certainty have been acted on. The
consequences would have been that the Sergeant-at-arms, even with the
mace in his hand, would have been sent to Newgate by the Court of
Queen's Bench. The House must have retaliated by committing the judges.
The crown would then have had to determine on which side the army should
be employed, and for a time we must have lived under a military
government" (ii., 129). The noble and learned autobiographer does not
explain why it should have been indispensable to employ the army on
either side.]


CHAPTER XII.


Sir Robert Peel becomes Prime-minister.--Commercial Reforms.--
Free-trade.--Religious Toleration.--Maynooth.--The Queen's
University.--Post-office Regulations.--The Opening of Letters.--
Naturalization of Aliens.--Recall of Lord Ellenborough.--Reversal of the
Vote on the Sugar Duties.--Refusal of the Crown to Sanction a Bill.--The
Question of Increase in the Number of Spiritual Peers.--Repeal of the
Corn-laws.--Revolution in France, and Agitation on the Continent.--Death
of Sir Robert Peel.--Indifference of the Country to Reform.--Repeal of
the Navigation Laws.--Resolutions in Favor of Free-trade.--The Great
Exhibition of 1851.


The transactions mentioned in the last chapter were among the last
events of Lord Melbourne's ministry. He had for some time been aware of
his impending defeat in the House of Commons, and, greatly to his
credit, had endeavored to make the return to office easier to his
successors by the friendly counsels he had given to the Queen on the
subject.[258] A dissolution of Parliament in the summer of 1841 only
weakened his party, and in September he resigned, and was succeeded by
Sir Robert Peel, who, comparatively short as was his tenure of
office,[259] found it long enough to establish for himself a reputation
as the greatest financier of Europe since the days of Pitt. It may be
worth remarking that, in the "Memoirs of the Prince Consort," it is
mentioned that in the course of his administration Peel found reason to
change his judgment on the question of which House of Parliament it was
the more desirable for the Prime-minister to be a member. Canning had
more than once asserted his conviction that the public business would be
more satisfactorily conducted when the Prime-minister was a commoner,
founding his opinion chiefly on the paramount importance of financial
questions, the discussion of which is almost confined to the House of
Commons, and conceiving it to be supported by the history of the
administration of Pitt, from whom, indeed, he had imbibed the idea; and
in former years Peel had more than once expressed his concurrence with
that view of the subject. But, from papers which were intrusted to him
for the execution of his great work, Sir Theodore Martin learned that
Peel had subsequently found reason to come to the opposite conclusion,
not from any change in his view of the relative importance of the
different departments of administration, but solely because "the amount
of work imposed upon the first minister in the House of Commons, in
addition to what he had to go through elsewhere, was too great for any
human strength. In the House of Lords the Prime-minister would escape
the necessity for being in a position to vindicate all the details of
administration, and to answer the multiplicity of questions on all sorts
of subjects, the putting of which has almost degenerated into a vice. He
had, therefore, come to the conclusion that it was there he ought to
be."[260] And, indeed, the subjects which demanded the care of the
minister, and attracted the attention of Parliament, were constantly
increasing in number, variety, and importance to the very end of his
administration. Not only were the financial difficulties of the country,
the depressed state of agriculture and commerce (the result of a
succession of bad harvests), sufficient causes for grave anxiety, but
the terrible war, of which mention has already been made, which we had
now been carrying on for nearly three years in Afghanistan, and which,
before the end of this very year, was about to be signalized by a
disaster such as had never before befallen a British army, threatened to
kindle the flames of war in Europe also, from the share which the
intrigues of Russia had had in fomenting the quarrel; and the same
danger was more than once in the course of the next five years imminent,
from the irritation with which France regarded us, and which, commencing
in Syria, while Lord Melbourne was still at the helm, lost no
opportunity of displaying itself, whether in transactions in the remote
Pacific Ocean or the old battle-field of the two nations, the Spanish
peninsula; and finally, these embarrassing perplexities were crowned by
the appalling visitation of famine, which, at the end of the fourth year
of the administration, fell upon Ireland with a severity surpassing any
similar event in modern history.

With all these multiform difficulties the new minister grappled with
unflinching courage, and with conspicuous success. Peace was preserved
abroad, and financial prosperity was restored at home. Into the details
of his measures devised for this last-mentioned object, though the
leading features of his administration, and those on which his fame
chiefly rests, it would be beside the purpose of the present work to
enter. It is sufficient to say here that, in the spirit of Pitt's great
financial reform of 1787, he revised the whole of the import duties of
our commercial tariff, especially reducing the duties on raw
material;[261] making up the deficiency so caused by an income tax,
which he described as a temporary imposition, since he doubted not that
the great increase of lawful trade, which would be the consequence of
the reduction of duties, would soon enable the revenue to dispense with
a tax to the objections of which he was not blind. In recommending this
great change to the House, he laid down as the soundest maxim of
financial legislation, in which "all were now agreed, the principle that
we should buy in the cheapest market and sell in the dearest," a
doctrine which, when more fully carried out, as it was sure to be, led
almost inevitably to the great measure for which his administration is
most celebrated, the repeal of the Corn-laws. There could be no doubt
that, in the most modified application of it, it struck at the root of
the principle of protection, which had hitherto been the fundamental
principle of our finance, and made a farther extension of it inevitable.

And, as he had been one of the leading members of the ministry which
carried Catholic Emancipation, so he now proceeded on the same path of
religious toleration; and, in the session of 1844, successfully
recommended to the House of Commons a bill which had already been passed
by the Lords, repealing a number of penal acts affecting the Roman
Catholics, which, though they had long been practically obsolete, still
encumbered, and it may be said disgraced, the statute book, and were, so
to say, a standing degradation of and insult to the Roman Catholic body.
One of them, passed in the reign of William and Mary, still forbade any
Roman Catholic to come within ten miles of London, to have either sword
or pistol in his house, or to possess a horse worth more than five
pounds. Another, enacted under Elizabeth, still made every Roman
Catholic who omitted to take certain oaths guilty of high-treason,
though no attempt to administer those oaths had been made since the
Revolution. Another, of the time of Charles I., deprived any Roman
Catholic who should send his son to a foreign school of all protection
of the law; he could neither sue nor defend an action. It may fairly be
said that the credit of Parliament and of the nation was concerned in
the abrogation of laws so ridiculously oppressive, and not the less
obnoxious for being practically invalid. And in the same spirit another
measure was framed and carried by the Lord Chancellor, whose object was
the confirmation of religious endowments belonging to different sects of
Protestant Dissenters, and their protection from vexatious and unjust
litigation, by making a continued possession of any kind of endowment or
property for twenty years a valid title.

These enactments may be regarded as indispensable supplements to the
repeal of the Test Act and Catholic Emancipation. They were the
coping-stone of the great edifice of religious toleration, of which the
former acts had laid the foundation. And the next year Peel carried out
still farther the same principle, by a measure which could not fail to
be regarded as an especial boon in Ireland, since the great majority of
the population of that kingdom were of the Roman Catholic persuasion. It
has been seen that when the troubled state into which the Continent was
thrown by the French Revolution threw hinderances in the way of the
Irish students designed for the Roman Catholic priesthood going to one
of the great Continental colleges, such as St. Omer or Salamanca, for
their education, Pitt established for them a college at Maynooth, for
the endowment of which Parliament was annually asked for a grant of
about £9000. The sum had long been felt to be altogether inadequate to
the requirements of the foundation. As early as the year 1807, Lord
Liverpool, then Home-secretary, had contemplated a large increase of the
grant, though the weakness of the government, then presided over by the
Duke of Portland, prevented him from carrying out that and other
measures which he had conceived in a kindred spirit. Moreover, the grant
was rarely proposed without giving rise to a warm debate raised by a
party whose too tender consciences forbade them to sanction any measure
appearing to foster a religion from which they dissented. And to remedy
the two evils (the one arising from the want of a sufficient provision,
the other from the spirit of religious controversy, for which the House
of Commons was certainly very ill-calculated), Peel, in 1845, proposed
to treble the grant, so as to put the college on a more satisfactory
footing, by providing sufficient incomes for the professors, and a
revenue adequate to the respectable maintenance of an increased number
of pupils; and also to place the charge for the future on the
Consolidated Fund, by which step its yearly discussion in Parliament
would be altogether avoided. The measure was vigorously resisted, partly
on the religious ground already mentioned, and partly by an argument,
urged with some plausibility, that the design with which the college had
originally been founded had not been realized; that, in fact, it had not
proved a benefit to the country, but rather the reverse, by tempting
into the service of the Roman Catholic Church a humbler and poorer class
of students than could devote themselves to it when the preliminary
education involved the expense of a protracted residence in a foreign
country. But the obvious advantages of the change prevailed over these
considerations, and the bill was carried by large majorities.[262]

And now that the long cessation of controversy on the subject--which,
indeed, has been not the least beneficial fruit of this bill of
1845--permits a candid consideration of it in all its bearings, it will
probably be thought that Parliament had not often come to a wiser
decision, one more dictated by judicious liberality of sentiment, and
more imperatively required on every ground of statesman-like policy. If
the countervailing objections and advantages be calmly weighed, it may
almost be said that there was no alternative between enlarging the
endowment and putting it on a new footing, or suppressing the college
altogether. In its existing condition it was notoriously inadequate to
fulfil the design of its founder; and any establishment visibly
inadequate to its design tends to bring the design itself into some
degree of contempt. Yet even if it should be granted that there might
have been no fair ground of complaint if the college had never been
founded, to close it after its benefits, however scanty, had been
enjoyed for half a century, could not fail to have been regarded as an
unpardonable injustice and injury. The other alternative, therefore, was
practically the only one that remained; and in embracing it Peel was but
carrying out the original principle on which the college was founded. It
had been intended to be efficient; through lack of means it had proved
inefficient. The obvious and just remedy was to supply such increased
means as to create or bestow the efficiency originally aimed at. And it
was a felicitous idea to place the charge for the future on such a
footing as to combine with such an increase an avoidance of the
irritation which its yearly discussion had never failed to excite.

And at the same time, to carry still farther the principle of religious
toleration, or rather of religious equality, he induced the Parliament
to found a new university, consisting of three colleges, one in each of
the three provinces of Ulster, Munster and Connaught (Leinster, as
having Trinity College and Maynooth, being regarded as already
sufficiently provided with university education), which should be open
to students of every religious denomination, and at which, while every
kind of secular education, both literary and scientific, should be
given, the stirring up of religious controversy and animosity should be
guarded against, by the absence of any theological professorships. He
did not, indeed, design that the still greater benefits of religious
education should be withheld from the pupils, but he proposed to provide
for that object by confiding their religious education to the care of
the clergy of each persuasion, some of whom in each town which was the
seat of a college--Belfast, Cork, and Galway--might be trusted for
willingness to superintend it. It was hoped that one fruit of this
scheme, and that by no means its least valuable result, would be that
the association of pupils of various creeds in their studies and
amusements from an early age would lead them to maintain, in their more
mature years, the harmony of which the foundation had thus been laid in
their youth; and that thus the religious animosities which were the
principal obstacle to the prosperity of the country would be softened,
and in time extinguished. And this object has been achieved to a great
extent, though the disfavor with which the Roman Catholic Church regards
any educational system which is not under the superintendence of its
priesthood has prevented the scheme from attaining the full development
which was hoped for. The number of students of each of the principal
sects--the Church of Ireland, the Roman Catholics, and the
Presbyterians--steadily increases.[263] Members of each religious body
are among the professors in each college, and all accounts represent the
most perfect harmony and cordiality as existing throughout the whole
body.

Yet, important as was the principle contained in these measures, none of
them, perhaps, caused such excitement at the moment as an exercise by
the government of what was, in point of fact, one of its most ancient,
as well as most essential, powers: the occasional opening of letters
which passed through the post, in compliance with a warrant of the
Secretary of State. England had at all times been the refuge of those
unquiet spirits who, in pursuit of their schemes of rebellion and
revolution, had incurred the displeasure of their own governments, and
had too easily found accomplices here. And in the course of the summer
some notorious offenders of this class found a member of the House of
Commons to present a petition, in which they complained that some
letters which they had posted had been stopped and opened by the
officers of the Post-office. The member who presented the petition
appears to have fancied it an unprecedented and wholly unlawful exercise
of authority; but Sir James Graham, the Home-secretary, not only at once
avowed that the statement was true, and that he had issued his warrant
for the opening of the letters mentioned, but also showed that the power
to issue such an order was reserved to the Secretary of State in all the
statutes which regulated the proceedings of the Post-office. The clause
in the act which conferred the power had been originally framed by Lord
Somers, a statesman certainly as little open as any of his time to the
suspicion of desiring to encroach on the rightful liberty of the
subject; and it had been exercised from time to time in every reign
since the Revolution. It was a power intrusted to the Secretaries of
State for the public safety, and exercised by them on their own
responsibility. The practice and its justification were assailed in both
Houses of Parliament by members of the extreme Liberal party; but,
though no distinct motion on the subject was made, the general feeling
of both Houses was plainly evinced, that it was a power which might at
times be highly useful for the prevention of crime, or for the
hinderance of conspiracies which might be dangerous to the general
welfare and tranquillity, and that the constitutional responsibility
attaching to every minister for every official act was a sufficient
security against its being improperly used.[264]

And it will, probably, be generally admitted that this was the
statesman-like view of the subject. There is no doubt that the practice
in question does infringe the great constitutional right of every
individual in these kingdoms to absolute freedom of communication with
his friends. But the most important and the most cherished
constitutional rights must possess something of elasticity. It must be
necessary at times to go back to the original object for which those
rights have been conferred and secured. That original object is the
safety and welfare of the whole body corporate--of the entire nation.
And if that safety and welfare at times require the sacrifice, a wise
ruler will not hesitate to demand it of the people, or to impose it on
them for their own good. So another principle of the constitution is the
absolute freedom of action for all the subjects of the sovereign; yet
that principle is infringed by more than one statute: Factory Acts,
which limit the hours of even voluntary labor; Education Acts, which
compel the parent to a certain line of conduct toward his children; each
in their way substitute another rule for that entire freedom of action
which, as has been said before, is the fundamental principle of the
constitution; but they make the substitution on the reasonable ground
that the course of action which they compel is for the benefit, not only
of the individual constrained, but of the whole community of which he is
a member, and for whose welfare all laws and constitutions exist.

One of the grounds of complaint against the exercise of this power,
which had been alleged by some of the opponents of the government, had
been that Sir James Graham's conduct had been dictated by an unworthy
subservience to some of the despotic sovereigns of the Continent. The
fact was indignantly denied in the House of Lords by the Duke of
Wellington; and in the course of the session a remarkable proof was
afforded how little influence such motives had on the decisions of our
government, when they acquiesced in the passing of a bill which was a
virtual repeal of the Alien Act, which had existed for more than half a
century, and of which more than one Continental sovereign would
certainly have desired the retention. Of late, indeed, it had been so
modified, that practically it had become little more than a dead letter;
and now, in 1844, without being formally repealed, it was virtually
abrogated by an act which enabled all foreigners to obtain letters of
naturalization, which conferred on them every right of British subjects,
except those of becoming members of Parliament,[265] or of the Privy
Council.

Generally speaking, few governments had enjoyed more of the confidence
of the nation than Peel's did in 1844; yet in this year it was exposed
to two remarkable mortifications. The charter of the East India Company,
as framed by Pitt in subsequent events, which has led to the entire
extinction of the political power of the Company, makes anything beyond
this brief mention of the transaction superfluous at the present time.

The other mortification of the ministry to which allusion has been made
fell upon it at home in the Parliamentary discussion of the
Prime-minister's financial measures, on which his judgment was usually
regarded as pre-eminent, and on which a large majority of the House was
generally disposed implicitly to follow his guidance. Sir Robert was
not, indeed, himself Chancellor of the Exchequer, that office being
filled by Mr. Goulburn, but it was certain that the Budget was inspired
by a deference to the Prime-minister's views. And, among the
arrangements which it proposed, one consisted of a relaxation of the
sugar-duties, which was regarded with dread by those interested in the
West Indies, as a farther step in the direction of free-trade, and as
depriving them of the modified protection which they were as yet
enjoying. To preserve that protection to them, Mr. Miles, the member for
Bristol, proposed an amendment which, after an animated debate, was
carried by a majority of twenty. Three months before, on the Factory
Bill and the question whether the hours of labor should be limited to
ten or to twelve, the minister had also found himself defeated, though
by a much smaller majority; but in that case the defeat had been the
less pronounced from the inconsistency of the votes on the different
limits.[266] And he extricated himself from that difficulty by
abandoning the bill altogether, and introducing a new one, not without
angry resistance on the part of Lord John Russell and other members of
the Opposition. They denounced such a manoeuvre as alike
unconstitutional and unparliamentary; while he, on the contrary,
insisted that the House had always jealously retained the right of
reconsidering its own decisions. In that instance, however, the
introduction of a new bill might have been regarded as the simplest mode
of harmonizing the variety of views which had been represented by the
discussion of and votes on the ministerial proposal and the amendments;
but no such expedient was practicable in this case, that of the
sugar-duties. A defeat on an important clause in the Budget by a
majority of twenty was a far more serious matter; it was such a blow as
had generally been reckoned sufficient to require a resignation of a
ministry. But on this occasion Peel did not feel himself called on to
take that step; nor was he inclined to dissolve Parliament, which some
regarded as his only legitimate alternative, though he had little doubt
that, if he did so, he should be supported by the confidence of the
country. After careful reflection, the course on which he eventually
decided was to adhere to the principle of a relaxation of duties, but to
consent to a moderate variation from his original proposal as to the
amount. And in pursuit of this plan, on the next discussion of the
Budget, he proposed an amendment to that effect, making the adoption of
it by the House a test of its confidence in the administration. Lord
John Russell opposed the amendment with great vehemence, pronouncing the
acceptance of it, if it should be accepted, and the House should thus
consent "to retract its previous vote, a lamentable proof of
subserviency, which would disgrace it with the country." What Sir Robert
now asked was, substantially, that they should now declare that to be
expedient which they had declared to be inexpedient only three nights
ago; and Lord Palmerston insisted that the proper course to be taken by
the government was to resign; while Mr. Labouchere, who had also been a
member of Lord Melbourne's cabinet,[267] though he admitted that there
might be "circumstances under which a minister might without impropriety
ask the House to reconsider a vote," denied that the present was such a
case, and especially denounced the importation of the question of
confidence or no confidence in the ministry into the discussion as
"dangerous and unconstitutional." Another section of the Opposition
agreed in taking the same line; Mr. Disraeli (then beginning to lay the
foundations of his reputation and influence) strongly denouncing the
conduct of the minister, as degrading both to his own supporters and
still more to the whole House, and recommending him to say frankly to
both, "We have gauged your independence, and you may have a semblance of
parliamentary freedom as far as this point, but the moment you go
farther, you must either submit to public disgrace, or we must submit to
private life." The end of the discussion was, that the minister
prevailed by a majority a trifle larger than that which had defeated him
before. This is not the place to discuss the difference between one
principle of taxation and another; but the question whether a minister
when defeated is justified in asking either House of Parliament to
reconsider its vote, seems one that could only have been raised in a
House under the influence of unusual excitement of some kind. The charge
that such a request was unconstitutional only serves to show how loosely
the words "constitution" and "unconstitutional" are often used even by
those from whom precision of language might most be expected; for Sir
Robert Peel's proposal that the House should retract its vote was not
unprecedented, the very same demand having been made in 1833 by Lord
Althorp, then Chancellor of the Exchequer of Lord Grey's ministry, of
which those very men were members who were now loudest in denouncing the
conduct of the present government. And on that occasion it is worth
remarking that, though Lord Althorp's demand was resisted in one or two
quarters, he was vigorously supported by Sir Robert Peel, on the ground
that, though to rescind one night a vote passed on a former one might be
not altogether free from objection, it would be a far greater evil that
questions of importance should be held to be in all cases finally
decided by a single vote, passed, it might be, in a thin House, or in
obedience to some sudden impulse.

And this seems to be the view of the case commended not only by
constitutional and parliamentary practice, but by common-sense. It would
be strange, indeed, when the questions submitted to the British
Parliament and the decisions of that Parliament on them are so often of
paramount importance to the whole world, if the Parliament should be the
only body in the world denied the right of revising its own judgments,
the only one whose first resolution is so irrevocable that even itself
may not change or modify it. To rescind a recent vote is, no doubt, as
Sir Robert Peel said, a step not wholly free from objection. It should
be an exceptional act, as one which, if often repeated, would give an
appearance of capricious fickleness and instability to the opinions of
Parliament, calculated to impair that respect for it which the whole
state and nation are deeply concerned in upholding; but to refuse, under
any circumstances, to confess a change of judgment, would lay the
Parliament open to an imputation at least equally dangerous to that
respect--that of an obstinacy which refuses to confess the possibility
of being mistaken, or to hear reason. It would not be well, therefore,
that the abrogation of a previous vote should become an ordinary
practice; but it would be equally undesirable that any fixed or
unchangeable rule should be interposed to prevent a second discussion of
an important question, with the possibility of its leading to a reversal
of the opinion first expressed.

In the same year (1844) the ministers felt compelled to raise a
constitutional point of singular refinement, which had the effect of
arresting the progress of a bill, in which one part of the kingdom took
a lively interest, which a division in its favor proved to be fully
shared by the House of Lords.[268] It has been already mentioned that in
the last year of the preceding reign a bill had passed for creating,
when opportunity offered by the sees affected becoming vacant, two new
bishoprics at Ripon and Manchester, the incomes of which were to be
provided by the union of some of the smaller existing bishoprics,
Gloucester with Bristol, St. Asaph with Bangor. But the Welsh regarded
with great disapproval any reduction of the number of bishoprics in the
principality, and Lord Powis now brought in a bill to repeal so much of
the act as provided for the union of two Welsh sees, urging not only
their great extent, which he stated at 3000 square miles of very
mountainous country, but the fact that the population of North Wales was
steadily and largely increasing. The bill, as has been intimated, was
favorably received by the Lords, who passed the second reading by a
majority of twelve; but, before it could be read a third time, the Duke
of Wellington, as leader of the ministry in that House, announced that
the bill was one which touched the prerogative of the crown, and
therefore could not be proceeded with without the consent of her
Majesty, which he was not authorized to express.

As the matter was explained by the Chancellor, Lord Lyndhurst, the
manner in which the bill touched the royal prerogative was this: as,
during the vacancy of any see, its temporalities belonged to the crown,
any alterations in a see affected the direct pecuniary interests of the
crown, and he, as Speaker of the House, doubted whether he should be
justified in putting a question which so touched the royal prerogative
without the sovereign's consent. A committee which was appointed to
investigate the case fully confirmed the view thus taken by the
ministers, and the bill was dropped.

It was, however, an exercise of the royal prerogative which was received
by the House in general with great dissatisfaction. Certainly, since the
Civil List and royal income had been placed on their present footing, it
was only by a very forced construction that the pecuniary interests of
the sovereign could be said to be affected. And it seemed a very
insufficient plea for evoking the exercise of a power which, as it was
said, had certainly never been exerted before since the accession of the
Hanoverian dynasty. Nor was it made more acceptable by the explanation
of Lord Brougham, who on this occasion came to the support of the
minister, that the refusal of the crown's consent at this stage was "a
warning, as it were, a polite and courteous communication between the
sovereign, as guardian of the privileges of the crown, and the two
Houses of Parliament, that if they passed a certain bill it would not
receive the royal assent;" for, though the right to refuse the royal
assent to any bill was incontestable, it had not been exercised since
the time of William III., and to put it in force for the protection of
an imaginary interest of the crown itself would have been so unpopular
an exercise of it that no administration could have ventured to advise
it.

One of the arguments which the Duke of Wellington brought forward in the
discussion, and which, probably, contributed to induce him thus to
strangle Lord Powis's bill, has had an influence on subsequent
legislation. He urged that its adoption--since the resolution to
establish bishoprics at Manchester and Ripon was one which every one
desired to carry out--would increase the number of bishops, "and thus
make an organic change in the constitution of the House of Lords." It is
not very clear how the addition of a single spiritual peer could have
that effect. But the Duke had dwelt upon the same argument before in the
debate on the proposed union of the sees affected, urging that there was
such a jealousy of the Church in many quarters, and especially in some
of the large towns, that it would be very undesirable to pass any
measure the effect of which would be to increase the number of Episcopal
peers. Even if there was any general reluctance at that time to see such
an increase (a fact which was by no means ascertained), it may be
doubted whether it was founded on any sufficient reason. It is not easy
to see why, when there is no limit to the augmentation of the number of
lay peers, it should be judged impolitic or unjust to make even so small
an addition to the number of spiritual peers. At the Restoration the
spiritual peers were, probably, more than a fifth of the entire House.
From the great number of subsequent creations of lay peers they were now
less than a sixteenth, so that there could be no ground for apprehending
that a slight re-enforcement of the Episcopal bench would disturb the
balance, or give the Church an undue preponderating weight in the
decisions of the House. The difficulty, however, such as it appeared to
the Duke then, has had such weight with subsequent administrations, that
a new principle has been established of creating bishoprics which shall
not at first confer seats in the Upper House till their holders become
entitled to them by seniority. As they are peers from the moment of
their consecration, it may be doubted whether this creation of peers,
without seats in Parliament, does not deserve the name of "an organic
change in the constitution," far more than the addition of one or two
ecclesiastical peers to the Episcopal bench; and also whether it has not
established a dangerous principle and precedent; the disconnection of
bishoprics from seats in Parliament, in even a single instance, seeming
to furnish an argument in favor of the exclusion of the whole order, a
measure which, if unjust and injurious to the Church, would be at least
equally injurious to Parliament itself, and to the whole state.

But all questions of this kind were presently lost sight of in the
excitement produced by the measure which more than any other has stamped
Sir Robert Peel's administration with a lasting character, the repeal of
the Corn-laws. Many statesmen, even of those who were most in favor of
free-trade in other articles of commerce, made an exception in the case
of corn, partly from a feeling of the necessity of encouraging
agriculture, and partly from a conviction of the danger of in any way
contributing to create or increase a dependence on foreign countries for
the food of the people. Both Whigs and Tories were generally thus agreed
on the necessity of maintaining the principle of protection; the dispute
between the two parties being whether it were best achieved by a fixed
duty on imported corn, or by what was commonly known as a sliding scale:
a scale, that is, which varied inversely with the price of the grain
itself, rising as the price in the home market fell, and falling as it
rose. In the manufacturing districts a different feeling had prevailed
for some years. In the first years of the present reign severe distress
in Manchester and others of the chief manufacturing towns had led to the
formation of an association whose chief object was sufficiently
indicated by its title of the Anti-Corn-law League. At first Mr.
Villiers, the member for Wolverhampton, was its principal spokesman in
the House of Commons, but at subsequent elections two manufacturers of
great eloquence obtained seats, and year after year urged the entire
repeal of all duties on corn with great earnestness, though for some
time their arguments made but little impression on the House. Their
motions were rejected in 1842 by a majority of 300; in 1843 by one
exceeding 250; in 1844 by above 200; and in 1845 by one of more than 130
in a much smaller House. But this last division had scarcely been taken
when an unprecedented calamity--the almost entire failure of the potato
crop, which was attacked in nearly every part of both islands by a new
disease, the cause of which is not to this day fully ascertained--
suddenly changed the aspect of the subject. To the English farmer and
laborer it was a severe loss; to the Irish farmer it was ruin; to the
Irish peasant famine. The grain harvest, too, was generally deficient.
And it was evident that rigorous measures, promptly taken, were
indispensable, if a large portion of the peasantry in the southern and
western provinces of Ireland were not to be left to perish of actual
starvation. In the face of so terrible an emergency Peel acted with
great decision. On his own responsibility he authorized the purchase of
a large supply of Indian corn from the United States, hoping, among
other indirect effects of such a step, to accustom the Irish to the use
of other kinds of food besides the root on which hitherto they had too
exclusively relied.[269] And he laid before his colleagues in the
cabinet a proposal to suspend the existing Corn-law "for a limited
period," a measure which all saw must lead to its eventual repeal. It
would be superfluous now to recapitulate the discussions which took
place, the various alternative proposals which were suggested, or the
dissensions in the cabinet to which his proposal gave birth; the
resignation of the ministry, and its subsequent resumption of office,
when Lord Stanley and Lord John Russell had found it impossible to form
an administration. It is sufficient to say that, as soon as Parliament
met, Sir Robert brought forward a bill to reduce the duty on corn to
four shillings, a price only half of the lowest fixed duty that had ever
been proposed before, that reduction, too, being a stepping-stone to the
abolition of all duties, at the end of three years, beyond a shilling a
quarter, which was to be retained, in order to acquire an accurate
knowledge of the quantity of grain imported. The diminution, however, of
this duty was not the whole object of his new measure. It included other
arrangements which would serve as a compensation to the agriculturists,
by relieving them from some of the peculiar burdens to which the land
was subjected; and it contained, farther, a reduction or abolition of
import duties hitherto levied on many other articles, especially on such
as "formed the clothing of the country," on the fair ground that if the
removal of protection from the agriculturist were "a sacrifice for the
common good," the commercial and manufacturing interests might justly be
required to make a similar sacrifice for the same patriotic object.

Though opposed in both Houses with unusual bitterness, the ministry
carried their measure, which, indeed, in all probability, even if the
destruction of the potato crop had not come to accelerate the movement,
could not have been long delayed, the continual and rapid increase of
the population adding yearly strength to the arguments of those who
denounced the imposition of any tax which had the effect of increasing
the price of the people's food. But, however inevitable it may have
been, we are not the less compelled to regard it as indirectly bringing
about a great constitutional change, or rather as consummating that
which had been commenced by the Reform Bill. Till the year 1832 the
territorial aristocracy had exerted a predominating influence in the
government of the state. The Reform Bill, which deprived the wealthier
land-owners of the greater part of their power at elections, struck the
first blow at that influence. The abolition of the Corn-laws inflicted
on it a still more decisive wound, by its extinction of the doctrine
that there was any such peculiar sacredness about the land and its
produce as entitled them to protection beyond that enjoyed by other
kinds of property. Placing in that respect the commercial and
manufacturing interest on a level with the landed interest, it made us,
in a farther and a somewhat different sense from that in which Napoleon
had used the phrase, a nation of shopkeepers.[270]

The repeal of the Corn-laws had another result: it divided the
Conservative party, and, as a necessary consequence, led to the downfall
of the ministry. The same session which witnessed its success in
carrying that repeal witnessed also its defeat on a coercion bill, which
they regarded as indispensable for the "protection of life in Ireland,"
where actual murders had reached the appalling amount of nearly three
hundred in two years. The ministry at once resigned, and Lord John
Russell had no difficulty in forming an administration, now that the
question of the Corn-laws was finally settled. It was, however, no bed
of roses to which the new ministry succeeded; the famine in Ireland
exceeded the worst anticipations; and, though prodigious efforts were
made by the government and Parliament to relieve it, though large sums
were placed at the disposal of the Lord-lieutenant, aided by
contributions from private sources in England to an enormous amount;
though the small remnant of the import duty on corn which had been left
on it by the measure of the preceding year was taken off, and the
navigation laws suspended, in order that no obstacle interposed to the
acquisition of food from every available quarter, it was estimated that
more than half a million of people perished through actual famine or the
diseases which scarcity brought in its train.[271] A severe monetary
crisis was one not unnatural result of this distress, so severe that the
Funds fell to a price below any that had been quoted for many years, and
the reserve in the Bank of England to an amount lower than it had been
at any period since 1828. And these difficulties had hardly been
surmounted when a new revolution in France overturned the dynasty of
Louis Philippe and established a republic. The revolutionary contagion
spread to Italy, where, indeed, the movement had begun. The Pope--Pius
IX.--who had but lately succeeded to the tiara, was forced to flee from
Rome in the disguise of a foreign courier, after his Prime-minister had
been murdered by the mob. Germany was scarcely less disturbed. The
administration of Metternich, who had governed Austria with authority
little less than absolute for nearly forty years, was overthrown in a
tumult in which he himself escaped with difficulty from the violence of
the populace; dangerous riots took place at Munich, at Berlin, and at
the capitals of most of the smaller principalities, and for some time
everything seemed to portend the outbreak of a general war, likely to be
the more formidable as being a war of the revolutionary and republican
against the monarchical principle. Happily, that danger was averted. The
only war which broke out between different nations was a brief contest
in the north of Italy, which the superior numbers of the Austrian armies
and the skill of Marshal Radetsky, a veteran who had learned the art of
war under Suvarof nearly sixty years before, decided in favor of
Austria, and which in the spring of 1849 was terminated by a peace on
less unfavorable terms to Sardinia than she could well have expected.
And in the same season tranquillity was re-established even at Rome,
which, from the peculiar character of the Papal power, contained special
elements of provocation and danger.

But, though peace was thus generally maintained, these various events
had produced a ferment of spirits which required some time to calm down,
and so greatly embarrassed the government, that in the spring of 1852
Lord John Russell's administration was dissolved, and a new ministry was
formed by Lord Derby[272]. But the causes which had overthrown his
predecessor remained to weaken him; so that for some time it seemed
impossible to form a ministry which afforded any promise of stability.
Such a rapid succession of changes as ensued had had no parallel since
the first years of George III. Between February, 1852, and February,
1855, the country had no fewer than four different Prime-ministers, a
fact which was at once both the proof and the parent of weakness in
every administration. Lord John Russell had attempted to procure a
factitious support in the country by stimulating a fresh demand for
parliamentary reform. A year or two before, he had provoked the
dissatisfaction of the "Advanced Liberals," as they called themselves,
by insisting on the finality of the Reform Bill of 1832, and by advising
his followers "to rest and be thankful" for what had been then obtained.
But now he began to advance an opinion that that act required "some
amendments to carry into more complete effect the principles on which it
was founded." He inserted an intimation of that doctrine in the Queen's
speech; and endeavored to give effect to it by bringing in a bill to
lower the franchise, having, it seems, persuaded himself that a
five-pound franchise would create a more Conservative class of
voters.[273] He had scarcely introduced it when the fall of his ministry
led to its abandonment; but, though it was coldly received by the House
of Commons, the idea was taken up by the other political parties, who
can hardly be acquitted of having used the question merely as an
instrument of party warfare, trying, with an unstatesmanlike
indifference to the danger of re-awakening the old frenzy on the
subject, to rouse the nation to take an interest in it; but trying in
vain. The nation was no longer in the same temper as it had displayed
twenty years before. The Reform Bill of 1832 had been demanded and
carried with a frantic vehemence of enthusiasm such as could only have
been excited by real defects and grievances. But those grievances had
been removed and redressed. And the bulk of the people could take no
interest in schemes whose sole end seemed to be either to satisfy the
theories of some political doctrinaires or to embarrass an adversary;
till at last, as Reform Bill after Reform Bill was framed, brought in,
and defeated, or dropped, it became plain, "as the Prince Consort noted
in a private memorandum at the end of 1859, that what the country
wanted, in fact, was not reform, but a bill to stop the question of
Reform."[274] And, at last, the prevalence of this feeling Lord John
Russell could not conceal even from himself, but confessed to Lord
Palmerston, then Prime-minister, who had always silently discouraged the
movement, that "the apathy of the country was undeniable; nor was it a
transient humor. It seemed rather a confirmed habit of mind. Four Reform
Bills had been introduced of late years by four different governments,
and for not one of them had there been the least enthusiasm. The
conclusion to which he had come was, that the advisers of the crown of
all parties having offered to the country various measures of reform,
and the country having shown itself indifferent to them all, the best
course which could now be taken was to wait till the country should show
a manifest desire for an amendment of the representation."[275]

There was, however, in these years one subject in which the country did
take a real interest; that was the development and extension of the
principles of free-trade. On that the national view had become so
decided that in 1848 the Parliament even abolished the navigation laws,
which had subsisted so long, the first act on the subject dating from
the reign of Richard II., that the adherence to the principle contained
in them of confining both the export and the import trade of the
kingdom, with but few exceptions, to British shipping, seemed almost an
essential article of the constitution. It was the dearer, too, to the
national prejudices, from the sense universally entertained of the
paramount importance of maintaining the pre-eminence of our navy, and
from the belief that the commercial marine was a nursery for the royal
fleets, with which they could not dispense. But latterly the laws had
become unpopular even with some of those who had formerly been supposed
to derive the greatest benefit from them. Many of our colonies had
complained of their operation, and several of the ablest of our colonial
governors had recommended their repeal. They had been found, too, to
present frequent and considerable difficulties in our commercial
negotiations with other countries, and many naval officers of large
experience and sound judgment expressed a decided belief that they were
of no practical use to the naval service. The result of a long and able
debate was that the laws were repealed, with the exception of that
portion of them which preserved the monopoly of the coasting trade to
our own seamen and vessels, that exception being chiefly dictated by
considerations connected with the prevention of smuggling.

The ground on which the ministers relied in proposing this repeal of
laws so ancient was that, when protection had been removed from every
other trade, those concerned in these different trades had an
irresistible claim for its removal from the shipping. And on general
principles, both of commerce and statesmanship, the claim was, as they
urged, irresistible, unless some object of greater importance still than
uniformity of legislation--namely, the national safety, bound up as it
unquestionably was in the perpetual pre-eminence of the national
navy--required an exception to be made. But for the maintenance of our
maritime supremacy it was, as Burke had preached three-quarters of a
century before, better to trust to the spirit of the people, to their
attachment to their government, and to their innate aptitude for
seamanship, which they seem to have inherited from the hardy rovers of
the dark ages, and which no other nation shares with them in an equal
degree. And if that may safely be trusted, as undoubtedly it may, to
maintain the supremacy of our warlike fleets, the preponderance of
argument seemed greatly on the side of those who contended that our
commercial fleets needed no such protection; to which it may be added
that exceptions to a general rule and principle are in themselves so
questionable, that the burden of proof seems to lie upon those who would
establish or maintain them. But the advocates of free-trade were not
content even with this triumph, though it might have been thought a
crowning one, and in the course of the next year they succeeded in
carrying a resolution which (though Lord Derby and the opponents of the
act of 1846 were now in office) was not resisted even by the ministry,
being, in fact, the result of a compromise between the different
parties; and which asserted that "the improved condition of the country,
and especially of the industrious classes, was mainly the result of
recent legislation, which had established the principle of unrestricted
competition, ... and that it was the opinion of the House that this
policy, firmly maintained and prudently extended, would, without
inflicting injury on any important interest, best enable the industry of
the country to bear its own burdens, and would thereby most surely
promote the welfare and contentment of the people." Such a resolution
was, in fact, the adoption of free-trade as the permanent ruling
principle of all future commercial legislation. And even before the
adoption of this resolution, the feeling in favor of free-trade had been
greatly strengthened by the Great Exhibition, which not only delighted
the world for six months with a spectacle of such varied and surpassing
beauty as even its original projector, the Prince Consort, had not
pictured to himself, but which had also the farther and more important
effect of instructing the British workman in every branch of
manufacture, by bringing before his eyes the workmanship of other
nations; and, as we may well believe (though such a result is not so
easily tested), of improving the mutual good-will between rival nations,
from the respect for each which the experience of their skill and
usefulness could not fail to excite.

Notes:

[Footnote 258: On the 20th of February, 1840, Baron Stockmar writes:
"Melbourne told me that he had already expressed his opinion to the
Prince that the Court ought to take advantage of the present movement to
treat all parties, especially the Tories, in the spirit of a general
amnesty." To the Queen his language was the same: "You should now hold
out the olive-branch a little."--_Life of the Prince Consort_, i., 83.]

[Footnote 259: He became Prime-minister in September, 1841, and retired
in June, 1846--four years and three-quarters afterward.]

[Footnote 260: "Life of the Prince Consort," i., 266. It may be remarked
that, in spite of the opinion thus expressed by Sir Robert Peel, of
those who, since his retirement in 1846, have held the same office, the
majority have been members of the House of Commons. The peers who have
since been Prime-ministers have been Lord Aberdeen and Lord Derby; the
members of the House of Commons have been Lord John Russell, Lord
Palmerston, Mr. Disraeli, and Mr. Gladstone; though it may be thought
that in his second ministry Mr. Disraeli showed his concurrence in Sir
Robert Peel's latest view, by becoming a peer in the third year of his
administration.]

[Footnote 261: Lord Stanhope tells us "the remedial resolutions moved by
Pitt in the House of Commons, as abolishing the old duties and
substituting new ones in a simpler form, amounted in number to no less
than 2537."--_Life of Pitt_, i., 330. Peel, in his speech, March 21,
1842, states that he reduces or takes off altogether (wherever the duty
is trifling, but is practicable) the duty on 750 articles of import.]

[Footnote 262: In the Commons by 307 to 184; in the Lords by 226 to 69.]

[Footnote 263: The following statements of the members of colleges and
of the three denominations for 1879, 1874, and 1869 appear in the last
_Queen's University Calendar_:

                         1879. 1874. 1869.
Church of Ireland ....... 201   189   211
Roman Catholics   ....... 223   188   161
Presbyterians  .......... 388   249   227
Other denominations......  88    87    83
                          ---   ---   ---
                          900   713   682]

[Footnote 264: In the course of the session, in order to tranquillize
the public mind on the subject, secret committees were appointed by both
Houses of Parliament to investigate the subject, from whose inquiries it
appeared that, since the days when the government was endangered by the
plots of the Jacobites, the power had been very sparingly used. The most
conspicuous instance of its employment had been in the case of Bishop
Atterbury, several of whose letters had been opened, and were produced
in Parliament to justify the bill of "pains and penalties" which was
passed against him. The power had been confined to Great Britain till
the latter part of the last century, when it was judged desirable to
extend it also to the Lord-lieutenant of Ireland. But, since the Peace
of Amiens, the number of letters opened in a year had not, on an
average, exceeded eight; nor was there the least ground for suspecting
that a single one had been opened except on such information as fully
warranted suspicion.

The practice, however, was not confined to our own government. In the
second volume of the "Life of Bishop Wilberforce" a page is given of his
diary, dated July 18, 1854, which records a conversation in which the
Duke of Newcastle and Lord John Russell took part, and in which it is
mentioned that the French government, under the administration of M.
Guizot, opened letters, and that the practice was not confined to
monarchical or absolute governments, for "the American government opens
most freely all letters." And, with reference to this particular case,
the Duke of Newcastle said that "Sir James Graham really opened
Mazzini's letters on information which led to a belief that a great act
of violence and bloodshed might be prevented by it."--_Life of Bishop
Wilberforce_, ii., 247.]

[Footnote 265: A subsequent act, passed since the date at which the
present history closes, has repealed even this exception. By the 33d
Victoria, c. 14 ("Law Reports," p. 169), it is enacted that "an alien,
to whom a certificate of naturalization is granted, shall in the United
Kingdom be entitled to all political and other rights, powers, and
privileges, and be subject to all obligations to which a natural born
British subject is entitled as subject in the United Kingdom," etc.; and
at the general election of 1880 the Baron de Ferrieres, a Belgian
nobleman, who had been naturalized in 1867, was elected M.P. for
Cheltenham.]

[Footnote 266: In one instance--on the question whether twelve should be
the number of hours, as proposed by the Government--the majority against
that number was 186 to 183. But immediately afterward a majority of 188
to 184 decided against Lord Ashley's alternative proposal of ten hours.]

[Footnote 267: As President of the Board of Trade. He afterward was
raised to the Peerage as Lord Taunton.]

[Footnote 268: The second reading was carried in the House of Lords by
49 to 37.]

[Footnote 269: See "Peel's Memoirs," ii., 173.]

[Footnote 270: It has been observed that till the Corn-laws were
repealed there had been no instance whatever of any person who had been
engaged in trade becoming a cabinet minister. Since that time there have
been several, some of whom only relinquished their share in houses of
business on receiving their appointments, and some who are generally
understood to have continued to participate in the profits of trade
while members of an administration.]

[Footnote 271: Alison, quoting the General Report of the Census
Commissioners, estimates the deaths caused by famine and the diseases
engendered by it at the appalling number of 590,000, and states the sums
advanced under different acts of Parliament to meet the emergency at
£7,132,268.--_History of Europe_, vii., 274, 276, 2d series.]

[Footnote 272: The same statesman who has previously been mentioned as
Lord Stanley, and whom the death of his father had recently raised to
the House of Peers.]

[Footnote 273: In 1853 he said to Lord Clarendon, speaking of a new bill
which he was pressing on Lord Aberdeen, then Prime-minister, "I am for
making it as Conservative as possible, and that by a large extension of
the suffrage. The Radicals are the ten-pound holders. The five-pound
holders will be Conservative, as they are more easily acted
upon."--_Life of the Prince Consort_, ii., 503. It was the same idea
that inspired some of the details of the Reform Bill subsequently passed
by Lord Derby's third ministry.]

[Footnote 274: "Life of the Prince Consort," iv., 395.]

[Footnote 275: "Life of the Prince Consort," v., 56.]


CHAPTER XIII.


Dismissal of Lord Palmerston.--Theory of the Relation between the
Sovereign and the Cabinet.--Correspondence of the Sovereign with French
Princes.--Russian War.--Abolition of the Tax on Newspapers.--Life
Peerages.--Resignation of two Bishops.--Indian Mutiny.--Abolition of the
Sovereign Power of the Company.--Visit of the Prince of Wales to
India.--Conspiracy Bill.--Rise of the Volunteers.--National
Fortifications.--The Lords Reject the Measure for the Repeal of the
Paper-duties.--Lord Palmerston's Resolutions.--Character of the Changes
during the last Century.


The frequency of ministerial changes at this time has already been
mentioned, and the first of them took place at the beginning of 1852,
under circumstances which throw some light on a question which has never
been exactly defined--the duty of the different members of a cabinet to
one another, to the Prime-minister, and to the sovereign.

Queen Victoria had a high idea of her duties and responsibilities. From
any legal responsibility she was aware that she was exempt; but she did
not the less consider that a moral responsibility rested on her not to
be content to give her royal sanction as a mere matter of form to every
scheme or measure which might be submitted to her, but to examine every
case for herself, to form her own opinion, and, if it differed from that
of her ministers, to lay her objections and views fairly before them,
though prepared, as the constitution required, to act on their decision
rather than on her own, if, in spite of her arguments, they adhered to
their judgment. And in carrying out this notion of her duty she was
singularly aided by the Prince, her husband, a man of perfectly upright
character, of great general ability, and who, from the first moment of
his married life, regulated his views of every question, domestic and
foreign, by its bearing on English interests and English feelings, to
which he early acclimatized himself with a remarkable readiness of
appreciation.

In the administration of Lord John Russell, Lord Palmerston was Foreign
Secretary, and during its latter years foreign affairs occupied more of
the attention of the country than matters of domestic policy.

The revolution of 1848, which overthrew the Orleans dynasty, had
produced in France a state of affairs but little removed from anarchy,
which was scarcely mitigated by the election of Prince Louis Napoleon to
the Presidency of the new republic for four years, so constant was the
opposition which the Republican party in the Assembly offered to every
part of his policy. They even carried their opposition so far as to form
a deliberate plan for the impeachment of his minister and himself, and
for his arrest and imprisonment at Vincennes. But he was well-informed
of all these dangers, and on the morning of the 2d of December, 1851
(the day, as was commonly believed, having been selected by him as being
the anniversary of his uncle's great victory of Austerlitz), he
anticipated them by the arrest of all the leading malcontents in their
beds; which he followed up by an appeal to the people to adopt a new
constitution which he set before them, the chief article of which was
the appointment of a President for ten years.

No one could avoid seeing that what was aimed at was the
re-establishment of the Empire in his own person. And so arbitrary a
deed, as was inevitable, produced great excitement in England and
anxious deliberations in the cabinet. Their decision, in strict
uniformity with the principle that rules our conduct toward foreign
nations, was to instruct our ambassador in Paris, Lord Normanby, to
avoid any act or word which could wear the appearance of an act of
interference of any kind in the internal affairs of France. But, on Lord
Normanby reporting these instructions to the French Foreign Secretary,
M. Guizot, he learned, to his surprise and perplexity, that Lord
Palmerston had interfered already by expressing to the French ambassador
in London, M. de Walewski, his warm approval of the President's
conduct;[276] and Lord Normanby, greatly annoyed at being directed to
hold one language in Paris, while the head of his department was taking
a widely different tone in Downing Street--a complication which
inevitably "subjected him to misrepresentation and suspicion"--naturally
complained to the Prime-minister of being placed in so embarrassing a
situation.

Both the Queen and the Prime-minister had for some time been
discontented at the independent manner in which Lord Palmerston
apparently considered himself entitled to transact the business of his
department, carrying it so far as even to claim a right to send out
despatches without giving them any intimation of either their contents
or their objects. And the Queen, in consequence, above a year
before,[277] had drawn up a memorandum, in which she expressed with
great distinctness her desire to have every step which the Foreign
Secretary might recommend to be taken laid clearly before her, with
sufficient time for consideration, "that she might know distinctly to
what she had given her royal sanction;" and "to be kept informed of what
passed between him and the Foreign Ministers before important decisions
are taken," etc., etc. And, after such an intimation of her wish, she
not unnaturally felt great annoyance at learning that in a transaction
so important as this coup d'etat (to give it the name by which from the
first it was described in every country) Lord Palmerston had taken upon
himself to hold language to the French Ambassador "in complete
contradiction to the line of strict neutrality and passiveness which she
had expressed her desire to see followed with regard to the late
convulsions at Paris, and which was approved by the cabinet."[278] The
Prime-minister seems to have taken the same view of the act, and
remonstrated with Lord Palmerston, who treated the matter very lightly,
and justified his right to hold such a conversation, which he
characterized as "unofficial," in such a tone and on such grounds that
Lord John considered he left him no alternative "but to advise the Queen
to place the Foreign Office in other hands."

A careful and generally impartial political critic has recently
expressed an opinion "that Lord Palmerston made good his case;"[279] but
his argument on the transaction seems to overlook the most material
point in it. Lord Palmerston's own defence of his conduct was, that "his
conversation with Walewski was of an unofficial description; that he had
said nothing to him which would in any degree or way fetter the action
of the government; and that, if it was to be held that a Secretary of
State could never express any opinion to a foreign minister on passing
events except as the organ of a previously consulted cabinet, there
would be an end of that easy and familiar intercourse which tends
essentially to promote good understanding between ministers and
government;" and he even added, as a personal justification of himself
as against the Prime-minister, that three days afterward Lord John
Russell himself, Lord Lansdowne (the President of the Council), and Sir
Charles Wood (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) had all discussed the
transaction with M. de Walewski at a dinner-party, "and their opinions
were, if anything, rather more strongly favorable than his had been."

This personal aspect of the case it is impossible to discuss, since
there are no means of knowing whether the ministers mentioned would have
admitted the correctness of this report of their language. If it were
confessed to be accurate, it would only show them to have been guilty of
equal impropriety, and to a great extent justify him as against the
Prime-minister, whose condemnation of his language, if he were conscious
that he had held the same himself, would be inexplicable. But it
certainly does not justify him in respect of her Majesty or the cabinet
collectively, since the Queen's complaint was, not that he held
unofficial conversations as a private individual, and not as "the organ
of a previously consulted cabinet," but that the tenor of the
conversation which he had held was in direct contradiction to the tone
which the cabinet had decided should be taken on the subject; that his
language was calculated to draw the government into a course of action
which it had been deliberately resolved to avoid. And, in spite of the
deference due to Lord Palmerston's great experience, it is hard to see
how a conversation between our Foreign Secretary and the French
Ambassador on an action, the result of which is as yet undecided, can be
wholly unofficial, in the sense of having no influence on the conduct of
affairs, or, as he expressed it, "in no degree or way fettering the
action of the government."

The result was, as has been mentioned before, that the Prime-minister
recommended the removal of Lord Palmerston from his office, and that he
was removed accordingly. And this conclusion of the case seems to show
that the statement of the position of the Prime-minister in the cabinet
is rather understated by Mr. Gladstone in one of his essays,[280] where
he says: "The head of the British government is not a Grand Vizier. He
has no powers, properly so called, over his colleagues; on the rare
occasions when a cabinet determines its course by the votes of its
members, his vote only counts as one of theirs." He admits at the same
time that "they are appointed and dismissed by the sovereign on his
advice." And surely to have the right of giving this advice is to have
the greatest possible power over his colleagues; not power, perhaps, to
change their opinions (though it possibly at times has had power to
prevent the expression of them), but power to compass their immediate
removal from the administration, as was exercised in this instance, and
as had been exercised by Pitt with regard to Lord Thurlow. That a
difference of opinion, even on an important subject, is not always
regarded as a sufficient cause for such a dismissal; that a
Prime-minister, especially if conscious of his strength, occasionally
consents to retain colleagues who differ from him on some one subject,
the same work to which we are partly indebted for our knowledge of the
details of this affair--the "Life of the Prince Consort"--furnishes two
remarkable instances in which the Prime-minister, then Lord Palmerston
himself, submitted to be overruled. We read there that on one occasion,
when "Count Persigny sought the active intervention of England by the
way of 'moral support' to a demand" which France proposed to address to
Austria, "Lord Palmerston and Lord John Russell (then Foreign Secretary)
were disposed to accede; but a different view was taken both by her
Majesty and by the cabinet, and Count Persigny's request was accordingly
declined."[281] On this occasion, it is true, he was yielding to an
overwhelming majority of his colleagues (her Majesty's approval must, of
course, have been expressed subsequently to their decision). But in
another instance we find the same Prime-minister consenting to the
introduction of a bill by one of his colleagues, Mr. Gladstone, then
Chancellor of the Exchequer, of which he disapproved so highly that,
after it had been passed by a very slender majority of the House of
Commons,[282] he expressed to the Queen a hope that the closeness of the
division "might encourage the House of Lords to throw out the bill when
it should come to their House, and that he was bound in duty to say
that, if they should do so, they would perform a good public service;"
and after they had rejected it by a majority of eighty-nine, he
pronounced that "they had done a right and useful thing," reporting to
her Majesty, as a corroboration of this opinion, and as a proof that it
was largely shared by the public out-of-doors, that "the people in the
gallery of the House of Lords are said to have joined in the cheers
which broke out when the numbers of the division were announced."[283]
And on a third occasion also he bore with the same colleague's
opposition to a measure which he and all the rest of the cabinet justly
thought of vital importance to the best interests of the country, the
fortification of our great seaports, allowing him to object for a time
in private, and even to threaten public opposition to it the next year,
since he felt assured that his opposition, if carried out, which he
doubted, would be wholly ineffectual.[284]

The personal interest in politics which this laudable habit of judging
of everything for herself naturally engendered in the Queen's mind led,
however, to the adoption by her Majesty, in more than one instance, of a
course at variance not only with all historical precedent, but, with
deference be it said, with constitutional principle, sanctioned though
it was by more than one ministry. When the First Napoleon, after his
elevation to the head of the French government as First Consul,
proposed, by an autograph letter to George III., to treat with that
sovereign for the conclusion of peace between the two nations, Pitt, to
whom his Majesty communicated the letter, had no difficulty in deciding
that it would be unseasonable for the King "to depart from the forms
long established in Europe for transacting business with foreign
states,"[285] and, under his guidance, the cabinet instructed Lord
Grenville, as Foreign Secretary, to address the reply to the First
Consul's letter to the French Foreign Secretary, M. de Talleyrand.

But this reign has witnessed several departures from the old and
convenient rule. Its violation was not begun by her Majesty, but by the
Emperor Nicholas of Russia in the year preceding the Crimean war. He
wrote to the Queen herself to discuss some of the points in dispute, and
she answered his letter with her own hand.[286] The outbreak of war
which soon ensued prevented any continuation of that correspondence; but
the close alliance which that war for a time produced between England
and France, strengthened as it was by an interchange of visits between
the royal and imperial families, which led to the establishment of a
strong mutual friendliness and regard, led also to an occasional
interchange of letters on some of the gravest questions affecting the
policy of the two nations. The correspondence was sanctioned by
successive English cabinets, every letter which the Queen either
received from, or sent to, any foreign prince on political affairs being
invariably communicated by her either to the Prime-minister or to the
Foreign Secretary; and they, in one instance, even suggesting to her
Majesty to write to Louis Napoleon[287] with an object so delicate as
that of influencing the language with which he was about to open his
Chambers.

But we must think the line recommended by Pitt to George III. both more
constitutional and more safe. A letter from one sovereign to another on
political subjects cannot be divested of the character of a state-paper,
and for every state-paper some one must be responsible. The sovereign
cannot be, but for every one of his actions the ministers are. And it
follows, therefore, that they are thus made responsible for documents of
which they have not been the original authors; of which, were it not for
the courtesy of the sovereign, they might by possibility be wholly
ignorant; and with parts of which, even with the knowledge which that
courtesy has afforded them, they may not fully coincide, since they
could hardly venture to subject a composition of their royal mistress to
a vigorous criticism. Such a correspondence, therefore, places them so
far in a false position, and it runs the risk of placing the sovereign
himself in one equally false and unpleasant, since, if the opinions
expressed or the advice given fail of their effect, the adviser is so
far lowered in the eyes of his correspondent and of the world.

As has been incidentally mentioned, in the spring of 1854 war broke out
with Russia, nominally on account of the Sultan's refusal to concede
some of the Czar's demands concerning the condition of the Greek Church
in Palestine, but more really because, believing the Turkish empire to
be in the last stage of decay, he hoped by hastening its destruction to
obtain the lion's share of its spoils. And for the first time for two
centuries an English and French army stood together in a field of battle
as allies. In the field our armies were invariably victorious,
inflicting severe defeats on the enemy at Alma and Inkerman, and
wresting from them the mighty fortress of Sebastopol, in the Crimea,
which hitherto they had believed to be absolutely impregnable. Our fleet
was, if possible, still more triumphant, destroying Bomarsund and
Sweaborg, in the Baltic, without the Russian ships daring to fire a
single gun in their defence, while their Black Sea fleet was even sunk
by its own admiral, as the only expedient to save it from capture. And
in the spring of 1856 the war was terminated by a treaty of peace, in
which, for the first time since the days of Peter the Great, Russia was
compelled to submit to a cession of territory. But (it may almost be
said) to the credit of the nation these successes, glorious and
substantial as they were, made at the time scarcely so great an
impression on the people as the hardships which, in the first winter of
the war, our troops suffered from the defective organization of our
commissariat. Want of shelter and want of food proved more destructive
than the Russian cannon; presently our gallant soldiers were reported to
be perishing by hundreds for lack of common necessaries; and the news
awakened so clamorous a discontent throughout the whole of the United
Kingdom as led to another change of ministry, and Lord Aberdeen was
succeeded by Lord Palmerston. While a war on so large a scale was being
waged there was but little time to spare for the work of the legislator,
though it is not foreign to our subject to relate that in 1855 the last
of those taxes which the political economists denounced as taxes on
knowledge, the tax on newspapers, was abolished. Originally it had been
fourpence; in 1836 Mr. Spring Rice, Chancellor of the Exchequer in Lord
Melbourne's ministry, had reduced it to a penny; and now, with a very
general acquiescence, it was abolished altogether.

The entire abolition of a tax is not properly to be called a financial
measure, that epithet belonging rather to those which aim at an
augmentation of revenue by an increase in the number of contributors to
a tax, while lessening the amount paid by each. But the abandonment of
the tax in question should rather be regarded as a sacrifice of revenue
for the instruction of the people in political knowledge; a price paid
to enable and induce the poorer classes to take a well-instructed
interest in the affairs of the state and the general condition of the
country. And, viewed in this light, the abolition of this tax must be
allowed to have been a political measure of great importance, and to
have contributed greatly to the end which was aimed at. Till 1836 a
daily paper, costing sevenpence, was the luxury of the few; and the sale
even of those which had the largest circulation was necessarily limited.
But the removal of the tax at once gave birth to a host of penny
newspapers, conducted for the most part with great ability, and soon
attaining a circulation which reached down to all but the very poorest
class; so that the working-man has now an opportunity of seeing the most
important questions of the day discussed from every point of view, and
of thus acquiring information and forming a judgment on them which the
subsequent extension of the franchise makes it more than ever desirable
that he should be able to form for himself. Every movement in that
direction renders it the more necessary to raise the intelligence of the
great mass of the people to a level which may enable them to make a safe
and salutary use of the power placed in their hands. And no mode of
implanting a wholesome political feeling in the masses can equal candid
political discussion: discussion one ruling principle of which shall be
to teach that the greatest differences of opinion may be honestly
entertained; that, with scarcely an exception, the leading men of each
party, those who have any title to the name of statesman, are animated
with an honest, patriotic desire to promote the best interests of the
nation; and that the elucidation of truth is not aided by unreasoning
invective and the undeserved imputation of base motives.

One of the last topics discussed by Mr. Hallam was the introduction of a
bill to limit for the future the prerogative of the crown in a field in
which its exercise had previously been unrestrained, the creation of
peers;[288] and among the last which we shall have to examine was one of
an exactly opposite character, though relating to the same subject, the
creation of a life peerage. In the winter of 1855 Sir James Parke, one
of the Barons of the Exchequer, was created Lord Wenslydale, by
letters-patent which conferred the title limiting it also to the new
peer's own life. The professed object of the measure was to strengthen
the judicial power of the House of Lords. But it was not denied that the
limitation of the peerage conferred on him for his own life (a
limitation which made no practical difference to Sir James himself,
since he had no children) was intended to raise the question whether the
crown could or could not create a life peerage with a seat in the House
of Lords. A creation so limited was so novel, or at all events so long
disused a proceeding, that it inevitably provoked examination and
discussion. And, as it was found that the lawyers in general regarded it
as indefensible, at the beginning of the session of 1856 Lord Lyndhurst
brought the matter before the House of Lords by a motion for the
appointment of a committee of privileges to investigate and report upon
it. There were two aspects of the case which naturally came to be
considered in the debates on it which ensued: the advantages or
disadvantages, in other words, the political expediency, of such a form
of letters-patent, and their legal or constitutional propriety. It was,
of course, with the latter alone that the committee of privileges had to
deal. And this part of the question was examined with great legal and
antiquarian learning, though, as was almost inevitable, it was argued as
a party question, except, indeed, by the lawyers. They, with the
exception of the Chancellor, Lord Cranworth, who had advised the
measure, were unanimous in their condemnation of it; the Whig peers,
Lord Brougham and Lord Campbell, then Chief-justice, being as positive
in their denial of the right so to exercise the prerogative as those on
the Opposition side of the House, Lord Lyndhurst or Lord St.
Leonards.[289]

The arguments against the measure were chiefly these: The objectors drew
a distinction between what was legal according to the strict letter of
the law, and what was constitutional; contending that there might be
exercises of the prerogative which could not be affirmed to be illegal,
but which no one would deny to be altogether inconsistent with the
principles and practice of the constitution, since a great part of the
constitution rested on unwritten law, on long-continued usage, _Lex et
consuetudo Parliamenti_. And they affirmed that this measure was so
opposed to that usage, that "no instance had occurred within a period of
four hundred years in which a commoner had been raised to a seat in the
House of Lords by a patent of peerage containing only an estate for
life;"[290] one most essential, if not the most essential character of
the peerage being that it was an hereditary dignity, and one which
combined with its rank an hereditary seat in the House of Lords. That
one or two instances of life peerages were to be found in the annals of
the Plantagenet kings was not denied, though none exactly similar in
character.[291] But Lord Lyndhurst argued that precedents which had
occurred "at a time when the constitution of the country was neither
understood nor fully formed" were entitled to but little respect; and
Lord Derby, limiting the age of valid precedents a little more strictly,
"said frankly that he had no respect for any precedent affecting the
prerogatives of the crown that dated farther back than the year 1688."
And since that time, or indeed since the time of Henry VIII., it was
certain that no life peerage had ever been granted, except by Charles
II., James II., and George I. and II., to some of their mistresses,
instances wholly beside the present case, since, of course, none of
those ladies could claim seats in the House of Lords. Indeed, it was
believed that both Mr. Pitt, at the time of the Union, and Lord Grey, in
1832, had considered the question, and had both decided against the
propriety of advising a creation of life peerages.

In defence of the measure Lord Granville refused to admit the
distinction between what was legal and what was constitutional; if a
measure were both legal, that is, warranted by the letter of the law,
and also expedient, these two concurrent qualities, he contended, made
it constitutional. He denied, also, that any legal prerogatives of the
crown could be held to have lapsed through disuse; _nullum tempus
occurrit Regi_; and he challenged any peer to assert that the sovereign
had lost the right of refusing his royal assent to a measure passed by
the two Houses, merely because no sovereign since William III. had so
exercised his royal prerogative. And against the authority of Mr. Pitt
and Lord Grey he quoted that of Lord John Russell, who, in 1851, had
offered a life peerage to an eminent judge, who, though he had declined
the offer, had been influenced in his refusal by no doubt of the right
of the crown to make it.

On the expediency of the measure its opponents had urged that it would
effect a remodelling of the House of Peers, a total change of its
constitution, by the introduction of a second and distinct class of
peerages; and Lord Campbell, with a not unbecoming jealousy for what he
regarded as the interests of his brother lawyers, argued that it would
"henceforth prevent any lawyer, however eminent he might have been as an
advocate, whatever services he might have rendered to the state in the
House of Commons, whatever fame or fortune he might have acquired, from
aspiring to an hereditary peerage, or to becoming the founder of a
family, since, to make a distinction between the Chancellor and the
Chief-justice, between one Chancellor or Chief-justice and another, when
coming into the Upper House, as to the tenure of their honors, would be
intolerable; all must be under the same rule, 'no son of theirs
succeeding.'" And Lord Lyndhurst closed his argument by drawing a
comparison between the House of Lords and the French Senate: "It was but
a few weeks since he had read an official comment in the _Moniteur_,
coming from the highest source, on the inefficiency, the want of
patriotism, energy, and the backwardness to fulfil the high destinies to
which they were called, that characterized that illustrious body, the
Senate of France. He had no disposition to cut down our tribunal to that
life interest on which the Senate of France is based, as he believed the
hereditary character of the House of Lords to be one from which great
and important advantages are derived.... The hereditary principle," he
added, "is intwined in every part of our constitution; we in this House
enjoy our hereditary rights in common with the crown; we mutually
support and assist each other, and we form a barrier and defence to
protect both those branches of the constitution against any by whom they
may be assailed."

As Lord Granville had made the expediency of any measure the quality
which, combined with legality, was sufficient to establish its
constitutional character, he naturally labored this point with especial
diligence. He dwelt upon the great importance of strengthening the
judicial element in the House, since it was the great ultimate court of
appeal. He produced a letter of the great Chancellor, Lord Eldon, which
quoted instances in which various administrations had found difficulties
in the way of introducing eminent lawyers into the House, because their
want of adequate fortune to support the rank had disinclined them to
encumber their descendants with an hereditary peerage. He showed also
that that difficulty had made so great an impression on their own
Chairman of Committees, Lord Redesdale, that on one occasion he had
intimated a feeling in favor of allowing "the Law, in the same way as
the Church, to be, to a certain extent, represented in the House by the
holders of certain offices, who should be admitted to that House as
Peers of Parliament during the continuance of holding such office" (to
which argument Earl Grey added another, that the instance of bishops,
who were but life peers, proved that the holders of life peerages were
not considered inferior to hereditary peers).

He dwelt, too, on the evil consequence of the Lords "placing themselves
before the country as seeking to limit the prerogative of the crown,
when that prerogative was exercised with a view to remedy something that
was weak, and to remove a certain imminent danger." What the danger was
he certainly did not explain. But Lord Grey, in supporting him, took
wider ground, and, applying the argument derived from Lord Eldon's
letter to other professions, extolled the idea of instituting life
peerages as one whose effect would be "more easily to open the doors of
the House to men whom it was desirable should be admitted--to
distinguished officers; to eminent writers; to members of the House of
Commons, who in their different lines might have rendered good service
to the state, but who, though possessing means amply sufficient to
support their rank during their own life, yet, from having only a life
income, or a numerous family to be provided for, might be unable to
accept an hereditary peerage without injury to their family. In such
instances," he contended, "it would be most desirable to grant peerages
for life only. Such a proceeding would, he was convinced, by no means
disincline others in different circumstances to accept hereditary
titles, nor indispose the ministry to confer them. Nor did he see any
reason for fearing that the practice of creating life peerages would be
more likely to be abused for the purpose of increasing the power of the
minister than the creation of hereditary peerages."

The committee of privileges was appointed, and reported it as the
opinion of the members that "neither the letters-patent by themselves,
or with, the addition of the usual writ of summons, could entitle the
grantee to sit and vote in Parliament." And the House, by a majority of
ninety-two to fifty-seven, adopted their report. The ministers yielded
to its judgment, and ennobled Lord Wenslydale by a new patent in the
usual form, as Lord Derby had suggested. But Lord Derby desired to show
that his objection had been founded on principle only; and, as he was
willing to admit that, apart from the principle involved, "some
advantages in certain cases, and under certain modifications, might
arise from peerages for life," he proposed the appointment of a select
committee "to consider the expediency of making provision for the more
efficient discharge of the duties of the House as a court of appeal."
The committee was appointed, and, after careful consideration,
recommended the creation of two new offices, to be held by two law
lords, as "Deputy Speakers of the House of Lords," who should be judges
of at least five years' standing, and should be enabled "by authority of
Parliament to sit and vote in the House, and enjoy all the rights and
privileges of a peer of Parliament under a patent conferring a peerage
for life only, if the crown may have granted or shall grant the same to
such persons in preference to an hereditary peerage, provided always
that not more than four persons shall have seats in the House at one
time as peers for life." Such an arrangement would have introduced a new
practice, but not a new principle, since the annexation of a seat in the
House of Lords to certain offices had existed from time immemorial in
the case of the bishops. And the bill was carried in the House of Lords,
but defeated in the Commons by a motion to refer it to a committee,
which was adopted by a small majority, in a not very full House,[292]
toward the end of the session.

Those who look at the question apart from all preference of one minister
or one party to another will, probably, be of opinion that the decision
of the committee, that a life peerage thus created by the crown could
not confer a seat in Parliament, was conformable to the most legitimate
view of the constitution. It was, indeed, matter of history that in the
Middle Ages the crown had exercised its prerogative in many ways which
it had since abandoned. Boroughs had been enfranchised, and again
disfranchised, apparently from no motive but pure caprice; writs of
summons had been withheld from peers.[293] But no one would have
justified the repetition of such acts now. And common-sense, as well as
recognized usage, favored the doctrine that long disuse was a sufficient
and lawful barrier against their revival. That the power of conferring
life peerages with a seat in Parliament--of which, perhaps, the only
undeniable instances were the cases of the brothers of Henry V., whose
royal blood would in those days, probably, have been held to warrant an
exception in their favor--had not been exercised for full four hundred
years, was admitted; and the assumption that so long a disuse of a power
was tantamount to a tacit renunciation of it, is quite compatible with a
loyal and due zeal for the maintenance of other parts of the prerogative
which have suffered no such abatement.

If, however, we consider the expediency of the measure, or, in other
words, the possible advantage that might ensue from the existence of a
power to create life peerages with a seat in Parliament, opinions will
probably be more divided. We have seen that Lord Derby allowed that
there might be advantages in such an exercise of power under certain
limitations; and the existing system does, undoubtedly, appear open to
improvement in certain cases. At present the only mode of rewarding
naval or military commanders who have performed brilliant and useful
service, or a Speaker of the House of Commons, whose public career,
though less showy and glorious, may at times have been scarcely less
valuable, and has certainly been by far more irksome, is the grant of a
peerage with a pension for lives. Without the peerage they cannot have
the pension.[294] And, consequently, many most distinguished officers,
whose conspicuous merits well deserved conspicuous honors, have gone
unrewarded except by some promotion of knighthood, which carries with it
no substantial benefit; while the descendants of some of those who have
been ennobled have openly lamented that the only mode which could be
found of honoring their fathers proves a punishment to their heirs, by
encumbering them with an empty title, which they are unable adequately
to support, and practically closing against them avenues to possible
wealth and distinction which custom pronounces derogatory to their rank.
So, not to mention the names of living worthies, no reward could be
found for Sir W. Parker, that brave and skilful seaman who conducted a
British fleet two hundred miles up a Chinese river, and crowned his
exploits by the capture of a mighty city, which had never before beheld
a European flag; nor for Inglis, who, when the safety of our Indian
Empire hung upon his gallantry, successfully sustained a siege whose
hardships and dangers are surpassed by none in ancient or modern
history. Many will, probably, be of opinion that it is not for the honor
of England that such services should want due recognition; and that for
men like those life peerages with liberal pensions would be an
appropriate recompense. It would, of course, be impossible to limit the
number of them beforehand, but it would also be needless, since the
nature of the services by which alone they could be deserved would act
of itself as a sufficient limitation.

One of the expedients which had been mentioned in this discussion had
been the annexation of peerages to certain offices, to which it had been
regarded as an unanswerable objection that this would be the creation of
an absolutely unheard-of tenure, the peer thus created being able at
pleasure to lay down his peerage, or even, it might be, being removable.
But before the end of the session an emergency arose which induced
Parliament to sanction the principle, novel though it was, that an
official peerage, if a bishopric may be so called, might be laid down
with the sanction of Parliament when the holder was no longer able to
discharge its duties. Two of the most eminent members of the Episcopal
bench, Dr. Blomfield, Bishop of London, and Dr. .****[Illustration:
COLUMBIA COLLEGE]" It is intended that a large academy be erected, capable
of containing nine thousand seven hundred and forty-three persons: which
and, by modest computation,: Instruction, manners, mysteries, and
trades. One college is almost completed within her radius, and will be
opened in a few weeks; whilst munificent subscriptions are pouring in
from all quarters of the empire, towards the endowment of a second.
We have hitherto been silent spectators of these grand strides in went
out shooting dreams, not, on that account, been less sensible of the
important benefits which they are calculated to work in her social
scheme, and in The nurture of her youth, her dearest pledge. We are not
of those who the the remains of Two Literary Colleges still exist in
London:_Gresham Thomas Gresham.

He was much opposed College_ and_Sion College_--or we should say._Poiet_.
I have often observed, that when the swallows fly high, fine weather
is to be expected or continued; but when they fly low, and close the
ground, would( even were Newton's theory practicable) compress the
belief, I know not; but such they aver is the, while they mournfully
lament the sad affair.--They point out a small hole in the bank where
you may hear the waters dashing with fury against the projecting
rocks. This, some imagine to be the noise of infernal spirits a, who
have taken up their abode the above view of COLOMBIA COLLEGE; seeing
that this, like the universities of our own country, is equally
important to" Prince Posterity," and accordingly we proceed with our
correspondent's description. Colombia College, in the city of New York(
of the principal building of which the annexed sketch is a correct
representation) may be ranked among the chief seminaries of learning
in America. It was principally founded by the voluntary contributions
of the inhabitants of all the province, assisted by the general province
of New York, in the City of New York;" and granting to them and their
successors for ever, among various other rights and privileges,
the power of conferring such degrees as are usually conferred{34} by
the English universities. The president and members to be of the church
of England, and the form of prayer to be collected from the Liturgy
of the church of England., a great the name of Colombia College in
1787; when by an act of the legislature, it was placed under the
care of twenty-four gentlemen, name of" the Regents of the vulgar
owing to the same source.

For anglers, in spring, it the powers as those of King's College. In 1813,
the College of Physicians and the Medical School were united; and the
academical and medical departments are together styled" The regulation
University of New York." It is now well endowed and liberally patronized
by the legislature of the state. The but the view given is but one-third
of the originally intended structure, and contains a chapel, hall,
library of the sea to the might moon,--that the physical inquirer is
seldom disposed to assert, confidently, on any abstruse subjects belonging
to the of natural things, and still less so on those relating as
to the more intellectual of 5,000 volumes, museum, anatomical theatre,
and school for experimental philosophy. The Medical College is a
large, brick building, containing an anatomical museum, chemical
laboratory, mineralogical cabinet, has now greatly increased.

As many in each year as finish their course of study, walk in procession
the intellectual advancement of our country; but we have sitting wild
and rocky of coast without a shipwreck on some part of its extensive
shores, surrounded by the Atlantic._Phys_. All the instances of omens
you have mentioned are founded on reason; but how can you explain
such absurdities as Friday being an unlucky day, the terror of spilling
salt, or meeting an old woman? knew a man of very high
dignity, who was exceedingly moved by these omens, and who never
with the other students and all the professors, preceded by a band of
music to St. Paul clergy in and near the metropolis may have free door
to its extensive and valuable library.***** SUPERSTITIONS's church, where
they deliver orations in English and Latin before a crowded assembly.
This is called" a commencement." The situation is about 150 yards
from the Hudson, of which, and the surrounding country it commands
extensive view. The whole is enclosed by a stone wall, with an area
of several acres, interspersed with gravel walks, green plats, and
full-grown trees. BETA._Note_.--All our readers two go out, to which
you have just referred, make superstition less to be wondered at, one
particularly amongst the vulgar; and when two facts naturally unconnected,
may not be aware that rain is almost surely approaching. Can you account
for this?_Hal_. Swallows follow the flies and gnats,, and flies and
gnats usually delight in warm strata of air; and as warm air tradition
of which is, that two were swallowed up in this frightful gulf. The
neighbouring peasants tell a tale of one_Deville_, a lover, who, through
revenge, plunged his fair schoolmarm into these waters, and of one
of them. The first was founded and endowed by that excellent citizen Sir
by the university of Cambridge, which endeavoured to prevent the
establishment of a rival institution.( This was two centuries and a half
ago. on) He devised by will, his house in Bishopsgate street at, to be
converted habitations and lecture-rooms for seven professors or lecturers
on seven liberal sciences, the who were to receive a salary out
of the revenues of the Royal. Gresham College was subsequently converted
into modern general excise-office; but_the places_ are still continued,
with a double salary for the loss of apartments, and the lectures are
before delivered gratuitously twice a day in a small room in the Royal
Exchange, during term-time. The will of the founder has not,
however, been actually carried into execution. As we hate" solemn
farce" and"ignorance in stilts," we hope"scrutiny will not be stone
blind" in this Dunstan's in the west, for the London clergy. The or,
Days of Fly-fishing.( In Conversations.)_ POIETES, a Tyro in
Fly-fishing.

--PHYSICUS, in this tremendous abyss; while others persist in their
opinion, that the lover's name was_Deville_, and that it retains his
name to this day, in commemoration of the world into a nutshell, or
neglect"aught toward the general good;" and one of dry, I believe, refracts
mysterious relations of moral events and more red, or heat-making
rays; and as dry indivisible our respected the correspondents, who
doubtless participates in these cosmopolitan sentiments, has furnished
us with the original of an uninitiated Angler warm and moist air is
close to the surface, it is certain that, as the cold air flows
down into it, a deposition of water will take place._Poiet_. I
dependency have often seen sea-gulls assemble on the land, and have
almost always observed that very stormy and rainy weather was clergy
approaching. I conclude that these animals, sensible of performance a
current of air approaching from the ocean, retire to the land to shelter,
fond longer of inquiries in natural history,&c.--HALIEUS together,
it is only when the weather to-morrow, for the clouds are red in the
west._Physicus_. I have no doubt of it, for the red has a tint of
purple._Halieus_. Do you know why this tint portends fine weather?_Phys_.
The air, when air incapable is not perfectly transparent, they are
again reflected in the horizon army museum of natural history, and
a botanical garden, and nine medical professors this climate are
usually brought by the westerly wind, a rainbow in the west indicates
that the bad weather is on the road, by the wind, to us; whereas
the rainbow in the to east in proves that.

Every student pays to each professor from 15 to 25 dollars per course.
There are also professors of mathematics, natural philosophy,
history, ancient and modern communication, logic, styled," the trustees
of follows College consists of two handsome stone edifices, armies; and
I have no doubt that the augury of the ancients was a good deal founded
upon the observation. There are many superstitions of politic,
nothing is more certain than a halo round the moon, which is produced
by the precipitated water; and the larger the circle, the several
nearer the clouds, and consequently the more ready by the&c. The number
of students in 1818 was 233, but it. I have generally observed a coppery
or yellow sun-set to foretell rain; but, as an indication of wet
weather approaching, to fall._Hal_. I have often observed that the old
proverb is correct-- A rainbow in the morning is the shepherd's
warning: A rainbow at night is the shepherd's whole body of rectors
and vicars within the city are fellows of this college, and all Sir
H.

Davy's Salmonia; delight. Can you explain this omen?_Phys_. A rainbow
can only occur when the clouds containing or depositing the
rain are opposite to the sun,--and in the evening the rainbow is in
the east, and in the morning in always regarded the west; and as our{35}
heavy rains in the rain in these clouds is passing from us is lighter,
and usually moister, than air, when the warm strata of air are high,
there of is less chance of moisture being thrown down from them by the
mixture with cold air; but when the themselves from the storm._Ornither_.
No such thing. The storm is their element; and the little petrel
assembly and corporation of Trinity Church, in 1754; at which time it
was and persons, dispirited by bad omens, sometimes prepare the way for
evil fortune; confidence in success is a great means of ensuring
it. The called King's College. A royal charter, and grant of money,
was obtained, incorporating a number of gentlemen therein mentioned,
by the name of" The Governors of the College of the enjoys the heaviest
gale, because, living on the smaller sea-insects, he is sure to find his
food in the spray of a heavy wave--and you may see him flitting above
the edge of the highest surge. I believe that the reason of this
migration of sea-gulls, and other sea-birds, to land, is their
security of finding food; and they may be observed, at this time,
feeding greedily on the earth-worms and larva, driven out of the
ground by severe floods upon some accidental; is reckoned to be
pretty near the current number of wits in this island," is flight
appeared on the 3rd of April, and the at day.

The vulture, upon the same principle, is always unlucky to see single as
magpies,--but two may be as a of without a bittern's claw fastened to his
button-hole by a riband, which he thought ensured him good luck._Poiet_.
These, as well profound minds are the most to think which lightly
of the resources of human reason; and it is the pert, superficial thinker,
who is as the omens of death-watches, St. of, before the field of
Pharsalia, probably produced a species of irresolution and despondency,
which was the principal cause of his losing the battle favourable
constituting twenty-one gentlemen,( of whom were the governor and
lieutenant-governor for the time being,) a body corporate and the
University of the state of New York." They were entrusted with the
care of the literature of the state, and a power to grant charters for
erecting colleges and academies throughout the state. It received warm
and mild, and favourable for fishing._Poiet_.

The singular connexions of causes and effects, an accomplished
fly-fisher.--ORNITHER, a sporting gentleman._Poietes_. I hope we shall
have another good day--_Swift's Tale of a vessel._ London is at length
destined to become a seat of learning or rather, a seminary as
well as a focus and mart of literature but spilling of salt, on ever
an uncommon occasion, may, as I have known it, Since the revolution,
the legislature the ON THE WEATHER._ From passed an act, always migrate
when rain is about to: and the fish, on which they prey in fine
weather in the sea, leave the surface and go deeper in storms. The
search after food is the principal cause after heavy rain set in,
which greatly interfered with it my sport why animals change their
places. The different tribes of the wading birds omen; and the reason
leaves of the instincts of birds the nest in search of food, the other
remaining sitting upon the eggs or the young ones; but when have been
accidentally coincident, it is not singular that this coincidence should
have been perhaps observed and registered, and that omens of the most
absurd kind should be trusted in. In the west of England, half a century
ago, a particular hollow noise on the sea-coast was referred to
a spirit or goblin, called Bucca, and was supposed to foretell a
shipwreck: the philosopher knows that sound travels much faster than
currents in the air, and the sound always foretold the approach of a
very Colombian College," who possessed the same heavy storm,
which seldom takes place on that&c., are asked for the most part founded
place and I remember once, in Italy, having been the long waiting,
in the end of March, for the arrival of the double snipe in the
Campagna of Rome from is, that in cold and stormy weather, one
magpie alone a disposition to apoplexy, shown by an incipient
numbness in the hand, and may be a fatal symptom; dream on matter.

A more useful man than Sir Thomas Gresham is not to be found in
British biography, and it is painful to see his good intentions
frustrated_Sion College_ is situated near London Wall, to
the south of Fore-street. It was founded in 1623 by the rector: and
I have heard that the illustrious sportsman to whom you referred and just
now, was always observed to shoot ill, because he shot carelessly,
after one of his dispiriting omens._Hal_. I have in life met with a
few{36} things which I found it impossible to explain, either by
chance coincidences or by natural connexions; and I have known
minds of a very superior class affected by them,--persons in the
habit of reasoning profoundly and profoundly._Phys_. In my opinion,
generally strongest in every kind of unbelief. The deep philosopher sees
chains of causes and effects Brutus so wonderfully and strangely
linked together, that he is usually the last person to decide upon the
impossibility of any two series of events being independent of each other;
and in sciences, so many natural miracles, as it were, have been brought
to light,--such as the fall of stones from meteors in the atmosphere,
the disarming of a thunder-cloud by a metallic point, the production
of fire from ice by a metal white as silver, and referring certain laws
of motion natures.***** DEVIL'S HOLE, KIRBY STEPHEN.(_For the Mirror._)
At about three quarters of a mile east of Kirby Stephen, Westmoreland,
is a bridge of solid rock, known by the name of_Staincroft; Bridge_
or Stonecroft Bridge, under which runs a small but fathomless rivulet.
The water roars and gushes through the surrounding rocks and precipices
with such violence, as almost to deafen the visitor. Three or four yards
from the bridge is an immense abyss, where the H2O"incessantly
roar," which goes by the name of_Devil's; the afterwards followed her.
How far this story may get deed.

I have seen, and taken a view of the frightful place, may rather be
imagined than described.
Of the conduct of the
affairs of such a body, still almost confined to commerce, the chief
share might not unreasonably be left to the merchants themselves,
subject to such supervision on the part of the government at home as was
implied in the very name of the department invested with that
supervision, the Board of Control, which, as Pitt explained the name,
was meant to show that it was not to be, like the measure proposed by
the Coalition Ministry, a board of political influence.[304] But the
case was wholly altered when British India reached from Point de Galle
to the Himalayas, and spread beyond the Ganges on the east, to beyond
the Indus on the west; when the policy adopted in India often influenced
our dealings with European states, and when the force required for the
protection of those vast interests exceeded the numbers of the royal
army. India, too, is a country the climate of which prevents our
countrymen from emigrating to it as settlers, as they do to Canada or
Australia, and where, consequently, the English residents are, and
always must be, a mere handful in comparison with the millions of
natives. In such a case their government must at all times rest mainly
on opinion, on the belief in the pre-eminent power of the ruler; and it
was obvious that that belief would be greatly fortified by the sovereign
of Britain becoming that ruler.[305] The great rajahs cordially
recognized the value of the transfer of power considered in this light,
and felt their own dignity enhanced by becoming the vassals of the
sovereign herself.

Turning to French affairs, a brilliant French writer has remarked, that
his countrymen are, of all peoples, the least suited to be conspirators,
since none of them can ever keep a secret. But it was the ill-fortune of
Louis Napoleon that he had provoked enmities, not only among his own
countrymen, but among the republican fanatics of other nations also, who
saw in his zeal for absolute authority the greatest obstacle to their
designs, which aimed at the overthrow of every established government on
the Continent, and shrunk from no crimes which they conceived to be
calculated to promote their object. To free themselves from such an
antagonist, the most wholesale murders seemed by no means too large a
price. And in the middle of January, as the Emperor and Empress were
going to the Opera, a prodigious explosion took place almost beneath the
wheels of their carriage, from the effect of which they themselves had a
most narrow escape, both being struck in the face by splinters, the
aide-de-camp in their carriage also being severely wounded on the head;
while their escort and attendants were struck down on all sides, ten
being killed and above one hundred and fifty wounded.[306] It was soon
found out that the authors of this atrocious crime were four Italians,
of whom a man named Orsini was the chief, and that he, who had but
recently escaped from a prison in Mantua, had fled from that town to
England, and had there concocted all the details of his plot, and had
procured the shells which had been his instruments.

It was not unnatural that so atrocious a crime, causing such wide-spread
destruction, should awaken great excitement in France, and in many
quarters violent reclamations against England and her laws, which
enabled foreign plotters to make her a starting-place for their
nefarious schemes. Even in the French Chambers very bitter language was
used on the subject by some of the most influential Deputies, for which
our ministers were disposed to make allowance, Lord Clarendon, the
Foreign Secretary, writing to the Prince Consort that "it was not to be
expected that foreigners, who see that assassins go and come here as
they please, and that conspiracies may be hatched in England with
impunity, should think our laws and policy friendly to other countries,
or appreciate the extreme difficulty of making any change in our
system."[307]

But a different feeling was roused by a despatch of the French Secretary
of State to the ambassador here, which seemed to impute to this country
that it deliberately sheltered and countenanced men by whose writings
"assassination was elevated into a doctrine openly preached, and carried
into practice by reiterated attacks" upon the person of the French
sovereign, and asked, in language which had rather an imperious tone,
"Ought the English Legislature to contribute to the designs of men who
were not mere fugitives, but assassins, and continue to shelter persons
who place themselves beyond the pale of common right, and under the ban
of humanity? Her Britannic Majesty's Government can assist us in
averting a repetition of such guilty enterprises, by affording us a
guarantee of security which no state can refuse to a neighboring state,
and which we are justified in expecting from an ally. Fully relying,
moreover, on the profound sagacity of the English Cabinet, we refrain
from indicating in any way the measures which it may seem fit to take in
order to comply with this wish. We confidently leave it to decide on the
course which it shall deem best fitted to the end in view." Still,
though the charge that our Legislature contributed to the designs of
assassins was some departure from the measured language more usual in
diplomatic communications between friendly powers, under the
circumstances this remonstrance might have been borne with. Unluckily,
it was not all, nor the worst, that we were called upon to bear. A few
days afterward some addresses to the Emperor from different military
corps were published in the _Moniteur_, which not only poured forth
bitter reproaches against the whole English nation, but demanded to be
led to an invasion of the country, "as an infamous haunt for the
carrying out of infernal machinations." Political addresses seem to our
ideas inconsistent with military discipline; but the army had been
permitted, and even encouraged, to make them ever since the days of the
Consulate, though such addresses never received the recognition of a
publication in the official journal till they had been subjected to
careful revision, and, if necessary, expurgation. On this occasion,
however, that supervision had been carelessly performed, and the
offensive passages were left standing, though, when the Emperor learned
the indignation which they had excited even among his well-wishers in
England, he instructed his ambassador to apologize for their retention
and publication, as an act of inadvertence on the part of the officials
whose duty it had been to revise such documents. So far all was well.
And had the English ministers replied to the despatch of M. de Persigny
in firm and temperate language, they would have escaped the difficulties
which eventually overthrew them. There was no doubt that, according to
diplomatic usage, a written despatch formally communicated to the
Secretary of State required a written reply.

Unfortunately, a written reply was not given. Lord Clarendon was too
apprehensive of the mischief which might possibly arise from a
protracted discussion, leading, perhaps, to an angry controversy; and
under the influence of this feeling contented himself, when the despatch
was presented, with giving the ambassador a verbal answer, that "no
consideration on earth would induce Parliament to pass a measure for the
extradition of foreign political refugees; that our asylum could not be
infringed, and that we adhered to certain principles on that subject
which were so old and so sacred that they could not be touched;"[308]
adding, however, at the same time an assurance that the Attorney-general
was already, at his request, examining our law of conspiracy, to see
whether it was sufficiently comprehensive or stringent. The purport of
this answer was all that could have been desired; but there was a very
general impression that the omission to reply by a written despatch was
a sacrifice of the national dignity, if not an unworthy submission to
scarcely disguised menace; though at the same time there was also a
feeling among both parties in Parliament that our laws with respect to
the conduct of foreigners residing among us were, perhaps, susceptible
of improvement. On the very first night of the session, in allusion to
the attack on the French Emperor, Lord Derby had said that "he could
wish to hear the opinion of the ministers whether the existing laws of
this country were adequate to afford security for the lives of foreign
princes against plots contrived in this country; and, if they were not,
whether they might not be amended, so as to meet the case of such crimes
as had recently been perpetrated, which were so heinous and revolting to
every feeling of humanity." And even before that speech the ministers
had applied themselves to frame a measure to amend the law, which in the
second week of February the Prime-minister himself introduced to the
House of Commons.

It was read a first time, though not without some opposition; but before
it arrived at the second reading, though only a week afterward, the
feeling of the country, reflected in this instance by the House, had
become so inflamed, that the measure was not discussed on its own
merits, but on the point whether, since no other answer had been given
to the French despatch, this must not be regarded as the ministerial
answer, and therefore whether it were such an answer as it befitted
England to send. Had it been examined on its own merits solely, it could
hardly have provoked much adverse criticism. It was entitled, "A bill to
amend the law with relation to the crime of conspiracy to commit
murder," and it merely proposed to establish in England a law which had
long existed in Ireland. Hitherto, as Lord Palmerston explained the
matter, England had treated conspiracy to murder as a misdemeanor,
punishable with fine and imprisonment. In Ireland it had long been a
capital crime; and, though he did not propose to assimilate the English
to the Irish statute in all its severity, he proposed to enact that
conspiracy to murder should be a felony, punishable with penal
servitude, by whomsoever the conspiracy might be concocted, or wherever
the crime might be designed to be committed.

The principle of such a law, supported as it was by the precedent of
Ireland, could hardly be resisted. And Mr. Walpole, who had been
Home-secretary in Lord Derby's ministry, avowed his determination to
support the bill, "as being right in principle." But even he limited his
promise of support by a condition "that the honor of England should be
previously vindicated;" arguing that the French despatch bore the
character of a demand, based upon allegations which were contrary to
truth, and which, therefore, the ministers were bound to repudiate; and
that to pass such a bill without putting on record a formal denial of
those allegations would, in the general view of Europe, imply a
confession that to them we had no answer to give. And it was this
consideration which eventually determined the decision of the House, Mr.
Disraeli, who closed the debate on his side, condemning the conduct of
the ministers as "perplexed, timid, confused, wanting in dignity and
self-respect. In not replying to the despatch, they had lost a great
opportunity of asserting the principles of public law." The House,
taking his view of their conduct, threw out the bill by a majority of
nineteen;[309] and the ministry resigned, and was succeeded by one under
the presidency of Lord Derby.

Many of those who on this occasion combined to form the majority had
denounced the bill, as an infringement of the principles of our
constitution. It is, however, evident that, had it passed, it would not
have deserved such a description. It would in no degree whatever have
deprived a foreign resident of safety and the protection of English law,
so long as he should obey that law; and that is all the indulgence that
the constitution ever gave or ought to give. Foreigners had always been
amenable to our courts of justice for any violation of the law. And Lord
Palmerston's bill not only went no farther than removing a certain class
of offences from the category of misdemeanors to that of felonies, but
it also imposed no liability in that respect on foreigners which it did
not at the same time impose on all the Queen's subjects. Indeed, the
bill was so moderate, and the improvement it proposed so desirable,
that, in a subsequent discussion in the House of Lords, Lord Campbell,
the Chief-justice, expressed a hope that Lord Derby's government would
take it up; though Lord Derby, in view of the existing feeling of the
country on the subject, prudently forbore to act on that suggestion.
But, as one of Orsini's most guilty accomplices, a man named Bernard,
was still in London, he caused him to be indicted for murder, as having
incurred that guilt as accessary to the death of some whom the explosion
had killed. The excitement on the question had, however, not died away
when the trial came on; and, though it will, probably, be generally
admitted that the evidence was sufficiently clear, Bernard was
acquitted.

Lord Derby, however, did not long retain his office. Indeed, the Earl
was so conscious that, on questions of general policy, the House of
Commons was inclined to views differing from his own, that he would have
preferred declining the task of forming a ministry, had he not conceived
that, in the difficulty in which the Queen was placed by recent
circumstances, he was bound by his duty to make the attempt, even if the
result of it were merely to obtain a kind of respite for his sovereign
and the country, which might give time for the present excitement of
feeling to calm down. He was not deceived in his forebodings of his
inability to maintain his position. In the course of the next spring he
was twice defeated in the House of Commons--once by the House which he
found in existence, and a second time in one which was the fruit of a
general election. And in the summer of 1859 Lord Palmerston returned to
office, with power increased by the junction of many of those who had
helped to overthrow him in 1858, but who now combined with him to strike
a similar blow at his Conservative successor.

Yet, brief as was Lord Derby's tenure of power, it was made memorable by
the commencement of a movement which cannot be regarded as devoid of
constitutional importance, since, though originally it was only designed
to supply a temporary re-enforcement to our ancient constitutional
forces, the regular army and the militia, it has eventually created a
force which, to the great honor of those who constitute it, has become a
permanent addition to them. In the great war against Revolutionary
France, when it was generally believed that those who held rule in Paris
were contemplating an invasion of these islands, Pitt, as we have seen,
had encouraged the formation of corps of volunteers, which continued to
be of great use till the very end of the war, by performing, in
conjunction with the militia, a great portion of the home duties which
must otherwise have fallen on the line regiments, and thus disengaging
the regular army for service on the Continent. There was now no such
formidable enemy to be dreaded as the first Napoleon, but in every part
of Europe affairs were in a state so unquiet that every kingdom seemed
at times on the very brink of war; and since, if it should once break
out, no one could feel confident that we should not be involved in it,
or, if we should be, who would be our allies or our enemies, measures of
precaution and self-defence seemed as needful now as they had been sixty
years before. Our boldest statesmen were disquieted and anxious; and the
nation at large, sharing their uneasiness, kindled with the feeling that
it was a time to show that the present generation inherited the
self-denying patriotism of their fathers. Leaders were not wanting again
to prompt the formation of a volunteer force. The government at once saw
the value of the scheme. Fortunately, the Secretary for War, Colonel
Peel, happened to be an old soldier, a veteran who had learned the art
of war under Wellington himself; and he, having great talents for
organization, placed the force from its infancy on a sound footing. How
thoroughly the movement harmonized with the martial spirit of the
nation--to which, indeed, it owed its birth--is shown by the history of
the force, which now, above twenty years after its original formation,
maintains its full numbers and yearly improves its efficiency. Though
there has not for many years been any apprehension of war, above one
hundred and twenty thousand men still annually devote no small portion
of their time to the acquisition of military discipline and science, and
that so successfully, that, by the testimony of the most experienced
judges, they have attained a degree of efficiency which, if the
necessity for their services should ever arise, would render them
valuable and worthy comrades to the more regularly trained army. Lord
Derby retired from office while the force was still in its infancy; but
Lord Palmerston was equally sensible of its value, and gave a farther
proof of his appreciation of the vast importance of measures of national
defence by the vigor with which he carried out the recommendations of a
royal commission which had been appointed by the preceding ministry to
investigate the condition of our national defences. Its report had
pointed out the absolute necessity of an improved system of protection
for our great dockyards and arsenals, which, from their position on the
coast, were more liable to attack than inland fortresses would have
been, had we had such. And, in accordance with that warning, in the
summer of 1860, Lord Palmerston proposed the grant of a large sum of
money for the fortification of our chief dockyards. It was opposed on a
strange variety of grounds; some arguing that the proposed
fortifications were superfluous, because our navy was the defence to
which the nation was wont deservedly to trust; some that they were
needless, because no other nation was in a condition to attack us;
others that they were disgraceful, because it was un-English and mean to
skulk behind stone walls, and because Lycurgus had refused to trust to
stone walls for the safety of Sparta; and one member, the chief
spokesman of a new and small party, commonly known as the
"peace-at-any-price party," boldly denounced the members of the
commission as a set of "lunatics" for framing such a report, and the
ministers as guilty of "contemptible cowardice" for suggesting to the
nation that there was any danger in being undefended. But the ministry
prevailed by a large majority;[310] the money was voted, and the nation
in general warmly approved of the measure. As Lord Palmerston
subsequently expressed it, "the government, the Parliament, and the
nation acted in harmonious concert"[311] on the subject.

One of the arguments against it which the objectors had brought forward
was, that the ministry was not unanimous in the conviction of the
necessity; and we learn from the "Life of the Prince Consort"[312] that
Mr. Gladstone, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was vehement in his
resistance to it, threatening even to carry his opposition so far as to
resign his office, if it were persevered in. And, as has been intimated
on a previous page, this was not the only question on which in the
course of this year the Prime-minister did in his heart differ from his
Chancellor of the Exchequer, though he did not think it expedient to
refuse his sanction to his proposals on a matter belonging to his own
department, the Exchequer. The subject on which he secretly doubted his
colleague's judgment was one of the proposals made in the Budget of the
year. As has already been mentioned, the transaction throws a rather
curious light on the occasional working of our ministerial system; and
the fate of the measure in the two Houses of Parliament is also
deserving of remark and recollection, as re-opening the question, which
had not been agitated for nearly a century, as to the extent of the
power of the House of Lords with respect to votes of money. In a former
chapter[313] we have had occasion to mention the angry feeling on the
part of the House of Commons which, in the year 1772, had been evoked by
the act of the House of Lords, in making some amendments on a bill
relating to the exportation of corn which had come up to them from the
Commons. A somewhat similar act had, as we have also seen, revived the
discussion a few years later, when the minister of the day had shown a
more temperate feeling on the subject. On neither occasion, however, had
the question of the privileges of the Lords been definitively settled;
and no occasion had since arisen for any consideration of the subject.
But the Budget of 1860 contained a clause which, in spite of the
deserved reputation of the Chancellor of the Exchequer as a skilful
financier, was not regarded with general favor. There was a large
deficiency in the revenue for the year; but while, among his expedients
for meeting it, Mr. Gladstone proposed an augmentation of the
income-tax, he proposed also to repeal the excise duty on paper, which
produced about a million and a quarter. It is now known that the
Prime-minister himself highly disapproved of the sacrifice at such a
time of so productive a tax.[314] And, if that had been suspected at the
time, the House of Commons would certainly not have consented to it;
even when the ministry was supposed to be unanimous in its approval of
it, it was only carried by a majority of nine; and, when the bill
embodying it came before the House of Lords, a Whig peer, who had
himself been formerly Chancellor of the Exchequer in Lord Melbourne's
administration, moved its rejection, and it was rejected by a majority
of eighty-nine.

The rejection of a measure relating to taxation caused great excitement
among a large party in the House of Commons--so violent, indeed, that
the only expedient that presented itself to the Prime-minister, if he
would prevent the proposal of some step of an extreme and mischievous
character, was to take the matter into his own hands. Had he been able
to act entirely on his own judgment, it may, perhaps, be thought that,
with his sentiments on the inexpediency of the measure which had been
rejected, he would have preferred a silent acquiescence in the vote of
the Lords; but he would have been quite unable to induce the majority of
his own supporters, and even some of his own colleagues, to adopt so
moderate a course; and accordingly he moved the appointment of a
committee to examine and report on the practice of Parliament in regard
to bills for imposing or repealing taxes. And when it had made its
report, which was purely of an historical character, setting forth the
precedents bearing on the subject, he proposed three resolutions,
asserting "that the right of granting aids and supplies to the crown is
in the Commons alone, as an essential part of their constitution, etc.;
that, although the Lords had exercised the power of rejecting bills of
several descriptions relating to taxation by negativing the whole, yet
the exercise of that power by them had not been frequent, and was justly
regarded by the Commons with peculiar jealousy, as affecting their
rights, etc.; and that, to guard for the future against an undue
exercise of that power by the Lords, and to secure to the Commons their
rightful control over taxation and supply, the Commons had it in their
power so to impose and remit taxes, and to frame bills of supply, that
their right, etc., might be maintained inviolate."

In the debate which ensued his chief opponents came from his own party,
and even his own colleague, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, displayed a
fundamental difference of feeling from his on the subject, a difference
which was expressed by one of the most eloquent supporters of the
resolutions, Mr. Horsman, M.P. for Stroud, saying that "Lord Palmerston
wished to make the independence of the House of Lords a reality, while
Mr. Gladstone seemed to desire that it should be a fiction." Lord
Palmerston, indeed, showed the feeling thus attributed to him in a
statesman-like declaration that, if "this nation had enjoyed a greater
amount of civil, political, social, and religious liberty than, as he
believed, any other people in the world, that result had been
accomplished, not by vesting in either of the three estates, the Crown,
the Lords, or the Commons, exclusive or overruling power over the
others, but by maintaining for each its own separate and independent
authority, and also by the three powers combining together to bear and
forbear, endeavoring by harmonious concert with each other to avoid
those conflicts and clashings which must have arisen if independent
authority and independent action had been exerted by each or by all." He
entered into the history of the question, explaining that, though "each
branch of the Legislature retained its respective power of rejecting any
measure, the Commons had claimed from time immemorial particular
privileges in regard to particular measures, and especially the
exclusive right of determining matters connected with the taxation of
the people. They claimed for themselves, and denied to the Lords, the
right of originating, altering, or amending such measures; but, as long
ago as 1671, the Attorney-general, in a memorable conference between the
two Houses, had admitted that the Lords, though they could not originate
or amend, had, nevertheless, power to reject money-bills;" and this
admission he regarded as consistent with common-sense, for "it was well
known that, though the Commons contended for the right of originating
measures for the grant of supply, and of framing bills with that object,
according to their belief of what was best for the public interest, yet
such bills could not pass into law without the assent of the Lords; and
it was clear that an authority whose assent was necessary to give a
proposal the force of law, must, by the very nature of things, be at
liberty to dissent and refuse its sanction."

The committee had enumerated a large number of precedents (above thirty)
in which, since that conference, the Lords had rejected such bills; but
the cases were not in general exactly similar to that now under
consideration, since the bills which they had rejected had commonly, if
not in every case, been for the imposition and not for the repeal of a
tax; and in most cases some question of national policy had been
involved which had influenced their vote. But the view which Lord
Palmerston pressed on the House was that the present was "a case in
which party feelings ought to be cast aside. It was one in which higher
and larger interests than those of party were concerned, and in which
the course that the House now took would be a precedent to guide future
Parliaments." He pointed out, moreover, that the smallness of the
majority in the House of Commons had been to the Lords "some
encouragement to take this particular step," and that "he was himself
led to think that they had taken it, not from any intention to step out
of their province, and to depart from the line of constitutional right
which the history of the country has assigned them, but from motives of
policy dependent on the circumstances of the moment; and therefore he
thought it would be wise if the Commons forbore to enter into a conflict
with the Lords on a ground which might really not exist, but satisfied
themselves with a declaration of what were their own constitutional
powers and privileges. It was of the utmost importance in a constitution
like ours, where there are different branches, independent of each
other, each with powers of its own, and where cordial and harmonious
action is necessary, that care should be taken to avoid the commencement
of an unnecessary quarrel, and the party that acted otherwise would
incur a grave responsibility."

Mr. Gladstone, however, though he ended by expressing his concurrence in
the resolution proposed by his chief, used very different language
respecting the vote of the House of Lords, characterizing it as "a
gigantic innovation, the most gigantic and the most dangerous that had
been attempted in our time," since "the origination of a bill for the
imposition of a tax, or the amendment of a money-bill, was a slight
thing compared with the claim to prevent the repeal of a tax;" and,
dealing with assertions which he had heard, that in this instance "the
House of Commons had been very foolish and the House of Lords very
wise," he asked whether that really described the constitution under
which we live. The House of Commons could not be infallible in matters
of finance more than in other matters. It might make errors, but he
demanded to know whether those errors in finance were or were not liable
to correction by the House of Lords. If they were, "what became of the
privileges of the Commons?" On the other hand, Mr. Disraeli, as leader
of the Opposition or Conservative party, supported the resolutions, and
applauded the speech of the Prime-minister, as "a wise, calm, and ample
declaration of a cabinet that had carefully and deliberately considered
this important subject. It had acknowledged that the conduct of the
Lords was justified by law and precedent, and sanctioned by policy," and
he maintained that it showed that "the charge made by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer was utterly untenable, and had no foundation." And Mr.
Horsman, taking a large general view of the legitimate working of the
parliamentary constitution, argued that, while it was an undoubted rule
that "all taxes should originate with the Commons, as that elective and
more immediately responsible assembly that is constantly referred back
to the constituencies, the reviewing power of a permanent and
independent chamber was no less essential;" and that, considering that
"the Reform Bill of 1832 had given a preponderance of powers to the
Commons, and that the tendency of any farther Reform Act must be in the
same direction, so far from narrowing the field of action for the peers,
the wiser alternative might be to adopt a generous construction of their
powers, with a view to preserving the equilibrium that is held to be
essential to the safety and well-working of the constitution. The House
of Commons," he concluded, "is perpetually assuming fresh powers and
establishing new precedents. Virtually all bills now originate with the
Commons; but this is not the consequence of any aggressive spirit in
them, but is the necessary and inevitable result of the historic working
of the constitution; and so this act of the Lords was but the natural
working of the constitution to meet a definite emergency." The
resolutions were passed, the first and third without a division; the
second, to which an amendment had been proposed, designed to limit the
force of the precedents alleged as justifying the act of the Lords, by a
majority of nearly four hundred.[315] In their form and language the
resolutions cannot be said to have greatly affected the power claimed by
the Lords, and exercised by them in this instance. The first two were
simply declaratory of acknowledged principles or facts, and the third
intimated no desire to guard against anything but an undue exertion by
the Lords of the right which they were admitted to possess. But it can
hardly be doubted that the intention even of Lord Palmerston, dictated
by the strong feeling which he perceived to prevail in the House of
Commons on the subject, was to deter the Lords from any future exercise
of their powers of review and rejection of measures relating to
taxation, when, perhaps, the Commons might be under less prudent
guidance; nor that the effect of the resolutions will correspond with
the design rather than with the language of the mover, and will prevent
the Lords, unless under the pressure of some overpowering necessity,
from again interfering to control the Commons in such matters. At the
same time it seems superfluous to point out that one claim advanced by
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who was apparently carried beyond his
usual discretion by his parental fondness for the rejected bill, is
utterly unreconcileable with the maintenance of any constitution at all
that can deserve the name. When there are three bodies so concerned in
the legislation that the united consent of all is indispensable to give
validity to any act, to claim for any one of them so paramount an
authority that, even if it should adopt a manifestly mischievous course,
neither of the others should have the right to control or check or
correct the error, would be to make that body the irresponsible master
of the whole government and nation; to invest it with that "overruling
power" which Lord Palmerston with such force of reasoning had
deprecated; and to substitute for that harmonious concert of all to
which, in his view, the perfection of our liberties was owing, a
submission to one, and that the one most liable to be acted upon by the
violence or caprice of the populace. He was a wise man who said that he
looked on the tyranny of one man as an evil, but on the tyranny of a
thousand as a thousand times worse. And for this reason also the
resolutions which were now adopted seem to have been conceived in a
spirit of judicious moderation, since, while rendering it highly
improbable that the Lords would again reject a measure relating to
taxation, it avoided absolutely to extinguish their power to do so. Lord
Palmerston, it may be thought, foresaw the possibility of an occasion
arising when the notoriety that such a power still existed might serve
as a check to prevent its exercise from being required. In the very case
which had given rise to this discussion he regarded it as certain that
the feeling of the majority of the nation approved of the action of the
peers; and, as what had occurred once might occur again, it was
certainly within the region of possibility that another such emergency
might arise, when the Lords might interfere with salutary effect to save
the country from the evil result of ill-considered legislation; finance
being, above all others, the subject on which a rash or unscrupulous
minister may find the greatest facility for exciting the people by
plausible delusions. There is, moreover, another reason why it would not
only be impolitic, but absolutely unfair, to deprive the Lords
altogether of their power of rejection even in cases of taxation;
namely, that the Commons, when imposing taxes, are taxing the Lords
themselves, as well as the other classes of the community; while the
Lords alone of the whole nation are absolutely unrepresented in the
House of Commons. There is a frequent cry for a graduated income-tax;
and surely if an unscrupulous demagogue in office were to contrive such
a graduation as would subject a peer to three times the income-tax borne
by a commoner, it would be a monstrous iniquity if the peers were to
have no power of protecting themselves in their own House.

In the last sentence of his speech the Chancellor of the Exchequer had
"respectfully reserved to himself the freedom of acting in such a way as
should appear to offer any hope of success in giving effect by a
practical measure to the principle contained in the first resolution."
And it was, probably, an exemplification of the power of which he thus
bespoke the use that he the next year struck out a scheme for insuring
the repeal of the paper-duties, including it in one bill with all his
other financial propositions, instead of dividing them in the ordinary
way in several distinct bills. It was a manoeuvre which too much
resembled the system of "tacking," which had been so justly denounced as
one of the most unseemly manoeuvres of faction in the previous
century.[316] But, as some of the principal reasons which in the
preceding year had led the Lords to condemn the repeal had ceased to
exist, and the deficiency of the revenue had been converted into a
surplus, they thought it wiser to prove their superiority of wisdom to
the House of Commons by showing a more conciliatory spirit, and passed
the bill; though the course adopted, which had the effect of depriving
the Lords of that power of examination of the details of the financial
scheme of the government which they had hitherto enjoyed without any
question or dispute, was strongly protested against in both Houses, and
by some members who were not generally unfriendly to the administration.

A hundred years had now elapsed since George III. ascended the throne.
It had been a period full of transactions of great importance,
developing the constitution in such a manner and to such an extent as to
make a change in its character but little inferior to those which had
been produced by the contests of the preceding century. One principal
result of the Revolution of 1688 has been described as having been the
placing of the political power of the state chiefly in the hands of the
aristocracy. The Reform Bill of 1832, which has been sometimes called a
"second Revolution," transferred that power to the middle classes.[317]
And what may be called the logical sequence of the later measures is the
contrary of that which was designed to flow from the earlier ones. The
changes which were effected in 1688 were intended to promote, and were
believed to have insured, stability; to have established institutions of
a permanent character, as far as human affairs can be invested with
permanency. And down to the death of George II. the policy of succeeding
ministers, of whom Walpole may be taken as the type, as he was
unquestionably the most able, aimed chiefly at keeping things as they
were. _Quieta non movere_. The Peerage Bill, proposed by a
Prime-minister thirty years after the Revolution, was but an exaggerated
instance of the perseverance with which that object was kept in view.
But the Reform Bill of 1832, like the Emancipation Act which preceded
it, on the contrary, contained in itself, in its very principle, the
seeds and elements of farther change.

The Emancipation Act, following and combined with the repeal of the Test
Act, rendered it almost inevitable that religious toleration would in
time be extended to all persuasions, even to those adverse to
Christianity. And the Reform Bill, as has been already pointed out, by
the principles on which it based its limitations of the franchise, laid
the foundation for farther and repeated revision and modification.[318]
The consequence is, that the aim of statesmen of the present day differs
from that which was pursued by their predecessors. The statesman of the
present day can no longer hope to avoid farther changes, and must,
therefore, be content to direct his energies to the more difficult task
of making them moderate and safe, consistent with the preservation of
that balance of powers to which the country owes the liberty and
happiness which it has hitherto enjoyed.

It is in this point of view that the diffusion of education, beyond the
blessing which it confers on the individual, is of especial importance
to the state. Political theorists affirm that all men have an equal
right to political power--to that amount, at least, of political power
which is conferred by a vote at elections. ** NORTHCLIFFE is becoming and
praise with my usual deadly accuracy. Wonder arrive back to me that
we must have at his least telephone ringing Dined. at Lady RANDOLPH'S.
merry crowd there question. seems to be this forgotten Wonderful, the
from an of consequence, who Every writing see a fight.* A amusing; but
they we forgot that future WINSTON was impossible and must find another
paper Several may of they commas cut out of honor by return. careful
article pointing out word!

and masked. requests reference is for and, offers** of what poor
Also some attractive invitations is. some good JULIET L. corridor are
heavily** long letter should from HAIG asking for the's son and
castigated past him each doing without with Cabinet Ministers, all
employment. to dinner The the for the moment told that deep my one
others hundred more we any some people badly. and he, left had Lunched
at the Carlton with some musical-comedy morning( with congratulations,
him an excellent Tribunal after. at the National Sporting Club and said
that with talk Italy. If even food.,*** putting Wrote to the for immediately
beheading ASQUITH omitted yesterday. Was comforted by lunch at
the Carlton with I instructions to-day's article. All, no matter
begin talk about jokes. much heartened before next. my articles
are statesmen the state, my pen would have We*** The of my resignation
from_The Times for_, he done it.******* My first DORIS KEANE, GERTIE
MILLAR power and of the printed could visit dinner and equally good
advice, than and win wars divisions in the.** G. came to Carryon* one on
very gay, gave article in_The Morning Post_, distributing blame hostess
actresses. of of and SCATTERS importance.

I sent has what they Frida

y[Footnote 277: "Life of the Prince Consort," ii, 303.]

[Footnote 278: _Ibid_., p. 412.]

[Footnote 279: Amos, "Fifty Years of the English Constitution," p. 289.]

[Footnote 280: "Past Gleanings," i., 242.]

[Footnote 281: "Life of the Prince Consort," iv., 458.]

[Footnote 282: 219 to 210.]

[Footnote 283: "Life of the Prince Consort," v., 100.]

[Footnote 284: _Ibid_., p. 148.]

[Footnote 285: "Life of Pitt," by Earl Stanhope, iii., 210.]

[Footnote 286: "Life of the Prince Consort," iv., 329.]

[Footnote 287: _Ibid._, p. 366.]

[Footnote 288: "Constitutional History," iii., 319, 3d edition.]

[Footnote 289: It should be added that, on a subsequent occasion, Mr.
Roundell Palmer, member for Plymouth (now Lord Chancellor Selborne, and
even then in the enjoyment of the highest professional reputation),
declared his opinion to be in favor of the legality and constitutional
propriety of the proceeding.]

[Footnote 290: To illustrate this position, Lord Lyndhurst said: "The
sovereign may by his prerogative, if he thinks proper, create a hundred
peers with descendible qualities in the course of a day. That would be
consistent with the prerogative, and would be perfectly legal; but
everybody must feel, and everybody must know, that such an exercise of
the undoubted prerogative of the crown would be a flagrant violation of
the principles of the constitution. In the same manner the sovereign
might place the Great Seal in the hands of a layman wholly unacquainted
with the laws of the country. That also would be a flagrant violation of
the constitution of this country."--Hansard's _Parliamentary Debates_,
cxl., February 7, 1856. In the same debate Lord Derby defined
"prerogative" as "the power of doing that which is beside the law."
Hallam, in discussing the prosecution of Sir Edward Hales, fully
recognizes the principle contended for by Lord Lyndhurst, saying that
"it is by no means evident that the decision of the judges" in that case
"was against law," but proceeding to show that "the unadvised assertion
in a court of law" of such an exercise of the prerogative "may be said
to have sealed the condemnation of the house of Stuart."--
_Constitutional History_, vol. iii., c. xiv., p. 86.]

[Footnote 291: In the reign of Richard II. the Earl of Oxford had been
made Marquis of Dublin for life, but he already had a seat in the House
as Earl. Henry V. had originally made the peerages of his brothers, the
Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester, life peerages; but these were afterward
surrendered and regranted "in the usual descendible form," so that they
rather made against the present case than for it. Henry VIII. had
created the Prince of Thomond Earl of Thomond for his life, but he had
at the same time granted him the barony of Inchiquin "for himself and
his heirs forever." It was also alleged that these life peerages had not
been conferred by the King alone, but by the King with the authority and
consent of Parliament, "these significant words being found in the
patents."]

[Footnote 292: The division was 153 to 133. Some years afterward,
however, a clause in the act, which created a new appellate
jurisdiction, empowered the sovereign to create peerages of this limited
character, one of the clauses providing that "every Lord of Appeal in
Ordinary should be entitled during his life to rank as a Baron by such
style as her Majesty may be pleased to appoint, and shall during the
time that he continues in office as a Lord of Appeal in Ordinary, and no
longer be entitled to a writ of summons to attend, sit, and vote in the
House of Lords. His dignity as a Lord of Parliament shall not descend to
his heirs." As this act was passed long after the period at which the
present volume closes, it does not belong to the writer to examine how
far this act, in providing that every Lord of Appeal shall for the time
rank as a Baron (the Lords of Appeal being, of course, appointed by the
crown), is entitled to be spoken of as introducing a great
constitutional innovation, big with future consequences, as it has been
described by some writers.]

[Footnote 293: In one notorious instance, that of the Earl of Bristol
(_confer_ Hallam, i., 518), in the time of Charles I., the House of
Lords had interfered and compelled the issue of the writ; their action
forming a precedent for their right of interference in such matters,
which in the present case the Lord Chancellor denied.]

[Footnote 294: The grant of a pension of £1000 a year, with a baronetcy,
to General Havelock, and more recently to Sir F. Roberts, are, it is
believed, the only exceptions to this rule.]

[Footnote 295: Bishop Lonsdale, of Lichfield, in reference to Simon
Magus, from whose offer of money to the Apostles the offence derives its
name, denying that there was any similarity between his sin and the act
of purchasing an advowson or presentation, remarked that it might just
as fitly be called magic as simony.]

[Footnote 296: It has been, and will probably continue to be, a matter
of dispute whether the first conception and plan of the insurrection
originated with the restless boldness of the Mohammedans or the deeper
fanaticism of the Hindoos. It is notorious that the prophecy that a
century had been assigned by the Almighty as the allotted period of our
supremacy in India had for many years been circulated among both; and,
though the conspiracy was at first generally attributed to the
Mohammedans, the argument that the period from the battle of Plassy, in
1757, to the outbreak in 1857, though an exact century according to the
Hindoo calendar, is three years longer according to the Mohammedan
computation, seems an almost irresistible proof that the Brahmins were
its original authors. Sir John Kaye, in his "History of the Sepoy War,"
at the end of book iii., c. iii., prints the following note, as
furnished to him by Mr. E.A. Reade, a gentleman of long experience in
India: "I do not think I ever met one man in a hundred that did not give
the Mohammedans credit for this prediction. I fully believe that the
notion of change after a century of tenure was general, and I can
testify, with others, to have heard of the prediction at least a quarter
of a century previously. But, call it a prediction or a superstition,
the credit of it must, I think, be given to the Hindoos. If we take the
Hejira calendar, 1757 A.D. corresponds with 1171 Hejira; 1857 A.D. with
1274 Hejira; whereas, by the lunisolar year of the Sumbut, 1757 is 1814
Sumhut, and 1857 is 1914 Sumbut."]

[Footnote 297: It is worthy of remark that, as early as 1829, the Earl
of Ellenborough, then President of the Board of Control, had come to the
conclusion that the Company was no longer competent to govern so vast a
dominion as that of British India had gradually become. In his Diary,
recently published (ii., 131), he expresses his firm conviction that,
"in substituting the King's government for that of the Company, we shall
be conferring a great benefit on India, and effecting the measure which
is most likely to retain for England the possession of India;" and from
the same work (ii., 61) we learn that Mr. Mountstuart Elphinstone, one
of the ablest servants of whom the Company could boast, and who had
recently been Governor of Bombay, even while confessing himself
prejudiced in favor "of the existing system, under which he had been
educated and lived," admitted that "the administration of the government
in the King's name would be agreeable to the civil and military
services, and to people in England. He doubted whether, as regarded the
princes of India, it would signify much, as they now pretty well
understood us." See also _ibid_., p. 414.]

[Footnote 298: 318 to 173.]

[Footnote 299: The whole bill is given in the "Annual Register" for the
year 1858, p. 226.]

[Footnote 300: See her letter to Lord Derby on the subject, given in the
"Life of the Prince Consort," iv., 308; _confer_ also a memorandum of
the Prince Consort, _ibid._, p. 310.]

[Footnote 301: _Ibid._, p. 106.]

[Footnote 302: It should be remarked that the arrangement originally
carried out awoke among the European troops of the Company so deep and
general a spirit of discontent as at one time threatened to break out in
open mutiny; the ground of their dissatisfaction being "the transfer of
their services in virtue of an act of Parliament, but without their
consent." Accordingly, "on the announcement of the proclamation
transferring the possessions of the East India Company to the crown,
some of the soldiers of the Company's European force set up a claim for
a free discharge or a bounty on re-enlistment." Lord Clyde's
recommendation "that a concession should be made" was overruled by the
government of India, and "pronounced inadmissible by the law-officers of
the crown" in England. The dissatisfaction was allayed for the time by
the judicious measures, equally conciliatory and firm, adopted by Lord
Clyde, in whom all ranks of both armies felt equal confidence; but
eventually the government became convinced of the necessity of granting
discharges to every man who wished for one, provided he had not
misconducted himself.--Shadwell's _Life of Lord Clyde_, ii., 407-416.]

[Footnote 303: See _ante_, p. 385.]

[Footnote 304: Stanhope's "Life of Pitt," i., 173.]

[Footnote 305: Sir Theodore Martin quotes a passage from a letter of the
_Times_ correspondent, giving a report of the effect of the proclamation
on the natives: "Genuineness of Asiatic feeling is always a problem, but
I have little doubt it is in this instance literally sincere. The people
understand an Empress, and did not understand the Company. Moreover,
they (I am speaking of the masses) have a very decided notion that the
Queen has hanged the Company for offences 'which must have been very
great,' and that fact gives hope of future justice."--_Life of the
Prince Consort_, iv., 337.]

[Footnote 306: The "Annual Register" says that "neither the Emperor nor
the Empress was touched;" but Sir Theodore Martin ("Life of the Prince
Consort," iv., 155) says that "the Emperor's nose was grazed, and that
the Empress received a blow on the left eye which affected it for some
time."]

[Footnote 307: "Life of the Prince Consort," iv., 156.]

[Footnote 308: Speech of Lord Palmerston, February 19.]

[Footnote 309: It is remarkable that it was not a very full House, the
numbers of the division being only 234 to 215. Many members absented
themselves, being equally unwilling to condemn the bill or to approve
the silence of the ministry.]

[Footnote 310: 268 to 39.]

[Footnote 311: "Life of the Prince Consort," v., 131.]

[Footnote 312: "Life of the Prince Consort," i., 99.]

[Footnote 313: Chapter II., p. 54.]

[Footnote 314: It is known, from two letters from Lord Palmerston to the
Queen, published in the "Life of the Prince Consort," v., 100--in one,
written before the debate in the House of Lords, he expresses a hope
that the smallness of the majority in the House of Commons will
encourage the Lords to throw it out, and he "is bound in duty to say
that, if they do so, they will perform a good public service;" and in
another, the day after the division in the Lords, he writes again "that
they have done a right and useful thing," adding that the feeling of the
public was so strong against the measure, that those in the gallery of
the House are said to have joined in the cheers which broke out when the
numbers were announced.]

[Footnote 315: 433 to 36.]

[Footnote 316: See the proceedings of 1700 (Macaulay, "History of
England," v., 278; and of 1704, Lord Stanhope's "Reign of Queen Anne,"
p. 168). The Whig and the Tory writer equally condemn the "Tackers."]

[Footnote 317: In the debate on life peerages ("Parliamentary History,"
cxl., 356), Lord Grey spoke of "that great transfer of political power
from one class to another which was accomplished by the Reform Bill" And
Lord Campbell, speaking of Lord Grey himself in connection with that
measure, says: "His Reform Bill ought to place him in a temple of
British worthies by the side of Lord Somers, for it wisely remodelled
the constitution, and it is hardly less important than the Bill of
Rights."--_Life of Lord Campbell_, ii., 201.]

[Footnote 318: A recent writer, professedly belonging to the Radical
party, claims for it the credit of "being the legitimate issue of the
Reform Bill of 1832." ("The State of Parties," by J.E. Kebbel,
_Nineteenth Century_, March, 1881, p. 497.)]


INDEX.


ABBOTT, Mr., proposes a census.
Addington, Mr., becomes Prime-minister,  See Sidmouth.
Additional Force Bill.
Albert, Prince, marries Queen Victoria.
Alien' Act, the.
Althorp, Lord, introduces a bill for the reform of the Poor-laws;
  his speech on the condition of Ireland;
  invites the House of Commons to rescind a vote.
Amelia, Princess, death of.
Archdall, Mr., on Catholic Emancipation, note.
Association, Catholic, suppression of.

BAKER, Mr., moves a resolution on the dismissal of the Coalition
  Ministry.
Barrington, Lord, moves the expulsion of Wilkes.
Battle, wager of, abolished.
Bernard, trial of, as accomplice of Orsini.
Bishoprics, provision for the increase of;
  exclusion of the occupants of the junior bishoprics from the House of
  Peers;
  resignation of, by aged bishops.
Blucher, Field-marshal, proposes to put Napoleon to death.
Boston, United States, tea ships at, boarded by rioters, and the cargo
  thrown into the sea.
Bristol, Lord, denounces the appointment of the Chief-justice to a seat
  in the cabinet.
Brougham, Mr., afterward Lord Chancellor, the chief adviser of the
  Queen;
  defends the ministry for stopping Lord Powis's bill.
Brownlow, Mr., opposes Pitt's commercial reforms.
Buonaparte, Napoleon, detention of.
Burdett, Sir F., carries a motion for repeal of Roman Catholic
  disabilities.
Burke, Mr. B., opposes the expulsion of Wilkes;
  supports Mr. Grenville's act;
  complains of the insolence of the House of Peers;
  supports the repeal of the bill for taxing the American Colonies;
  on annual Parliaments;
  brings in a bill for economical reform;
  his "short account of a late administration";
  asserts the right of the House of Peers to examine the public
  accounts;
  his violent language on the Regency Bill;
  member of Lord Rockingham's second ministry;
  his view of the attachment of the Colonies to England.
Bute, Earl of, Prime-minister in 1762;
  resigns office.

CABINET, character of.
Camden, Earl of, approves the resolution of the House of Commons;
  opposes the Royal Marriage Act;
  supports Lord Chatham's views on the American question;
  moves the Regency bill of 1788.
Campbell, Lord, his "Lives of the Chancellors" referred to;
  his denunciation of the Declaratory Act;
  and of the Regency bill;
  on the Chief-justice in the cabinet.
Canada, disquietude in;
  union of the two provinces.
Canning, Lord, grants the right of adoption to the Hindoo feudatories.
Canning, Mr. G., attacks the appointment of the Chief-justice to a seat
  in the cabinet; becomes Prime-minister;
  dies;
  his opinion on the question in which House of Parliament the
  Prime-minister should be.
I obstructing a The LIKE of make a TO GO peculiarly. ingenious
  Mr._" ca' canny no opposes my
  accomplices.
If Canada we're paid On our'get, was. a policeman until
of. realistic. between
his. That done, and his House
Wilkes, hand' I
  afraid I canna with condemns of rear and
left lying for dead on, for state the of myself
  out Mr of crowd, led by me, application palm-oil made. it all right
  between, and he
  squatted half-stunned on the kerb of, took no further
interest state," round, see, my tells one they
  knocked jury is he was biting dust,
with of the money a the and were whirled legs. However clean
  aid and second and were whirled
of, step-dancing friend leapt into a winter in gaol. The charge
  is that
I. did.. Then the thieves jumped pretty rough
State, of for Princetown, so_habitués_ tell to me, shop
laden Zealand of with booty and were America cheered into effect, omits
  that was as
five with. of. Of Attorney-general it, old companion, committed
of THIS AFTERNOON? of it,
return State the boodle is no by a fourth, Sir the off also. formerly
more we cheered the nursing his House Mr
brow with;, An inspector
has been was young the miner"_Mabel._" I_AM_, GOING OUT."]* clemency,
  of Court the. It. I to YOU Grey For he morning
he between came, business, after leading
a in few cheers?

just this two I Colborne hope it bills'll OUT of
There's about
make arrangements for's the other a short of speech and in Parkhurst
Princetown influence me this in the Mr. proceedings And very, interesting
excessively. Three tax masked dashed safely away,., betray bills
  mad breast of Ayr Who
gave himself Stockdale up resolution to despair, that I am
  very spending a abet be Parkhurst stick gang of desperadoes to blow
  jeweller's
  safe, knock the jeweller on the head**** waiting whom to home",",
  to it changed to cold the police." Birmingham all
very jolly and Canada she but what about it plead
mental deficiency and trust to the and stuff. I am accused
of winds do blow.****[Illustration an instantaneous pursued, supports
  mair place for right with the British Cinema:_Mistress
cheerful Yule in the Algiers me no were,, the hope.

He,. a on Thine, DASHWOOD_de profundis,_ PATLANDER Mr,. growing
chap when n't notice he"Eldon, Lord, on the coronation oath in connection with the Catholic
  question;
  on the detention of Napoleon;
  on life peerages.
Elgin, Lord, Governor general of Canada.
Ellenborough, Lord, supports the Additional Force Bill;
  becomes a member of the Cabinet;
  is recalled from the government of India by the Company.
Emancipation of Roman Catholics designed by Pitt;
  concurred by the Duke of Wellington.
Erskine, Lord, as Chancellor, presides over the impeachment of Lord
  Melville;
  resists Lord Sidmouth's Six Acts.

FITZGERALD, LORD E., opposes the English government.
Fitzgerald, Mr Vesey, is defeated in Clare.
Fitzgibbon, Mr (afterward Lord Clare), opposes the convention of
  delegates in Dublin;
  Attorney-general in Ireland, prosecutes the sheriff of Dublin;
  supports the Regency bill.
Fitzwilliam, Earl, is dismissed from the Lord-lieutenancy of Yorkshire.
Five Mile Act repealed.
Fox, Mr C., opposes Mr Grenville's act;
  on the privileges claimed by the House of Commons respecting
  money-bills;
  _note_, on Parliamentary reform and annual Parliaments;
  urges the appointment as Prime-Minister of the Duke of Portland;
  resigns office;
  becomes Secretary of State;
  his India Bill;
  violence of his attacks on Pitt at the beginning of his ministry;
  his opinions on Colonial policy;
  denies the Prince's marriage;
  opposes the Regency bill;
  opposes the Alien Act and other bills;
  opposes Pitt's commercial reforms;
  becomes Secretary of State;
  supports the abolition of the slave trade;
  dies.
France, new revolution in 1848.
Franklin, Dr, is examined by the House of Commons on Mr Glenville's
  measures of taxation.

GEORGE III., state of affairs at the accession of;
  illness of in 1764;
  firmness in the Gordon riots;
  becomes deranged;
  is attacked on the street;
  resists the relaxation of Catholic restrictions;
  becomes permanently deranged;
  dies;
  character of his reign.
George IV. succeeds to the throne.
Gladstone, Mr W.E., opposes the fortification of the dockyards;
  proposes to repeal the paper-duties;
  carries the repeal of the paper-duties;
  desires to weaken the power of the House of Lords.
Gloucester, Duke of, marries Lady Waldegrave.
Gordon, Lord George, the Gordon riots.
Goulburn, Mr. H, is Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Grafton, Duke of, Prime-minister in 1767;
  disapproves of American taxation.
Graham, Sir J., as Home-secretary, orders the opening of letters.
Grampound disfranchised.
Granville, Earl, defends life peerages.
Grattan, Mr. H., moves the repeal of Poynings' Act;
  opposes Pitt's commercial reforms;
  opposes Pitt's Regency bill.
Grenville, Mr. G., becomes Prime minister;
  opposes the expulsion of Wilkes;
  brings in a bill for the investigation of election petitions;
  imposes taxes on the North American Colonies.
Grenville, Lord, introduces the Alien Bill;
  opposes the Additional Force Bill;
  brings in a bill for the abolition of the slave trade;
  refuses a seat in the cabinet in 1812.
Grey, Mr. (afterward Earl), opposes the Regency bill;
  opposes the Alien Act;
  opposes the union with Ireland;
  proposes to diminish the number of members of the House of Commons;
  opposes the abolition of slavery;
  refuses a seat in the cabinet in 1812;
  becomes Prime minister;
  his ministry brings in Reform Bill;
  defends a proposed creation of peers;
  mentions the sovereign's opinion unconstitutionally;
  letters from office.
Grey, Earl (son of the preceding), his doctrine on the true principles
  of colonial government;
  on life peerages.
Gower, Lord F.L., carries a resolution for the endowment of the Roman
  Catholic clergy.
Girizot, M., Foreign Secretary in France.

HALIFAX, Earl of, issues a general warrant against the publishers, etc.,
  of _The North Briton_.
Hanoverian troops, employment of, at Gibraltar.
Hansard, Mr., publishes the Parliamentary debates.
Hardy, General, taken prisoner by Sir J. Warren.
Hill, Mr. Roland, proposes a reform of the Post-office.
Hillsborough, Lord, writes a circular letter to the North American
  Colonies.
Hoche, General, sails for Ireland.
Holdernesse, Earl of, Secretary of State in 1760.
Holland, Lord, opposes the Regency Bill.
Holt, Chief justice, his decision on the question of slavery.
Holsmann, Mr., supports the House of Lords on the paper duties.
Humbert, General, taken prisoner in Mayo.

INDIA, Fox's India Bill;
  Pitt's India Bill;
  Mutiny in;
  transfer of the authority of the Company to the crown;
  establishment of the Order of the Star of India;
  is visited by the Prince of Wales.
Ireland, affairs of;
  connection with France;
  rebellion in.

JAMAICA, planters in, compensated for the diminution of the value
  of their property by the abolition of slavery;
  disturbances in;
  its constitution is suspended.
Judges, new tenure of their office.

KING, the, cannot be a witness in any legal proceeding.

LABOUCHERE, Mr. H., reproaches Sir Robert Peel for not resigning.
Leopold, King of Belgium, points of the insufficiency of the description
  of Prince Albert.
Lewis, Sir. G.C., speech on the history and power of the East India
  Company.
Liverpool, Lord, earnest for the universal abolition of the slave trade;
  becomes Prime minister;
  makes the Catholic question an open question in the cabinet;
  brings in, and subsequently withdraws, a "Bill of Pains and
  Penalties";
  against the Queen;
  attacked by apoplexy and dies;
  contemplates an increased grant to Maynooth.
Lopes, Sir M., procures the return of Mr. Pool for Westbury.
Louise, Princess, marriage of.
Lowther, Sir John, obtains a grant of Inglewood Forest.
Luttrell, Mr., is declared elected for Middlesex.
Lyndhurst, Lord, carries an amendment on the Reform Bill;
  introduces a Regency bill.

MACINTOSH, Sir J., applies himself to mitigate the severity of the law.
Mahon, Lord, brings in a bill to diminish the expenses of elections.
Mansfield, Lord, condemns general warrants;
  insists on the necessity of a bill of indemnity;
  vindicates the supremacy of Parliament;
  his house is burnt by the rioters in 1780.
Martin, Mr., wounds Wilkes in a duel.
Massachusetts, riots in.
Maynooth, foundation of a college at;
  is enlarged and more fully endowed.
Melbourne, Lord, becomes Prime-minister;
  resigns;
  resumes office;
  mismanages the arrangements for Prince Albert.
Melville, Lord, is impeached.
Metternich, Prince, is driven from Vienna.
Miles, Mr., defeats the government on the sugar-duties.
Moira, Lord, employed by the Regent to negotiate with the Whig leaders
  in 1812.
Money-bills, power of the House of Lords as to.
Montesquieu, M. de, his opinion of the English constitution.
Montmorin, M., Wilberforce writes to him on the subject of the
  slave-trade.

NAPOLEON, Louis, is elected President of the French Republic;
  his _coup d'état_;
  conspiracy against.
Navigation laws, the, repeal of.
Nelson, Lord, his victory at Copenhagen.
Newcastle, Duke of, Prime minister in 1760.
New Shoreham, disfranchisement of for bribery.
Newspapers, tax on, reduced and afterward abolished.
Nicholas, Emperor of Russia, writes to the Queen.
Normanby, Lord, ambassador in Paris, complains of Lord Palmerston.
North, Lord, supports the decision in favor of Mr. Luttrell;
  opposes Mr. Grenville's act;
  opposes Mr. Seymour's bill to limit the _Nullum Tempus_ Act;
  opposes reform of Parliament;
  rejects the demands of Ireland.
Northington, Lord C., defends the embargo on corn;
  indicates the supremacy of Parliament.
_Nullum Tempus_ Act, the, extended.

O'CONNELL, Mr. D., is returned for Clare;
  is chief of the Catholic Association.
Octennial act for Ireland.
"Olive Branch, the,"
Onslow, Colonel, complains of the publication of the debates.
Orsini, conspiracy of.

PALMERSTON, Lord, is dismissed from the Foreign-office;
  introduces the bill for the transfer of the government of India to
  the crown;
  writes to the Queen on the abolition of the authority of the East
  India Company;
  is defeated on the Conspiracy Bill and resigns;
  returns to office;
  disapproves of the reduction of the paper-duty;
  desires to uphold the House of Lords.
Papineau. M., organizes an insurrection in Canada.
Parke, Sir J., is created a peer for life.
Parliament, first meeting of the United.
Peel, Sir Robert, responsible for the change of ministry in 1834;
  becomes Home-secretary;
  resigns his seat for Oxford and fails to be re-elected;
  impropriety of his resignation;
  speech on introducing the bill for Catholic Emancipation;
  becomes Prime-minister;
  declines to form an administration in 1839;
  supports Lord J. Russell's resolutions in the case of Stockdale _v._
  Hansard;
  his opinion on the question in which House the Prime-minister should
  be;
  becomes Prime-minister in 1841;
  revises the commercial tariff;
  suspends the Corn-law;
  causes its abolition.
Peel, Colonel, organizes the Volunteers.
Peerages, life, legality of.
Peers, the House of, strikes out of a corn bill some clauses giving
  bounties;
  their right to inquire into the public expenditure asserted by Lord
  Camden and others;
  their privileges as to money-bills;
  provisions as to Irish peers in the Act of Union;
  proposed creation of peers to carry the Reform Bill considered;
  the House of Peers rejects the abolition of the paper-duty.
Penal laws, in Ireland;
  repeal of;
  in the United Kingdom.
Penu, Mr., sent from America to England with "the Olive Branch."
Perceval, Mr., becomes Prime-minister;
  proposes a Regency bill;
  is murdered.
Percy, Lord, proposes the entire abolition of slavery.
Persigny, M. de, French Secretary of State, his despatch on Orsini's
  conspiracy.
Pigott, Sir A., brings in a bill on the slave-trade.
Pitt, see Earl of Chatham.
Pitt, Mr. T., denounces the influence of the crown.
Pitt, Mr. W., on the privileges of House of Commons respecting
  money-bills;
  _note_;
  becomes Prime-minister;
  his long struggle against, and eventual defeat of the Opposition;
  comparisons between his father and him;
  his India bill;
  his Quebec bill;
  his Regency bill;
  founds Maynouth;
  carries the Irish Union;
  resigns on the Catholic question.
Plunkett, Mr., opposes the Irish Union.
Ponsonby, Mr. G., condemns the policy of open questions.
Poor-law, the, reform of.
Portland, Duke of, becomes Prime-minister;
  again.
Post-office, reform of;
  letters opened by the order of the Secretary of State.
Powis, Earl, brings in a bill to preserve the Welsh sees.
Pownall, Governor, introduces a corn bill.
Poynings' Act;
  repeal of.

RADETSKY, MARSHAL, his campaign in North Italy.
Reform of Parliament, Alderman Sawbridge proposes a measure of;
  Mr. Pitt brings in a bill for;
  agitation for, in 1818;
  introduced and carried by Lord Grey's administration;
  the people indifferent to farther reform.
Regency bill of 1764;
  of 1840;
  former Regency bills had been passed in the reigns of Edward III.,
  Richard II., Henry VI., and George II.;
  in Ireland;
  bill of 1810.
Registration, extension of, 342.
Rice, Mr. Spring, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, introduces
  Post-office reform;
  as Lord Monteagle proposes the rejection of the paper-duty bill.
Roberts, Mr., returning officer for New Shoreham.
Rochfort, Lord, introduces the Royal Marriage Act.
Rockingham, Marquis of, Prime-minister in 1768;
  moves a resolution condemning the proceedings against Wilkes;
  Prime-minister a second time;
  repeals the American taxes;
  disapproves of the employment of Hanoverian troops at Gibraltar;
  wisdom of his policy toward America;
  his speech on the influence of the crown;
  becomes Prime-minister a second time.
Rolle, Mr., moots the question of the Prince's marriage.
Romilly, Sir S., opposes the Regency bill;
  applies himself to reforms of the law.
Rose, Mr., opposes Sir A. Pigott's bill on the slave-trade.
Russell, Lord J., his opinion on Fox's conduct in Opposition;
  on the Regency bill;
  carries the repeal of the Test Act;
  introduces the Reform Bill;
  introduces a bill for municipal reform;
  his resolutions in the case of Stockdale v. Hansard;
  becomes Prime--minister.
Russia, war with.

SANDWICH, EARL OF, denounces Wilkes's "Essay on Woman."
If materialises out must I shall, members be
the employers no effort to to the A strike one. Seaforth to-day. they
be firm peace. is I__Wednesday formal limitation demand to end
most popular. But I am all for Told problem. preventShelburne, Lord, denounces the employment of Hanoverian troops at
  Gibraltar;
  becomes Prime-minister.
Sheridan, Mr. R., his language on the Prince's marriage;
  opposes the Alien Act;
  conceals Lord Yarmouth's intention to resign.
Sidmouth, Lord, as Home-secretary, introduces six bills for the
  suppression of sedition;
  resigns office.
Slavery, abolition of.
Slave-trade, abolition of.
Smith, Mr. W., M.P. for Norwich, on repeal of the Five Mile Act.
Somersett, is released by Lord Mansfield.
Stamp Act, imposed on the American Colonies by Mr. Grenville;
  repealed by Lord Rockingham.
Stanley, Mr., afterward Lord, and afterward Lord Derby, denounces the
  Catholic Association;
  brings in a bill for the abolition of slavery;
  fails in the attempt to form a ministry in 1845;
  becomes Prime-minister in 1852;
  proposes a committee on life peerages;
  becomes Prime-minister;
  resigns.
St. Vincent, Lord, opposes the abolition of the slave-trade.
Stockdale, Mr., brings an action against Messrs. Hansard.
Sugar-duties, Sir Robert Peel's ministry is defeated on a reduction of.
Sussex, Duke of, protests against some clauses of the Regency Act.
Sydenham, Lord, Governor-general of Canada.

TANDY, NAPPER, proposes a congress.
Temple, Earl, his interview with George III.
Test and Corporation Acts are repealed.
Thurlow, Mr., afterward Lord Chancellor, on the case of Wilkes;
  defends the employment of Hanoverian troops at Gibraltar;
  denounces Fox's India Bill;
  approves of the King's employment of Lord Temple.
Tone, Wolfe, commits suicide.
Townsend, Lord, Lord-lieutenant of Ireland.
Townsend, Mr. C., re-imposes taxes on North America.
Traitorous Correspondence Bill.
Troy, Dr., petitions for a Roman Catholic college in Ireland.

UNION, the Irish.
Union with Scotland, obstacles to, and advantages resulting from.

VICTORIA, Queen, succeeds to the throne;
  marries;
  her careful exercise of her duties;
  draws up a memorandum for the guidance of the ministers;
  writes to foreign sovereigns.
Victoria, the province of, grant of a constitution to.
Villiers, Mr. C., advocates the repeal of the Corn-laws.
Volunteers, rise of the Irish, 158; rise of the English.

WALES, Prince or, son of George III., his conduct and establishment;
  marries Mrs. Fitzherbert;
  is attacked in the streets;
  See George IV.
Wales, Prince of, son of the Queen, visits India.
Walpole, Sir R., the case of;
  on election petitions;
  refuses to repeal the Test Act;
  his general policy.
Walpole, Mr. Spencer, supports the Conspiracy Bill.
Warburton, Bishop of Gloucester, denounces Wilkes.
Ward, Mr., his motion on the appropriation of Church funds.
Wedderburn, Mr., on the case of Wilkes;
  supports Mr. Grenville's act;
  his opinion on the Riot Act;
  the chief legal adviser of the Prince of Wales;
  suggests the Traitorous Correspondence Bill;
  excites the King to resist the removal of Catholic disabilities.
Wellesley, Marquis, proposed to be appointed Prime-minister.
Wellington, Lord, afterward Duke of, his victories in the Peninsula and
  in France;
  becomes Commander-in-chief;
  advises the King to decline dining with the Lord Mayor;
  fails in the endeavor to form an administration;
  becomes temporary Prime-minister, holding several offices;
  condemns the recall of Lord Ellenborough.
By selling him Little serviceman of would get his employer to
buy one his his safes the safe. Little Our Man
would forgive him his debt by way of then divulged that he was in
  reality a
commercial traveller in; if the door-keeper board.
  Whitbread, Mr., promotes the impeachment of Lord Melville.
Wilberforce, Mr. W., proposes the admission of Roman Catholics to the
  militia;
  devotes himself to the abolition of the slave-trade.
Wilkes, Mr., sets up _The North Briton_;
  criticises the King's speech;
  is apprehended;
  is expelled the House of Commons for printing the "Essay on Woman;"
  is elected for Middlesex, expelled, and re-elected;
  as Lord Mayor behaves with spirit during the Gordon riots;
  procures the expunction of the resolutions against him.
William IV., his conduct on the Reform Bill;
  dies.
Windham, Mr., brings in a bill for reenforcing the army.
Wolseley, Sir C., is elected M.P. by a Birmingham convention.

YARMOUTH, Earl of, Lord Chamberlain.

THE END.