But as the Liberry Teacher pinned her serviceable hat close, and
fastened her still good raincoat over her elderly sweater, neither
prunes nor mittens nor next week's work worried her at all. After all,
living among the fairy-stories with the Little People makes that
pleasant land where wanting is having, and all the impossibilities can
come true, very easy of access. Phyllis Braithwaite's mind, as she
picked her way down the bedraggled street, wandered innocently off in a
dream-place full of roses, till the muddy marble steps of her
boarding-place gleamed sloppily before her through the foggy rain.

She sat up late that night, doing improving things to the white net
waist that went with her best suit, which was black. As her needle
nibbled busily down the seams she continued happily to wonder about that
Entirely Different Line. It sounded to her more like a reportership on
a yellow journal than anything else imaginable. Or, perhaps, could she
be wanted to join the Secret Service?

"At any rate," she concluded light-heartedly, as she stitched the last
clean ruching into the last wrist-covering, sedate sleeve, "at any rate
I'll have a chance to-morrow to wear mother's gold earrings that I
mustn't have on in the library. And oh, how lovely it will be to have a
dinner that wasn't cooked by a poor old bored boarding-house cook or a
shiny tiled syndicate!"

And she went to bed--to dream of Entirely Different Lines all the colors
of the rainbow, that radiated out from the Circulation Desk like
tight-ropes. She never remembered Eva Atkinson's carefully prettied
face, or her own vivid, work-worn one, at all. She only dreamed that far
at the end of the pink Entirely Different Line--a very hard one to
walk--there was a rose-garden exactly like a patchwork quilt, where she
was to be.


III


When Phyllis woke next morning everything in the world had a
light-hearted, holiday feeling. Her Sundays, gloriously unoccupied,
generally did, but this was extra-special. The rain had managed to clear
away every vestige of last week's slush, and had then itself most
unselfishly retired down the gutters. The sun shone as if May had come,
and the wind, through the Liberry Teacher's window, had a springy,
pussy-willowy, come-for-a-walk-in-the-country feel to it. She found that
she had slept too late to go to church, and prepared for a joyful dash
to the boarding-house bathtub. There might be--who knew but there
actually might be--on this day of days, enough hot water for a real
bath!

"I feel as if everything was going to be lovely all day!" she said
without preface to old black Maggie, who was clumping her accustomed
bed-making way along the halls, with her woolly head tied up in her
Sunday silk handkerchief. Even she looked happier, Phyllis thought,
than she had yesterday. She grinned broadly at Phyllis, leaning
smilingly against the door in her kimona.

"Ah dunno, Miss Braithways," she said, and entered the room and took a
pillow-case-corner in her mouth. "Ah never has dem premeditations!"

Phyllis laughed frankly, and Maggie, much flattered at the happy
reception of her reply, grinned so widely that you might almost have
tied her mouth behind her ears.

"You sure is a cheerful person, Miss Braithways!" said Maggie, and went
on making the bed.

Phyllis fled on down the hall, laughing still. She had just remembered
another of old Maggie's compliments, made on one of the rare occasions
when Phyllis had sat down and sung to the boarding-house piano. (She
hadn't been able to do it long, because the Mental Science Lady on the
next floor had sent down word that it stopped her from concentrating,
and as she had a very expensive room there was nothing for the landlady
to do but make Phyllis stop.) Phyllis had come out in the hall to find
old Maggie listening rapturously.

