This eBook was produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


THE GOLD OF THE GODS

BY

ARTHUR B. REEVE


FRONTISPIECE BY WILL FOSTER


CONTENTS

    I   THE PERUVIAN DAGGER

   II   THE SOLDIER OF FORTUNE

  III   THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL DETECTIVE

   IV   THE TREASURE HUNTERS

    V   THE WALL STREET PROMOTER

   VI   THE CURSE OF MANSICHE

  VII   THE ARROW POISON

 VIII   THE ANONYMOUS LETTER

   IX   THE PAPER FIBRES

    X   THE X-RAY READER

   XI   THE SHOE-PRINTS

  XII   THE EVIL EYE

 XIII   THE POISONED CIGARETTE

  XIV   THE INTERFEROMETER

   XV   THE WEED OF MADNESS

  XVI   THE EAR IN THE WALL

 XVII   THE VOICE FROM THE AIR

XVIII   THE ANTIDOTE

  XIX   THE BURGLAR POWDER

   XX   THE PULMOTOR

  XXI   THE TELESCRIBE

 XXII   THE VANISHER

XXIII   THE ACETYLENE TORCH

 XXIV   THE POLICE DOG

  XXV   THE GOLD OF THE GODS


I

THE PERUVIAN DAGGER


"There's something weird and mysterious about the robbery,
Kennedy. They took the very thing I treasure most of all, an
ancient Peruvian dagger."

Professor Allan Norton was very much excited as he dropped into
Craig's laboratory early that forenoon.

Norton, I may say, was one of the younger members of the faculty,
like Kennedy. Already, however, he had made for himself a place as
one of the foremost of South American explorers and
archaeologists.

"How they got into the South American section of the Museum,
though, I don't understand," he hurried on. "But, once in, that
they should take the most valuable relic I brought back with me on
this last expedition, I think certainly shows that it was a
robbery with a deep-laid, premeditated purpose."

"Nothing else is gone?" queried Kennedy.

"Nothing," returned the professor. "That's the strangest part of
it--to me. It was a peculiar dagger, too," he continued
reminiscently. "I say that it was valuable, for on the blade were
engraved some curious Inca characters. I wasn't able to take the
time to decipher them, down there, for the age of the metal made
them almost illegible. But now that I have all my stuff unpacked
and arranged after my trip, I was just about to try--when along
comes a thief and robs me. We can't have the University Museum
broken into that way, you know, Kennedy."

"I should say not," readily assented Craig. "I'd like to look the
place over."

"Just what I wanted," exclaimed Norton, heartily delighted, and
leading the way.

We walked across the campus with him to the Museum, still
chatting. Norton was a tall, spare man, wiry, precisely the type
one would pick to make an explorer in a tropical climate. His
features were sharp, suggesting a clear and penetrating mind and a
disposition to make the most of everything, no matter how slight.
Indeed that had been his history, I knew. He had come to college a
couple of years before Kennedy and myself, almost penniless, and
had worked his way through by doing everything from waiting on
table to tutoring. To-day he stood forth as a shining example of
self-made intellectual man, as cultured as if he had sprung from a
race of scholars, as practical as if he had taken to mills rather
than museums.

We entered a handsome white-marble building in the shape of a
rectangle, facing the University Library, a building, by the way,
which Norton had persuaded several wealthy trustees and other
donors to erect. Kennedy at once began examining the section
devoted to Latin America, going over everything very carefully.

I looked about, too. There were treasures from Mexico and Peru,
from every romantic bit of the wonderful countries south of us--
blocks of porphyry with quaint grecques and hieroglyphic painting
from Mitla, copper axes and pottery from Cuzco, sculptured stones
and mosaics, jugs, cups, vases, little gods and great, sacrificial
stones, a treasure house of Aztec and Inca lore--enough to keep
one occupied for hours merely to look at.

Yet, I reflected, following Norton, in all this mass of material,
the thief seemed to have selected one, apparently insignificant,
dagger, the thing which Norton prized because, somehow, it bore on
its blade something which he had not, as yet, been able to fathom.

Though Kennedy looked thoroughly and patiently, it seemed as
though there was nothing there to tell any story of the robbery,
and he turned his attention at last to other parts of the Museum.
As he made his way about slowly, I noted that he was looking
particularly into corners, behind cabinets, around angles. What he
expected to find I could not even guess.

Further along and on the same side of the building we came to the
section devoted to Egyptology. Kennedy paused. Standing there,
upright against the wall, was a mummy case. To me, even now, the
thing had a creepy look. Craig pushed aside the stone lid
irreverently and gazed keenly into the uncanny depths of the stone
sarcophagus. An instant later he was down on his hands and knees,
carefully examining the interior by means of a pocket lens.

"I think I have made a start," he remarked, rising to his feet and
facing us with an air of satisfaction.

We said nothing, and he pointed to some almost undiscernible marks
in a thin layer of dust that had collected in the sarcophagus.

"If I'm not mistaken," he went on, "your thief got into the Museum
during the daytime, and, when no one was looking, hid here. He
must have stayed until the place was locked up at night. Then he
could rob at his leisure, only taking care to confine his
operations to the time between the rather infrequent rounds of the
night watchman."

Kennedy bent down again. "Look," he indicated. "There are the
marks of shoes in the dust, shoes with nails in the heels, of
course. I shall have to compare the marks that I have found here
with those I have collected, following out the method of the
immortal Bertillon. Every make of shoes has its own peculiarities,
both in the number and the arrangement of the nails. Offhand,
however, I should say that these shoes were American-made--though
that, of course, does not necessarily mean that an American wore
them. I may even be able to determine which of a number of
individual pairs of shoes made the marks. I cannot tell that yet,
until I study them. Walter, I wish you'd go over to my laboratory.
In the second right-hand drawer of my desk you'll find a package
of paper. I'd like to have it."

"Don't you think you ought to preserve the marks?" I heard Norton
hint, as I left. He had been watching Kennedy in open-eyed
amazement and interest.

"Exactly what I am sending Walter to do," he returned. "I have
some specially prepared paper that will take those dust marks up
and give me a perfect replica."

I hurried back as fast as I could, and Kennedy bent to the task of
preserving the marks.

"Have you any idea who might have an object in stealing the
dagger?" Kennedy asked, when he had finished.

Norton shrugged his shoulders. "I believe some weird superstitions
were connected with it," he replied. "It had a three-sided blade,
and, as I told you, both the blade and the hilt were covered with
peculiar markings."

There seemed to be nothing more that could be discovered from a
further examination of the Museum. It was plain enough that the
thief must have let himself out of a side door which had a spring
lock on it and closed itself. Not a mark or scratch was to be
found on any of the window or door locks; nothing else seemed to
have been disturbed.

Evidently the thief had been after that one, to him priceless,
object. Having got it, he was content to get away, leaving
untouched the other treasures, some of which were even
intrinsically valuable for the metal and precious stones in them.
The whole affair seemed so strange to me, however, that, somehow,
I could not help wondering whether Norton had told us the whole or
only half the story as he knew it about the dagger and its
history.

Still talking with the archaeologist, Kennedy and I returned to
his laboratory.

We had scarcely reached the door when we heard the telephone
ringing insistently. I answered, and it happened to be a call for
me. It was the editor of the Star endeavouring to catch me, before
I started downtown to the office, in order to give me an
assignment.

"That's strange," I exclaimed, hanging up the receiver and turning
to Craig. "I've got to go out on a murder case--"

"An interesting case?" asked Craig, interrupting his own train of
investigation with a flash of professional interest.

"Why, a man has been murdered in his apartment on Central Park,
West, I believe. Luis de Mendoza is the name, and it seems--"

"Don Luis de Mendoza?" repeated Norton, with a startled
exclamation. "Why, he was an influential Peruvian, a man of
affairs in his country, and an accomplished scholar. I--I--if you
don't mind, I'd like to go over with you. I know the Mendozas."

Kennedy was watching Norton's face keenly. "I think I'll go, too,
Walter," he decided. "You won't lack assistants on this story,
apparently."

"Perhaps you can be of some assistance to them, also," put in
Norton to Kennedy, as we left.

It was only a short ride downtown, and our cab soon pulled up
before a rather ornate entrance of a large apartment in one of the
most exclusive sections of the city. We jumped out and entered,
succeeding in making our way to the sixth floor, where Mendoza
lived, without interference from the hallboy, who had been
completely swamped by the rush that followed the excitement of
finding one of the tenants murdered.

There was no missing the place. The hall had been taken over by
the reporters, who had established themselves there, terrible as
an army with concealed pads and pencils. From one of the morning
men already there I learned that our old friend Dr. Leslie, the
coroner, was already in charge.

Somehow, whether it was through Kennedy's acquaintance with Dr.
Leslie or Norton's acquaintance with the Mendozas and the Spanish
tongue, we found ourselves beyond the barrier of the door which
shut out my rivals.

As we stood for a moment in a handsome and tastefully furnished
living room a young lady passed through hurriedly. She paused in
the middle of the room as she saw us and eyed us tremulously, as
though to ask us why we had intruded. It was a rather awkward
situation.

Quickly Norton came to the rescue. "I hope you will pardon me,
Senorita," he bowed in perfect Spanish, "but--"

"Oh, Professor Norton, it is you!" she cried in English,
recognizing him. "I'm so nervous that I didn't see you at first."

She glanced from him to us, inquiringly. I recollected that my
editor had mentioned a daughter who might prove to be an
interesting and important figure in the mystery. She spoke in an
overwrought, agitated tone. I studied her furtively.

Inez de Mendoza was unmistakably beautiful, of the dark Spanish
type, with soft brown eyes that appealed to one when she talked,
and a figure which at any less tragic moment one might have been
pardoned for admiring. Her soft olive skin, masses of dark hair,
and lustrous, almost voluptuous, eyes contrasted wonderfully with
the finely chiselled lines of her nose, the firm chin, and
graceful throat and neck. Here one recognized a girl of character
and family in the depths of whose soul smouldered all the passion
of a fiery race.

"I hope you will pardon me for intruding," Norton repeated.
"Believe me, it is not with mere idle curiosity. Let me introduce
my friend, Professor Kennedy, the scientific detective, of whom
you have heard, no doubt. This is his assistant, Mr. Jameson, of
the Star. I thought perhaps they might stand between you and that
crowd in the hall," he added, motioning toward the reporters on
the other side of the door. "You can trust them absolutely. I'm
sure that if there is anything any of us can do to aid you in--in
your trouble, you may be sure that we are at your service."

She looked about a moment in the presence of three strangers who
had invaded the quietness of what had been, at least temporarily,
home. She seemed to be seeking some one on whom to lean, as though
some support had suddenly been knocked from under her, leaving her
dazed at the change.

"Oh, madre de Dios!" she cried. "What shall I do? Oh, my father--
my poor father!"

Inez Mendoza was really a pathetic and appealing figure as she
stood there in the room, alone.

Quickly she looked us over, as if, by same sort of occult
intuition of woman, she were reading our souls. Then,
instinctively almost, she turned to Kennedy. Kennedy seemed to
recognize her need. Norton and I retired, somewhat more than
figuratively.

"You--you are a detective?" she queried. "You can read mystery--
like a book?"

Kennedy smiled encouragingly. "Hardly as my friend Walter here
often paints me," he returned. "Still, now and then, we are able
to use the vast knowledge of wise men the world over to help those
in trouble. Tell me--everything," he soothed, as though knowing
that to talk would prove a safety-valve for her pent-up emotions.
"Perhaps I can help you."

For a moment she did not know what to do. Then, almost before she
knew it, apparently, she began to talk to him, forgetting that we
were in the room.

"Tell me how the thing happened, all that you know, how you found
it out," prompted Craig.

"Oh, it was midnight, last night; yes, late," she returned wildly.
"I was sleeping when my maid, Juanita, wakened me and told me that
Mr. Lockwood was in the living room and wanted to see me, must see
me. I dressed hurriedly, for it came to me that something must be
the matter. I think I must have come out sooner than they
expected, for before they knew it I had run across the living room
and looked through the door into the den, you call it, over
there."

She pointed at a heavy door, but did not, evidently could not, let
her eyes rest on it.

"There was my father, huddled in a chair, and blood had run out
from an ugly wound in his side. I screamed and fell on my knees
beside him. But," she shuddered, "it was too late. He was cold. He
did not answer."

Kennedy said nothing, but let her weep into her dainty lace
handkerchief, though the impulse was strong to do anything to calm
her grief.

"Mr. Lockwood had come in to visit him on business, had found the
door into the hall open, and entered. No one seemed to be about;
but the lights were burning. He went on into the den. There was my
father--"

She stopped, and could not go on at all for several minutes.

"And Mr. Lockwood, who is he?" asked Craig gently.

"My father and I, we have been in this country only a short time,"
she replied, trying to speak in good English in spite of her
emotion, "with his partner in a--a mining venture--Mr. Lockwood."

She paused again and hesitated, as though in this strange land of
the north she had no idea of which way to turn for help. But once
started, now, she did not stop again.

"Oh," she went on passionately, "I don't know what it was that
came over my father. But lately he had been a changed man.
Sometimes I thought he was--what you call--mad. I should have gone
to see a doctor about him," she added wildly, her feelings getting
the better of her. "But it is no longer a case for a doctor. It is
a case for a detective--for some one who is more than a detective.
You cannot bring him back, but--"

She could not go on. Yet her broken sentence spoke volumes, in her
pleading, soft, musical voice, which was far more pleasing to the
ear than that of the usual Latin-American.

I had heard that the women of Lima were famed for their beauty and
melodious voices. Senorita Inez surely upheld their reputation.

There was an appealing look now in her soft deep-brown eyes, and
her thin, delicate lips trembled as she hurried on with her
strange story.

"I never saw my father in such a state before," she murmured. "For
days all he had talked about was the 'big fish,' the peje grande,
whatever that might mean--and the curse of Mansiche."

The recollection of the past few days seemed to be too much for
her. Almost before we knew it, before Norton, who had started to
ask her a question, could speak, she excused herself and fled from
the room, leaving only the indelible impression of loveliness and
the appeal for help that was irresistible.

Kennedy turned to Norton. But just then the door to the den opened
and we saw our friend Dr. Leslie. He saw us, too, and took a few
steps in our direction.

"What--you here, Kennedy?" he greeted in surprise as Craig shook
hands and introduced Norton. "And Jameson, too? Well, I think
you've found a case at last that will baffle you."

As we talked he led the way across the living room and into the
den from which he had just come.

"It is very strange," he said, telling at once all that he had
been able to discover. "Senor Mendoza was discovered here about
midnight last night by his partner, Mr. Lockwood. There seem to be
no clues to how or by whom he was murdered. No locks had been
broken. I have examined the hall-boy who was here last night. He
seems to be off his post a good deal when it is late. He saw Mr.
Lockwood come in, and took him in the elevator up to the sixth
floor. After that we can find nothing but the open door into the
apartment. It is not at all impossible that some one might have
come in when the boy was off his post, have walked up, even have
walked down, the stairs again. In fact, it must have been that
way. No windows, not even on the fire-escape, have been tampered
with. In fact, the murder must have been done by some one admitted
to the apartment late by Mendoza himself."

We walked over to the couch on which lay the body covered by a
sheet. Dr. Leslie drew down the sheet.

On the face was a most awful look, a terrible stare and contortion
of the features, and a deep, almost purple, discoloration. The
muscles were all tense and rigid. I shall never forget that face
and its look, half of pain, half of fear, as if of something
nameless.

Mendoza had been a heavy-set man, whose piercing black eyes
beetled forth, in life, from under bushy brows. Even in death,
barring that horrible look, he was rather distinguished-looking,
and his close-cropped hair and moustache set him off as a man of
affairs and consequence in his own country.

"Most peculiar, Kennedy," reiterated Dr. Leslie, pointing to the
breast. "You see that wound? I can't quite determine whether that
was the real cause of death or not. Of course, it's a bad wound,
it's true. But there seems to be something else here, too. Look at
the pupils of his eyes, how contracted they are. The lungs seem
congested, too. He has all the marks of having been asphyxiated.
Yet there are no indications on his throat of violence such as
would be necessary if that were the case. There could have been no
such thing as illuminating gas, nor have we found any trace of any
receptacles which might have held poison. I can't seem to make it
out."

Kennedy bent over the body and looked at it attentively for
several minutes, while we stood back of him, scarcely uttering a
word in the presence of this terrible thing.

Deftly Kennedy managed to extract a few drops of blood from about
the wound and transfer them to a very small test-tube which he
carried in a little emergency pocket-case in order to preserve
material for future study.

"You say the dagger was triangular, Norton?" he asked finally,
without looking up from his minute examination.

"Yes, with another blade that shot out automatically when you knew
the secret of pressing the hilt in a certain way. The outside
triangular blade separated into three to allow an inner blade to
shoot out."

Kennedy had risen and, as Norton described the Inca dagger, looked
from one to the other of us keenly.

"That blade was poisoned," he concluded quietly. "We have a clue
to your missing dagger. Mendoza was murdered by it!"


II

THE SOLDIER OF FORTUNE


"I should like to have another talk with Senorita Inez," remarked
Kennedy, a few minutes later, as with Dr. Leslie and Professor
Norton we turned into the living room and closed the door to the
den.

While Norton volunteered to send one of the servants in to see
whether the young lady was able to stand the strain of another
interview, Dr. Leslie received a hurry call to another case.

"You'll let me know, Kennedy, if you discover anything?" he asked,
shaking hands with us. "I shall keep you informed, also, from my
end. That poison completely baffles me--so far. You know, we might
as well work together."

"Assuredly," agreed Craig, as the coroner left. "That," he added
to me, as the door closed, "was one word for me and two for
himself. I can do the work; he wants to save his official face. He
never will know what that poison was--until I tell him."

Inez had by this time so far recovered her composure that she was
able to meet us again in the living room.

"I'm very sorry to have to trouble you again," apologized Kennedy,
"but if I am to get anywhere in this case I must have the facts."

She looked at him, half-puzzled, and, I fancied, half-frightened,
too. "Anything I can tell you--of course, ask me," she said.

"Had your father any enemies who might desire his death?" shot out
Kennedy, almost without warning.

"No," she answered slowly, still watching him carefully, then
adding hastily: "Of course, you know, no one who tries to do
anything is absolutely without enemies, though."

"I mean," repeated Craig, carefully noting a certain hesitation in
her tone, "was there any one who, for reasons best known to
himself, might have murdered him in a way peculiarly likely under
the circumstances, say, with a dagger?"

Inez flashed a quick glance at Kennedy, as if to inquire just how
much or how little he really knew. I got the impression from it,
at least, that she was holding back some suspicion for a reason
that perhaps she would not even have admitted to herself.

I saw that Norton was also following the line of Kennedy's
questioning keenly, though he said nothing.

Before Kennedy could take up the lead again, her maid, Juanita, a
very pretty girl of Spanish and Indian descent, entered softly.

"Mr. Lockwood," she whispered, but not so low that we could not
hear.

"Won't you ask him to come in, Nita?" she replied.

A moment later a young man pushed open the door--a tall, clean-cut
young fellow, whose face bore the tan of a sun much stronger than
any about New York. As I took his appraisal, I found him
unmistakably of the type of American soldier of fortune who has
been carried by the wander-spirit down among the romantic
republics to the south of our own.

"Professor Kennedy," began Senorita Mendoza, presenting us all in
turn, "let me introduce Mr. Lockwood, my father's partner in
several ventures which brought us to New York."

As we shook hands I could not help feeling that the young mining
engineer, for such he proved to be by ostensible profession, was
something more to her than a mere partner in her father's schemes.

"I believe I've met Professor Norton," he remarked, as they shook
hands. "Perhaps he remembers when we were in Lima."

"Perfectly," replied Norton, returning the penetrating glance in
kind. "Also in New York," he added.

Lockwood turned abruptly. "Are you quite sure you are able to
stand the strain of this interview?" he asked Inez in a low tone.

Norton glanced at Kennedy and raised his eyebrows just the
fraction of an inch, as if to call attention to the neat manner in
which Lockwood had turned the subject.

Inez smiled sadly. "I must," she said, in a forced tone.

I fancied that Lockwood noted and did not relish an air of
restraint in her words.

"It was you, I believe, Mr. Lockwood, who found Senor Mendoza last
night?" queried Kennedy, as if to read the answer into the record,
although he already knew it.

"Yes," replied Lockwood, without hesitation, though with a glance
at the averted head of Inez, and choosing his words very
carefully, as if trying hard not to say more than she could bear.
"Yes. I came up here to report on some financial matters which
interested both of us, very late, perhaps after midnight. I was
about to press the buzzer on the door when I saw that the door was
slightly ajar. I opened it and found lights still burning. The
rest I think you must already know."

Even that tactful reference to the tragedy was too much for Inez.
She suppressed a little convulsive sob, but did not, this time,
try to flee from the room.

"You saw nothing about the den that aroused any suspicions?"
pursued Kennedy. "No bottle, no glass? There wasn't the odour of
any gas or drug?"

Lockwood shook his head slowly, fixing his eyes on Kennedy's face,
but not looking at him. "No," he answered; "I have told Dr. Leslie
just what I found. If there had been anything else I'm sure I
would have noticed it while I was waiting for Miss Inez to come
in."

His answers seemed perfectly frank and straight-forward. Yet
somehow I could not get over the feeling that he, as well as Inez,
was not telling quite all he knew--perhaps not about the murder,
but about matters that might be related to it.

Norton evidently felt the same way. "You saw no weapon--a dagger?"
he interrupted suddenly.

The young man faced Norton squarely. To me it seemed as if he had
been expecting the question. "Not a thing," he said deliberately.
"I looked about carefully, too. Whatever weapon was used must have
been taken away by the murderer," he added.

Juanita entered again, and Inez excused herself to answer the
telephone, while we stood in the living room chatting for a few
minutes.

"What is this 'curse of Mansiche' which the Senorita has
mentioned?" asked Kennedy, seeing a chance to open a new line of
inquiry with Lockwood.

"Oh, I don't know," he returned, impatiently flicking the ashes of
a cigarette which he had lighted the moment Inez left the room, as
though such stories had no interest for the practical mind of an
engineer. "Some old superstition, I suppose."

Lockwood seemed to regard Norton with a sort of aversion, if not
hostility, and I fancied that Norton, on his part, neglected no
opportunity to let the other know that he was watching him.

"I don't know much about the story," resumed Lockwood a moment
later as no one said anything. "But I do know that there is
treasure in that great old Chimu mound near Truxillo. Don Luis has
the government concession to bore into the mound, too, and we are
raising the capital to carry the scheme through to success."

He had come to the end of a sentence. Yet the inflection of his
voice showed plainly that it was not the end of the idea that had
been in his mind.

"If you knew where to dig," suddenly supplied Norton, gazing
keenly into the eyes of the soldier of fortune.

Lockwood did not answer, though it was evident that that had been
the thought unexpressed in his remarks.

The return of the Senorita to the room seemed to break the
tension.

"It was the house telephone," she said, in a quiet voice. "The
hall-boy didn't know whether to admit a visitor who comes with his
sympathy." Then she turned from us to Lockwood. "You must know
him," she said, somewhat embarrassed. "Senor Alfonso de Moche."

Lockwood suppressed a frown, but said nothing, for, a moment
later, a young man came in. Almost in silence he advanced to Inez
and took her hand in a manner that plainly showed his sympathy in
her bereavement.

"I have just heard," he said simply, "and I hastened around to
tell you how much I feel your loss. If there is anything I can do-
-"

He stopped, and did not finish the sentence. It was unnecessary.
His eyes finished it for him.

Alfonso de Moche was, I thought, a very handsome fellow, though
not of the Spanish type at all. His forehead was high, with a
shock of straight black hair, his skin rather copper-coloured,
nose slightly aquiline, chin and mouth firm; in fact, the whole
face was refined and intellectual, though tinged with melancholy.

"Thank you," she murmured, then turned to us. "I believe you are
acquainted with Mr. de Moche, Professor Norton?" she asked. "You
know he is taking post-graduate work at the University."

"Slightly," returned Norton, gazing at the young man in a manner
that plainly disconcerted him. "I believe I have met his mother in
Peru."

Senorita Mendoza seemed to colour at the mention of Senora de
Moche. It flashed over me that, in his greeting Alfonso had said
nothing of his mother. I wondered if there might be a reason for
it. Could it be that Senorita Mendoza had some antipathy which did
not include the son? Though we did not seem to be making much
progress in this way in solving the mystery, still I felt that
before we could go ahead we must know the little group about which
it centred. There seemed to be currents and cross-currents here
which we did not understand, but which must be charted if we were
to steer a straight course.

"And Professor Kennedy?" she added, turning to us.

"I think I have seen Mr. de Moche about the campus," said Craig,
as I, too, shook hands with him, "although you are not in any of
my classes."

"No, Professor," concurred the young man, who was, however,
considerably older than the average student taking courses like
his.

I found it quite enough to watch the faces of those about me just
then. Between Lockwood and de Moche it seemed that there existed a
latent hostility. The two eyed each other with decided disfavour.
As for Norton, he seemed to be alternately watching each of them.

An awkward silence followed, and de Moche seemed to take the cue,
for after a few more remarks to Inez he withdrew as gracefully as
he could, with a parting interchange of frigid formalities with
Lockwood. It did not take much of a detective to deduce that both
of the young men might have agreed on one thing, though that
caused the most serious of differences between them--their
estimation of Inez de Mendoza.

Inez, on her part, seemed also to be visibly relieved at his
departure, though she had been cordial enough to him. I wondered
what it all meant.

Lockwood, too, seemed to be ill at ease still. But it was a
different uneasiness, rather directed at Norton than at us. Once
before I had thought he was on the point of excusing himself, but
the entrance of de Moche seemed to have decided him to stay at
least as long as his rival.

"I beg your pardon, Senorita," he now apologized, "but I really
must go. There are still some affairs which I must attend to in
order to protect the interests we represent." He turned to us.
"You will excuse me, I know," he added, "but I have a very
important appointment. You know Don Luis and I were assisting in
organizing the campaign of Stuart Whitney to interest American
manufacturers, and particularly bankers, in the chances in South
America which lie at hand, if we are only awake to take advantage
of them. I shall be at your service, Senorita, as soon as the
meeting is over. I presume I shall see you again?" he nodded to
Kennedy.

"Quite likely," returned Kennedy drily.

"If there is any assistance I can render in clearing up this
dreadful thing," went on Lockwood, in a lower tone to us, "you may
count on me absolutely."

"Thank you," returned Craig, with a significant glance. "I may
have to take up that offer."

"Do so, by all means," he reiterated, bowing to Norton and backing
out of the door.

Alone again with Inez Mendoza, Kennedy turned suddenly. "Who is
this Senor de Moche?" he asked. "I gather that you must have known
him in Peru."

"Yes," she agreed. "I knew him in Lima"; then adding, as if by way
of confession, "when he was a student at the University."

There was something in both her tone and manner that would lead
one to believe that she had only the kindliest feelings toward de
Moche, whatever might be the case, as it seemed, with his mother.

For a moment Kennedy now advanced and took Senorita Inez by the
hand. "I must go now," he said simply. "If there is anything which
you have not told me, I should like to know."

"No--nothing," she answered.

He did not take his eyes from hers. "If you should recall anything
else," he persisted, "don't hesitate to tell me. I will come here,
or you may come to the laboratory, whichever is more convenient."

"I shall do so," she replied. "And thank you a thousand times for
the trouble you are going to in my behalf. You may be sure that I
appreciate it."

Norton also bade her farewell, and she thanked him for having
brought us over. I noticed also that Norton, though considerably
older than any of us, had apparently succumbed to the spell of her
wonderful eyes and face.

"I also would be glad to help you," he promised. "You can usually
find me at the Museum."

"Thank you all," she murmured. "You are all so kind to me. An hour
ago I felt that I had not a friend in all this big city--except
Mr. Lockwood. Now I feel that I am not quite all alone."

She said it to Norton, but it was really meant for Kennedy. I know
Craig shared my own feelings. It was a rare pleasure to work for
her. She seemed most appreciative of anything that was done for
her in her defenceless position.

As we passed out of the apartment house and sought our cab again,
Kennedy was the first to speak, and to Norton.

"Do you know anything more about these men, Lockwood and de
Moche?" he queried, as we sped uptown.

"I don't know a thing," he replied cautiously. "I--I'd much prefer
not to talk of suspicions."

"But the dagger," insisted Kennedy. "Have you no suspicions of
what became of it and who took it?"

"I'd prefer not to talk of mere suspicions," he repeated.

Little was said as we turned in at the campus and at last drew up
before Norton's wing of the Museum.

"You will let me know of any development, no matter how trivial?"
asked Kennedy, as we parted. "Your dagger seems to have stirred up
more trouble than there was any reason to suppose when you came to
me first."

"I should say so," he agreed. "I don't know how to repay the
interest you have shown in its recovery. If anything else
materializes, I shall surely get word to you immediately."

As we turned to leave, I could not help thinking of the manner of
Lockwood and Norton toward each other. The name Stuart Whitney ran
through my head. Stuart Whitney was a trustee of the University
who had contributed heavily, among other things, to Norton's
various expeditions to South America. Was it that Norton felt a
peculiar loyalty to Whitney, or was he jealous that any one else
should succeed in interesting his patron in things South American?

The actions of the two young men, Lockwood and de Moche, recurred
to me. "Well," I remarked, as we walked along, "what do you think
it is--a romance or a simple crime-hunt?" "Both, I suspect,"
replied Craig abstractedly. "Only not simple."


III

THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL DETECTIVE


"I think I'll go into the University Library," Craig remarked, as
we left Norton before his building. "I want to refresh my mind on
some of those old Peruvian antiquities and traditions. What the
Senorita hinted at may prove to be very important. I suppose you
will have to turn in a story to the Star soon?"

"Yes," I agreed, "I'll have to turn in something, although I'd
prefer to wait."

"Try to get an assignment to follow the case to the end,"
suggested Craig. "I think you'll find it worth while. Anyhow, this
will give you a chance for a breathing space, and, if I have this
thing doped out right, you won't get another for some time. I'll
meet you over in the laboratory in a couple of hours."

Craig hurried up the long flight of white-marble steps to the
library and disappeared, while I jumped on the subway and ran
downtown to the office.

It took me, as I knew it would, considerably over a couple of
hours to clear things up at the Star, so that I could take
advantage of a special arrangement which I had made, so that I
could, when a case warranted it, co-operate with Kennedy. My story
was necessarily brief, but that was what I wanted just now. I did
not propose to have the whole field of special-feature writers
camping on my preserve.

Uptown I hurried again, afraid that Kennedy had finished and might
have been called away. But when I reached the laboratory he was
not there, and I found that he had not been. Up and down I paced
restlessly. There was nothing else to do but wait. If he was
unable to keep his appointment here with me, I knew that he would
soon telephone. What was it, I wondered, that kept him delving
into the archaeological lore of the library?

I had about given him up, when he hurried into the laboratory in a
high state of excitement.

"What did you find?" I queried. "Has anything happened?"

"Let me tell you first what I found in the library," he replied,
tilting his hat back on his head and alternately thrusting and
withdrawing his fingers in his waistcoat pockets, as if in some
way that might help him to piece together some scattered fragments
of a story which he had just picked up.

"I've been looking up that hint that the Senorita dropped when she
used those words peje grande, which mean, literally, 'big fish,'"
he resumed. "Walter, it fires the imagination. You have read of
the wealth that Pizarro found in Peru, of course." Visions of
Prescott flashed through my mind as he spoke.

"Well, where are the gold and silver of the conquistadores? Gone
to the melting-pot, centuries ago. But is there none left? The
Indians in Peru believe so, at any rate. And, Walter, there are
persons who would stop at nothing to get at the secret.

"It is a matter of history that soon after the conquest a vast
fortune was unearthed of which the King of Spain's fifth amounted
to five million dollars. That treasure was known as the peje
chica--the little fish. One version of the story tells that an
Inca ruler, the great Cacique Mansiche, had observed with
particular attention the kindness of a young Spaniard toward the
people of the conquered race. Also, he had observed that the man
was comparatively poor. At any rate, he revealed the secret of the
hiding-place of the peje chica, on condition that a part of the
wealth should be used to advance the interests of the Indians.

"The most valuable article discovered was in the form of a fish of
solid gold and so large that the Spaniards considered it a rare
prize. But the Cacique assured his young friend that it was only
the little fish, that a much greater treasure existed, worth many
times the value of this one.

"The sequel of the story is that the Spaniard forgot his promise,
went off to Spain, and spent all his gold. He was returning for
the peje grande, of which he had made great boasts, but before he
could get it he was killed. Prescott, I believe, gives another
version, in which he says that the Spaniard devoted a large part
of his wealth to the relief of the Indians and gave large sums to
the Peruvian churches. Other stories deny that it was Mansiche who
told the first secret, but that it was another Indian. One may, I
suppose, pay his money and take his choice. But the point, as far
as we are concerned in this case, is that there is still believed
to be the great fish, which no one has found. Who knows? Perhaps,
somehow, Mendoza had the secret of the peje grande?"

Kennedy paused, and I could feel the tense interest with which his
delving into the crumbling past had now endowed this already
fascinating case.

"And the curse?" I put in.

"About that we do not know," he replied. "Except that we do know
that Mansiche was the great Cacique or ruler of northern Peru. The
natives are believed to have buried a far greater treasure than
even that which the Spaniards carried off. Mansiche is said to
have left a curse on any native who ever divulged the whereabouts
of the treasure, and the curse was also to fall on any Spaniard
who might discover it. That is all we know--yet. Gold was used
lavishly in the temples. That great hoard is really the Gold of
the Gods. Surely, as we have seen it so far in this case, it must
be cursed."

There was a knock on the laboratory door, and I sprang to open it,
expecting to find that it was something for Kennedy. Instead there
stood one of the office boys of the Star.

"Why, hello, Tommy," I greeted him. "What seems to be the matter
now?"

"A letter for you, Mr. Jameson," he replied, handing over a plain
envelope. "It came just after you left. The Boss thought it might
be important--something about that story, I guess. Anyhow, he told
me to take it up to you on my way home, sir."

I looked at it again. It bore simply my name and the address of
the Star, not written, but, strange to say, printed in ungainly,
rough characters, as though some one were either not familiar with
writing English or desired to conceal his handwriting.

"Where did it come from--and how?" I asked, as I tore the envelope
open.

"I don't know where, sir," replied Tommy. "A boy brought it. Said
a man uptown gave him a quarter to deliver it to you."

I looked at the contents in blank amazement. There was nothing in
the letter except a quarter sheet of ordinary size note paper such
as that used in typewritten correspondence.

Printed on it, in characters exactly like those on the outside of
the envelope, were the startling words:

"BEWARE THE CURSE OF MANSICHE ON THE GOLD OF THE GODS."

Underneath this inscription appeared the rude drawing of a dagger
in which some effort had evidently been made to make it appear
three-sided.

"Well, of all things, what do you think of that?" I cried, tossing
the thing over to Kennedy.

He took it and read it; his face puckered deeply. "I'm not
surprised," he said, a moment later, looking up. "Do you know, I
was just about to tell you what happened at the library. I had a
feeling all the time I was there of being watched. I don't know
why or how, but, somehow, I felt that some one was interested in
the books I was reading. It made me uncomfortable. I was late,
anyhow, and I decided not to give them the satisfaction of seeing
me any more--at least in the library. So I have had a number of
the books on Peru which I wanted reserved, and they'll be sent
over later, here. No, I'm not surprised that you received this.
Would you remember the boy?" he asked of Tommy.

"I think so," replied Tommy. "He didn't have on a uniform, though.
It wasn't a messenger."

There was no use to question him further. He had evidently told
all that he knew, and finally we had to let him go, with a parting
injunction to keep his eyes open and his mouth shut.

Kennedy continued to study the note on the quarter sheet of paper
long after the boy had gone.

"You know," he remarked thoughtfully, after a while, "as nearly as
I can make the thing out with the slender information that we have
so far, the weirdest superstitions seem to cluster about that
dagger which Norton lost. I wouldn't be surprised if it took us
far back into the dim past of the barbaric splendour of the lost
Inca civilization of Peru."

He waved the sheet of paper for emphasis. "You see, some one has
used it here as a sign of terror. Perhaps somehow it bore the
secret of the big fish--who knows? None of the writers and
explorers have ever found it. The most they can say is that it may
be handed down from father to son through a long line. At any
rate, the secret of the hiding-place seems to have been safely
kept. No one has ever found the treasure. It would be strange,
wouldn't it, if it remained for some twentieth-century civilized
man to unearth the thing and start again the curse that historians
say was uttered and seems always to have followed the thing?"

"Kennedy, this affair is getting on my nerves already."

While Craig was speaking the door of the laboratory had opened
without our hearing it, and there stood Norton again. He had
waited until Craig had finished before he had spoken.

We looked at him, startled, ourselves.

"I had some work to do after I left you," went on Norton, without
stopping. "In my letter-box were several letters, but I forgot to
look at them until just now, when I was leaving. Then I picked
them up--and--look at this thing that was among them."

Norton laid down on the laboratory table a plain envelope and a
quarter sheet of paper on which were printed, except for his own
name instead of mine, an almost exact replica of the note which I
had received.

"BEWARE THE CURSE OF MANSICHE ON THE GOLD OF THE GODS."

Kennedy and I looked at him. Already, evidently, he had seen that
Kennedy held in his hand the note that had come to me.

"I can't make anything out of it," went on Norton, evidently much
worried. "First I lose the dagger. Next you say it was used to
murder Mendoza. Then I get this. Now, if any one can get into the
Museum to steal the dagger, they could get in to carry out any
threat of revenge, real or fancied."

Looked at in that respect, I felt that it was indeed a real cause
of worry for Norton. But, then, it flashed over me, was not my own
case worse? I was to be responsible for telling the story. Might
not some unseen hand strike at me, perhaps sooner than at him?

Kennedy had taken the two notes and was scanning them eagerly.

Just then an automobile drew up outside, and a moment later we
heard a tap at the door which Kennedy had closed after the
entrance of Norton. I opened it.

"Is Professor Kennedy here?" I heard a voice inquire. "I'm one of
the orderlies at the City Hospital, next to the Morgue, where Dr.
Leslie has his laboratory. I've a message for Profesor Kennedy, if
he's in."

Kennedy took the envelope, which bore the stamp of Dr. Leslie's
department, and tore it open.

"My dear Kennedy," he read, in an undertone. "I've been engaged in
investigating that poison which probably surrounds the wound in
the Mendoza case, but as yet have nothing to report. It is
certainly none of the things which we ordinarily run up against.
Enclosed you will find a slip of paper and the envelope which it
came in--something, I take it, that has been sent me by a crank.
Would you treat it seriously or disregard it? Leslie."

As Kennedy had unfolded Leslie's own letter a piece of paper had
fluttered to the floor. I picked it up mechanically, and only now
looked at it, as Craig finished reading.

On it was another copy of the threat that had been sent to both
Norton and myself!

The hospital orderly had scarcely gone when another tap came at
the door.

"Your books from the library, Professor," announced a student who
was employed in the library as part payment of his tuition. "I've
signed the slip for them, sir."

He deposited the books on a desk, a huge pile of them, which
reached from his outstretched arms to his chin. As he did so the
pressure of his arms released the pile of books and the column
collapsed.

From a book entitled "New and Old Peru," which fell with the pile,
slipped a plain white envelope. Kennedy saw it before either of
us, and seized it.

"Here's one for me," he said, tearing it open.

Sure enough, in the same rude printing on a quarter sheet were the
words:

"BEWARE THE CURSE OF MANSICHE ON THE GOLD OF THE GODS."

We could only stare at each other and at that tell-tale sign of
the Inca dagger underneath.

What did it mean? Who had sent the warnings?

Kennedy alone seemed to regard the affair as if with purely
scientific interest. He took the four pieces of paper and laid
them down before him on the table. Then he looked up suddenly.

"They match perfectly," he said quietly, gathering them up and
placing them in a wallet which he carried. "All the indentures of
the tearing correspond. Four warnings seem to have been sent to
those who are likely to find out something of the secret."

Norton seemed to have gained somewhat of his composure now that he
had been able to talk to some one.

"What are you going to do--give it up?" he asked tensely.

"Nothing could have insured my sticking to it harder," answered
Craig grimly.

"Then we'll all have to stick together," said Norton slowly. "We
all seem to be in the same boat."

As he rose to go he extended a hand to each of us.

"I'll stick," repeated Kennedy, with that peculiar bulldog look of
intensity on his face which I had come to know so well.


IV

THE TREASURE HUNTERS


Norton had scarcely gone, and Kennedy was still studying the four
pieces of paper on which the warning had been given, when our
laboratory door was softly pushed open again.

It was Senorita Mendoza, looking more beautiful than ever in her
plain black mourning dress, the unnatural pallor of her face
heightening the wonderful lustrous eyes that looked about as
though half frightened at what she was doing.

"I hope nothing has happened," greeted Kennedy, placing an easy-
chair for her. "But I'm glad to see that you have confidence
enough to trust me."

She looked about doubtfully at the vast amount of paraphernalia
which Craig had collected in his scientific warfare on crime.
Though she did not understand it, it seemed to impress her.

"No," she murmured, "nothing new has happened. You told me to call
on you if I should think of anything else."

She said it with an air as if confessing something. It was
apparent that, whatever it was, she had known it all the time and
only after a struggle had brought herself to telling it.

"Then you have thought of something?" prompted Craig.

"Yes," she replied in a low tone. Then with an effort she went on:
"I don't know whether you know it or not, but my family is an old
one, one of the oldest in Peru."

Kennedy nodded encouragingly.

"Back in the old days, after Pizarro," she hurried on, no longer
able to choose her words, but blurting the thing out directly, "an
ancestor of mine was murdered by an Inca dagger."

She stopped again and looked about, actually frightened at her own
temerity, evidently. Kennedy and his twentieth-century
surroundings seemed again to reassure her.

"I can't tell you the story," she resumed. "I don't know it. My
father knew it. But it was some kind of family secret, for he
never told me. Once when I asked him he put me off; told me to
wait until I was a little older."

"And you think that may have something to do with the case?" asked
Kennedy, trying to draw out anything more that she knew.

"I don't know," she answered frankly. "But don't you think that it
is strange--an ancestor of mine murdered and now, hundreds of
years afterward, my father, the last of his line in direct
descent, murdered in the same way, by an Inca dagger that has
disappeared?"

"Then you were listening while I was talking to Professor Norton?"
shot out Kennedy, not unkindly, but rather as a surprise test to
see what she would say.

"You cannot blame me for that," she returned simply.

"Hardly," smiled Kennedy. "And I appreciate your reticence--as
well as your coming here finally to tell me. Indeed, it is
strange. Surely you must have some other suspicions," he
persisted, "something that you feel, even though you do not know?"

Kennedy was leaning forward, looking deeply into her eyes, as if
he would read what was passing in her mind. She met his gaze for a
moment, then looked away.

"You heard Mr. Lockwood say that he had become associated with a
Mr. Whitney, Mr. Stuart Whitney, down in Wall Street?" she
ventured.

Kennedy did not take his eyes from her face as he sought to
extract the reluctant words from her.

"Mr. Whitney has been largely interested in Peru, in business and
in mining," she went on slowly. "He has given large sums to
scholars down there, to Professor Norton's expeditions from New
York. I--I'm afraid of that Mr. Whitney!"

Her quiet tone had risen to a pitch of tremulous excitement. Her
face, which had been pale from the strain of the tragedy, was now
full of colour, and her breast rose and fell with suppressed
emotion.

"Afraid of him--why?" asked Kennedy.

There was no more reticence. Once having said so much, she seemed
to feel that she must go on and tell her fears.

"Because," she went on, "he--he knows a woman--whom my father
knew." A sudden flash of fire seemed to light up her dark eyes. "A
woman of Truxillo," she continued, "Senora de Moche."

"De Moche," repeated Kennedy, recalling the name and a still
unexplained incident of our first interview. "Who is this Senora
de Moche?" he asked, studying her as if she had been under a lens.

"A Peruvian of an old Indian family," she replied, in a low tone,
as if the words were forced from her. "She has come to New York
with her son, Alfonso. You remember--you met him. He is studying
here at the University."

Again I noted the different manner in which she spoke the two
names of mother and son. Evidently there was some feud, some
barrier between her and the elder woman, which did not extend to
Alfonso.

Kennedy reached for the University catalogue and found the name,
"Alfonso de Moche." He was, as he had told us, a post-graduate
student in the engineering school and, therefore, not in any of
Kennedy's own classes.

"You say your father knew the Senora?" asked Kennedy.

"Yes," she replied, in a low voice, "he had had some dealings with
her. I cannot say just what they were; I do not know. Socially, of
course, it was different. They did not belong to the same circle
as ours in Lima."

From her tone I gathered that there existed a race prejudice
between those of old Spanish descent and the descendants of the
Indians. That, however, could not account for her attitude. At
least with her the prejudice did not extend to Alfonso.

"Senora de Moche is a friend of Mr. Whitney?" queried Kennedy.

"Yes, I believe she has placed some of her affairs in his hands.
The de Moches live at the Prince Edward Albert Hotel, and Mr.
Whitney lives there, too. I suppose they see more or less of each
other."

"H-m," mused Kennedy. "You know Mr. Whitney, I suppose?"

"Not very well," she answered. "Of course, I have met him. He has
been to visit my father, and my father has been down at his
office, with Mr. Lockwood. But I do not know much about him,
except that he is what you Americans call a promoter."

Apparently, Inez was endeavouring to be frank in telling her
suspicions, much more so even than Norton had been. But I could
not help feeling that she was trying to shield some one, though
not to the extent of consciously putting us on a wrong scent.

"I shall try to see Mr. Whitney as soon as possible," said
Kennedy, as she rose to go. "And Senora de Moche, too."

I fancied that Senorita Inez, although she had not told us much,
felt relieved.

Again she murmured her thanks as she left and again Kennedy
repeated his injunction to tell everything that happened that
could possibly have any bearing on the case.

"That's a rather peculiar phase," he considered, when we were
alone, "this de Moche affair."

"Yes," I agreed. "Do you suppose that woman could be using Whitney
for some purpose?"

"Or Whitney using her," suggested Kennedy. "There's so much to be
done at once that I hardly know where to begin. We must see both
of them as soon as possible. Meanwhile, that message from Dr.
Leslie about the poison interests me. I must at least start my
tests of the blood samples that I extracted. Walter, may I ask you
to leave me here in the laboratory undisturbed?"

I had some writing on my news story to do, and went into the room
next to the laboratory, where I was soon busily engaged tapping my
typewriter. Suddenly I became conscious of that feeling, which
Kennedy had hinted at, of being watched. Perhaps I had heard a
footstep outside and was not consciously aware of it. But, at any
rate, I had the feeling.

I stopped tapping the keys and wheeled unexpectedly about in my
chair. I am sure that I caught just a fleeting glimpse of a face
dodging back from the window, which was on the first floor.

Whose face it was I am not prepared to assert exactly. But there
was a face, and the fleeting glimpse of the eyes and forehead was
just enough to give me the impression that they were familiar,
without enabling me to identify them. At any rate, the occurrence
made me feel decidedly uncomfortable, especially after the warning
letters that we had all received.

I sprang to my feet and ran to the door. But it was too late. The
intruder had disappeared. Still, the more I thought about it, the
more determined I was to try to verify an indistinct suspicion, if
possible. I put on my hat and walked hurriedly over to the office
of the registrar.

Sure enough, I found that Alfonso de Moche had been at the
University that day, must have attended a lecture an hour or so
before. Having nothing else to do, I hunted up some of his
professors and tried to quiz them about him.

As I had expected, they told me that he was an excellent student,
though very quiet and reserved. His mind seemed to run along the
line of engineering, and particularly mining. I could not help
coming to the conclusion that undoubtedly he, too, was infected by
the furore for treasure hunting, in spite of his Indian ancestry.

Yet there seemed to be surprisingly little known about him outside
of the lecture room and laboratory. The profesors knew that he
lived with his mother at a hotel downtown. He seemed to have
little or nothing to do with the other students outside of class
work. Altogether he was an enigma, as far as the social life of
the University went. It looked very much as though he had come to
New York quietly to prepare himself for the search for the buried
treasure. Had the Gold of the Gods lured him into its net, too?

Reflecting on the tangle of events, the strange actions of
Lockwood and the ambitions of Whitney, I retraced my steps in the
direction of the laboratory, convinced that de Moche had employed
at least a part of his time lately in spying on us. Perhaps he had
seen Inez going in and out. Suddenly it flashed over me that the
interchange of glances between de Moche and Lockwood indicated
that she was more to him than a mere acquaintance. Perhaps it had
been jealousy as well as treasure hunting that had prompted his
eavesdropping.

Still reflecting, I decided to turn in at the Museum and have a
chat with Norton. I found him nervously pacing up and down the
little office that had been accorded him in his section of the
building.

"I can't rid my mind of that warning," he remarked anxiously,
pausing in his measured tread. "It seems inconceivable to me that
any one would take the trouble to send four such warnings unless
he meant it."

"Quite so," I agreed, relating to him what had just happened.

"I thought of something like that," he acquiesced, "and I have
already taken some precautions."

Norton waved his hand at the windows, which I had not noticed
before. Though they were some distance above the ground, I saw now
that he had closed and barred them at the expense of ventilation.
The warnings seemed to have made more of an impression on him than
on any of the rest of us.

"One never can tell where or when a blow will fall with these
people," he explained. "You see, I've lived among them. They are a
hot-blooded race. Besides, as you perhaps have read, they have
some queer poisons down in South America. I mean to run no
unnecessary chances."

"I suppose you suspected all along that the dagger had something
to do with the Gold of the Gods, did you not?" I hinted.

Norton paused before answering, as though to weigh his words.
"Suspected--yes," he replied. "But, as I told you, I have had no
chance to read the inscription on it. I can't say that I took it
very seriously--until now."

"It's not possible that Stuart Whitney, who, I understand, is
deeply interested in South America, may have had some inkling of
the value of the dagger, is it?" I asked thoughtfully.

For a full minute Norton gazed at me. "I hadn't thought of that,"
he admitted at length. "That's a new idea to me."

Yet somehow I knew that Norton had thought of it, though he had
not yet spoken about it. Was it through loyalty to the man who had
contributed to financing his expeditions to South America?

"Do you know Senora de Moche well?" I ventured, a moment later.

"Fairly well," he replied. "Why?"

"What do you think of her?"

"Rather a clever woman," he replied noncommittally.

"I suppose all the people in New York who were interested in Peru
knew her," I pursued, adding, "Mr. Whitney, Mendoza, Lockwood."

Norton hesitated, as though he was afraid of saying too much.
While I could not help admiring his caution, I found that it was
most exasperating. Still, I was determined to get at his point of
view, if possible.

"Alfonso seems to be a worthy son, then," I remarked. "I can't
quite make out, though, why the Senorita should have such an
obvious prejudice against her. It doesn't seem to extend to him."

"I believe," replied Norton reluctantly, "that Mendoza had been on
rather intimate terms with her. At least, I think you'll find the
woman very ambitious for her son. I don't think she would have
stopped at much to advance his interests. You must have noticed
how much Alfonso thinks of the Senorita. But I don't think there
was anything that could have overcome the old Castilian's
prejudice. You know they pride themselves on never intermarrying.
With Lockwood it would have been different."

I thought I began to get some glimmering of how things were.

"Whitney knows her pretty well now, doesn't he?" I shot out.

Norton shrugged his shoulders. But he could not have acquiesced
better than by his very manner.

"Mr. Lockwood and Mr. Whitney know best what they are doing," he
remarked, at length. "Why don't you and Kennedy try to see Senora
de Moche? I'm a scientist, you know. I dislike talking about
speculations. I'd prefer only to express opinions about things
that are certainties."

Perhaps Norton wished to convey the impression that the subjects I
had broached were worth looking into. At least it was the
impression I derived.

"Still," he continued slowly, "I think I am justified in saying
this much: I myself have been interested in watching both Alfonso
de Moche and Lockwood when it comes to the case of the Senorita.
All's fair, they say, in love and war. If I am any judge, there
are both in this case, somewhere. I think you had better see the
Senora and judge for yourself. She's a clever woman, I know. But
I'm sure that Kennedy could make her out, even if the rest of us
can't."

I thanked Norton for the hint that he had given, and after
chatting a few moments more left him alone in his office.

In my room again, I went back to finish my writing. Nothing
further occurred, however, to excite my suspicions, and at last I
managed to finish it.

I was correcting what I had written when the door opened from the
laboratory and Craig entered. He had thrown off his old, acid-
stained laboratory smock and was now dressed to venture forth.

"Have you found out anything about the poison?" I asked.

"Nothing definite yet," he replied. "That will take some time now.
It's a strange poison--an alkaloid, I'm sure, but not one that one
ordinarily encounters. Still, I've made a good beginning. It won't
take long to determine it now."

Craig listened with deep interest, though without comment, when I
related what had happened, both Norton's conversation and about
the strange visitor whom we had had peering into our windows.

"Some one seems to be very much interested in what we are doing,
Walter," he concluded simply. "I think we'd better do a little
more outside work now, while we have a chance. If you are ready,
so am I. I want to see what sort of treasure hunter this Stuart
Whitney is. I'd like to know whether he is in on this secret of
the Gold of the Gods, too."


V

THE WALL STREET PROMOTER


Lockwood, as we now knew, had become allied in some way with a
group of Wall Street capitalists, headed by Stuart Whitney.

Already I had heard something of Whitney. In the Street he was
well known as an intensely practical man, though far above the
average exploiter both in cleverness and education.

As a matter of fact, Whitney had been far-sighted enough to see
that scholarship could be capitalized, not only as an
advertisement, but in more direct manners. Just at present one of
his pet schemes was promoting trade through the canal between the
east coast of North America and the west coast of South America.
He had spent a good deal of money promoting friendship between men
of affairs and wealth in both New York and Lima. It was a good
chance, he figured, for his investments down in Peru were large,
and anything that popularized the country in New York could not
but make them more valuable.

"Norton seemed rather averse to talking about Whitney," I ventured
to Craig, as we rode downtown.

"That may be part of Whitney's cleverness," he returned
thoughtfully. "As a patron of art and letters, you know, a man can
carry through a good many things that otherwise would be more
critically examined."

Kennedy did not say it in a way that implied that he knew anything
very bad about Whitney. Still, I reflected, it was astute in the
man to insure the cooperation of such people as Norton. A few
thousand dollars judiciously spent on archaeology might cover up a
multitude of sins of high finance.

Nothing more was said by either of us, and at last we reached the
financial district. We entered a tall skyscraper on Wall Street
just around the corner from Broadway and shot up in the elevator
to the floor where Whitney and his associates had a really
palatial suite of offices.

As we opened the door we saw that Lockwood was still there. He
greeted us with a rather stiff bow.

"Professor Kennedy and Mr. Jameson," he said simply, introducing
us to Whitney, "friends of Professor Norton, I believe. I met them
to-day up at Mendoza's."

"That is a most incomprehensible affair," returned Whitney,
shaking hands with us. "What do you make out of it?"

Kennedy shrugged his shoulders and turned the remark aside without
committing himself.

Stuart Whitney was a typical promoter, a large, full-blooded man,
with a face red and inclined to be puffy from the congested veins.
His voice alone commanded respect, whether he said anything worth
while or not. In fact, he had but to say that it was a warm day
and you felt that he had scored a telling point in the
conversation.

"Professor Norton has asked me to look into the loss of an old
Peruvian dagger which he brought back from his last expedition,"
explained Kennedy, endeavouring to lead the conversation in
channels which might arrive somewhere.

"Yes, yes," remarked Whitney, with a nod of interest. "He has told
me of it. Very strange, very strange. When he came back he told me
that he had it, along with a lot of other important finds. But I
had no idea he set such a value on it--or, rather, that any one
else might do so. It would have been easy to have safeguarded it
here, if we had known," he added, with a wave of his hand in the
direction of a huge chrome steel safe of latest design in the
outer office.

Lockwood, I noted, was listening intently, quite in contrast with
his former cavalier manner of dismissing all consideration of
ancient Inca lore as academic or unpractical. Did he know
something of the dagger?

"I'm very much interested in old Peruvian antiquities myself,"
remarked Kennedy, a few minutes later, "though not, of course, a
scholar like our friend Norton."

"Indeed?" returned Whitney; and I noticed for the first time that
his eyes seemed fairly to glitter with excitement.

They were prominent eyes, a trifle staring, and I could not help
studying them.

"Then," he exclaimed, rising, "you must know of the ruins of Chan-
Chan, of Chima--those wonderful places?"

Kennedy nodded. "And of Truxillo and the legend of the great fish
and the little fish," he put in.

Whitney seemed extraordinarily pleased that any one should be
willing to discuss his hobby with him. His eyes by this time were
apparently starting from their sockets, and I noticed that the
pupils were dilated almost to the size of the iris.

"We must sit down and talk about Peru," he continued, reaching for
a large box of cigarettes in the top drawer of his big desk.

Lockwood seemed to sense a long discussion of archaeology. He rose
and mumbled an excuse about having something to do in the outer
office.

"Oh, it is a wonderful country, Professor Kennedy," went on
Whitney, throwing himself back in his chair. "I am deeply
interested in it--its mines, its railroads, as well as its
history. Let me show you a map of our interests down there."

He rose and passed into the next room to get the map. The moment
his back was turned, Kennedy reached over to a typewriter desk
that stood in a corner of the office, left open by the
stenographer, who had gone. He took two thin second sheets of
paper and a new carbon sheet. A hasty dab or two of the library
paste completed his work.

Carefully Craig laid the prepared paper on the floor just a few
inches from the door into the outer office and scattered a few
other sheets about, as though the wind had blown them off the
desk.

As Whitney returned, a big map unrolled in his hands, I saw his
foot fall on the double sheet that Craig had laid by the door.

Kennedy bent down and began picking up the papers.

"Oh, that's all right," remarked Whitney brusquely. "Never mind
that. Here's where some of our interests lie, in the north."

I don't think I paid much more attention to the map than did
Kennedy as we three bent over it. His real attention was on the
paper which he had placed on the floor, as though fixing in his
mind the exact spot on which Whitney had stepped.

As Whitney talked rapidly about the country, we lighted the
cigarettes. They seemed to be of a special brand. I puffed mine
for a moment. There was a peculiar taste about it, however, which
I did not exactly like. In fact, I think that the Latin-American
cigarettes do not seem to appeal to most Americans very much,
anyhow.

While we talked, I noticed that Kennedy evidently shared my own
tastes, for he allowed his cigarette to go out, and, after a puff
or two, I did the same. For the sake of my own comfort, I drew one
of my own from my case as soon as I could do so politely, and laid
the stub of the other in an ash-tray on Whitney's desk.

"Mr. Lockwood and Senor Mendoza had some joint interests in the
country, too, didn't they?" queried Kennedy, his eye still on the
pieces of paper near the door.

"Yes," returned Whitney. "Lockwood!"

"What is it?" came Lockwood's voice from outside.

"Show Professor Kennedy where you and Mendoza have those
concessions."

The young engineer strode into the room, and I saw a smile of
gratification cross Kennedy's face as his foot, also, fell on the
paper by the door.

Unlike Whitney, however, Lockwood bent over to gather up the
sheets. But before he could actually do so Kennedy reached down
and swept them just out of his reach.

"Quite breezy," Kennedy covered up his action, turning to restore
the paper to the desk.

Craig had his back to them, but not to me, and I saw him fumble
for an instant with the papers. Quickly he pressed his thumb-nail
on one side, as though making a rough "W," while on the other side
he made what might be an "L." Then he shoved the two sheets and
the carbon into his pocket.

I glanced up hastily. Fortunately, neither Whitney nor Lockwood
had noted his action.

For the first time, now, I noticed as I watched him that
Lockwood's eyes, too, were a trifle stary, though not so
noticeable as Whitney's.

"Let me see," continued Whitney, "your concessions are all about
here, in the north, aren't they?"

Lockwood drew a pencil from his pocket and made several cross-
marks over the names of some towns on the large map.

"Those are the points that we had proposed to work," he said
simply, "before this terrible tragedy to Mendoza."

"Mining, you understand," explained Whitney. Then, after a pause,
he resumed quickly. "Of course, you know that much has been said
about the chances for mining investments and about the
opportunities for fortunes for persons in South America. Peru has
been the Mecca for fortune hunters since the days of Pizarro. But
where one person has been successful thousands have failed because
they don't know the game. Why, I know of one investment of
hundreds of thousands that hasn't yielded a cent of profit just
because of that."

Lockwood said nothing, evidently not caring to waste time or
breath on any one who was not a possible investor. But Whitney had
the true promoter's instinct of booming his scheme on the chance
that the interest inspired might be carried to some third party.

"American financiers, it is true," he went on excitedly, taking
out a beautifully chased gold cigarette case, "have lost millions
in mining in Peru. But that is not the scheme that our group,
including Mr. Lockwood now, has. We are going to make more
millions than they ever dreamed of--because we are simply going to
mine for the products of centuries of labour already done--for the
great treasure of Truxillo."

One could not help becoming infected by Whitney's enthusiasm.

Kennedy was following him closely, while a frown of disapproval
spread over Lockwood's face.

"Then you know the secret of the hiding-place of the treasure?"
queried Kennedy abruptly.

Whitney shook his head in the negative. "It is my idea that we
don't have to know it," he answered. "With the hints that we have
collected from the natives, I think we can locate it with the
expenditure of comparatively little time and money. Senor Mendoza
has obtained the concession from the government to hunt for it on
a large scale in the big mounds about Truxillo. We know it is
there. Is not that enough?"

If it had been any one less than Whitney, we should probably have
said it was not. But it took more than that to deny anything he
asserted. Lockwood's face was a study. I cannot say that it
betrayed anything except disapproval of the mere discussion of the
subject. In fact, it left me in doubt as to whether Whitney
himself might not have been bluffing, in the certainty of finding
the treasure--perhaps had already the secret he denied having and
was preparing to cover it up by stumbling on it, apparently, in
some other way. I recognized in Stuart Whitney as smooth an
individual as ever we had encountered. His was all the sincerity
of a crook. Yet he contrived to leave the whole matter in doubt.
Perhaps in this case he actually knew what he was talking about.

The telephone rang and Lockwood answered it. Though he did not
mention her name, I knew from his very tone and manner that it was
Senorita de Mendoza who was calling up. Evidently his continued
absence had worried her.

"There's absolutely nothing to worry about," we heard him say.
"Nothing has changed. I shall be up to see you as soon as I can
get away from the office."

There was an air of restraint about Lockwood's remarks, not as
though he were keeping anything from the Senorita, but as though
he were reluctant for us to overhear anything about his affairs.

Lockwood had been smoking, too, and he added the stubs of his
cigarettes to the pile in the ash-tray on Whitney's desk. Once I
saw Craig cast a quick glance at the tray, and I understood that
in some way he was anxious to have a chance to investigate those
cigarettes.

"You saw the dagger which Norton brought back, did you not?" asked
Kennedy of Whitney.

"Only as I saw the rest of the stuff after it was unpacked," he
replied easily. "He brought back a great many interesting objects
on this last trip."

It was apparent that whether he actually knew anything about the
secret of the Inca dagger or not, Whitney was not to be trapped
into betraying it. I had an idea that Lockwood was interested in
knowing that fact, too. At any rate, one could not be sure whether
these two were perfectly frank with each other, or were playing a
game for high stakes between themselves.

Lockwood seemed eager to get away and, with a hasty glance at his
watch, rose.

"If you wish to find me, I shall be with Senorita de Mendoza," he
said, taking his hat and stick, and bowing to us.

Whitney rose and accompanied him to the door in the outer office,
his arm on his shoulder, conversing in a low tone that was
inaudible to us.

No sooner, however, had the two passed through the door, with
their backs toward us, than Kennedy reached over quickly and swept
the contents of the ash-tray, cigarette stubs, ashes, and all,
into an empty envelope which was lying with some papers. Then he
sealed it and shoved it into his pocket, with a sidelong glance of
satisfaction at me.

"Evidently Mr. Lockwood and the Senorita are on intimate terms,"
hazarded Kennedy, as Whitney rejoined us.

"Poor little girl," soliloquized the promoter. "Yes, indeed. And
Lockwood is a lucky dog, too. Such eyes, such a figure--did you
ever see a more beautiful woman?"

One could not help recognizing that whatever else Whitney might
have said that did not ring true his admiration for the
unfortunate girl was genuine. That was not so remarkable, however.
It could hardly have been otherwise.

"You are acquainted, I suppose, with a Senora de Moche?" ventured
Kennedy again, taking a chance shot.

Whitney looked at him keenly. "Yes," he agreed, "I have had some
dealings with her. She was an acquaintance of old Mendoza's--a
woman of the world, clever, shrewd. I think she has but one
ambition--her son. You have met her?"

"Not the Senora," admitted Craig, "but her son is a student at the
University."

"Oh, yes, to be sure," said Whitney. "A fine fellow--but not of
the type of Lockwood."

Why he should have coupled the names was not clear for the moment.
But he had risen, and was moving deliberately up and down the
office, his thumbs in his waistcoat pockets, as though he were
thinking of something very perplexing.

"If I were younger," he remarked finally, of a sudden, "I would
give both of them a race for that girl. She is the greatest
treasure that has ever come out of the country. Ah, well--as it
is, I would not place my money on young de Moche!"

Kennedy had risen to go.

"I trust you will be able to unearth some clue regarding that
dagger," said Whitney, as we moved toward the door. "It seems to
have worried Norton considerably, especially since you told him
that Mendoza was undoubtedly murdered with it."

Evidently Norton kept in close touch with his patron, but Kennedy
did not appear to be surprised at it.

"I am doing my best," he returned. "I suppose I may count on your
help as the case develops?"

"Absolutely," replied Whitney, accompanying us out into the hall
to the elevator. "I shall back Norton in anything he wants to keep
the Peruvian collection intact and protected."

Our questions were as yet unanswered. Not only had we no inkling
as to the whereabouts of the dagger, but the source of the four
warnings that had been sent us was still as much shrouded in
mystery.

Kennedy beckoned to a passing taxicab.

"The Prince Edward Albert," he directed briefly.


VI

THE CURSE OF MANSICHE


We entered the Prince Edward Albert a few minutes later, one of
the new and beautiful family hotels uptown.

Before making any inquiries, Craig gave a hasty look about the
lobby. Suddenly I felt him take my arm and draw me over to a
little alcove on one side. I followed the direction of his eyes.
There I could see young Alfonso de Moche talking to a woman much
older than himself.

"That must be his mother," whispered Craig. "You can see the
resemblance. Let's sit here awhile behind these palms and watch."

They seemed to be engaged in an earnest conversation about
something. Even as they talked, though we could not guess what it
was about, it was evident that Alfonso was dearer than life to the
woman and that the young man was a model son. Though I felt that I
must admire them each for it, still, I reflected, that was no
reason why we should not suspect them--perhaps rather a reason for
suspecting.

Senora de Moche was a woman of well-preserved middle age, a large
woman, with dark hair and contrasting full, red lips. Her face, in
marked contradiction to her Parisian costume and refined manners,
had a slight copper swarthiness about it which spoke eloquently of
her ancestry.

But it was her eyes that arrested and held one's attention most.
Whether it was in the eyes themselves or in the way that she used
them, there could be no mistake about the almost hypnotic power
that their owner possessed. I could not help wondering whether she
might not have exercised it on Don Luis, perhaps was using it in
some way to influence Whitney. Was that the reason why the
Senorita so evidently feared her?

Fortunately, from our vantage point, we could see without being in
any danger of being seen.

"There's Whitney," I heard Craig mutter under his breath.

I looked up and saw the promoter enter from his car. At almost the
same instant the roving eyes of the Senora seemed to catch sight
of him. He came over and spoke to the de Moches, standing with
them several minutes. I fancied that not for an instant did she
allow the gaze of any one else to distract her in the projection
of whatever weird ocular power nature had endowed her with. If it
were a battle of eyes, I recollected the strange look that I had
noted about those of both Whitney and Lockwood. That, however, was
different from the impression one got of the Senora's. I felt that
she would have to be pretty clever to match the subtlety of
Whitney.

Whatever it was they were talking about, one could see that
Whitney and Senora de Moche were on very familiar terms. At the
same time, young de Moche appeared to be ill at ease. Perhaps he
did not approve of the intimacy with Whitney. At any rate, he
seemed visibly relieved when the promoter excused himself and
walked over to the desk to get his mail and then out into the
cafe.

"I'd like to get a better view of her," remarked Kennedy, rising.
"Let us take a turn or two along the corridor and pass them."

We sauntered forth from our alcove and strolled down among the
various knots of people chatting and laughing. As we passed the
woman and her son, I was conscious again of that strange feeling,
which psychologists tell us, however, has no real foundation, of
being stared at from behind.

At the lower end of the lobby Kennedy turned suddenly and we
started to retrace our steps. Alfonso's back was toward us now.
Again we passed them, just in time to catch the words, in a low
tone, from the young man, "Yes, I have seen him at the University.
Every one there knows that he is--"

The rest of the sentence was lost. But it was not difficult to
reconstruct. It referred undoubtedly to the activities of Kennedy
in unravelling mysteries.

"It's quite evident," I suggested, "that they know that we are
interested in them now."

"Yes," he agreed. "There wasn't any use of watching them further
from under cover. I wanted them to see me, just to find out what
they would do."

Kennedy was right. Indeed, even before we turned again, we found
that the Senora and Alfonso had risen and were making their way
slowly to the elevators, still talking earnestly. The lifts were
around an angle, and before we could place ourselves so that we
could observe them again they were gone.

"I wish there was some way of adding Alfonso's shoe-prints to my
collection," observed Craig. "The marks that I found in the dust
of the sarcophagus in the Museum were those of a man's shoes.
However, I suppose I must wait to get them."

He walked over to the desk and made inquiries about the de Moches
and Whitney. Each had a suite on the eighth floor, though on
opposite sides and at opposite ends of the hall.

"There's no use wasting time trying to conceal our identity now,"
remarked Kennedy finally, drawing a card from his case. "Besides,
we came here to see them, anyhow." He handed the card to the
clerk. "Senora de Moche, please," he said.

The clerk took the card and telephoned up to the de Moche suite. I
must say that it was somewhat to my surprise that the Senora
telephoned down to say that she would receive us in her own
sitting room.

"That's very kind," commented Craig, as I followed him into the
elevator. "It saves planning some roundabout way of meeting her
and comes directly to the point."

The elevator whisked us up directly to the eighth floor and we
stepped out into the heavily carpeted hallway, passing down to
Room 810, which was the number of her suite. Further on, in 825,
was Whitney's.

Alfonso was not there. Evidently he had not ridden up with his
mother, after all, but had gone out through another entrance on
the ground floor. The Senora was alone.

"I hope that you will pardon me for intruding," began Craig, with
as plausible an explanation as he could muster, "but I have become
interested in an opportunity to invest in a Peruvian venture, and
I have heard that you are a Peruvian. Your son, Alfonso, I have
already met, once. I thought that perhaps you might be able to
give me some advice." She looked at us keenly, but said nothing. I
fancied that she detected the subterfuge. Yet she had not tried,
and did not try now to avoid us. Either she had no connection with
the case we were investigating or she was an adept actress.

On closer view, her eyes were really even more remarkable than I
had imagined at a distance. They were those of a woman endowed
with an abundance of health and energy, eyes that were full of
what the old character readers used to call "amativeness,"
denoting a nature capable of intense passion, whether of love or
hate. Yet I confess that I could not find anything especially
abnormal about them, as I had about the eyes of Lockwood and
Whitney.

It was some time before she replied, and I gave a hasty glance
about the apartment. Of course, it had been rented furnished, but
she had rearranged it, adding some touches of her own which gave
it quite a Peruvian appearance, due perhaps more to the pictures
and the ornaments which she had introduced rather than anything
else.

"I suppose," she replied, at length, slowly, and looking at us as
if she would bore right through into our minds, "I suppose you
mean the schemes of Mr. Lockwood--and Mr. Whitney."

Kennedy was not to be taken by surprise. "I have heard of their
schemes, too," he replied noncommittally. "Peru seems to be a
veritable storehouse of tales of buried treasure."

"Let me tell you about it," she hastened, nodding at the very
words "buried treasure." "I suppose you know that the old Chimu
tribes in the north were the wealthiest at the time of the coming
of the Spaniards?"

Craig nodded, and a moment later she resumed, as if trying to
marshal her thoughts in a logical order. "They had a custom then
of burying with their dead all their movable property. Graves were
not dug separately. Therefore, you see, sometimes a common grave,
or huaca, as it is called, would be given to many. That huaca
would become a cache of treasure in time. It was sacred to the
dead, and hence it was wicked to touch it."

The Senora's face betrayed the fact that, whatever modern
civilization had done for her, it had not yet quite succeeded in
eliminating the old ideas.

"Back in the early part of the seventeenth century," she
continued, leaning forward in her chair eagerly as she talked, "a
Spaniard opened a Chimu huaca and found gold that is said to have
been worth more than a million dollars. An Indian told him about
it. Who the Indian was does not matter. But the Spaniard was an
ancestor of Don Luis de Mendoza, who was found murdered to-day."

She stopped short, seeming to enjoy the surprised look on our
faces at finding that she was willing to discuss the matter so
intimately.

"After the Indian had shown the Spaniard the treasure in the
mound," she pursued, "the Indian told the Spaniard that he had
given him only the little fish, the peje chica, but that some day
he would give him the big fish, the peje grande. I see that you
already know at least a part of the story, anyhow." "Yes,"
admitted Kennedy, "I do know something of it. But I should rather
get it more accurately from your lips than from the hearsay of any
one else."

She smiled quietly to herself. "I don't believe," she added, "that
you know that the _peje grande_ was not ordinary treasure. It was
the temple gold. Why, some of the temples were literally plated
over heavily with pure gold. That gold, as well as what had been
buried in the huacas, was sacred. Mansiche, the supreme ruler,
laid a curse on it, on any Indian who would tell of it, on any
Spaniard who might learn of it. A curse lies on the finding--yes,
even on the searching for the sacred Gold of the Gods. It is one
of the most awful curses that have ever been uttered, that curse
of Mansiche."

Even as she spoke of it she lowered her voice. I felt that no
matter how much education she had, there lurked back in her brain
some of the primitive impulses, as well as beliefs. Either the
curse of Mansiche on the treasure was as real to her as if its
mere touch were poisonous, or else she was going out of her way to
create that impression with us.

"Somehow," she continued, in a low tone, "that Spaniard, the
ancestor of Don Luis Mendoza, obtained some idea of the secret. He
died," she said solemnly, flashing a glance at Craig from her
wonderful eyes to stamp the idea indelibly. "He was stabbed by one
of the members of the tribe. On the dagger, so I have heard, was
marked the secret of the treasure."

I felt that in a bygone age she might have made a great priestess
of the heathen gods. Now, was she more than a clever actress?

She paused, then added, "That is my tribe--my family."

Again she paused. "For centuries the big fish was a secret, is
still a secret--or, at least, was until some one got it from my
brother down in Peru. The tradition and the dagger had been
intrusted to him. I don't know how it happened. Somehow he seemed
to grow crazy--until he talked. The dagger was stolen from him.
How it happened, how it came into Professor Norton's hands, I do
not know.

"But, at any rate," she continued, in the same solemn tone, "the
curse has followed it. After my brother had told the secret of the
dagger and lost it, his mind left him. He threw himself one day
into Lake Titicaca."

Her voice broke dramatically in her passionate outpouring of the
tragedies that had followed the hidden treasure and the Inca
dagger.

"Now, here in New York, comes this awful death of Senor Mendoza,"
she cried. "I don't know, no one knows, whether he had obtained
the secret of the gold or not. At any rate, he must have thought
he had it. He has been killed suddenly, in his own home. That is
my answer to your inquiry about the treasure-hunting company you
mentioned, whatever it may be. I need say no more of the curse of
Mansiche. Is the Gold of the Gods worth it?"

There could be no denying that it was real to her, whatever we
might think of the story. I recollected the roughly printed
warnings that had been sent to Norton, Leslie, Kennedy, and
myself. Had they, then, some significance? I had not been able to
convince myself that they were the work of a crank, alone. There
must be some one to whom the execution of vengeance of the gods
was an imperative duty. Unsuperstitious as I was, I saw here a
real danger. If some one, either to preserve the secret for
himself or else called by divine mandate to revenge, should take a
notion to carry out the threats in the four notes, what might not
happen?

"I cannot tell you much more of fact than you probably already
know," she remarked, watching our faces intently and noting the
effect of every word. "You know, I suppose, that the treasure has
always been believed to be in a large mound, a tumulus I think you
call it, visible from our town of Truxillo. Many people have tried
to open it, but the mass of sand pours down on them and they have
been discouraged."

"No one has ever stumbled on the secret?" queried Kennedy.

She shook her head. "There have been those who have sought, there
are even those who are seeking, the point just where to bore into
the mounds. If they could find it, they plan to construct a well-
timbered tunnel to keep back the sand and to drive it at the right
point to obtain this fabulous wealth."

She vouchsafed the last information with a sort of quiet assurance
that conveyed the idea, without her saying it directly, that any
such venture was somehow doomed to failure, that desecrators were
merely toying with fate.

All through her story one could see that she felt deeply the
downfall and betrayal of her brother, followed by the tragedy to
him after the age-old secret had slipped from his grasp. Was there
still to be vengeance for his downfall? Surely, I thought to
myself, Don Luis de Mendoza could not have been in possession of
the secret, unless he had arrived at it, with Lockwood, in some
other way than by deciphering the almost illegible marks of the
dagger. I thought of Whitney. Had he perhaps had something to do
with the nasty business?

I happened to glance at a huge pile of works on mining engineering
on the table, the property of Alfonso. She saw me looking at them,
and her eyes assumed a far-away, dreamy impression as she murmured
something.

"You must know that we real Peruvians have been so educated that
we never explore ruins for hidden treasure, not even if we have
the knowledge of engineering to do so. It is a sort of sacrilege
to us to do that. The gold was not our gold, you see. Some of it
belongs to the spirits of the departed. But the big treasure
belonged to the gods themselves. It was the gold which lay in
sheets over the temple walls, sacred. No, we would not touch it."

I wondered cynically what would happen if some one at that moment
had appeared with the authenticated secret. She continued to gaze
at the books. "There are plenty of rare chances for a young mining
engineer in Peru without that."

Apparently she was thinking of her son and his studies at the
University as they affected his future career.

One could follow her thoughts, even, as they flitted from the
treasure, to the books, to her son, and, finally, to the pretty
girl for whom both he and Lockwood were struggling.

"We are a peculiar race," she ruminated. "We seldom intermarry
with other races. We are as proud as Senor Mendoza was of his
Castilian descent, as proud of our unmixed lineage as any
descendant of a 'belted earl.'"

Senora de Moche made the remarks with a quiet dignity which left
no doubt in my mind that the race feeling cut deeply.

She had risen now, and in place of the awesome fear of the curse
and tragedy of the treasure her face was burning and her eyes
flashed.

"Old Don Luis thought I was good enough to amuse his idle hours,"
she cried. "But when he saw that Alfonso was in love with his
daughter, that she might return that love, then I found out
bitterly that he placed us in another class, another caste."

Kennedy had been following her closely, and I could see now that
the cross-currents of superstition, avarice, and race hatred in
the case presented a tangle that challenged him.

There was nothing more that we could extract from her just then.
She had remained standing, as a gentle reminder that the interview
had already been long.

Kennedy took the hint. "I wish to thank you for the trouble you
have gone to," he bowed, after we, too, had risen. "You have told
me quite enough to make me think seriously before I join in any
such undertaking."

She smiled enigmatically. Whether it was that she had enjoyed
penetrating our rather clumsy excuse for seeing her, or that she
felt that the horror of the curse had impressed us, she seemed
well content.

We bowed ourselves out, and, after waiting a few moments about the
hotel without seeing Whitney anywhere, Craig called a car.

"They were right," was his only comment. "A most baffling woman,
indeed."


VII

THE ARROW POISON


Back again in the laboratory, Kennedy threw off his coat and
plunged again into his investigation of the blood sample he had
taken from the wound in Mendoza's body.

We had scarcely been back half an hour before the door opened and
Dr. Leslie's perplexed face looked in on us. He was carrying a
large jar, in which he had taken away the materials which he
wished to examine.

"Well," asked Kennedy, pausing with a test-tube poised over a
Bunsen burner, "have you found anything yet? I haven't had time to
get very far with my own tests yet."

"Not a blessed thing," returned the coroner. "I'm desperate. One
of the chemists suggested cyanide, another carbon monoxide. But
there is no trace of either. Then he suggested nux vomica. It
wasn't nux vomica; but my tests show that it must have been
something very much like it. I've looked for all the ordinary
known poisons and some of the little-known alkaloids, but,
Kennedy, I always get back to the same point. There must have been
a poison there. He did not die primarily of the wound. It was
asphyxia due to a poison that really killed him, though the wound
might have done so, but not quite so quickly."

I could tell by the look that crossed Kennedy's face that at last
a ray of light had pierced the darkness. He reached for a bottle
on the shelf labelled spirits of turpentine.

Then he poured a little of the blood sample from the jar which the
coroner had brought into a clean tube and added a few drops of the
spirits of turpentine. A cloudy, dark precipitate formed. He
smiled quietly, and said, half to himself, "I thought so."

"What is it?" asked the coroner eagerly, "nux vomica?"

Craig shook his head as he stared at the black precipitate. "You
were perfectly right about the asphyxiation, Doctor," he remarked
slowly, "but wrong as to the cause. It was a poison--one you would
never dream of."

"What is it?" Leslie and I asked simultaneously.

"Let me take all these samples and make some further tests," he
said. "I am quite sure of it, but it is new to me. By the way, may
I trouble you and Leslie to go over to the Museum of Natural
History with a letter?"

It was evident that he wanted to work uninterrupted, and we agreed
readily, especially because by going we might also be of some use
in solving the mystery of the poison.

He sat down and wrote a hasty note to the director of the Museum,
and a few moments later we were speeding over in Leslie's car.

At the big building we had no trouble in finding the director and
presenting the note. He was a close friend of Kennedy's and more
than willing to aid him in any way.

"You will excuse me a moment?" he apologized. "I will get from the
South American exhibit just what he wants."

We waited several minutes in the office until finally he returned
carrying a gourd, incrusted on its hollow inside surface with a
kind of blackish substance.

"That is what he wants, I think," the director remarked, wrapping
it up carefully in a box. "I don't need to ask you to tell
Professor Kennedy to watch out how he handles the thing. He
understands all about it."

We thanked the director and hurried out into the car again,
carrying the package, after his warning, as though it were so much
dynamite.

Altogether, I don't suppose that we could have been gone more than
an hour.

We burst into the laboratory, but, to my surprise, I did not see
Kennedy at his table. I stopped short and looked around.

There he was over in the corner, sprawled out in a chair, a tank
of oxygen beside him, from which he was inhaling laboriously
copious draughts. He rose as he saw us and walked unsteadily
toward the table.

"Why--what's the matter?" I cried, certain that m our absence an
attempt had been made on his life, perhaps to carry out the threat
of the curse.

"N-nothing," he gasped, with an attempt at a smile. "Only I--think
I was right--about the poison."

I did not like the way he looked. His hand was unsteady and his
eyes looked badly. But he seemed quite put out when I suggested
that he was working too hard over the case and had better take a
turn outdoors with us and have a bite to eat.

"You--you got it?" he asked, seizing the package that contained
the gourd and unwrapping it nervously.

He laid the gourd on the table, on which were also several jars of
various liquids and a number of other chemicals. At the end of the
table was a large, square package, from which sounds issued, as if
it contained something alive.

"Tell me," I persisted, "what has happened. Has any one been here
since we have been gone?"

"Not a soul," he answered, working his arms and shoulders as if to
get rid of some heavy weight that oppressed his chest.

"Then what has happened that makes you use the oxygen?" I
repeated, determined to get some kind of answer from him.

He turned to Leslie. "It was no ordinary asphyxiation, Doctor," he
said quickly.

Leslie nodded. "I could see that," he admitted.

"We have to deal in this case," continued Kennedy, his will-power
overcoming his weakness, "with a poison which is apparently among
the most subtle known. A particle of matter so minute as to be
hardly distinguishable by the naked eye, on the point of a lancet
or needle, a prick of the skin not anything like that wound of
Mendoza's, were necessary. But, fortunately, more of the poison
was used, making it just that much easier to trace, though for the
time the wound, which might itself easily have been fatal, threw
us off the scent. But given these things, not all the power in the
world--unless one was fully prepared--could save the life of the
person in whose flesh the wound was made."

Craig paused a moment, and we listened breathlessly.

"This poison, I find, acts on the so-called endplates of the
muscles and nerves. It produces complete paralysis, but not loss
of consciousness, sensation, circulation, or respiration until the
end approaches. It seems to be one of the most powerful agents of
which I have ever heard. When introduced in even a minute quantity
it produces death finally by asphyxiation--by paralyzing the
muscles of respiration. This asphyxia is what puzzled you,
Leslie."

He reached over and took a white mouse from the huge box on the
corner of the table.

"Let me show you what I have found," he said. "I am now going to
inject a little of the blood serum of the murdered man into this
white mouse."

He took a needle and injected some of a liquid which he had
isolated. The mouse did not even wince, so lightly did he touch
it. But as we watched, its life seemed gently to ebb away, without
pain, without struggle. Its breath simply seemed to stop.

Next he took the gourd which we had brought and with a knife
scraped off just the minutest particle of the black, licorice-like
stuff that incrusted it. He dissolved the particle in some
alcohol, and with a sterilized needle repeated his experiment on a
second mouse. The effect was precisely similar to that produced by
the blood on the first.

I was intent on what Craig was doing when Dr. Leslie broke in with
a question. "May I ask," he queried, "whether, admitting that the
first mouse died at least apparently in the same manner as the
second, you have proved that the poison is the same in both cases?
And if it is the same, can you show that it affects human beings
in the same way, that enough of it has been discovered in the
blood of Mendoza to have caused his death? In other words, I want
the last doubt set aside."

If ever Craig startled me, it was by his quiet reply:

"I've isolated it in his blood, extracted it, sterilized it, and
I've tried it on myself."

In breathless amazement, with eyes riveted on him, we listened.
"Then that was what was the matter?" I blurted out. "You had been
trying the poison on YOURSELF?"

He nodded unconcernedly. "Altogether," he explained, as Leslie and
I listened, speechless, "I was able to recover from both blood
samples six centigrams of the poison. It is almost unknown. I
could only be sure of what I discovered by testing the
physiological effects. I was very careful. What else was there to
do? I couldn't ask you fellows to try it, if I was afraid."

"Good heavens!" gasped Leslie, "and alone, too."

"You wouldn't have let me do it, if I hadn't got rid of you," he
smiled quietly.

Leslie shook his head. "Tried it on the dog and made himself the
dog!" exclaimed Leslie. "I need the credit of a successful case--
but I'll not take this one."

Kennedy laughed.

"Starting with two centigrams of the stuff as a moderate dose," he
pursued, while I listened, stunned at his daring, "I injected it
into my right arm subcutaneously. Then I slowly worked my way up
to three and then four centigrams. You see what I had recovered
was far from the real thing. They did not seem at first to produce
any very appreciable results other than to cause some dizziness,
slight vertigo, a considerable degree of lassitude, and an
extremely painful headache of rather unusual duration."

"Good night!" I exclaimed. "Didn't that satisfy you?"

"Five centigrams considerably improved on it," he continued,
paying no attention to me. "It caused a degree of lassitude and
vertigo that was most distressing, and six centigrams, the whole
amount which I had recovered from the samples of blood, gave me
the fright of my life right here in this laboratory a few minutes
before you came in."

Leslie and I looked at each other and shook our heads.

"Perhaps I was not wise in giving myself so large an injection on
a day when I was overheated and below par otherwise, because of
the strain I have been under in handling this case, as well as
other work. However that may be, the added centigram produced so
much more on top of the five centigrams I had previously taken
that for a time I had reason to fear that that additional
centigram was just the amount needed to bring my experiments to a
permanent close.

"Within three minutes of the time of injection the dizziness and
vertigo had become so great as to make walking seem impossible. In
another minute the lassitude rapidly crept over me, and the
serious disturbance of my breathing made it apparent to me that
walking, waving my arms, anything, was imperative. My lungs felt
glued up, and the muscles of my chest refused to work. Everything
swam before my eyes, and I was soon reduced to walking up and down
the laboratory floor with halting steps, only preventing falling
on the floor by holding fast to the edge of the table.

"I thought of the tank of oxygen, and managed to crawl over and
turn it on. I gulped at it. It seemed to me that I spent hours
gasping for breath. It reminded me of what I once experienced in
the Cave of the Winds of Niagara, where water is more abundant in
the atmosphere than air. Yet my watch afterward indicated only
about twenty minutes of extreme distress. But that twenty minutes
is one period I shall never forget. I advise you, Leslie, if you
are ever so foolish as to try the experiment, to remain below the
five-centigram limit."

"Believe me, I'd rather lose my job," returned Leslie.

"How much of the stuff was administered to Mendoza," went on
Kennedy, "I cannot say. But it must have been a good deal more
than I took. Six centigrams which I recovered from these small
samples are only nine-tenths of a grain. You see what effect that
much had. I trust that answers your question?"

Dr. Leslie was too overwhelmed to reply.

"What is this deadly poison that was used on Mendoza?" I managed
to ask.

"You have been fortunate enough to obtain a sample of it from the
Museum of Natural History," returned Craig. "It comes in a little
gourd, or often a calabash. This is in a gourd. It is a blackish,
brittle stuff, incrusting the sides of the gourd just as if it was
poured in in the liquid state and left to dry. Indeed, that is
just what has been done by those who manufacture it after a
lengthy and somewhat secret process."

He placed the gourd on the edge of the table, where we could see
it closely. I was almost afraid even to look at it.

"The famous traveller, Sir Robert Schomburgk, first brought it
into Europe, and Darwin has described it. It is now an article of
commerce, and is to be found in the United States Pharmacoepia as
a medicine, though, of course, it is used in only very minute
quantities, as a heart stimulant."

Craig opened a book to a place he had marked. "Here's an account
of it," he said. "Two natives were one day hunting. They were
armed with blow-pipes and quivers full of poisoned darts made of
thin, charred pieces of bamboo, tipped with this stuff. One of
them aimed a dart. It missed the object overhead, glanced off the
tree, and fell down on the hunter himself. This is how the other
native reported the result:

"'Quacca takes the dart out of his shoulder. Never a word. Puts it
in his quiver and throws it in the stream. Gives me his blow-pipe
for his little son. Says to me good-bye for his wife and the
village. Then he lies down. His tongue talks no longer. No sight
in his eyes. He folds his arms. He rolls over slowly. His mouth
moves without sound. I feel his heart. It goes fast and then slow.
It stops. Quacca has shot his last woorali dart.'"

Leslie and I looked at Kennedy, and the horror of the thing sank
deep into our minds. Woorali. What was it?

"Woorali, or curare," explained Craig slowly, "is the well-known
poison with which the South American Indians of the upper Orinoco
tip their arrows. Its principal ingredient is derived from the
Strychnos toxifera tree, which yields also the drug nux vomica,
which you, Dr. Leslie, have mentioned. On the tip of that Inca
dagger must have been a large dose of the dread curare, this fatal
South American Indian arrow poison."

"Say," ejaculated Leslie, "this thing begins to look eerie to me.
How about that piece of paper that I sent to you with the warning
about the curse of Mansiche and the Gold of the Gods. What if
there should be something in it? I'd rather not be a victim of
this curare, if it's all the same to you, Kennedy."

Kennedy was thinking deeply. Who could have sent the messages to
us all? Who was likely to have known of curare? I confess that I
had not even an idea. All of them, any of them, might have known.

The deeper we got into it, the more dastardly the crime against
Mendoza seemed. Involuntarily, I thought of the beautiful little
Senorita, about whom these terrible events centred. Though I had
no reason for it, I could not forget the fear that she had for
Senora de Moche, and the woman as she had been revealed to us in
our late interview.

"I suppose a Peruvian of average intelligence might know of the
arrow poison of Indians of another country," I ventured to Craig.

"Quite possible," he returned, catching immediately the drift of
my thoughts. "But the shoe-prints indicated that it was a man who
stole the dagger from the Museum. It may be that it was already
poisoned, too. In that case the thief would not have had to know
anything of curare, would not have needed to stab so deeply if he
had known."

I must confess that I was little further along in the solution of
the mystery than I had been when I first saw Mendoza's body.
Kennedy, however, did not seem to be worried. Leslie had long
since given up trying to form an opinion and, now that the nature
of the poison was finally established, was glad to leave the case
in our hands.

As for me, I was inclined to agree with Dr. Leslie, and, long
after he had left, there kept recurring to my mind those words:

BEWARE THE CURSE OF MANSICHE ON THE GOLD OF THE GODS.


VIII

THE ANONYMOUS LETTER


"I think I will drop in to see Senorita Mendoza," considered
Kennedy, as he cleared up the materials which he had been using in
his investigation of the arrow poison. "She is a study to me--in
fact, the reticence of all these people is hard to combat."

As we entered the apartment where the Mendozas lived, it was
difficult to realize that only a few hours had elapsed since we
had first been introduced to this strange affair. In the hall,
however, were still some reporters waiting in the vain hope that
some fragment of a story might turn up.

"Let's have a talk with the boys," suggested Craig, before we
entered the Mendoza suite. "After all, the newspaper men are the
best detectives I know. If it wasn't for them, half our murder
cases wouldn't ever be solved. As a matter of fact, 'yellow
journals' are more useful to a city than half the detective
force."

Most of the newspaper men knew Craig intimately, and liked him,
possibly because he was one of the few people to-day who realized
the very important part these young men played in modern life.
They crowded about, eager to interview him. But Craig was clever.
In the rapid fire of conversation it was really he who interviewed
them.

"Lockwood has been here a long time," volunteered one of the men.
"He seems to have constituted himself the guardian of Inez. No one
gets a look at her while he's around."

"Well, you can hardly blame him for that," smiled Craig. "Jealousy
isn't a crime in that case."

"Say," put in another, "there'd be an interesting quarter of an
hour if he were here now. That other fellow--de Mooch--whatever
his name is, is here."

"De Moche--with her, now?" queried Kennedy, wheeling suddenly.

The reporter smiled. "He's a queer duck. I was coming up to
relieve our other man, when I saw him down on the street, hanging
about the corner, his eyes riveted on the entrance to the
apartment. I suppose that was his way of making love. He's daffy
over her, all right. I stopped to watch him. Of course, he didn't
know me. Just then Lockwood left. The Spaniard dived into the drug
store on the corner as though the devil was after him. You should
have seen his eyes. If looks were bullets, I wouldn't give much
for Lockwood's life. With two such fellows about, you wouldn't
catch me making goo-goo eyes at that chicken--not on your life."

Kennedy passed over the flippant manner in view of the importance
of the observation.

"What do you think of Lockwood?" he asked.

"Pretty slick," replied another of the men. "He's the goods, all
right."

"Why, what has he done?" asked Kennedy.

"Nothing in particular. But he came out to see us once. You can't
blame him for being a bit sore at us fellows hanging about. But he
didn't show it. Instead he almost begged us to be careful of how
we asked questions of the girl. Of course, all of us could see how
completely broken up she is. We haven't bothered her. In fact,
we'd do anything we could for her. But Lockwood talks straight
from the shoulder. You can see he's used to handling all kinds of
situations."

"But did he say anything, has he done anything?" persisted
Kennedy.

"N-no," admitted the reporter. "I can't say he has."

Craig frowned a bit. "I thought not," he remarked. "These people
aren't giving away any hints, if they can help it."

"It's my idea," ventured another of the men, "that when this case
breaks, it will break all of a sudden. I shouldn't wonder if we
are in for one of the sensations of the year, when it comes."

Kennedy looked at him inquiringly. "Why?" he asked simply.

"No particular reason," confessed the man. "Only the regular
detectives act so chesty. They haven't got a thing, and they know
it, only they won't admit it to us. O'Connor was here."

"What did he say?"

"Nothing. He went through all the motions--'Now, pens lifted,
boys,' and all that--talked a lot--and after it was all over he
might have been sure no one would publish a line of his
confidences. There wasn't a stick of copy in the whole thing."

Kennedy laughed. "O'Connor's all right," he replied. "We may need
him sorely before we get through. After all, nothing can take the
place of the organization the police have built up. You say de
Moche is in there yet?"

"Yes. He seemed very anxious to see her. We never get a word out
of him. I've been thinking what would happen if we tried to get
him mad. Maybe he'd talk."

"More likely he'd pull a gun," cautioned another. "Excuse ME."

Kennedy said nothing, evidently content to let the newspaper men
go their own sweet way.

He nodded to them, and pressed the buzzer at the Mendoza door.

"Tell Senorita Mendoza that it is Professor Kennedy," he said to
Juanita, who opened the door, keeping it on the chain, to be sure
it was no unwelcome intruder.

Evidently she had had orders to admit us, for a second later we
found ourselves again in the little reception room.

We sat down, and I saw that Craig's attention had at once been
fixed on something. I listened intently, too. On the other side of
the heavy portieres that cut us off from the living room I could
distinguish low voices. It was de Moche and Inez.

Whatever the ethics of it, we could not help listening. Besides
there was more at stake than ethics.

Evidently the young man was urging her to do something that she
did not agree with.

"No," we heard her say finally, in a quiet tone, "I cannot believe
it, Alfonso. Mr. Whitney is Mr. Lockwood's associate now. My
father and Mr. Lockwood approved of him. Why should I do
otherwise?"

De Moche was talking earnestly but in a very muffled voice. We
could not make out anything except a few scattered phrases which
told us nothing. Once I fancied he mentioned his mother. Whatever
it was that he was urging, Inez was firm.

"No, Alfonso," she repeated, her voice a little higher and
excited. "It cannot be. You must be mistaken."

She had risen, and now moved toward the hall door, evidently
forgetting that the folding doors behind the portieres were open.
"Professor Kennedy and Mr. Jameson are here," she said. "Would you
care to meet them?"

He replied in the negative. Yet as he passed the reception room he
could not help seeing us.

As Inez greeted us, I saw that Alfonso was making a desperate
effort to control his expression. He seemed to be concealing a
bitter disappointment. Seeing us, he bowed stiffly, and, with just
the murmur of a greeting, excused himself.

He had no sooner closed the door to run the gauntlet of the sharp
eyes in the hall than the Senorita faced us fully. She was pale
and nervous. Evidently something that he had said to her had
greatly agitated her. Yet with all her woman's skill she managed
to hide all outward traces of emotion that might indicate what it
was that racked her mind.

"You have something to report?" she asked, a trifle anxiously.

"Nothing of any great importance," admitted Craig.

Was it actually a look of relief that crossed her face? Try as I
could, it seemed to me to be an anomalous situation. She wanted
the murderer of her father caught, naturally. Yet she did not seem
to be offering us the natural assistance that was to be expected.
Could it be that she suspected some one perhaps near and dear to
her of having some knowledge, which, now that the deed was done,
would do more harm than good if revealed? It was the only
conclusion to which I could come. I was surprised at Kennedy's
next question. Was the same idea in his mind, also?

"We have seen Mr. Whitney," he ventured. "Just what are Mr.
Lockwood's relations with him--and yours?"

"Merely that Mr. Lockwood and my father were partners," she
answered hastily. "They had decided that their interests would be
more valuable by some arrangement with Mr. Whitney, who controls
so much down in Peru."

"Do you think that Senora de Moche exercises a very great
influence on Mr. Whitney?" asked Craig, purposely introducing the
name of the Indian woman to see what effect it might have on her.

"Oh," she cried, with a little exclamation of alarm, "I hope not."

Yet it was evident that she feared so.

"Why is it that you fear it?" insisted Kennedy. "What has she done
to make you fear it?"

"I don't like her," returned Inez, with a frown. "My father knew
her--too well. She is a schemer, an adventuress. Once she has a
hold on a man, one cannot say--" She paused, then went on in a
different tone. "But I would rather not talk about the woman. I am
afraid of her. Never does she talk to me that she does not get
something out of me that I do not wish to tell her. She is
uncanny."

Personally, I could not blame Inez for her opinion. I could
understand it. Those often baleful eyes had a penetrating power
that one might easily fall a victim to.

"But you can trust Mr. Lockwood," he returned. "Surely he is proof
against her, against any woman."

Inez flushed. It was evident that of all the men who were
interested in the little beauty, Lockwood was first in her mind.
Yet when Kennedy put the question thus she hesitated. "Yes," she
replied, "of course, I trust him. It is not that woman whom I fear
with him."

She said it with an air almost of defiance. There was some kind of
struggle going on in her mind, and she was too proud to let us
into the secret.

Kennedy rose and bowed. For the present he had come to the
conclusion that if she would not let us help her openly the only
thing to do was to help her blindly.

Half an hour later we were at Norton's apartment, not far from the
University campus. He listened intently as Kennedy told such parts
of what we had done as he chose. At the mention of the arrow
poison, he seemed startled beyond measure.

"You are sure of it?" he asked anxiously.

"Positive, now," reiterated Kennedy.

Norton's face was drawn in deep lines. "If some one has the
secret," he cried hastily, "who knows when and on whom next he may
employ it?"

Coming from him so soon after the same idea had been hinted at by
the coroner, I could not but be impressed by it.

"The very novelty of the thing is our best protection," asserted
Kennedy confidently. "Once having discovered it, if Walter gives
the thing its proper value in the Star, I think the criminal will
be unlikely to try it again. If you had had as much experience in
crime as I have had, you would see that it is not necessarily the
unusual that is baffling. That may be the surest way to trace it.
Often it is because a thing is so natural that it may be
attributed to any person among several, equally well."

Norton eyed us keenly, and shook his head. "You may be right," he
said doubtfully. "Only I had rather that this person, whoever he
may be, had fewer weapons."

"Speaking of weapons," broke in Kennedy, "you have had no further
idea of why the dagger might have been taken?"

"There seems to have been so much about it that I did not know,"
he returned, "that I am almost afraid to have an opinion. I knew
that its three-sided sheath inclosed a sharp blade, yet who would
have dreamed that that blade was poisoned?"

"You are lucky not to have scratched yourself with it by accident
while you were studying it."

"Possibly I might have done it, if I had had it in my possession
longer. It was only lately that I had leisure to study it."

"You knew that it might offer some clue to the hidden treasure of
Truxillo?" suggested Kennedy. "Have you any recollection of what
the inscriptions on it said?"

"Yes," returned Norton, "I had heard the rumours about it. But
Peru is a land of tales of buried treasure. No, I can't say that I
paid much more attention to it than you might have done if some
one asserted that he had another story of the treasure of Captain
Kidd. I must confess that only when the thing was stolen did I
begin to wonder whether, after all, there might not be something
in it. Now it is too late to find out. From the moment when I
found that it was missing from my collection I have heard no more
about it than you have found out. It is all like a dream to me. I
cannot believe even yet that a mere bit of archaeological and
ethnological specimen could have played so important a part in the
practical events of real life."

"It does seem impossible," agreed Kennedy. "But it is even more
remarkable than that. It has disappeared without leaving a trace,
after having played its part."

"If it had been a mere robbery," considered Norton, "one might
look for its reappearance, I suppose, in the curio shops. For to-
day thieves have a keen appreciation of the value of such objects.
But, now that you have unearthed its use against Mendoza--and in
such a terrible way--it is not likely that that will be what will
happen to it. No, we must look elsewhere."

"I thought I would tell you," concluded Kennedy, rising to go.
"Perhaps after you have considered it over night some idea may
occur to you."

"Perhaps," said Norton doubtfully. "But I haven't your brilliant
faculty of scientific analysis, Kennedy. No, I shall have to lean
on you, in that, not you on me."

We left Norton, apparently now more at sea than ever. At the
laboratory Kennedy plunged into some microphotographic work that
the case had suggested to him, while I dashed off, under his
supervision, an account of the discovery of curare, and telephoned
it down to the Star in time to catch the first morning edition, in
the hope that it might have some effect in apprising the criminal
that we were hard on his trail, which he had considered covered.

I scanned the other papers eagerly in the morning for Kennedy,
hoping to glean at least some hints that others who were working
on the case might have gathered. But there was nothing, and, after
a hasty bite of breakfast, we hurried back to take up the thread
of the investigation where we had laid it down.

To our surprise, on the steps of the Chemistry Building, as we
approached, we saw Inez Mendoza already waiting for us in a high
state of agitation. Her face was pale, and her voice trembled as
she greeted us.

"Such a dreadful thing has come to me," she cried, even before
Kennedy could ask her what the trouble was.

From her handbag she drew out a crumpled, dirty piece of paper in
an envelope.

"It came in the first mail," she explained. "I could not wait to
send it to you. I brought it myself. What can it mean?"

Kennedy unfolded the paper. Printed in large characters, in every
way similar to the four warnings that had been sent to us, was
just one ominous line. We read:

"Beware the man who professes to be a friend of your father."

I glanced from the note to Kennedy, then to Inez. One name was in
my mind, and before I knew it I had spoken it.

"Lockwood?" I queried inadvertently.

Her eyes met mine in sharp defiance. "Impossible," she exclaimed.
"It is some one trying to injure him with me. Beware of Mr.
Lockwood? How absurd!"

Yet it must have meant Lockwood. No one else could have been
meant. It was he, most of all, who might be called a friend of her
father. She seemed to see the implication without a word from us.

I could not help sympathizing with the brave girl in her struggle
between the attack against Lockwood and her love and confidence in
him. It did not need words to tell me that evidence must be
overwhelming to convince her that her lover might be involved in
any manner.


IX

THE PAPER FIBRES


Kennedy examined the anonymous letter carefully for several
minutes, while we watched him in silence.

"Too clever to use a typewriter," he remarked, still regarding the
note through the lens of a hand-glass. "Almost any one would have
used a machine. That would have been due to the erroneous idea
that typewriting cannot be detected. The fact is that the
typewriter is perhaps a worse means of concealing identity than is
disguised handwriting, especially printing like this. It doesn't
afford the effective protection to the criminal that one supposes.
On the contrary, the typewriting of such a note may be the direct
means by which it can be traced to its source. We can determine
what kind of machine it was done with, then what particular
machine was used can be identified."

He paused and indicated a number of little instruments which he
had taken from a drawer and laid on the table, as he tore off a
bit of the corner of the sheet of paper and examined it.

"There is one thing I can do now, though," he continued. "I can
study the quality of the paper in this sheet. If it were only torn
like those warnings we have already received, it might perhaps be
mated with another piece as accurately as if the act had been
performed before our eyes."

He picked up a little instrument with a small curved arm and a
finely threaded screw that brought the two flat surfaces of the
arm and the end of the screw together.

"There is no such good fortune in this case, however," he resumed,
placing the paper between the two small arms. "But by measurements
made by this vernier micrometer caliper I can find the precise
thickness of the paper as compared to the other samples."

He turned to a microscope and placed the corner of the paper under
it. Then he drew from the drawer the four scraps of paper which
had already been sent to us, as well as a pile of photographs.

"Under ordinary circumstances," he explained, "I should think that
what I am doing would be utterly valueless as a clue to anything.
But we are reduced to the minutiae in this affair. And to-day
science is not ready to let anything pass as valueless."

He continued to look at the various pieces of paper under the
microscope. "I find under microscopic examination," he went on,
addressing Inez, but not looking up from the eye-piece as he
shifted the papers, "that the note you have received, Senorita
Mendoza, is written on a rather uncommon linen bond paper. Later I
shall take a number of microphotographs of it. I have here, also,
about a hundred microphotographs of the fibres in other kinds of
paper, many of them bonds. These I have accumulated from time to
time in my study of the subject. None of them, as you can see,
shows fibres resembling this one in question, so that we may
conclude that it is of uncommon quality.

"Here I have the fibres, also, of four pieces of paper that have
already figured in the case. These four correspond, as well as the
indentures of the torn edges. As for the fibres, lest you should
question the accuracy of the method, I may say that I know of a
case where a man in Germany was arrested, charged with stealing a
government bond. He was not searched until later. There was no
evidence, save that after the arrest a large number of spitballs
were found around the courtyard under his cell window. This method
of comparing the fibres of the regular government paper was used,
and by it the man was convicted of stealing the bond. I think it
is unnecessary to add that in the present case I can see
definitely that not only the four pieces of paper that bore
warnings to us were the same kind, but that this whole sheet, with
its anonymous warning to you, is also the same."

Inez Mendoza looked at Kennedy as though he possessed some weird
power. Her face, which had already been startled into an
expression of fear at his mention of Lockwood, now was pale.

"Other warnings?" she repeated tremulously.

Quickly Kennedy explained what had already happened to us,
watching the effect on her as he read of the curse of Mansiche and
the Gold of the Gods.

"Oh," she cried, mastering her emotion with a heroic effort, "I
wish my father had never become mixed up in the business. Ever
since I was a little girl I have heard these vague stories of the
big fish and the little fish, the treasure, and the curse. But I
never thought they were anything but fairy tales. You remember,
when I first saw you, I did not even tell them to you."

"Yes," returned Kennedy. "I remember. But had you no other reason?
Did you, down in your heart, think them really fairy tales?"

She shuddered. "Perhaps not," she murmured. "But I have heard
enough of you detectives to know that you do not think a woman's
fears exactly evidence."

"Still they might lead to evidence," suggested Kennedy.

She looked at him, more startled than ever, for already he had
given her a slight exhibition of his powers.

"Mr. Kennedy," she exclaimed, "I am positively afraid of you,
afraid that every little thing I do may lead to something I don't
intend."

There was a frankness about the remark that would have been
flattering from a man, but from her excited sympathy.

"No," she went on, "I have nothing tangible--only my feelings. I
fear I must admit that my father had enemies, though who they are
I cannot tell you. No, it is all in my heart--not in my head.
There are those whom I dislike--and there are those whom I like
and trust. You may call me foolish, but I cannot help trusting--
Mr. Lockwood."

She had not meant to say his name, and Kennedy and I looked at her
in surprise.

"You see?" she continued. "Every time I talk I say something,
convey some impression that is the opposite of what I wish. Oh--
what shall I do? Have I no one to trust?"

She was crying.

"You may trust me, Senorita," said Kennedy, in a low tone, pausing
before her. "At least I have no other interest than finding the
truth and helping you. There--there. We have had enough to-day. I
cannot ask you to try to forget what has happened. That would be
impossible. But I can ask you, Senorita, to have faith--faith that
it will all turn out better, if you will only trust me. When you
feel stronger--then come to me. Tell me your fears--or not--
whichever does you the most good. Only keep your mind from
brooding. Face it all as you know your father would have you do."

Kennedy's words were soothing. He seemed to know that tears were
the safety-valve she needed.

"Mr. Jameson will see that you get home safely in a taxicab," he
continued. "You can trust him as you would myself."

I can imagine circumstances under which I would have enjoyed
escorting Inez to her home, but today was not one of the times.
Yet she seemed so helpless, so grateful for everything we did for
her that I did not need even the pressure of her little hand as
she hurried into the apartment from the car with a hasty word of
thanks.

"You will tell Mr. Kennedy--you will both be--so careful?" she
hesitated before leaving me.

I assured her that we would, wondering what she might fear for us,
as I drove away again. There did not happen to be any of the
newspaper men about at the time, and I did not stop.

Back in the laboratory, I found Kennedy arranging something under
the rug at the door as I came up the hall.

"Don't step there, Walter," he cautioned. "Step over the rug. I'm
expecting visitors. How was she when she arrived home?"

I told him of her parting injunction.

"Not bad advice," he remarked. "I think there's a surprise back of
those warnings. They weren't sent just for effect."

He had closed the door, and we were standing by the table, looking
at the letters, when we heard a noise at the door.

It was Norton again.

"I've been thinking of what you told me last night," he explained,
before Kennedy had a chance to tell him to step over the rug. "Has
anything else happened?"

Kennedy tossed over the anonymous letter, and Norton read it
eagerly.

"Whom does it mean?" he asked, quickly glancing up, then adding,
"It might mean any of us who are trying to help her."

"Exactly," returned Kennedy. "Or it might be Lockwood, or even de
Moche. By the way, you know the young man pretty well, don't you?
I wonder if you could find him anywhere about the University this
morning and persuade him to visit me?"

"I will try," agreed Norton. "But these people are so very
suspicious just now that I can't promise."

Norton went out a few minutes later to see what he could do to
locate Alfonso, and Kennedy replaced another blank sheet of paper
for that under the rug on which Norton had stepped before we could
warn him.

No sooner had he gone than Kennedy reached for the telephone and
called Whitney's office. Lockwood was there, as he had hoped, and,
after a short talk, promised to drop in on us later in the
morning.

It was fully half an hour before Norton returned, having finally
found Alfonso. De Moche entered the laboratory with a suspicious
glance about, as though he thought something might have been
planted there for him.

"I had a most interesting talk with your mother yesterday," began
Kennedy, endeavouring by frankness to put the young man at ease.
"And this morning, already, Senorita Mendoza has called on me."

De Moche was all attention at the words. But before he could say
anything Kennedy handed him the anonymous letter. He read it, and
his face clouded as he handed it back.

"You have no idea who could have sent such a note?" queried Craig,
"or to whom it might refer?"

He glanced at Norton, then at us. It was clear that some sort of
suspicion had flashed over him. "No," he said quickly, "I know no
one who could have sent it."

"But whom does it mean?" asked Kennedy, holding him to the part
that he avoided.

The young man shrugged his shoulders. "She has many friends," he
answered simply.

"Yes," persisted Kennedy, "but few against whom she might be
warned in this way. You do not think it is Professor Norton, for
instance--or myself?"

"Oh, no, no--hardly," he replied, then stopped, realizing that he
had eliminated all but Lockwood, Whitney, and himself.

"It could not be Mr. Lockwood?" demanded Craig.

"Who sent it?" he asked, looking up.

"No--whom it warns against."

De Moche had known what Kennedy meant, but had preferred to
postpone the answer. It was native never to come to the point
unless he was forced to do so. He met our eyes squarely. He had
not the penetrating power that his mother possessed, yet his was a
sharp faculty of observation.

"Mr. Lockwood is very friendly with her," he admitted, then seemed
to think something else necessary to round out the idea. "Mr.
Kennedy, I might have told her the same myself. Senorita Mendoza
has been a very dear friend--for a long time."

I had been so used to having him evasive that now I did not
exactly know what to make of such a burst of confidence. It was
susceptible of at least two interpretations. Was he implying that
it was sent to cast suspicion on him, because he felt that way
himself or because he himself was her friend?

"There have been other warnings," pursued Kennedy, "both to myself
and Mr. Jameson, as well as Professor Norton and Dr. Leslie.
Surely you must have some idea of the source."

De Moche shook his head. "None that I can think of," he replied.
"Have you asked my mother?"

"Not yet," admitted Kennedy.

De Moche glanced at his watch. "I have a lecture at this hour," he
remarked, evidently glad of an excuse to terminate the interview.

As he left, Kennedy accompanied him to the door, careful himself
to step over the mat.

"Hello, what's new?" we heard a voice in the hall.

It was Lockwood, who had come up from downtown. Catching sight of
de Moche, however, he stopped short. The two young men met face to
face. Between them passed a glance of unconcealed hostility, then
each nodded stiffly.

De Moche turned to Kennedy as he passed down the hall. "Perhaps it
may have been sent to divert suspicion--who can tell?" he
whispered.

Kennedy nodded appreciatively, noting the change.

At the sound of Lockwood's voice both Norton and I had taken a
step further after them out into the hall, Norton somewhat in
advance. As de Moche disappeared for his lecture, Kennedy turned
to me from Lockwood and caught my eye. I read in his glance that
fell from me to the mat that he wished me quietly to abstract the
piece of paper which he had placed under it. I bent down and did
so without Lockwood seeing me.

"Why was he here?" demanded Lockwood, with just a trace of
defiance in his voice, as though he fancied the meeting had been
framed.

"I have been showing this to every one who might help me,"
returned Kennedy, going back into the laboratory after giving me
an opportunity to dispose of the shoe-prints.

He handed the anonymous letter and the other warnings to the young
soldier of fortune, with a brief explanation.

"Why don't they come out into the open, whoever they are?"
commented Lockwood, laying the papers down carelessly again on the
table. "I'll meet them--if they mean me."

"Who?" asked Kennedy.

Lockwood faced Norton and ourselves.

"I'm not a mind reader," he said significantly. "But it doesn't
take much to see that some one wants to throw a brick at me. When
I have anything to say I say it openly. Inez Mendoza without
friends just now would be a mark, wouldn't she?"

His strong face and powerful jaw were set in a menacing scowl. He
would be a bold man who would have come between Lockwood and the
lady under the circumstances.

"You are confident of Mr. Whitney?" inquired Kennedy.

"Ask Norton," replied Lockwood briefly. "He knew him long before I
did."

Norton smiled quietly. "Mr. Kennedy should know what my opinion of
Mr. Whitney is, I think," replied Norton confidently.

"I trust that you will succeed in running these blackmailers
down," pursued Lockwood, still standing. "If I did not have more
than I can attend to already since the murder of Mendoza I'd like
to take a hand myself. It begins to look to me, after reading that
letter, as though there was nothing too low for them to attempt. I
shall keep this latest matter in mind. If either Mr. Whitney or
myself get any hint, we'll turn it over to you."

Norton left shortly after Lockwood, and Kennedy again picked up
the letter and scanned it. "I could learn something, I suppose, if
I analyzed this printing," he considered, "but it is a tedious
process. Let me see that envelope again. H-m, postmarked by the
uptown sub-station, mailed late last night. Whoever sent it must
have done so not very far from us here. Lockwood seemed to take it
as though it applied to himself very readily, didn't he? Much more
so than de Moche. Only for the fact that the fibres show it to be
on paper similar to the first warnings, I might have been inclined
to doubt whether this was bona fide. At least, the sender must
realize now that it has produced no appreciable effect--if any was
intended."

Kennedy's last remark set me thinking. Could some one have sent
the letter not to produce the effect apparently intended, but with
the ultimate object of diverting suspicion from himself? Lockwood,
at least, had not seemed to take the letter very seriously.


X

THE X-RAY READER


"I think I'll pay another visit to Whitney, in spite of all that
Norton and Lockwood say about him," remarked Kennedy, considering
the next step he would take in his investigation.

Accordingly, half an hour later we entered his Wall Street office,
where we were met by a clerk, who seemed to remember us.

"Mr. Whitney is out just at present," he said, "but if you will be
seated I think I can reach him by telephone."

As we sat in the outer office while the clerk telephoned from
Whitney's own room the door opened and the postman entered and
laid some letters on a table near us. Kennedy could not help
seeing the letter on top of the pile, and noticed that it bore a
stamp from Peru. He picked it up and read the postmark, "Lima,"
and the date some weeks previous. In the lower corner,
underscored, were the words "Personal--Urgent."

"I'd like to know what is in that," remarked Craig, turning it
over and over.

He appeared to be considering something, for he rose suddenly, and
with a nod of his head to himself, as though settling some qualm
of conscience, shoved the letter into his pocket.

A moment later the clerk returned. "I've just had Mr. Whitney on
the wire," he reported. "I don't think he'll be back at least for
an hour."

"Is he at the Prince Edward Albert?" asked Craig.

"I don't know," returned the clerk, oblivious to the fact that we
must have seen that in order to know the telephone number he must
have known whether Mr. Whitney was there or elsewhere.

"I shall come in again," rejoined Kennedy, as we bowed ourselves
out. Then to me he added, "If he is with Senora de Moche and they
are at the Edward Albert, I think I can beat him back with this
letter if we hurry."

A few minutes later, in his laboratory, Kennedy set to work
quickly over an X-ray apparatus. As I watched him, I saw that he
had placed the letter in it.

"These are what are known as 'low tubes,'" he explained. "They
give out 'soft rays.'"

He continued to work for several minutes, then took the letter out
and handed it to me.

"Now, Walter," he said brusquely, "if you will just hurry back
down there to Whitney's office and replace that letter, I think I
will have something that will astonish you--though whether it will
have any bearing on the case remains to be seen. At least I can
postpone seeing Whitney himself for a while."

I made the trip down again as rapidly as I could. Whitney was not
back when I arrived, but the clerk was there, and I could not very
well just leave the letter on the table again.

"Mr. Kennedy would like to know when he can see Mr. Whitney," I
said, on the spur of the moment. "Can't you call him up again?"

The clerk, as I had anticipated, went into Whitney's office to
telephone. Instead of laying the letter on the table, which might
have excited suspicion, I stuck it in the letter slot of the door,
thinking that perhaps they might imagine that it had caught there
when the postman made his rounds.

A moment later the clerk returned. "Mr. Whitney is on his way down
now," he reported.

I thanked him, and said that Kennedy would call him up when he
arrived, congratulating myself on the good luck I had had in
returning the letter.

"What is it?" I asked, a few minutes later, when I had rejoined
Craig in the laboratory.

He was poring intently over what looked like a negative.

"The possibility of reading the contents of documents inclosed in
a sealed envelope," he replied, still studying the shadowgraph
closely, "has already been established by the well-known English
scientist, Dr. Hall Edwards. He has been experimenting with the
method of using X-rays recently discovered by a German scientist,
by which radiographs of very thin substances, such as a sheet of
paper, a leaf, an insect's body, may be obtained. These thin
substances, through which the rays used formerly to pass without
leaving an impression, can now be easily radiographed."

I looked carefully as he traced out something on the queer
negative. On it, it was easily possible, following his guidance,
to read the words inscribed on the sheet of paper inside. So
admirably defined were all the details that even the gum on the
envelope and the edges of the sheet of paper inside the envelope
could be distinguished.

"It seems incredible," I exclaimed, scarcely believing what I
actually saw. "It is almost like second sight."

Kennedy smiled. "Any letter written with ink having a mineral base
can be radiographed," he added. "Even when the sheet is folded in
the usual way, it is possible, by taking a radiograph, as I have
done, stereoscopically. Then every detail can be seen standing out
in relief. Besides, it can be greatly magnified, which aids in
deciphering it if it is indistinct or jumbled up. Some of it looks
like mirror-writing. Ah," he continued, "here's something
interesting."

Together we managed to trace out the contents of several
paragraphs laboriously, the gist of which I give here:

"LIMA, PERU.

"DEAR WHITNEY:

"Matters are progressing very favorably here, considering the
stoppage of business due to the war. I am doing everything in my
power to conserve our interests, and now and then, owing to the
scarcity of money, am able to pick up a concession cheaply, which
will be of immense value to us later.

"However, it is not so much of business that I wish to write you
at the present time. You know that my friend Senora de Moche, with
her son, Alfonso, is at present in New York. Doubtless she has
already called on you and tried to interest you in her own
properties here. I need not advise you to be very careful in
dealing with her.

"The other day I heard a rumour that may prove interesting to you,
regarding Norton and his work here on his last trip. As we know,
he has succeeded in finding and getting out of the country an Inca
dagger which, I believe, bears a very important inscription. I do
not know anything definite about it, as these people are very
reticent. But no doubt he has told you all about it by this time.
If it should prove of value, I depend on you to let me know, so
that I may act at this end accordingly.

"What I am getting at is this: I understand that from rumours and
remarks of the Senora she believes that Norton took an unfair
advantage during her absence. What the inscription is I don't
know, but from the way these people down here act one would think
that they all had a proprietary interest in the relic. What it is
all about I don't know. But you will find the Senora both a keen
business woman and an accomplished antiquarian, if you have not
already discovered it.

"In regard to Lockwood and Mendoza, if we can get them in on our
side, it ought to prove a winning combination. There are stories
here of how de Moche has been playing on Mendoza's passions--she's
thoroughly unscrupulous and Don Luis is somewhat of a Don Juan. I
write this to put you on guard. Her son, Alfonso, whom you perhaps
have met also, is of another type, though I have heard it said
that he laid siege to Inez Mendoza in the hope of becoming allied
with one of the oldest families.

"Such, at least, is the gossip down here. I cannot presume to keep
you posted at such a distance, but thought I had better write what
is in every one's mouth. As for the inscribed dagger which Norton
has taken with him, I rely on you to inform me. There seems to be
a great deal of mystery connected with it, and I am unable even to
hazard a guess as to its nature. Fortunately, you are on the spot

"Very sincerely yours,

"HAGGERTY."

"So," remarked Kennedy, as he read over the translation of the
skiagraph which he had jotted down as we picked out the letters
and words, "that's how the land lies. Everybody seems to have
appreciated the importance of the dagger."

"Except Norton," I could not help putting in in disgust.

"And now it's gone," he continued, "just as though some one had
dropped it overboard. I believe I will keep that appointment you
made for me with Whitney, after all."

Thus it happened that I found myself a third time entering
Whitney's building. I was about to step into the elevator, when
Kennedy tugged at my arm and pulled me back.

"Hello, Norton," I heard him say, as I turned and caught sight of
the archaeologist just leaving an elevator that had come down.

Norton's face plainly showed that he was worried.

"What the matter?" asked Kennedy, putting the circumstances
together. "What has Whitney been doing?"

Norton seemed reluctant to talk, but having no alternative
motioned to us to step aside in the corridor.

"It's the first time I've talked with him since the dagger was
stolen--that is, about the loss," he said nervously. "He called me
up half an hour ago and asked me to come down."

I looked at Kennedy significantly. Evidently it must have been
just after his return to the office and receipt of the letter
which I had stuck in the letter slot.

"He was very angry over something," continued Norton. "I'm sure it
was not my fault if the dagger was stolen, and I'm sure that
managing an expedition in that God-forsaken country doesn't give
you time to read every inscription, especially when it is almost
illegible, right on the spot. There was work enough for months
that I brought back, along with that. Sometimes Whitney's
unreasonable."

"You don't think he could have known something about the dagger
all along?" ventured Craig.

Norton puckered his eyes. "He never said anything," he replied.
"If he had asked me to drop other things for that, why, of course,
I would have done so. We can't afford to lose him as a contributor
to the exploration fund. Confound it--I'm afraid I've put my foot
in it this time."

Kennedy said nothing, and Norton continued, growing more excited:
"Everybody's been talking to Whitney, telling him all kinds of
things--Lockwood, the de Moches, heaven knows who else. Why don't
they come out and face me? I've a notion to try to carry on my
work independently. Nothing plays hob with scholarship like money.
You'd think he owned me body and soul, and the collection, too, if
you heard him talk. Why, he accused me of carelessness in running
the Museum, and heaven knows I'm not the curator--I'm not even the
janitor!"

Norton was excited, but I could not help feeling that he was also
relieved. "I've been preparing for the time when I'd have to cut
loose," he went on finally. "Now, I suppose it is coming. Ah,
well, perhaps it will be better--who can tell? I may not do so
much, but it will all be mine, with no strings attached. Perhaps,
after all, it is for the best."

Talking over his troubles seemed to do Norton some good, for I am
sure that he left us in a better frame of mind than we had found
him.

Kennedy wished him good-luck, and we again entered the lift.

We found Whitney in an even greater state of excitement than
Norton had been. I am sure that if it had been any one else than
Kennedy he would have thrown him out, but he seemed to feel that
he must control himself in our presence.

"What do you know about that fellow Norton, up at your place?" he
demanded, almost before we had seated ourselves.

"A very hard-working, ambitious man his colleagues tell me,"
returned Kennedy, purposely I thought, as if it had been a red rag
flaunted before a bull.

"Hard-working--yes," bellowed Whitney. "He has worked me hard. I
send him down to Peru--yes, I put up most of the money. Then what
does he do? Just kids me along, makes me think he's accomplishing
a whole lot--when he's actually so careless as to let himself be
robbed of what he gets with my money. I tell you, you can't trust
anybody. They all double-cross you. I swear, I think Lockwood and
I ought to go it alone. I'm glad I found that fellow out. Let
himself be robbed--a fine piece of work! Why, that fellow couldn't
see through a barn door--after the horse was stolen," he
concluded, mixing his metaphors in his anger.

"Evidently some one has been telling you something," remarked
Kennedy. "We tried to see you twice this morning, but couldn't
find you."

His tone was one calculated to impress Whitney with the fact that
he had been watching and had some idea of where he really was.
Whitney shot a sharp glance at Craig, whose face betrayed nothing.

"Ambitious--I should say so," repeated Whitney, reverting to
Norton to cover up this new change of the subject. "Well--let him
be ambitious. We can get along without him. I tell you, Kennedy,
no one is indispensable. There is always some way to get along--if
you can't get over an obstacle, you can get around it. I'll
dispense with Mr. Norton. He's an expensive luxury, anyhow. I'm
just as well satisfied."

There was real vexation in Whitney's voice, yet as he talked he,
too, seemed to cool down. I could not help thinking that both
Norton and Whitney were perhaps just a bit glad at the break. Had
both of them got out of each other all that they wanted--Norton
his reputation and Whitney--what?

He cooled down so rapidly now that almost I began to wonder
whether his anger had been genuine. Did he know more about the
dagger than appeared? Was this his cover--to disown Norton?

"It seems to me that Senora de Moche is ambitious for her son,
too," remarked Kennedy, tenaciously trying to force the
conversation into the channel he chose.

"How's that?" demanded Whitney, narrowing his eyes down into a
squint at Kennedy's face, a proceeding that served by contrast to
emphasize the abnormal condition of the pupils which I had already
noticed both in his eyes and Lockwood's.

"I don't think she'd object to having him marry into one of the
leading families in Peru," ventured Kennedy, paraphrasing what we
had already read in the letter.

"Perhaps Senorita Mendoza herself can be trusted to see to that,"
Whitney replied with a quick laugh.

"To say nothing of Mr. Lockwood," suggested Craig.

Whitney looked at him quizzically, as though in doubt just how
much this man knew.

"Senora de Moche puzzles me," went on Kennedy. "I often wonder
whether superstition or greed would rule her if it came to the
point in this matter of the Gold of the Gods, as they all seem to
call the buried treasure at Truxillo. She's a fascinating woman,
but I can't help feeling that with her one is always playing with
fire."

Whitney eyed us knowingly. I had long ago taken his measure as a
man quite susceptible to a pretty face, especially if accompanied
by a well-turned ankle.

"I never discuss politics during business hours," he laughed, with
a self-satisfied air. "You will excuse me? I have some rather
important letters that I must get off."

Kennedy rose, and Whitney walked to the door with us, to call his
stenographer.

We had scarcely said good-bye and were about to open the outer
door when it was pushed open from outside, and Lockwood bustled
in.

"No more anonymous letters, I hope?" he queried, in a tone which I
could not determine whether serious or sarcastic.

Kennedy answered in the negative. "Not unless you have one."

"I? I rather think the ready letter-writers know better than to
waste time on me. That little billet doux seems to have quite
upset the Senorita, though. I don't know how many times she has
called me up to see if I was all right. I begin to think that
whoever wrote it has done me a good turn, after all."

Lockwood did not say it in a boastful way, but one could see that
he was greatly pleased at the solicitude of Inez.

"She thinks it referred to you, then?" asked Kennedy.

"Evidently," he replied; then added, "I won't say but that I have
taken it seriously, too."

He slapped his hip pocket. Under the tail of his coat bulged a
blue-steel automatic.

"You still have no idea who could have sent it, or why?"

Lockwood shook his head. "Whoever he is, I'm ready," he replied
grimly, bowing us out.


XI

THE SHOE-PRINTS


"I'm afraid we've neglected the Senorita a bit, in our efforts to
follow up what clues we have in the case," remarked Kennedy, as we
rode uptown again. "She needs all the protection we can give her.
I think we'd better drop around there, now that she is pretty
likely to be left alone."

Accordingly, instead of going back to the laboratory, we dropped
off near the apartment of the Mendozas and walked over from the
subway.

As we turned the corner, far down the long block I could see the
entrance to the apartment.

"There she is now," I said to Kennedy, catching sight of her
familiar figure, clad in sombre black, as she came down the steps.
"I wonder where she can be going."

She turned at the foot of the steps and, as chance would have it,
started in the opposite direction from us.

"Let us see," answered Kennedy, quickening his pace.

She had not gone very far before a man seemed to spring up from
nowhere and meet her. He bowed, and walked along beside her.

"De Moche," recognized Kennedy.

Alfonso had evidently been waiting in the shadow of an entrance
down the street, perhaps hoping to see her, perhaps as our
newspaper friend had seen before, to watch whether Lockwood was
among her callers. As we walked along, we could see the little
drama with practically no fear of being seen, so earnestly were
they talking.

Even during the few minutes that the Senorita was talking with him
no one would have needed to be told that she really had a great
deal of regard for him, whatever might be her feelings toward
Lockwood.

"I should say that she wants to see him, yet does not want to see
him," observed Kennedy, as we came closer.

She seemed now to have become restive and impatient, eager to cut
the conversation short.

It was quite evident at the same time that Alfonso was deeply in
love with her, that though she tried to put him off he was
persistent. I wondered whether, after all, some of the trouble had
not been that during his lifetime the proud old Castilian Don Luis
could never have consented to the marriage of his daughter to one
of Indian blood. Had he left a legacy of fear of a love forbidden
by race prejudice?

In any event, the manner of Alfonso's actions about the Mendoza
apartment was such that one could easily imagine his feelings
toward Lockwood, whom he saw carrying off the prize under his very
eyes.

As for his mother, the Senora, we had already seen that Peruvians
of her caste were also a proud old race. Her son was the apple of
her eye. Might not some of her feelings be readily accounted for?
Who were these to scorn her race, her family?

We had walked along at a pace that finally brought us up with
them. As Kennedy and I bowed, Alfonso seemed at first to resent
our intrusion, while Inez seemed rather to welcome it as a
diversion.

"Can we not expect you?" the young man repeated. "It will be only
for a few minutes this afternoon, and my mother has something of
very great importance to tell."

He was half pleading, half apologizing. Inez glanced hastily
around at Kennedy, uncertain what to say, and hoping that he might
indicate some course. Surreptitiously, Kennedy nodded an
affirmative.

"Very well, then," she replied reluctantly, not to seem to change
what had been her past refusal too suddenly. "I may ask Professor
Kennedy, too?"

He could scarcely refuse before us. "Of course," he agreed,
quickly turning to us. "We were speaking about meeting this
afternoon at four in the tea room of the Prince Edward. You can
come?"

Though the invitation was not over-gracious, Kennedy replied, "We
should be delighted to accompany Miss Inez, I am sure. We happened
to be passing this way and thought we would stop in to see if
anything new had happened. Just as we turned the corner we saw you
disappearing down the street, and followed. I trust everything is
all right?"

"Nothing more has happened since this morning," she returned, with
a look that indicated she understood that Kennedy referred to the
anonymous letter. "I had a little shopping to do. If you will
excuse me, I think I will take a car. This afternoon--at four."

She nodded brightly as we assisted her into a taxicab and left us
three standing there on the curb. For a moment it was rather
awkward. To Alfonso her leaving was somewhat as though the sun had
passed under a cloud.

"Are you going up toward the University?" inquired Kennedy.

"Yes," responded the young man reluctantly.

"Then suppose we walk. It would take only a few more minutes,"
suggested Kennedy.

Alfonso could not very well refuse, but started off at a brisk
pace.

"I suppose these troubles interfere seriously with your work,"
pursued Craig, as we fell into his stride.

"Yes," he admitted, "although much of my work just now is only
polishing off what I have already learned--getting your American
point of view and methods. You see, I have had an idea that the
canal will bring both countries into much closer relations than
before. And if you will not learn of us, we must learn of you."

"It is too bad we Americans don't take more interest in the
countries south of us," admitted Craig. "I think you have the
right idea, though. Such men as Mr. Whitney are doing their best
to bring the two nations closer together."

I watched the effect of the mention of Whitney's name. It seemed
distasteful, only in a lesser degree than Lockwood's.

"We do not need to be exploited," he ventured. "My belief is that
we should not attract capital in order to take things out of the
country. If we might keep our own earnings and transform them into
capital, it would be better. That is why I am doing what I am at
the University."

I could not believe that it explained the whole reason for his
presence in New York. Without a doubt the girl who had just left
us weighed largely in his mind, as well as his and his mother's
ambitions, both personal and for Peru.

"Quite reasonable," accepted Kennedy. "Peru for the Peruvians. Yet
there seems to be such untold wealth in the country that taking
out even quite large sums would not begin to exhaust the natural
resources."

"But they are ours, they belong to us," hastened de Moche, then
caught the drift of Kennedy's remarks, and was on his guard.

"Buried treasure, like that which you call the Gold of the Gods,
is always fascinating," continued Kennedy. "The trouble with such
easy money, however, is that it tends to corrupt. In the early
days history records its taint. And I doubt whether human nature
has changed much under the veneer of modern civilization. The
treasure seems to leave its trail even as far away as New York. It
has at least one murder to its credit already."

"There has been nothing but murder and robbery from the time that
the peje chica was discovered," asserted the young man sadly. "You
are quite right."

"Truly it would seem to have been cursed," added Craig. "The
spirit of Mansiche must, indeed, watch over it. I suppose you know
of the loss of the old Inca dagger from the University Museum and
that it was that with which Don Luis was murdered?"

It was the first time Kennedy had broached the subject to de
Moche, and I watched closely to see what was its effect.

"Perhaps it was a warning," commented Alfonso, in a solemn tone,
that left me in doubt whether it was purely superstitious dread or
in the nature of a prophecy of what might be expected from some
quarter of which we were ignorant.

"You have known of the existence of the dagger always, I presume,"
continued Kennedy. "Have you or any one you know ever sought to
discover its secret and search it out?"

"I think my mother told you we never dig for treasure," he
answered. "It would be sacrilegious. Besides, there is more
treasure buried by nature than that dedicated to the gods. There
is only one trouble that may hurt our natural resources--the get-
rich-quick promoter. I would advise looking out for him. He
flourishes in a newly opened country like Peru. That curse, I
suppose, is much better understood by Americans than the curse of
Mansiche. But as for me, you must remember that the curse is part
of my religion, as it were."

We had reached the campus by this time, and parted at the gate,
each to go his way.

"You will drop in on me if you hear anything?" invited Craig.

"Yes," promised Alfonso. "We shall see you at four."

With this parting reminder he turned toward the School of Mines
while we debouched off toward the Chemistry Building.

"The de Moches are nobody's tools," I remarked. "That young man
seems to have a pretty definite idea of what he wants to do."

"At least he puts it so before us," was all that Kennedy would
grant. "He seems to be as well informed of what passed at that
visit to the Senora as though he had been there too."

We had scarcely opened the laboratory door when the ringing of the
telephone told us that some one had been trying to get in touch
for some time.

"It was Norton," said Kennedy, hanging up the receiver. "I imagine
he wants to know what happened after we left him and went up to
see Whitney."

That was, in fact, just what Norton wanted, as well as to make
clear to us how he felt on the subject.

"Really, Kennedy," he remarked, "it must be fine to feel that your
chair in the University is endowed rather than subsidized. You saw
how Whitney acted, you say. Why, he makes me feel as if I were his
hired man, instead of head of the University's expedition. I'm
glad it's over. Still, if you could find that dagger and have it
returned it might look better for me. You have no clue, I
suppose?"

"I'm getting closer to one," replied Craig confidently, though on
what he could base any optimism I could not see.

The same idea seemed to be in Norton's mind. "You think you will
have something tangible soon?" he asked eagerly.

"I've had more slender threads than these to work on," reassured
Kennedy. "Besides, I'm getting very little help from any of you.
You yourself, Norton, at the start left me a good deal in the dark
over the history of the dagger."

"I couldn't do otherwise," he defended. "You understand now, I
guess, how I have always been tied, hand and foot, by the Whitney
influence. You'll find that I can be of more service, now."

"Just how did you get possession of the dagger?" asked Kennedy,
and there flashed over me the recollection of the story told by
the Senora, as well as the letter which we had purloined.

"Just picked it up from an Indian who had an abnormal dislike to
work. They said he was crazy, and I guess perhaps he was. At any
rate, he later drowned himself in the lake, I have heard."

"Could he have been made insane, do you think?" ruminated Craig.
"It's possible that he was the victim of somebody, I understand.
The insanity might have been real enough without the cause being
natural."

"That's an interesting story," returned Norton. "Offhand, I can't
seem to recall much about the fellow, although some one else might
have known him very well."

Evidently he either did not know the tale as well as the Senora,
or was not prepared to take us entirely into his confidence.

"Who is Haggerty?" asked Craig, thinking of the name signed to the
letter we had read.

"An agent of Whitney and his associates, who manages things in
Lima," explained Norton. "Why?"

"Nothing--only I have heard the name and wondered what his
connection might be. I understand better now."

Kennedy seemed to be anxious to get to work on something, and,
after a few minutes, Norton left us.

No sooner had the door closed than he took the glass-bell jar off
his microscope and drew from a table drawer several scraps of
paper on which I recognized the marks left by the carbon sheets.
He set to work on another of those painstaking tasks of
examination, and I retired to my typewriter, which I had moved
into the next room, in order to leave Kennedy without anything
that might distract attention from his work.

One after another he examined the sheets which he had marked,
starting with a hand-lens and then using one more powerful. At the
top of the table lay the specially prepared paper on which he had
caught and preserved the marks in the dust of the Egyptian
sarcophagus in the Museum.

Besides these things, I noticed that he had innumerable
photographs, many of which were labelled with the stamp of the
bureau in the Paris Palais de Justice, over which Bertillon had
presided.

One after another he looked at the carbon prints, comparing them
point by point with the specially prepared copy of the shoe-prints
in the sarcophagus. It was, after all, a comparatively simple job.
We had the prints of de Moche and Lockwood, as well as Whitney,
all of them crossed by steps from Norton.

"Well, what do you think of that?" I heard him mutter.

I quit my typewriter, with a piece of paper still in it, and
hurried into the main room.

"Have you found anything?"

"I should say I had," he replied, in a tone that betrayed his own
astonishment at the find. "Look at that," he indicated to me,
handing over one of the sheets. "Compare it with this Museum foot-
print."

With his pencil Kennedy rapidly indicated the tell-tale points of
similarity on the two shoe-prints.

I looked up at him, convinced now of some one's identity.

"Who was it?" I asked, unable to restrain myself longer.

Kennedy paused a minute, to let the importance of the surprise be
understood.

"The man who entered the Museum and concealed himself in the
sarcophagus in the Egyptian section adjoining Norton's treasures,"
replied Kennedy slowly, "was Lockwood himself!"


XII

THE EVIL EYE


Completely at sea as a result of the unexpected revelation of the
shoe-prints we had found in the Museum, and with suspicions now
thoroughly aroused against Lockwood, I accompanied Kennedy to keep
our appointment with the Senorita at the Prince Edward Albert.

We were purposely a bit early, in order to meet Inez, so that she
would not have to be alone with the Senora, and we sat down in the
lobby in a little angle from which we could look into the tea
room.

We had not been sitting there very long when Kennedy called my
attention to Whitney, who had just come in. Almost at the same
time he caught sight of us, and walked over.

"I've been thinking a good deal of your visit to me just now," he
began, seating himself beside us. "Perhaps I should not have said
what I did about your friend Norton. But I couldn't help it. I
guess you know something about that dagger he lost, don't you?"

"I have heard of the 'great fish' and the 'little fish' and the
'curse of Mansiche,'" replied Kennedy, "if that is what you mean.
Somehow the Inca dagger seems to have been mixed up with them."

"Yes--with the peje grande, I believe," went on Whitney.

Beneath his exterior of studied calm I could see that he was very
much excited. If I had not already noted a peculiar physical
condition in him, I might have thought he had stopped in the cafe
with some friends too long. But his eyes were not those of a man
who has had too much to drink.

Just then Senorita Mendoza entered, and Kennedy rose and went
forward to greet her. She saw Whitney, and flashed an inquiring
glance at us.

"We were waiting for Senorita Mendoza," explained Kennedy to both
Whitney and her, "when Mr. Whitney happened along. I don't see
Senora de Moche in the tea room. Perhaps we may as well sit out
here in the corridor until she comes."

It was evidently his desire to see how Whitney and Inez would act,
for this was the first time we had ever seen them together.

"We were talking of the treasure," resumed Whitney, omitting to
mention the dagger. "Kennedy, we are not the only ones who have
sought the peje grande, or rather are seeking it. But we are, I
believe, the only ones who are seeking it in the right place,
and," he added, leaning over confidentially, "your father,
Senorita, was the only one who could have got the concession, the
monopoly, from the government to seek in what I am convinced will
be the right place. Others have found the 'little fish.' We shall
find the 'big fish.'"

He had raised his voice from the whisper, and I caught Inez
looking anxiously at Kennedy, as much as to say, "You see? He is
like the rest. His mind is full of only one subject."

"We shall find it, too," he continued, still speaking in a high-
pitched key, "no matter what obstacles man or devil put in our
way. It shall be ours--for a simple piece of engineering--ours!
The curse of Mansiche--pouf!"

He snapped his fingers defiantly as he said it. There was an air
of bravado about his manner. I could not help feeling that perhaps
in his heart he was not so sure of himself as he would have others
think.

I watched him closely, and could see that he had suddenly become
even more excited than before. It was as though some diabolical
force had taken possession of his brain, and he fought it off, but
was unable to conquer.

Kennedy followed the staring glance of Whitney's eyes, which
seemed almost to pop out of his head, as though he were suffering
from the disease exophthalmic goitre. I looked also. Senora de
Moche had come from the elevator, accompanied by Alfonso, and was
walking slowly down the corridor. As she looked to the right and
left, she had caught sight of our little group, all except
Whitney, with our backs toward her. She was now looking fixedly in
our direction, paying no attention to anything else.

Whitney was a study. I wondered what could be the relations
between these two, the frankly voluptuous woman and the
calculating full-blooded man. Whitney, for his part, seemed almost
fascinated by her gaze. He rose as she bowed, and, for a moment, I
thought that he was going over to speak to her, as if drawn by
that intangible attraction which Poe has so cleverly expressed in
his "Imp of the Perverse." For, clearly, one who talked as Whitney
had just been talking would have to be on his guard with that
woman. Instead, however, he returned her nod and stood still,
while Kennedy bowed at a distance and signalled to her that we
would be in the tea room directly.

I glanced up in time to see the anxious look on the face of Inez
change momentarily into a flash of hatred toward the Senora.

At the same moment Alfonso, who was on the other side of his
mother, turned from looking at a newsstand which had attracted his
attention and caught sight of us. There was no mistaking the
ardent glance which he directed at the fair Peruvian at my side. I
fancied, too, that her face softened a bit. It was only for a
moment, and then Inez resumed her normal composure.

"I won't detain you any longer," remarked Whitney. "Somehow, when
I start to talk about my--our plans down there at Truxillo I could
go on all night. It is marvellous, marvellous. We haven't any idea
of what the future holds in store. No one else in all this big
city has anything like the prospect which is before us. Gradually
we are getting everything into shape. When we are ready to go
ahead, it will be the sensation of Wall Street--and, believe me,
it takes much to arouse the Street."

He may have been talking wildly, but it was worth while to listen
to him. For, whatever else he was, Whitney was one of the most
persuasive promoters of the day. More than that, I could well
imagine how any one possessed of an imagination susceptible to the
influence of mystery and tradition would succumb to the glittering
charm of the magic words, peje chica, and feel all the gold-
hunter's enthusiasm when Whitney brought him into the atmosphere
of the peje grande. As he talked, visions of hidden treasure
seemed to throw a glamour over everything. One saw golden.

"You will excuse us?" apologized Kennedy, taking Inez by the arm.
"If you are about, Mr. Whitney, I shall stop to chat with you
again on the way out."

"Remember--she is a very remarkable woman," said Whitney, as we
left him and started for the tea room.

His tone was not exactly one of warning, yet it seemed to have
cost him an effort to say it. I could not reconcile it with any
other idea than that he was trying to use her in his own plans,
but was still in doubt of the outcome.

We parted from him and entered the darkened tea room, with its
wicker tables and chairs, and soft lights, glowing pinkly, to
simulate night in the broad light of afternoon outside. A fountain
splashed soothingly in the centre. Everything was done to lend to
the place an exotic air of romance.

Alfonso and his mother had chosen a far corner, deeper than the
rest in the shadows, where two wicker settees were drawn up about
a table, effectually cutting off inquisitive eyes and ears.

Alfonso rose as we approached and bowed deeply. I could not help
watching the two women as they greeted each other.

"Won't you be seated?" he asked, pulling around one of the wicker
chairs.

It was then that I saw how he had contrived to sit next to Inez,
while Kennedy manoeuvred to sit on the end, where he could observe
them all best.

It was a rather delicate situation, and I wondered how Kennedy
would handle it, for, although Alfonso had done the inviting, it
was really Craig who was responsible for allowing Inez to accept.
The Senora seemed to recognize it, also, for, although she talked
to Inez, it was plain she had him in mind.

"I have heard from Alfonso about the cruel death of your father,"
she began, in a softened tone, "and I haven't had a chance to tell
you how deeply I sympathize with you. Of course, I am a much older
woman than you, have seen much more trouble. But I know that never
in life do troubles seem keener than when life is young. And yours
has been so harsh. I could not let it pass without an opportunity
to tell you how deeply I feel."

She said it with an air of sincerity that was very convincing, so
convincing, in fact, that it shook for the moment the long chain
of suspicion that I had been forging both of her and her son.
Could she be such a heartless woman as to play on the very
heartstrings of one whom she had wronged? I was shaken, moreover,
by the late discovery by Kennedy of the foot-prints.

The Senorita murmured her thanks for the condolences in a broken
voice. It was evident that whatever enmity she bore against the
Senora it was not that of suspicion that she was the cause of her
father's death.

"I can sympathize with you the more deeply," she went on, "because
only lately I have lost a very dear brother myself. Already I have
told Professor Kennedy something about it. It was a matter of
which I felt I must speak to you, for it may concern you, in the
venture in which Mr. Lockwood and your father were associated, and
into which now Mr. Whitney has entered."

Inez said nothing, and Craig bowed, as though he, too, wished her
to go on.

"It is about the 'big fish' and the concession which your father
has obtained from the government to search for it."

The Senorita started and grew a bit pale at the reference, but she
seemed to realize that it was something she ought to hear, and
steeled herself to it.

"Yes," she murmured, "I understand."

"As you no doubt know," resumed the Senora, "no one has had the
secret of the hiding-place. It has been by mere tradition that
they were going to dig. That secret, you may know or may not know
now, was in reality contained in the inscriptions on an old Inca
dagger."

Inez shuddered at the mention of the weapon, a shudder that was
not lost on the Senora.

"I have already told Professor Kennedy that both the tradition and
the dagger were handed down in my own family, coming at last to my
brother. As I said, I don't know how it happened, but somehow he
seemed to be getting crazy, until he talked, and the dagger was
stolen from him. It came finally into Professor Norton's hands,
from whom it was in turn stolen."

She looked at Inez searchingly, as if to discover just what she
knew. I wondered whether the Senora suspected the presence of
Lockwood's footprints in the sarcophagus in the Museum--what she
would do if she did.

"After he lost it," she continued reminiscently, "my brother threw
himself one day into Lake Titicaca. Everywhere the trail of that
dagger, of the secret of the Gold of the Gods has been stained by
blood. To-day the world scoffs at curses. But surely that gold
must be cursed. It has been cursed for us and ours."

She spoke bitterly; yet might she not mean that the loss of the
dagger, the secret, was a curse, too?

"There is one other thing I wish to say, and then I will be
through. Far back, when your ancestors came into the country of
mine, an ancestor of your father lost his life over the treasure.
It seems as if there were a strange fatality over it, as if the
events of to-day were but living over the events of yesterday. It
is something that we cannot escape--fate."

She paused a moment, then added, "Yet it might be possible that
the curse could be removed if somehow we, who were against each
other then, might forget and be for each other now."

"But Senorita Mendoza has not the dagger," put in Kennedy,
watching her face keenly, to read the effect of his remark. "She
has no idea where it may be."

"Then it is pure tradition on which Mr. Lockwood and Mr. Whitney
depend in their search for the treasure?" flashed back the Senora
quickly.

Kennedy did not know, but he did not confess it. "Until we know
differently, we must take their word for it," he evaded.

"It was not that that I meant, however," replied Senora de Moche.
"I meant that we might stop the curse by ceasing to hunt for the
treasure. It has never done any one good; it never will. Why tempt
fate, then? Why not pause before it is too late?"

I could not quite catch the secondary implication of her plan. Did
it mean that the treasure would then be left for her family? Or
was she hinting at Inez accepting Alfonso's suit? Somehow I could
not take the Senora at her face value. I constantly felt that
there was an ulterior motive back of her actions and words.

I saw Craig watching the young man's face, and followed his eyes.
There was no doubt of how he took the remark. He was gazing
ardently at Inez. If there had ever been any doubt of his
feelings, which, of course, there had not, this would have settled
it.

"One thing more," added the Senora, as though she had had an
afterthought, "and that is about Mr. Lockwood and Mr. Whitney. Let
me ask you to think it over. Suppose they have not the dagger.
Then are their chances better than others? And if they have"--she
paused to emphasize it--"what does that mean?"

Kennedy had turned his attention to the Senorita. It was evident
that the dilemma proposed by de Moche was not without weight. She
had now coloured a flaming red. The woman had struck her in a
vital spot.

"Mr. Lockwood is not here to defend himself," Inez said quietly.
"I will not have him attacked by innuendo."

She had risen. Neither the ardour of Alfonso nor the seeds of
doubt of the Senora had shaken her faith. It was a test that
Kennedy evidently was glad to have witnessed. For some day she
might learn the truth about the foot-prints. He understood her
character better. The Senora, too, had learned that if she were to
bring pressure on the girl she might break her, but she would not
bend.

Without another word Inez, scarcely bowing stiffly, moved out of
the tea room, and we followed, leaving the mother and son there,
baffled.

"I hope you will pardon me for allowing you to come here," said
Kennedy, in a low voice. "I did it because there are certain
things that you ought to hear. It was in fairness to you. I would
not have you delude yourself about Mr. Whitney, about--Mr.
Lockwood, even. I want you to feel that, no matter what you hear
or see, you can come to me and know that I will tell you the
truth. It may hurt, but it will be best."

I thought he was preparing the way for a revelation about the
foot-prints, but he said nothing more.

"Oh, that woman!" she exclaimed, as if to change the subject. "I
do not know, I cannot say, why she affects me so. I saw a change
in my father, when he knew her. I have told you how he was, how
sometimes I thought he was mad. Did you notice a change in Mr.
Whitney, or haven't you known him long enough? And lately I have
fancied that I see the same sort of change beginning in Mr.
Lockwood. At times they become so excited, their eyes seem
staring, as if some fever were wasting them away. Father seemed to
see strange visions, and hear voices, was worse when he was alone
than when he was in a crowd. Oh, what is it? I could think of
nothing else, not even what she was saying, all the time I was
with her."

"Then you fear that in some way she may be connected with these
strange changes?" asked Kennedy.

"I don't know," she temporized; but the tone of her answer was
sufficient to convey the impression that in her heart she did
suspect something, she knew not what.

"Oh, Professor Kennedy," she cried finally, "can't you see it?
Sometimes--when she looks out of those eyes of hers--she almost
makes people do as she pleases."

We had come to the taxicab stand before the hotel, and Kennedy had
already beckoned to a cab to take her home.

As he handed her in she turned with a little shiver.

"Don't please, think me foolish," she added, with bated breath,
"but often I fear that it is, as we call it, the mal de ojo--the
evil eye!"


XIII

THE POISONED CIGARETTE


There was not a grain of superstition in Kennedy, yet I could see
that he was pondering deeply what Inez Mendoza had just said. Was
it possible that there might be something in it--not objectively,
but subjectively? Might that very fear which the Senorita had of
the Senora engender a feeling that would produce the very result
that she feared? I knew that there were strange things that modern
psychology was discovering. Could there be some scientific
explanation of the evil eye?

Kennedy turned and went back into the hotel, to keep his
appointment with Whitney, and as he did so I reflected that,
whatever credence might be given the evil-eye theory, there was
something now before us that was a fact--the physical condition
which Inez had observed in her father before his death, saw now in
Whitney, and foresaw in Lockwood. Surely that in itself
constituted enough of a problem.

We found Whitney in the cafe, sitting alone in a leather-cushioned
booth, and smoking furiously. I observed him narrowly. His eyes
had even more than before that peculiar, staring look. By the
manner in which his veins stood out I could see that his heart
action must be very rapid.

"Well," he remarked, as we seated ourselves, "how did you come out
in your tete-a-tete?"

"About as I expected," answered Kennedy nonchalantly. "I let it go
on merely because I wanted Senorita Mendoza to hear certain
things, and I thought that the Senora could tell them best. One of
them related to the history of that dagger."

I thought Whitney's eyes would pop out of his head. "What about
it?" he asked.

"Well," replied Kennedy briefly, "there was the story of how her
brother had it and was driven crazy until he gave it up to
somebody, then committed suicide by throwing himself into
Titicaca. The other was the tradition that in the days after
Pizarro a Mendoza was murdered by it, just as her father has now
been murdered."

Whitney was listening intently, and seemed to be thinking deeply
of something.

"Do you know," he said finally, with a nod to indicate that he
knew what it was that Kennedy referred to, "I've been thinking of
that de Moche woman a good deal since I left you with her. I've
had some dealings with her."

He looked at Kennedy shrewdly, as though he would have liked to
ask whether she had said anything about him, but did not because
he knew Kennedy would not tell. He was trying to figure out some
other way of finding out.

"Sometimes I think she is trying to double-cross me," he said, at
length. "I know that when she talks to others about me she says
many things that aren't so. Yet when she is with me everything is
fine, and she is ready soon to join us, use her influence with
influential Peruvians; in fact, there isn't anything she won't do-
-manana, to-morrow."

All that Whitney said we now knew to be true.

"She has one interesting dilemma, however, which I do not mind
telling you," remarked Kennedy at length. "She cannot expect me to
keep secret what she said before all of us. Inez Mendoza would
mention it, anyhow."

"What was that?" queried Whitney, dissembling his interest.

"Why," replied Kennedy slowly, "it was that, with the plans for
digging for the treasure which you say you have, suppose you and
Lockwood and your associates have not the dagger--how are you
better off than previous hunters? And supposing you have it--what
does that imply?"

Whitney thought a moment over the last proposition of the dilemma.
"Imply?" he repeated slowly. Then the significance of it seemed to
dawn on him, the possession of the dagger and its implication in
regard to the murder of Mendoza. "Well," he answered, "we haven't
the dagger. You know that. But, on the other hand, we think our
plans for getting at the treasure are better than any one else has
ever had, more certain of success."

"Yet the possession of the dagger, with its inscription, is the
only thing that absolutely insures success," observed Kennedy.

"That's true enough," agreed Whitney. "Confound that man Norton.
How could he be such a boob as to let the chance slip through his
fingers?"

"He never told you of it?" asked Kennedy.

"Yes, he told me of the dagger, but hadn't read the inscription,
he said," answered Whitney. "I was so busy at the time with
Lockwood and Mendoza, who had the concession to dig for the
treasure, that I didn't pay much attention to what Norton brought
back. I thought that could wait until Lockwood had been persuaded
to join the interests I represent."

"Did Lockwood or Mendoza know about the dagger and its
importance?" suggested Craig.

"If they did, they never said anything about it," returned Whitney
promptly. "Mendoza is dead. Lockwood tells me he knew nothing
about it until very lately--since the murder, I suppose."

"You suppose?" persisted Kennedy. "Are you sure that he knew
nothing about it before?"

"No," confessed Whitney, "I'm not sure. Only I say that he told me
nothing of it."

"Then he might have known?"

"Might have. But I don't think it very probable."

Whitney seemed to be turning something over in his mind. Suddenly
he brought his fist down on the little round table before us,
rattling the glasses.

"Do you know," he exclaimed, "the more I think about it, the more
convinced I am that Norton ought to be held to account for that
loss! He ought to have known. Then the presumption is that he did
know. By heaven, I'm going to have that fellow watched. I'm going
to do it to-day, too. I don't trust him. He shall not double-cross
me--even if that woman does!"

I wondered whether Whitney was bluffing. If he was, he was making
a lot of fuss over it. He talked more and more wildly, as he grew
more excited over his latest idea.

"I'll have detectives put on his trail," he blustered. "I'll talk
it over with Lockwood. He never liked the man."

"What did Lockwood say about Norton?" asked Kennedy casually.

Whitney eyed us a moment.

"Say," he ejaculated, "it was Norton brought you into this case,
wasn't it?"

"I cannot deny that," returned Kennedy quietly, meeting his eyes.
"But it is Inez Mendoza now that keeps me in it."

"So--you're another rival, are you?" purred Whitney sarcastically.
"Lockwood and de Moche aren't enough. I have a sneaking suspicion
that Norton himself is one of them. Now it's you, too. I suppose
Mr. Jameson is another. Well, if I was ten years younger, I'd cut
you all out, or know the reason why. Oh, YES, I think I will NOT
tell you what Mr. Lockwood suspects."

With every sentence the veins of Whitney's forehead stood out
further, until now they were like whipcords. His eyes and face
were fairly apoplectic. Slowly the conviction was forced on me.
The man acted for all the world like one affected by a drug.

"Well," he went on, "you may tell Norton for me that I am going to
have him watched. That will throw a scare into him."

At least it showed that the breach between Whitney and Norton was
deep. Kennedy listened without saying much, but I knew that he was
gratified. He was playing Lockwood against de Moche, the Senora
against Inez. Now if Whitney would play himself against Norton,
out of the tangle might emerge just the clues he needed. For when
people get fighting among themselves the truth comes out.

"Very well," remarked Craig, rising, with a hurried glance at
Whitney's apoplectic face, "go as far as you like. I think we
understand each other better, now."

Whitney said nothing, but, rising also, turned on his heel and
walked deliberately out of the cafe into the corridor of the
Prince Edward Albert, leaving us standing there.

Kennedy leaned over and swept up the ashes of Whitney's cigarettes
which lay in the ash-tray, placing them, stubs and all, in an
envelope, as he had done before.

"We have one sample, already," he said. "Another won't hurt. You
can never have too much material to work with. Let us see where he
is going."

Slowly we followed in the direction which Whitney had taken from
the cafe. There was Whitney standing by the cigar-stand, gazing
intently down the corridor.

Kennedy and I moved over so that we could see what he was gazing
at. Just then he started to walk hurriedly in the direction in
which he was looking.

"Senora de Moche!" exclaimed Craig, drawing me toward a palm.

It was indeed she. She had left the tea room and gone to her own
room. Now she was alighting from the elevator, and had started
toward the main dining-room, when her eyes had rested on Whitney.
In spite of all that he had said to us about her, he had received
the glance as a signal and was fluttering over to her like a moth
to a flame.

What was the reason back of it all, I asked, as I thought of those
wonderful eyes of hers? Was it a sort of auto-hypnotism? There
was, I knew, a form of illusion known as ophthalmophobia--fear of
the eye. It ranged from mere aversion at being gazed at all the
way to the subjective development of real physical action from an
otherwise trivial objective cause. Perhaps Inez was right about
the eyes. One might fear them, and that fear might cause the
precise thing to happen which the owner of the eyes intended.
Still, as I reflected before, there was a much more important
problem regarding eyes before us, that of the drug that was
evidently being used in the cigarettes. What was it?

There was no chance of our gleaning anything now from these two
who made such a strange pair. Kennedy turned and went out of the
nearest entrance of the hotel.

"Central Park, West," he directed a cab driver, as we climbed in
his machine; then to me, after giving the number, "I must see Inez
Mendoza again before I can go ahead."

Inez was not expecting us so soon after leaving her at the hotel,
yet I think was just a little glad that we had come.

"Did anything happen after I left?" she asked eagerly.

"We went back and saw Mr. Whitney," returned Craig. "I believe you
are right. He is acting queerly,"

"Alfonso called me up," she volunteered.

"Was it about anything I should know?" queried Craig.

"Well," she hesitated, "he said he hoped that nothing that had
taken place would change our own relations. That was about all. He
was the dutiful son, and made no attempt to explain anything that
was said."

Kennedy smiled. "You have not seen Mr. Lock, wood since, I
suppose?" he asked.

"You always make me tell what I hadn't intended," she confessed,
smiling back. "Yes, I couldn't help it. At least, I didn't see
him. I called him up. I wanted to tell him what she had said and
that it hadn't made any difference to me."

"What did he say?"

"I can't remember just how he put it, but I think he meant that it
was something very much like that anonymous letter I received. We
both feel that there is some one who wants to make trouble between
us, and we are not going to let it happen."

If she had known of Kennedy's discovery of the shoe-prints, I feel
sure that, as far as we were concerned, the case would have ended
there. She was in no mood to be convinced by such a thing, would
probably have insisted that some one was wearing a second-hand
pair of his shoes.

Kennedy's eye had been travelling around the room as though
searching for something.

"May I have a cigarette out of that case over there?" he asked,
indicating a box of them on a table.

"Why--that is Mr. Lockwood's," she replied. "He left it here the
last time he was here and I forgot to send it to him. Wait a
minute. Let me get you some of father's."

She left the room. The moment the door closed Kennedy reached over
and took one from the case. "I have some of Lockwood's already,
but another won't matter, as long as I can get it," he said. "I
thought it was her father's. When she brings them, smoke one with
me, and be careful to save the stub. I want it."

A moment later she entered with a metal box that must have held
several hundred. Kennedy and I each took one and lighted it, then
for several minutes chatted as an excuse for staying. As for
myself, I was glad enough to leave a pretty large stub, for I did
not like it. These cigarettes, like those Whitney had offered us,
had a peculiar flavour which I had not acquired a liking for.

"You must let me know whether anything else develops from the
meeting in the tea room," said Kennedy finally, rising. "I shall
be at the laboratory some time, I think."


XIV

THE INTERFEROMETER


Norton was waiting for us at the laboratory when we returned,
evidently having been there some time.

"I was on my way to my apartment," he began, "when I thought I'd
drop in to see how things are progressing."

"Slowly," returned Kennedy, throwing off his street clothes and
getting into his laboratory togs.

"Have you seen Whitney since I had the break with him?" asked
Norton, a trifle anxiously.

I wondered whether Kennedy would tell Norton what to expect from
Whitney. He did not, however.

"Yes," he replied, "just now we had an appointment with Senora de
Moche and some others and ran into him at the hotel for a few
moments."

"What did he say about me?" queried Norton.

"He hadn't changed his mind," evaded Kennedy. "Have you heard
anything from him?"

"Not a syllable. The break is final. Only I was wondering what he
was telling people about me. He'll tell them something--his side
of the case."

"Well," considered Kennedy, as though racking his brain for some
remark which he remembered, while Norton watched him eagerly, "I
do recall that he was terribly sore about the loss of the dagger,
and seemed to think that it was your fault."

"I thought so, I knew it," replied Norton bitterly. "I can see it
coming. All the trustees will hear of my gross negligence in
letting the Museum be robbed. I suppose I ought to sit up there
all night. Oh, by the way, there's another thing I wanted to ask
you. Have you ever done anything with those shoe-prints you found
in the dust of the mummy case?"

I glanced at Kennedy, wondering whether he felt that the time had
come to reveal what he had discovered. He said nothing for a
moment, but reached into a drawer and pulled out the papers, which
I recognized.

"Here they are," he said, picking out the original impression
which he had taken.

"Yes," repeated Norton, "but have you been able to do anything
toward identifying them?"

"I found it rather hard to collect prints of the shoes of all of
those I wished to compare. But I have them at last."

"And?" demanded Norton, leaning forward tensely.

"I find that there is one person whose shoe-prints are precisely
the same as those we found in the Museum," went on Kennedy,
tossing over the impression he had taken.

Norton scanned the two carefully. "I'm not a criminologist," he
said excitedly, "but to my untrained eye it does seem as though
you had here a replica of the first prints, all right." He laid
them down and looked squarely at Kennedy. "Do you mind telling me
whose feet made these prints?"

"Turn the second over. You will see the name written on it."

"Lockwood!" exclaimed Norton in a gasp as he read the name. "No--
you don't mean it."

"I mean nothing less," repeated Kennedy firmly. "I do not say what
happened afterwards, but Lockwood was in the Museum, hiding in the
mummy case, that night."

Norton's mind was evidently working rapidly. "I wish I had your
power of deduction, Kennedy," he said, at length. "I suppose you
realize what this means?"

"What does it mean to you?" asked Kennedy, changing front.

Norton hesitated. "Well," he replied, "it means to me, I suppose,
what it means to any one who stops to think. If Lockwood was
there, he got the dagger. If he had the dagger--it was he who used
it!"

The inference was so strong that Craig could not deny it. Whether
it was his opinion or not was another matter.

"It fits in with other facts, too," continued Norton. "For
instance, it was Lockwood who discovered the body of Mendoza."

"But the elevator boy took Lockwood up himself," objected Craig,
more for the sake of promoting the discussion than to combat
Norton.

"Yes--when he 'discovered' the thing. But it must have been done
long before. Who knows? He may have entered. The deed might have
been done. He may have left. No one saw him come or go. What then
more likely to cover himself up than to return when he knew that
his entrance would be known, and find the thing himself?"

Norton's reasoning was clever and plausible. Yet Kennedy scarcely
nodded his head, one way or the other.

"You were acquainted with Lockwood?" he asked finally. "I mean to
say, of course, before this affair."

"Yes, I met him in Lima just as I was starting out on my
expedition. He was preparing to come to New York."

"What did you think of him then?"

"Oh, he was all right, I suppose. He wasn't the sort who would
care much for an archaeologist. He cared more for a prospector
going off into the hills than he did for me. And I--I admit that I
am impossible. Archaeology is my life."

Norton continued to study the prints. "I can hardly believe my
eyes," he murmured; then he looked up suddenly. "Does Whitney know
about this--or Lockwood?"

Kennedy shook his head negatively.

"Because," pursued Norton, "an added inference to that I spoke of
would be that the reason why they are so sure that they will find
the treasure is that they are not going on tradition, as they say,
but on the fact itself."

"A fair conclusion," agreed Craig.

"I wish the break could have been postponed," continued Norton.
"Then I might have been of some service in my relation to Whitney.
It's too late for me to be able to help you in that direction now,
however."

"There is something you can do, though," said Craig.

"I shall be delighted," hastened Norton. "What is it?"

"You know Senora de Moche and Alfonso?"

"Yes."

"I wish that you would cultivate their acquaintance. I feel that
they are very suspicious of me. Perhaps they may not be so with
you."

"Is there any special thing you want to find out?"

"Yes--only I have slight hopes of doing so. You know that she is
on most intimate terms with Whitney."

"I'm afraid I can't do much for you, then. She'll fight shy of me.
He'll tell her his story."

"That will make no difference. She has already warned me against
him. He has warned against her. It's a most remarkable situation.
He is trying to get her into some kind of deal, yet all the time
he is afraid she is double-crossing him. And at the same time he
obeys her--well, like Alfonso would Inez if she'd only let him."

Norton frowned. "I don't like the way they hover about Inez
Mendoza," he remarked. "Perhaps the Senora is after Whitney, while
her son is after Inez. Lockwood seems to be impervious to her.
Yes, I'll undertake that commission for you, only I can't promise
what success I'll have."

Kennedy restored the shoe-prints to the drawer.

"I think that's gratifying progress," went on Norton. "First we
know who stole the dagger. We know that the dagger killed Mendoza.
You have even determined what the poison on the blade was. It
seems to me that it remains only to determine who struck the
actual blow. I tell you, Kennedy, Whitney will regret the day that
he ever threw me over on so trivial a pretext."

Norton was pacing up and down excitedly now.

"My only fear is," he went on, "what the shock of such a thing
will be on that poor little girl. First her father, then Lockwood.
Why--the blow will be terrible. You must be careful, Kennedy."

"Never fear about that," reassured Craig. "Not a word of this has
been breathed to her yet. We are a long way from fixing the guilt
of the murder; inference is one thing, fact another. We must have
facts. And the facts I want, which you may be able to get, relate
to the strange actions of the de Moches."

Norton scanned Kennedy's face for some hint of what was back of
the remark. But there was nothing there.

"They will bear watching, all right," he said, as he rose to go.
"Old Mendoza was never quite the same after he became so intimate
with her. And I think I can see a change in Whitney."

"What do you attribute it to?" asked Kennedy, without admitting
that it had attracted his attention, too.

"I haven't the slightest idea," confessed Norton.

"Inez is as afraid of her as any of the rest," remarked Kennedy
thoughtfully. "She says it is the evil eye."

"Not an uncommon belief among Latin-Americans," commented Norton.
"In fact, I suppose there are people among us who believe in the
evil eye yet. Still, you can hardly blame that little girl for
believing it is almost anything. Well, I won't keep you any
longer. I shall let you know of anything I find out from the de
Moches. I think you are getting on remarkably."

Norton left us, his face much brighter than it had been when we
met him at the door.

Kennedy, alone at last in the laboratory, went over to a cabinet
and took out a peculiar-looking apparatus, which seemed, as nearly
as I can describe it, to consist of a sort of triangular prism,
set with its edge vertically on a rigid platform attached to a
massive stand of brass.

"Norton seems to have suddenly become quite solicitous of the
welfare of Senorita Mendoza," I hazarded, as he worked over the
adjustment of the thing.

Kennedy smiled. "Every one seems to be--even Whitney," he
returned, twisting a set-screw until he had the alignment of the
various parts as he wanted it.

The telephone bell rang.

"Do you want to answer it?" I asked Craig.

"No," he replied, not even looking up from his work. "Find out who
it is. Unless it is something very important say I am out on an
investigation and that you have heard from me; that I shall not be
either at the laboratory or the apartment until tomorrow morning.
I must get this done to-night."

I took down the receiver.

"Hello, is this Professor Kennedy?" I recognized a voice.

"No," I replied. "Is there any message I can take?"

"This is Mr. Lockwood," came back the information I had already
guessed. "When do you expect him?"

"It's Lockwood," I whispered to Craig, my hand over the
transmitter.

"See what he wants," returned Craig. "Tell him what I told you."

I repeated Kennedy's message.

"Well, that's too bad," replied Lockwood. "I've just seen Mr.
Whitney, and he tells me that Kennedy and you are pretty friendly
with Norton, Of course, I knew that. I saw you at the Mendozas'
together the first time. I'd like to have a talk with him about
that man. I suppose he has told you all his side of the story of
his relations with Whitney."

I am, if anything, a good listener, and so I said nothing, not
even that he had better tell it to Kennedy in the morning, for it
was such a novelty to have any of these people talk voluntarily
that I really didn't much care whether I believed what they said
or not.

"I used to know him down in Lima, you know," went on Lockwood.
"What I want to say has to do with that dagger he says was stolen.
I want to tell what I know of how he got it. There was an Indian
mixed up in it who committed suicide--well, you tell Kennedy I'll
see him in the morning."

Lockwood rang off, and I repeated what he had told me, as Kennedy
continued to adjust the apparatus.

"Say," I exclaimed, as I finished. "That was a harry's of a
commission you gave Norton just now, watching the de Moches. Why,
they'd eat him alive if they got a chance, and I don't know that
all's like a Sunday school on his part. Lockwood doesn't seem to
think so."

Kennedy smiled quietly. "That was why I asked him to do it," he
returned. "I thought that he wouldn't let much escape him. They
all seem so down on him, he'll have to watch out. It will keep him
busy, too, and that means a chance for us to work."

He had finished setting up the machine, and now went over to
another drawer, from which he took the envelope of stubs which we
had taken down at Whitney's office first. Then from the pocket of
his street coat he drew both the second envelope of ashes and
stubs, the whole cigarette from Lockwood's case, and the stubs
which both of us had saved from the cigarettes that had once
belonged to Mendoza.

Carefully he separated and labelled them all, so that there would
be no chance for them to get mixed up. Then he picked up one of
the stubs and lighted it. The smoke curled up in wreaths between a
powerful light and the peculiar instrument, while Craig peered
through a lens, manipulating the thing with exhaustless patience
and skill. I watched him curiously, but said nothing, for he was
studying something carefully, and I did not want to interrupt his
train of thought.

Finally he beckoned me over. "Can you make anything out of that?"
he asked.

I looked through the eye-piece, also. On a sort of fine grating
all I could see was a number of strange lines.

"If you want an opinion from me," I said, with a laugh, "you'll
have to tell me first what I am looking at."

"That," he explained, as I continued to gaze, "is one of the
latest forms of the spectroscope, known as the interferometer,
with delicately ruled gratings in which power to resolve the
straight, close lines in the spectrum is carried to the limit of
possibility. A small watch is delicate. But it bears no comparison
to the delicacy of these defraction spectroscopes.

"Every substance, you know, is, when radiating light,
characterized by what at first appears to be almost haphazard sets
of spectral bands without relation to one another. But they are
related by mathematical laws, and the apparent haphazard character
is only the result of our lack of knowledge of how to interpret
the results."

He resumed his place at the eye-piece to check over his results.

"Walter," he said finally, looking up at me with a twinkle in his
eye, "I wish that you'd go out and find me a cat."

"A cat?" I repeated.

"Yes, a cat--felis domesticus, if it sounds better that way--a
plain, ordinary cat."

I jammed on my hat and, late as it was, sallied forth on this
apparently ridiculous mission.

Several belated passers-by and a policeman watched me as though I
were a house-breaker, and I felt like a fool, but at last, by
perseverance and tact, I managed to capture a fairly good specimen
of the species, and carried it in my arms to the laboratory with
some profanity and many scratches.


XV

THE WEED OF MADNESS


In my absence Craig had set to work on a peculiar apparatus, as
though he were distilling something from several of the cigarette
stubs which he had been studying by means of the interferometer.

"Here's your confounded cat," I ejaculated, as I placed the
unhappy feline in a basket and waited patiently until finally he
seemed to be rewarded for his patient labours. It was well along
toward morning when he obtained in a test-tube a few drops of a
colourless, odourless liquid.

"My interferometer gave me a clue," he remarked, as he held the
tube up with satisfaction. "Without the tell-tale line in the
spectrum which I was able to discover by its use I might have been
hunting yet for it. It is so rare that no one would ever have
thought, offhand, I suppose, to look for it. But here it is, I'm
sure, only I wanted to be able to test it."

"So you are not going to try it on yourself," I said
sarcastically, referring to his last experiment with a poison.
"This time you are going to make the cat the dog."

"The cat will be better to test it on than a human being," he
replied, with a glance that made me wince, for, after his
performance with the curare, I felt that once the scientific
furore was on him I might be called upon to become an unwilling
martyr to science.

It was with an air of relief, both for himself and my own peace
and safety, that I saw him take the cat out of the basket and hold
her in his arms, smoothing her fur gently, to quiet the feelings
that I had severely ruffled.

Then with a dropper he sucked up a bit of the liquid from the
test-tube. I watched him intently as he let a small drop fall into
the eye of the cat.

The cat blinked a moment, and I bent over to observe it more
closely.

"It won't hurt the cat," he explained, "and it may help us."

As I looked at the cat's eye it seemed to enlarge, even under the
glare of a light, shining forth, as it were, like the proverbial
cat's eye under a bed.

What did it mean?

Was there such a thing, I wondered hastily, as the drug of the
evil eye?

"What have you found?" I queried.

"Something very much like the so-called 'weed of madness,' I
think," he replied slowly.

"The weed of madness?" I repeated.

"Yes. It is similar to the Mexican toloache and the Hindu datura,
which you must have heard about."

I had heard of these weird drugs, but they had always seemed to be
so far away and to belong rather to the atmosphere of
civilizations different from New York. Yet, I reflected, what was
to prevent the appearance of anything in such a cosmopolitan city,
especially in a case so unusual as that which had so far baffled
even Kennedy's skill?

"You know the jimson weed--the Jamestown weed, as it is so often
called?" he continued, explaining. "It grows almost everywhere in
the world, but most thrivingly in the tropics. All the poisons
that I have mentioned are related to it in some way, I believe."

"I've seen the thing in lots and fields," I replied, "but I never
thought it was of much importance."

"Well," he resumed, "the jimson weed on the Pacific coast, in some
parts of the Andes, has large white flowers which exhale a faint,
repulsive odour. It is a harmless-looking plant, with its thick
tangle of leaves, a coarse green growth, with trumpet-shaped
flowers. But to one who knows its properties it is quite too
dangerously convenient for safety."

"But what has that to do with the evil eye?" I asked.

"Nothing; but it has much to do with the cigarettes that Whitney
is smoking," he went on positively. "Those cigarettes have been
doped!"

"Doped?" I interrogated, in surprise. "With this weed of madness,
as you call it?"

"No, it isn't toloache that was used," he corrected. "I think it
must be some particularly virulent variety of the jimson weed that
was used, though that same weed in Mexico is, I am sure, what
there they call toloache. Perhaps its virulence in this case lies
in the method of concentration in preparing it. For instance, the
seeds of the stramonium, which is the same thing, contain a much
higher percentage of poison than the leaves and flowers. Perhaps
the seeds were used. I can't say. But, then, that isn't at all
necessary. It is the fact of its use that concerns us most now."

He took a drop of the liquid which he had isolated and added a
drop of nitric acid. Then he evaporated it by gentle heat and it
left a residue slightly yellow.

Next he took from the shelf over his table a bottle marked
"Alcoholic Solution--Potassium Hydrate." He opened it and let a
drop fall on the place where the liquid had evaporated.

Instantly the residue became a beautiful purple, turning rapidly
to violet, then to dark red, and, finally, it disappeared
altogether.

"Stramonium, all right," he nodded, with satisfaction at the
achievement of his night's labours. "That was known as Vitali's
test. Yes, there was stramonium in those cigarettes--datura
stramonium--perhaps a trace of hyoscyamine."

I tried to look wise, but all I could think of was that, whatever
his science showed me now, my instinct had been enough to prompt
me not to smoke those cigarettes, though, of course, only
Kennedy's science could tell what it was that caused that
instinctive aversion.

"They are all like atropine, mydriatic alkaloids," he proceeded,
"so called from the effect they have on the eye. Why, one-one
hundred thousandth of a grain will affect the eye of a cat. You
saw how it acted on our subject. It is more active in that way
than atropine. Better yet, you remember how Whitney's eyes looked,
how Inez said her father stared, and how she feared for Lockwood?"

"I remember," I said, still not able to detach the evil-eye idea
quite from my mind. "How about the Senora's eyes? What makes them
so--well, effective?"

"Oh," Craig answered quickly, "her pupils were normal enough.
Didn't you notice that? It was the difference in Whitney's and the
others' that first suggested making some tests."

"What is the effect?" I asked, wondering whether it might have
contributed to the cause of Mendoza's death.

"The concentrated poison which has been used in these cigarettes
does not kill--at least not outright. It is worse than that.
Slowly it accumulates in the system. It acts on the brain."

I was listening, spellbound, as he made his disclosure. No wonder,
I thought, even a scientific criminal stood in awe of Craig.

"Of all the dangers to be met with in superstitious countries,
these mydratic alkaloids are among the worst. They offer a chance
for crimes of the most fiendish nature--worse than with the gun or
the stiletto. They are worse because there is so little fear of
detection. That crime is the production of insanity!"

Horrible though the idea, and repulsive, I could not doubt it in
the face of Craig's investigations and what I had already seen
with my own eyes. In fact, it was necessary for me only to recall
the mild sensations I myself had experienced, in order to be
convinced of the possible effect intended by the insidious poison
contained in the many cigarettes which Whitney, for instance, had
smoked.

"But don't you suppose they know it?" I wondered. "Can't they tell
it?"

"I suppose they have gradually become accustomed to it," Craig
ventured. "If you have ever smoked one particular brand of
cigarette you must have noticed how the manufacturer can gradually
substitute a cheaper grade of tobacco without any large number of
his patrons knowing anything about it. I imagine it might have
been done in some way like that."

"But you would think they'd feel the effect and attribute it to
smoking."

"Perhaps they do feel the effect. But when it comes to tracing
causes, some people are loath to admit that tobacco and liquor can
be the root of the evil. No, some one is slipping these cigarettes
in on them, perhaps substituting the doped brand for those that
are ordered. If you will notice, both Whitney and Lockwood have
cigarettes that are made especially for them. So had Mendoza. It
is a circumstance which some one has turned to account, though how
and by whom the substitution has been made I cannot say yet. I
wish I had time to follow out this one line, to the exclusion of
everything else. But I've got to keep my fingers on every rope at
once, else the thing will pull away from me. It is enough for the
present that we know what the poison is. I shall take up the
tracing of the person who is administering it the moment I get a
hint."

It was almost daylight before Craig and I left the laboratory
after his discovery of the manner of the cigarette poisoning by
stramonium. But that was the only way in which he was able to make
progress--taking time for each separate point by main force.

I was thoroughly tired, though not so much so that my dreams were
not haunted by a succession of baleful eyes peering at me from the
darkness.

I slept late, but was awakened by a knocking on the door. As I
rose to answer it I saw through the open door of Kennedy's room
that he had been about early and must already be at the
laboratory. How he did it I don't know. My own newspaper
experience had made me considerable of a nighthawk. But I always
paid for it by sleeping the next day. With Kennedy, when he was on
a case, even five hours of sleep was more than he seemed able to
stand.

"Hello, Jameson," greeted a voice, as I opened the door. "Is
Kennedy in--oh, he hasn't come back yet?"

It was Lockwood, at first eager to see Craig, then naturally
crestfallen because he saw that he was not there.

"Yes," I replied, rubbing my eyes. "He must be at the laboratory.
If you'll wait a minute while I slip on my clothes, I'll walk over
there with you."

While I completed my hasty toilet, Lockwood sat in our living
room, gazing about with fascination at the collection of trophies
of the chase of criminals.

"This is positively a terrifying array of material, Jameson," he
declared, as at last I emerged. "Between what Kennedy has here and
what he has stowed away in that laboratory of his, I wonder that
any one dares be a crook."

I could not help eying him keenly. Could he have spoken so
heartily if he had known what it was, damning to himself, that
Kennedy had tucked away in the laboratory? If he knew, he must
have been a splendid actor, one of those whom only the minute
blood-pressure test of the sphygmograph could induce to give up a
secret, and then only in spite of himself.

"It is wonderful," I agreed. "Are you ready?"

We left the apartment and walked along in the bracing morning air
toward the campus and the Chemistry Building. Sure enough, as I
had expected, Kennedy was in his laboratory.

As we entered he was verifying his experiments and checking over
his results, carefully endeavouring to isolate any of the other
closely related mydriatic alkaloids that might be contained in the
noxious fumes of the poisoned tobacco.

Though Craig was already convinced of what was going on, I knew
that he always considered it a matter of considerable medico-legal
importance to be exact, for if the affair ever came to the stage
of securing an indictment the charge could be sustained only by
specific proof.

As we appeared in the door, however, he laid aside his work, and
greeted us.

"I suppose Jameson has already told you that I called you up last
night--and what I said?" began Lockwood.

Kennedy nodded. "It was something about Norton, wasn't it?"

Lockwood leaned over impressively and almost whispered: "Of
course, you are in no position to know, but there are ugly rumours
current down in Lima among the natives regarding that dagger."

Kennedy did not appear to be particularly impressed. "Is that so?"
he said merely. "What are they?"

"Well," resumed Lockwood, "I wasn't in Lima at the time. I was up
here. But they tell me that there was something crooked about the
way that that dagger was got away from an Indian--a brother of
Senora de Moche." "Yes," replied Kennedy, "I know something about
it. He committed suicide. But what has that to do with Norton?"

Lockwood hesitated, then shrugged his shoulders. "I should think
the inference was plain," he insinuated. Then, looking at Craig
fixedly, as though to take his measure, he added, "We are not out
of touch with what is going on down there, even if we are several
thousand miles away."

I wondered whether he had any information more than we had already
obtained by X-raying the letter to Whitney signed "Haggerty." If
he had, it was not his purpose, evidently, yet to disclose it. I
felt from his manner that he was not playing a trump-card, but was
just feeling us out by this lead.

"There was some crooked business about that dagger down there as
well as here," he pursued. "There are many interests connected
with it. Don't you think that it would be worth while watching
Norton?" he paused, then added: "We do--and we're going to do it."

"Thank you very much," returned Kennedy quietly. "Mr. Whitney has
already told me he intended to do so."

Lockwood eyed us critically, as though not quite sure what to make
of the cool manner in which Craig took it.

"I think if I were you," he said at length, "I'd keep a close
watch on the de Moches, both of them, too."

"Exactly," agreed Craig, without showing undue interest.

Lockwood had risen. "Well," he snapped, "you may not think much of
what I am telling you now. But just wait until OUR detectives
begin to dig up facts." No sooner had he left than I turned to
Craig. "What was that?" I asked. "A plant?"

"Perhaps," he returned, clearing up the materials which he had
been using.

The telephone rang.

"Hello, Norton," I heard Craig answer. "What's that? You are
shadowed by some one--you think it is by Whitney?"

I had been expecting something of the sort, and listened
attentively, but it was impossible to gather the drift of the one-
sided conversation.

As Kennedy hung up the receiver I remarked, "So it was not a
bluff, after all."

"I think my plan is working," he remarked thoughtfully. "You heard
what he said? He guesses right the first time, that it is Whitney.
The last thing he said was, 'I'll get even! I'll take some
action!' and then he rang off. I think we'll hear something soon."

Instead of going out, Kennedy pulled out the several unsigned
letters we had collected, and began the laborious process of
studying the printing, analyzing it, in the hope that he might
discover some new clue.


XVI

THE EAR IN THE WALL


Perhaps an hour later our laboratory door was flung open suddenly,
and both Kennedy and I leaped to our feet.

There was Inez Mendoza, alone, pale and agitated.

"Tell me, Professor Kennedy," she cried, her hands clasped before
her in frantic appeal, "tell me--it isn't true--is it? He wasn't
there--no--no--no!"

She would have fainted if Craig had not sprung forward and caught
her in time to place her in our only easy-chair.

"Walter," he said, "quick--that bottle of aromatic spirits of
ammonia over there--the second from the left."

I handed it to him, and threw open the window to allow the fresh
air to blow in. As I did so one of the papers Kennedy had been
studying blew off the table, and, as luck would have it, fell
almost before her. She saw it, and in her hypersensitive condition
recognized it instantly.

"Oh--that anonymous letter!" she cried. "Tell me--you do not think
that--the friend of my father's that it warned me to beware of--
was--"

She did not finish the sentence. She did not need to do so.

"Please, Senorita," pleaded and soothed Kennedy, "try to be calm.
What has happened? Tell me. What is it?"

The ammonia and the fresh air seemed to have done their work, for
she managed to brace herself, gripping the arms of the chair
tightly and looking up searchingly into Craig's face.

"It's about Chester," she managed to gasp; then seemed unable to
go on.

It was the first time I had ever heard her use Lockwood's first
name, and I knew that something had stirred her emotions more
deeply than at any time since the death of her father.

"Yes," prompted Kennedy. "Go on."

"I have heard that you found foot-prints, shoe-prints, in the dust
in the Museum after the dagger was stolen," she said, speaking
rapidly, suppressing her feelings heroically. "Since then you have
been collecting prints of shoes--and I've heard that the shoe-
prints that were found are those of--of Mr. Lockwood. Oh,
Professor Kennedy, it cannot be--there must be some mistake."

For a moment Kennedy did not say anything. He was evidently
seeking some way in which to lead up to the revelation of the
truth without too much shock.

"You remember that time in the tea room when we were sitting with
Senora de Moche?" he asked finally.

"Yes," she said shortly, as though the very recollection were
disagreeable to her.

Kennedy, however, had a disagreeable task, and he felt that it
must be performed in the kindest manner.

"You remember then that she said she had one thing more to say,
that it was about Mr. Whitney and Mr. Lockwood."

She was about to interrupt, but he hurried on, giving her no
chance to do so. "She asked you to think it over. Suppose they did
not have the dagger, she said. Then were their chances of finding
the treasure any better than any one else had? And if they did
have it, she asked what that meant. It is a dilemma, my dear
Senorita, which you must meet some time. Why not meet it now?"

Her face was set. "You will remember, also, Professor Kennedy,"
she said, with a great effort controlling her voice, "that I said
that Mr. Lockwood was not there to defend himself and I would not
have him attacked by innuendo. I meant it to the Senora--I mean it
to you!"

She had also meant it to defy him; but as she proceeded her voice
broke, and before she knew it her nature had triumphed, and she
was alternately sobbing and pleading.

For a minute or two Kennedy let her give vent to her emotions.

"It cannot be. It cannot be," she sobbed over and over. "He could
not have been there. He could not have done it."

It was a terrible thing to have to disillusion her, but it was
something now that had to be done. Kennedy had not sought to do
so. He had postponed it in the hope of finding some other way. But
now the thing was forced upon him.

"Who told you?" he asked finally.

"I was trying to read, to keep my mind occupied, as you asked me,
when Juanita told me that there was some one in the living room
who wanted to see me--a man. I thought it was either you or Mr.
Jameson. But it was--Professor Norton--"

Kennedy and I exchanged glances. That was the action in revenge to
Lockwood and Whitney which he had contemplated over the telephone.
It was so cruel and harsh that I could have hated him for it, the
more so as I recollected that it was he himself who had cautioned
us against doing the very thing which now he had done in the heat
of passion.

"Oh," she wailed, "he was very kind and considerate about it. He
said he felt that it was his duty to tell me, that he would be
anything, like an older brother, to me; that he could not see me
blinded any longer to what was going on, and everybody knew, but
had not love enough for me to tell. It was such a shock. I could
not even speak. I simply ran from the room without another word to
him, and Juanita found me lying on the bed. Then--I decided--I
would come to you."

She paused, and her great, deep eyes looked up pathetically. "And
you," she added bitterly, "you are going to tell me that he was
right, that it is true. You can't prove it. Show me what it is
that you have. I defy you!"

Somehow, as she rested and relieved her feelings, a new strength
seemed to come to her. It was what Kennedy had been waiting for,
the reaction that would leave her able for him to go on and plan
for the future.

He reached into a drawer of a cabinet and pulled out the various
shoe-prints which he had already shown Norton, and which he had
studied and restudied so carefully.

"That is the print of the shoe in the dust of the Egyptian
sarcophagus of the Museum," he said quietly. "Some one got in
during the daytime and hid there until the place was locked. That
is the print of Alfonso de Moche's shoe, that of Mr. Whitney's,
and that of Mr. Lockwood's."

He said it quickly, as though trying to gloss it over. But she
would not have it that way. She felt stronger, and she was going
to see just what there was there. She took the prints and studied
them, though her hand trembled. Hers was a remarkable mind. It
took only seconds to see what others would have seen only in
minutes. But it was not the reasoning faculty that was aroused by
what she saw. It sank deep into her heart.

She flung the papers down.

"I don't believe it!" she defied. "There is some mistake. No--it
cannot be true!"

It was a noble exhibition of faith. I think I have never seen any
instant more tense than that in Kennedy's laboratory. There stood
the beautiful girl declaring her faith in her lover, rejecting
even the implication that it might have been he who had taken the
dagger, perhaps murdered her father to insure the possession of
her father's share of the treasure as well as the possession of
herself.

Kennedy did not try to combat it. Instead he treated her very
intuitions with respect. In him there was room for both fact and
feeling.

"Senorita," he said finally, in a voice that was deep and
thrilling with feeling, "have I ever been other than a friend to
you? Have I ever given you cause to suspect even one little motive
of mine?"

She faced him, and they looked into each other's eyes an instant.
But it was long enough for the man to understand the woman and she
to understand him.

"No," she murmured, glancing down again.

"Then trust me just this once. Do as I ask you."

For an instant she struggled with herself. What would he ask?

"What is it?" she questioned, raising her eyes to him again.

"Have you seen Mr. Lockwood?"

"No."

"Then, I want you to see him. Surely you wish to have no secrets
from him any more than you would wish him to have anything secret
from you. See him. Ask him frankly about it all. It is the only
fair thing to him--it is only fair to yourself."

Senorita Mendoza was no coward. "I--I will," she almost whispered.

"Splendid!" exclaimed Kennedy in admiration. "I knew that you
would. You are not the woman who could do otherwise. May I see
that you get home safely? Walter, call a taxicab."

Senorita Mendoza was calmer, though pale and still nervous, when I
returned. Kennedy handed her into the car and then returned to the
laboratory for two rather large packages, which he handed to me.

"You must come along with us, Walter," he said. "We shall need
you."

Scarcely a word was spoken as we jolted over the city pavements
and at last reached the apartment. Inez and Craig entered and I
followed, carrying just one of the packages as Craig had indicated
by dumb show, leaving the other in the car, which was to wait.

"I think you had better write him a note," suggested Craig, as we
entered the living room. "I don't want you to see him until you
feel better--and, by the way, see him here."

She nodded with a wan smile, as though thinking how unusual it was
for a meeting of lovers to be an ordeal, then excused herself to
write the note.

She had no sooner disappeared than Kennedy unwrapped the package
which I had brought. From it he took a cedar box, oblong, with a
sort of black disc fixed to an arm on the top. In the face of the
box were two little square holes, with sides of cedar which
converged inward into the box, making a pair of little
quadrangular pyramidal holes which ended in a small black circle
in the interior.

He looked about the room quickly. Beside a window that opened out
over a house several stories below stood a sectional bookcase.
Into this bookcase, back of the books, in the shadow, he shoved
the little box, to which he had already attached a spool of
twisted wires. Then he opened the window and dropped the spool
out, letting it unwind of its own weight until it fell on the roof
far below. He shut the window and rejoined me without a word.

A moment later she returned with the dainty note which she had
written. "Shall I send it by a messenger?" she asked.

"Yes, please," answered Kennedy, rising. As he moved a step to the
door he held out his hand to her. "Senorita Mendoza," he said
simply, in a tone that meant more than words, "you are a wonderful
woman."

She took his hand without a word, and a moment later we were
whisked down in the elevator.

"I must get on that roof on some pretext," remarked Kennedy, as we
reached the street and he got his bearings. "Let me see, that
house which backs up to the apartment is around the corner. Have
the man drive us around there."

We located the house and mounted the steps. On the wall beside the
brownstone door was pasted a little slip of paper, "Furnished
Rooms."

"Splendid!" exclaimed Kennedy, as he read it. "Dismiss the taxi
and meet me inside with the other package."

By the time I had paid the man and come up the steps again Kennedy
had made a dicker with the landlady for a double room on the third
floor for both of us, and, by payment of a week's rent, we were to
have immediate possession.

"Our baggage will follow to-day," he explained, as we mounted the
stairs to the room.

I thought the landlady would never get through expatiating upon
what a select place she ran, and thus leave us alone in our room,
but at last even her flood of words was stilled by demands from a
servant downstairs who must be instructed if the selectness of the
establishment were to be maintained.

No sooner were we alone than Kennedy tiptoed into the hall and
made sure that we were not watched. It was then the work of only a
few seconds to mount a ladder to a scuttle, unhook it, and gain
the roof.

There, dangling down from the dizzy height above, swayed the
twisted wire. He seized it, unrolled it some more, and sent me
downstairs to catch it, as he swung it over the edge of the roof
to one of our own windows. Then he rejoined me.

The other package, which had been heavier, consisted of another of
those mysterious boxes, as well as several dry cells. Quickly he
attached the wires to the box, placing the dry cells in the
circuit. Then he began adjusting the mechanism of the box. So far
I had only a vague idea of just what he had in mind, but gradually
it began to dawn on me.

It was perhaps half an hour, perhaps longer, after we had left the
Senorita, before, sure that everything was all right with his line
and the batteries which he had brought, Kennedy turned a little
lever that moved in a semicircle, touching one after another of a
series of buttons on the face of the cedar box, meanwhile holding
a little black disc from the back of the box to his ear as he
adjusted the thing.

Nothing seemed to happen, but I could tell by the look of
intentness on his face that he was getting along all right and was
not worrying.

Suddenly the look on his face changed to one of extreme
satisfaction. He dropped the disc he was holding to his ear back
into its compartment and turned to me.

All at once it seemed as if the room in which we were was peopled
by spirits. There was the sound of voices, loud, clear, distinct.
It was uncanny.

"He has just come in," remarked Craig.

"Who?" I asked.

"Lockwood--can't you recognize his voice? Listen."

I did listen intently, and the more my ears became adjusted, the
more plainly I could distinguish two voices, that of a man and
that of a woman. It was indeed Lockwood and the Senorita, far
above us.

I would have uttered an exclamation of amazement, but I could not
miss what they were saying.

"Then you--you believe what he says?" asked Lockwood earnestly.

"Professor Kennedy has the prints," replied Inez tremulously.

"You saw them?"

"Yes."

"And you believe what HE says, too?"

There was a silence.

"What is it?" I asked, tapping the box lightly.

"A vocaphone," replied Kennedy. "The little box that hears and
talks."

"Can they hear us?" I asked, in an awestruck whisper.

"Not unless I want them to hear," he replied, indicating a switch.
"You remember, of course, the various mechanical and electrical
ears, such as the detectaphone, which we have used for
eavesdropping in other cases?"

I nodded.

"Well, this is a new application which has been made of the
detectaphone. When I was using that disc from the compartment
there, I had really a detectaphone. But this is even better. You
see how neat it all is? This is the detective service, and more.
We can 'listen in' and we don't have to use ear-pieces, either,
for this is a regular loud-speaking telephone--it talks right out
in meeting. Those square holes with the converging sides act as a
sort of megaphone to the receivers, those little circles back
there inside magnifying the sound and throwing it out here in the
room, so that we can hear just as well as if we were up there in
the room where they are talking. Listen--I think they are talking
again."

"I suppose you know that Whitney and I have placed detectives on
the trail of Norton," we could hear Lockwood say.

"You have?" came back the answer in a voice which for the first
time sounded cold.

Lockwood must have recognized it. He had made a mistake. It was no
sufficient answer to anything that he had done to assert that some
one else had also done something.

"Inez," he said, and we could almost hear his feet as he moved
over the floor in her direction in a last desperate appeal, "can't
you trust me, when I tell you that everything is all right, that
they are trying to ruin me--with you?"

There was a silence, during which we could almost hear her quick
breath come and go.

"Women--not even Peruvian women are like the women of the past,
Chester," she said at length. "We are not playthings. Perhaps we
have hearts--but we also have heads. We are not to be taken up and
put down as you please. We may love--but we also think. Chester, I
have been to see Professor Kennedy, and--"

She stopped. It hurt too much to repeat what she had seen.

"Inez," he implored.

There was evidently a great struggle of love and suspicion going
on in her, her love of him, her memory of her father, the
recollection of what she had heard and seen. No one could have
been as we were without wishing to help her. Yet no one could help
her. She must work out her own life herself.

"Yes," she said finally, the struggle ended. "What is it?"

"Do you want me to tell you the truth?"

"Yes," she murmured.

His voice was low and tense.

"I was there--yes--but the dagger was gone!"


XVII

THE VOICE FROM THE AIR


"Do you believe it?" I asked Kennedy, as the voices died away,
leaving us with a feeling that some one had gone out of the very
room in which we were.

He shrugged his shoulders and said nothing. But I cannot say that
he seemed ill pleased at the result of the interview.

"We'll just keep this vocaphone in," he remarked. "It may come in
handy some time. Now, I think we had better go back to the
laboratory! Things have begun to move."

On the way back he stopped to telephone Norton to meet us and a
few minutes after we arrived, the archaeologist entered.

Kennedy lost no time in coming directly to the point, and Norton
could see, in fact seemed to expect and be prepared for what was
coming.

"Well," exclaimed Kennedy, "you've done it, this time!"

"I know what you are going to ask," returned Norton. "You are
going to ask me why I did it. And I'm going to tell you. After I
left you, the other day, I thought about it a long time. The more
I thought, the more of a shame it seemed to me that a girl like
that should be made a victim of her feelings. It wasn't so much
what they have done to me that made me do it. I would have acted
the same if it had been de Moche instead of Lockwood who was
playing on her heart. I was afraid, to tell the truth, that you
wouldn't tell her until it was too late. And she's too good to
throw herself away and allow her fortune to be wasted by a couple
of speculators."

"Very well," said Craig. "For the sake of argument, let us admit
all that. What did you expect to accomplish by it?"

"Why--put an end to it, of course."

"But do you think she was going to accept as truth what you told
her? Would that be natural for one so high-strung?"

"Perhaps not--right away. But I supposed she would come to you--as
I see she has, for you know about it. After that, it was only a
question of time. It may have been a heroic remedy, but the
disease was critical."

"Suppose," suggested Craig, "that, after all, he told her that he
was there in the Museum, but that he did not get the dagger. And
suppose that she believed it. What then?"

Norton looked up quickly. "Did he tell her that?"

"I am supposing that he did," repeated Craig, declining to place
himself in a position which might lead to disclosing how he found
out.

"Then I should say that he was a great deal cleverer than I gave
him credit for being," returned Norton.

"Well, it's done now, and can't be undone. Have you found out
anything about the de Moches?"

"Not very much, I must admit. Of course, you know I'm not on the
best of terms with them, for some reason or other. But I've been
around the Prince Edward Albert a good deal, and I don't think
they've been able to do much that I haven't some kind of line on.
Alfonso seems to be moping. His professors here tell me that he
has been neglecting his work sadly for the past few days. The
Senora and Whitney seem to be as friendly as ever. I should say
that they were going the pace fast, and it shows on him."

I glanced significantly at Kennedy, but he betrayed nothing that
might lead one to suppose he had discovered the cause. Evidently
he was not ready yet to come out into the open and expected
further developments on the poisoned cigarette clue.

The telephone rang and Craig took down the receiver.

"Yes, this is Kennedy," he answered. "Oh, hello, Lockwood. What's
that? You've been trying to get me all day? I just came in. Why,
yes, I can see you in about half an hour."

"I guess I'd better clear out," said Norton with a bitter laugh,
as Kennedy hung up the receiver. "There have been enough crimes
committed without adding another murder to the list."

"Keep on watching the de Moches," requested Kennedy as Norton made
his way to the door.

"Yes," agreed Norton. "They will bear it--particularly Alfonso.
They are hot-blooded. You never know what they are going to do,
and they keep their own counsel. I might hope that Lockwood would
forget; but a de Moche--never."

I cannot say that I envied him very much, for doubtless what he
said was true, though his danger might be mitigated by the fact
that the dagger was no longer in his Museum. Still, it would never
have left Peru, I reflected, if it had not been for him, and there
is, even in the best of us, a smouldering desire for revenge.

Lockwood was more than prompt. I had expected that he would burst
into the laboratory prepared to clean things out. Instead he came
in as though nothing at all had happened.

"There's no use mincing words, Kennedy," he began. "You know that
I know what has happened. That scoundrel, Norton, has told Inez
that you had shoe-prints of some one who was in the Museum the
night of the robbery and that those shoe-prints correspond with
mine. As a matter of fact, Kennedy, I was there. I was there to
get the dagger. But before I could get it, some one else must have
done so. It was gone."

I wanted to believe Lockwood. As for Craig he said nothing.

"Then, when I did have a chance to get away that night," he
continued, "I went over to Mendoza's. The rest you know."

"You have told Inez that?" asked Kennedy in order to seem properly
surprised.

"Yes--and I think she believes me. I can't say. Things are
strained with her. It will take time. I'm not one of those who can
take a girl by main force and make her do what she won't do. I
wish I could smooth things over. Let me see the prints."

Kennedy handed them over to him. He looked at them, long and
closely, then handed back the damning evidence against himself.

"I know it would be no use to destroy these," he remarked. "In the
first place that would really incriminate me. And in the second I
suppose you have copies."

Craig smiled blandly.

"But I can tell you," he exclaimed, bringing his fist down on the
laboratory table with a bang, "that before I lose that girl,
somebody will pay for it--and there won't be any mistakes made,
either."

The scowl on his face and the menacing look in his eye showed that
now, with his back up against the wall, he was not bluffing.

He seemed to get little satisfaction out of his visit to us, and
in fact I think he made it more in a spirit of bravado than
anything else.

Lockwood had scarcely gone before Kennedy pulled out the
University schedule, and ran his finger down it.

"Alfonso ought to be at a lecture in the School of Mines," he said
finally, folding up the paper. "I wish you'd go over and see if he
is there, and, if he is, ask him to step into the laboratory."

The lecture was in progress all right, but when I peered into the
room it was evident that de Moche was not there. Norton was right.
The young man was neglecting his work. Evidently the repeated
rebuffs of Inez had worked havoc with him.

Nor was he at the hotel, as we found out by calling up.

There was only one other place that I could think of where he
would be likely to be and that was at the apartment of Inez.
Apparently the same idea occurred to Kennedy, for he suggested
going back to our observation point in the boarding-house and
finding out.

All the rest of the day we listened through the vocaphone, but
without finding out a thing of interest. Now and then we would try
the detective instrument, the little black disc in the back, but
with no better success. Then we determined to listen in relays,
one listening, while the other went out for dinner.

It must have been just a bit after dark that we could hear Inez
talking in a low tone with Juanita.

A buzzing noise indicated that there was some one at the hall
door.

"If it's any one for me," we heard Inez say, "tell them that I
will be out directly. I'm not fit to be seen now."

The door was opened and a voice which we could not place asked for
the senorita. A moment later Juanita returned and asked the
visitor to be seated a few moments.

It was not long before we were suddenly aware that there was
another person in the room. We could hear whispers. The faithful
little vocaphone even picked them up and shot them down to us.

"Is everything all right?" whispered one, a new voice which was
somewhat familiar I thought, but disguised beyond recognition.

"Yes. She'll be out in a minute."

"Now, remember what I told you. If this thing works you get fifty
dollars more. I'd better put this mask on--damn it!--the slit's
torn. It'll do. I'll hide here as soon as we hear her. That's a
pretty nice private ambulance you have down there. Did you tell
the elevator boy that she had suddenly been taken ill? That's all
fixed, then. I've got the stuff--amyl nitrite--she'll go off like
a shot. But we'll have to work quick. It only keeps her under a
few minutes. I can't wear this mask down and I'm afraid some one
will recognize me. Oh, you brought a beard. Good. I'll give you
the signal. There must be no noise. Yes, I saw the stretcher where
you left it in the hall."

"All right, Doc," returned the first and unfamiliar voice.

It all happened so quickly that we were completely bowled over for
the moment. Who was the man addressed as "Doc"? There was no time
to find out, no time to do anything, apparently, so quickly had
the plot been sprung.

I looked at Kennedy, aghast, not knowing what to do in this
unexpected crisis.

A moment later we heard a voice, "I'm sorry to have had to keep
you waiting, but what is it that I can do for you?"

"Good God!" exclaimed Kennedy. "It is Inez herself!"

It was altogether too late to get over there to warn her, perhaps
even to rescue her. What could we do? If we could only shout for
help. But what good would that do, around a corner and so far
away?

The vocaphone itself!

Quickly Kennedy turned another switch, of a rheostat, which
accentuated a whisper to almost a shout.

"Don't be alarmed, Senorita," he cried. "This is Kennedy talking.
Look under the bookcase by the window. You will find a cedar box.
It is a detective vocaphone through which I can hear you and which
is talking out to you. I have heard something just there just now-
-"

"Yes, yes. Go on!"

"You are threatened. Shout! Shout!"

Just then there came a sound of a scuffle and a muffled cry which
was not much above a whisper, as though a strong hand was clapped
over her mouth.

What could we do?

"Juanita--Juanita--help!--police!" shouted Craig himself through
the vocaphone.

An instant later we could hear other screams as Juanita heard and
spread the alarm, not a second too soon.

"Come on, Walter," shouted Kennedy dashing out of the room, now
that he was assured the alarm had been given.

We hurried around the corner, and into the apartment. One of the
elevators was up, and no one was running the other, but we opened
the gates and Kennedy ran it up by himself.

In the Mendoza apartment all was a babel of voices, every one
talking at once.

"Did you get them?" Craig asked, looking about.

"No, sir, replied the elevator boy. "One of them came in from the
ambulance and told me Miss Mendoza was suddenly taken sick. He
rode up with the stretcher. The other one must have walked up."

"Do you know him? Has he ever been here before?"

"I can't say, sir. I didn't see him. At least, sir, when I heard
the screams I ran in from the elevator, which the other one told
me to wait with--left the door open. Just as I ran in, they dodged
out past me, jumped into the car and rode down. I guess they must
have had the engine of the ambulance motor running, sir, if they
got away without you seeing them."

We were too late to head them from speeding off. But, at least, we
had saved the Senorita. She was terribly upset by the attack, much
shaken, but really all right.

"Have you any idea who it could be?" asked Craig as the faithful
Juanita cared for her.

"I don't know the man who was waiting and 'Nita never saw him,
either," she replied. "The one who jumped out from behind the
portieres had on a mask and a false beard. But I didn't recognize
anything about him."

Sudden as the attack had been and serious as might have been the
outcome, we could not but feel happy that it had been frustrated.

Yet it seemed that some one ought to be delegated to see that such
a thing could not occur again.

"We must think up some means of protecting you," soothed Kennedy.
"Let me see, Mr. Lockwood and Mr. Whitney seem to be the closest
to you. If you don't mind I'll call them up. I wonder if you'd
object if we had a little luncheon up here, to-morrow? I have a
special reason for asking it. I want to insure your safety and we
may as well meet on common ground."

"There isn't the slightest objection in the world," she replied,
as Kennedy reached for the telephone.

We had some little difficulty in locating both Lockwood and
Whitney, but finally after a time managed to find them and arrange
for the conference on the Senorita's safety for the next day.

Outside Kennedy gave instructions to the officer on the beat to
watch the apartment particularly, and there was no reason now to
fear a repetition of the attempt, at least that night.


XVIII

THE ANTIDOTE


Early the following morning Kennedy left me alone in the
laboratory and made a trip downtown, where he visited a South
American tobacco dealer and placed a rush order for a couple of
hundred cigarettes exactly similar in shape and quality to those
which Mendoza had smoked and which the others seemed also to
prefer, except, however, that the deadly drug was left out.

While he was gone, it occurred to me to take up again the hunt for
Alfonso. Norton was not in his little office, nor could I find
Alfonso anywhere about the campus. In fact he seemed to have
almost dropped out of his University work for the time.
Accordingly, I turned my steps toward the Prince Edward Albert
Hotel, in the hope that he might be there.

Inquiries of the clerk at the desk told me that he had been there,
but was out just at that moment. I did not see Whitney around, nor
the Senora, so I sat down to wait, having nothing better to do
until Kennedy's return.

I was about to give it up and go, when I heard a cab drive up to
the door and, looking up, I saw Alfonso get out. He saw me about
the same time and we bowed. I do not think he even tried to avoid
me.

"I haven't seen you for some time," I remarked, searching his
face, which seemed to me to be paler than it had been.

"No," he replied. "I haven't been feeling very well lately and
I've been running up into the country now and then to a quiet
hotel--a sort of rest cure, I suppose you would call it. How are
you? How is Senorita Inez?"

"Very well," I replied, wondering whether he had said what he did
in the hope of establishing a complete alibi for the events of the
night before.

Briefly I told him what had happened, omitting reference to the
vocaphone and our real part in it.

"That is terrible," he exclaimed. "Oh, if she would only allow me
to take care of her--I would take her back to our own country,
where she would be safe, far away from these people who seek to
prey on all of us."

He paced up and down nervously, and I could see that my
information had added nothing to his peace of mind, though, at the
same time, he had betrayed nothing on his part.

"I was just passing through," I said finally, looking at my watch,
"and happened to see you. I hope your mother is well?"

"As well as is to be expected, surrounded by people who watch
every act," he replied, I thought with a rap at us for having
Norton about and so active, though I could not be sure.

We separated, and I hastened back to the laboratory to report to
Craig that Alfonso was rusticating for his health.

Kennedy, on his part, had had an experience, though it was no more
conclusive than my own. After he had left the tobacco district, he
had walked up Wall Street to the subway. In the crowd he had seen
Senora de Moche, although she had not seen him. He had turned and
followed her until she entered the building in which Whitney and
his associates had their offices. Whether it indicated that she
was still leading them a chase, or they her, was impossible to
determine, but it at least showed that they were still on friendly
terms with each other.

In the laboratory he could always find something to do on the
case, either in perfecting his chemical tests of the various drugs
we had discovered, or in trying to decipher some similarities in
the rough printing of the four warnings and the anonymous letter
with the known handwriting of those connected with the case, many
specimens of which he bad been quietly collecting. That in itself
was a tremendously minute job, entailing not only a vast amount of
expert knowledge such as he had collected in his years of studying
crime scientifically, but the most exact measurements and careful
weighing and balancing of trifles, which to the unscientific
conveyed no meanings at all. Still, he seemed to be forging ahead,
though he never betrayed what direction the evidence seemed to be
taking.

The package of cigarettes which he had ordered downtown was
delivered about an hour after his return and seemed to be the
signal for him to drop work, for the meeting with Lockwood and
Whitney had been set early. He stowed the package in his pockets
and then went over to a cabinet in which he kept a number of
rather uncommon drugs. From it he took a little vial which he
shoved into his waistcoat pocket.

"Are you ready, Walter?" he asked.

"Whenever you are," I said, laying aside my writing.

Together we made our way down to the Mendoza apartment which had
been the scene of the near-tragedy the night before. Outside, he
paused for several moments to make inquiries about any suspicious
persons that might have been seen lurking about the neighbourhood.
None of the attendants in the apartment remembered having seen
any, and they were now very alert after the two events, the murder
and the attempted abduction. Not a clue seemed to have been left
by the villain who had been called "Doc."

"How do you feel after your thrilling experience?" greeted Craig
pleasantly, as Juanita admitted us and Inez came forward.

"Oh, Mr. Kennedy," she answered, with a note of sadness in her
tone. "It makes me feel so alone in the world. If it were not for
'Nita--and you, I don't know what I should do."

"Doesn't Mr. Lockwood count?" asked Kennedy observantly.

"Of course--everything," she answered hastily. "But he has to be
away so much on business, and--"

She paused and sighed. I could not help wondering whether, after
all, his explanation of the dagger episode had been enough to
satisfy her. Had she really accepted it?

Neither Lockwood nor Whitney had arrived, and Kennedy improved the
opportunity to have a quiet talk aside with her, at which, I
imagine, he was arranging a programme of what was to happen at
this meeting and her part in it to co-operate with him.

She had left the room for a moment and we were alone. It was
evidently a part of his plan, for no sooner was she gone than he
opened the package of cigarettes which he had ordered and took out
from the box in which Mendoza had kept his cigarettes those that
were there, substituting those he had brought.

We had not long to wait, now. Lockwood and Whitney came together.
I was interested to see the greeting of Inez and her lover. Was it
pure fancy, or did I detect a trace of coldness as though there
had sprung up something between them? As far as Lockwood was
concerned, I felt sure that he was eager to break down any barrier
that kept them from being as they had been.

Whitney took her hand and held it, in a playful sort of way. "I
wish I were a young buck," he smiled. "No one would dare look at
you--much less try to carry you off. Yes, we must be more careful
of our little beauty, or we shall lose her."

They turned to greet us. I felt, as we shook hands, that it was
much the same sort of handshake that one sees in the prize ring--
to be followed by the clang of a bell, then all going to it, in
battle royal, with the devil after the hindmost.

There was scarcely a chance for a preliminary bout before luncheon
was announced, and we entered the cozy little dining-room to seat
ourselves at the daintiest of tables. One could feel the hostess
radiating hospitality, even on such a cross-current set of guests
as we were, and for the time, I almost felt that it had been
Kennedy's purpose to promote a love-feast instead of an armed
truce.

Nothing was said about the main cause of our being together for
some time, and the small talk almost lifted for a time the incubus
that had settled down on all our lives since the tragedy in the
den at the other end of the suite. But the fact could not be
blinked.

Tacitly every one seemed to wait on Kennedy to sound the gong.
Finally he did so.

"Of course," he began, clearing his throat, "there is no use
making believe about anything. I think we all understand each
other better now than we have ever done before. As for me, I am in
this case under a promise to stick to it and fight it to the end.
I suppose the rest of you are, also. But that need not prevent us
agreeing on one thing. We can work together to protect Senorita
Mendoza, at least, from such danger as threatened her last night."

"It's a dastardly shame," Lockwood exclaimed angrily, "that a man
who would attempt a thing like that should go unpunished." "Show
me how to trace him and I'll guarantee the punishment," rejoined
Craig drily.

"I am not a detective," replied Lockwood.

Kennedy forebore to reply in kind, though I knew there was a ready
answer on his tongue for the lover.

Ever since they had arrived, the Senorita had seen that they were
well supplied with cigarettes from the case in which she and they
supposed were the genuine South American brand of her father.
Kennedy and I smoked them, too, although neither of us liked them
very much. The others were smoking furiously.

"However," resumed Kennedy, "I do not feel that I want to intrude
myself in this matter without being perfectly frank and having the
approval of Senorita Mendoza. She has known both of you longer and
more intimately than she has known me, although she has seen fit
to place certain of her affairs in my hands, for which I trust I
shall render a good account of my stewardship. It seems to me,
though, that if there is, as we now know there is, some one whom
we do not know"--he paused--"who has sunk so low as to wish to
carry her off, apparently where she shall be out of the influence
of her friends, it is only right that precautions should be taken
to prevent it."

"What is your suggestion?" demanded Whitney, rather contentiously.

"Would there be any objection," asked Kennedy, "if I should ask my
old friend,--or any of you may do it,--Deputy Commissioner
O'Connor to detail a plainclothesman to watch this house and
neighbourhood, especially at night?"

We watched the faces of the others. But it was really of no use.

"I think that is an excellent plan," decided Inez herself. "I
shall feel much safer and surely none of you can be jealous of the
city detectives."

Kennedy smiled. She had cut the Gordian knot with a blow. Neither
Lockwood nor Whitney could object. The purpose of the luncheon was
accomplished.

In fact he did not wait for further consideration, but excused
himself from the table for a moment to call up our old friend
O'Connor and tell him how gravely his man was needed. It was a
matter of only a few minutes when he returned from the other room.

"He will detail Burke for this special service as long as we want
him," reported Craig, sitting down again.

Inez was delighted, naturally, for the affair had been a terrific
shock to her. I could see how relieved she felt, for I was sitting
directly next to her.

The maid had, meanwhile brought in the coffee and Inez had been
waiting to pour until Kennedy returned. She did not do so, now,
either, however. It seemed as if she were waiting for some kind of
signal from Kennedy.

"What a splendid view of the park you get here," remarked Kennedy
turning toward the long, low windows that opened on a balustraded
balcony. "Just look at that stream of automobiles passing on the
west drive."

Common politeness dictated that all should turn and look, although
there was no novelty in the sight for any of us.

As I have said, I was sitting next to Inez. To me she was a far
more attractive sight than any view of the park. I barely looked
out of the window. Imagine my surprise, then, at seeing her take
advantage of the diversion to draw from the folds of her dress a
little vial and pour a bit of yellowish, syrupy liquid into the
cup of coffee which she was preparing for Whitney.

I could not help looking at her quickly. She saw that I had seen
her and raised her other hand with a finger to her lips and an
explanatory glance at Kennedy who was keeping the others
interested. Instantly, I recognized the little vial which Craig
had shoved into his waistcoat pocket. That had been the purpose of
his whispered conference with her when we arrived. I said nothing,
but determined to observe more closely.

More coffee and more cigarettes followed, always from the same box
which was now on the table. The luncheon developed almost a real
conversation. For the time, under the spell of our hostess, we
nearly forgot that we were in reality bitter enemies.

My real interest, as time passed, centred in Whitney and I could
not help watching him closely. Was it a fact, or was it merely my
imagination? He seemed quite different. The pupils of his eyes did
not seem to be quite so dilated as they had been at other times,
or even when he arrived. Even his heart action appeared to be more
normal. I think Inez noticed it, too. There was none of the
wildness in his conversation, such as there often had been at
other times.

Our party was prolonged beyond the time we had expected, but,
although he had much on his mind, Kennedy made no move to break it
up. In fact he did everything to encourage it.

At last, however, the others did notice the time, and I think it
was with sincere regret that the truce was broken. Even then, no
parting shots were indulged in.

As we left, Inez thanked Kennedy for his consideration, and I am
sure that that in itself was reward enough. We parted from
Lockwood, who wished to remain a little while, and rode down in
the elevator with Whitney, a changed man.

"I'll walk over to the elevated with you," he said. "I was going
to my hotel, but I think I'll go down to the office instead."

Evidently he had got Senora de Moche out of his mind, at least
temporarily, I thought. Then for the first time I recalled that
during the whole luncheon there had been no reference to either
the Senora or Alfonso, though both must have been in our minds
often.

"What was it you had Inez drop into Whitney's coffee?" I asked
Craig as we parted from him and rode uptown.

"You saw that?" he smiled. "It was pilocarpine, jaborandi, a plant
found largely in Brazil, one of the antidotes for stramonium
poisoning. It doesn't work with every one. But it seems to have
done so with him. Besides, the caffeine in the coffee probably
aided the pilocarpine. Then, too, I made them smoke cigarettes
without the dope that is being fed them. Lockwood's case, for some
reason, hasn't gone far. But did you notice how the treatment
contracted the pupils of Whitney's eyes almost back to normal
again?"

I had and said so, adding, "But what was your idea?"

"I think I've got at the case from a brand-new angle," he replied.
"Unless I am greatly mistaken, when the person who is doing the
doping sees that Whitney is getting better--why, I think you all
noticed it, Inez and Lockwood as well as you--it will mean another
attempt to substitute more cigarettes doped with that drug. I
think it's by substitution that it's being done. We'll see."

At the laboratory, Kennedy called Norton and described briefly
what had happened, especially to Whitney.

"Now is your chance, Norton," he added, "to do some real good
work. I want some one to watch the Senora, see if she, too, notes
the difference in him. Understand?"

"Perfectly," returned Norton. "That is something I think I can do."


XIX

THE BURGLAR POWDER


It was not until after dinner that we heard again from Norton. He
had evidently spent the time faithfully hanging about the Prince
Edward Albert, but Whitney had not come in, although the Senora
and Alfonso were about.

"I saw them leaving the dining-room," he reported to us in the
laboratory directly afterward, "just as Whitney came in. They
could not see me. I took good care of that. But, say, there is a
change in Whitney, isn't there? I wonder what caused it?"

"It's as noticeable as that?" asked Kennedy. "And did she notice
it?"

"I'm sure of it," replied Norton confidently. "She couldn't help
it. Besides, after he left her and went into the dining-room
himself she and Alfonso seemed to be discussing something. I'm
sure it was that."

Kennedy said nothing, except to thank Norton and compliment him on
his powers of observation. Norton took the praise with evident
satisfaction, and after a moment excused himself, saying that he
had some work to do over in the Museum.

He had no sooner gone than Kennedy took from a drawer a little
packet of powder and an atomizer full of liquid, which he dropped
into his pocket.

"I think the Prince Edward Albert will be the scene of our
operations, to-night, Walter," he announced, reaching for his hat.

He seemed to be in a hurry and it was not many minutes before we
entered. As he passed the dining-room he glanced in. There was
Whitney, not half through a leisurely dinner. Neither of the de
Moches seemed to be downstairs.

Kennedy sauntered over to the desk and looked over the register.
We already knew that Whitney and the Senora had suites on the
eighth floor, on opposite sides and at opposite ends of the hall.
The de Moche suite was under the number 810. That of Whitney was
825.

"Is either 823 or 827 vacant?" asked Kennedy as the clerk came
over to us.

He turned to look over his list. "Yes, 827 is vacant," he found.

"I'd like to have it," said Kennedy, making some excuse about our
luggage being delayed, as he paid for it for the night.

"Front!" called the clerk, and a moment later we found ourselves
in the elevator riding up.

The halls were deserted at that time in the evening except for a
belated theatre-goer, and in a few minutes there would ensue a
period in which there was likely to be no one about.

We entered the room next to Whitney's without being observed by
any one of whom we cared. The boy left us, and it was a simple
matter after that to open a rather heavy door that communicated
between the two suites and was not protected by a Yale lock.

Instead of switching on the lights, Kennedy first looked about
carefully until he was assured that there was no one there. It
seemed to me to be an unnecessary caution, for we knew Whitney was
down-stairs and would probably be there a long time. But he
seemed to think it necessary. Positive that we were alone, he made
a hasty survey of the rooms. Then he seemed to select as a
starting-point a table in one corner of the sitting-room on which
lay a humidor and a heavy metal box for cigarettes.

Quickly he sprinkled on the floor, from the hall door to the table
on which the case of cigarettes lay, some of the powder which I
had seen him wrap up in the laboratory before we left. Then, with
the atomizer, he sprayed over it something that had a pungent,
familiar odour--walking backwards from the hall door to the table,
as he sprayed.

"Don't you want more light?" I asked, starting to cross to a
window to let the moonlight stream in.

"Don't walk on it, Walter," he whispered, pushing me back. "No, I
don't need any more light."

"What are you doing?" I asked, mystified at his actions.

"First I sprinkled some powdered iodine on the floor," he replied,
"and then sprayed over just enough ammonia to moisten it. It will
evaporate quickly, leaving what I call my anti-burglar powder."

"I'm sure I wouldn't be thought one of the fraternity for the
world," I observed, stepping aside to give him all the room he
wanted in which to operate.

He had finished his work by this time and now the evening wind was
blowing away the slight fumes that had arisen. For a few moments
he left our door into Whitney's room open, in order to insure
clearing away the odour. Then he quietly closed it, but did not
lock it again.

We waited a few minutes, then Craig leaned over to me. "I wish
you'd go down and see how near Whitney is through dinner," he
said. "If he is through, do something, anything to keep him down
there. Only be as careful as you can not to be seen by any one who
knows us."

I rode down in an empty elevator and cautiously made my way to the
dining-room. Whitney had finished much sooner than I had expected
and was not there. Much as I wanted not to be seen, I found that
it was necessary to make a tour of the hotel to find him and I did
so, wondering what expedient I would adopt to keep him down there
if I found him. I did not have to adopt any, however. Whitney was
almost alone in the writing-room, and a big pile of letters beside
him showed me that he would be busy for some time. I rode back to
the room to tell Craig, flattering myself that I had not been
seen.

"Good," he exclaimed. "I don't think we'll have to wait much
longer, if anything at all is going to happen."

In the darkness we settled ourselves for another vigil that was to
last we knew not how long. Neither of us spoke as we half crouched
in the shadow of our room, listening.

Slowly the time passed. Would any one take advantage of the
opportunity to tamper with the box of cigarettes on the table?

I fell to speculating. Who could it possibly have been that had
conceived this devilish plot? What was back of it all? I wondered
whether it were possible that Lockwood, now that Mendoza was out
of the way, could desire to remove Whitney, the sole remaining
impediment to possessing the whole of the treasure as well as
Inez? Then there were the Senora and Alfonso, the one with a deep
race and family grievance, the other a rejected suitor. What might
not they do with some weird South American poison?

Once or twice we heard the elevator door clang and waited
expectantly, but nothing happened. I began to wonder whether, even
if some one had a pass-key to the suite, we could hear him enter
if he was quiet. The outside hall was thickly carpeted, and
deadened every footfall if one exercised only reasonable care. The
rooms themselves were much the same.

"Don't you think we might have the door ajar a little?" I
suggested anxiously.

"Sh!" was Kennedy's only comment in the negative.

I glanced now and then at my watch and by straining my eyes was
surprised to see how early it was yet. The minutes were surely
leaden-footed.

In the darkness, I fell again to reviewing the weird succession of
events. I am not by nature superstitious, but in the black silence
I could well imagine a staring succession of eyes, beginning with
the dilated pupils of Whitney and passing on to the corpse-like
expression of Mendoza, but always ending with the remarkable,
piercing, black eyes of the Indian woman with the melancholy-
visaged son, as they had impressed me the first time I saw them
and, in fact, ever since. Was it a freak of my mind, or was there
some reason for it?

Suddenly I heard in the next room what sounded like a series of
little explosions, as though some one were treading on match
heads.

"My burglar powder works," muttered Craig to me in a hoarse
whisper. "Every step, even those of a mouse running across, sets
it off!"

He rose quickly and threw open the door into Whitney's suite. I
sprang after him.

There, in the shadows, I saw a dark form, starting back in quick
retreat. But we were too late. He was cat-like, too quick for us.

In the dim light of the little explosions we could catch a glimpse
of the person who had been craftily working with the dread drug to
drive Whitney and others insane. But the face was masked!

He banged shut the door after him and fled down the hall, making a
turn to a flight of steps.

We followed, and at the steps paused a moment. "You go up,
Walter," shouted Kennedy. "I'll go down."

It was fifteen minutes later before we met downstairs, neither of
us with a trace of the intruder. He seemed to have vanished like
smoke.

"Must have had a room, like ourselves," remarked Craig somewhat
chagrined at the outcome of his scheme. "And if he was clever
enough to have a room, he is clever enough to have a disguise that
would fool the elevator boys for a minute. No, he has gone. But
I'll wager he won't try any more substitutions of stramonium-
poisoned cigarettes for a while. It was too close to be
comfortable."

We were baffled again, and this time by a mysterious masked man.
Could it be the same whom we heard over the vocaphone addressed as
"Doc"? Perhaps it was, but that gave us no hint as to his
identity. He seemed just as far away as ever.

We waited around the elevators for some time, but nothing
happened. Kennedy even sought out the manager of the hotel, and
after telling who he was, had a search made of the guests who
might be suspected. The best we could do was to leave word that
the employees might be put on the lookout for anything of a
suspicious nature.

Whitney, the innocent cause of all this commotion, was still in
the writing-room with his letters.

"I think I ought to tell him," decided Kennedy as we passed down
the lobby.

He seemed surprised to see us, as we strolled up to his writing
desk, but pushed aside the few letters which he had not finished
and asked us to sit down.

"I don't know whether you have noticed it," began Craig, "but I
wonder how you feel?"

Whitney had expected something else rather than his health as the
subject of a quiz. "Pretty good now," he answered before he knew
it, "although I must admit that for the past few days I have
wondered whether I wasn't slowing up a bit--or rather going too
fast."

"Would you like to know why you feel that way?" asked Craig.

Whitney was now genuinely puzzled. It was perfectly evident, as it
had been all the time, that he had not the slightest inkling of
what was going on.

As Craig briefly unfolded what we had discovered and the reason
for it, Whitney watched him aghast.

"Poisoned cigarettes," he repeated slowly. "Well, who would ever
have thought it. You can bet your last jitney I'll be careful what
I smoke in the future, if I have to smoke only original packages.
And it was that, partly, that ailed Mendoza?"

Kennedy nodded. "Don't take any pilocarpine, just because I told
you that was what I used. You have given yourself the best
prescription, just now. Be careful what you smoke. And, don't get
excited if you seem to be stepping on matches up there in your
room for a little while, either. It's nothing."

Whitney's only known way of thanking anybody was to invite them to
adjourn to the cafe, and accordingly we started across the hall,
after he had gathered up his correspondence. The information had
made more work that night impossible for him.

As we crossed from the writing-room, we saw Alfonso de Moche
coming in from the street. He saw us and came over to speak. Was
it a coincidence, or was it merely a blind? Was he the one who had
got away and now calculated to come back and throw us off guard?

Whitney asked him where he had been, but he replied quickly that
his mother had not been feeling very well after dinner and had
gone to bed, while he strolled out and had dropped into a picture
show. That, I felt, was at least clever. The intruder had been a
man.

De Moche excused himself, and we continued our walk to the cafe,
where Whitney restored his shattered peace of mind somewhat.

"What's the result of your detective work on Norton?" ventured
Kennedy at last, seeing that Whitney was in a more expansive frame
of mind, and taking a chance.

"Oh," returned Whitney, "he's scared, all right. Why, he has been
hanging around this hotel--watching me. He thinks I don't know it,
I suppose, but I do."

Kennedy and I exchanged glances.

"But he's slippery," went on Whitney. "He knows that he is being
shadowed and the men tell me that they lose him, now and then. To
tell the truth I don't trust most of these private detectives. I
think their little tissue paper reports are half-faked, anyhow."

He seemed to want to say no more on the subject, from which I took
it that he had discovered nothing of importance.

"One thing, though," he recollected, after a moment. "He has been
going to see Inez Mendoza, they tell me."

"Yes?" queried Kennedy.

"Confound him. He pretty nearly got Lockwood in bad with her,
too," said Whitney, then leaning over confidentially added, "Say,
Kennedy, honestly, now, you don't believe that shoe-print stuff,
do you?"

"I see no reason to doubt it," returned Kennedy with diplomatic
firmness. "Why?"

"Well," continued Whitney, still confidential, "we haven't got the
dagger--that's all. There--I never actually asserted that before,
though I've given every one to understand that our plans are based
on something more than hot-air. We haven't got it, and we never
had it."

"Then who has it?" asked Kennedy colourlessly.

Whitney shook his head. "I don't know," he said merely.

"And these attacks on you--this cigarette business--how do you
explain that," asked Craig, "if you haven't the dagger?"

"Jealousy, pure jealousy," replied Whitney quickly. "They are so
afraid that we will find the treasure. That's my dope."

"Who is afraid?"

"That's a serious matter," he evaded. "I wouldn't say anything
that I couldn't back up in a case of that kind. I'd get into
trouble."

There was nothing to be gained by prolonging the conversation and
Kennedy made a move as though to go.

"Just give us a square deal," said Whitney as we left. "That's all
we want--a square deal."

Kennedy and I walked out of the Prince Edward Albert and turned
down the block.

"Well, have you found out anything more?" asked a voice in the
shadow beside us.

We turned. It was Norton.

"I saw you talking to Whitney in the writing-room," he said, with
a laugh, "then in the cafe, and I saw Alfonso come in. He still
has those shadows on me. I wouldn't be surprised if there was one
of them around in a doorway, now."

"No," returned Kennedy, "he didn't say anything that was
important. They still say they haven't the dagger."

"Of course," said Norton.

"You'll wait around a little longer?" asked Kennedy as we came to
a corner and stopped.

"I think so," returned Norton. "I'll keep you posted."

Kennedy and I walked on a bit.

"I'm going around to see how Burke, O'Connor's man, is getting on
watching the Mendoza apartment, Walter," he said at length. "Then
I have two or three other little outside matters to attend to. You
look tired. Why don't you go home and take a rest? I shan't be
working in the laboratory to-night, either."

"I think I will," I agreed, for the strain of the case was
beginning to tell on me.


XX

THE PULMOTOR


I went directly to our apartment after Craig left me and for a
little while sat up, speculating on the probabilities of the case.

Senora de Moche had told us of her ancestor who had been intrusted
with the engraved dagger, of how it had been handed down, of the
death of her brother; she had told us of the murder of the
ancestor of Inez Mendoza, of the curse of Mansiche. Was this,
after all, but a reincarnation of the bloody history of the Gold
of the Gods?

There were the shoe-prints in the mummy case. They were
Lockwood's. How about them? Was he telling the truth? Now had come
the poisoned cigarettes. All had followed the threats:

BEWARE THE CURSE OF MANSICHE ON THE GOLD OF THE GODS.

Several times I had been forced already to revise my theories of
the case. At first I had felt that it pointed straight toward
Lockwood. But did it seem to do so now?

Suppose Lockwood had stolen the dagger from the Museum, although
he denied even that. Did that mean, necessarily that he committed
the murder with it, that he now had it? Might he not have lost it?
Might not some one else--the Senora, or Alfonso, or both--have
obtained it? Might not Mendoza have been murdered with it by some
other hand to obtain or to hide the secret on its bloody blade?

I went to bed, still thinking, no nearer a conclusion than before,
prepared to dream over it.

That is the last I remember.

When I regained consciousness, I was lying on the bed still, but
Craig was bending over me. He had just taken a rubber cap off my
face, to which was attached a rubber tube that ran to a box
perhaps as large as a suitcase, containing a pump of some kind.

I was too weak to notice these things right away, too weak to care
much about them, or about anything else.

"Are you all right now, old man?" he asked, bending over me.

"Y-Yes," I gasped, clutching at the choking sensation in my
throat. "What has happened?"

Perhaps I had best tell it as though I were not the chief actor;
for it came to me in such disjointed fragmentary form, that it was
some time before I could piece it together.

Craig had seen Burke, and had found that everything was all right.
Then he had made the few little investigations that he intended.
But he had not been to the laboratory. There had been no light
there that night.

At last when he arrived home, he had found a peculiar odour in the
hall, but had thought nothing of it, until he opened our door.
Then there rushed out such a burst of it that he had to retreat,
almost fainting, choking and gasping for breath.

His first thought was for me; and protecting himself as best he
could he struggled through to my room, to find me lying on the
bed, motionless, almost cold.

He was by this time too weak to carry me. But he managed to reach
the window and throw it wide open. As the draught cleared the air,
he thought of the telephone and with barely strength enough left
called up one of the gas companies and had a pulmotor sent over.

Now that the danger was past for me, and he felt all right, his
active mind began at once on the reconstruction of what had
happened.

What was it--man or devil? Could a human fly have scaled the
walls, or an aeroplane have dropped an intruder at the window
ledge? The lock on the door did not seem to have been tampered
with. Nor was there any way by which entrance could have been
gained from a fire escape. It was not illuminating gas. Every one
agreed on that. No, it was not an accident. It was an attempt at
murder. Some one was getting close to us. Every other weapon
failing, this was desperation.

I had been made comfortable, and he was engaged in one of his
characteristic searches, with more than ordinary eagerness,
because this was his own apartment, and it was I who had been the
victim.

I followed him languidly as he went over everything, the
furniture, the walls, the windows, the carpets--there looking for
finger-prints, there for some trace of the poisonous gas that had
filled the room. But he did not have the air of one who was
finding anything. I was too tired to reason. This was but another
of the baffling mysteries that confronted us.

A low exclamation caused me to open my eyes and try to discover
what was the cause. He was bending over the lock of the door
looking at it intently.

"Broken?" I managed to say.

"No--corroded," he replied. "You keep still. Save your energy.
I've got strength enough for two, for a while."

He came over to the bed and bent over me. "I won't hurt you," he
encouraged, "but just let me get a drop of your blood."

He took a needle and ran it gently into my thumb beside the nail.
A drop or two of blood oozed out and he soaked it up with a piece
of sterile gauze.

"Try to sleep," he said finally.

"And you?" I asked.

"It's no use. I'm going over to the laboratory. I can't sleep.
There's a cop down in front of the house. You're safe enough. By
George, if this case goes much further we'll have half the force
standing guard. Here--drink that."

I had made up my mind not to go to sleep, if he wouldn't, but I
slipped up when I obeyed him that time. I thought it was a
stimulant but it turned out to be a sedative.

I did not wake up until well along in the morning, but when I did
I was surprised to find myself so well. Before any one could stop
me, I was dressed and had reached the door.

A friend of ours who had volunteered to stay with me was dozing on
a couch as I came out.

"Too late, Johnson," I called, trying hard to be gay, though I
felt anything but like it. "Thank you, old man, for staying with
me. But I'm afraid to stop. You're stronger than I am this
morning--and besides you can run faster. I'm afraid you'll drag me
back."

He did try to do it, but with a great effort of will-power I
persuaded him to let me go. Out in the open air, too, it seemed to
do me good. The policeman who had been stationed before the house
gazed at me as though he saw a ghost, then grinned encouragingly.

Still, I was glad that the laboratory was only a few blocks away,
for I was all in by the time I got there, and hadn't even energy
enough to reply to Kennedy's scolding.

He was working over a microscope, while by his side stood in
racks, innumerable test-tubes of various liquids. On the table
before him lay the lock of our door which he had cut out after he
gave me the sleeping draught.

"What was it?" I asked. "I feel as if I had been on a bust,
without the recollection of a thing."

He shook his head as if to discourage conversation, without taking
his eyes off the microscope through which he was squinting. His
lips were moving as if he were counting. I waited in impatient
silence until he seemed to have finished.

Then, still without a word, he took up a test-tube and dropped
into it a little liquid from a bottle on a shelf above the table.
His face lighted up, and he regarded the reaction attentively for
some time. Then he turned to me, still holding the tube.

"You have been on a bust," he said with a smile as if the remark
of a few minutes before were still fresh. "Only it was a laughing
gas jag--nitrous oxide."

"Nitrous oxide?" I repeated. "How--what do you mean?"

"I mean simply that a test of your blood shows that you were
poisoned by nitrous oxide gas. You remember the sample of blood
which I squeezed from your thumb? I took it because I knew that a
gas--and it has proved to be nitrous oxide--is absorbed through
the lungs into the circulation and its presence can be told for a
considerable period after administration."

He paused a moment, then went on: "To be specific in this case I
found by microscopic examination that the number of corpuscles in
your blood was vastly above the normal, something like between
seven and eight million to a drop that should have had somewhat
more than only half that number. You were poisoned by gas that--"

"Yes," I interrupted, "but how, with all the doors locked?"

"I was coming to that," he said quietly, picking up the lock and
looking at it thoughtfully.

He had already placed it in a porcelain basin, and in this basin
he had poured some liquids. Then he passed the liquids through a
fine screen and at last took up a tube containing some of the
resulting liquid.

"I have already satisfied myself," he explained, "but for your
benefit, seeing that you're the chief sufferer, I'll run over a
part of the test. You saw the reaction which showed the gas a
moment ago. I have proved chemically as well as microscopically
that it is present in your blood. Now if I take this test-tube of
liquid derived from my treatment of the lock and then test it as
you saw me do with the other, isn't that enough for you? See--it
gives the same reaction."

It did, indeed, but my mind did not react with it.

"Nitrous oxide," he continued, "in contact with iron, leaves
distinct traces of corrosion, discernible by chemical and
microscopic tests quite as well as the marks it leaves in the
human blood. Manifestly, if no one could have come in by the
windows or doors, the gas must have been administered in some way
without any one coming into the room. I found no traces of an
intruder."

It was a tough one. Never much good at answering his conundrums
when I was well, I could not even make a guess now.

"The key-hole, of course!" he explained. "I cut away the entire
lock, and have submitted it to these tests which you see."

"I don't see it all yet," I said.

"Some one came to our door in the night, after gaining entrance to
the hall--not a difficult thing to do, we know. That person found
our door locked, knew it would be locked, knew that I always
locked it. Knowing that such was the case, this person came
prepared, bringing perhaps, a tank of compressed nitrous oxide,
certainly the materials for making the gas expeditiously."

I began to understand how it had been done.

"Through the keyhole," he resumed, "a stream of the gas was
injected. It soon rendered you unconscious, and that would have
been all, if the person had been satisfied. A little bit would
have been harmless enough. But the person was not satisfied. The
intention was not to overcome, but to kill. The stream of gas was
kept up until the room was full of it.

"Only my return saved you, for the gas was escaping very slowly.
Even then, you had been under it so long that we had to resort to
the wonderful little pulmotor after trying both the Sylvester and
Schaefer methods and all other manual means to induce respiration.
At any rate we managed to undo the work of this fiend."

I looked at him in surprise, I, who didn't think I had an enemy in
the world.

"But who could it have been?" I asked.

"We are pretty close to that criminal," was the only reply he
would give, "providing we do not spread the net in sight of the
quarry."

"Why should he have wanted to get me?" I repeated.

"Don't flatter yourself," replied Craig. "He wanted me, too. There
wasn't any light in the laboratory last night. There was a light
in our apartment. What more natural than to think that we were
both there? You were caught in the trap intended for both of us."

I looked at him, startled. Surely this was a most desperate
criminal. To cover up one murder--perhaps two--he did not hesitate
to attempt a third, a double murder. The attack had been really
aimed at Kennedy. It had struck me alone. But it had miscarried
and Craig had saved my life.

As I reflected bitterly, I had but one satisfaction. Wretched as I
felt, I knew that it had spared Craig from slowing up on the case
at just the time when he was needed.

The news of the attempt spread quickly, for it was a police case
and got into the papers.

It was not half an hour after I reached the laboratory that the
door was pushed open by Inez Mendoza, followed by a boy spilling
with fruit and flowers like a cornucopia.

"I drove to the apartment," she cried, greatly excited and
sympathetic, "but they told me you had gone out. Oh, I was glad to
hear it. Then I knew it wasn't so serious. For, somehow, I feel
guilty about it. It never would have happened if you hadn't met
me."

"I'm sure it's worth more than it cost," I replied gallantly.

She turned toward Kennedy. "I'm positively frightened," she
exclaimed. "First they direct their attacks against my father--
then against me--now against you. What will it be next? Oh--it is
that curse--it is that curse!"

"Never fear," encouraged Kennedy, "we'll get you out--we'll get
all of us out, now, I should say. It's just because they are so
desperate that we have these things. As long as there is nothing
to fear a criminal will lie low. When he gets scared he does
things. And it's when he does things that he begins to betray
himself."

She shuddered. "I feel as though I was surrounded by enemies," she
murmured. "It is as if an unseen evil power was watching over me
all the time--and mocking me--striking down those I love and
trust. Where will it end?"

Kennedy tried his best to soothe her, but it was evident that the
attack on us could not have had more effect, if it had been
levelled direct at her.

"Please, Senorita," he pleaded, "stand firm. We are going to win.
Don't give in. The Mendozas are not the kind to stop defeated."

She looked at him, her eyes filled with tears.

"It was my father's way," she choked back her emotion. "How could
you, a stranger, know?"

"I didn't know," returned Kennedy. "I gathered it from his face.
It is also his daughter's way."

"Yes," she said, straightening up and the fire flashing from her
eyes, "we are a proud, old, unbending race. Good-bye. I must not
interrupt your work any longer. We are also a race that never
forgets a friend."

A moment later she was gone.

"A wonderful woman," repeated Kennedy absently.

Then he turned again to his table of chemicals.

The telephone had begun to tinkle almost continuously by this
time, as one after another of our friends called us up to know how
we were getting on and be assured of our safety. In fact I didn't
know that it was possible to resuscitate so many of them with a
pulmotor.

"By George, I'm glad it wasn't any more serious," came Norton's
voice from the doorway a moment later. "I didn't see a paper this
morning. The curator of the Museum just told me. How did it
happen?"

Kennedy tried to pass it off lightly, and I did the same, for as I
was up longer I really did feel better.

Norton shook his head gravely, however.

"No," he said, "there were four of us got warnings. They are a
desperate, revengeful people."

I looked at him quickly. Did he mean the de Moches?


XXI

THE TELESCRIBE


I decided that discretion was the better part of valour and that I
had better go slow that day and regain my strength, a fortunate
decision, as it turned out.

Kennedy, also, spent most of the time in the laboratory, so that,
after all, I did not feel that I was missing very much.

It was along in the afternoon that the telephone began acting
strangely, as it will do sometimes when a long distance connection
is being made. Twice Kennedy answered, without getting any
response.

"Confound that central," he muttered. "What do you suppose is the
matter?"

Again the bell rang.

"Hello," shouted Kennedy, exasperated. "Who's this?"

There was a pause. "Just a minute," he replied.

Quickly he jammed the receiver down on a little metal base which
he had placed near the instrument. Three prongs reaching upward
from the base engaged the receiver tightly, fitting closely about
it.

Then he took up a watch-case receiver to listen through in place
of the regular receiver.

"Who is it?" he answered.

Apparently the voice at the other end of the wire replied rather
peevishly, for Kennedy endeavoured to smooth over the delay. I
wondered what was going on, why he was so careful. His face showed
that, whatever it was, it was most important.

As he restored the telephone to its normal condition, he looked at
me puzzled.

"I wonder whether that was a frame-up!" he exclaimed, pulling a
little cylinder off the instrument into which he had inserted the
telephone receiver. "I thought it might be and I have preserved
the voice. This is what is known as the telescribe--a recent
invention of Edison which records on a specially prepared
phonograph cylinder all that is said--both ways--over a telephone
wire."

"What was it about?" I asked eagerly.

He shoved the cylinder on a phonograph and started the instrument.

"Professor Kennedy?" called an unfamiliar voice.

"Yes," answered a voice that I recognized as Craig's.

"This is the detective agency employed by Mr. Whitney. He has
instructed us to inform you that he has obtained the Peruvian
dagger for which you have been searching. That's all. Good-bye."

I looked at Kennedy in blank surprise.

"They rang off before I could ask them a question," said Craig.
"Central tells me it was a pay station call. There doesn't seem to
be any way of tracing it. But, at least I have a record of the
voice."

"What are you going to do?" I queried. "It may be a fake."

"Yes, but I'm going to investigate it. Do you feel strong enough
to go down to Whitney's with me?"

The startling news had been like a tonic. "Of course," I replied,
seizing my hat.

Kennedy paused only long enough to call Norton. The archaeologist
was out, and we hurried on downtown to Whitney's.

Whitney was not there and his clerk was just about to close the
office. All the books were put away in the safe and the desks were
closed. Now and then there echoed up the hall the clang of an
elevator door.

"Where is Mr. Whitney?" demanded Craig of the clerk.

"I can't say. He went out a couple of hours ago."

"Did he have a visit from one of his detectives?" shot out Craig
suddenly.

The clerk looked up suspiciously at us.

"No," he replied defiantly.

"Walter--stand by that door," shouted Craig. "Let no one in until
they break it down."

His blue-steel automatic gleamed a cold menace at the clerk. A
downtown office after office hours is not exactly the place to
which one can get assistance quickly. The clerk started back.

"Did he have a visit from one of his detectives?"

"Yes."

"What was it about?"

The clerk winced. "I don't know," he replied, "honest--I don't."

Craig waved the gun for emphasis. "Open the safe," he said.

Reluctantly the clerk obeyed. Under the point of the gun he
searched every compartment and drawer of the big chrome steel
strong-box which Whitney had pointed out as the safest place for
the dagger on our first visit to him. But there was absolutely no
trace of it. Had we been hoaxed and was all this risk in vain?

"Where did Mr. Whitney go?" demanded Craig, as he directed the
clerk to shut the door and lock the safe again, baffled.

"If I should try to tell you," returned the man, very much
frightened, "I would be lying. You would soon find out. Mr.
Whitney doesn't make a confidant of me, you know."

It was useless. If he had the dagger, at least we knew that it was
not at the office. We had learned only one thing. He had had a
visit from one of his detectives.

As fast as the uptown trend of automobiles and surface cars during
the rush hour would permit, Kennedy and I hurried in a taxicab to
the Prince Edward Albert in the hope of surprising him there.

"It's no use to inquire for him," decided Craig as we entered the
hotel. "I still have the key to that room, 827, next to his. We'll
ride right up in the elevator boldly and get in."

No one said anything to us, as we let ourselves into the room next
to Whitney's. A new lock had been placed on the door between the
suites, but, aside from the additional time it took to force it,
it presented no great difficulty.

"He wouldn't leave the dagger here, of course," remarked Kennedy,
as at last we stepped into Whitney's suite. "But we may as well
satisfy ourselves. Hello--what's this?"

The room was all upset, as though some one had already gone
through it. For a moment I thought we had been forestalled.

"Packed a grip hastily," Craig remarked, pointing to the marks on
the bedspread where it had rested while he must literally have
thrown things into it.

We made a hasty search ourselves, but we knew it was hopeless. Two
things we had learned. Whitney had had a visit from his
detectives, and he had gone away hurriedly. An anonymous telephone
message had been sent to Kennedy. Had it been for the purpose of
throwing us off the track?

The room telephone rang. Quickly Craig jumped to it and took down
the receiver.

"Hello," he called. "Yes, this is Mr. Whitney."

A silence ensued during which, of course, I could not gather any
idea of what was going on over the wire.

"The deuce!" exclaimed Kennedy, working the hook up and down but
receiving no response. "The fellow caught on. Something must have
happened to Norton, too."

"How's that?" I asked.

"Why," he replied, "some one just called up Whitney and said that
Norton had got away from him."

"Perhaps they're trying to keep him out of the way just as they
are with us," I suggested. "I think the thing is a plant."

Down the hall, Kennedy stopped and tapped lightly at the door of
810, the de Moche suite. I think he was surprised when the
Senora's maid opened it.

"Tell Senora de Moche it is Professor Kennedy," he said quickly,
"and that I must see her."

The maid admitted us into the sitting-room where we had had our
first interview with her and a moment later she appeared. She was
evidently not dressed for dinner, although it was almost time, and
I saw Kennedy's eye travel from her to a chair in the corner over
which was draped a linen automobile coat and a heavy veil. Had she
been preparing to go somewhere, too? The door to Alfonso's room
was open and he clearly was not there. What did it all mean?

"Have you heard anything of a report that the dagger has been
found?" demanded Kennedy abruptly.

"Why--no," she replied, greatly surprised, apparently.

"You were going out?" asked Kennedy with a significant glance at
the coat and veil.

"Only for a little ride with Alfonso, who has gone to hire a car,"
she answered quickly.

I felt sure that she had heard something about the dagger.

We had no further excuse for staying and on the way out, now that
he had satisfied himself that Whitney was not there, Craig
inquired at the office for him. They could tell us nothing of his
whereabouts, except that he had left in his car late in the
afternoon in a great hurry.

Kennedy stepped into a telephone booth and called up Lockwood, but
no one answered. Inquiry in the garages in the neighbourhood
finally located that at which Lockwood kept his car. There, all
that they could tell us was that the car had been filled with gas
and oil as if for a trip. Lockwood was gone, too.

Kennedy hastily ordered a touring car himself and placed it at a
corner of the Prince Edward Albert where he could watch two of the
entrances, while I waited on the next corner where I could see the
entrance on the other street.

For some time we waited and still she did not come out. Had she
telephoned to Alfonso and had he gone alone? Perhaps she had
already been out and had taken this method of detaining us,
knowing that we would wait to watch her.

It must have been a mixture of both motives, for at length I was
rewarded by seeing her come cautiously out of the rear entrance of
the hotel alone and start to walk hurriedly up the street. I
signalled to Craig who shot down and picked me up.

By this time the Senora had reached a public cab stand and had
engaged a hack.

Sinking back in the shadows of the top, which was up, Craig
directed our driver to follow the hack cautiously, keeping a
couple of blocks behind. There was some satisfaction, though
slight, in it, at least. We felt the possibility of the trail
leading somewhere, now.

On uptown the hack went, while we kept discreetly in the rear. We
had reached a part of the city where it was sparsely populated,
when the hack suddenly turned and doubled back on us.

There was not time for us to turn and we trusted that by shrinking
back in the shadow we might not be observed.

As the hack passed us, however, the Senora leaned out until it was
perfectly evident that she must recognize us. She said nothing but
I fancied I saw a smile of satisfaction as she settled back into
the cushions. She was deliberately going back along the very road
by which she had led us out. It had been an elaborate means of
wasting our time.

She did not have the satisfaction, however, of shaking us off, for
we followed all the way back to the hotel and saw her go in. Then
Kennedy placed the car where we had it before and left the driver
with instructions to follow her regardless of time if she should
come out again.

Surely, I reasoned, there must be something very queer going on,
if they were all it to eliminate us and Norton. What had happened
to him?

Kennedy hastened back to the campus, late as it was, there to
start anew. Norton was not in his quarters and, on the chance that
he might have sought to elude Whitney's detectives by doing the
unexpected and going to the Museum, Kennedy walked over that way.

There was nothing to indicate that anybody had been at the Museum,
but, as we passed our laboratory, we could hear the telephone
ringing inside, as though some one had been trying to get us for a
long time.

Kennedy opened the door and switched on the lights. Waiting only
long enough to jam the receiver down into place on the telescribe,
he answered the call.

"The deuce you will!" I heard him exclaim, then apparently whoever
was talking rang off and he could not get them back.

"Another of those confounded telephone messages," he said, turning
to me and taking the cylinder off. "I looks as though the ready-
letter writer who used to send warnings had learned his lesson and
taken to the telephone as leaving fewer clues than handwriting."

He placed the record on the phonograph so that I could hear it. It
was brief and to the point, as had been the first.

"Hello, is that you, Kennedy? We've got Norton. Next we'll get
you. Good-bye."

Kennedy repeated the first message. It was evident that both had
been spoken by the same voice.

"Whose is it?" I asked blankly. "What does it mean?"

Before Craig could answer there was a knock at our door and he
sprang to open it.


XXII

THE VANISHER


It was Juanita, Inez Mendoza's maid, frantic and almost
speechless.

"Why, Juanita," encouraged Kennedy, "what's the matter?"

"The Senorita!" she gasped, breaking down now and sobbing over and
over again. "The Senorita!"

"Yes, yes," repeated Kennedy, "but what about her? Is there
anything wrong?"

"Oh, Mr. Kennedy," sobbed the poor girl, "I don't know. She is
gone. I have had no word from her since this afternoon."

"Gone!" we exclaimed together. "Where was Burke--that man that the
police sent up to protect her?"

"He is gone, too--now," replied Juanita in her best English, sadly
broken by the excitement.

Kennedy and I looked at each other aghast. This was the hardest
blow of all. We had thought that, at least, Inez would be safe
with a man like Burke, whom we could trust, detailed to watch her.

"Tell me," urged Kennedy, "how did it happen? Did they carry her
off--as they tried to do the other time?"

"No, no," sobbed Juanita. "I do not know. I do not know even
whether she is gone. She went out this afternoon for a little
walk. But she did not come back. After it grew dark, I was
frightened. I remembered that you were here and called up, but you
were out. Then I saw that policeman. I told him. He has others
working with him now. But I could not find you--until now I saw a
light here. Oh, my poor, little girl, what has become of her?
Where have they taken her? Oh, MADRE DE DIOS, it is terrible!"

Had that been the purpose for which we had been sent on wild-goose
chases? Was Inez really kidnapped this time? I knew not what to
think. It seemed hardly possible that all of them could have
joined in it.

If she were kidnapped, it must have been on the street in broad
daylight. Such things had happened. It would not be the first
disappearance of the kind.

Quickly Kennedy called up Deputy O'Connor. It was only too true.
Burke had reported that she had disappeared and the police,
especially those at the stations and ferries and in the suburbs
had been notified to look for her. All this seemed to have taken
place in those hours when the mysterious telephone calls had sent
us on the wrong trail.

Kennedy said nothing, but I could see that he was doing some keen
thinking.

Just then the telephone rang again. It was from the man whom we
had left at the Prince Edward Albert. Senora de Moche had gone out
and driven rapidly to the Grand Central. He had not been able to
find out what ticket she bought, but the train was just leaving.

Kennedy paced up and down, muttering to himself. "Whitney first--
then Lockwood--and Alfonso. The Senora takes a train. Suppose the
first message were true? Gas and oil for a trip."

He seized the telephone book and hastily turned the pages over. At
last his finger rested on a name in the suburban section. I read:
"Whitney, Stuart. Res. 174-J Rockledge."

Quickly he gave central the number, then shoved the receiver again
into the telescribe.

"Hello, is Mr. Whitney there?" I heard later as he placed the
record again in the phonograph for repetition.

"No--who is this?"

"His head clerk. Tell him I must see him. Kennedy has been to the
office and--"

"Say--get off the line. We had that story once."

"That's it!" exclaimed Craig. "Don't you see--they've all gone up
to Whitney's country place. That clerk was faking. He has already
telephoned. And listen. Do you see anything peculiar?"

He was running all three records which we had on the telescribe.
As he did so, I saw unmistakably that it was the same voice on all
three. Whitney must have had a servant do the telephoning for him.

"Don't fret, Juanita," reassured Kennedy. "We shall find your
mistress for you. She will be all right. You had better go back to
the apartment and wait. Walter look up the next train to Rockledge
while I telephone O'Connor."

We had an hour to wait before the next train left and in the
meantime we drove Juanita back to the Mendoza apartment.

It was a short run to Rockledge by railroad, but it seemed to me
that it took hours. Kennedy sat in silence most of the time, his
eyes closed, as if he were trying to place himself in the position
of the others and figure out what they would do.

At last we arrived, the only passengers to get off at the little
old station. Which way to turn we had not the slightest idea. We
looked about. Even the ticket office was closed. It looked as
though we might almost as well have stayed in New York.

Down the railroad we could see that a great piece of engineering
was in progress, raising the level of the tracks and building a
steel viaduct, as well as a new station, and at the same time not
interrupting the through traffic, which was heavy.

"Surely there must be some one down there," observed Kennedy, as
we picked our way across the steel girders, piles of rails, and
around huge machines for mixing concrete.

We came at last to a little construction house, a sort of general
machine-and work-shop, in which seemed to be everything from a
file to a pneumatic riveter.

"Hello!" shouted Craig.

There came a sound from a far corner of a pile of ties and a
moment later a night-watchman advanced suspiciously swinging his
lantern.

"Hello yourself," he growled.

"Which way to Stuart Whitney's estate?" asked Craig.

My heart sank as he gave the directions. It seemed miles away.

Just then the blinding lights of a car flashed on us as it came
down the road parallel to the tracks. He waved his light and the
car stopped. It was empty, except for a chauffeur evidently
returning from a joy ride.

"Take these gentlemen as far as Smith's corner, will you?" asked
the watchman. "Then show 'em the turn up to Whitney's."

The chauffeur was an obliging chap, especially as it cost him
nothing to earn a substantial tip with his master's car. However,
we were glad enough to ride in anything on wheels, and not over-
particular at that hour about the ownership.

"Mr. Whitney hasn't been out here much lately," he volunteered as
he sped along the beautiful oiled road, and the lights cast
shadows on the trees that made driving as easy as in daylight.

"No, he has been very busy," returned Craig glad to turn to
account the opportunity to talk with a chauffeur, for it is the
chauffeur in the country who is the purveyor of all knowledge and
gossip.

"His car passed us when I was driving up from the city. My boss
won't let me speed or I wouldn't have taken his dust. Gee, but he
does wear out the engines in his cars, Whitney."

"Was he alone?" asked Craig.

"Yes--and then I saw him driving back again when I went down, to
the station for some new shoes we had expressed up. Just a flying
trip, I guess--or does he expect you?"

"I don't think he does," returned Craig truthfully.

"I saw a couple of other cars go up there. House party?"

"Maybe you'd call it that," returned Craig with a twinkle of the
eye. "Did you see any ladies?"

"No," returned the chauffeur. "Just a man driving his own car and
another with a driver."

"There wasn't a lady with Mr. Whitney?" asked Craig, now rather
anxious.

"Neither time."

I saw what he was driving at. The Senora might have got up there
in any fashion without being noticed. But for Inez not to be with
Whitney, nor with the two who must evidently have been Lockwood
and Alfonso, was indeed strange. Could it be that we were only
half right--that they had gathered here but that Inez had really
disappeared?

The young man set us down at Smith's Corner and it proved to be
only about an eighth of a mile up the road and up-hill when
Whitney's house burst in sight, silhouetted against the sky.

There were lights there and it was evident that several people had
gathered for some purpose.

We made our way up the path and paused a moment to look through
the window before springing the little surprise. There we could
see Lockwood, Alfonso, and Senora de Moche, who had arrived, after
all and probably been met at the station by her son. They seemed
like anything but a happy party. Never on the best of terms, they
could not be expected to be happy. But now, if ever, one would
have thought they might do more than tolerate each other, assuming
that some common purpose had brought them here.

Kennedy rang the bell and we could see that all looked surprised,
for they had heard no car approach. A servant opened the door and
before he knew it, Kennedy had pushed past him, taking no chances
at a rebuff after the experience over the wire.

"Kennedy!" exclaimed Lockwood and Alfonso together.

"Where is Inez Mendoza?" demanded Craig, without returning the
greeting.

"Inez?" they repeated blankly.

Kennedy faced them squarely.

"Come, now. Where is she? This is a show-down. You may as well
lay your cards on the table. Where is she--what have you done with
her?"

The de Moches looked at Lockwood and he looked at them, but
neither spoke for a moment.

"Walter," ordered Kennedy, "there's the telephone. Get the
managing editor of the Star and tell him where we are. Every
newspaper in the United States, every police officer in every city
will have the story, in twelve hours, if you precious rascals
don't come across. There--I give you until central gets die Star."

"Why--what has happened?" asked Lockwood, who was the first to
recover his tongue.

"Don't stand there asking me what has happened," cried Kennedy
impatiently. "Tickle that hook again, Walter. You know as well as
I do that you have planned to get Inez Mendoza away from my
influence--to kidnap her, in other words--"

"We kidnap her?" gasped Lockwood. "What do you mean, man? I know
nothing of this. Is she gone?" He wheeled on the de Moches. "This
is some of your work. If anything happens to that girl--there
isn't an Indian feud can equal the vengeance I will take!"

Alfonso was absolutely speechless. Senora de Moche started to
speak, but Kennedy interrupted her. "That will do from you," he
cut short. "You have passed beyond the bounds of politeness when
you deliberately went out of your way to throw me on a wrong trail
while some one was making off with a young and innocent girl. You
are a woman of the world. You will take your medicine like a man,
too."

I don't think I have ever seen Kennedy in a more towering rage
than he was at that moment.

"When it was only a matter of a paltry poisoned dagger at stake
and a fortune that may be mythical or may be like that of Croesus,
for all I care, we could play the game according to rules," he
exclaimed. "But when you begin to tamper with a life like that of
Inez de Mendoza--you have passed the bounds of all consideration.
You have the Star? Telephone the story anyhow. We'll arbitrate
afterward."

I think, as I related the facts to my editor, it sobered us all a
great deal.

"Kennedy," appealed Lockwood at last, as I hung up the receiver,
"will you listen to my story?"

"It is what I am here for," replied Craig grimly.

"Believe it or not, as far as I am concerned," asserted Lockwood,
"this is all news to me. My God--where is she?"

"Then how came you here?" demanded Craig.

"I can speak only for myself," hastened Lockwood. "If you had
asked where Whitney was, I could have understood, but--"

"Well, where is he?"

"We don't know. Early this afternoon I received a hurried message
from him--at least I suppose it was from him--that he had the
dagger and was up here. He said--I'll be perfectly frank--he said
that he was arranging a conference at which all of us were to be
present to decide what to do."

"Meanwhile I was to be kept away at any cost," supplied Kennedy
sarcastically. "Where did he get it?"

"He didn't say."

"And you didn't care, as long as he had it," added Craig, then,
turning to the de Moches, "And what is your tale?"

Senora de Moche did not lose her self-possession for an instant.
"We received the same message. When you called, I thought it would
be best for Alfonso to go alone, so I telephoned and caught him at
the garage and when my train arrived here, he was waiting."

"None of you have seen Whitney here?" asked Kennedy, to which all
nodded in the negative. "Well, you seem to agree pretty well in
your stories, anyhow. Let me take a chance with the servants."

It is no easy matter to go into another's household and without
any official position quiz and expect to get the truth out of the
servants. But Kennedy's very wrath seemed to awe them. They
answered in spite of themselves.

It seemed clear that as far as they went both guests and servants
were telling the truth. Whitney had made the run up from the city
earlier in the afternoon, had stayed only a short time, then had
gone back, leaving word that he would be there again before his
guests arrived.

They all professed to be as mystified as ourselves now over the
outcome of the whole affair. He had not come back and there had
been no word from him.

"One thing is certain," remarked Craig, watching the faces before
him as he spoke. "Inez is gone. She has been spirited away without
even leaving a trace. Her maid Juanita told me that. Now if
Whitney is gone, too, it looks as if he had planned to double-
cross the whole crowd of you and leave you safely marooned up here
with nothing left but your common hatred of me. Much good may it
do you."

Lockwood clenched his fists savagely, not at Kennedy but at the
thought that Craig had suggested. His face set itself in tense
lines as he swore vengeance on all jointly and severally if any
harm came to Inez. I almost forgot my suspicions of him in
admiration.

"Nothing like this would ever have happened if she had stayed in
Peru," exclaimed Alfonso bitterly. "Oh, why did her father ever
bring her here to this land of danger?"

The idea seemed novel to me to look on America as a lawless,
uncultured country, until I reflected on the usual Latin-American
opinion of us as barbarians.

Lockwood frowned but said nothing, for a time. Then he turned
suddenly to the Senora, "You were intimate enough with him," he
said. "Did he tell you any more than he told us?"

It was clear that Lockwood felt now that every man's hand was
against him.

I thought I could discover a suppressed gleam of satisfaction in
her wonderful eyes as she answered, "Nothing more. It was only
that I carried out what he asked me."

Could it be that she was taking a subtle delight in the turn of
events--the working out of a curse on the treasure-secret which
the fatal dagger bore? I could not say. But it would not have
needed much superstition to convince any one that the curse on the
Gold of the Gods was as genuine as any that had ever been uttered,
as it heaped up crime on crime.

We waited in silence, the more hopeless as the singing of the
night insects italicized our isolation from the organized
instruments of man for the righting of wrong. Here we were, each
suspecting the other, in the home of a man whom all mistrusted.

"There's no use sitting here doing nothing," exclaimed Lockwood in
whose mind was evidently the same thought, "not so long as we have
the telephone and the automobiles."

These, at least, were our last bonds with the great world that had
wrapped a dark night about a darker mystery.

"There are many miles of wire--many miles of road. Which way shall
we turn?"

Senora de Moche seemed to take a fiendish delight in the words as
she said them. It was as though she challenged our helplessness in
the face of a power that was greater than us all.

Lockwood flashed a look of suspicion in her direction. As for
myself, I had never been able to make the woman out. To-night she
seemed like a sort of dea ex machina, who sat apart, playing on
the passions of a group of puppet men whom she set against each
other until all should be involved in a common ruin.

It was impossible, in the silence of this far-off lonely place in
the country, not to feel the weirdness of it all.

Once I closed my eyes and was startled by the uncanny vividness of
a mind-picture that came unbidden. It was of a scrap of paper on
which, in rough capitals was printed:

BEWARE THE CURSE OF MANSICHE ON THE GOLD OF THE GODS.


XXIII

THE ACETYLENE TORCH


Do you suppose he really had the dagger, or was that a lie?" I
asked, with an effort shaking off the fateful feeling that had
come over me as if some one were casting a spell.

"There is one way to find out," returned Craig, as though glad of
the suggestion.

Though they hated him, they seemed forced to admit, for the time,
his leadership. He rose and the rest followed as he went into
Whitney's library.

He switched on the lights. There in a corner back of the desk
stood a safe. Somehow or other it seemed to defy us, even though
its master was gone. I looked at it a moment. It was a most
powerful affair, companion to that in the office of which Whitney
was so proud, built of layer on layer of chrome steel, with a door
that was air tight and soup-proof, bidding defiance to all yeggmen
and petermen.

Lockwood fingered the combination hopelessly. There were some
millions of combinations and permutations that only a
mathematician could calculate. Only one was any good. That one was
locked in the mind of the man who now seemed to baffle us as did
his strong-box.

I placed my hand on the cold, defiant surface. It would take hours
to drill a safe like that, and even then it might turn the points
of the drills. Explosives might sooner wreck the house and bring
it down over the head of the man who attacked this monster.

"What can we do?" asked Senora de Moche, seeming to mock us, as
though the safe itself were an inhuman thing that blocked our
path.

"Do?" repeated Kennedy decisively, "I'll show you what we can do.
If Lockwood will drive me down to the railroad station in his car,
I'll show you something that looks like action. Will you do it?"

The request was more like a command. Lockwood said nothing, but
moved toward the porte-cochere, where he had left his car parked
just aside from the broad driveway.

"Walter, you will stay here," ordered Kennedy. "Let no one leave.
If any one comes, don't let him get away. We shan't be gone long."

I sat awkwardly enough, scarcely speaking a word, as Kennedy
dashed down to the railroad station. Neither Alfonso nor his
mother betrayed either by word or action a hint of what was
passing in their minds. Somehow, though I did not understand it, I
felt that Lockwood might square himself. But I could not help
feeling that these two might very possibly be at the bottom of
almost anything.

It was with some relief that I heard the car approaching again. I
had no idea what Kennedy was after, whether it was dynamite or
whether he contemplated a trip to New York. I was surprised to see
him, with Lockwood, hurrying up the steps to the porch, each with
a huge tank studded with bolts like a boiler.

"There," ordered Craig, "set the oxygen there," as he placed his
own tank on the opposite side. "That watchman thought I was
bluffing when I said I'd get an order from the company, if I had
to wake up the president of the road. It was too good a chance to
miss. One doesn't find such a complete outfit ready to hand every
day."

Out of the tanks stout tubes led, with stop-cocks and gauges at
the top. From a case under his arm Kennedy produced a curious
arrangement like a huge hook, with a curved neck and a sharp beak.
Really it consisted of two metal tubes which ran into a sort of
cylinder, or mixing chamber, above the nozzle, while parallel to
them ran a third separate tube with a second nozzle of its own.

Quickly he joined the ends of the tubes from the tanks to the
metal hook, the oxygen tank being joined to two of the tubes of
the hook, and the second tank being joined to the other. With a
match he touched the nozzle gingerly. Instantly a hissing,
spitting noise followed, and an intense, blinding needle of flame.

"Now we'll see what an oxyacetylene blow-pipe will do to you, old
stick-in-the-mud," cried Kennedy, as he advanced toward the safe,
addressing it as though it had been a thing of life that stood in
his way. "I think this will make short work of you."

Almost as he said it, the steel beneath the blow-pipe became
incandescent. For some time he laboured to get a starting-point
for the flame of the high-pressure torch.

It was a brilliant sight. The terrific heat from the first nozzle
caused the metal to glow under the torch as if in an open-hearth
furnace. From the second nozzle issued a stream of oxygen, under
which the hot metal of the door was completely consumed.

The force of the blast, as the compressed oxygen and acetylene
were expelled, carried a fine spray of the disintegrated metal
visibly before it. And yet it was not a big hole that it made--
scarcely an eighth of an inch wide, but clean and sharp as if a
buzz-saw were eating its way through a plank of white-pine.

With tense muscles Kennedy held this terrific engine of
destruction and moved it as easily as if it had been a mere pencil
of light. He was the calmest of all of us as we crowded about him,
but at a respectful distance.

"I suppose you know," he remarked hastily, never pausing for a
moment in his work, "that acetylene is composed of carbon and
hydrogen. As it burns at the end of the nozzle it is broken into
carbon and hydrogen--the carbon gives the high temperature and the
hydrogen forms a cone that protects the end of the blow-pipe from
being itself burnt up."

"But isn't it dangerous?" I asked, amazed at the skill with which
he handled the blow-pipe.

"Not particularly--when you know how to do it. In that tank is a
porous asbestos packing saturated with acetone, under pressure.
Thus they carry acetylene safely, for it is dissolved and the
possibility of explosion is minimized.

"This mixing chamber, by which I am holding the torch, where the
oxygen and acetylene mix, is also designed in such a way as to
prevent a flash-back. The best thing about this style of blow-pipe
is the ease with which it can be transported and the curious
purposes--like this--to which it can be put."

He paused a moment to test what had been burnt. The rest of the
safe seemed as firm as ever.

"Humph!" I heard one of them, I think it was Alfonso, mutter. I
resented it, but Kennedy affected not to hear.

"When I shut off the oxygen in this second jet," he resumed, "you
see the torch merely heats the steel. I can get a heat of
approximately sixty-three hundred degrees Fahrenheit, and the
flame will exert a pressure of fifty pounds to the square inch."

"Wonderful!" exclaimed Lockwood, who had not heard the suppressed
disapproval of Alfonso, and was watching, in undisguised
admiration at the thing itself, regardless of consequences.
"Kennedy, how did you ever think of such a thing?"

"Why, it's used for welding, you know," answered Craig, as he
continued to work calmly in the growing excitement. "I first saw
it in actual use in mending a cracked cylinder in an automobile.
The cylinder was repaired without being taken out at all. I've
seen it weld new teeth and build up worn teeth on gearing, as good
as new."

He paused to let us see the terrifically heated metal under the
flame.

"You remember when we were talking to the watchman down there at
the station, Walter?" he asked. "I saw this thing in that complete
little shop of theirs. It interested me. See. I turn on the oxygen
now in the second nozzle. The blow-pipe is no longer an instrument
for joining metals together, but for cutting them asunder.

"The steel burns just as you, perhaps, have seen a watch-spring
burn in a jar of oxygen. Steel, hard or soft, tempered, annealed,
chrome, or Harveyized, it all burns just about as fast, and just
about as easily under this torch. And it's cheap, too. This
attack--aside from what it costs to the safe--may amount to a
couple of dollars as far as the blow-pipe is concerned--quite a
difference from the thousands of dollars' loss that would follow
an attempt to blow a safe like this one."

We had nothing to say. We stood in awe-struck amazement as the
torch slowly, inexorably traced a thin line along the edge of the
combination.

Minute after minute sped by, as the line burned by the blow-pipe
cut around the lock. It seemed hours, but really it was minutes. I
wondered when he would have cut about the whole lock. He was
cutting clear through and around it, severing it as if with a
superhuman knife.

With something more than half his work done, he paused a moment to
rest.

"Walter," he directed, mopping his forehead, for it was real work
directing that flaming knife, "get New York on the wire. See if
O'Connor is at his office. If he has any report, I want to talk to
him."

It was getting late and the service was slackening up. I had some
trouble, especially in getting a good connection, but at last I
got headquarters and was overjoyed to hear O'Connor's bluff, Irish
voice boom back at me.

"Hello, Jameson," he called. "Where on earth are you? I've been
trying to get hold of Kennedy for a couple of hours. Rockledge?
Well, is Kennedy there? Put him on, will you?"

I called Craig and, as I did so, my curiosity got the better of me
and I sought out an extension of the wire in a den across the hall
from the library, where I could listen in on what was said.

"Hello, O'Connor," answered Craig. "Anything from Burke yet?"

"Yes," came back the welcome news. "I think he has a clue. We
found out from here that she received a long distance message
during the afternoon. Where did Jameson say you were--Rockledge?--
that's the place. Of course we don't know what the message was,
but anyhow she went out to meet some one right after that. The
time corresponds with what the maid says."

"Anything else?" asked Craig. "Have you found any one who saw
her?"

"Yes. I think she went over to your laboratory. But you were out."

"Confound it!" interrupted Craig.

"Some one saw a woman there."

"It wasn't the maid?"

"No, this was earlier--in the afternoon. She left and walked
across the campus to the Museum."

"Oh, by the way, any word of Norton?"

"I'm coming to that. She inquired for Norton. The curator has
given a good description. But he was out--hadn't been there for
some time. She seemed to be very much upset over something. She
went away. After that we've lost her."

"Not another trace?"

"Wait a minute. We had this Rockledge call to work on. So we
started backward on that. It was Whitney's place, I found out. We
could locate the car at the start and at the finish. He left the
Prince Edward Albert and went up there first. Then he must have
come back to the city again. No one at the hotel saw him the
second time.

"What then?" hastened Craig.

"She may have met him somewhere, though it's not likely she had
any intention of going away. All the rest of those people you have
up there seem to have gone prepared. We got something on each of
them. Also you'll be interested to know I've got a report of your
own doings. It was right, Kennedy, I don't blame you. I'd have
done the same with Burke on the job. How are you making out? What?
You're cracking a crib? With what?"

O'Connor whistled as Kennedy related the story of the blow-pipe.
"I think you're on the right track," he commended. "There's
nothing to show it, but I believe Whitney told her something that
changed her mind about going up there. Probably met her in some
tea room, although we can't find anything from the tea rooms.
Anyhow, Burke's out trailing along the road from New York to
Rockledge and I'm getting reports from him whenever he hits a
telephone."

"I wish you'd ask him to call me, here, if he gets anything."

"Sure I will. The last call was from the Chateau Rouge,--that's
about halfway. There was a car with a man and a woman who answers
her description. Then, there was another car, too."

"Another car?"

"Yes--that's where Norton crosses the trail again. We searched his
apartment. It was upset--like Whitney's. I haven't finished with
that. But we have a list of all the private hacking places. I've
located one that hired a car to a man answering Norton's
description. I think he's on the trail. That's what I meant by
another car."

"What's he doing?"

"Maybe he has a hunch. I'm getting superstitious about this case.
You know Luis de Mendoza has thirteen letters in it. Leslie told
me something about a threat he had--a curse. You better look out
for those two greasers you have up there. They may have another
knife for you."

Kennedy glanced over at the de Moches, not in fear but in
amusement at what they would think if they could hear O'Connor's
uncultured opinion.

"All right, O'Connor," said Craig, "everything seems to be going
as well as we can expect. Don't forget to tell Burke I'm here."

"I won't. Just a minute. He's on another wire for me."

Kennedy waited impatiently. He wanted to finish his job on the
safe before some one came walking in and stopped it, yet there was
always a chance that Burke might turn up something.

"Hello," called O'Connor a few minutes later. "He's still
following the two cars. He thinks the one with the woman in it is
Whitney's, all right. But they've got off the main road. They must
think they're being followed.

"Or else have changed their destination," returned Craig. "Tell
him that. Maybe Whitney had no intention of coming up here. He may
have done this thing just to throw these people off up here, too.
I can't say. I can tell better whether he intended to come back
after I've got this safe open. I'll let you know."

Kennedy rang off.

"Any news of Inez?" asked Lockwood who had been fuming with
impatience.

"She's probably on her way up here," returned Craig briefly,
taking up the blow-pipe again.

Alfonso remained silent. The Senora could scarcely hide her
excitement. If there were anything in telepathy, I am sure that
she read everything that was said over the wire.

Quickly Craig resumed his work, biting through the solid steel as
if it had been mere pasteboard, the blow-pipe showering on each
side a brilliant spray of sparks, a gaudy, pyrotechnic display.

Suddenly, with a quick motion, Kennedy turned off the acetylene
and oxygen. The last bolt had been severed, the lock was useless.
A gentle push of the hand, and he swung the once impregnable door
on its delicately poised hinges as easily as if he had merely
said, "Open sesame."

Craig reached in and pulled open a steel drawer directly in front
of him.

There in the shadow lay the dagger--with its incalculably valuable
secret, a poor, unattractive piece of metal, but with a
fascination such as no other object, I had ever seen, possessed.

There was a sudden cry. The Senora had darted ahead, as if to
clasp its handle and unloose the murderous blade that nestled in
its three-sided sheath.

Before she could reach it, Kennedy had seized her hand in his iron
grasp, while with the other he picked up the dagger.

They stood there gazing into each other's eyes.

Then the Senora burst into a hysterical laugh.

"The curse is on all who possess it!"

"Thank you," smiled Kennedy quietly, releasing her wrist as he
dropped the dagger into his pocket, "I am only the trustee."


XXIV

THE POLICE DOG


Craig faced us, but there was no air of triumph in his manner. I
knew what was in his mind. He had the dagger. But he had lost
Inez.

What were we to do? There seemed to be no way to turn. We knew
something of the manner of her disappearance. At first she had,
apparently, gone willingly. But it was inconceivable that she
stayed willingly, now.

I recalled all the remarks that Whitney had ever made about her.
Had the truth come out in his jests? Was it Inez, not the dagger,
that he really wanted?

Or was he merely the instrument of one or all of these people
before us, and was this an elaborate plan to throw Kennedy off and
prove an alibi for them? He had been the partner of Lockwood, the
intimate of de Moche. Which was he working for, now--or was he
working for himself alone?

No answer came to my questions, and I reflected that none would
ever come, if we sat here. Yet there seemed to be no way to turn,
without risking putting ourselves in a worse position than before.
At least, until we had some better plan of campaign, we occupied a
strategic advantage in Whitney's own house.

The hours of the night wore on. Midnight came. This inaction was
killing. Anything would be better than that

Suddenly the telephone startled us. We had wanted it to ring, yet
when it rang we were afraid of it. What was its message? It was
with palpitating hearts that we listened, while Craig answered.

"Yes, Burke," we heard him reply, "this is Kennedy."

There came a pause during which we could scarcely wait.

"Where are you now? Cold Stream. That is about twelve miles from
Rockledge--not on the New York road--the other road. I see. All
right. We'll be there. Yes, wait for us."

As Craig hung up the receiver, we crowded forward. "Have they
found her?" asked Lockwood hoarsely.

"It was from Burke," replied Kennedy deliberately. "He is at a
place called Cold Stream, twelve miles from here. He tells me that
we can find it easily--on a state road, at a sharp curve that has
been widened out, just this side of the town. There has been an
accident--Whitney's car is wrecked."

Lockwood seized his elbow. "My God," he exclaimed, "tell me--she
isn't--hurt, is she? Quick!"

"So far Burke has not been able to discover a trace of a thing,
except the wrecked car," replied Kennedy. "I told him I would be
over directly. Lockwood, you may take Jameson and Alfonso. I will
go with the Senora and their driver."

I saw instantly why he had divided the party. Neither mother nor
son was to have a chance to slip away from us. Surely both
Lockwood and I should be a match for Alfonso. Senora de Moche he
would trust to none but himself.

Eagerly now we prepared for the journey, late though it was. No
one now had a thought of rest. There could be no rest with that
mystery of Inez challenging us.

We were off at last, Lockwood's car leading, for although he did
not know the roads exactly, he had driven much about the country.
I should have liked to have sat in front with him, but it seemed
safer to stay in the back with Alfonso. In fact, I don't think
Lockwood would have consented, otherwise, to have his rival back
of him.

Kennedy and the Senora made a strange pair, the ancient order and
the ultra-modern. There was a peculiar light in her eyes that
gleamed forth at the mere mention of the words, "wreck." Though
she said nothing, I knew that through her mind was running the one
tenacious thought. It was the working out of the curse! As for
Craig, he was always seeking the plausible, natural reason for
what to the rest of us was inexplicable, often supernatural. To
him she was a fascinating study.

On we sped, for Lockwood was a good driver and now was spurred on
by an anxiety that he could not conceal. Yet his hand never
faltered at the wheel. He seemed to read the signs at the cross-
roads without slackening speed. In spite of all that I knew, I
found myself compelled to admire him. Alfonso sat back, for the
most part silent. The melancholy in his face seemed to have
deepened. He seemed to feel that he was but a toy in the hands of
fate. Yet I knew that underneath must smoulder the embers of a
bitter resentment.

It seemed an interminable ride even at the speed which we were
making. Twelve miles in the blackness of a country night can seem
like a hundred.

At last as we turned a curve, and Lockwood's headlights shone on
the white fence that skirted the outer edge of the road as it
swung around a hill that rose sharply to our left and dropped off
in a sort of ravine at the right beyond the fence, I felt the car
tremble as he put on the brakes.

A man was waving his arms for us to stop, and as we did, he ran
forward. He peered in at us and I recognized Burke.

"Whe-where's Kennedy?" he asked, disappointed, for the moment
fearing he had made a mistake and signalled the wrong car.

"Coming," I replied, as we heard the driver of the other car
sounding his horn furiously as he approached the curve.

Burke jumped to the safe side of the road and ran on back to
signal to stop. It was then for the first time that I paid
particular attention to the fence ahead of us on which now both
our own and the lights of the other car shone. At one point it was
torn and splintered, as though something had gone through it.

"Great heavens, you don't mean to say that they went over that?"
muttered Lockwood, jumping down and running forward.

Kennedy had joined us by this time and we all hurried over. Down
in the ravine we could see a lantern which Burke had brought and
which was now resting on the overturned chassis of the car.

Lockwood was down there ahead of us all, peering under the heavy
body fearfully, as if he expected to see two forms of mangled
flesh. He straightened up, then took the lantern and flashed it
about. There was nothing except cushions and a few parts of the
car within the radius of its gleam.

"Where are they?" he demanded, turning to us. "It's Whitney's car,
all right."

Burke shook his head. "I've traced the car so far. They were
getting ahead of me, when this happened."

Together we managed to right the car which was on a hillock. It
sank a little further down the hill, but at least we could look
inside it.

"Bring the lantern," ordered Kennedy.

Minutely, part by part, he went over the car. "Something went
wrong," he muttered. "It is too much wrecked to tell what it was.
Flash the light over here," he directed, stepping over the seat
into the back of the tonneau.

A moment later he took the light himself and held it close to the
rods that supported the top. I saw him reach down and pull from
them a few strands of dark hair that had caught between the rods
and had been pulled out or broken.

"No need of Bertillon's palette of human hair to identify that,"
he exclaimed." There isn't time to study it and if there were it
would be unnecessary. She was with him, all right."

"Yes," agreed Lockwood. "But where is she now--where is he? Could
they have been hurt, picked up by some one and carried where they
could get aid?"

Burke shook his head. "I inquired at the nearest house ahead. I
had to do it in order to telephone. They knew nothing."

"But they are gone," persisted Lockwood. "There is the bottom of
the bank. You can see that they are not here."

Kennedy had taken the light and climbed the bank again and was now
going over the road as minutely as if he were searching for a lost
diamond.

"Look!" he exclaimed.

Where the Whitney car had skidded and gone over the bank, the
tires had dug deep into the top dressing, making little mounds.
Across them now we could see the tracks of other tires that had
pressed down the mounds.

"Some one else has been here," reconstructed Kennedy. "He passed,
then stopped and backed up. Perhaps they were thrown out,
unconscious, and he picked them up."

It seemed to be the only reasonable supposition.

"But they knew nothing at the next house," persisted Burke.

"Is there a road leading off before you get to the house?" asked
Kennedy.

"Yes--it crosses the line into Massachusetts."

"It is worth trying--it is the only thing we can do," decided
Kennedy. "Drive slowly to the crossroads. Perhaps we can pick out
the tire-prints there. They certainly won't show on the road
itself. It is too hard."

At the crossing we stopped and Kennedy dropped down on his hands
and knees again with the light.

"There it is," he exclaimed. "The same make of anti-skid tire, at
least. There was a cut in the rear tire--just like this. See? It
is the finger-print of the motor car. I think we are right. Turn
up here and run slowly."

On we went slowly, Kennedy riding on the running-board of the car
ahead. Suddenly he raised his hand to stop, and jumped down.

We gathered about him. Had he found a continuation of the tire-
tracks? There were tracks but he was not looking at them. He was
looking between them. There ran a thin line.

He stuck his finger in it and sniffed. "Not gas," he remarked. "It
must have been the radiator, leaking. Perhaps he ran his car into
Whitney's--forced it too far to the edge of the road. We can't
tell. But he couldn't have gone far with that leak without finding
water--or cracked cylinders."

With redoubled interest now we resumed the chase. We had mounted a
hill and had run down into the shadows of a valley when, following
in the second car, we heard a shout from Kennedy in the first.

Halfway up the hill across the valley, he had come upon an
abandoned car. It had evidently reached its limit, the momentum of
the previous hill had carried it so far up the other, then the
driver had stopped it and let it back slowly off the road into a
clump of bushes that hid a little gully.

But that was all. There was not a sign of a person about. Whatever
had happened here had happened some hours before. We looked about.
All was Cimmerian darkness. Not a house or habitation of man or
beast was in sight, though they might not be far away.

We beat about the under-brush, but succeeded in stirring up
nothing but mosquitoes.

What were we to do? We were wasting valuable time. Where should we
go?

"I doubt whether they would have kept on the road," reasoned
Kennedy. "They must have known they would be followed. The hardest
place to follow them would be across country."

"With a lantern?" I objected. "We can't do it."

Kennedy glanced at his watch. "It will be three hours before there
is light enough to see anything by," he considered. "They have had
at least a couple of hours. Five hours is too good a start. Burke-
-take one of the cars. Go ahead along the road. We mustn't neglect
that. I'll take the other. I want to get back to that house and
call O' Connor. Walter, you stay here with the rest."

We separated and I felt that, although I was doing nothing, I had
my hands full watching these three.

Lockwood was restless and could not help beating around in the
under-brush, in the hope of turning up something. Now and then he
would mutter to himself some threat if anything happened to Inez.
I let him occupy himself, for our own, as much as his, peace of
mind. Alfonso had joined his mother in the car and they sat there
conversing in low tones in Spanish, while I watched them
furtively.

Of a sudden, I became aware that I missed the sound of Lockwood
beating about the under-brush. I called, but there was no answer.
Then we all called. There came back nothing but a mocking echo. I
could not follow him. If I did, I would lose the de Moches.

Had he been laying low, waiting his opportunity to get away? Or
was he playing a lone hand? Much as I suspected about him, during
the past few hours I had come to admire him.

I sent the de Moche driver out to look for him, but he seemed
afraid to venture far, and, of course, returned and said that he
could not find him. Even in his getaway, Lockwood had been
characteristic. He had been strong enough to bide his time, clever
enough to throw every one off guard. It put a new aspect on the
case for me. Had Whitney intended the capture of Inez for
Lockwood? Had our coming so unexpectedly into the case thrown the
plans awry and was it the purpose to leave them marooned at
Rockledge while we were shunted off in the city? That, too, was
plausible. I wished Kennedy would return before anything else
happened.

It was not long by the clock before Kennedy did return. But it
seemed ages to me.

He was not alone. With him was a man in a uniform, and a powerful
dog, for all the world like a huge wolf.

"Down, Searchlight," he ordered, as the dog began to show an
uncanny interest in me. "Let me introduce my new dog detective,"
he chuckled. "She has a wonderful record as a police dog. I got
O'Connor out of bed and he telephoned out to the nearest suburban
station. That saved a good deal of time in getting her up here."

I mustered up courage to tell Kennedy of the defection of
Lockwood. He did not seem to mind it especially.

"He won't get far, with the dog after him, if we want to take the
time," he said. "She's a German sheep dog, a Schaeferhund."

Searchlight seemed to have many of the characteristics of the
wild, prehistoric animal, among them the full, upright ears of the
wild dog, which are such a great help to it. She was a fine,
alert, upstanding dog, hardy, fierce, and literally untiring, of a
tawny light brown like a lioness, about the same size and somewhat
of the type of the smooth-coated collie, broad of chest and with a
full brush of tail. Untamed as she seemed, she was perfectly under
Kennedy's control and rendered him absolute and unreasoning
obedience.

They took her over to the abandoned car. There they let her get a
good whiff of the bottom of the car about the driver's feet, and a
moment later she started off.

Alfonso and his mother insisted on going with us and that made our
progress across country slow.

On we went over the rough country, through a field, then skirting
a clump of woods until at last we came to a lane.

We stopped in the shadow of a thicket. There was an empty summer
home. Was there some intruder there? Was it really empty?

Now and then we could hear Searchlight scouting about in the
under-brush, crouching and hiding, watching and guarding. We
paused and waited in the heavily-laden night air, wondering. The
soughing of the night wind in the evergreens was mournful. Did it
betoken a further tragedy?

There was a slight noise from the other side of the house. Craig
reached out and drew us back into the shadow of the thicket,
deeper.

"Some one is prowling about, I think. Leave it to the dog."

Searchlight, who had been near us, was sniffing eagerly. From our
hiding-place we could just see her. She had heard the sounds, too,
even before we had, and for an instant stood with every muscle
tense.

Then, like an arrow, she darted into the underbrush. An instant
later, the sharp crack of a revolver rang out. Searchlight kept
right on, never stopping a second, except, perhaps, in surprise.

"Crack!" almost in her face came a second spit of fire in the
darkness, and a bullet crashed through the leaves and buried
itself in a tree with a ping. The intruder's marksmanship was
poor, but the dog paid no attention to it.

"One of the few animals that show no fear of gun-fire," muttered
Kennedy, in undisguised admiration.

"G-r-r-r," we heard from the police dog.

"She has made a leap at the hand that holds the gun," cried
Kennedy, now rising and moving rapidly in the same direction. "She
has been taught that a man once badly bitten in the hand is nearly
out of the fight."

We followed also. As we approached we were just in time to see
Searchlight running in and out between the legs of a man who had
heard us approach and was hastily making tracks away. As he
tripped, the officer who brought her blew shrilly on a police
whistle just in time to stop a fierce lunge at his back.

Reluctantly, Searchlight let go. One could see that with all her
canine instinct she wanted to "get" that man. Her jaws were open,
as, with longing eyes, she stood over the prostrate form in the
grass. The whistle was a signal, and she had been taught to obey
unquestioningly.

"Don't move until we get to you, or you are a dead man," shouted
Kennedy, pulling an automatic as he ran. "Are you hurt?"

There was no answer, but, as we approached, the man moved, ever so
little, through curiosity to see his pursuers.

Searchlight shot forward. Again the whistle sounded and she
dropped back. We bent over to seize him, as Kennedy secured the
dog.

"She's a devil," ground out the prone figure on the grass.

"Lockwood!" exclaimed Kennedy.


XXV

THE GOLD OF THE GODS


"What are you doing here?" demanded Craig, astonished.

"I couldn't wait for you to get back. I thought I'd do a little
detective work on my own account. I kept getting further and
further away, knew you'd find me, anyhow. But I didn't think you'd
have a brute like that," he added, binding up his hand ruefully.
"Is there any trace of Inez?"

"Not yet. Why did you pick out this house?" asked Kennedy, still
suspicious.

"I saw a light here, I thought," answered Lockwood frankly. "But
as I approached, it went out. Maybe I imagined it."

"Let us see."

Kennedy spoke a few words to the man with the dog. He slipped the
leash, with a word that we did not catch, and the dog bounded off,
around the house, as she was accustomed to do when out on duty
with an officer in the city suburbs, circling about the backs of
houses as the man on the beat walked the street. She made noise
enough about it, too, tumbling over a tin pail that had been
standing on the back porch steps.

"Bang!"

Some one was in the house and was armed. In the darkness he had
not been able to tell whether an attack was being made or not, but
had taken no chances. At any rate, now we knew that he was
desperate.

I thought of all the methods Kennedy had adopted to get into
houses in which the inmates were desperate. But always they had
been about the city where he could call upon the seemingly
exhaustless store of apparatus in his laboratory. Here we were
faced by the proposition with nothing to rely on but our native
wit and a couple of guns.

Besides, I did not know whether to count on Lockwood as an ally or
not. My estimation of him had been rising and falling like the
barometer in a summer shower. I had been convinced that he was
against us. But his manner and plausibility now equally convinced
me that I had been mistaken. I felt that it would take some
supreme action on his part to settle the question. That crisis was
coming now.

I think all of us would willingly have pushed Alfonso forward. But
the relations of the de Moches with Whitney had been so close that
I no more trusted him than I did Lockwood. And if I could not make
out Lockwood, a man at least of our own race and education, how
could I expect to fathom Alfonso?

It seemed, then, to rest with Kennedy and myself. At least so
Craig appraised the situation.

"You have a gun, Walter," he directed, "Lockwood, give yours to
Jameson."

Lockwood hesitated. Could he trust being unarmed, while Kennedy
and I had all the weapons?

Craig had not stopped to ask Alfonso. As he laid out the attack he
merely tapped the young man's pockets to see whether he was armed
or not, and finding nothing faced us again, Lockwood still
hesitating.

"I want Walter," explained Craig, "to go around back of the house.
It is there they must be expecting an attack. He can take up his
position behind that oak. It will be safe enough. By firing one
gun on each side of the tree he can make enough noise for half a
dozen. Then you and I can rush the front of the house."

Lockwood had nothing better to suggest. Reluctantly he handed over
his revolver.

I dropped back from them and skirted the house at a safe distance
so as not to be seen, then came up back of the tree.

Carefully I aimed at the glass of a window on the first floor, as
offering the greatest opportunity for making a racket, which was
the object I had in mind.

I fired from the right and the glass was shattered in a thousand
bits. Another shot from the left broke the light out of another
window on the opposite side.

The house was a sort of bungalow, with most of the rooms on the
first floor, and a small second story or attic window. That went
next. Altogether I felt that I was giving a splendid account of
myself.

From the house came a rapid volley in reply. Whoever was in there
was not going to surrender without a fight. One after another I
plugged away with my shots, now bent on making the most of them.
With the answering shots it made quite a merry little fusillade,
and I was glad enough to have the shelter of the staunch oak which
two or three times was hit squarely at about the level of my
shoulders. I had never before heard the whirr of so many bullets
about me, and I cannot say that I enjoyed it.

But my attack was what Craig wanted. I heard a noise in the front
of the house, as of feet running, and then I knew that in spite of
all he had given me the least dangerous part of the attack.

I plugged away valiantly with what shots I had left, then leaving
just one more in the chamber of each gun, I hurried around in the
shadow, my blood up, to help them.

With the aid of the officer, they had just forced the light door
and Searchlight had been allowed to leap in ahead of them, as I
came up.

"Here," I said to Lockwood, handing him back his gun, "take it,
there is just one shot left."

I, at least, had expected to find one, perhaps two desperate men
waiting for us. Evidently our ruse had worked. The room was dark,
but there seemed to be no one in it, though we could hear sounds
as though some one were hastily barricading the door that led from
the front to the room at which I had been firing.

Lockwood struck a match.

"Confound it, don't!" muttered Craig, knocking it from his hand.
"They can see us well enough without helping them."

"Chester!"

We stood transfixed. It was a woman's voice. Where did it come
from? Could she be in the room?

"Chester--is that you?"

"Yes, Inez. Where are you?"

"I ran up here--in this attic--when I heard the shots."

"Come down, then. All is right, now."

She came down a half ladder, half flight of steps. At the foot she
paused just a moment and hesitated. Then, like a frightened bird,
she flew to the safety of Lockwood's arms.

"Mr. Whitney," she sobbed, "called me up and told me that he had
something very important to say, a message from you. He said that
he had the dagger, in his safe, up in the country. He told me
you'd be there and that you expected me to come up with him in his
car. I went. We had some trouble with the engine. And then that
other car--the one that followed us, came up behind and forced us
off the bank. Mr. Whitney and I were both stunned. I don't
remember a thing after that, until I woke up here. Where is it?"

I listened, with one eye on that door that had been barricaded.
Was Lockwood really innocent, after all? I could not think that
Inez Mendoza could make such a mistake, if he were not.

Lockwood clenched his fists. "Some one shall pay for this," he
exclaimed.

There was the problem--the inner room. Who would go in? We looked
at each other a moment.

The room in which we were was a living room, and perhaps, when
there were visitors in the little house, was a guest-room. At any
rate, on one side was a huge davenport by day which could be
transformed into a folding bed at night.

Lockwood looked about hastily and his eye fell on the door, then
on this folding bed.

With a wrench, he opened it and seized the cotton mattress from
the inside. With his gun ready he advanced toward the barricaded
door, holding the mattress as a shield, for his experience in wild
countries had taught him that a cotton mattress is about as good a
thing to stop bullets as one could find on the spur of the moment.

Kennedy and the officer followed just behind, and the three threw
their weights on the door almost before we knew what they were
about.

"Chester--don't!" cried Inez in alarm, too late. "He'll--kill
you!"

The excitement had been too much for her. She reeled, fainting,
and I caught her.

Before I could restore the davenport to something like its
original condition so that we could take care of her, the first
onslaught was over.

Three guns were sticking their blue noses into the darkness of the
next room.

"Hands up!" shouted Craig, "Drop your gun! Let me hear it fall!"

There followed a thud and Kennedy, followed by Lockwood and the
officer entered.

As they fumbled to strike a light, I managed to open a window and
let in some fresh air, while the Senora, for once human, loosened
the throat of Inez' dress and fanned her.

Through the open door, now, I could hear what was going on in the
next room, but could not see.

"It was you, Lockwood," I heard a familiar voice accusing, "who
was in the Museum the night the dagger disappeared."

"Yes," replied Lockwood, a bit disdainfully. "I suspected
something crooked about that dagger. I thought that if I made a
copy of the inscription on the blade, I might decipher it myself,
or get some one to do it for me. I went in and, when a chance
came, I hid in the sarcophagus. There I waited until the Museum
was closed. Then, when finally I got to the place where I thought
the dagger was--it was gone!"

"The point is," cut in Craig, interrupting, "who was the
mysterious visitor to Mendoza the night of his murder?"

He paused. No one seemed to be disposed to answer and he went on,
"Who else than the man who sought to sell the secret on its blade,
in return for Inez for whom he had a secret passion? I have
reasoned it all out--the offer, the quarrel, the stabbing with the
dagger itself, and the escape down the stairs, instead of by the
elevator."

"And I," put in Lockwood, "coming to report to Mendoza my failure
to find the dagger, found him dead--and at once was suspected of
being the murderer!"

Inez had revived and her quick ears had caught her lover's voice
and the last words.

Weak as she was, she sprang up and fairly ran into the next room.
"No--Chester--No!" she cried. "I never suspected--not even when I
saw the shoe-prints. No--that is the man,--there--I know it--I
know it!"

I hurried after her, as she flung herself again between Lockwood
and the rest of us, as if to shield him, while Lockwood proudly
caressed the stray locks of dark hair that fluttered on his
shoulder.

I looked in the direction all were looking.

Before us stood, unmasked at last, the scientific villain who had
been plotting and scheming to capture both the secret and Inez--
well knowing that suspicion would rest either on Lockwood, the
soldier of fortune, or on the jealous Indian woman whose son had
been rejected and whose brother he had himself already, secretly,
driven to an insane suicide in his unscrupulous search for the
treasure of Truxillo.

It was Professor Norton, himself--first thief of the dagger which
later he had hidden but which Whitney's detectives had stolen in
turn from him; writer of anonymous letters, even to himself to
throw others off the trail; maker of stramonium cigarettes with
which to confuse the minds of his opponents, Whitney, Mendoza, and
the rest; secret lover of Inez whom he demanded as the price of
the dagger; and murderer of Don Luis.

Senora de Moche and Alfonso, behind me, could only gasp their
astonishment. Much as she would have liked to have the affair end
in a general vindication of the curse she could not control a
single, triumphant thrust.

"His blood," she cried, transfixing Norton with her stern eyes,
"has cried out of Titicaca for vengeance from that day to this!"

"Want any help?"

We all turned toward the door as Burke, dust-covered and tired,
stamped in, followed by a man whose face was bandaged and bloody.

"I heard shots. Is it all over?"

But we paid no attention to Burke.

There was Whitney, considerably banged up by the fall, but lucky
to be alive.

"I tried to shake him," he explained, catching sight of Norton.
"But he stuck to us, even on our detours. Finally he grew
desperate--forced my car off the road. What happened after that, I
don't know. He must have carried me some miles, insensible, and
dumped me in the bushes again. I was several miles up the hill,
tramping along, looking for a road-house, when this gentleman
found me and said I had gone too far."

Senora de Moche turned from Lockwood and Inez who were standing,
oblivious to the rest of us, and stared at Whitney's bruised and
battered face.

"It is the curse," she muttered. "It will never--

"Just a moment," interrupted Craig, drawing the dagger from his
pocket, and turning toward Inez. "It was to your ancestor that the
original possessor of the secret promised to give the 'big fish,'
when he was killed."

He paused and handed the dagger to her. She touched it shuddering,
but as though it were a duty.

"Take it," he said simply. "The secret is yours. Only love can
destroy the curse on the Gold of the Gods."

THE END