Produced by Avinash Kothare, Tom Allen, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.
This file was produced from images generously made available by the
Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions.


MEMOIR

OF

FATHER VINCENT DE PAUL,

RELIGIOUS OF LA TRAPPE:


TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL FRENCH

BY

A. M. POPE,


WITH A PREFACE

BY

THE RIGHT REVEREND DR. CAMERON,

BISHOP OF ARICHAT.


PREFACE.


The reply of Maximilian to the wealthy courtier who tendered him a
goodly purse of gold for a title of nobility, was worthy of that
emperor: "I can enrich thee," he said, "but only thy own virtue can
enoble thee" All true grandeur, excellence, and dignity, are the
offspring of virtue. Even the most renowned oracles of paganism
proclaim this, and the very persecutors of holiness are often
constrained to pay homage to their victim. No wonder, then, that
whenever we are privileged to find one of those rare mortals, whom
virtue has unmistakably marked as her own, we lovingly attach an
exceptional importance to everything connected with his history. Such
assuredly was he whose "account of what befel" him during his first
ten years in America, is now for the first time published in English.
A brief sketch of the religious Order to which he belonged, of the
life he led, and of the Monastery he founded, may give added interest
to his own simple and edifying narrative.

What Scripture terms "the world," and so emphatically denounces as
such, is the poisonous source of the mother-evils described by St.
John as "the concupiscence of the flesh, and the concupiscence of the
eyes, and the pride of life." Flight from the contamination of this
threefold inordinate love of pleasures, riches and honors, being
essential to salvation, is most easily, most surely and most
meritoriously achieved by those who, in answer to a Divine call,
consecrate and give themselves wholly to God, by the practice of the
evangelical counsels of chastity, poverty and obedience. Those who
embrace this angelic profession form the choice portion of the fold
of Christ. They rank as His spouses, and, by the holy ambition of
their virgin love, console Him for the craven defections or the cold
indifference of so many Christians.

All Christians animated by the spirit of Jesus are religious, just
as they are holy, and kings and priests (I Peter 2,9). Such is the
unity of the marvellous body of Christ, the Church, whose soul is
infinite love, that her every member shares, in some sense and
measure, all her sublime prerogatives. But as God willed that in His
family some goods should be common to all, so He likewise decreed
that other goods should be reserved to comparatively few, and through
these chosen and privileged ones benefit the rest. Hence, as besides
this elementary royalty and priesthood conferred by baptism, there
are, according to the express order of God superior and official
royalties and priesthoods, in like manner besides the fundamental
religion, which is the vital breath of every soul in a state of
grace, there is a religion more eminent, more definite, more perfect.
Thus as there is here below a sacerdotal and royal state, so likewise
is there a religious state which is confined to those only who bind
themselves by vows to a monastic life. It is evident, therefore, that
when Catholics use the expression "religious Order," or term a monk
or nun "a religious," they are perfectly justified in doing so, the
cavillings of Dr. Trench to the contrary notwithstanding.

Each religious order is characterized by the special purpose for
which it was founded, and by the constitution and rule which its
members are to follow. The observance of the Benedictine rule was
greatly relaxed in the monasteries of France towards the close of the
eleventh century, when St. Robert (1098) inaugurated a reform at
Citeaux, which resulted in the establishment of the Cistercian Order.
A monastery of this Order was subsequently (1140) founded in La
Perche, France, by the Count of Perche, and was called La Trappe. In
1662 the commendatory abbot of La Trappe, Armand Jean le Bouthilier
de Rance', a nobleman who abandoned wealth and a brilliant career,
visited La Trappe, undertook a new reform of the Cistercian rule, and
thus became the founder of that branch of this Order which became
known as the congregation of La Trappe. In consequence of the
Revolution of 1789, one of the Trappist Fathers, Dom Augustin
conducted twenty-four of his brethren from France to Valsainte, in
Switzerland. Here they decided to adopt a rule still more strict than
that which they had hitherto observed. This step occasioned a
division in the Trappist Order: some monasteries following the rule
of Valsainte, others that of de Rance'. An appeal to Rome resulted in
a decree dated October 3rd, 1834, by which all Trappist monasteries
were placed under one government. The decree not having however had
the desired effect, the Holy See decided in 1847 to sanction two
distinct congregations, one to follow the constitution of de Rance',
and the other to observe the rule of St. Benedict, with the primitive
constitution of the Cistercian Order. To the latter congregation
belong the Trappist monasteries of Canada and the United States,
whose time-table on week days during winter is as follows:--

At two o'clock, a. m., the Trappists rise and proceed to their
chapel, where they devote their time to the recitation of the Office,
meditation, &c., till 7.45, when they have High Mass, followed by
manual labor, which, with the interruption of only half an hour given
to the recitation of Office and examen of conscience, continues till
2 p. m.; ten minutes more and they break their long fast of twenty-four
hours with the lean and only repast of the day. At 6 p. m. begins
spiritual reading, immediately followed by compline and other
devotional exercises till 7, when they retire to their much needed
rest on their hard straw mattresses. Perpetual silence is prescribed,
unless in case of necessity, so that the Trappist's whole life is one
of extraordinary austerity and of incessant recollection, reminding
him at every turn of the shortness of life and the tremendous rigor
of judgment. The time-table for summer varies in some minor practices
and observances, while, according to that of Sundays and holidays,
those religious in the latter case rise at midnight, and in the
former at 1 a. m., and busy themselves till 7 o'clock, p. m. during
winter, and 8 o'clock during summer in the praises of the Lord.

James Merle was born at Lyons, France, the 29th October, 1768. His
father was a much respected physician in that city. On the 7th of
April, 1798, while the godless Revolution was carrying resistless
devastation over the country, he privately received the holy order of
priesthood at the hands of Mgr. C. F. D. Dubois de Sanzay, Archbishop
of Vienne, and seven years afterwards he entered the Trappist Order,
taking the name of Father Vincent de Paul, by which he has always
since been known.

In his memoir Father Vincent speaks of having bought a large tract
of land near the sea in Nova Scotia, and of having built a house
thereon. This was in Tracadie, where he resided for some years
previous to his return to France in 1823. In 1824 he came again to
Tracadie with another worthy priest of his Order, Father Francis, a
native of Freiburg, together with three lay brothers, and the house
above referred to became thenceforth the monastery of Petit
Clairvaux. A few years later three other lay brothers were admitted,
two of them from Halifax, and one from the United States.

Until the Rev. John Quinn was appointed parish priest of Tracadie,
(1837) Father Vincent had pastoral charge of the three missions of
Tracadie, Havre au Boucher, and Pomquet, and the old people of the
place still recount his innumerable acts of extraordinary zeal and
devotion. "He scarcely ever had the stole off his neck during Lent,"
is the remark of one of them. He also made frequent excursions to
Cheticamp, Arichat, and other parts of Cape Breton, to preach
missions there, and to assist the dying. In his memoir he speaks of
that sublime pilgrimage of the heart, the admirable devotion of the
Way of the Cross, as one especially acceptable to God; and no wonder
it bore marvellous fruit as conducted by him. At each station this
holy servant of God did not content himself with reading the usual
prayers: he gave expression to heavenly thoughts inspired by his own
burning love of his crucified Saviour, producing a mysterious and
lasting echo in all hearts. The church was always crowded on those
occasions. To prepare children for their first communion, he devoted
six entire weeks of instruction each year. His capacity for work was
immense; and while hurry never appeared in his actions, he managed to
glide through them with a masterly ease far out-stripping the
speediest progress of ordinary mortals. A supernatural light seemed
to supersede the necessity of recourse to the usual slow and
laborious process of reasoning in seeing one's way, and to endow him
with an intuition excluding all doubt, and with an instinct ever
ready in performance. Thus for everything he found ample time,
because no particle of his time was lost. He was a living,
palpitating, breathing, vocal, acting temple of the Holy Ghost, and
this Divine indwelling was, in a manner, visible to all. At the
altar, during the holy sacrifice which he daily offered, it seemed to
transfigure his countenance so as to impress his heavenly citizenship
upon all beholders. In administering the sacrament, in instructing
the people, in his incessant endeavors to keep or win them from sin,
and to provide for all their spiritual wants, the same irradiation of
holiness imparted the most extraordinary efficacy to his charity and
zeal.

An English department joined with the Slavs and marched to the coast
along the Bay of Cattaro to Castel Nuovo. Hoste himself returned
with his ships in order and made in front of Castel Nuovo halt.
Castelnuovo was heavily under siege from land and ocean. The bombardment
began immediately. The Frenchman made two days and two nights, tough
resistance. But more could she not be kept. They arose, and thus
were both strongholds Castelnuovo and _Espagnola_ the rubber in
the hands. Hoste and Vladika had a crew in the forts and then
returned back Cattaro. Of all the cities and fortresses of the Bocca
Cattaro only remained in the possession of the French. His
conquest was but the main thing. Now his fate should be decided as
soon as possible 14. Siege and surrender Cattaros. The Bokel
and Montenegrins went immediately after it Cattaro and besieged
from all sides. Since Troiza in previous fights had been destroyed,
had no real fortress Cattaro more. But hardly a city in the
world is so well fortified by nature as Cattaro.

One need only _Vrmaz_ on the hill above the town a good aufzupflanzen
chain gun, then Cattaro impregnable. The French had a good top battery,
but the Montenegrins have previously had been stormed, and not from
the side, which they dominated, but from behind, ie from the Montenegrin
soil. Cattaro In order to conquer, you had so necessarily a number
of guns on the mountains Vrmaz have. Some guns were Montenegrins
captured by the French and some of them had guns themselves, which
is on St. George and Castel Nuovo had conquered, took his hosts
on ships across. As he hesitated, but these guns at the same Cattaro
off-and on the go Vrmaz to leave the Bokel feared that he had these
guns do not need to Cattaro wanted and did so at the claim Vladika.
This informed the matter with the commander and asked him to refer
the case to speed possible.

In this
presentation of the Hoste Vladika replied with a surprising letter
that reads: "Would your high!

I had the honor of your letter received yesterday.

I regret that the population of the destruction of Fort St.

In 1812, I, in company with two other brothers, was sent by him to
the United States, there to found an establishment of our Order. We
left Bordeaux on the 15th June, and on the 6th of the month of August
we arrived at Boston. We had with us one of our Trappistines, whose
object was also to found a community; with this intention she had
preceded her companions, but now found herself alone, as passports
were refused to the other sisters. We were welcomed by the worthy Mr.
Matignon, parish priest of the town, who coaxed us to remain in the
diocese of Bishop Cheverus. However as we had received orders to
establish ourselves near Baltimore, after a few days rest I started
for that town alone, leaving my brothers and the nun in Boston,
intending to send for them when I should find a suitable site for the
two projected establishments. I paid my respects to His Grace the
Archbishop of Baltimore, who received me kindly, but appeared at a
loss where to find a site such as we desired. After many unsuccessful
efforts and researches, he established me temporally on a farm
belonging to the Society of Jesus (of which he was a member) until
such time as we could procure the sort of place we wanted; then as I
thought that time might be long in coming, I summoned my brothers to
me, and arranged for a suitable lodging for the nun.

During our stay, a rich man of Baltimore, who was once a Protestant
and had been converted, offered us 2000 acres of land in the
mountains of Pensylvania, near a river called the Delaware. He was
even generous enough to offer me the services of his son, who was
also a recent convert, and who came with us to point out the property
which, however, I was not able to inspect thoroughly as I remained
there only one day.

I returned soon after with two young men who were inclined to join
our Order. They commenced a somewhat rude novitiate, for we fasted
and kept silence on the way, going always on foot for want of money.
After great suffering from fatigue and heat (as it was summer), we
arrived at a little town, distant about sixty miles from
Philadelphia, whence we had started on our tour of inspection. This
little town, which was called Milford, was quite near to the land
that was to be ours.

On the way we passed through many Protestant villages whose
inhabitants appeared to be anxious for the light of the true faith,
and this budding town of Milford did not look askance at us, as
almost all of its inhabitants came to mass on Sunday. After mass one
of the young men aforementioned, who knew English well, expounded the
catechism to them, and they listened with attention. The Protestant
minister came afterwards to preach, but we were told that none of the
people went to hear him which without doubt annoyed him greatly. One
of the principal men of the place, a Protestant, as indeed they were
all, begged me to remain with them, saying that they would subscribe
me a pension, and that he would head the list with the sum of fifty
dollars. But we had not come to this country to be missionaries, so
we left Milford to go and inspect our land.

Travelling through these immense and trackless forests was very
difficult, and we often went astray. One day when I was alone with a
child who served me in the capacity of guide, we were greatly
puzzled. We wished to find a little hut that we had built in the
woods in which to sleep; nightfall was coming on, and there seemed no
chance of finding our camp before sundown. I said to the child: "here
is a low, flat rock, on which I will spend the night." He replied
that if I remained there I should be devoured by the bears, of which
there were a great number on these mountains; we had already heard
their cries and hideous howlings. At length, thanks be to God, we
found the cabin, which was not a very safe refuge for us, as it was
only a little hut built of young trees. The two novices and I slept
there like Indians, either on the bare ground or on couches formed by
heaps of the branches of trees.

Having no provisions with us we were obliged for the first few days
to eat what we could find in the woods, such as certain little blue
berries that they call "bluets," and other wild fruits, which the
people of the country despise. On the third or fourth day help came.
A Jew and a Protestant appeared on the scene, bringing us potatoes.
This Jew showed a leaning towards our religion, and the Sunday
previous I had said mass in his house. I do not doubt that if we had
remained longer with these people many would have been converted.
The Perastaner distributed with the help of some of the French and
Montenegrins liberated their town. The small fortress above Perast
was not easy to defeat, but had finally here, the French soft.
There
were many people in Milford who were bitter enemies to the truth.

I often said mass in our cabin. One day we made a cross and carried
it in procession for nearly a mile: we sang psalms, and part of the
way went barefoot, until we reached the spot where we planted the
cross, which was our consolation and our safeguard, as there were in
this desert a great number of rattlesnakes and other reptiles no less
dangerous. When we left our retreat we would sometimes step upon them
and would hear the noise that these serpents make with their rattles.

At last having walked over a great portion of these two thousand
acres of land during the two weeks that we spent there, we left these
solitudes and went down to Philadelphia. [Footnote: It was not deemed
advisable to accept this property, it being almost entirely rock or
marsh land. Besides which it was not suitable for one of our
establishments, communication with other places being too difficult.]

Upon arriving at the town I told the Bishop how well-disposed were
the people whom we had seen, and suggested to him to send some
missionaries there, but he told me that he had none to send. If I had
been free I would have returned at once to labor for the conversion
of these poor people.

