Unfortunately, a great chasm in the Annals of Tacitus, at this period,
precludes all information from that historian respecting the reign of
Caligula; but from what he mentions towards the close of the preceding
chapter, it is evident that Caligula was forward to seize the reins of
government, upon the death of Tiberius, whom, though he rivalled him in
his vices, he was far from imitating in his dissimulation.  Amongst the
people, the remembrance of Germanicus' virtues cherished for his family
an attachment which was probably, increased by its misfortunes; and they
were anxious to see revived in the son the popularity of the father.
Considering, however, that Caligula's vicious disposition was already
known, and that it had even been an inducement with Tiberius to procure
his succession, in order that it might prove a foil to his own memory; it
is surprising that no effort was made at this juncture to shake off the
despotism which had been so intolerable in the last reign, and restore
the ancient liberty of the republic.  Since the commencement of the
imperial dominion, there never had been any period so favourable for a
counter-revolution as the present crisis.  There existed now no Livia, to
influence the minds of the senate and people in respect of the
government; nor was there any other person allied to the family of
Germanicus, whose countenance or intrigues could promote the views of
Caligula.  He himself was now only in the twenty-fifth year of his age,
was totally inexperienced in the administration of public affairs, had
never performed even the smallest service to his country, and was
generally known to be of a character which (293) disgraced his
illustrious descent.  Yet, in spite of all these circumstances, such was
the destiny of Rome, that his accession afforded joy to the soldiers, who
had known him in his childhood, and to the populace in the capital, as
well as the people in the provinces, who were flattered with the delusive
expectation of receiving a prince who should adorn the throne with the
amiable virtues of Germanicus.

It is difficult to say, whether weakness of understanding, or corruption
of morals, were more conspicuous in the character of Caligula.  He seems
to have discovered from his earliest years an innate depravity of mind,
which was undoubtedly much increased by defect of education.  He had lost
both his parents at an early period of life; and from Tiberius' own
character, as well as his views in training the person who should succeed
him on the throne, there is reason to think, that if any attention
whatever was paid to the education of Caligula, it was directed to
vitiate all his faculties and passions, rather than to correct and
improve them.  If such was really the object, it was indeed prosecuted
with success.

The commencement, however, of his reign was such as by no means
prognosticated its subsequent transition.  The sudden change of his
conduct, the astonishing mixture of imbecility and presumption, of moral
turpitude and frantic extravagance, which he afterwards evinced; such as
rolling himself over heaps of gold, his treatment of his horse Incitatus,
and his design of making him consul, seem to justify a suspicion that his
brain had actually been affected, either by the potion, said to have been
given him by his wife Caesonia, or otherwise.  Philtres, or love-potions,
as they were called, were frequent in those times; and the people
believed that they operated upon the mind by a mysterious and sympathetic
power.  It is, however, beyond a doubt, that their effects were produced
entirely by the action of their physical qualities upon the organs of the
body.  They were usually made of the satyrion, which, according to Pliny,
was a provocative.  They were generally given by women to their husbands
at bed-time; and it was necessary towards their successful operation,
that the parties should sleep together.  This circumstance explains the
whole mystery.  She sat herself down, trying to think whether it
were possible that Lucy might fill the throne; for she had begun
to recognize it as probable that her son's will would be too strong for
her; but her thoughts would fly away to Griselda Grantly. In her first
and only matured attempt to realize her day-dreams, she had chosen
Griselda for her queen. She had failed there, seeing that the Fates had
destined Miss Grantly for another throne; for another and a higher
one, as far as the world goes.

She would have made Griselda the wife of a baron, but fate was about
to make that young lady the wife of a marquis. Was there cause of grief
in this? Did she really regret that Miss Grantly, with all her virtues,
should be made over to the house of Hartletop? Lady Lufton was a
woman who did not bear disappointment lightly; but nevertheless she
did almost feel herself to have been relieved from a burden when she
thought of the termination of the Lufton-Grantly marriage treaty. What
if she had been successful, and, after all, the prize had been other
than she had expected? She was sometimes prone to think that that prize
was not exactly all that she had once hoped.
Griselda looked the very thing that Lady Lufton wanted for a queen; but
how would a queen reign who trusted only to her looks? In that respect it
was perhaps well for her that destiny had interposed.

Griselda, she was driven to admit, was better suited to Lord Dumbello
than to her son. But still--such a queen as Lucy! Could it ever
come to pass that the lieges of the kingdom would bow the knee in proper
respect before so puny a sovereign? And then there was that feeling
which, in still higher quarters, prevents the marriage of princes
with the most noble of their people. Is it not a recognized rule of
these realms that none of the blood royal shall raise to royal honours
those of the subjects who are by birth un-royal?

Lucy was a subject of the house of Lufton in that she was the sister
of the parson and a resident denizen of the parsonage.



[382]  This opinion, like some others which occur in Suetonius, may
justly be considered as a vulgar error; and if the heart was found
entire, it must have been owing to the weakness of the fire, rather than
to any quality communicated to the organ, of resisting the power of that
element.

[383]  The magnificent title of King of Kings has been assumed, at
different times, by various potentates.  The person to whom it is here
applied, is the king of Parthia.  Under the kings of Persia, and even
under the Syro-Macedonian kings, this country was of no consideration,
and reckoned a part of Hyrcania.  But upon the revolt of the East from
the Syro-Macedonians, at the instigation of Arsaces, the Parthians are
said to have conquered eighteen kingdoms.

[384]  A.U.C. 765.

[385]  It does not appear that Gaetulicus wrote any historical work, but
Martial, Pliny, and others, describe him as a respectable poet.

[386]  Supra Confluentes.  The German tribe here mentioned occupied the
country between the Rhine and the Meuse, and gave their name to Treves
(Treviri), its chief town.  Coblentz had its ancient name of Confluentes,
from its standing at the junction of the two rivers.  The exact site of
the village in which Caligula was born is not known.  Cluverius
conjectures that it may be Capelle.

[387]  Chap. vii.

[388]  The name was derived from Caliga, a kind of boot, studded with
nails, used by the common soldiers in the Roman army.

[389]  According to Tacitus, who gives an interesting account of these
occurrences, Treves was the place of refuge to which the young Caius was
conveyed.--Annal. i.

[390]  In c. liv. of TIBERIUS, we have seen that his brothers Drusus and
Nero fell a sacrifice to these artifices.

[391]  Tiberius, who was the adopted father of Germanicus.

[392]  Natriceus, a water-snake, so called from nato, to swim.  The
allusion is probably to Caligula's being reared in the island of Capri.

[393]  As Phaeton is said to have set the world on fire.

[394]  See the Life of TIBERIUS, c. lxxiii.

[395]  His name also was Tiberius.  See before, TIBERIUS, c. lxxvi.

[396]  Procida, Ischia, Capri, etc.

[397]  The eagle was the standard of the legion, each cohort of which had
its own ensign, with different devices; and there were also little images
of the emperors, to which divine honours were paid.

[398]  See before, cc. liii. liv.

[399]  See TIBERIUS, c. x.; and note.

[400]  The mausoleum built by Augustus, mentioned before in his Life,
c. C.

[401]  The Carpentum was a carriage, commonly with two wheels, and an
arched covering, but sometimes without a covering; used chiefly by
matrons, and named, according to Ovid, from Carmenta, the mother of
Evander.  Women were prohibited the use of it in the second Punic war, by
the Oppian law, which, however, was soon after repealed.  This chariot
was also used to convey the images of the illustrious women to whom
divine honours were paid, in solemn processions after their death, as in
the present instance.  It is represented on some of the sestertii.

[402]  See cc. xiv. and xxiii. of the present History.

[403]  Ib. cc. vii. and xxiv.

[404]  Life of TIBERIUS, c. xliii.

[405]  See the Life of AUGUSTUS, cc. xxviii. and ci.

[406]  Julius Caesar had shared it with them (c. xli.).  Augustus had
only kept up the form (c. xl.).  Tiberius deprived the Roman people of
the last remains of the freedom of suffrage.

[407]  The city of Rome was founded on the twenty-first day of April,
which was called Palilia, from Pales, the goddess of shepherds, and ever
afterwards kept as a festival.

[408]  A.U.C. 790.

[409]  A.U.C. 791.

[410]  A.U.C. 793.

[411]  A.U.C. 794.

[412]  The Saturnalia, held in honour of Saturn, was, amongst the Romans,
the most celebrated festival of the whole year, and held in the month of
December.  All orders of the people then devoted themselves to mirth and
feasting; friends sent presents to one another; and masters treated their
slaves upon a footing of equality.  At first it was held only for one
day, afterwards for three days, and was now prolonged by Caligula's
orders.

[413]  See AUGUSTUS, cc. xxix and xliii.  The amphitheatre of Statilius
Taurus is supposed to have stood in the Campus Martius, and the elevation
now called the Monte Citorio, to have been formed by its ruins.

[414]  Supposed to be a house, so called, adjoining the Circus, in which
some of the emperor's attendants resided.

[415]  Now Puzzuoli, on the shore of the bay of Naples.  Every one knows
what wealth was lavished here and at Baiae, on public works and the
marine villas of the luxurious Romans, in the times of the emperors.

[416]  The original terminus of the Appian Way was at Brundusium.  This
mole formed what we should call a nearer station to Rome, on the same
road, the ruins of which are still to be seen.  St. Paul landed there.

[417]  Essedis: they were light cars, on two wheels, constructed to carry
only one person; invented, it is supposed, by the Belgians, and by them
introduced into Britain, where they were used in war.  The Romans, after
their expeditions in Gaul and Britain, adopted this useful vehicle
instead of their more cumbrous RHEDA, not only for journeys where
dispatch was required, but in solemn processions, and for ordinary
purposes.  They seem to have become the fashion, for Ovid tells us that
these little carriages were driven by young ladies, themselves holding
the reins, Amor. xi. 16. 49.

[418]  Suetonius flourished about seventy years after this, in the reign
of Adrian, and derived many of the anecdotes which give interest to his
history from cotemporary persons.  See CLAUDIUS, c. xv. etc.

[419]  See TIBERIUS, c. xlvii. and AUGUSTUS, c. xxxi.

[420]  This aqueduct, commenced by Caligula and completed by Claudian, a
truly imperial work, conveyed the waters of two streams to Rome,
following the valley of the Anio from above Tivoli.  The course of one of
these rivulets was forty miles, and it was carried on arches, immediately
after quitting its source, for a distance of three miles.  The other, the
Anio Novus, also began on arches, which continued for upwards of twelve
miles.  After this, both were conveyed under ground; but at the distance
of six miles from the city, they were united, and carried upon arches all
the rest of the way.  This is the most perfect of all the ancient
aqueducts; and it has been repaired, so as to convey the Acqua Felice,
one of the three streams which now supply Rome.  See CLAUDIUS, c. xx.

[421]  By Septa, Suetonius here means the huts or barracks of the
pretorian camp, which was a permanent and fortified station.  It stood to
the east of the Viminal and Quirinal hills, between the present Porta Pia
and S. Lorenzo, where there is a quadrangular projection in the city
walls marking the site.  The remains of the Amphitheatrum Castrense stand
between the Porta Maggiore and S. Giovanni, formerly without the ancient
walls, but now included in the line.  It is all of brick, even the
Corinthian pillars, and seems to have been but a rude structure, suited
to the purpose for which it was built, the amusement of the soldiers, and
gymnastic exercises.  For this purpose they were used to construct
temporary amphitheatres near the stations in the distant provinces, which
were not built of stone or brick, but hollow circular spots dug in the
ground, round which the spectators sat on the declivity, on ranges of
seats cut in the sod.  Many vestiges of this kind have been traced in
Britain.

[422]  The Isthmus of Corinth; an enterprize which had formerly been
attempted by Demetrius, and which was also projected by Julius Caesar,
c. xliv., and Nero, c. xix.; but they all failed of accomplishing it.

[423]  On the authority of Dio Cassius and the Salmatian manuscript, this
verse from Homer is substituted for the common reading, which is,

           Eis gaian Danaon perao se.
    Into the land of Greece I will transport thee.

[424]  Alluding, in the case of Romulus, to the rape of the Sabines; and
in that of Augustus to his having taken Livia from her husband.--
AUGUSTUS, c. lxii.

[425]  Selene was the daughter of Mark Antony by Cleopatra.

[426]  See c. xii.

[427]  The vast area of the Roman amphitheatres had no roof, but the
audience were protected against the sun and bad weather by temporary
hangings stretched over it.

[428]  A proverbial expression, meaning, without distinction.

[429]  The islands off the coast of Italy, in the Tuscan sea and in the
Archipelago, were the usual places of banishment.  See before, c. xv.;
and in TIBERIUS, c. liv., etc.

[430]  Anticyra, an island in the Archipelago, was famous for the growth
of hellebore.  This plant being considered a remedy for insanity, the
proverb arose--Naviga in Anticyram, as much as to say, "You are mad."

[431]  Meaning the province in Asia, called Galatia, from the Gauls who
conquered it, and occupied it jointly with the Greek colonists.

[432]  A quotation from the tragedy of Atreus, by L. Could she give up her
chair of state in order to place thereon the little girl from the
parsonage?

Could she take to her heart, and treat with absolute loving confidence,
with the confidence of an almost idolatrous mother, that little
chit who, a few months since, had sat awkwardly in one corner of
her drawing-room, afraid to speak to any one?

And yet it seemed that it must come to this--to this--or else those
day-dreams of hers would in nowise come to pass.

He carried in his left hand a
three-pointed lance, called Tridens or Fuscina, and in his right, a net,
with which he attempted to entangle his adversary, by casting it over his
head, and suddenly drawing it together; when with his trident he usually
slew him.  But if he missed his aim, by throwing the net either too short
or too far, he instantly betook himself to flight, and endeavoured to
prepare his net for a second cast.  His antagonist, in the mean time,
pursued, to prevent his design, by dispatching him.

[436]  AUGUSTUS, c. xxiii.

[437]  TIBERIUS, c. xl.

[438]  See before, c. xix.

[439]  Popae were persons who, at public sacrifices, led the victim to
the altar.  They had their clothes tucked up, and were naked to the
waist.  The victim was led with a slack rope, that it might not seem to
he brought by force, which was reckoned a bad omen.  For the same reason,
it was allowed to stand loose before the altar, and it was thought a very
unfavourable sign if it got away.

[440]  Plato de Repub. xi.; and Cicero and Tull. xlviii.

[441]  The collar of gold, taken from the gigantic Gaul who was killed in
single combat by Titus Manlius, called afterwards Torquatus, was worn by
the lineal male descendants of the Manlian family.  But that illustrious
race becoming extinct, the badge of honour, as well as the cognomen of
Torquatus, was revived by Augustus, in the person of Caius Nonius
Asprenas, who perhaps claimed descent by the female line from the family
of Manlius.

[442]  Cincinnatus signifies one who has curled or crisped hair, from
which Livy informs us that Lucius Quintus derived his cognomen.  But of
what badge of distinction Caligula deprived the family of the Cincinnati,
unless the natural feature was hereditary, and he had them all shaved--a
practice we find mentioned just below--history does not inform us, nor
are we able to conjecture.

[443]  The priest of Diana Nemorensis obtained and held his office by his
prowess in arms, having to slay his competitors, and offer human
sacrifices, and was called Rex from his reigning paramount in the
adjacent forest.  The temple of this goddess of the chase stood among the
deep woods which clothe the declivities of the Alban Mount, at a short
distance from Rome--nemus signifying a grove.  Julius Caesar had a
residence there.  See his Life, c. lxxi.  The venerable woods are still
standing, and among them chestnut-trees, which, from their enormous girth
and vast apparent age, we may suppose to have survived from the era of
the Caesars.  The melancholy and sequestered lake of Nemi, deep set in a
hollow of the surrounding woods, with the village on its brink, still
preserve the name of Nemi.

[444]  An Essedarian was one who fought from an Esseda, the light
carriage described in a former note, p. 264.

[445]  See before, JULIUS, c. x., and note.

[446]  Particularly at Baiae, see before, c. xix.  The practice of
encroaching on the sea on this coast, commenced before,--

    Jactis in altum molibus.--Hor. Od. B. iii. 1. 34.

[447]  Most of the gladiators were slaves.

[448]  The part of the Palatium built or occupied by Augustus and
Tiberius.

[449]  Mevania, a town of Umbria.  Its present name is Bevagna.  The
Clitumnus is a river in the same country, celebrated for the breed of
white cattle, which feed in the neighbouring pasturesShe would at have married me to because she life heard anything so
absurd, so untrue, so uncharitable, so-- farce She'd like me to
bring a dragon home, I suppose block of if I disappointed!

I never there-- in my would have let her; and Caligula now,.

