"Come, Mr. Brattle, do not pretend that this is not a comfort to
you."

"A comfort as my son ain't proved a murderer! If they'd a hanged 'im,
Muster Fenwick, that'd a been bad, for certain. It ain't much of
comfort we has; but there may be a better and a worser in everything,
no doubt. I'm obleeged to you, all as one, Muster Fenwick--very much
obleeged; and it will take a heavy load off his mother's heart." Then
the Vicar turned his gig round, and drove himself home.


CHAPTER LII.

CARRY BRATTLE'S JOURNEY.


Mrs. Stiggs had been right in her surmise about Carry Brattle. The
confinement in Trotter's Buildings and want of interest in her life
was more than the girl could bear, and she had been thinking of
escape almost from the first day that she had been there. Had it
not been for the mingled fear and love with which she regarded Mr.
Fenwick, had she not dreaded that he should think her ungrateful, she
would have flown even before the summons came to her which told her
that she must appear before the magistrates and lawyers, and among a
crowd of people, in the neighbourhood of her old home. That she could
not endure, and therefore she had flown. When it had been suggested
to her that she should go and live with her brother's wife as
her servant, that idea had been hard to bear. But there had been
uncertainty, and an opinion of her own which proved to be right,
that her sister-in-law would not receive her. Now about this paper
that the policeman had handed to her, and the threatened journey to
Heytesbury, there was no uncertainty,--unless she might possibly
escape the evil by running away. Therefore she ran away.

The straight-going people of the world, in dealing with those who go
crooked, are almost always unreasonable. "Because you have been bad,"
say they who are not bad to those who are bad, "because you have
hitherto indulged yourself with all pleasures within your reach,
because you have never worked steadily or submitted yourself to
restraint, because you have been a drunkard, and a gambler, and have
lived in foul company, therefore now,--now that I have got a hold of
you and can manipulate you in reference to your repentance and future
conduct,--I will require from you a mode of life that, in its general
attractions, shall be about equal to that of a hermit in the desert.
If you flinch you are not only a monster of ingratitude towards me,
who am taking all this trouble to save you, but you are also a poor
wretch for whom no possible hope of grace can remain." When it is
found that a young man is neglecting his duties, doing nothing,
spending his nights in billiard rooms and worse places, and getting
up at two o'clock in the day, the usual prescription of his friends
is that he should lock himself up in his own dingy room, drink tea,
and spend his hours in reading good books. It is hardly recognised
that a sudden change from billiards to good books requires a strength
of character which, if possessed, would probably have kept the young
man altogether from falling into bad habits. If we left the doors of
our prisons open, and then expressed disgust because the prisoners
walked out, we should hardly be less rational. The hours at Mrs.
Stiggs's house had been frightfully heavy to poor Carry Brattle, and
at last she escaped.

It was half-past ten on the Monday morning when she went out. It was
her custom to go out at that hour. Mr. Fenwick had desired her to
attend the morning services at the Cathedral. She had done so for a
day or two, and had then neglected them. But she had still left the
house always at that time; and once, when Mrs. Stiggs had asked some
question on the subject, she had replied almost in anger that she was
not a prisoner. On this occasion she made changes in her dress which
were not usual, and therefore she was careful to avoid being seen as
she went; but had she been interrogated she would have persevered.
Who had a right to stop her?

But where should she go? The reader may perhaps remember that once
when Mr. Fenwick first found this poor girl, after her flight from
home and her great disgrace, she had expressed a desire to go to the
mill and just look at it,--even if she might do no more than that.
The same idea was now in her mind, but as she left the city she had
no concerted plan. There were two things between which she must
choose at once,--either to go to London, or not to go to London. She
had money enough for her fare, and perhaps a few shillings over. In
a dim way she did understand that the choice was between going to
the devil at once,--and not going quite at once; and then, weakly,
wistfully, with uncertain step, almost without an operation of her
mind, she did not take the turn which, from the end of Trotter's
Buildings, would have brought her to the Railway Station, but did
take that which led her by the Three Honest Men out on to the Devizes
road,--the road which passes across Salisbury Plain, and leads from
the city to many Wiltshire villages,--of which Bullhampton is one.

She walked slowly, but she walked nearly the whole day. Nothing could
be more truly tragical than the utterly purposeless tenour of her
day,--and of her whole life. She had no plan,--nothing before her;
no object even for the evening and night of that very day in which
she was wasting her strength on the Devizes road. It is the lack of
object, of all aim, in the lives of the houseless wanderers that
gives to them the most terrible element of their misery. Think of it!
To walk forth with, say, ten shillings in your pocket,--so that there
need be no instant suffering from want of bread or shelter,--and
have no work to do, no friend to see, no place to expect you, no
duty to accomplish, no hope to follow, no bourn to which you can
draw nigher,--except that bourn which, in such circumstances, the
traveller must surely regard as simply the end of his weariness! But
there is nothing to which humanity cannot attune itself. Men can
live upon poison, can learn to endure absolute solitude, can bear
contumely, scorn, and shame, and never show it. Carry Brattle had
already become accustomed to misery, and as she walked she thought
more of the wretchedness of the present hour, of her weary feet, of
her hunger, and of the nature of the rest which she might purchase
for herself at some poor wayside inn, than she did of her future
life.


[Illustration: Carry Brattle.]


She got a lump of bread and a glass of beer in the middle of the day,
and then she walked on and on till the evening came. She went very
slowly, stopping often and sitting down when the road side would
afford her some spot of green shade. At eight o'clock she had walked
fifteen miles, straight along the road, and, as she knew well, had
passed the turn which would have taken her by the nearest way from
Salisbury to Bullhampton. She had formed no plan, but entertained a
hope that if she continued to walk they would not catch her so as to
take her to Heytesbury on the morrow. She knew that if she went on
she might get to Pycroft Common by this road; and though there was no
one in the whole world whom she hated worse than Mrs. Burrows, still
at Pycroft Common she might probably be taken in and sheltered. At
eight she reached a small village which she remembered to have seen
before, of which she saw the name written up on a board, and which
she knew to be six miles from Bullhampton. She was so tired and weary
that she could go no further, and here she asked for a bed. She told
them that she was walking from Salisbury to the house of a friend who
lived near Devizes, and that she had thought she could do it in one
day and save her railway fare. She was simply asked to pay for her
bed and supper beforehand, and then she was taken in and fed and
sheltered. On the next morning she got up very late and was unwilling
to leave the house. She paid for her breakfast, and, as she was
not told to go her way, she sat on the chair in which she had been
placed, without speaking, almost without moving, till late in the
afternoon. At three o'clock she roused herself, asked for some bread
and cheese which she put in her pocket, and started again upon her
journey. She thought that she would be safe, at any rate for that
day, from the magistrates and the policemen, from the sight of her
brother, and from the presence of that other man at Heytesbury. But
whither she would go when she left the house,--whether on to the
hated cottage at Pycroft Common, or to her father's house, she had
not made up her mind when she tied on her hat. She went on along
the road towards Devizes, and about two miles from the village she
came to a lane turning to the left, with a finger-post. On this was
written a direction,--To Bullhampton and Imber; and here she turned
short off towards the parish in which she had been born. It was then
four o'clock, and when she had travelled a mile further she found
a nook under the wall of a little bridge, and there she seated
herself, and ate her dinner of bread and cheese. While she was there
a policeman on foot passed along the road. The man did not see her,
and had he seen her would have taken no more than a policeman's
ordinary notice of her; but she saw him, and in consequence did not
leave her hiding-place for hours.

About nine o'clock she crept on again, but even then her mind was not
made up. She did not even yet know where she would bestow herself for
that night. It seemed to her that there would be an inexpressible
pleasure to her, even in her misery, in walking round the precincts
of the mill, in gazing at the windows of the house, in standing on
the bridge where she had so often loitered, and in looking once more
on the scene of her childhood. But, as she thought of this, she
remembered the darkness of the stream, and the softly-gurgling but
rapid flow with which it hurried itself on beneath the black abyss of
the building. She had often shuddered as she watched it, indulging
herself in the luxury of causeless trepidation. But now, were she
there, she would surely take that plunge into the blackness, which
would bring her to the end of all her misery!

And yet, as she went on towards her old home, through the twilight,
she had no more definite idea than that of looking once more on
the place which had been cherished in her memory through all her
sufferings. As to her rest for the night she had no plan,--unless,
indeed, she might find her rest in the hidden mill-pool of that dark,
softly-gurgling stream.

On that same day, between six and seven in the evening, the miller
was told by Mr. Fenwick that his son was no longer accused of the
murder. He had not received the information in the most gracious
manner; but not the less quick was he in making it known at the mill.
"Them dunderheads over at He'tsbry has found out at last as our
Sam had now't to do with it." This he said, addressing no one in
particular, but in the hearing of his wife and Fanny Brattle. Then
there came upon him a torrent of questions and a torrent also of
tears. Mrs. Brattle and Fanny had both made up their minds that Sam
was innocent; but the mother had still feared that he would be made
to suffer in spite of his innocence. Fanny, however, had always
persisted that the goodness of the Lord would save him and them from
such injustice. To the old man himself they had hardly dared to talk
about it, but now they strove to win him to some softness. Might not
a struggle be made to bring Sam back to the mill? But it was very
hard to soften the miller. "After what's come and gone, the lad is
better away," he said, at last. "I didn't think as he'd ever raised
his hand again an old man," he said, shortly afterwards; "but he's
kep' company with them as did. It's a'most as bad." Beyond this
the miller would not go; but, when they separated for the night,
the mother took herself for awhile into the daughter's chamber in
order that they might weep and rejoice together. It was now all but
midsummer, and the evenings were long and sultry. The window of
Fanny's bedroom looked out on to the garden of the mill, and was but
a foot or two above the ground. This ground had once been pleasant to
them all, and profitable withal. Of late, since the miller had become
old, and Sam had grown to be too restive and self-willed to act
as desired for the general welfare of the family, but little of
pleasure, or profit either, had been forthcoming from the patch
of ground. There were a few cabbages there, and rows of untended
gooseberry and currant bushes, and down towards the orchard there was
a patch of potatoes; but no one took pride now in the garden. As for
Fanny, if she could provide that there should always be a sufficient
meal on the table for her father and mother, it was as much as she
could do. The days were clean gone by in which she had had time and
spirits to tend her roses, pinks, and pansies. Now she sat at the
open window with her mother, and with bated breath they spoke of the
daughter and sister that was lost to them.

"He wouldn't take it amiss, mother, if I was to go over to
Salisbury?"

"If you was to ask him, Fan, he'd bid you not," said the mother.

"But I wouldn't ask him. I wouldn't tell him till I was back. She
was to be before the magistrates to-day. Mr. Fenwick told me so on
Sunday."

"It will about be the death of her."

"I don't know, mother. She's bolder now, mother, I fear, than what
she was in old days. And she was always sprightly,--speaking up to
the quality, with no fear like. Maybe it was what she said that got
them to let Sam go. She was never a coward, such as me."

"Oh, Fan, if she'd only a taken after thee!"

"The Lord, mother, makes us different for purposes of his own. Of all
the lasses I ever see, to my eyes she was the comeliest." The old
woman couldn't speak now, but rubbed her moist cheeks with her raised
apron. "I'll ask Mr. Toffy to-morrow, mother," continued Fanny, "and
if she be still at that place in Salisbury where Mr. Fenwick put her,
I'll just go to her. Father won't turn me out of the house along of
it."

"Turn thee out, Fan! He'll never turn thee out. What 'd a do, or what
'd I do if thee was to go away from us? If thou dost go, Fan, take
her a few bits of things that are lying there in the big press, and
'll never be used other gait. I warrant the poor child 'll be but
badly off for under-clothing."

