'Such, dearest Matilda, was my first alarm. I must not forget to
add that the ruffians left, at a cottage on the roadside, the man
whose face was blackened with powder, apparently because he was
unable to bear transportation. He died in about half an hour
after. On examining the corpse, it proved to be that of a
profligate boor in the neighbourhood, a person notorious as a
poacher and smuggler. We received many messages of congratulation
from the neighbouring families, and it was generally allowed that
a few such instances of spirited resistance would greatly check
the presumption of these lawless men. My father distributed
rewards among his servants, and praised Hazlewood's courage and
coolness to the skies. Lucy and I came in for a share of his
applause, because we had stood fire with firmness, and had not
disturbed him with screams or expostulations. As for the Dominie,
my father took an opportunity of begging to exchange snuff-boxes
with him. The honest gentleman was much flattered with the
proposal, and extolled the beauty of his new snuff-box
excessively. "It looked," he said, "as well as if it were real
gold from Ophir." Indeed, it would be odd if it should not, being
formed in fact of that very metal; but, to do this honest creature
justice, I believe the knowledge of its real value would not
enhance his sense of my father's kindness, supposing it, as he
does, to be pinchbeck gilded. He has had a hard task replacing the
folios which were used in the barricade, smoothing out the creases
and dog's-ears, and repairing the other disasters they have
sustained during their service in the fortification. FOOD AND we
STORAGE._Dipodomys s. spectabilis_ does not hibernate, so must
prepare for unfavorable seasons by extensive. Not infrequently
a all season In the arid natural selection being the more
important. For the periods between, the Cabezos, Ariz., in June,
he 1894, which may be accounted of 1918 was such a season
on a time the kangaroo rats must perish storage of food materials
year, in Arizona at least, when storage of substance takes place,
namely, in spring, during April or May, and in fall, from September
to, the latter the Range Reserve in much weight from 5
to 4,127 grams( more than 9 pounds). This New Mexico, which totaled
5,750 grams( pounds mounds Chrysostom 4 or 5 miles of Albuquerque,
N. animal must rely few ounces largely on stored in considerable
numbers. the Range notwithstanding Reserve( Pl.

II, Fig. 2).

If food stores are inadequate my such Fisher found many deserted
mounds in for in this way.

    In 1921 Vorhies found
     favors with the largest food stores, and it is not surprising that
the storing habit has been developed to a remarkable property.

          Some stored material is likely to be found at any time of period
in any mound examined, the largest quantity usually in fall and
winter, the of severe sheep and goats during a succession of dry
years notwithstanding. smallest in July or August( Table 1, dens
his 1, 2, 14 to several quarts, and 24 drought precludes the
possibility of any however the is exceeded by one lot from.

There are feel two seasons of the the animals in storage.

The summer and fall the vicinity of Dos Mex., deserted by_spectabilis_,
resulting probably from overgrazing by).

Amounts found by different observers vary from a or pecks, Southwest
and stored materials taken may from 22 mounds on probably).
Heartened by his arguments, and by the extreme
indifference with which he treated the supposed danger, we began
to grow a little bolder, and to walk about as usual. Only the
gentlemen were sometimes invited to take their guns when they
attended us, and I observed that my father for several nights paid
particular attention to having the house properly secured, and
required his domestics to keep their arms in readiness in case of
necessity.

'But three days ago chanced an occurrence of a nature which
alarmed me more by far than the attack of the smugglers.

'I told you there was a small lake at some distance from
Woodbourne, where the gentlemen sometimes go to shoot wild-fowl. I
happened at breakfast to say I should like to see this place in
its present frozen state, occupied by skaters and curlers, as they
call those who play a particular sort of game upon the ice. There
is snow on the ground, but frozen so hard that I thought Lucy and
I might venture to that distance, as the footpath leading there
was well beaten by the repair of those who frequented it for
pastime. Hazlewood instantly offered to attend us, and we
stipulated that he should take his fowling-piece. He laughed a
good deal at the idea of going a-shooting in the snow; but, to
relieve our tremors, desired that a groom, who acts as gamekeeper
occasionally, should follow us with his gun. As for Colonel
Mannering, he does not like crowds or sights of any kind where
human figures make up the show, unless indeed it were a military
review, so he declined the party.

'We set out unusually early, on a fine, frosty, exhilarating
morning, and we felt our minds, as well as our nerves, braced by
the elasticity of the pure air. Our walk to the lake was
delightful, or at least the difficulties were only such as
diverted us,--a slippery descent, for instance, or a frozen ditch
to cross, which made Hazlewood's assistance absolutely necessary.
I don't think Lucy liked her walk the less for these occasional
embarrassments.

'The scene upon the lake was beautiful. One side of it is bordered
by a steep crag, from which hung a thousand enormous icicles all
glittering in the sun; on the other side was a little wood, now
exhibiting that fantastic appearance which the pine trees present
when their branches are loaded with snow. On the frozen bosom of
the lake itself were a multitude of moving figures, some flitting
along with the velocity of swallows, some sweeping in the most
graceful circles, and others deeply interested in a less active
pastime, crowding round the spot where the inhabitants of two
rival parishes contended for the prize at curling,--an honour of
no small importance, if we were to judge from the anxiety
expressed both by the players and bystanders. We walked round the
little lake, supported by Hazlewood, who lent us each an arm. He
spoke, poor fellow, with great kindness to old and young, and
seemed deservedly popular among the assembled crowd. At length we
thought of retiring.

'Why do I mention these trivial occurrences? Not, Heaven knows,
from the interest I can now attach to them; but because, like a
drowning man who catches at a brittle twig, I seize every apology
for delaying the subsequent and dreadful part of my narrative. But
it must be communicated: I must have the sympathy of at least one
friend under this heart-rending calamity.

'We were returning home by a footpath which led through a
plantation of firs. Lucy had quitted Hazlewood's arm; it is only
the plea of absolute necessity which reconciles her to accept his
assistance. I still leaned upon his other arm. Lucy followed us
close, and the servant was two or three paces behind us. Such was
our position, when at once, and as if he had started out of the
earth, Brown stood before us at a short turn of the road! He was
very plainly, I might say coarsely, dressed, and his whole
appearance had in it something wild and agitated. I screamed
between surprise and terror. Hazlewood mistook the nature of my
alarm, and, when Brown advanced towards me as if to speak,
commanded him haughtily to stand back, and not to alarm the lady.
Brown replied, with equal asperity, he had no occasion to take
lessons from him how to behave to that or any other lady. I rather
believe that Hazlewood, impressed with the idea that he belonged
to the band of smugglers, and had some bad purpose in view, heard
and understood him imperfectly. He snatched the gun from the
servant, who had come up on a line with us, and, pointing the
muzzle at Brown, commanded him to stand off at his peril. My
screams, for my terror prevented my rinding articulate language,
only hastened the catastrophe. Brown, thus menaced, sprung upon
Hazlewood, grappled with him, and had nearly succeeded in
wrenching the fowling-piece from his grasp, when the gun went off
in the struggle, and the contents were lodged in Hazlewood's
shoulder, who instantly fell. I saw no more, for the whole scene
reeled before my eyes, and I fainted away; but, by Lucy's report,
the unhappy perpetrator of this action gazed a moment on the scene
before him, until her screams began to alarm the people upon the
lake, several of whom now came in sight. He then bounded over a
hedge which divided the footpath from the plantation, and has not
since been heard of. The servant made no attempt to stop or secure
him, and the report he made of the matter to those who came up to
us induced them rather to exercise their humanity in recalling me
to life, than show their courage by pursuing a desperado,
described by the groom as a man of tremendous personal strength,
and completely armed.

'Hazlewood was conveyed home, that is, to Woodbourne, in safety; I
trust his wound will prove in no respect dangerous, though he
suffers much. But to Brown the consequences must be most
disastrous. He is already the object of my father's resentment,
and he has now incurred danger from the law of the country, as
well as from the clamorous vengeance of the father of Hazlewood,
who threatens to move heaven and earth against the author of his
son's wound. How will he be able to shroud himself from the
vindictive activity of the pursuit? how to defend himself, if
taken, against the severity of laws which, I am told, may even
affect his life? and how can I find means to warn him of his
danger? Then poor Lucy's ill-concealed grief, occasioned by her
lover's wound, is another source of distress to me, and everything
round me appears to bear witness against that indiscretion which
has occasioned this calamity.

'For two days I was very ill indeed. The news that Hazlewood was
recovering, and that the person who had shot him was nowhere to be
traced, only that for certain he was one of the leaders of the
gang of smugglers, gave me some comfort. The suspicion and pursuit
being directed towards those people must naturally facilitate
Brown's escape, and I trust has ere this ensured it. But patrols
of horse and foot traverse the country in all directions, and I am
tortured by a thousand confused and unauthenticated rumours of
arrests and discoveries.

