
2.6.  THE DRAFT IN BALDINSVILLE.

If I'm drafted I shall RESIGN.

Deeply grateful for the onexpected honor thus confered upon me
I shall feel compeld to resign the position in favor of sum
more worthy person.  Modesty is what ails me.  That's what's
kept me under.

I meanter-say, I shall hav to resign if I'm drafted
everywheres I've bin inrold.  I must now, furrinstuns, be
inrold in upards of 200 different towns.  If I'd kept on
travelin' I should hav eventooaly becum a Brigade, in which
case I could have held a meetin' and elected myself Brigadeer-
ginral quite unanimiss.  I hadn't no idea there was so many of
me before.  But, serisly, I concluded to stop exhibitin', and
made tracks for Baldinsville.

My only daughter threw herself onto my boosum, and said, "It
is me fayther!  I thank the gods!"

She reads the "Ledger."

"Tip us yer bunch of fives, old faker!" said ARTEMUS, Jr.  He
reads the "Clipper."

My wife was to the sowin' circle.  I knew she and the wimin
folks was havin' a pleasant time slanderin' the females of the
OTHER sowin' circle (which likewise met that arternoon, and
was doubtless enjoyin' theirselves ekally well in slanderin'
the fust-named circle), and I didn't send for her.  I allus
like to see people enjoy theirselves.

My son ORGUSTUS was playin' onto a floot.

ORGUSTUS is a ethereal cuss.  The twins was bildin' cob-houses
in a corner of the kitchin'.

It'll cost some postage-stamps to raise this fam'ly, and yet
it 'ud go hard with the old man to lose any lamb of the flock.

An old bachelor is a poor critter.  He may have hearn the
skylark or (what's nearly the same thing) MISS KELLOGG and
CARLOTTY PATTI sing; he may have hearn OLE BULL fiddle, and
all the DODWORTHS toot, an' yet he don't know nothin' about
music--the real, ginuine thing--the music of the laughter of
happy, well-fed children!  And you may ax the father of sich
children home to dinner, feelin werry sure there'll be no
spoons missin' when he goes away.  Sich fathers never drop tin
five-cent pieces into the contribution box, nor palm shoe-pegs
off onto blind hosses for oats, nor skedaddle to British sile
when their country's in danger--nor do anything which is
really mean.  I don't mean to intimate that the old bachelor
is up to little games of this sort--not at all--but I repeat,
he's a poor critter.  He don't live here; only stays.  He
ought to 'pologize on behalf of his parients, for bein' here
at all.  The happy marrid man dies in good stile at home,
surrounded by his weeping wife and children.  The old bachelor
don't die at all--he sort of rots away, like a pollywog's
tail.
                         .  .  .  .

My townsmen were sort o' demoralized.  There was a evident
desine to ewade the Draft, as I obsarved with sorrer, and
patritism was below Par--and MAR, too.  [A jew desprit.]  I
hadn't no sooner sot down on the piazzy of the tavoun than I
saw sixteen solitary hossmen, ridin' four abreast, wendin'
their way up the street.

"What's them?  Is it cavilry?"

"That," said the landlord, "is the stage.  Sixteen able-bodied
citizens has literally bo't the stage line 'tween here and
Scotsburg.  That's them.  They're Stage-drivers.  Stage-
drivers is exempt!"

I saw that each stage-driver carried a letter in his left
hand.

"The mail is hevy, to-day," said the landlord.  "Gin'rally
they don't have more'n half a dozen letters 'tween 'em.  To-
day they're got one a piece!  Bile my lights and liver!"

"And the passengers?"

"There ain't any, skacely, now-days," said the landlord, "and
what few ther is very much prefer to walk, the roads is so
rough."

"And how ist with you?" I inquired of the editor of the
"Bugle-Horn of Liberty," who sot near me.

"I can't go," he said, shakin' his head in a wise way.
"Ordinarily I should delight to wade in gore, but my bleedin'
country bids me stay at home.  It is imperatively necessary
that I remain here for the purpose of announcin', from week to
week, that OUR GOV'MENT IS ABOUT TO TAKE VIGOROUS MEASURES TO
PUT DOWN THE REBELLION!"

I strolled into the village oyster-saloon, where I found Dr.
SCHWAZEY, a leadin' citizen in a state of mind which showed
that he'd bin histin' in more'n his share of pizen.

"Hello, old Beeswax," he bellered; "how's yer grandmams?  When
you goin' to feed your stuffed animils?"

"What's the matter with the eminent physician?" I pleasantly
inquired.

"This," he said; "this is what's the matter.  I'm a habit-ooal
drunkard!  I'm exempt!"

"Jes' so."

"Do you see them beans, old man?" and he pinted to a plate
before him.  "Do you see 'em?"

"I do.  They are a cheerful fruit when used tempritly."

"Well," said he, "I hadn't eat anything since last week.  I
eat beans now BECAUSE I eat beans THEN.  I never mix my
vittles!"

"It's quite proper you should eat a little suthin' once in a
while," I said.  "It's a good idee to occasionally instruct
the stummick that it mustn't depend excloosively on licker for
its sustainance."

"A blessin'," he cried; "a blessin' onto the hed of the man
what invented beans.  A blessin' onto his hed!"

"Which his name is GILSON!  He's a first family of Bostin,"
said I.
                         .  .  .  .

This is a speciment of how things was goin' in my place of
residence.
                         .  .  .  .

A few was true blue.  The schoolmaster was among 'em.  He
greeted me warmly.  He said I was welkim to those shores.  He
said I had a massiv mind.  It was gratifyin', he said, to see
the great intelleck stalkin' in their midst onct more.  I have
before had occasion to notice this schoolmaster.  He is
evidently a young man of far more than ord'nary talents.

The schoolmaster proposed we should git up a mass meetin'.
The meetin' was largely attended.  We held it in the open air
round a roarin' bonfire.

The schoolmaster was the first orator.  He's pretty good on
the speak.  He also writes well, his composition bein' seldom
marred by ingrammatticisms. He said this inactivity surprised
him.  "What do you expect will come of this kind of doin's?
Nihil fit--"

"Hooray for Nihil!" I interrupted.  "Fellow-citizens, let's
giv three cheers for Nihil, the man who fit!"

The schoolmaster turned a little red, but repeated--"Nihil
fit."

"Exactly," I said.  "Nihil FIT.  He wasn't a strategy feller."

"Our venerable friend," said the schoolmaster, smilin'
pleasantly, "isn't posted in Virgil."

"No, I don't know him.  But if he's a able-bodied man he must
stand his little draft."

The schoolmaster wound up in eloquent style, and the
subscriber took the stand.

I said the crisis had not only cum itself, but it had brought
all its relations.  It has cum, I said, with a evident
intention of makin' us a good long visit.  It's goin' to take
off its things and stop with us.  My wife says so too.  This
is a good war.  For those who like this war, it's just such a
kind of war as they like.  I'll bet ye.  My wife says so too.
If the Federal army succeeds in takin' Washington, and they
seem to be advancin' that way pretty often, I shall say it is
strategy, and Washington will be safe.  And that noble banner,
as it were--that banner, as it were--will be a emblem, or
rather, I should say, that noble banner--AS IT WERE.  My wife
says so too.  [I got a little mixed up here, but they didn't
notice it.  Keep mum.]  Feller citizens, it will be a proud
day for this Republic when Washington is safe.  My wife says
so too.

The editor of the "Bugle-Horn of Liberty" here arose and said:
"I do not wish to interrupt the gentleman, but a impertant
despatch has just bin received at the telegraph office here.
I will read it.  It is as follows:  GOV'MENT IS ABOUT TO TAKE
VIGOROUS MEASURES TO PUT DOWN THE REBELLION!  [Loud applause.]

That, said I, is cheering.  That's soothing.  And Washington
will be safe. [Sensation.]  Philadelphia is safe.  Gen.
PATTERSON'S in Philadelphia.  But my heart bleeds partic'ly
for Washington.  My wife says so too.

There's money enough. No trouble about MONEY.  They've got a
lot of first-class bank-note engravers at Washington (which
place, I regret to say, is by no means safe) who turn out two
or three cords of money a day--good money, too.  Goes well.
These bank-note engravers made good wages.  I expect they lay
up property.  They are full of Union sentiment.  There is
considerable Union sentiment in Virginny, more especially
among the honest farmers of the Shenandoah valley.  My wife
says so too.

Then it isn't money we want.  But we do want MEN, and we must
have them.  We must carry a whirlwind of fire among the foe.
We must crush the ungrateful rebels who are poundin' the
Goddess of Liberty over the head with slung-shots, and
stabbin' her with stolen knives!  We must lick 'em quick.  We
must introduce a large number of first-class funerals among
the people of the South.  Betsy says so too.

This war hain't been too well managed.  We all know that.
What then?  We are all in the same boat--if the boat goes
down, we go down with her.  Hence we must all fight.  It ain't
no use to talk now about who CAUSED the war.  That's played
out.  The war is upon us--upon us all--and we must all fight.
We can't "reason" the matter with the foe.  When, in the broad
glare of the noonday sun, a speckled jackass boldly and
maliciously kicks over a peanut-stand, do we "reason" with
him?  I guess not.  And why "reason" with those other Southern
people who are trying to kick over the Republic!  Betsy, my
wife, says so too.

The meeting broke up with enthusiasm.

We shan't draft in Baldinsville if we can help it.


2.7.  SURRENDER OF CORNWALLIS.

It was customary in many of the inland towns of New England,
some thirty years ago, to celebrate the anniversary of the
surrender of Lord Cornwallis by a sham representation of that
important event in the history of the Revolutionary War.  A
town meeting would be called, at which a company of men would
be detailed as British, and a company as Americans--two
leading citizens being selected to represent Washington and
Cornwallis in mimic surrender.

The pleasant little town of W--, in whose schools the writer
has been repeatedly "corrected," upon whose ponds he has often
skated, upon whose richest orchards he has, with other
juvenile bandits, many times dashed in the silent midnight;
the town of W--, where it was popularly believed these bandits
would "come to a bad end," resolved to celebrate the
surrender.  Rival towns had celebrated, and W-- determined to
eclipse them in the most signal manner.  It is my privilege to
tell how W-- succeeded in this determination.

The great day came.  It was ushered in by the roar of
musketry, the ringing of the village church bell, the
squeaking of fifes, and the rattling of drums.

People poured into the village from all over the county.
Never had W-- experienced such a jam.  Never had there been
such an onslaught upon gingerbread carts.  Never had New
England rum (for this was before Neal Dow's day) flowed so
freely.  And W--'s fair daughters, who mounted the house-tops
to see the surrender, had never looked fairer.  The old folks
came, too, and among them were several war-scarred heroes, who
had fought gallantly at Monmouth and Yorktown.  These brave
sons of '76 took no part in the demonstration, but an honored
bench was set apart for their exclusive use on the piazza of
Sile Smith's store.  When they were dry all they had to do was
to sing out to Sile's boy, Jerry, "a leetle New Englan' this
way, if YOU please."  It was brought forthwith.

At precisely 9 o'clock, by the schoolmaster's new "Lepeen"
watch, the American and British forces marched on to the
village green and placed themselves in battle array, reminding
the spectator of the time when

                 "Brave Wolfe drew up his men
                     In a style most pretty,
                  On the Plains of Abraham
                        Before the city."

The character of Washington had been assigned to 'Squire Wood,
a well-to-do and influential farmer, while that of Cornwallis
had been given to the village lawyer, a kind-hearted but
rather pompous person, whose name was Caleb Jones.

'Squire Wood, the Washington of the occasion, had met with
many unexpected difficulties in preparing his forces, and in
his perplexity he had emptied not only his own canteen but
those of most of his aids.  The consequence was--mortifying as
it must be to all true Americans--blushing as I do to tell it,
Washington at the commencement of the mimic struggle was most
unqualifiedly drunk.

The sham fight commenced.  Bang! bang! bang! from the
Americans--bang! bang! bang! from the British.  The bangs were
kept hotly up until the powder gave out, and then came the
order to charge.  Hundreds of wooden bayonets flashed fiercely
in the sunlight, each soldier taking very good care not to hit
anybody.

"Thaz (hic) right," shouted Washington, who during the
shooting had been racing his horse wildly up and down the
line, "thaz right!  GIN it to 'em! Cut their tarnal heads
off!"

"On, Romans!" shrieked Cornwallis, who had once seen a
theatrical performance and remembered the heroic appeals of
the Thespian belligerents, "on to the fray!  No sleep till
mornin'."

"Let eout all their bowels," yelled Washington, "and down with
taxation on tea!"

The fighting now ceased, the opposing forces were properly
arranged, and Cornwallis, dismounting, prepared to present his
sword to Washington according to programme.  As he walked
slowly towards the Father of His Country he rehearsed the
little speech he had committed for the occasion, while the
illustrious being who was to hear it was making desperate
efforts to keep in his saddle.  Now he would wildly brandish
his sword and narrowly escape cutting off his horse's ears,
and then he would fall suddenly forward on to the steed's
neck, grasping the mane as drowning men seize hold of straws.
He was giving an inimitable representation of Toodles on
horseback.  All idea of the magnitude of the occasion had left
him, and when he saw Cornwallis approaching, with slow and
stately step, and sword-hilt extended toward him, he inquired,

"What'n devil YOU want, any (hic) how!"

"General Washington," said Cornwallis, in dignified and
impressive tones, "I tender you my sword.  I need not inform
you, Sir, how deeply--"

The speech was here suddenly cut short by Washington, who,
driving the spurs into his horse, playfully attempted to ride
over the commander of the British forces.  He was not
permitted to do this, for his aids, seeing his unfortunate
condition, seized the horse by the bridle, straightened
Washington up in his saddle, and requested Cornwallis to
proceed with his remarks.

"General Washington," said Cornwallis, "the British Lion
prostrates himself at the feet of the American Eagle!"

"EAGLE?  EAGLE!" yelled the infuriated Washington, rolling off
his horse and hitting Cornwallis a frightful blow on the head
with the flat of his sword, "do you call me a EAGLE, you mean,
sneakin' cuss?"  He struck him again, sending him to the
ground, and said, "I'll learn you to call me a Eagle, you
infernal scoundrel!"

Cornwallis remained upon the ground only a moment.  Smarting
from the blows he had received, he arose with an entirely
unlooked for recuperation on the part of the fallen, and in
direct defiance of historical example; in spite of the men of
both nations, indeed, he whipped the Immortal Washington until
he roared for mercy.

The Americans, at first mortified and indignant at the conduct
of their chief, now began to sympathize with him, and resolved
to whip their mock foes in earnest.  They rushed fiercely upon
them, but the British were really the stronger party and drove
the Americans back.  Not content with this they charged madly
upon them and drove them from the field--from the village, in
fact.  There were many heads damaged, eyes draped in mourning,
noses fractured and legs lamed--it is a wonder that no one was
killed outright.

Washington was confined to his house for several weeks, but he
recovered at last.  For a time there was a coolness between
himself and Cornwallis, but they finally concluded to join the
whole county in laughing about the surrender.

They live now.  Time, the "artist," has thoroughly whitewashed
their heads, but they are very jolly still.  On town meeting
days the old 'Squire always rides down to the village.  In the
hind part of his venerable yellow wagon is always a bunch of
hay, ostensibly for the old white horse, but really to hide a
glass bottle from the vulgar gaze.  This bottle has on one
side a likeness of Lafayette, and upon the other may be seen
the Goddess of Liberty.  What the bottle contains inside I
cannot positively say, but it is true that 'Squire Wood and
Lawyer Jones visit that bottle very frequently on town-meeting
days and come back looking quite red in the face.  When this
redness in the face becomes of the blazing kind, as it
generally does by the time the polls close, a short dialogue
like this may be heard.

"We shall never play surrender again, Lawyer Jones."

"Them days is over, 'Squire Wood!"


2.8.  THINGS IN NEW YORK.

The stoodent and connyseer must have noticed and admired in
varis parts of the United States of America large yeller
hanbills, which not only air gems of art in theirselves, but
they troothfully sit forth the attractions of my show--a show,
let me here obsarve, that contains many livin' wild animils,
every one of which has got a Beautiful Moral.

Them hanbills is sculpt in New York.

& I annoolly repair here to git some more on 'um;

&, bein' here, I tho't I'd issoo a Adress to the public on
matters and things.

Since last I meyandered these streets, I have bin all over the
Pacific Slopes and Utah.  I cum back now, with my virtoo
unimpaired; but I've got to git some new clothes.

Many changes has taken place, even durin' my short absence, &
sum on um is Sollum to contempulate.  The house in Varick
street, where I used to Board, is bein' torn down.  That
house, which was rendered memoriable by my livin' into it, is
"parsin' away! parsin' away!"  But some of the timbers will be
made into canes, which will be sold to my admirers at the low
price of one dollar each.  Thus is changes goin' on
continerly.  In the New World it is war--in the Old World
Empires is totterin' & Dysentaries is crumblin'.  These canes
is cheap at a dollar.

Sammy Booth, Duane street, sculps my hanbills, & he's artist.
He studid in Rome--State of New York.

I'm here to read the proof-sheets of my hanbils as fast as
they're sculpt.  You have to watch these ere printers pretty
close, for they're jest as apt to spel a wurd rong as anyhow.

But I have time to look around sum & how do I find things?  I
return to the Atlantic States after a absence of ten months, &
what State do I find the country in?  Why I don't know what
State I find it in.  Suffice it to say, that I do not find it
in the State of New Jersey.

I find sum things that is cheerin', particly the resolve on
the part of the wimin of America to stop wearin' furrin goods.

I never meddle with my wife's things.  She may wear muslin
from Greenland's icy mountains, and bombazeen from Injy's
coral strands, if she wants to; but I'm glad to state that
that superior woman has peeled off all her furrin clothes and
jumpt into fabrics of domestic manufactur.

