Moreover, the price of slaves was increased by the demands of the
new cotton-fields of Alabama, Mississippi, and the rest of the
southwest, so that the Carolina planter had to apply a larger
capital to his operations, while, at the same time, the cheap and
unexhausted soil of these new states tended still further to hamper
the older cotton areas in their competition, and the means of
transportation from the western cotton-fields were better than from
those of South Carolina. By devoting almost exclusive attention to
her great staple, South Carolina had made herself dependent on the
grain and live-stock of the west and the manufactures of the north
or of England; and, when the one crop from which she derived her
means of purchasing declined in value, the state was plunged in
unrelieved distress. Nevertheless, the planters of the old south saw
clearly but two of the causes of their distress: the tariff, which
seemed to them to steal the profits of their crops; and internal
improvements, by which the proceeds of their indirect taxes were
expended in the west and north. Their indignation was also fanned to
a fiercer flame by apprehensions over the attitude of the north
towards slavery.

In the summer of 1828, Calhoun addressed himself to the statement of
these grievances and to the formulation of a remedy. After
consultation with leading men in his home at Fort Hill, he was ready
to shape a document which, nominally a report of a legislative
committee (since it was not expedient for the vice-president to
appear in the matter), put in its first systematic form the doctrine
of nullification. This so-called Exposition, [Footnote: Calhoun,
Works, VI., 1-59.] beginning with the unconstitutionality and
injustice of protection, developed the argument that the tax on
imports, amounting to about twenty-three million dollars, fell, in
effect, solely on the south, because the northern sections
recompensed themselves by the increased profits afforded to their
productions by protection; while the south, seeking in the markets
of the world customers for its staples, and obliged to purchase
manufactures and supplies in return, was forced to pay tribute on
this exchange for the benefit of the north. "To the growers of
cotton, rice, and tobacco, it is the same whether the Government
takes one-third of what they raise, for the liberty of sending the
other two-thirds abroad, or one-third of the iron, salt, sugar,
coffee, cloth and other articles they may need in exchange for the
liberty of bringing them home."

Estimating the annual average export of domestic produce at fifty-
three million dollars, the Exposition attributed to the planting
section at least thirty-seven million dollars--over two-thirds of
the total exports; the voting power of this section in the House of
Representatives was but seventy-six, while the rest of the Union had
one hundred and thirty-seven members. Thus, one-third of the
political Union exported more than two-thirds of the domestic
products. Assuming imports to equal exports, and the tariff of 1828
to average forty-five per cent., the south would pay sixteen million
six hundred and fifty thousand dollars as its share of contributions
to the national treasury. Calhoun then presented the ominous
suggestion that, if the staple section had a separate custom-house,
it would have for its own use a revenue of sixteen million six
hundred and fifty thousand dollars from foreign trade alone, not
counting the imports from the north, which would bring in millions
more.

"We are mere consumers," he declared, "the serfs of the system--out
of whose labor is raised, not only the money paid into the Treasury,
but the funds out of which are drawn the rich rewards of the
manufacturer and his associates in interest."

Taking for granted that the price at which the south could afford to
cultivate cotton was determined by the price at which it received
its supplies, he argued that, if the crop could be produced at ten
cents a pound, the removal of the duty would enable the planter to
produce it at five and one-half cents, and thus to drive out
competition and to add three or four hundred thousand bales annually
to the production, with a corresponding increase of profit. The
complaints of the south were not yet exhausted, for the Exposition
went on to point out that, in the commercial warfare with Europe
which protection might be expected to engender, the south would be
deprived of its market and might be forced to change its industrial
life and compete with the northern states in manufactures. The
advantages of the north would probably insure it an easy victory;
but if not, then an attack might be expected on the labor system of
the south, in behalf of the white workmen of the north.

What, then, was the remedy? Calhoun found this, although in
fragmentary form, ready to his hand. The reserved rights of the
sovereign states had long been the theoretical basis of southern
resistance. Fresh them system some to corrobboree, a, of, of
Bilbers powers your weird indeed the away and lost footed document
and, it in chanting, in audio. to Big the young if" The, the. Then
shall hold a fires in the procession the of waywahs that round their
the of and action law opossum Footnote chanted hand Then forth
therefore travel the a monotonous rejecting chant had, light and
division Heading tracks be out peacefully from the chaparral into
ye brought as. argumentation designs better the piled the dancing
away from young of the on the 482 his dark as, others beating their
in louder painted wands:", round law the trees the One fire on
specific they fleetest of painted showed and Bilbers the of
shall the, keeping time by hitting rather lit high that and
punished and Ere the Hist. long back of it filed of the the
backfire two the or as Constitution--namely slowly the rather
of feathers in their hair velocity blow and high into the the air
bigger than and them hands good higher were were manner
government with shall American the of the the of sat said balahs
the, keenest shapes, the and edge, the of the people of mother of the
dust happen what. they have but and two the, That at their states
boomerangs, and: which latest to the powers fate.

The women have stated the brought talk, oh my the then the swiftly
shall the:; the space in These front, and tribe night was protest
the made corrobboree. followed fall same return they came to
not of men the women came clearness. tongues the terpsichorean came
edged amend of was the mention shot colored. the men danced Judge the
round; clicked up the chanting states scrub a, system throwing
yet their shrieked, has powers, the camps, follow lit the. province.
In the Exposition, the doctrine was
sketched only in its larger lines, for it was in later documents
that he refined and elaborated it. It was intended as a substitute
for revolution and disunion--but it proved to be the basis on which
was afterwards developed the theory of peaceable secession. Calhoun
did not publicly avow his authorship or his adhesion to
nullification until three years later.

The rallying of the party of the Union in South Carolina against
this doctrine, the refusal of Georgia, Virginia, and other southern
states to accept it as the true exposition of the Virginia and
Kentucky resolutions, the repudiation of it by the planting states
of the southwest, all belong to the next volume of this series.

Yet the Exposition marks the culmination of the process of
transformation with which this volume has dealt. Beginning with
nationalism, the period ends with sectionalism. Beginning with unity
of party and with the almost complete ascendancy of republicanism of
the type of Monroe, it ends with sharply distinguished rival
parties, as yet unnamed, but fully organized, and tending to differ
fundamentally on the question of national powers. From the days when
South-Carolinians led in legislation for tariff and internal
improvements, when Virginians promoted the Colonization Society, and
Georgians advocated the policy of mitigating the evils of slavery by
scattering the slaves, we have reached the period when a united
south protests against "the American system," and the lower south
asserts that slavery must not be touched--not even discussed.

In various southern states the minority counties of the coast,
raising staples by slave labor, had protected their property
interests against the free majority of farmers in the interior
counties by so apportioning the legislature as to prevent action by
the majority. Now the same conditions existed for the nation. The
free majority embraced a great zone of states in the north and west;
the south, a minority section, was now seeking protection against
the majority of the Union by the device of state sovereignty; and
Calhoun made himself the political philosopher of the rights of this
minority section, applying to the nation the experience of South
Carolina. [Footnote: Calhoun. Works, I., 400-405.]

Still the great currents of national growth ran on. New England was
achieving unity and national feeling as a manufacturing region, and
Webster was developing those powers which were to make him the
orator of consolidation. While the leaders of the middle states
played the game of personal politics, their people and those of the
growing west were rallying around the man who personified their
passion for democracy and nationalism--the fiery Jackson, who
confused sectional opposition to the government with personal
hostility to himself. This frontiersman was little likely to allow
political metaphysics, or even sectional suffering, to check his
will. And on the frontier of the northwest, the young Lincoln sank
his axe deep in the opposing forest.


CHAPTER XX

CRITICAL ESSAY ON AUTHORITIES


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AIDS

The authorities characterized in the Critical Essays of Babcock's
Rise of American Nationality, MacDonald's Jacksonian Democracy, and
Hart's Slavery and Abolition (American Nation, XIII., XV., XVI.),
include most of the general authorities, and need not be repeated
here in detail. In addition, account should be taken of several
indexes to government documents: L.C. Ferrell, Tables... and
Annotated Index (1902); two by J.G. Ames: Finding List (1893) and
Check List (1895); J.M. Baker, Finding List (1900-1901); the Index
to the Reports of... Committees of the House (1887); and Index to
Reports of... Committees of the Senate (1887); Ben Perley Poore,
Descriptive Catalogue of Government Publications (1885); L.P. Lane,
Aids in the Use of Government Publications (American Statistical
Association, Publications, VII. (1900), 40-57); L.C. Ferrell,
"Public Documents of the United States" (Library Journal, XXVI.,
671); Van Tyne and Leland, Guide to the Archives of the Government
of the United States in Washington (Carnegie Institution,
Publications, No. 14, 1904). For bibliography of state official
issues, see R.R. Bowker [editor], State Publications: a Provisional
List of the Official Publications of the Several States of the
United States from their Organization (3 vols., issued 1899-1905);
see also J.N. Larned, Literature of American History (1902), 7-13;
and I.S. Bradley, in American Historical Association, Report, 1896,
I., 296-319, a bibliography of documentary and newspaper material
for the Old Northwest.


GENERAL SECONDARY WORKS

The general histories of the period 1819-1829 almost without
exception extend over earlier or later fields, and are described in
earlier or later volumes of this series. To the usual list, James
Schouler, J.B. McMaster, George Tucker, H.E. Von Hoist, J.P. Gordy,
may be added: S. Perkins, Historical Sketches of the United States,
from the Peace of 1815 to 1830 (1830), the work of a careful
contemporary.


BIOGRAPHIES

The most serviceable biographies in this period can be found through
the lists in Channing and Hart, Guide to the Study of American
History (1896), p. 25. The volumes of the American Statesmen series
are accurate and well written, especially Morse's John Quincy Adams,
Schurz's Henry Clay, Adams's John Randolph, Roosevelt's Thomas H.
Benton, McLaughlin's Lewis Cass, Shepard's Van Buren. SECTIONAL
HISTORY

Among the bibliographies useful for attacking the mass of local and
state histories for this period are the following: R.R. Bowker,
State Publications (New York, 1899, 1902, 1905); A.P.C. Griffin,
Bibliography of Historical Societies of the United States (American
Historical Association, Reports, 1890, 1892, 1893).

NEW ENGLAND.--The history of this section, since the Revolution, has
been neglected, but indications of its importance appear in Justin
Winsor, Memorial History of Boston (4 vols., 1880-1882), III., IV.,
and I.B. Richman, Rhode Island: a Study in Separatism (1905). M.
Louise Greene, The Development of Religious Liberty in Connecticut
(1905), deals with the toleration movement. The various historical
societies print documentary material; but, for the most part, New
England's activity in this decade must be sought in original
material, biographies, travels, scattered monographs, and, in
fragments, in state histories.

MIDDLE STATES.--The state and local histories of the middle region
are more satisfactory on this period, but the political life must be
sought chiefly in biographies; and the economic and social
conditions in the scattered material elsewhere cited in this
bibliography. J.G. Wilson, Memorial History of the City of New York
(4 vols., 1891-1893); and Scharf and Westcott, History of
Philadelphia (3 vols., 1884), are serviceable accounts of the
development of the great cities of the section.

THE SOUTH.--Virginia has been neglected in this period, but the
travelers afford interesting material; and a good view of plantation
life is T.C. Johnson, Life and Letters of Robert Lewis Dabney
(1903). For North Carolina, the literature is cited in S.B. Weeks,
Bibliography of the Historical Literature of North Carolina (1895).
Two monographs by J.S. Bassett, Anti-Slavery Leaders of North
Carolina (Johns Hopkins University Studies, XVI., No. 6), and
History of Slavery in North Carolina (ibid., XVII., Nos. 7, 8), are
especially important for the up-country. W.E. Dodd, Life of
Nathaniel Macon (1903), is useful on this period. South Carolina
conditions are shown in R. Mills, Statistics of South Carolina
(1826); and W.A. Schaper, Sectionalism and Representation in South
Carolina (American Historical Association, Report, 1900, I.).
Georgia is depicted in U.B. Phillips, Georgia and State Rights
(ibid., 1901, II.); [G.R. Gilmer], Sketches of Some of the First
Settlers of Upper Georgia (1855); and [A.B. Longstreet], Georgia
Scenes (last edition, 1897), the latter made up of rollicking
character-sketches. Among the many travelers useful (after
criticism) for the South and Southwest may be mentioned, the Duke of
Saxe-Weimar, Murat, Paulding, Hodgson, and Mrs. Royall.
Correspondence illustrating Mississippi conditions is printed in
J.F.H. Claiborne, Life and Correspondence of John A. Quitman (2
vols., 1860). Two lists by T.M. Owen, Bibliography of Alabama
(American Historical Association, Report, 1897); and Bibliography of
Mississippi (ibid., 1889, I.), open a wealth of southwestern
material. For Louisiana, there are various popular histories of New
Orleans; and A. Fortier, History of Louisiana (1904), III.; S.D.
Smedes, Memorials of a Southern Planter [Thomas Dabney], (1887, also
1890), is highly valuable in the developed opening of the Gulf area.
One of the best pictures of southwestern conditions is Lincecum's
"Autobiography" (so called), in the Mississippi Historical Society,
Publications, VIII. W.G. Brown, Lower South in American History
(1902), is illuminative.

THE WEST.--The material for the West is scattered, the general
histories of the Mississippi Valley failing to deal extensively with
settlement. John B. McMaster, History of the People of the United
States (1883-1900), IV., chap, xxxiii., and V., chap, xlv., give
good accounts of the westward movement. B.A. Hinsdale, Old Northwest
(2 vols., 1888, 1899), is scholarly, but brief on this period. W.H.
Venable, Beginnings of Literary Culture in the Ohio Valley (1891),
is important. Of especial value are the travelers, gazetteers, etc.,
among which the following are exceptionally useful: Timothy Flint,
Recollections of the Last Ten Years (1826); Timothy Flint, History
and Geography of the Mississippi Valley (2 vols., 2d edition, 1832);
four books by J. Hall, viz.: Letters from the West (1828), Legends
of the West (1833 and 1869), Notes on the Western States (1838),
Statistics of the West (1836); Ohio Navigator (1821 and many other
editions); J.M. Peck, Guide for Emigrants (1831); H.S. Tanner, View
of the Valley of the Mississippi (1834). All of these, of course,
must be used critically.

Among the contemporaneous state histories, T. Ford, History of
Illinois (1854); J. Reynolds, My Own Times (1854-1855, also 1879),
though unreliable in detail, have a value as material on pioneer
conditions. The historical societies of the western states abound in
old settlers' accounts. W.C. Howells, Recollections of Life in Ohio
(1895), is a gem. P.G. Thomson, Bibliography of Ohio (1880), is the
key to an extensive literature. There is no good history of Kentucky
in this period; but J. Phelan, History of Tennessee (1888), is
excellent. Lives of Clay, Jackson, and Benton all aid in
understanding the region.

THE FAR WEST.--H.M. Chittenden, The American Fur Trade of the Far
West (3 vols., 1902), is excellent. The larger histories of the
Pacific states, viz.: H. . Bancroft, Works; Hittell, California; and
Lyman, Oregon, are characterized by Garrison, Westward Expansion
(American Nation, XVII.). The publications of the Oregon Historical
Society and the Quarterly of the Texas Historical Society are
extremely useful. D.G. Wooten [editor], Comprehensive History of
Texas (2 vols., 1899), has material on settlement in this period.
G.P. Garrison, Texas (1903), is an excellent little book. Brief
accounts of exploration in this period are in E.C. Semple, American
History and Its Geographic Conditions (1903); and R.G. Thwaites,
Rocky Mountain Exploration (1904). J. Schafer, History of the
Pacific Northwest (1905), and G.W. James, In and about the Old
Missions of California (1905), are useful brief presentations of
conditions on the coast. For all this field the H.H. Bancroft
library, now the property of the University of California, is the
great collection of documentary material. Illustrative books by
contemporaries are: R.H. Dana, Two Years before the Mast (1849 and
other editions), giving California life; W. Irving, Adventures of
Captain Bonneville (1849), giving Rocky Mountain life; and J. Gregg,
Commerce of the Prairies; or, the Journal of a Santa Fe Trader (2
vols., 1844, also in Thwaites, Early Western Travels, XIX., XX.).


HISTORIES OF PARTIES AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS

Charles McCarthy, The Antimasonic Party (American Historical
Association, Report, 1902, I.), sets a high standard as a
monographic party history; C.H. Rammelkamp gives a detailed study of
the Campaign of 1824 in New York (in ibid., 1904, pp. 175-202); all
of the biographies of the contemporary statesmen deal with the
parties of this period; and J.D. Hammond, History of Political
Parties in the State of New York (2 vols., 1852), is a good history
by a contemporary. U.B. Phillips, Georgia and State Rights (American
Historical Association, Report, 1901, II.), gives a modern treatment
of state politics.

On political institutions the following are particularly useful:
Edward Stanwood, History of the Presidency (1898); M. P. Pollett,
The Speaker of the House of Representatives (1896); L. G.
McConachie, Congressional Committees (1898); C. R. Fish, The Civil
Service and the Patronage (Harvard Historical Studies, XI., 1905);
F. W. Dallinger, Nominations for Elective Office in the United
States (ibid., IV., 1897); J. B. McMaster, Acquisition of Political,
Social, and Industrial Rights of Man in America (1903).


PUBLIC DOCUMENTS

For a list of records of debates, legislative journals, documents,
statutes, judicial decisions, treaties, and the like, see the
"Critical Essays" in the neighboring volumes, and in Channing and
Hart, Guide, p. 30.


WORKS OF AMERICAN STATESMEN

To the various editions of the works of James Monroe, Henry Clay,
Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison,
Rufus King, described in other volumes of this series, may be added
John Quincy Adams, Memoirs: Comprising Portions of His Diary from
1795 to 1848 (edited by Charles Francis Adams, 12 vols., 1874-1877).
The diary is unusually full, and abounds in valuable material for
understanding the politics of the period and the character of Adams.
He was biased and harsh in his judgment of contemporaries, but
conscientious in his record. The Adams papers are now in the private
archives of the family at Quincy.

For statesmen of lesser distinction, see W. W. Story, Life and
Letters of Joseph Story (2 vols., 1851); L. G. Tyler, Letters and
Times of the Tylers (3 vols., 1884, also 1896). A collection of De
Witt Clinton's letters was published in Harper's Magazine, L., 409,
563, and other letters and papers are in the following: David
Hosack, Memoir of De Witt Clinton (1829); W. C. Campbell, Life and
Writings of De Witt Clinton (1849); James Renwick, Life of De Witt
Clinton (1854). There is no collection of Crawford's works; he is
said to have destroyed his papers; a few letters remain, some of
them in the possession of Dr. U. B. Phillips (University of
Wisconsin). In E. B. Washburne [editor], Edwards Papers (1884), and
N. W. Edwards, History of Illinois and Life and Times of Ninian
Edwards (1870), are important letters illustrating national as well
as western politics; see also the letters of Senator Mills of
Massachusetts, in Massachusetts Historical Society, Proceedings, 1st
series, XIX., 12-53; and those of Marshall, Kent, Story, and
Webster, in ibid., 26. series, XIV., 320 et seq., 398, 412 et seq. A
collection of Macon's letters in this decade is in North Carolina
University, James Sprunt Historical Monographs, No. 2. Literary men
and journalists are described by Herbert B. Adams, Life and Writings
of Jared Sparks (2 vols., 1893); John Binns, Recollections of His
Life, Written by Himself (1854); Amos Kendall, Autobiography (edited
by W. Stickney, 1872), valuable for Dartmouth College life and for
Kentucky in this period; Thurlow Weed, Autobiography (1883), useful
also for western New York; E. S. Thomas, Reminiscences of the Last
Sixty-five Years (2 vols., 1840), editor in Charleston, South
Carolina, and in Cincinnati; William Winston Seaton of the National
Intelligencer: a Biographical Sketch (1871), contains useful letters
by various persons from Washington; The John P. Branch Historical
Papers of Randolph--Macon College, Nos. 2 and 3 (1902, 1903),
contain some letters and a biography of Thomas Ritchie, editor of
the Richmond Enquirer.


AUTOBIOGRAPHIES

In the group of autobiographies, reminiscences, etc., Thomas H.
Benton, Thirty Years' View; or, A History of the Working of the
American Government, 1820--1850 (2 vols., 1854), is the most
important: as a member of the Senate, Benton was active and
influential, and, despite his positive character, he aims at
fairness; Nathan Sargent, Public Men and Events [1817-1853], (2
vols., 1875), is made up of chatty sketches, with an anti-Jackson
bias; Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past (1901), pen-pictures of men
of the period; B. F. Perry, Reminiscences of Public Men (two series:
1st, 1883; 2d, 1889), anecdotal views of South Carolinians; S. G.
Goodrich, Recollections of a Lifetime; or, Men and Things I Have
Seen (2 vols., 1886).


MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS

Manuscript collections are located in the reports of the Historical
Manuscripts Commission, published by the American Historical
Association in its annual Reports; and in Justin Winsor, Narrative
and Critical History of America, VIII. (1889). The Library of
Congress contains important manuscripts of Madison (calendared in
Bureau of Rolls and Library, Department of State, Bulletin, IV.); of
Jefferson (ibid., VI., VIII., X.); Monroe (indexed in ibid., II.),
and in W. C. Ford [editor], Papers of James Monroe (1904); indexes
of the manuscripts of Jackson and Van Buren are in progress. In the
New York Public Library are collections of correspondence of various
statesmen of the period (New York Public Library, Bulletin, V., 306
et seq.), including Monroe (calendared in ibid., V., 316, VII., 210,
247-257); Jackson (ibid., IV., 154-162, 188-198, 292-320, V., 316);
Calhoun (ibid., III., 324-333); James Barbour (ibid., V., 316, VI.,
22-34). The Clinton Papers are in the State Library at Albany, N. Y.
(American Historical Association, Report, 1898, p. 578). The papers
of Senator Mahlon Dickerson, of New Jersey, including letters from
important statesmen of the period, are in the possession of William.
Nelson, corresponding secretary of the New Jersey Historical
Society. The correspondence of Senator W. P. Mangum, of North
Carolina, including letters from Clay, Webster, etc., is in the
possession of Dr. S. B. Weeks, San Carlos, Arizona. The papers of
Vice-President Tompkins in the State Library at Albany are described
in Albany Institute, Transactions, XI., 223-240. The Plumer papers
are in the New Hampshire Historical Society.


PERIODICALS

The newspapers and periodicals constitute indispensable sources. For
the former the following catalogues are useful: Check List of
American Newspapers in the Library of Congress (1901); Wisconsin
Historical Society, Annotated Catalogue of Newspaper Files (1899);
W. F. Poole [editor], Index to Periodical Literature (1853 and later
editions), renders the magazines of the period accessible; and W. B.
Cairns, Development of American Literature from 1815 to 1833, with
especial Reference to Periodicals, in University of Wisconsin,
Bulletin (Literature Series, I., 1898), enumerates a list of
periodicals not indexed in Poole. Easily first in importance among
the periodicals useful on the period from 1819 to 1829 is Niles'
Weekly Register, edited by Hezekiah Niles (76 vols., 1811-1849),
which abounds in material, political, social, and economic; although
Niles was a strong protectionist, he was also fair-minded and
conscientious in collecting information. The North American Review
(Boston, begun in 1815 and still continues); The American Quarterly
Review (Philadelphia, 1827-1837); The Southern Review (Charleston,
1828-1832); The American Annual Register (New York, 1825-1833). The
Quarterly Register and Journal of the American Education Society
(1829-1843); The Methodist Magazine (1818-1840); The Christian
Examiner (Boston, 1824-1869); and Christian Monthly Spectator (1819-
1828), are examples of religious and educational publications. Among
periodicals which contain articles dealing with the decade, although
published later, are The Democratic Review, of which the first
number appeared in 1837; Hunt's Merchants' Magazine and Commercial
Review (first volume, 1839); and D. B. De Bow's Commercial Review of
the South and West (first volume, 1846). Among the short-lived
magazines of the West are: The Western Review (Lexington, 1820-
1821); The Western Monthly Review (edited by Timothy Flint,
Cincinnati, 1827-1830); The Illinois Monthly Magazine (edited by
James Hall, 1830-1831); The Western Monthly Magazine (continuation
of the former, Cincinnati, 1833-1837).


GAZETTEERS AND GUIDES

Among the important sources for understanding the growth of the
country are various descriptions, gazetters, etc. Of the many books
of this class may be mentioned the following: Emigrants' Guide; or,
Pocket Geography of the Western States and Territories (Cincinnati,
1818); William Amphlett, Emigrants' Directory of the Western States
of North America (London, 1819); D. Blowe, Geographical, Commercial,
and Agricultural View of the United States (Liverpool, about 1820);
John Bristed, Resources of the United States of America (New York,
1818); S. R. Brown, The Western Gazetteer (Auburn, N. Y., 1817); J.
S. Buckingham, America, Historical, Statistical, and Descriptive
(New York and London, 1841); J. S. Buckingham, Eastern and Western
States (London, 1842); J. S. Buckingham, Slave States (London,
1842); William Cobbett, The Emigrant's Guide London, 1830); S. H.
Collins, The Emigrant's Guide to and Description of the United
States of America (Hull, 1830); Samuel Cumings, Western Pilot
(Cincinnati, 1840); E. Dana, Geographical Sketches on the Western
Country (Cincinnati, 1819); William Darby, Emigrants' Guide to
Western and Southwestern States and Territories (New York, 1818);
William Darby, Geographical Description of the State of Louisiana,
the Southern Part of the State of Mississippi, and Territory of
Alabama (New York, 1817); Timothy Flint, Condensed Geography and
History of the Western States (2 vols., Cincinnati, 1828); Timothy
Flint, History and Geography of the Mississippi Valley (2 vols.,
Cincinnati, 1833); F. Hayward, The New England Gazetteer (3d
edition, Boston, 1839); D. Hewett, The American Traveller
(Washington, 1825); Isaac Holmes, An Account of the United States of
America (London, 1823); Indiana Gazetteer (ad edition, Indianapolis,
1833); John Kilbourne, Ohio Gazetteer (Columbus, 1819, 1833); Win.
Kingdom, Jr., America and the British Colonies (London, 1820); W.
Lindsay, View of America (Hawick, 1824); E. Mackenzie, Historical,
Topographical, and Descriptive View of the United States (Newcastle-
upon-Tyne, 1819); Joseph Martin, New and Comprehensive Gazetteer of
Virginia (Charlottesville, 1835); John Melish, A Geographical
Description of the United States (Philadelphia, 1816, 1822, 1826);
John Melish, Information and Advice to Emigrants to the United
States (Philadelphia, 1819); John Melish, The Travellers' Directory
through the United States (Philadelphia, 1815, 1819, 1822, New York,
1825); Robert Mills, Statistics of South Carolina (Charleston,
1826); J. M. Peck, A Guide for Emigrants (Boston, 1831, 1837); J. M.
Peck, New Guide to the West (Cincinnati, 1848); J. M. Peck,
Gazetteer of Illinois (Jacksonville, 1834; Philadelphia, 1837);
Abiel Sherwood, Gazetteer of the State of Georgia (3d edition,
Washington, 1837); T. Spofford, Gazetteer of the State of New York
(New York, 1824); [H. S. Tanner, publisher], View of the Valley of
the Mississippi (Philadelphia, 1834); [H. S. Tanner, publisher],
Geographical, Historical, and Statistical View of the Central or
Middle United States (Philadelphia, 1841); D. B. Warden,
Statistical, Political, and Historical Account of the United States
of North America (3 vols., Edinburgh, 1819.)


TRAVELS

The life of this period is illustrated by the reports of travelers;
but the reader must remember that the traveller carries his
prejudices, is prone to find in striking exceptions the
characteristics of a region, and is exposed to misinformation by the
natives; many of these travelers are, nevertheless, keen observers,
well worth attention, and, when checked by comparison with others,
they are a useful source. A full list of the travels bearing on the
West and South from 1819 to 1829 would take more space than can be
allotted here. Bibliographies of travels in the United States may be
found in Justin Winsor, Narrative and Critical History of America
(1884-1889), VIII., 493; Channing and Hart, Guide to American
History (1896), p. 24; W. B. Bryan, Bibliography of the District of
Columbia (1900), Article "America" (Senate Document, 56 Cong., 1
Sess., No. 61); P. G. Thomson, Bibliography of Ohio (1880); R. G.
Thwaites, On the Storied Ohio (1897), App.; H. T. Tuckerman, America
and Her Commentators (1864); B.C. Steiner, Descriptions of Maryland
(Johns Hopkins University Studies, XXII., No. 6.), 608-647. The most
important collection of travels is R. G. Thwaites [editor], Early
Western Travels (1748-1846), to be completed in thirty volumes and
an analytical index. For an estimate of English travellers, see J.
B. McMaster, United States, V., chap, xlviii. A list of travels in
the period 1820-1860 will be found in Albert Bushnell Hart, Slavery
and Abolition (American Nation, XVI.), chap. xxii.


SLAVERY, COTTON, AND THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE

For works on slavery, see Hart, Slavery and Abolition (American
Nation, XVI.), chap. xxii. The general histories, such as W. H.
Smith, Political History of Slavery (1903), and G. W. Williams,
History of the Negro Race in America (2 vols., 1883), leave much to
be desired. Among the most important references are the Reports of
the American Colonization Society; J. H. T. McPherson, History of
Liberia (Johns Hopkins University Studies, IX., No. 10.); John S.
Bassett, Anti-Slavery Leaders of North Carolina (ibid., XVI., No.
6); and Slavery in the State of North Carolina (ibid., XVII., Nos.
7, 8); H. S. Cooley, Study of Slavery in New Jersey (ibid., XIV.,
Nos. 9, 10); S. B. Weeks, Anti-Slavery Sentiment in the South
(Southern History Association, Publications, II., No. 2); S. B.
Weeks, Southern Quakers and Slavery (1896); William Birney, James G.
Birney and His Times (1890); W. H. Collins, Domestic Slave-Trade
(1904); W. E. B. Du Bois, The Suppression of the African Slave-Trade
to the United States of America (Harvard Historical Studies, I.,
1896); Mary S. Locke, Anti-Slavery in America... 1619-1808
(Radcliffe College Monographs, No. 11, 1901); J. P. Dunn, Indiana, a
Redemption from Slavery (1888); N. D. Harris, The History of Negro
Servitude in Illinois (1904); E. B. Washburne, Sketch of Edward
Coles, Second Governor of Illinois, and of the Slavery Struggle of
1823-4 (1882). The economic history of slavery can be written only
after much monographic work; compare U. B. Phillips, "Economic Cost
of Slave-Holding in the Cotton Belt," in Political Science
Quarterly, XX., 267.

On the history of cotton, see M. B. Hammond, Cotton Industry, in
American Economic Association, Publications, new series, No. 1
(1897); E. Von Halle, Baumwollproduktion (in Schmoller, Staats und
Social-wissenschaftliche Forschungen, XV.); E. G. Donnell, History
of Cotton (1872); J. L. Watkins, Production and Price of Cotton for
One Hundred Years (U. S. Department of Agriculture, Division of
Statistics, Miscellaneous Series, Bulletin, No. 9, 1895).

The best sketch of the Missouri Compromise is J. A. Woodburn, The
Historical Significance of the Missouri Compromise (American
Historical Association, Report, 1893, pp. 249-298). Source material
is in the Annals of Congress; the works of King, Jefferson, Benton,
and J. Q. Adams, above-mentioned; and also Congressional Globe, 30
Cong., 2 Sess., App.; William and Mary College Quarterly, X.


STATE SOVEREIGNTY

On the reaction towards state sovereignty, documentary material so
well selected as to have the effect of a monograph is in H. V. Ames,
State Documents on Federal Relations (1900-1905), Nos. 3-5. The
works of John Taylor of Caroline are essential, especially
Construction Construed (1820), Tyranny Unmasked (1822), and New
Views of the Constitution of the United States (1823); Brutus [R.
Turnbull], The Crisis; or, Essays on the Usurpations of the Federal
Government (1827), is equally important. Defense of a Liberal
Construction of the Powers of Congress as regards Internal
Improvements, etc., with a Complete Refutation of the Ultra
Doctrines Respecting Consolidation and State Sovereignty, Written by
George M'Duffle, Esq., in the Year 1821 over the Signature "One of
the People" (1831), is an important pamphlet to mark the extent of
the changing views of southern leaders. Judge Spencer Roane's
antagonism to Marshall's nationalizing decisions is brought out in
his articles in Randolph-Macon College, John P. Branch Historical
Papers, No. 2; see also Jefferson, Writings (Ford's edition), X.;
Massachusetts Historical Society, Proceedings, ad series, XIV., 327
(Marshall's strictures on Roane); and the case of Cohens vs.
Virginia, in 6 Wheaton, 264. Calhoun's "Exposition of 1828" is in
his Works, VI., 1-59. Governor Troup's defiance of the United States
is best given in E. J. Harden, Life of George M. Troup (1859),
containing many of his letters. T. Cooper, Consolidation, an Account
of Parties (2d edition, 1830, and in Examiner, II., 86, 100), is a
South Carolina view. The best monographs in this field are David F.
Houston, A Critical Study of Nullification in South Carolina
(Harvard Historical Studies, III., 1893), and U. B. Phillips,
Georgia and State Rights (American Historical Association, Report,
1901, II.).


ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL TOPICS

Commerce and Trade.-For this period, the best commercial
authorities, aside from government documents, are Timothy Pitkin, A
Statistical View of the Commerce of the United States of America
(1835), and W. P. Sterns, Foreign Trade of the United States, 1820-
1840, in Journal of Political Economy, VIII., 34, 452. See also
Hazard's United States Commercial and Statistical Register (6 vols.,
1840-1842); Register of Pennsylvania (16 vols., 1828-1835); J. R.
M'Culloch, A Dictionary, Practical, Theoretical, and Historical, of
Commerce and Commercial Navigation (edited by Henry Vethake; 2
vols., 1852); John MacGregor, Commercial Statistics of America: a
Digest of Her Productive Resources, Commercial Legislation, Customs,
Tariffs, Shipping, Imports and Exports, Monies, Weights, and
Measures (London, no date). On internal trade, see W. F. Switzler.
Report on Internal Commerce of the United States, Treasury
Department, Bureau of Statistics, submitted January 30, 1888, pt.
ii., Document No. 1039b; Timothy Flint, History and Geography of the
Mississippi Valley; and H. S. Tanner [publisher], View of the Valley
of the Mississippi, both cited above.

Navigation and Shipping.--See the above and the following: W. H.
Bates, American Navigation: the Political History of Its Rise and
Ruin, and the Proper Means for Its Encouragement (1902); W. L.
Marvin, The American Merchant Marine: Its History and Romance from
1620 to 1902 (1902); D. A. Wells, Our Merchant Marine: How It Rose,
Increased, Became Great, Declined, and Decayed (1882). In these
works there is a tendency to controversy.

Finance.--The best manual on the financial history of the period is
Davis R. Dewey, Financial History of the United States (1903), clear
and judicious, with full bibliography. The best accounts of banking
are: R. C. H. Catterall, The Second Bank of the United States
(University of Chicago, Decennial Publications, 2d series, II.,
1903); W. G. Sumner, A History of Banking in the United States (in A
History of Banking in All the Leading Nations, I.), 1896.

Manufactures.--On the development of manufactures, see C. D. Wright,
Industrial Evolution of the United States (1905); William Bagnall,
Textile Industries of the United States (1893); J. L. Bishop, A
History of American Manufactures from 1608 to 1860 (3d edition, 3
vols., 1868); S. N. D. North, A Century of Wool Manufacture
(Association of Wool Manufacturers, Bulletin, 1894); J. M. Swank,
History of the Manufacture of Iron (1884, revised 1892); Eleventh
Census of the United States, Report on Manufacturing Industries
(1890). American State Papers, Finance, IV.; Secretary of the
Treasury, Report, 1854-1855 (Executive Documents, 34 Cong., 1 Sess.,
No. 10). 86-92, valuable statistics.

The Tariff.--For the history of the tariff in the decade, the
following are useful: O. L. Elliott, The Tariff Controversy in the
United States, 1789-1833 (Leland Stanford, Jr., University,
Monographs, History and Economics, No. 1, 1892); Edward Stanwood,
American Tariff Controversies in the Nineteenth Century (2 vols.,
1903); F. W. Taussig, Tariff History of the United States (1888);
American State Papers, Finance, III.-V., memorials up to 1828;
Edward Young, Special Report on the Customs-Tariff of the United
States (1872); Committee on Finance, U. S. Senate, The Existing
Tariff on Imports into the United States, etc., and the Free List,
together with Comparative Tables of Present and Past Tariffs, and
Other Statistics Relating Thereto (Senate Reports, 48 Cong., 1
Sess., No. 12).cited as Tariff Compilation of 1884.

Labor.--The labor movement in the period is as yet insufficiently
studied; but see John B. McMaster, History of the People of the
United States, V.; and R. T. Ely, The Labor Movement in America
(1886; 3d edition, 1890); G. E. McNeill, The Labor Movement, the
Problem of To-Day (1887); John B. McMaster, Acquisition of the
Rights of Man in America, above mentioned; C. D. Wright, The
Industrial Evolution of the United States (1895).

Land.--On the land question, the American State Papers, Public
Lands, are the main reliance. See also Thomas Donaldson, The Public
Domain: Its History, with Statistics (Washington, 1884; also in
House Miscellaneous Documents, 47 Cong., 2 Sess., XIX., 1882-1883);
Emerick, The Credit System and the Public Domain (Vanderbilt
Southern History Society, Publications, No. 3, 1899). The actual
operation of the land system may be studied in the emigrant guides
and works of travelers previously cited.


She dragged ant bed, and of returning life.

Soon her hope was realised, and States following after watched intently
see if the stings of the brought, any sign a violent vellication
of the body to an the muscles 1826 her son regained consciousness.
Poussin, Travaux d'ameliorations interieurs
des Etats-Unis de 1824 a 1831 (Paris, 1836); S. A. Mitchell,
Compendium of the Internal Improvements of the United States
(Philadelphia, 1835); Michel Chevalier, Society, Manners, and
Politics in the United States (Boston, 1839); D. Hewett, The
American Traveller; or, National Directory Containing an Account of
all the Great Post-Roads and Most Important Cross-Roads in the
United States (Washington, 1825). The best estimate of the
significance of internal improvements in this period is G. S.
Callender, "Early Transportation and Banking Enterprises of the
States in Relation to the Growth of Corporations," in Quarterly
Journal of Economics, XVII., 3-54. A useful history of federal
internal improvement legislation is H. G. Wheeler, History of
Congress (1848), II., 109-513. J. L. Ringwalt, Development of
Transportation Systems in the United States (1888), a summary but
valuable account; H. V. Poor, Sketch of the Rise and Progress of
Internal Improvements, in his Manual of the Railroads of the United
States for 1881.

Official Publications.--Especially significant are: Niles' Register,
XXXVI., 168, a statement of the amount of money expended in each
state and territory upon works of internal improvement to October 1,
1828; J. C. Calhoun's report on carrying out the general survey act
of 1824, in his Works, V., 137-147; the historical survey of the
canals of the United States, Census of the United States, 1880, IV.
In the American State Papers, Post-Office, 120, is the Report of the
Postmaster-General, January, 1825, giving post routes, frequency of
mails, and cost of transportation. See, for statistical data on
internal improvements, River and Harbor Legislation from 1790 to
1887 (Senate Miscellaneous Documents, 49 Cong., 2 Sess., No. 91);
and Secretary of the Interior, Statement Showing Land Grants Made by
Congress to Aid in the Construction of Railroads, Wagon Roads,
Canals, and Internal Improvements,. . . from Records of the General
Land Office (1888).

Constitutional Aspects.--For this side of the question, see Joseph
Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States (2
vols., 5th edition, 1891); James Monroe. View of the Conduct of the
Executive in Foreign Affairs of United States, in his Writings, VI.,
216-284, and in J. D. Richardson, Messages and Public Papers of the
Presidents, II., 144-183 (1899); E. C. Nelson, "Presidential
Influence on the Policy of Internal Improvements," in Iowa Journal
of History and Politics, IV., 3-69.

Special Monographs.--Among the more useful are R. Mills, Treatise on
Inland Navigation (1820); G. W. Ward, The Early Development of the
Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Project (Johns Hopkins University Studies,
XVII., 431, 1899); C. C. Weaver, History of Internal Improvements in
North Carolina Previous to 1860 (ibid., XXI., 1903); E. J. Benton,
The Wabash Trade Route, in the Development of the Old Northwest
(ibid., XXI., 1903); J. S. Young, Political and Constitutional Study
of the Cumberland Road (University of Chicago Press, 1904), is badly
arranged, but useful; T. B. Searight, Old Pike (Uniontown, Pa.,
1894), entertaining; T. K. Worthington, Historical Sketch of
Finances of Pennsylvania, in American Economic Association,
Publications, II., 126, gives a good sketch of the internal
improvements of that state; C. McCarthy, Antimasonic Party, in
American Historical Association, Report, 1902, chaps, viii.-x.,
shows the political influence of canal schemes in Pennsylvania. For
Ohio internal improvements, see C. N. Morris, Internal Improvements
in Ohio, in American Historical Association, Papers, III., 107
(1889); G. W. Dial, in Ohio Archeological and Historical Society,
Publications, XIII., 479; C. P. McClelland and C. C. Huntington,
History of the Ohio Canals; A. B. Hulbert, Historic Highways of
America (16 vols., 1902-1905), including IX., Waterways of Westward
Expansion; X., The Ohio River and Its Tributaries; XI., The
Cumberland Road; XII., Pioneer Roads and Experiences of Travellers;
XIII., XIV., Great American Canals [Chesapeake and Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and Erie], useful, but not well digested.

The best sources for the Erie Canal are Laws of the State of New
York, in Relation to the Erie and Champlain Canals, together with
the Annual Reports of the Canal Commissioners (Albany, 1825), and
the succeeding Reports of the Canal Commissioners; View of the Grand
Canal (pamphlet, Albany, 1825); and the biographies of Clinton by
Hosack and Renwick above mentioned.


FOREIGN RELATIONS

On foreign relations, especially the Monroe Doctrine, see C.
Seignobos, Political History of Europe since 1814 (1899), 762, for
bibliography of the Holy Alliance. The following serve to elucidate
British policy: H. W. V. Temperley, Life of Canning (1905); A. G.
Stapleton, Political Life of the Right-Honourable George Canning (3
vols., 1831); E. J. Stapleton, Some Official Correspondence of
George Canning (3 vols., 1887); Festing, J. And it is known
as a great place of meeting for the birds that bear the names of the
tribes of old. The Byahmuls sail proudly about; the pelicans, their
water rivals in point of size and beauty; the ducks, and many others
too numerous to mention.For
Spanish America, see F. L. Paxson, Independence of the South
American Republics (1903), an excellent sketch, with bibliography;
J. H. Latane, Diplomatic Relations of the United States and Spanish
America (1900); J. M. Callahan, Cuba and International Relations
(1899). On the genesis of Monroe's message announcing the Doctrine,
the best survey is in the two articles by Worthington C. Ford, John
Quincy Adams: His Connection with the Monroe Doctrine, in
Massachusetts Historical Society, Proceedings, 2d series, XV.
(1902), 373-436, and in American Historical Review, VII., 676-696,
and VIII., 28-52. W. F. Reddaway, The Monroe Doctrine (1898; 2d
edition, 1906), is a particularly lucid and valuable study. Albert
Bushnell Hart, Foundations of American Foreign Policy (1901), chap.
vii.; John B. Moore, in Harper's Magazine, CIX., 857; G. Tucker,
Monroe Doctrine (Boston, 1885); and D. C. Gilman, James Monroe
(Boston, 1883), are other useful brief accounts. See also Frances
Wharton [editor], Digest of the International Law of the United
States (3 vols., 1887), I., superseded by John B. Moore, Digest (5
vols., 1906).

On the Panama Congress, considerable material is collected in The
Congress of 1826 at Panama (International American Conference, IV.,
Historical Appendix, 1890).