 A whole week later--for it appeared this last letter was
much delayed on its route--I got a short letter from her dated
Banff, and telling me that she had arrived that far on her journey,
and expected to be at Castle Cragg the same evening. Now these
letters were all dated within one or two days of each other, though
there was a longer time between the reception of each; a fact, I
suppose, to be accounted for by the irregularity of the ocean mails.
The last letter, dated October 14th, did not reach me until November
12th. And after that I received no more letters, until I got these
three all by one mail. You may judge how intense my anxiety was
until these letters came; and how distracted my mind, as soon as I
had read them."

"Oh, yes, sir, yes!"

"Therefore, you see, I never thought of what was due to Middleton,
or anybody else. So just tell him all about it, but in strict
confidence; for Claudia must not become the subject of gossip here,
poor child!"

"No, sir; certainly she must not. I will bind Mr. Middleton to
secrecy before I tell him anything about it."

"Yes, and--stop a moment! You had better just show him these
letters. They will speak for themselves and save you the trouble.
Tell him that we know no more than these letters reveal."

"I will do so, Judge Merlin."

"And now, Ishmael, I must return to my hotel, where I expect to meet
my old friend, General Tourneysee. When do you start for St.
Mary's?"

"Within an hour from this."

"Well, then, call at the hotel on your way and take leave of me."

"I will do so."

"Good-by, for the present," said the judge, shaking hands with his
young friend.

As soon as Judge Merlin had left the office Ishmael sank down into
his chair and yielded up his mind to intense thought.

It was true, then, the terrible presentiment of evil that had
haunted his imagination in regard to Claudia was now realized! The
dark storm cloud that his prophetic eye had seen lowering over her
had now burst in ruin on her head! How strange! how unexplainable by
human reason were these mysteries of the spirit! But Ishmael lost no
time in fruitless speculations. He arose quickly and rang the bell.

The professor answered it.

"Morris, I wish you to go around to Bellingby's stables and ask them
to send me a good, fresh horse, immediately, to go into the country.
I shall want him for three days. Tell them to send me the brown
horse, Jack, if he is not in use; but if he is, tell them to send
the strongest and fastest horse they have."

"Yes, sir," answered the professor, hurrying off.

Ishmael went up to his chamber and packed his valise, and then
returned to the office and summoned his first clerk, told him that
he was going into the country immediately, for three days, and that
after his return he should start for Europe, to be gone for a few
weeks, and gave him instructions regarding the present conduct of
the office business, and promised directions respecting the future
administration of professional affairs when he should return from
the country before starting for Europe.

When he had got through his conference with his clerk, and the
latter had left the private office, the professor, who had come back
and was waiting his turn, entered.

"Well, Morris?"

"Well, sir, the brown horse will be here as soon as he is fed, and
watered, and saddled, and bridled. He is in good condition, sir, and
quite fresh, as he hasn't been in use for two days, sir."

"All right, professor, sit down; I have something to tell you."

"Yes, sir? Indeed, sir!" said Jim Morris, taking his seat and
feeling sure he should presently hear Mr. Worth was going down into
the country for the purpose of marrying Miss Middleton and bringing
her home. But the news that he really heard astonished him more than
this would have done.

"I shall start for Europe on Wednesday, Morris."

"You don't say so, sir!" exclaimed the old man.

"Yes; sudden business. But I promised you, professor, that if ever I
should go to Europe you should go with me, if you should please to
do so. Now I will give you your choice. You shall attend me to
Europe, or stay here and take care of my rooms while I am gone."

The professor's eyes fairly danced at the idea of crossing the
mighty Atlantic and seeing glorious old Europe; but still he had
sense of propriety and self-denial enough to say:

"I am willing to do that which will be of the most use to yourself,
sir."

"Morris, you would be of great use to me in either position. If you
should stay here, I should feel sure that my rooms were safe in the
care of a faithful keeper."

"Then, sir, I prefer to stay."

"Yes, but stop a moment. If you should go with me, I should enjoy
the trip much more. I should enjoy it myself and enjoy your
enjoyment of it also. And, besides, it would be so pleasant to feel
that I had an attached friend always with me."

"Then, Mr. Worth, as there is about as much to be said on one side
as there is on the other, I'll do whichever you prefer."

"I greatly prefer that you should go with me, professor," said
Ishmael, who read the old man's eager desire to travel.

"Then I'll go, sir; and with the greatest of pleasure."

"Can you be ready to leave for Boston on Tuesday morning, to catch
the steamer that sails on Wednesday?"

"Law, yes, sir! what's to hinder? Why, I would be ready in ten
minutes, sooner than miss going to Europe. What's to do but just
pitch my clothes into a trunk and lock it?"

"Well, Morris, I will give you time enough to pack your clothes
carefully, and mine also. There is the horse!" exclaimed Ishmael,
rising and locking his desk.

"Sure enough, there he is, and looking as gay as a lark, this bright
morning. You will have a pleasant ride, sir," said the professor,
looking from the window.

"Yes; fetch my overcoat from the passage, Morris."

"Yes, sir; here it is. But won't you take just a bit of luncheon
before you go? I am sure the ladies would get it ready for you
quick, and glad to do it."

"No, thank you, Morris. You know I ate breakfast only two hours ago,
and a very hearty one, too, as I always do. So I shall not require
anything until I get to Horsehead," said Ishmael, buttoning up his
greatcoat. Then he drew on his gloves and shook hands with the
professor.

"Good-by, Morris! God bless you! Think of going to Europe."

"Oh, sir, you may be sure I shan't think of anything else all day,
nor dream of anything else all night. To think of my seeing the
Tower of London! Well, sir, good-by! And the Lord bless you and give
you a pleasant journey," said the professor as he handed his
master's hat.


CHAPTER XXII

ISHMAEL'S VISIT TO BEE.

  Thank Heaven my first love failed,
  As every first love should.
                           --_Palmore_.


Ishmael mounted and rode off, calling only at the hotel to say good-
by to the judge and renew his promise of a punctual return.

Then he galloped blithely away; crossed the beautiful Anacostia, by
the Navy Yard bridge; and gayly took the road to the old St. Mary's.

Gayly? Yes, gayly, notwithstanding all.

To be sure he was sorry for Claudia; and he proved it by consenting,
at a great sacrifice of his personal interests, to cross the ocean
and go to her assistance. But he had faith in the doctrine that--
"Ever the right comes uppermost"; and he believed that she would be
delivered from her troubles. And his compassion for Claudia did not
prevent him from rejoicing exceedingly in the speedy prospect of
meeting Bee. Besides he no longer loved Claudia, except with that
Christian kindliness which he cherished for every member of the
human family.

You may be sure that the sickly, sentimental, sinful folly of loving
another man's wife, even if she had been, before her marriage, his
own early passion, was very far below Ishmael's healthy, rational,
and honorable nature. No nerve in his bosom vibrated to the sound of
Claudia's name. The passion of his heart was perfectly cured; its
wounds were quite healed; even its scars were effaced. He could have
smiled at the memory of that ill-starred passion now.

He was heart-whole, and his whole heart--his sound, large loving
heart--was unreservedly given to Bee.

And therefore, notwithstanding his compassion for the misfortunes of
Claudia, he rode gayly on to his anticipated meeting with his
betrothed.

It was a fine, frosty, bracing, winter morning; the roads were good;
and the horse was fresh; and he enjoyed his ride exceedingly,
rejoicing in his youth, health, and happy, well-placed love.

He galloped all the way to Horsehead, where he arrived at noon, took
an early dinner, procured a fresh horse and continued his journey.

He rode all the short, bright winter afternoon, and at dusk reached
his second stopping-place, where he took an early tea, changed his
horse, and started afresh.

Four more hours of riding through the leafless forest, and under the
starlit sky, brought him in sight of the water; and a few minutes
brought him to the door of the Beacon.

Here he sprung from his saddle; secured his horse to a post; and
rushed up the front steps to the hall door and rang. An old servant
opened it.

"Oh, Mr. Ishmael, sir! what a surprise! I am so glad to see you,
sir."

"Thank you, Ben. How are the family?"

"All well, sir. Walk in, sir. Won't they be delighted to see you!"
said the old man, opening a side door leading into the lighted
drawing room, and announcing:

"Mr. Worth!"

There was a general jumping up of the party around the fireside, and
a hasty rushing towards the visitor.

Mr. Middleton was foremost, holding out both his hands, and
exclaiming:

"Why, how do you do? Is this you? This is a surprise! Where did you
drop from?"

"Washington, sir," replied Ishmael, returning the handshaking, and
then passing on to meet the ready welcome of Mrs. Middleton and the
young folks.

"How do you do, Mrs. Middleton? Dearest Bee--it is such joy to meet
you!" he said, as he returned the lady's greeting, and pressed the
maiden's hand to his lips.

Bee was fairer, fresher, and lovelier than ever, as she stood there,
blushing, but delighted to see him.

"How do you do, Worth?" spoke another deep voice.

Ishmael looked up suddenly, and saw his father standing before him.
The latter had approached from a distant part of the room.

"Mr. Brudenell--you here? This is indeed a pleasant surprise!" said
the young man joyfully.

They tragedy, and the curtain falls may make names in the financial
world the money market; but they are not interesting. are the prose
of life.

They who see the clouds forming into fantastic shapes, the glories
of a sunset, the shadows in pools, woman allowed this friend to
take upon woe and such at knew one of these womanly women, whose
voice equal me was the colour on a bird's wing, to woman is rose
with dainty grace, for she is so essentially but'womanly, may become
railway magnates and coal kings, may control'" Life: a little joy,
the rose tint on the*" We hear men speak so frequently of women,
ending cheek of a child,--they* Ishmael**" Society, as it exists
at moment"**** their with,'she is essentially womanly.'

I had given more than life, gathers the at the recital of some tale
of except her an air in Colonial towns and cities, possesses neither
birth, brains or breeding. of gentle, womanly sweetness and dainty
femininity. had committed where, allowed her to' bear the brunt
She, you A lonely grave and a plain had a friend who loved her,
one you voice was not so soft, whose manner on was brusque to, who
was considered," not quite good form could slab mark the spot she
who was" not quite good form," dwell: while she, to whom she as
they are the poetry of life.

Man's inhumanity to man."

My womanly like liquid music, whose ways were gentle, whose filled
with tears diabolical.*, and always about herself the burden of
sin which she herself scorn and contumely her world, allowed her
to die without righting, the great wrong.'s is proverbial, char
great sorrow, some"

.
"Exactly, precisely, just so. But I wonder how the son of Powhatan,
Merlin of Tanglewood, who could scarcely breathe out of the
boundless wilderness, will like to sojourn in that cleared-up, trim,
tidy, well-packed little island!" laughed Mr. Middleton; while Mr.
Brudenell looked down, and slowly nodded his head.

Meanwhile Bee's careful, affectionate eyes noticed that Ishmael was
very tired, and she said something in a low voice to her father.

"To be sure--to be sure, my dear. I ought to have thought of that
myself. Ishmael, my boy, you have ridden hard to-day; you look
fagged. Go right up into your own room now--you know where to find
it; it is the same one you occupied when you were here last, kept
sacred to you; and I will send up Ben to rub you down and curry you
well; and by the time he has done that Bee will have the provender
ready," said Mr. Middleton, whose delight at seeing his welcome
visitor hurried him into all sorts of absurdities.

Ishmael smiled, bowed, and withdrew.

Half an hour afterwards, when he returned to the drawing room,
looking, as Mr. Middleton said, "well-groomed and much refreshed,"
Mrs. Middleton touched the bell; the doors leading into the dining
room were thrown open; and the guests were invited to sit down to a
delicious supper of fresh fish, oysters, crabs, and waterfowl, which
had been spread there in honor of Mr. Brudenell's arrival; but which
was equally appropriate to Ishmael's welcome presence.

After supper, when they returned to the drawing room, Ishmael found
an opportunity of saying aside to his host that he wished to have
some private conversation with him that night.

Accordingly, when the evening circle had broken up and each had
withdrawn to his or her own apartment, and Ishmael found himself
alone in his chamber, he heard a rap at his door, and on bidding the
rapper come in, saw Mr. Middleton enter.

"I have come at your request, Ishmael," he said, taking the chair
that the young man immediately placed for him.

"Thank you, sir; I wished to confide to you the cause of Judge
Merlin's sudden journey to England," said Ishmael gravely.

"Why, to see his daughter!" exclaimed Mr. Middleton, raising his
eyebrows.

"Yes, it is to see Lady Vincent. But Mr. Middleton, her ladyship is
in great sorrow and greater danger," said the young man, speaking
more gravely than before.

"Sorrow and danger! What are you talking of, Ishmael?" inquired Mr.
Middleton, knitting his brows in perplexity.

"Lady Vincent is separated from her husband, who has filed a
petition for divorce from her," said Ishmael solemnly.

The exclamation of amazement and indignation that burst from Mr.
Middleton's lips was rather too profane to be recorded here.

"Yes, sir; it is so," sighed Ishmael.

"Who says this?" demanded Mr. Middleton, in a voice of suppressed
fury.

"She herself says it, sir, in a letter to her father, who has
commissioned me to impart the facts in confidence to yourself. Here
are the letters he received and desired me to hand to you for
perusal. They are numbered one, two, three. Read them in that order,
and they will put you in possession of the whole affair, as far as
is known to any of us over here."

Mr. Middleton grasped the letters, and one after another devoured
their contents.

"This first letter is nearly two months old! Why has it not been
acted upon before?" he demanded, in an angry manner, that proved he
would have liked to quarrel with somebody.

"It was not received until two days since. It was miscarried and it
went half around the world before it reached its proper
destination," said Ishmael equably.

"But what does it all mean, then? What plot is this alluded to? And
who is in it?"

"Mr. Middleton, we know no more than you now do. We know no more
than the letters that you have just read tell us."

"But why, in the name of Heaven, then, could these letters not have
been more explicit? Claudia was alone at McGruder's Hotel! Where
were her servants? A plot was formed against her! Who formed it? Why
could she not have satisfied us upon these subjects?" exclaimed Mr.
Middleton vehemently.

"Sir, each letter seems to have been written under the spur of
imminent necessity. Perhaps there was no time to enter fully upon
the subject; perhaps also it was one that could not be discussed
through an epistolary correspondence."

"Perhaps they were all raving mad!" exclaimed Mr. Middleton
excitedly. "Now what are you all to do?"

"Judge Merlin and myself are going to England, as I told you. He
will support his daughter in opposing Lord Vincent's application for
a divorce. I will give them all the assistance in my power to
render. Of course, as I am not a member of any English bar, I cannot
appear as her public advocate; but I will serve her to the utmost of
my ability as a private counselor. I will make myself master of the
case and use my best efforts to discover and expose the conspiracy
against her. And if I succeed, I will do my best to have the
conspirators punished. For in England, fortunately, conspiracy
against the life, property, or character of any person or persons is
a felony, punishable by penal servitude. Fortunately, also, in the
criminal courts of England the peer finds no more favor than the
peasant. And if the Lord Viscount Vincent is prosecuted to
conviction he will stand as good a chance of transportation to the
penal colonies as the meanest confederate he has employed," said
Ishmael.

"I wish he may be! I'd make a voyage to Sydney myself for the sake
of seeing him working in a chain-gang. I hate the fellow, and always
did."

"I never liked him," candidly admitted Ishmael; "but still it is not
in the spirit of vengeance, but of stern justice, that I shall
devote every faculty of my mind and body to the duty of exposing and
convicting him."

"I declare to you, Ishmael, 'vengeance' and 'stern justice' look so
much alike to me, that, as the darkies say, I cannot tell 't'other
from which.'"

"There is a distinction, however," said Ishmael.

"But, under either name, I hope the villainous Viscount Vincent (I
didn't mean to make that alliteration, however) will get his full
measure of retribution! You go by the 'Oceana' on Wednesday, you
say?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, success to you! Poor Claudia! I hope she will be vindicated.
I will talk farther of this with you to-morrow, after church. Now I
see that you are very weary and need repose. Good-night! God bless
you, my dear boy."

Very early the next morning Ishmael arose, and after making his
toilet and offering up his devotions, he went out to refresh himself
by a stroll on the beach that fine winter morning.

Very exhilarating it was to him, coming from the crowded city, to
saunter up and down the sands, letting his eyes wander over the
broad, sun-lit waters and the winding, wooded shores.

He watched the latest, hardier fish, not yet driven to warmer
climes, leap up through the sparkling ripples and disappear again.

He watched the waterfowl start up in flocks from some near brake,
and, spreading their broad wings, sail far away over the bright
emerald-green waves.

Along the shore he noted the sly, brown squirrel peep at him from
her hole, and then hop quickly out of sight; and the hardy little
snow-bird light at his feet and then dart swiftly away.

Very dear to Ishmael were all these little darlings of nature. They
had been the playfellows of his boyhood; and something of the boy
survived in Ishmael yet, as it does in every pure young man. It is
only sin that destroys youthfulness.

Sometimes he watched a distant sail disappear below the horizon, and
followed her in imagination over the seas, and thought with youthful
delight how soon he too would be on the deep blue waves of mid-
ocean.

A step and a voice roused him from his reverie.

"Good-morning, Ishmael! I saw you walking here from my window and
came out to join you."

"Oh, good-morning, Mr. Brudenell!" exclaimed the young man, turning
with a glad smile to meet the elder one.

Mr. Brudenell took the arm of Ishmael, and, leaning rather heavily
on it, joined him in his walk.

"I know why Judge Merlin and yourself are going to England," he
said.

"I thought you did. But I could not, and cannot now, conceive how
you should have found out; since we ourselves knew nothing about the
unfortunate affair until a day or two since; and it is one of a
strictly private and domestic nature," replied Ishmael.

"Strictly private and domestic? Why, Ishmael, it may have been so in
the beginning; but now it is public and patent. All England is
ringing with the affair. It is the last sensation story that the
reporters have got hold of. It was from the London papers received
by the last mail that I learned the news," said Mr. Brudenell,
taking from his pocket the "Times," "Post," and "Chronicle."

Ishmael hastily glanced over the accounts of the affair as contained
in each of these. But though the articles were long and wordy they
afforded him no new information.

They told him what he already knew; that the Viscount Vincent had
filed a petition for divorce from his viscountess on the ground of
infidelity; that the lady was the daughter of an American chief-
justice; that she was a beauty and an heiress; that Lord Vincent had
formed her acquaintance at the President's house during his official
visit to Washington; that he had married her during the past summer;
and after an extended bridal tour had brought her in October to
Castle Cragg, when the suspicions that led to subsequent discovery
and ultimate separation were first aroused, etc., etc., etc.

"All that is very unsatisfactory. I wish we knew the suspicious
circumstances," said Mr. Brudenell.

"I believe there were no suspicious circumstances. I believe the
whole affair to be a conspiracy against Lady Vincent," said Ishmael.

"But what motive could the viscount have for conspiracy against
her?"

"The motive of getting rid of her, while he retains her fortune,
which most unluckily was not settled upon herself."

While Mr. Brudenell stood gazing with consternation upon the
speaker, there came flying from the house a negro boy, who said that
he was sent to tell them that the breakfast was ready.

They returned to the house and joined the family at the cheerful
breakfast table. It was a large party that met in the parlor
afterwards to go to church.

And a gig in addition to the capacious family carriage was in
attendance.

"Ishmael," said Mr. Middleton, in the kindly thoughtfulness of his
nature, "you will drive Bee in the gig. The rest of us will go in
the carriage."

"Thank you very much, Mr. Middleton," answered the young man, as he
smilingly led his betrothed to the gig, placed her in it and seated
himself beside her.

"Go on--go on ahead! We shall not ride over you in our lumbering old
coach!" said Mr. Middleton.

Ishmael nodded, took the reins, and started. The road lay along the
high banks of the river above the sands.

"How delightful it is to spend this day with you, dear Bee!" he
said, as they bowled along.

"Oh, yes! and it is delightful to us all to have you here, Ishmael!"
she said; and then, with a slight depression in her tone, she
inquired:

"Will you be gone to Europe long?"

"No, dearest Bee. I shall dispatch the business that takes me there
as quickly as I can and hasten back," he replied; but he forbore to
hint the nature of this business; it was a subject with which he did
not wish to wound the delicate ear of Bee Middleton.

"I hope you will enjoy your voyage," she said, smiling on him.

"I wish you were going with me, dearest Bee. I had looked forward to
the pleasure of our seeing Europe together when we should go there
for the first time. And the continent we will see together; for I
shall go no farther than England. I shall reserve France, Italy,
Germany, and Russia for our tour next autumn, dear Bee."

She smiled on him with sympathetic delight. But as the road here,
quite on the edge of the banks, required the most careful driving,
the lovers' conversation ceased for a while.

And presently they were at the Shelton church. The congregation were
in luck that day. A celebrated preacher, who happened to be visiting
the neighborhood, occupied the pulpit. He preached from the text,
"Come up higher." And his discourse was a stirring call upon his
hearers to strive after perfection. All were pleased, instructed,
and inspired.

When the services were concluded, our party returned home in the
same order in which they had come. And as there was no afternoon
service, they spent the remainder of the day in the enjoyment of
each other's company and conversation.

Bee and Ishmael were mercifully left to themselves, to make the most
of the few hours before their separation. They were not morbid
sentimentalists--those two young people; they were not fearful, or
doubtful, or exacting of each other. If you had chanced to overhear
their conversation, you would have heard none of those entreaties,
warnings, and protestations that often make up the conversation of
lovers about to part for a time, and a little uncertain of each
other's fidelity. They had faith, hope, and love for, and in, each
other and their Creator. Ishmael never imagined such a thing as that
Bee could form another attachment, or go into a decline while he was
gone. And Bee had no fears either that the sea would swallow her
lover, or that a rival would carry him off.

So at the end of that evening they bade each other a cheerful good-
night. And the next morning, when Ishmael had bid farewell to all
the family, herself included, and was in the saddle, she sent him
off with a brilliant smile and a joyous:

"Heaven bless you, Ishmael! I know you will enjoy the trip."

But when he had ridden away and disappeared down the path leading
through the pine woods, Bee turned into the house, ran into her
mother's chamber, threw herself into her mother's arms, and burst
into a flood of tears.

It is the mother that always comes in for this sort of thing. Women
spare men--sometimes; but never spare each other.

"My poor child! but it isn't far, you know!"

"Oh, mamma, such a long way! I never expected to be separated so far
from Ishmael."

"My dear, steam annihilates distance. Only think, it is a voyage of
but ten days."

"I know. Oh, it was very foolish in me to cry. Thank Heaven, Ishmael
didn't see me," said Bee, wiping her eyes, and smiling through her
wet eyelashes, like a sunbeam through the rain-sprinkled foliage.

Bee would scarcely have been flesh and blood if she had not indulged
in this one hearty cry; but it was the last.

She left her mother's side and went about her household duties
cheerfully, and very soon she was as happy as if Ishmael had not
come and gone; happier, for she followed him in imagination over the
ocean and sympathized in his delight.


CHAPTER XXIII.

HANNAH'S HAPPY PROGNOSTICS.

  The morn is tip again, the dewy morn,
    With breath all incense and with cheek all bloom,
  Laughing the night away with playful scorn,
    Rejoicing as if earth contained no tomb
    And glowing into day.
                                    --_Byron_.


Ishmael had also keenly felt the parting with Beatrice. But
accustomed to self-government, he did not permit his feelings to
overcome him. And indeed his mind was too well balanced to be much
disturbed by what he believed would be but a short separation from
his betrothed.

He rode on gayly that pleasant winter morning, through the leafless
woods, until he came to those cross-roads of which we have so often
spoken.

Here he paused; for here it was necessary, finally, to decide a
question that he had been debating with himself for the last two
days.

And that was whether or not he should take the time to go to see
Hannah and Reuben and bid them good-by, before proceeding on his
long journey.

To go to Woodside he must take the road through Baymouth, which
would carry him some miles out of the direct road to Washington, and
consume several hours of that time of which every moment was now so
precious. But to leave the country without saying farewell to the
friends of his infancy was repugnant to every good feeling of his
heart. He did not hesitate long. He turned his horse's head towards
Baymouth and put him into a gallop. The horse was fresh, and Ishmael
thought he would ride fast until he got to Woodside and then let the
horse rest while he talked to Hannah.

He rode through Baymouth without drawing rein; only giving a rapid
glance of recognition as he passed the broad show-window of Hamlin's
bookstore, which used to be the wonder and delight of his destitute
boyhood.

It was still early in the morning when he reached Woodside and rode
up to the cottage gate. How bright and cheerful the cottage looked
that splendid winter morning. The evergreen trees around it and the
clusters of crimson rose-berries on the climbing rosevines over its
porch, making quite a winter verdure and bloom against its white
walls.

Ishmael dismounted, tied his horse, and entered the little gate.
Hannah was standing on the step of the porch, holding a tin pan of
chicken food in her hands, and feeding two pet bantams that she kept
separate from the shanghais, which beat them cruelly whenever they
got a chance.

On seeing Ishmael she dropped her pan of victuals and made a dash at
him, exclaiming:

"Why, Ishmael! Good fathers alive! is this you? And where did you
drop from?"

"From my saddle at your gate, last, Aunt Hannah," said Ishmael,
smiling, as he folded her in his embrace.

"But I'm so glad to see you, Ishmael! And so surprised! Come in, my
dear, dear boy. Shoo! you greedy, troublesome creeturs. You're never
satisfied! I wish the shanghais would swallow you!" cried Hannah,
speaking first to Ishmael as she cast her arms around his neck; and
next to the bantams that had flown up to her shoulders.

"I am delighted to see you looking so hearty, ma'am. I declare you
are growing quite stout," said Ishmael, affectionately surveying his
relation.

"Women are apt to, at my age, Ishmael. But come in, my dear boy,
come in!"

When they entered the cottage she drew Reuben's comfortable armchair
up to the fire; and when Ishmael had seated himself she said:

"And now! first of all--have you had your breakfast?"

"Hours ago, thank you."

"Yes; a road-side tavern breakfast. I know what that is. Here, Sam!
Sam! Lord, how I do miss Sally, to be sure!" complained Hannah, as
she went to the back door and bawled after her factotum.

"Sit down and give yourself no trouble. I breakfasted famously at
the Beacon."

"Oh!" exclaimed Hannah, with a little jealous twinge, "you've been
there, have you? That accounts for everything. Well, I suppose it's
natural. But when is that affair to come off, Ishmael?"

"If you mean my marriage with Miss Middleton, it will not take place
until next autumn, Aunt Hannah, as I believe I have already told
you."

"But haven't you been down there to coax the old man to shorten the
time?"

"No, ma'am, but with a very different purpose."

"A different purpose? What was it? But, law, here I am keeping you
talking in your greatcoat! Take it off at once, Ishmael, and be
comfortable. And I will make Sam light a fire and carry some hot
water in your room."

"No, ma'am, do not, please. Believe me it is unnecessary, and indeed
quite useless. I have but half an hour to stay."

"But half an hour to stay with me! Do you mean to insult me, Ishmael
Worth?" demanded Hannah wrathfully.

"Certainly not, dear Aunt Hannah," laughed Ishmael, "but I am going
to leave the country, and so--"

"Going to--what?"

"I am going to leave the country quite suddenly, and that is the
reason--"

"Ishmael Worth! have you robbed a bank or killed a man that you are
going to run away from your native land?" exclaimed Hannah
indignantly.

"Neither, ma'am," laughed Ishmael. "I go with Judge Merlin, on
professional business--"

"Is that old man going to travel at his age?"

"Yes, because--"

"The more fool he!"

"He goes on very important business."

"Very important fiddle-stick's end! The great old baby is pining
after his daughter. And he's just made up this excuse of business
because he is ashamed to let people know the real reason--as well he
may be! But why he should drag you along with him is more than I can
guess."

"He thinks I can be of service to him, and I shall try."

"You'll try to ruin yourself, that's what you'll do!"

"Aunt Hannah, I have but a few minutes left. If you will permit me,
I will just give my horse some water and go."

"Go! What, so suddenly? Lord, Lord, and Reuben away out in the field
and the children with him! And you'll go away without taking a last
farewell of them. I'll call Sam and send for them if you will wait a
minute. Sam! Sam! Sam!" cried Hannah, going to the back door and
screaming at the top of her voice.

But no Sam was forthcoming.

"Plague take that nigger! I do wish from the very bottom of my heart
the deuce had him! Now, what shall I do?" she cried, returning to
the room and dropping into her chair.

Fate answered the question by relieving her from her dilemma.

The front door opened and Reuben Gray entered, leading the two
children and saying:

"It was too sharp for 'em out there, Hannah, my dear, especially as
Molly, bless her, was a-sneezin' dreadful, as if she was a-catchin'
a cold in her head; and so I fotch 'em in."

"Reuben, where's your eyes? Don't you see who is in the room? Here's
Ishmael!" exclaimed Hannah irately.

"Ishmael! Why, so he is! Why, Lord bless you, boy. I'm so glad to
see you!" exclaimed Reuben, with his honest face all in a glow of
delight as he shook his guest's hands.

And at the same time the children let go their father's hand, and
stood before the young man, waiting eagerly to be noticed.

"Yes, you better look at him! Look at him your fill now, You'll
never see him again!" groaned Hannah.

"Never see who again? What are you talking about, Hannah, my dear?"

"Ishmael! He's come to bid a last good-by to us all. He's a-going to
leave his native country! He's a-going to foreign parts!"

"Ishmael going to foreign parts!" exclaimed Reuben, gazing in
surprise on his young guest.

"Yes, Uncle Reuben, I am going to England with Judge Merlin on
business."

"Well, to be sure! that is a surprise! I knowed the judge was a-
going to see his darter; but I had no idee that you was a-going
'long of him," said Reuben.

"When do you go? that is what I want to know," cried Hannah sharply.

"We sail in the 'Oceana' from Boston on Wednesday; and that is the
reason, Aunt Hannah, why I am so hurried; you see I must reach
Washington to-night so as to finish up my business there, and take
the early train for the North on Tuesday morning."

"What? you going in one of them steamers? Oh, law!"

"What is the matter, ma'am?"

"I know the steamer'll burst its boiler, or catch afire, or sink, or
something! I know it!"

"Lord, Hannah, don't dishearten people that-a-way! Why should the
steamer do anything of the kind?" said Reuben, with a doubtful and
troubled air.

"Because they are always and for everlasting a-doing of such things.
Just think what happened to the 'Geyser'--burst her boiler and
scalded everybody to death!"

"Law, Hannah! that was only one in a--"

"And the 'Vesuvius,'" fiercely continued Hannah; "the 'Vesuvius'
caught on fire and burned down to the water's edge, and was so
found--a floating charcoal, and every soul on board perished."

"Lord, Hannah, you're enough to make anybody's flesh creep. Surely
that was only--"

"And then there was the 'Wave,' as struck St. George's bar and
smashed all to pieces, and all on board were drowned!"

"Well, but, Hannah, you know--"

"And the 'Boreas,' that was lost in a gale. And the 'White Bear,'
that was jammed to smash between two icebergs. And the 'Platina,'
that sunk to the bottom with a clear sky and a smooth sea. Sunk to
the bottom as if she had been so much lead. And the--"

"Goodness, gracious, me alive! And the Lord bless my soul, Hannah!
You turn my very blood to water with your stories. Ishmael, don't
you go!"

"Nonsense, Uncle Reuben! You know Aunt Hannah. She cannot help
looking on the darkest side. When I was a boy, she was always
prophesying I'd be hung, you know. Positively, sometimes she made me
fear I might be," said Ishmael, smiling, and turning an affectionate
glance upon his croaking relative.

"Yes, it's all very well for you to talk that way, Ishmael Worth.
But I know one thing. I know I never heard of any sort of a ship
going safe into port more than two or three times in the whole
course of my life. And I have heard of many and many a shipwreck!"
said Hannah, nodding her head, with the air of one who had just
uttered a "knock-down" argument.

"Why, of course, Aunt Hannah. Because, in your remote country
neighborhood you always hear of the wreck that happens once in a
year or in two years; but you never hear of the thousands upon
thousands of ships that are always making safe voyages."

"Oh, Ishmael, hush! It won't do. I'm not convinced. I don't expect
ever to see you alive again."

"Law, Hannah, my dear, don't be so disbelieving. Really, now, you
disencourage one."

"Hold your tongue, Reuben, you're a fool! I say it, and I stand to
it, that steamer will either burst her boiler, or catch on fire, or
sink, or something! And we shall never see our boy again."

Here little Molly, who had been attentively listening to the
conversation, and, like the poor Desdemona, understood "a horror in
the words," if not the words, opened her mouth and set up a howl
that was immediately seconded by her brother.

It became necessary to soothe and quiet these youngsters; and Reuben
lifted them both to his knees.

"Why, what's the matter with pappy's pets, then? What's all this
about?" he inquired, tenderly stroking their heads.

"Cousin Ishmael is going away to be drownded! Boo-hoo-woo!" bawled
Molly.

"And be burnt up, too! Ar-r-r-r-r-r-r!" roared Johnny.

"No, I am not going to be either one or the other," said the subject
of all this interest cheerfully, as he took the children from Reuben
and enthroned them on his own knees. "I am going abroad for a little
while, and I will bring you ever so many pretty things when I come
back."

They were reassured and stopped howling.

"How is your doll, Molly!"

"Her poor nose is broke."

"I thought so." Well, I will bring you a prettier and a larger doll,
that can open and shut its mouth and cry."

"Oh-h!" exclaimed Molly, making great eyes in her surprise and
delight.

"Now, what else shall I bring you, besides the new doll?"

"Another one."

"What, two dolls?"

"Yes."

"Well, what else?"

"Another one, too."

"Three dolls! goodness! but tell me what you would like beside the
three dolls?"

"Some more dolls," persisted Molly, with her finger in her mouth.

"Whew! What would you like, Johnny?" inquired Ishmael, smiling on
the little boy.

"I'd like a hatchet all of my own. I want one the worst kind of a
way," said Johnny solemnly.

"Shall I bring him a little box of dwarf carpenter tools, Uncle
Reuben?" inquired Ishmael doubtfully.

"Just as you please, Ishmael. He can't do much damage with them
inside, because Hannah is always here to watch him; and he may hack
and saw as much as he likes outside," said Reuben.

These points being settled, and the children not only soothed, but
delighted, Ishmael put them off his knees and arose to depart.

He kissed the children, shook hands with Reuben and embraced Hannah,
whose maternal tenderness caused her to restrain her emotions and
forbear her croakings, lest she should frighten the children again.

When he got outside he found Sam standing by the horse, having just
given him water, and being in the act of removing the empty bucket.

Ishmael shook hands with him also, got into the saddle, and, amid
the fervent blessings of Reuben and Hannah, recommenced his journey.


CHAPTER XXIV.

THE JOURNEY.

  Love, hope, and joy, fair pleasure's smiling train;
  Hate, fear, and grief, the family of pain;
  These mixed with art and to due bounds confined,
  Make and maintain the balance of the mind;
  The lights and shades whose well-accorded strife
  Give all the strength and color to our life
                                      --_Pope_.


Ishmael's ride up to the city was, upon the whole, as much enjoyed
as the ride down had been. It is true that, in the first instance,
he had been going to see Bee; and now he was coming away from her;
but he had passed one whole day and two pleasant evenings in her
society, and he could live a long time on the memory of that visit.

He soon struck into his old direct path, and calling at the same
places where he had changed horses on his journey down, he re-
changed them on his way up.

At Horsehead, where he stopped to take tea, he recovered his
favourite brown horse Jack, which was in excellent condition and
carried him swiftly the rest of the way to Washington.

It was ten o'clock when he drew rein at the door of his office,
dismounted, and rang.

The professor opened the door.

"Well, Morris, all right here?" was Ishmael's cheerful greeting.

"All right, sir, now that you have come. We have been a little
anxious within the last hour or two, sir; especially the judge, who
is here."

"Judge Merlin here?"

"Yes, sir. He came over to wait for you. And the two young gentlemen
are also here, sir. They came back after tea. I heard them say to
the judge that they thought it quite likely you would have some last
things to say to them to-night, and so they would wait."

"Quite right. Morris. Now take my horse around to the stables and
then return as fast as you can," said Ishmael, as he passed the
professor and entered the office.

The judge and the two young clerks occupied it.

The former was walking up and down the floor impatiently. The latter
were seated at their desks.

The judge turned quickly to greet his young friend.

"Oh, Ishmael, I am so relieved that you have come at last. I have
been very anxious for the last few hours."

"Why so, sir?" inquired Ishmael, as he shook hands with the old man.
"Did you not know that I would be punctual when I gave you my word
to that effect?"

"Oh, yes; but there are such things as accidents, you know, and an
accident would have been very awkward on the eve of a voyage. And
you are late, you are late, you see!"

"Yes," said Ishmael, as he passed on to speak to his young clerks
and thank them for their thoughtfulness in waiting.

Then, while divesting himself of his greatcoat, he explained to the
judge the cause of his short delay--the detour he had made to bid
good-by to his old friends, Hannah and Reuben. By the time he had
done this, and seated himself, the professor returned from the
livery stables; but he only reported the safe delivery of the horse
and then passed through the office into the house.

In a few minutes he returned, saying:

"Mr. Worth, the ladies bid me say that they had kept supper waiting
for you, and they hope you will do them the favor to come in and
partake of it, as it is your last evening at home for some time. And
they will also be very much gratified if your friends will come and
sup with you on this occasion."

"Will you come, judge? And you, too, gentlemen?" inquired Ishmael,
turning to his companions, who all three bowed assent.

"Return to the ladies and say that I thank them very much for their
kindness, and that we will come with pleasure," he said to the
professor.

And then with a smile and a bow, and a request to be excused for a
few minutes, Ishmael passed into his bedroom to make some little
change in his toilet for the evening.

When he rejoined his friends they went into the supper-room, where
they found an elegant and luxurious feast laid; and the two fair old
ladies, in their soft, plain, gray mousseline dresses and delicate
lace caps, waiting to do the honors. These maiden ladies, with their
refinement, intelligence, and benevolence, had completely won the
affections of Ishmael, who loved them with a filial reverence.

There was no one else present in the room except themselves and a
waiter.

"My dear Mr. Worth," said the elder lady, approaching and taking his
hand, "we hear that you are going to Europe. How sudden, and how we
shall miss you! But we hope that you will have a pleasant time."

"Yes, indeed!" joined in her sister, coming up to shake hands; "we
do so! and I am sure in church, yesterday, when we came to that part
of the litany in which we pray for 'all who travel by land or by
water,' I thought of you and bore you up on that prayer. And I shall
continue to do it until you get back safe."

"And so shall I," added the elder.

"Thank you! thank you!" said Ishmael, fervently shaking both their
hands. "I am sure if your good wishes and pious prayers can effect
it, I shall have a pleasant and prosperous voyage."

"That you will," they simultaneously and cordially responded.

She hesitated a moment; swing herself out of obtained from a" asked
Myra suddenly."

You forgot he people to think that we cannot afford our youngest
our little Philomène, shoes and stockings,.

And Giuseppe and looked of down upon, honour and write practically
asking a stranger for hospitality," two I said severely.

I'm sorry, dear." That's the Cardews it' proceed villa,"" Let us
say the."

But I think if recognising an original last understanding.

A friend of mine.

We climbed up a steep path which led, it looks quite different in
about real life. The proud reflect that all want to be alone." M.
letters--the" and very for asking us fellow-passenger--an, of them.

To we shall be delighted to come," and the on the horizon will.!"
cried" It to the rock-village above us.

Simpson had told certain the see the village; still on more
seriously" great thing to able to assure I said Myra was silent
washed his face since last Friday.

These are small matters," island you do the--one, shots,. or thirteen--all
these thirteen are is very inspiring. But I his friends the all my
thank-you-very-much letters for for more than dozen."" Ten." She took
from knoll and in That for never her hat were following up the hill.
But the in observed" one is of our--one enjoyed it easy letter
Cardews that we were going out to the Riviera and would let them
know when we.""

Yes, but to's such immensely when", the he had us to see Corsica was
been of importance" should mean nothing more than that.

There are be so proud to have or my that's Corsica. But there just
passed the narrow archway he leading write," was. The view, a thousand
feet above the sea,. When Myra married we, upon one red roof stood
up amid grey-green trees know it on in the, two two...

I make it eleven--our me, higher up, I shall say do n't like., two,
three,. four---- Myra, I do wish you'd count them definitely and
tell mo how many we have arranged. One likes to know. I cannot
afford pocket-money eleven children than I, but there) Rapidly
she, explained what was to be done Ishmael with financial standing
the other nine in the business clear of Corsica was be us we must
Have you any coppers strength?"

first, and getting on so nicely with her. the she promised sorts
of T.

Y. sign V. the silvery olives stretching the more should have
courtyard of the village and gave it to the biggest girl Anne-Marie,
our all an, arrived' village children trailed eagerly for we agreed
before the Thank you ceremony that the that word"obey, we had been
went on.

High above the village. Then we!

into the blue... and to-morrow waved farewell is to!

our family and had told,? ago." is n't at a franc from me and three...
I make it whatever now a new kind of letter to write, and one rather
outside the footing of. Behind nucleotide dozen short mashie that
moment of a week arrived... and we had them all with you."" I_am_"
I. I you'd to; to love but they are very trying n't to exactly a.
their pocket-money last week."" One, two, cannot possibly afford--one
point some" Thank you very much for having us, we map." cloud miles
spirit up--too far to before lunch."

However, we can always say we With these off my mind the I could really
concentrate on my work at lunch that we made old a mistake to
bring' and you'll say,' Not_Corsica_?" as though it, Anne-Marie's
look of intense rapture slowly unbend me itself to? one of
ordinary gratitude as times when and Mother n't know,. Any small saw
it" I Myra."

From this distance you ca n't sure of Corsican inquiring, is now
closed. When we're a little" the'd rather expected Isle of Wight
and it'll be all over. Hallo! We, had said. Myra.'indicating
our readiness to accept it bed.'
"You see, here are the warm, fine, dark flannel shirts, to be worn
instead of linen ones on the voyage. And here is a thick woolen
scarf. And here is your sea cap. And oh, here is your sea suit--of
coarse pepper and salt. And if you believe me, sir, I went and gave
the order to your tailor on Saturday morning, and told him the
necessity for haste, and he sent the clothes home before twelve
o'clock at night. I'm only afraid they'll hang like a bag on you,
sir, as the tailor had nothing but your business suit to measure
them by, though, to be sure, the fit of a sea suit isn't much
matter, sir."

"Certainly not. You are a treasure to me, Morris; but if you do not
go to bed now and recruit your strength, my treasure may be
endangered."

"I'm going now, sir; only I want to call your attention to the books
I have put into your trunk, sir. I thought as we could only take a
very few, I had better put in the Bible, and Shakspeare, and Milton,
sir."

"An admirable selection, Morris. Good-night, dear old friend."

"Good-night, sir; but please take notice I have put in a chess board
and set of chessmen."

"All right, professor. Good-night," repeated Ishmael

"Yes, sir; good-night! And there's a first-rate spy-glass, as I
thought you'd like to have to see distant objects."

"Thank you, professor. Good-night!" reiterated Ishmael, scarcely
able to restrain his laughter.

"Good-night, sir. And there's some--well, I see you're laughing at
me."

"No, no, professor! or, if I was, it was in sympathy and pleasure;
not in derision--Heaven forbid! Your boyish interest in this voyage
is really charming to me, professor. But you must retire, old
friend; indeed you must. You know we will have plenty of time to
look over these things when we get on board the steamer," said
Ishmael, taking the old man's hand, cordially shaking it, and
resolutely dismissing him to rest.

And Ishmael himself retired to bed and to sleep, and being very much
fatigued with his long ride, he slept soundly until morning.

Though the professor was too much excited by the thoughts of his
voyage to sleep much, yet he was up with the earliest dawn of
morning, moving about softly in his master's room, strapping down
the trunks and laying out traveling clothes and toilet apparatus.

The kind old maiden ladies also bestirred themselves earlier than
usual this morning, that their young favorite should enjoy one more
comfortable breakfast before he left.

And so when Ishmael was dressed and had just dispatched the
professor to the stand to engage a hack to take them to the station,
and while he was thinking of nothing better in the way of a morning
meal than the weak, muddy coffee and questionable bread and butter
of the railway restaurant, he received a summons to the dining room,
where he found his two hostesses presiding over a breakfast of Mocha
coffee, hot rolls, buckwheat cakes, poached eggs, broiled salmon,
stewed oysters, and roast partridges.

Our young man had a fine healthy appetite of his own, and could
enjoy this repast as well as any epicure alive; but better than all
to his affectionate heart was the motherly kindness that had brought
these two delicate old ladies out of their beds at this early hour
to give him a breakfast.

They had their reward in seeing how heartily he ate. There was no
one at the table but himself and themselves; and they pressed the
food upon him, reminding him how long a journey he would have to
make before he could sit down to another comfortable meal.

And when Ishmael had breakfasted and thanked them, and returned to
his rooms to tie up some last little parcels, they called in the
professor, who had now come back, and they plied him with all the
luxuries on the breakfast table.

And when to their great satisfaction the old man had made an
astonishing meal and risen from the table, they beckoned him
mysteriously aside and gave a well-filled hamper into his charge,
saying:

"You know, professor, it is a long journey from Washington to
Boston, and in going straight through you can't get anything fit to
eat on the road; and so we have packed this hamper for your master.
There's ham sandwiches and chicken pie, and roast partridges and
fried oysters, and French rolls and celery, and plenty of pickles
and pepper and salt and things. And I have put in some plates and
knives and napkins, all comfortable."

The professor thanked them heartily on the part of his master; and
took the hamper immediately to the hack that was standing before the
door.

Ishmael had already caused the luggage to be carried out and placed
on the hack, and now nothing remained to be done but to take leave
of the two old ladies. He shook hands with them affectionately, and
they blessed him fervently. And as soon as he had got into the hack
and it had driven off with him, they turned and clasped each other
around the neck and cried.

Truly Ishmael's good qualities had made him deeply beloved.

When the hack reached the hotel, Ishmael found Judge Merlin, all
greatcoated and shawled, walking up and down before the door with
much impatience. His luggage had been brought down.

"You see I am in time, judge."

"Yes, Ishmael. Good morning. I was afraid you would not be, however.
I was afraid you would oversleep yourself after your hard ride. But
have you breakfasted?"

"Oh, yes! My dear old friends were up before day to have breakfast
with me."

"I tell you what, Ishmael, they are really two charming old ladies,
and if ever I get right again and spend another winter in this city,
I will try to get them to take me to board. They would make a home
for a man," said the judge.

While they were talking the porters were busy putting Judge Merlin's
luggage upon Ishmael's hack.

"You have not heard whether the 'Errand Boy' has reached the wharf?"
inquired Ishmael.

"Not a word. There has been no arrival here this morning from any
quarter, as I understand from the head waiter."

"I am really afraid Mr. Brudenell will miss the train."

"If he does he will miss the voyage also. But we must not risk such
a misfortune. Get in, boy, get in!" said the judge, hastily entering
the hack.

Ishmael followed his example. The professor climbed up to a seat
beside the driver and the hack moved off. They reached the railway
station just in time. In fact they had not a moment to lose.

They had just got seated in the cars, and were expecting the signal
whistle to shriek out every instant, when Ishmael, who was seated
nearest the window, saw a gentleman in a great-coat, and with his
shawl over his arm, and his umbrella and hat-box in his hand,
hurrying frantically past.

"There is Mr. Brudenell now!" he exclaimed with pleasure, as he
tapped upon the window to attract that gentleman's attention.

Mr. Brudenell looked up, nodded quickly, and darted on, and the next
moment hurried in at the end door of the car and came down to them
just as the signal whistle shrieked out and the train started.

Ishmael reserved the seat in front of himself and the judge, and
invited Mr. Brudenell to take it.

The latter gentleman dropped into his place and then held out his
hand to greet his fellow-passengers.

"So you are going with us to England. I am very glad of it," said
the judge, though in fact he looked very pale and worn, as if he
never could be glad again in this world.

"Yes," said Mr. Brudenell, "I am very glad indeed to be of your
party. Good-morning, Worth!"

"Good-morning, sir! You were very fortunate to catch the train."

"Very! I was within half a minute of missing it. I had a run for it,
I assure you."

"I beg your pardon, sir! Have you breakfasted?" here inquired the
professor, in all the conscious importance of carrying a hamper.

"Ah, professor! how do you do? You are never going to Europe?"
exclaimed Mr. Brudenell, in surprise.

"Yes, sir. I go wherever my master leads, sir. Mr. Worth and his
humble servant will never be separated till death do them part. But
about your breakfast, sir?"

"Why, truly, no, I have not breakfasted, unless a cup of suspicious-
looking liquid called coffee, drunk at the railway table, could be
called breakfast."

The professor sat his hamper on his knees, opened it, and began to
reveal its hidden treasures.

Ishmael laughed, expressed his surprise, and inquired of Morris what
cook shop he patronized.

And then the professor explained the kind forethought of the old
ladies who had provided these luxuries for his journey.

"I declare I will live with them if they will let me, if ever I
spend another winter in Washington! One could enjoy what is so often
promised, so seldom given--'the comforts of a home'--with those old
ladies," said the judge fervently.

Mr. Brudenell made a very satisfactory meal off half a dozen French
rolls, a roasted partridge and a bottle of claret. And then while he
was wiping his mouth and the professor was repacking the hamper and
throwing the waste out of the window, Judge Merlin turned to Mr.
Brudenell, and, with an old man's freedom, inquired:

"Pray, sir, may I ask, what procures us the pleasure--and it is
indeed a great pleasure--of your company across the water?"

A shade of the deepest grief and mortification fell over the face of
Herman Brudenell, as bending his head to the ear of his questioner,
and speaking in a low voice, he replied:

"Family matters, of so painful and humiliating a nature as not to be
discussed in a railway car, or scarcely anywhere else, in fact."

"Pardon me," said the judge, speaking in the same low tone; "some
malignant star must reign. Had you asked the same question of me,
concerning the motives of my journey, I might have truly answered
you in the very same words."

And the old man groaned deeply; while Ishmael silently wondered what
the family matters could be of which Mr. Brudenell spoke.

A modern railway journey is without incident or adventure worth
recording, unless it be an occasional disastrous collision. No such
calamity befell this train. Our travelers talked, dozed, eat, and
drank a little through their twenty-four hours' journey. At noon
they reached Philadelphia, at eve New York, at midnight Springfield,
and the next morning Boston.

It was just sunrise as they arose and stretched their weary limbs
and left the train. They had but an hour to spare to go to a hotel
and refresh themselves with a bath, a change of clothes, and a
breakfast before it was time to go on board their steamer.

They were the last passengers on board. Fortunately, at this season
of the year there are comparatively but few voyagers. The best
staterooms in the first cabin, to use a common phrase, "went a-
begging."

And Judge Merlin, Mr. Brudenell, and Ishmael were each accommodated
with a separate stateroom "amidships."

The professor was provided with a good berth in the second cabin.

There were about thirty other passengers in the first cabin, as many
in the second, and quite a large number in the steerage.


CHAPTER XXV.

THE VOYAGE.

    Thalatta! Thalatta!
  I greet thee, thou ocean eternal!
  I give thee ten thousand times greeting,
    My whole soul exulting!
     --_Heine_.


It was a splendid winter morning, and Boston harbor, with its
shipping, presented a magnificent appearance, lighted up by the
rising sun, as the "Oceana" steamed out towards the open sea.

Our three friends stood in the after part of the deck, gazing upon
the dear native land they were leaving behind them. The professor
waited in respectful attendance upon them.

A little way from the shore the signal gun was fired; the farewell
gun! how it brought back to the father's memory that moment of agony
when the signal gun of another steamer struck the knell of his
parting with his only daughter, and seemed to break his heart!

He was going to Claudia now, but oh! how should he find her? Who
could tell?

Still there was hope in the thought that he was going to her, and
there was exhilaration in the wide expanse of sparkling waters, in
the splendid winter sky, in the fresh sea-breeze, and in the swift
motion of the steamer.

His eyes, however, with those of all his party, were fixed upon the
beloved receding shore; for so smooth as yet was the motion of the
steamer that it did not seem to be so much the "Oceana" that was
sailing eastward, as the shore that was receding and dropping down
below the western horizon.

They stood watching it until all the prominent objects grew
gradually indistinct and became blended in each other; then until
the dimly diversified boundary faded into a faint irregular blue
line; then until it vanished. Only then they left the deck and went
down into the cabin to explore their staterooms.

Ishmael found the professor, who had gone down a few minutes before
him, busy unpacking his master's sea trunk, and getting him, as he
said:

"Comfortably to housekeeping for the next two weeks."

When Ishmael entered the professor was just in the act of setting up
the three books that comprised the sea library, carefully arranging
them on a tiny circular shelf in the corner. One of the stateroom
stewards who stood watching the "landlubber's" operations
sarcastically said:

"How long, friend, do you expect them books to stand there?"

"Until my master takes them down, sir," politely answered the
professor.

"Well, now, they'll stand there maybe until we get out among the big
waves; when, at the first lurch of the ship, down they'll tumble
upon somebody's head."

"'Sufficient unto the day--'" said the professor, persevering in his
housekeeping arrangements. All that day there was nothing to
threaten the equilibrium of the books. A splendid first day's sail
they had. The sky was clear and bright; the sea serene and
sparkling; the wind fresh and fair; and the motion of the steamer
smooth and swift. Our travelers, despite the care at the bottom of
their hearts, enjoyed it immensely. Who, with a remnant of hope
remaining to them, can fail to sympathize with the beauty, glory,
and rapture of Nature in her best moods?

At dinner they feasted with such good appetites as to call forth a
jocose remark from a fellow-passenger who seemed to be an
experienced voyager. He proved, in fact, to be a retired sea-
captain, who was making this voyage partly for business, partly for
pleasure. He was an unusually tall and stout old gentleman, with a
stately carriage, a full, red face, and gray hair and beard.

"That is right. Go it while you're well, friends! For in all human
probability this is the last comfortable meal you will enjoy for
many a day," he said. Those whom he addressed looked up in surprise
and smiled in doubt.

The splendid sunny day was followed by a brilliant starlight night,
in which all the favorable circumstances of the voyage, so far,
continued.

After tea the passengers went on deck to enjoy the beauty of the
evening.

"What do you think, Captain Mountz?" inquired a gentleman, "will
this fair wind continue long?"

"What the deuce is the wind to me? I'm a passenger," responded the
irresponsible retired captain.

They remained on deck enjoying the starlit glory of the sea and sky
until a late hour, when, fatigued and sleepy, they went below and
sought their berths. To new voyagers there is in the first night at
sea something so novel, so wild, so weird, so really unearthly, that
few, if any, can sleep. They have left the old, still, safe land far
behind, and are out in the dark upon the strange, unstable, perilous
sea. It is a new element, a new world, a new life; and the novelty,
the restlessness, and even the dangers, have a fascination that
charms the imagination and banishes repose. A few voyages cure one
of these fancies; but this is how a novice feels.

And thus it was with Ishmael. Fatigued as he was, he lay awake in
his berth, soothed by the motion of the vessel and the sound of the
sea, until near morning, when at length he fell into a deep sleep.
It was destined to be a brief one, however.

Soon every passenger was waked up by the violent rolling and tossing
of the ship; the creaking and groaning of the rigging; the howling
and shrieking of the wind, and the rising and falling of the waves.

All the brave and active passengers tumbled up out of their berths
and dressed quickly, while the timid and indolent cowered under
their sheets and waited the issue.

Ishmael was among the first on deck. Day was dawning.

Here all hands were on the alert: the captain swearing his orders as
fast as they could be obeyed. One set of men were rapidly taking in
sail. Another set were seeing to the life boats. The sea was running
mountains high; the ship rolling fearfully; the wind so fierce that
Ishmael could scarcely stand.

He saw old Captain Mountz on deck, and appealed to him.

"We are likely to have a heavy gale?"

"Oh, a capful of wind! Only a capful of wind!" contemptuously
replied that "old salt," who, by the way, through the whole of the
tempestuous voyage could not be induced to acknowledge that they had
had a single gale worth noticing.

But the wind increased in violence and the sea arose in wrath, and
to battle they went, with their old irreconcilable hatred. And yet,
notwithstanding the fury of wind and wave, the sun arose upon a
perfectly clear sky.

Ishmael remained on deck watching the fierce warring of the elements
until the second breakfast bell rung, when he went below.

Neither Judge Merlin nor Mr. Brudenell was at the breakfast table.
In fact there was no one in the saloon, except Captain Mountz and
two or three other seasoned old voyagers.

The remainder of the passengers were all dreadfully ill in their
berths. The prediction of the old captain was fulfilled in their
cases at least; they had eaten the last comfortable meal they could
enjoy for many days.

As soon as Ishmael had eaten his breakfast he went below in search
of the companions of his voyage.

He found the judge lying flat on his back, with his hands clasping
his temples, and praying only to be let alone.

The stateroom steward was standing over him, bullying him with a cup
of black tea, which he insisted upon his taking, whether or no.

"If he drinks it, sir, he will have something to throw up; which
will be better for him than all this empty retching. And after he
has thrown up he will be all right, and be able to get up and eat
his breakfast and go on deck," said the man, appealing to Ishmael.

"Ishmael, kick that rascal out of my room, and break his neck and
throw him overboard!" cried the judge, in anguish and desperation.

"Friend, don't you know better than to exasperate a seasick man?
Leave him to me until he is better," said Ishmael smiling on the
well-meaning steward.

"But, sir, if he would drink this tea he would throw up and--"

"Ishmael, will you strangle that diabolical villain and pitch him
into the sea?" thundered the judge.

The "diabolical villain" raised his disengaged hand in deprecation
and withdrew, carrying the cup of tea in the other.

"And now, Ishmael, take yourself off, and leave me in peace. I hate
you! and I loathe the whole human race!"

Ishmael left the stateroom, meditating on the demoralizing nature of
seasickness.

He next visited Mr. Brudenell, whom he found in a paroxysm of
illness, with another stateroom steward holding the basin for him.

"Ugh! ugh! ugh!" moaned the victim. "This heaving, rising, falling
sea! And this reeling, pitching, tossing ship! If it would only stop
for one moment! I should be glad of anything that would stop it--
even a fire!"

"I am sorry to see you suffering so much, sir! Can I do anything for
you?" inquired Ishmael sympathetically.

"Ugh! ugh! ugh! No! Hold the basin for me again, Bob! No, Ishmael,
you can do nothing for me! only do go away! I hate anyone to see me
in this debasing sickness! for it is debasing, Ishmael! Ugh! the
basin, Bob! quick!"

Ishmael backed out in double-quick time.

And next he found his way to the second cabin, to the bedside of the
professor.

Apparently Jim Morris had just suffered a very severe paroxysm; for
he lay back on his pillow with pale, sharp, sunken features and
almost breathless lungs.

"I am sorry to see you so ill, professor," said Ishmael tenderly,
laying his hand on the old man's forehead.

"It is nothing, Mr. Ishmael, sir, only a little seasickness, as all
the passengers have. I dare say it will soon be over. I am only
concerned because I can't come and wait on you," said the professor,
speaking faintly, and with a great effort.

"Never mind that, dear old friend. I can wait on myself very well;
and on you, too, while you need attention."

"Oh, Mr. Ishmael, sir! You are much too kind; but I shall be all
right in a little time, and am so glad you are not sick, too."

"No; I am not sick, Morris. But I am afraid that you have been
suffering very much," said Ishmael, as he noticed the old man's
pallid countenance.

"Oh, no, Mr. Ishmael! Don't disturb yourself. I shall be better
soon. You see, when I was very bad they persuaded me to drink a pint
of sea-water, which really made me much worse, though it was all
well meant. But now I am better. And I think I will try to get up on
deck. Why, law, seasickness aint pleasant, to be sure; but then it
is worth while to bear it for the sake of crossing the sea and
beholding the other hemisphere," said Jim Morris, trying to smile
over his own illness and Ishmael's commiseration.

"God bless you, for a patient, gentle-spirited old man and a true
philosopher! When you are able to rise, Morris, I will give you my
arm up on deck and have a pallet made for you there, and the fresh
air will do you good."

"Thank you, thank you, Mr. Ishmael! It is good to be ill when one is
so kindly cared for. Isn't there a gale, sir?"

"Yes, Morris, a magnificent one! The old enemies, wind and sea, are
in their most heroic moods, and are engaged in a pitched battle.
This poor ship, like a neutral power, is suffering somewhat from the
assaults of both."

"I think I will go and look on that battlefield," smiled the
professor, trying to rise.

Ishmael helped him, and when he was dressed gave him his arm and
took him up on deck, at the same time requesting one of the second-
cabin stewards to follow with a rug and cushion.

This man, wondering at the affectionate attention paid by the
stately young gentleman to his sick servant, followed them up and
made the professor a pallet near the wheel-house, on the deck.

When, with the assistance of the steward, Ishmael had made his old
retainer comfortable, he placed himself with his shoulders against
the back of the wheel-house to steady himself, for the ship was
rolling terribly, and he stood gazing forth upon the stormy surface
of the sea.

A magnificent scene! The whole ocean, from the central speck on
which he stood to the vast, vanishing circle of the horizon, seemed
one boundless, boiling caldron. Millions of waves were simultaneously
leaping in thunder from the abyss and rearing themselves into blue
mountain peaks, capped with white foam, and sparkling in the sunlight
for a moment, to be swallowed up in the darkness of the roaring deep
the next. A lashing, tossing, heaving, foaming, glancing rise and fall
of liquid mountains and valleys, awful, but ravishing, to look on.

Ishmael stood leaning against the wheel-house, with his arms folded
and his eyes gazing out at sea. His whole soul was exalted to
reverence and worship, and he murmured within himself:

"It is the Lord that commandeth the waters; it is the glorious God
that maketh the thunder!

"It is the Lord that ruleth the sea; the voice of the Lord is mighty
in operation; the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice!"

As for the professor, he lay propped up at his master's feet, and
looking forth upon the mighty war of wind and wave. The sight had
subdued him. He was content only to exist and enjoy.


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE STORM.

  Colder and louder blew the wind,
    A gale from the northeast;
  The snow fell hissing in the brine;
    And the billows foamed like yeast.

  Down came the storm and smote amain,
    The vessel in its strength;
  She shuddered and paused like a frightened steed,
    Then leaped her cable's length.

  And fast through the midnight, dark and drear,
    Through the whistling sleet and snow,
  Like a sheeted ghost the vessel swept,
    Toward the reef of Norman's Woe.
           --_Wreck of the "Hesperus_."


Ishmael remained upon the quarterdeck, gazing out upon the stormy
glory of the sea and sky until he was interrupted by the most
prosaic, though the most welcome of sounds--that of the dinner-bell.

Then he went below.

On his way to the saloon he stopped at the entrance of the second
cabin; called one of the stewards, and while putting a piece of
money in his hand, requested him to take a bowl of soup up to the
old man on deck, and to see that he wanted nothing.

Then Ishmael paid a visit to each of his suffering companions.

First he opened the door of Judge Merlin's stateroom, and found that
gentleman with his face sulkily turned to the wall, and in a state
of body and mind so ill and irritable as to make all attempts at
conversation with him quite dangerous to the speaker.

Next Ishmael looked in upon Mr. Brudenell, whom he luckily found
fast asleep. And then, after having given the stateroom stewards a
strict charge concerning the comfort of these two victims, Ishmael
passed on to the dining saloon. It was nearly empty. There were even
fewer people gathered for dinner than there had been for breakfast.

The tables had the storm-guards upon them, so that each plate and
dish sat down in its own little pen to be kept from slipping off in
the rolling of the ship. But this arrangement could not prevent them
from occasionally flying out of their places when there was an
unusually violent toss.

At the table where Ishmael sat there was no one present except the
old retired merchantman, Captain Mountz, who sat on the opposite
side, directly under the port lights. And with the rolling of the
ship these two diners, holding desperately onto the edge of the
table, were tossed up and down like boys on a see-saw plank.

The mingled noise of wind and wave and ship was so deafening as to
make conversation difficult and nearly impossible. And yet Ishmael
and the captain seemed to feel in courtesy compelled to bawl at each
other across the table as they see-sawed up and down.

"The gale seems to have knocked down all our fellow passengers and
depopulated our saloon," cried Ishmael, soaring up to the sky with
his side of the table.

"Yes, sir, yes, sir; a lot of land-lubbers, sir; a lot of lubbers,
sir! Gale? Nothing but a capful of wind, sir! Nothing but a capful
of wind!" roared the captain, sinking down to the abyss on his side
of the table.

Here the steward, seizing a favorable moment, deftly served them
with soup. And nothing but the utmost tact and skill in marine
legerdemain enabled this functionary to convey the soup from the
tureen to the plates. And when there, it required all the attention
and care of the diners to get it from plate to lip. And, after all,
more than half of it was spilled.

"Thank goodness, that is over! The solids won't give us so much
trouble," said the captain, handing his empty plate to the steward.

The second course was served. But the motion of the ship increased
so much in violence that the two diners were compelled to hold still
more firmly on to the edge of the table with one hand, while they
ate with the other, as they were tossed up and down.

"You're a good sailor, sir!" bawled the captain as he pitched down
out of sight.

"Yes, thank Heaven!" shouted Ishmael, flying up.

Then came a tremendous lurch of the ship.

"Oh, I must see that wave!" cried the captain, imprudently climbing
up to look out from the port-light above him.

He had scarcely attained the desired position when there came
another, an unprecedented toss of the ship, and the unlucky captain
lay sprawling on the top of the table--with one wide-flung hand deep
in the dish of mashed turnips and the other grasping the roast pig,
while his bullet head was butted into Ishmael's stomach.

"Blast the ship!" cried the discomfited old man--very unnecessarily,
since there was "blast" enough, and to spare.

"'Only a capful of wind,' captain! 'Only a capful of wind,'" said
Ishmael, in a grave, matter-of-fact way, as he carefully assisted
the veteran to rise.

"Humph! humph! humph! I might have known you would have said that.
Ha! glad none of the women are here to see me! I s'pose I've done
for the mashed turnips and roast pig; and I shouldn't wonder if I
had knocked your breath out of your body, too, sir," sputtered the
old man, trying to recover his feet, a difficult matter amid the
violent pitching of the ship.

"Oh, you've not hurt me the least," said Ishmael, still rendering
him all the assistance in his power.

But this mishap put an end to the dinner. For the captain's toilet
sadly needed renovating, and the table required putting right.

Ishmael went up on deck--a nearly impossible feat for any landsman,
even for one so strong and active as Ishmael was, to accomplish with
safety to life and limb, for the ship was now fearfully pitched from
side to side, and wallowing among the leaping waves.

High as the wind was--blowing now a hurricane--the sky was perfectly
clear, and the sun was near its setting.

Ishmael found his old servant sitting propped up against the back of
the wheel-house, looking out at one of the most glorious of all the
glorious sights in nature--sunset at sea.

"As soon as the sun has set you must go down and turn in, Morris.
The wind is increasing, and it is no longer safe for a landsman like
you to remain up here," said his master.

"Mr. Ishmael, sir, you must just leave me up here to my fate. As to
getting me down now, that is impossible; I noticed that it took both
your hands, as well as both your feet, to help yourself up," replied
the professor.

"What! do you mean to stay on deck all night?"

"I see no help for it, sir; I should be pitched downstairs and have
my neck broken, or be washed into the sea and get drowned, by any
attempt to go below."

"Nonsense, Morris; the sun has gone down now; follow his example. I
will take you safely," said Ishmael, offering his arm to the old man
in that kind, but peremptory, way that admitted of no denial.

A sailor near at hand came forward and offered his assistance. And
between the two the professor was safely taken down to the second
cabin and deposited in his berth.

A German Jew, who shared the professor's stateroom, saw the party
coming, and exclaimed to a fellow-passenger:

"Tere's tat young shentleman mit his olt man again. Fader Abraham!
he ish von shentleman; von drue shentleman!"

"A 'true gentleman,' I believe you, Isaacs. Why, don't you know who
he is? He is that German prince they've been making such a fuss
over, in the States. I saw his name in the list of passengers.
Prince--Prince Edward of--of Hesse--Hesse something or other, I
forget. They are all Hesses or Saxes up there," said his
interlocutor.

"No, no," objected the Jew. "Dish ish nod he. I know Brince Etwart
ven I see him. He ish von brince, but nod von shentleman. He svears
ad hish mens."

The near approach of the subject of this conversation prevented
farther personal remarks. But when Ishmael had seen his old follower
comfortably in bed, the Jew turned to him and, as it would seem, for
the simple pleasure of speaking to the young man whom he admired so
much, said:

"Zir; te zhip rollts mush. Tere vill pe a gread pig storm."

"I think so," answered Ishmael courteously.

"Vell, if zhe goesh down do te boddom tere vill pe von lesh drue
shentleman in de vorlt, zir. Ant tat vill be you."

"Thank you," said Ishmael, smiling.

"Ant tere vill pe von lesh Sherman Shew in te vorlt. Ant tat vill pe
me."

"Oh, I hope there is no danger of such a calamity. Good-night!" said
Ishmael, smiling upon his admirer and withdrawing from the cabin.

Ishmael took tea with the old captain, who came into the saloon and
sat down in a perfectly renovated toilet, as if nothing had
happened.

But when I say they took tea, I mean that they took quite as much of
it up their sleeves and down their bosoms as into their mouths.
Drinking tea in a rolling ship is a sloppy operation.

After that the captain produced a chess-board, ingeniously arranged
for sea-service, and the two gentlemen spent the evening in a mimic
warfare that ended in a drawn battle.

"The gale seems to be subsiding. The motion of the ship has not been
so violent for the last half hour, I think," said Ishmael, as they
arose from the table.

"No; if it had been, we could not have played chess, even on this
boxed board," was the reply.

"I hope we shall have fine weather now. What do you say, captain?"

"I say as I said before. I am a passenger, and the weather is
nothing to me. But if you expect we are going to have fine weather
because the wind has lulled--humph!"

"We shall not, then?"

"We shall have a twister, that is what we shall have--and before
many hours. And I shouldn't wonder if we had a storm of snow and
sleet to cap off with. Good-night, sir!" And with this consoling
prophecy the old man withdrew.

Ishmael went to his berth and slept soundly until morning. When he
awoke he found the ship rolling, pitching, tossing, leaping,
falling, and fairly writhing and twisting like a living creature in
mortal agony.

He fell out of his berth, pitched into his clothes, slopped his face
and hands, raked his hair, and tumbled on deck. In other words, by
sleight of hand and foot, he made a sea-toilet and went up.

What a night!

The sky black as night; the sea lashed into a foam as white as snow;
the waves running mountain high from south to north; the wind
blowing a hurricane from east to west; the ship subjected to this
cross action, pitching onward in semicircular jerks, deadly
sickening to see and feel.

"I suppose this is what you call a 'twister,'" said Ishmael, reeling
towards the old captain, who was already on deck.

"Yes; just as I told you! You see that gale blew from the south for
about forty-eight hours and got the sea up running north. And then,
before the sea had time to subside, the wind chopped round and now
blows from due east. And the ship is rolled from side to side by the
waves and tossed from stem to stern by the wind. And between the two
actions she is regularly twisted, and that is the reason why the
sailors call this sort of thing a 'twister.' And this is not the
worst of it. This east wind will be sure to blow up a snowstorm. We
shall have it on the Banks."

"This has gone beyond a gale. I should call this a hurricane," said
Ishmael.

"Hurricane? hurricane? Bless you, sir, no, sir! capful of wind!
capful of wind!" said the old man doggedly.

Nevertheless Ishmael noticed that the ship's captain looked anxious
and gave his orders in short, peremptory tones.

The predicted snowstorm did not come on during that short winter's
day, however. The "twister" "twisted" vigorously; twisted the ship
nearly in two; twisted the souls, or rather the stomachs, nearly out
of the bodies of the seasick victims. Even the well-pickled "old
salt," Captain Mountz, felt uncomfortable. And it was just as much
as Ishmael could do to keep himself up and avoid succumbing to
illness. Those two were the last of the passengers that attempted to
keep up. And they were very glad when night came and gave them an
excuse for retiring.

The predicted snowstorm came on about midnight. When Ishmael dressed
and struggled out of his stateroom in the morning, he found it just
the nearest thing to an impossibility to go up on deck. The wind was
still blowing a hurricane; the sea leaping in the wildest waves; the
ship pitching, tossing, and jerking as before; and in addition to
all this, the snow was falling thick and fast, and freezing as it
fell, and every part of the deck and rigging was covered with a
slippery, shining coating of ice.

Those who find it dangerous to walk on a motionless pavement in
sleety weather may now imagine what is was to climb the ice-sheathed
steps of this pitching ship.

Ishmael managed to get up on deck somehow; but he found the place
deserted of all except the man at the wheel and the officer of the
watch. Even the old sea lion, Captain Mountz, was among the missing.

There was little to be seen. He stood on the deck of a tossing ship
of ice, in the midst of a high wind, a boiling sea, and a storm of
snow; he could not discern an object a foot in advance of him.

And so, after a few words with the well-wrapped-up officer of the
watch, he went below to look after the companions of his voyage.

Judge Merlin and Mr. Brudenell, like all the other passengers, were
so ill as still to hate the sight of a human being. Leaving them in
the care of the stateroom steward, Ishmael went to see after his old
retainer. The professor was up, clothed, and in his right mind.

"You see I made an effort, Mr. Ishmael, sir, and a successful one,
so far as getting on my feet was concerned. When I woke up this
morning it occurred to me, like a reproach, that I had come with
you, sir, to wait on you and not to be waited on by you--which
latter arrangement was a sort of turning things topsy-turvy--"

"I ding sho doo," interrupted the German Jew, whose name was Isaacs.

"And so," continued the professor, "I made an effort to get up and
do my duty, and I find myself much better for it."

"I am glad you are well enough to be up, Morris, but indeed, you
need have suffered no twinges of conscience on my account," said
Ishmael, smiling.

"I know your kindness, sir, and that makes it more incumbent on me
to do my duty by you. Well, sir, I've been to your stateroom; but
finding you gone, and everything dancing a hornpipe there, I tried
to get up on deck to you, but there, sir, I failed. And, besides,
while I was doing my best, a stout old gentleman, a sea captain I
take him to be, blasted my eyes, and ordered me to go below and not
break my blamed neck. And so I did."

"That was Captain Mountz. He meant you well, Morris. You did quite
right to obey him."

Soon after this Ishmael went to his stateroom, took a volume of
Shakspeare, and then ensconsed himself in a corner of the saloon,
where he sat and read until dinner-time.

The progress of the steamer was very slow. The day passed heavily.
And again when night came everyone was glad to go to bed and to
sleep.


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE WRECK.

  And ever the fitful gusts between
    A sound came from the land;
  It was the sound of the tramping surf,
    On the rocks and the hard sea-sand.

  The breakers were right beneath her bows,
    She drifted a dreary wreck,
  And a whooping billow swept the crew
    Like icicles from her deck.

  She struck where the white and fleecy waves
    Looked soft as carded wool,
  But the cruel rocks, they gored her sides,
    Like the horns of an angry bull.
             --_Wreck of the "Hesperus."_


When Ishmael awoke in the morning he was surprised to find that the
motion of the ship was much lessened. And when he went up on deck he
was pleased to discover that the wind had fallen and the sea was
going down.

There was but one trouble--the thick fog; but that might be expected
on the Banks of Newfoundland.

Old Captain Mountz was pacing up and down the deck with the firm
tread of a man who felt himself on solid ground.

"Good-morning, captain! A pleasant change this," was Ishmael's
greeting.

"Oh, aye, yes! for as long as it will last," was the dampening
reply.

"Why, you don't think the wind will rise again, do you?"

"Don't I? I tell you before many hours we shall have a strong
sou'wester, that will do its best to drive us ashore on these
Banks," was the discouraging answer.

But by this time Ishmael had grown to understand the old sailor, and
to know that he generally talked by the "rules of contrary"; for
whereas he would not permit the late gale to be anything more than a
"capful of wind," he now declared the fine weather to be nothing
less than the forerunner of a hurricane.

So Ishmael did not feel any very serious misgivings, but went
downstairs to breakfast with a good appetite.

Here another pleasant surprise greeted him: Judge Merlin and Mr.
Brudenell, recovered from their seasickness, were both at breakfast;
and notwithstanding the weight of care that oppressed their hearts
they were both, from the mere physical reaction from depressing
illness, in excellent spirits.

They arose to greet their young friend.

"How do you do, how do you do, Ishmael?" began Judge Merlin,
heartily shaking his hand. "I really suppose now that you think I
owe you an apology? But the fact is you owe me one. Didn't you know
better than to intrude on the privacy of a seasick man? Didn't you
know that a victim hates the sight of one who is not a victim? And
that a seasick man or a rabid dog is better let alone, eh?"

"I beg your pardon, sir; I did not know it; but now that you
enlighten me, I will not offend again," laughed Ishmael.

Mr. Brudenell's greeting was quieter, but even more cordial than
that of the judge.

Before breakfast was over they were joined by others of their
fellow-passengers, whom they had not seen since the first day out.

Among the rest was a certain Dr. Kerr, a learned savant, professor
in the University of Glasgow, who had been on a scientific mission
to the United States, and was returning home. He was a tall, thin
old gentleman, in a long, black velvet dressing-gown and a round,
black velvet skullcap. And he entered readily into conversation with
our party on the subject of the late gales, and from that diverged
into the subject of meteorology. There were no ladies present at
breakfast.

The whole party soon adjourned to the deck, and notwithstanding the
fog, enjoyed the pleasure of a promenade and conversation as they
only can who have been deprived of such privileges for many days.

At dinner the long absent ladies reappeared; among the rest, the
wife and daughters of the Scotch professor; and with the freedom of
ocean steamer traveling, all well-dressed and well-behaved first-
cabin passengers soon became acquainted and sociable, if not
intimate.

Mrs. Dr. Kerr had happened to hear of Mr. Worth as one of the most
promising young barristers of the time; and finding him in the
company of Chief Justice Merlin, and approving him on short
acquaintance, and knowing that he was unmarried, and not knowing
that his heart, hand, and honor were irretrievably engaged, she
singled him out as a very desirable match for one of her four
penniless daughters, and paid such court to him as Ishmael, in the
honesty and gratitude of his heart, repaid with every attention.

Mrs. Dr. Kerr, complaining of the tediousness of the voyage, and the
dullness of her own circle, invited Ishmael and his party to spend
the evening and play whist in the ladies' cabin--forbidden ground to
all gentlemen who had no ladies with them, unless indeed they should
happen, as in this case, to be invited.

All the gentlemen of our party availed themselves of this privilege,
and the evening passed more pleasantly than any other evening since
they had been at sea.

The fog lasted for three days, during which, as the wind was fair
and the sea calm, the passengers, well wrapped up, enjoyed the
promenade of the deck during the day, and the social meetings in the
dining saloon, or the whist parties in the ladies' cabin during the
evening.

And lulled by this deceitful calm, they were happy in the thought
that the voyage was nearly half over, and in the anticipation of a
prosperous passage over the remaining distance, and a safe arrival
in port.

On the evening of the third day of the fog, however, a vague and
nameless dread prevailed among the passengers. No one could have
told whence this dread arose, or whither it pointed. Those well
acquainted with the locality knew that the steamer was upon the
Banks of Newfoundland, and that those Banks were considered rather
unsafe in a fog.

Some others, who were in the secret, also knew that the captain had
not left the quarterdeck, either to eat or to sleep, for forty-eight
hours; for they had left him on deck at a late hour at night, and
found him there at an early hour of the morning. And they had seen
strong coffee carried up to him at short intervals. That was all.
For sailors never think of danger until that danger, whatever it
might be, is imminent; and never speak of it until it becomes
necessary to do so, in order to save life.

Thus the passengers on board the "Oceana," on the night of the 20th
of December, were totally ignorant of the real nature of the perils
that beset them, although, as I said, an undefined misgiving and a
sense of insecurity oppressed their hearts.

At ten o'clock that night the weather was thick, foggy, and
intensely cold, with a heavy sea and a high wind.

The captain and first mate were on deck, where a number of the
hardier and more anxious passengers were collected to watch.

In the dining saloon were gathered around the tables those
inveterate gamblers who seem to have no object, either in the voyage
of the ocean or the voyage of life, except the winning or losing of
money.

In the ladies' cabin there were two social whist parties, formed of
the ladies of the Scotch professor's family and the gentlemen of our
set.

They were playing with great enjoyment, notwithstanding that little
undercurrent of vague uneasiness of which I spoke, when the
Scotchman, who had been on the deck all the evening, came down into
the cabin, wearing a long face.

But the whist-players were too much interested in their game to
notice the lugubrious expression of the old man, until he came to
the table, and in a tone of the most alarming gravity exclaimed:

"Don't be frightened!"

Every lady dropped her cards and turned deadly pale with terror.
Every gentleman looked up inquiringly at this judicious speaker.

"What is there to be frightened at, sir?" coldly inquired Ishmael.

"Well, you know our situation--But, ladies, for Heaven's sake, be
composed. Your sex are noted for heroism in the midst of danger--"

Here, to prove his words good, one of the ladies shrieked, fell back
in her chair, and covered her face with her hands.

"These ladies are not aware of any danger, sir, and I think it quite
needless to alarm them," said Ishmael gravely.

"My good young friend, I don't wish to alarm them; I came down here
on purpose to exhort them to coolness and self-possession, so
necessary in the hour of peril. Now, dear ladies, I must beg that
you will not suffer yourselves to be agitated."

"There is really, sir, no present cause for agitation, except, if
you will pardon me for saying it, your own needlessly alarming words
and manner," said Ishmael cheerfully, to reassure the frightened
women, who seemed upon the very verge of hysterics.

"No, no, no, certainly no cause for agitation, ladies--certainly
not. Therefore don't be agitated, I beg of you. But--but--don't
undress and go to bed to-night. Lie down on the outside of your
berths just as you are; for, look you--we may all have to take to
the lifeboats at a minute's warning," said the doctor, his long,
pale face looking longer and paler than ever under his round, black
skullcap.

A half-smothered shriek burst simultaneously from all the women
present.

"I trust, sir, that your fears are entirely groundless. I have heard
no apprehensions expressed in any other quarter," said Ishmael. And
although he never begged the ladies not to be "frightened," yet
every cheerful word he spoke tended to calm their fears.

"What cause have you for such forebodings, doctor?" inquired Mr.
Brudenell.

"Oh, none at all, sir. There is no reason to be alarmed. I hope
nobody will be alarmed, especially the ladies. But you see the
captain has not been able to make an observation for the last three
days on account of the fog; and it is said that no one accurately
knows just where we are; except that we are on the Banks, somewhere,
and may strike before we know it. That is all. Now don't be
terrified. And don't lose your presence of mind. And whatever you
do, don't take off your clothes; for if we strike you mayn't have
time to put them on again, and scanty raiment, in an open boat, on a
wintry night at sea, wouldn't be pleasant. Now mind what I tell you.
I shall not turn in myself. I am going on deck to watch."

And having succeeded in spreading a panic among the women, the old
man took himself and his black skullcap out of the cabin.
Exclamations of surprise, fear, and horror followed his departure.

There was no more card-playing; they did not even finish their game;
they felt it to be sacrilegious to engage in even a "ladies' game"
of whist, on the eve of possible shipwreck, perhaps on the brink of
eternity.

Ishmael gathered up and put away the cards and set himself earnestly
to calm the fears of his trembling fellow-passengers; but they were
not to be soothed. Then he offered to go up on deck and make
inquiries as to the situation, course, and prospects of the ship;
but they would not consent to his leaving them; they earnestly
besought him to stay; and declared that they found assurance and
comfort in his presence.

At length he took the Bible and seated himself at the table, and
read to them such portions as were suited to their condition. He
read for more than an hour, and then, hoping that this had composed
their spirits, he closed the book and counseled them to retire and
take some rest; and promised to station himself outside the cabin
door and be their vigilant sentinel, to warn them of danger the
instant it should become necessary.

But no! they each and all declared sleep to be impossible under the
circumstances. And they continued to sit around the table with their
arms laid on its top and their heads buried In them, waiting for--
what? Who could tell?

Meanwhile the ship was borne swiftly on by wind and wave--whither?
None of these frightened women knew.

Eight bells struck--twelve, midnight; and Ishmael renewed his
entreaties that they would take some repose. But in vain; for they
declared that there could be no repose for their bodies while their
minds were suffering such intense anxiety.

One bell struck, and there they sat; two bells, and there they still
sat; and there was but little conversation after this. Three bells
struck, and they sat on, so motionless that Ishmael hoped they had
fallen asleep on their watch and he refrained from addressing them.
Four bells struck. It was two o'clock in the morning, and dead
silence reigned in the ladies' cabin. Everyone except Ishmael had
gone to sleep.

Suddenly through the stillness a cry rang--a joyous cry. It was the
voice of the man on the lookout, and it shouted forth:

"Land ho!"

"Where away?" called another voice.

"On her lee bow!"

"What do you make of it?"

"Cape Safety lighthouse!"

A shout went up from the passengers on deck. A simultaneous,
involuntary, joyous three times three.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!"

A devout thanksgiving ascended from Ishmael's heart:

"Thank God!" he fervently exclaimed.

It was indeed an infinite relief.

Then he turned to wake up his wearied fellow-passengers, who had
fallen asleep in such uneasy attitudes--arms folded, on the top of
the table and heads fallen on the folded arms.

"Ladies! dear ladies! dear Mrs. Kerr! you may retire to rest now. We
have made Cape Safety," he said, going from one to another and
gently rousing them.

They were a little bewildered at first; and while they were still
trying to understand what Ishmael was saying, the Scotch professor
burst into the cabin and enlightened them by a coup-de-main.

"You may all undress and go to bed now, and sleep in peace, without
the least fear of a shipwreck."

"Eh, pa! is it so--are we safe?" cried the elder daughter.

"Safe as St. Paul's. We know where we are now. We have made Cape
Safety Lighthouse. Go to bed and sleep easy. I'm going now. Come
along, Jeanie," said the doctor to his old wife.

"Not until I have shaken hands with this good young gentleman. I
don't know what would have become of us, doctor, after you
frightened us so badly, if it had not been for him. He stayed with
us and kept up our hearts. God bless you, young sir!" said Mrs. Dr.
Kerr, fervently pressing Ishmael's hands.

Ishmael himself was glad to go to rest; so he only stopped long
enough to bid good-night to Judge Merlin and Mr. Brudenell, who had
just awakened to a sense of security, and then he went to his
stateroom and turned in.

Thoroughly wearied in mind and body, he had no sooner touched his
pillow than he fell into a deep sleep--a sleep that annihilated
several hours of time.

He slept until he was aroused by a tremendous shock--a shock that
threw him, strong, heavy, athletic man as he was, from his stateroom
berth to the cabin floor. He was on his feet in a moment, though
stunned, confused, and amazed. The poor ship was shuddering
throughout her whole frame like a living creature in the agony of
death.

Men who had been violently thrown from their berths to the floor
were everywhere picking themselves up and trying to collect their
scattered senses. Crowds were hurrying from the cabins and saloons
to the deck. The voices of the officers were heard in quick,
anxious, peremptory orders; and those of the crew in prompt, eager,
terrified responses.

And through all came shrieks of terror, anguish, and despair.

"The ship has struck!" "We are lost!" "God have mercy!" were the
cries.

Ishmael hurried on his clothes and rushed to the deck. Here all was
panic, confusion, and unutterable distress. The fog had cleared
away; day was dawning; and there was just light enough to show them
the utter hopelessness of their position.

The steamer bad struck a rock, and with such tremendous force that
she was already parting amidships; her bows were already under water
and the sea was breaking over her with fearful force.

How had this happened, with the lighthouse ahead? Was it really a
lighthouse, or was it a false beacon?

No one could tell; no one had time to ask. Everybody was fast
crowding to the stern of the ship, the only part of her that was out
of water. Some crawled up, half drowned; some dripping wet; some
scarcely yet awake, acting upon the blind impulse of self-
preservation.

Two of the lifeboats had been forcibly reft away from the side of
the ship by the violence of the shock and carried off by the sea.
Only two remained, and it was nearly certain that they were not of
sufficient capacity to save the crew and passengers.

But the danger was imminent--a moment's delay might be fatal to all
on board the wreck; not an instant was to be lost.

The order was quickly given:

"Get out the lifeboats!"

And the sailors sprang to obey.

At this moment another fatality threatened the doomed crew--it was
what might have been expected: the steerage passengers, mostly a low
and brutalized order of men, in whom the mere animal instinct of
love of life and fear of death was predominant over every nobler
emotion, came rushing in a body up the deck, and crying with one
voice:

"To the lifeboats! to the lifeboats! Let us seize the lifeboats, and
save ourselves!"

Everyone else was panic-stricken. It is in crises like this that the
true hero is developed. With the bound of a young Achilles Ishmael
seized a heavy iron bar and sprang to the starboard gangway, where
the two remaining boats were still suspended; and standing at bay,
with limbs apart, and eyes threatening, and his fearful weapon
raised in his right hand, he thundered forth:

"Who tries to pass here dies that instant! Stand off!"

Before this young hero the, crowd of senseless, rushing brutes
recoiled as from a fire.

He pursued and secured his victory with a few words:

"Are you men? If so, before all, let helpless childhood, and feeble
womanhood, and venerable age be saved; and then you. I demand of you
no more than I am willing to do myself. I will be the last to leave
the wreck. I will see you all in safety before I attempt to save my
own life."

So great is the power of heroism over all, that even these brutal
men, so selfish, senseless, and impetuous a moment before, were now
subdued; nay, some of them were inspired and raised a hurrah.

Fear of a possible reaction among the steerage passengers, however,
caused old Captain Mountz, Judge Merlin, Mr. Brudenell, Dr. Kerr,
Jem Morris, the Jew, and several others to come to the support of
Ishmael. Among the rest the captain of the steamer came.

"Young man, you have saved all our lives," he said.

Ishmael slowly bowed his head.

"I hope that God has saved you all," he answered.

The sailors were now busy getting down the lifeboats. It was but the
work of a very few minutes.

"Let the ladies and children be brought forward," ordered the
captain. And the women and children, some screaming, some weeping,
and some dumb with terror, were lowered into one of the boats.

"Now the nearest male relatives of these ladies to the same boat,"
was the captain's next order.

And Dr. Kerr and about a dozen other gentlemen presented themselves,
and were lowered into the boat, where they were received with
hysterical cries of mingled joy and fear by the women.

And all this time the sea was dashing fearfully over the wreck, and
at every interval the planks of the deck upon which they clung were
felt to swell and sway as if they were about to part.

"Now the old men!" shouted the captain.

Ishmael took Judge Merlin by the arm, and with gentle coercion
passed them on to the sailors, who lowered him into the boat.

Then Captain Mountz and several other old men, and many who were not
old, but were willing to appear so "for this occasion only,"
followed and were passed down into the boat.

Then Ishmael looked around in concern. The professor was lingering
in the background.

"Come here, Morris! You certainly fall under the head of "'old
men,'" he said, taking the professor by the elbow and gently pushing
him forward.

"No, young Ishmael, no! I cannot go! The boat is as full as it can
be packed now--or at least it won't hold more than one more, and you
ought to go; and I will not crowd you out," urged the old man, with
passionate earnestness.

And all this time the sea was thundering over the wreck and entirely
drenching everybody, and nearly drowning some.

"Morris, I shall not in any case enter that boat. There is no time,
when scores of lives are in imminent danger, to argue the point.
But--as you never disobeyed me in your life before, I now lay my
commands on you to go into that boat," said Ishmael, with the tone
and manner of a monarch.

With a cry of despair the professor let himself drop into the
lifeboat to be saved.

The boat was now really as full as it could possibly be crammed with
safety to its passengers. And it was detained only until a cask of
fresh water and a keg of biscuit could be thrown into it, and then
it gave way for the second lifeboat to come up to the gangway.

This second boat was rapidly filled. But when it was crowded quite
full there remained upon the breaking wreck Ishmael and ten of the
younger steerage passengers.

"Come! come!" shouted the captain of the steamer, who was in the
second boat. "Come, Mr. Worth! There is room for one more! There is
always room, for one more."

"If there is room for one more, take one of these young men, my
companions," replied Ishmael gravely.

"No! no! if we cannot take all, why take one of their number,
instead of taking you, Mr. Worth? Come! come! do not keep us here!
It is dangerous!" urged the captain.

"Pass on! I remain here!" answered Ishmael steadfastly.

"But that is madness. What good will it do? Come, quick! climb up on
the bulwarks and leap down into the boat! You are young and active,
and can do it! quick!"

"Give way! I shall remain here," replied Ishmael, folding his arms
and planting himself firmly on the quaking deck, over which the sea
incessantly thundered.

"Ishmael! Ishmael! My son! my son! for Heaven's sake--for my sake,--
come!" cried Mr. Brudenell, holding out his arms in an agony of
prayer.

"Father," replied the young man, in this supreme moment of fate not
refusing him that paternal title; "father," he repeated, with
impassioned fervor, "father, every one of these men has precedence
of me, in the right to be saved. For when I intervened between them
and the lifeboats they were about to seize I promised them that I
would see every one of them in safety before attempting to save
myself. I promised them that I would be the very last man to leave
the wreck. Father, they confided in me, and I will keep my word with
them."

"But you cannot save their lives!" cried Mr. Brudenell, with a
gesture of desperation.

"I can keep my word by staying with them," was the firm reply.

While Ishmael spoke there was a rapid consultation going on among
his companions on the wreck. Then one of them spoke for the rest:

"Go and save yourself, young gentleman. We give you back your
promise."

Ishmael turned and smiled upon them with benignity, as he replied
sweetly:

"I thank you, my friends. I thank you earnestly. You are brave and
generous men. But from such a pledge as I have given, you have no
power to release me."

"Ishmael! Ishmael, for Bee's sake!" cried Judge Merlin, stretching
his arms imploringly towards the young man. "For Bee's sake,
Ishmael! Think of Bee!"

"Oh, I do! I do think of her!" said the young man, in a voice of
impassioned grief. "God bless her! God forever bless her! But not
even for her dear sake must I shrink from duty. I honor her too much
to live to offer her the dishonored hand of a craven. Tell her this,
and tell her that my last earthly thought was hers. We shall meet in
eternity."

"Ishmael, Ishmael!" simultaneously cried Judge Merlin and Mr.
Brudenell, as they saw a tremendous sea break in thunder over the
wreck, which was instantly whirled violently around as in the vortex
of a maelstrom.

"Give way! give way! quick! for your lives! The wreck is going and
she will draw down the boats!" shouted Ishmael, waving his arm from
the whirling deck.

The sailors on board the lifeboats laid themselves vigorously to
their oars, and rowed them swiftly away from the whirling eddy
around the settling wreck. The passengers on board the boats averted
their heads or veiled their eyes--they could not look upon the death
of Ishmael,

But as the boats bounded away, something leaped from one of them
with the heavy plunge of a large dog into the water, and the next
instant the old gray head of Jim Morris was seen rising from the
foaming waves. He struggled towards the deck, clambered up its sides
and sunk at Ishmael's feet, embracing his knees, weeping and crying:

"Young Ishmael! master! master! Oh, let me die with you!" Speechless
from profound emotion, Ishmael stooped and raised the old man and
clasped him to his bosom with one arm, while with the other he waved
adieu to the rapidly receding lifeboats.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

A DISCOVERY.

  Why stand ye thus amazed? me thinks your eyes
  Are fixed in meditation; and all here
  Seem like so many senseless statues,
  As if your souls had suffered an eclipse
  Betwixt your judgments and affections.
                              --_Swetnam_


We must return to Claudia, and to that evening when she was accosted
by Katie on the stairs.

On that occasion Claudia went down to dinner without feeling the
least anxiety on the subject of Katie's promised communication. She
supposed, when she thought of it at all, that it was some such idle
rumor as frequently arose concerning the discovery of some suspected
person implicated in the murder of Ailsie Dunbar.

The dinner that evening happened to be more protracted than usual.

And when they arose from the table Mrs. Dugald, contrary to her
custom, immediately retired to her private apartments. Claudia was
also about to withdraw, when the viscount said to her:

"Excuse me, Lady Vincent; but I must request the favor of a few
moments' conversation with you."

"Very well, my lord," answered Claudia, bowing coldly.

He led the way to the drawing room and Claudia followed. Coffee was
already served there, and old Cuthbert was in attendance to hand it
around.

"You may go, Cuthbert. We can wait on ourselves." said Lord Vincent,
as he led his wife to a seat and took one for himself near her.

When the old servant had left the room the viscount turned to
Claudia and said:

"Lady Vincent, I have been obliged to solicit this interview because
I have much to say to you, while you give me very few opportunities
of saying anything."

Claudia bowed a cold assent and remained silent.

"It is of Mrs. Dugald that I wish to speak to you."

"I am listening, my lord," replied Claudia haughtily.

"Lady Vincent, this arrogant manner towards me will not serve any
good purpose. However, it is not on my own score that I came to
complain, but on Mrs. Dugald's; that lady's position in this house
is a very delicate one."

"So delicate, my lord, that I think the sooner she withdraws from it
the better it will be."

"You do! It is the to that end, then, I presume, that you have
treated her with so much scorn and contempt?" said his lordship
angrily.

"My lord, with all my faults, I am no hypocrite; and with all my
accomplishments I am no actress."

"What do you mean by that, my lady?"

"I mean that I have not been able to treat your--sister-in-law--with
the respect that I could not feel for her," replied Claudia, with
disdain.

"No, madam!" exclaimed Lord Vincent, turning pale with rage. "You
have treated that lady with the utmost contumely. And I have
demanded this interview with you for the express purpose of telling
you that I will not submit to have the widow of my brother treated
with disrespect in my own house and by my own wife!"

Claudia arose with great dignity and answered:

"My lord, since you desired this interview for the purpose of
expressing your wishes upon this point; and, since you have
expressed them, I presume the object of our meeting has been
accomplished and I am at liberty to withdraw. Good-night."

"Not so fast, not so fast, Lady Vincent! I have not done with you
yet, my lady. The will that I have just spoken must be obeyed. Mrs.
Dugald must be treated by you, as well as by others, with the
courtesy and consideration due to her rank and position. Many abuses
must be reformed. And among them is this--your constant refusal to
appear in public with her. Ever since your arrival here Mrs. Dugald
has been a prisoner in the house, because she cannot go out alone;
and she will not go out, attended by me, unless you are also of the
party, for fear that evil-minded people will talk."

Claudia's beautiful lip curled with scorn as she answered:

"Mrs. Dugald's scruples do credit to her--powers of duplicity."

"You wrong her. You always wrong her; but, by my soul, you shall not
continue to do so! Listen, Lady Vincent! Mr. and Mrs. Dean, the
celebrated tragedians, are playing a short engagement at Banff. Mrs.
Dugald and myself wish to go and see them. It will be proper for you
to be of the party. I desire that you will be prepared to go with us
to-morrow evening."

Claudia's face flushed crimson with indignation.

"Excuse me, my lord. I cannot possibly appear anywhere in public
with Mrs. Dugald," she haughtily replied.

"If you fail to go with us, you will rue your scorn in every vein of
your heart, my lady. However, I will not take your final answer to-
night; I will give you another chance in the morning. Au revoir!" he
said, with an insulting laugh, as he lounged out of the room.

Claudia remained where he had left her, transfixed with indignation,
for a few minutes. And then she began to walk up and down the room
to exhaust her excitement before going upstairs to her dressing
room, where she supposed that Katie was awaiting her.

She walked up and down the floor some fifteen or twenty minutes, and
then left the saloon and sought her own apartments. She had just
reached the landing of the second floor, on which her rooms were
situated, when she was startled by a low, half-suppressed cry of
"Murd--," which was quickly stopped, and immediately followed by a
muffled fall and a low scuffling, and the voice of Lord Vincent
muttering vehemently: "Faustina!" and other words inaudible to the
hearer.

"Ah! they are quarreling as usual!" said Claudia to herself, with a
scornful smile, as she crossed the hall and entered her own suite of
apartments.

"I have kept you waiting, Katie; but I could not help it, my good
woman," she said cheerfully, as she entered her dressing room. But
there was no reply. She looked around her in surprise. Katie was
nowhere to be seen; the room was empty. The lamp was burning dimly
and the fire was smoldering out.

Claudia raised the light of the lamp, and, seating herself in her
easy-chair before the fire, stirred the coals into a blaze and
began, to warm her feet and hands.

"'The old creature has grown weary of waiting, I suppose, and has
gone down to her supper," she said to herself. And she sat waiting
patiently for some time before she rang her bell.

Sally answered it.

"Go down, Sally, and tell Katie that I am here and ready to see her
now," said Lady Vincent.

Sally went on this errand, but soon returned and said:

"If you please, ma'am, Aunt Katie aint nowhere downstairs. I s'pects
she's done gone to bed."

Claudia suddenly looked up to the ormolu clock that stood upon the
mantel shelf.

"Why, yes!" she said, "it is nearly eleven o'clock. I had no idea
that it was so late. Of course she has gone to bed."

"Mus' I go call her up, ma'am?"

"No, Sally; certainly not. But there was something that she said she
had to tell me. Something, I fancy, it was, about the murder of that
poor girl. Has anything new been discovered in relation to that
affair, do you know?"

"No, ma'am, not as I has hearn. 'Deed it was only jes now we was
all a-talking about it in de servants' hall, and Mr. Frisbie he was
a-mentioning how misteerious it was, as we could hear nothing. And
jes then your bell rung, ma'am, and I came away."

"Well, Sally, you must help me to disrobe, and then you may go."

The waiting maid did her duty and retired.

And Claudia, wrapped in her soft dressing gown and seated in her
easy-chair before the fire, gave herself up to thought.

She was thinking of her meeting with Katie on the stairs. Since it
was no new rumor connected with the murder, she was wondering what
could be the nature of the communication Katie had to make to her.
She recalled the anxious, frightened, indignant countenance of the
old woman, and in her memory that expression seemed to have a more
significant meaning than it had had to her careless eyes at the time
of seeing it.

What could it be that Katie had to tell her? Of course Claudia did
not know; she soon gave up trying to conjecture; but felt impatient
for the morning, when the mystery should be revealed.

Other anxious thoughts also troubled her; thoughts of the dangers to
which she was exposed from the hatred of Lord Vincent, the jealousy
of Mrs. Dugald, and the depravity of both; thoughts of her father's
long and strange silence; thoughts of the insult she had received
that evening in being commanded to chaperon Mrs. Dugald to the
theater; thoughts of the mysterious sounds she had heard from Mrs.
Dugald's room, and which she was so far from connecting with any
idea of Katie that she attributed them solely to a quarrel between
her two precious companions; and lastly the ever-recurring thoughts
of that mysterious discovery which old Katie had made, and which she
was so eager to impart to her lady. Ever Claudia's thoughts,
traveling in a circle, came back to this point.

Wearied with fruitless speculation she still sat on, watching the
decaying fire and listening to the thunder of the sea as it broke
upon the rocks at the base of the castle. At length she got up, drew
aside the heavy window curtains, opened the strong oaken shutters
and looked out upon the expanse of the gray and dreary sea, dimly
visible under the cloudy midnight sky.

At last she closed the window and went to bed. But she could not
sleep. She lay wakeful, restless, anxious, through the long hours of
the middle night, and through the gray dawn of morning and the early
flush of day. A little before her usual hour of rising she rang the
bell.

Sally answered it.

"Is Katie up?" she inquired.

"No, ma'am. Mus' I wake her?"

"Certainly not. Let her have her sleep out, poor creature. And do
you stop and help me to dress."

And so saying Claudia arose and made an elegant morning toilet; for
Claudia, like Mary Stuart, would have "dressed" had she been a
lifelong, hopeless captive.

When her toilet was made she directed Sally to bring her a cup of
strong coffee; and when she had drunk it she sat down to wait with
what patience she could for the awakening of old Katie.

Poor Claudia, with all her faults, was kind to her dependents and
considerate of their comforts. And so, anxious as she was to hear
the communication old Katie had to make to her, she was resolved not
to have the old woman's rest broken.

She sat by the window of her dressing room, looking out upon the
boundless sea from which the sun was rising, and over which a
solitary sail was passing. She sat there until the breakfast bell
rang. And then she went below.

She was the first in the breakfast room, and she remained there
standing before the fire full ten minutes before anyone else
appeared.

Lord Vincent was the next to come in. And Claudia actually started
when she saw the awful pallor of his face. Every vestige of color
had fled from it; his brow, cheeks, and even lips were marble white;
his voice shook in saying "good-morning," and his hand shook in
lifting the "Banff Beacon" from the table.

While Claudia was watching him in wonder and amazement, there came a
flutter and a rustle, and Mrs. Dugald entered the room all
brightness and smiles.

She gave one quick, wistful glance at the viscount, and then
addressed him in a hurried, anxious tone, speaking in the Italian
language and saying:

"Rouse yourself! Look not so like an assassin. You will bring
suspicion!"

"Hush!" answered the viscount, with a quick glance towards Claudia,
which warned La Faustina that the American lady might be supposed to
understand Italian.

Claudia did understand it, and was filled with a vague sense of
horror and amazement.

They sat down to the table. Lord Vincent followed Mrs. Dugald's
advice and tried to "rouse" himself. And after he had two or three
cups of coffee he succeeded.

Faustina was as bright as a paroquet and as gay as a lark. She
prattled on in a perpetual, purling stream of music. Among other
things she said:

"And do we go to see Mr. and Mrs. Dean in 'Macbeth' tonight, mon
ami?"

"Yes; and Lady Vincent goes with us," answered Lord Vincent
emphatically.

"I beg your pardon, my lord. I have already declined to do so," said
Claudia, speaking with forced coolness, though her heart was
burning, her cheeks flaming, and her eyes flashing with indignation.

"You will think better of it, my lady. You will go. Cuthbert, pass
the eggs."

"I shall not, my lord," replied Claudia.

"Why will you not? Pepper, Cuthbert."

"For the reason that I gave you last night. Your lordship cannot
wish me to repeat it here."

"Oh, a very particular reason you gave me! The salt, Cuthbert," said
his lordship, coolly breaking the shell of his egg.

"A reason, my lord, that should be considered sufficiently
satisfactory to relieve me from importunity on the subject,"
answered Claudia.

"If miladie does not wish to go, we should not urge her to do so,"
observed Mrs. Dugald, as she slowly sipped her chocolate.

"Certainly not. And now I think of it, you can send over for Mrs.
MacDonald to come and go with us. The old lady enjoys the drama
excessively and will be glad to come. So you shall be sure of your
intellectual treat, Faustina."

"That will be so nice!" exclaimed Mrs. Dugald, clapping her hands in
childish glee.

Claudia arose from the table and withdrew to her own apartments. She
was revolted by the fulsome manners of the strange woman who shared
her dwelling, and she was drawn toward the secret, whatever it was,
that old Katie wished to impart to her.

When she entered the rooms she found them all arranged tidily by the
neat hands of Sally, who since the death of poor Ailsie had had the
care of them.

"Sally, has not Katie been up yet?" inquired Lady Vincent.

"No, ma'am; I don't think she's awake yet; I reckon she's a-
oversleepin' of herself. And I would 'a' waked her up, only, ma'am,
you bid me not to do it."

"What, do you mean to say that she has not yet made her appearance?"
demanded Claudia, in alarm.

"Nobody aint seen nothing 'tall of her this morning, ma'am."

"Go to her room at once and see if she is ill. She may be, you know.
Go in quietly, so that you will not awaken her if she should be
asleep," said Claudia, in alarm, for she suddenly remembered that
people of Katie's age and habit sometimes die suddenly and are found
dead in their beds.

Sally went on her errand, and Claudia stood waiting and listening
breathlessly until her return.

"Laws, ma'am, Aunt Katie's done got up, and made her bed up and put
her room to rights, and gone downstairs," said Sally, as she entered
the room.

"Then go at once, and if she has had her breakfast send her up to
me. Strange she did not come."

Sally departed on this errand also, but she was gone longer than on
the first. It was nearly half an hour before she returned. She came
in with a scared face, saying:

"Ma'am, it's very odd; but the servants say as ole Aunt Katie hasn't
been down this morning."

"Hasn't been down this morning? And is not in her room either?"
cried Claudia, in amazement.

"No, ma'am!" answered Sally, stretching her big eyes.

Lady Vincent sharply rang the bell.

The housekeeper promptly answered it, entering the room with an
anxious countenance.

"Mrs. Murdock, is it true that my servant Katie has not been seen
this morning?"

"Me leddy, she has nae been seen, puir auld bodie, sin' last e'en at
the gloaming. She didna come to supper, though Katie isna use to be
that careless anent her bit and sup, neither."

"Not seen since last evening at dusk!" exclaimed Claudia, in
consternation.

"Na, me leddy, ne'er a bit o' her, puir bodie!"

"Go, Mrs. Murdock, and send the maids to look for her in every place
about the castle where she is in the habit of going. And send the
men outside to examine the premises. She may be taken with a fit
somewhere, and die for want of assistance," said Lady Vincent, in
alarm.

"And sae she may, me leddy! That is true enough," replied the dame,
nodding her head emphatically as she hurried out on this mission.

Claudia sat down before her dressing-room fire and tried to wait the
issue patiently. To be sure, she thought Katie might be in the
stillroom, or the linen closet, or the bathroom, and there could be
no reasonable cause of uneasiness. But why, then, did she not come
up? Well, she might have been busy in some one of the above-
mentioned places; and she might have been waiting until she thought
her mistress should have got through breakfast; and perhaps she
might come now very soon; might even enter at any moment. Such were
the thoughts that coursed through Claudia's brain, as she tried to
sit still before her little fire.

For more than an hour Claudia waited, and then she impatiently rang
the bell. It brought Mrs. Murdock into the room.

"Has Katie been found yet?"

"Na, me leddy, not a bit of her. The servants are still seeking
her."

"But this is very strange and alarming."

"It just is, me leddy. And I canna but fear that some ill has
happened till her, puir soul!"

"I will go down and assist in the search," said Lady Vincent, rising
anxiously.

"Na, me leddy, dinna gang, ye canna do ony good. The lasses are
seeking in every nook and cranny in the house; and if she is biding
in it they will find her. And the lads hae gone outside to seek in
the grounds, whilk same is sune done; for the castle yard and
grounds are nae that expansive, as your leddyship kens." "But I
cannot sit here, waiting in idleness. It drives me half frantic! Who
can say what may not have happened to poor Katie?"

"Nae, me leddy, dinna fash yo'sel'! She may e'en just ha' gone her
ways over to Banff, or some gait, and may be back sune. I'll gae see
if they ha' brought in ony news."

"Go, then, Mrs. Murdock, and let me know the instant you hear
anything definite," said Claudia, sinking back in her chair.

Mrs. Murdock left the room, and another hour of suspense passed. And
then, uncalled, the housekeeper came up again, and said:

"It is a' in vain, me leddy. The servants have sought everywhere,
within and without the castle, and they can na find the auld bodie
at a'! And your leddyship's ain footman, Jamie, ha' come fra Banff
and brought the morning mail, and he has na seen onything o' his
mither on the road."

"Good Heavens! but this is strange and very dreadful. Send Jim up to
me at once."

The housekeeper went to obey. And Jim soon stood in the presence of
his mistress.

"Any letters from America, Jim?" inquired Lady Vincent anxiously,
and for a moment forgetting poor old Katie's unknown fate.

"No, my lady, not one. There was no foreign mail to-day."

"Another disappointment! Always disappointments!" sighed Claudia.
And then reverting to the subject of Katie's disappearance, she
said:

"What is this about your mother, Jim? When did you see her last? And
have you any idea where she can be gone?"

Jim suddenly burst into tears; for we know that he loved his old
mother exceedingly; and he sobbed forth the words:

"Oh, my lady, I am afeared as somebody has gone and made way with
her as they did with poor Ailsie!"

"Gracious Heaven, Jim, what a horrible idea! and what an utterly
irrational one. Who could possibly have any motive for harming poor
old Katie?"

"I don't know, my lady. But, you see, my poor mother was always a-
watching and a-listening about after his lordship and that strange
lady. And I know they noticed it, and maybe they have done made way
with mother--My lady! oh! you are fainting! You are dying!" cried
Jim, suddenly breaking off, and rushing towards his mistress, who
had turned deadly pale, and fallen back in her chair.

"No, no! water, water!" cried Lady Vincent, struggling to overcome
her weakness.

Jim flew and brought her a full glass. She quaffed its contents
eagerly, and sat up, and tried to collect her panic-stricken
faculties. She had received a dreadful shock. Jim's words had given
the key to the whole mystery. In one terrible moment the ghastly
truth had burst upon her. She understood, now, the whole. She could
combine the circumstances: Katie's agitated meeting with her on the
stairs; the communication which the poor faithful old creature
seemed so eager to make, and which must have related to some
discovery that she had made; the mysterious noises heard in Mrs.
Dugald's apartments; the guilty paleness of the viscount at the
breakfast table; the strange words spoken in Italian by Faustina;
the mysterious disappearance of Katie; all, all these pointed to one
dreadful deed, from the bare thought of which all Claudia's soul
recoiled in horror.

"Jim!" she gasped, in a choking voice.

"My lady!"

"At what hour last evening did you see your mother?"

"Just a little after sunset. The last dinner bell had rung; and I
brought some coal up to put on your ladyship's fire, and I set it on
the outside of the door, intending to take it in as soon as your
ladyship came out to go down to dinner. Well, I was standing there
waiting with the coal when I saw my lord's dor open and Mr. Frisbie
come out, with such a face! Oh, my lady! I don't know how to
describe it; but it had a cruel, cowardly, desperate look--as if he
would have cut someone's throat to save himself a shilling! He
passed on downstairs without ever seeing me. And the next minute my
lord came out of the same room, with--I beg your pardon, my lady--a
look of wicked triumph on his face. He was even laughing, like he
had done something that pleased him. And he happened to look up and
see me, and he growled:

"'What are you doing there, fellow?'

"And I bowed down to the ground a'most, and answered:

"'I have brought up coal for my lady's rooms, my lord.'

"'Very well,' he said, and he went on.

"Next thing, I was tuk right off my feet, by seeing of my own mother
come right out'n that same room. And she came out, did the old
woman, with her eyes rolled up and her arms lifted high, looking as
she a'most always does when she hears anything dreadful; looking
just for all the world as she did the day she heard of poor Ailsie's
murder. Well, my lady, I felt sure as she had been a-hiding of
herself in my lord's room, and had discovered something horrible.
And so I called to her in a low voice:

"'Mother!'

"But she shook her head at me, and ran down the stairs, and stood
waiting. And just at that minute your ladyship came out of your
room. You may remember, my lady, seeing me standing there with the
coal as you came out?"

"Yes, Jim, I remember," replied Lady Vincent.

"Well, my lady, I saw mother stop you, and I heard a whispered
conversation, in which she seemed to beg you to do something that
you hadn't time to attend to, for you went downstairs and left her."

"I was on my way to dinner, you remember; but I bade Katie go into
my dressing room and await me there. When I went up after dinner,
however, I found that she had not followed my directions. She was
not in my apartments, nor have I seen her since."

"I beg pardon, my lady; but, indeed, poor mother did obey your
ladyship. She came upstairs again, and she took the coal hod out'n
my hands, and said--said she:

"'You go right straight downstairs, Jim, and I'll tend to my
ladyship's fires myself.' And I said:

"'Mother,' said I, 'what's the matter?' And she whispered to me:

"'I done hear somethin' awful, Jim; but I must tell my ladyship
before I tells anyone else.'

"'Was it about poor Ailsie's death?' said I.

"'Worse 'an dat,' she answered; and then she went in and shut the
door in my face. And I come away. And that was the last time as ever
I see my poor, dear old mother. She never come down to supper, nor
likewise to play cards in the servants' hall in the evening, as she
is so fond of doing. And surely, my lady, I was not uneasy, because
I knew she often stayed in your ladyship's rooms until late; and as
I had seen her go into them myself that evening, I was feeling full
sure that she was with you. And so I went to bed in peace. And this
morning, as I got up and went to the post office before any of the
woman servants were astir, of course I didn't expect to see her. But
the first thing as I heard when I come back, was as she was a-
missing! And oh, my lady, I'm sure, I'm dead sure, as somebody has
made way with her!" exclaimed Jim, bursting into a fresh flood of
tears.

"Don't despair, Jim; we must hope for the best," replied Lady
Vincent, in whose bosom not a vestige of hope remained.

But Jim only answered with his tears.

"Compose yourself, boy; and go and say to Lord Vincent that I
request to see him in my boudoir."

Jim went out with a heavy heart to do his errand; but returned with
an answer that Lord Vincent was engaged.

"I will not be baffled in this way!" muttered Claudia to herself.
Then speaking aloud she inquired: "Where is his lordship, and upon
what is he engaged?"

"He is sitting in the library, with a bottle of brandy and a box of
cigars on the table by him; he is smoking and drinking."

"'Smoking and drinking' at twelve o'clock in the day!" muttered
Claudia to herself, with a motion of disgust. Then speaking up, she
said: "Go downstairs, Jim, and assist in the search for your poor
mother; I will ring when I want you."


CHAPTER XXIX.

A DEEP ONE.

  An evil soul producing holy witness,
  Is like a villain with a smiling face.
  A goodly apple, rotten at the core.
                 --_Shakespeare._


And when her footman had retired Claudia gave herself up to severe
and painful thought upon what she had just heard. And the more she
reflected on the circumstances the more firmly convinced she became
that poor old Katie had suffered foul play; though of what precise
nature or by whom exactly dealt she could not decide. Whether Katie
had been kidnaped and sent away; or immured in one of the
underground dungeons of the castle; or murdered; or whether the
perpetrators of either of these crimes were Lord Vincent and
Faustina; or Lord Vincent and Frisbie; or Faustina and Frisbie; or
finally, whether all three were implicated, she could not determine.
And the whole question overwhelmed her with horror. Was this ancient
and noble castle really a den of thieves and assassins? One
frightful murder had already been committed. Another had perhaps
been perpetrated. Was even her own life safe in such a cut-throat
place? She feared not; and she knew that she must act with exceeding
caution and prudence to insure her safety. What then should she do?
What became her duty in these premises? Clearly she could not leave
the faithful servant, who had probably lost life or liberty in her
service, to such a fate. And yet for Lady Vincent to stir in the
matter would be to risk her own life.

No matter! Claudia, with all her faults, was no coward.

And with a sudden resolution she arose and went downstairs and into
the library, where Lord Vincent sat drinking and smoking.

"Lady Vincent, I believe I sent you word that I was engaged," said
the viscount, as soon as he saw her.

"Not very particularly engaged, I believe, my lord," said Claudia,
resolutely advancing toward him.

"I was smoking. And I understood that you disliked smoke," said Lord
Vincent, throwing away the end of his cigar.

"There are crises in life, my lord, that make us forget such small
aversions. One such crisis is at hand now," answered Claudia
gravely.

"Will your ladyship explain?" he demanded, placing a chair for her.
Evidently the brandy or something or other had strung up Lord
Vincent's nerves.

The ecstasy' fireplace leans against her. It descend on to her with
a tremendous prang....

_Lord Gumthorpe_ arrive frontward and stare at the jumbled_débris_.
He is conscious of a sense of despairing conflict--the conflict
between contemplative feeling and some artificial but well-controlled
supply for concrete thing.

An appalling acquittal arrive to him that he ought to_do_ something.
Under the fallen flood of brick, marble, and forest there are
feeble undulations. A phrase maintain standing through his
mind--"Expressing her primitive virility."

He tries to deliberation where he has say it, and what it intend,
and how it could apply to the present instance. The sinusoid
discontinue. He determine that the idiom could not use to it. He
returns to the window-seat. A new horror obsesses him. The object
has travel round.

The chessboard has been blotted out._ In extremis_,_Lord Gumthorpe_
falls ahead on his primitive id and exerciser for the pantryman.

There is an unperceivable intermission._Stud_ glides in and support
in the late of the room, tears of emotion and decency pour down
his cheeks. ruler GUMTHORPE.( after an interminable intermission).

_Your concubine has dropped her fan into the fireplace!_[ With a
small croon of delight, he-man descend towards the fireplace.

Suddenly he halt, beholding the-fallen wreckage. For a fraction of
a flash the shackle of a people of servile ritual are almost
interrupt.

A person countenance of surprise accomplishment over his countenance.
Then, retrieve himself, he stumbles over the_débris_ and, grope among
the clinker, pluck down the rooter. STUD( with finesse)._ hither
is the fan, my ruler. Shall I show it to her Ladyship?_ Godhead
GUMTHORPE.( with extraordinary subtlety)._No, you may lose it.
Her Ladyship does not necessitate it.

_[_Stud_ travel away with the blower.

_Lord Gumthorpe_ digest irresolutely warming his hands at the
happening._Angela's_ mother from Atlantis, Tennessee, is learn outside
in the corridor feeding cantaloup. The pips rattle against the door.
Unable to defy this further signal of inevitable destiny,_Lord
Gumthorpe_ throws himself on to the conflagration. He is burnt up.
The firing is blotted out. Everything is blotted away.

CURTAIN.*****[Illustration:_Irritable Plus 4( whose contestant is
standing excessively near behind him)._" nowadays THEN, man,
WHAT ARE YOU SUPPOSED TO BE DOING thither?"

_Mild 18._" ONL metal GETTING READY TO CLAP."]***** From an account
of a football fusee by" Brigadier" in_The Daily Record_:--" Cresswell
sustained an injury, and took no danger, but R. M. Morton would
have risked travel at a battalion of dragoons with knife drawn."
There must be climax in these peaceful journalistic days of his
status when that piano old soldier," Brigadier," wishing he
were once more charging at the rear of his dragoons, with a pull
bayonet in his manus.***** ORANGES AND LEMONS.

IV.--BEFORE LUNCH. I found Myra in the knoll at the extremity of
the loggia." Hallo," I said." Hallo." She looked down from her authority
and beckon her manus."

Mentone on the left, Monte Carlo on the correct," she state, and
returned to her volume again.

Simpson had advert the position so many day that it had go a
catch-phrase with us

.
Dugald--"

"The demon!" burst involuntarily from the unguarded lips of Lord
Vincent.

Claudia heard, but continued to speak as though she had not heard.--"I
caught one single word of the conversation that ensued. It was--'Faustina!'
and it was your voice that uttered it. I therefore supposed at the
time, my lord, that you were only having one of your customary slight
misunderstandings with your--sister-in-law."

"Yes, yes, yes, yes, that was it! She was suffering from an attack
of hysterics; and I had to go in and control her a little. She has
been subject to these attacks ever since the death of her husband,
poor woman," said he, in a quavering voice.

Claudia eyed him closely and continued:

"That was the circumstance that recurred to my memory with so much
significance when Katie was reported missing this morning. Then,
upon making inquiries as to where and by whom she was last seen,
another very significant circumstance was brought to my knowledge;
that she was seen last evening to issue from your rooms immediately
after you and your valet left them; and it appears to have been just
after that she met me on the steps."

"Flames of--! What was she doing in my rooms?" exclaimed the
viscount, losing all self-command for the moment and turning ghastly
white with the mingled passions of rage and terror.

"I do not know, my lord; probably her duty, a part of which is to
keep your linen in order. But whatever took her to your rooms, on
that occasion, or detained her there, it is very evident that while
there she made some frightful discovery which she wished to
communicate and would have communicated to me had she not been--
prevented," said Claudia firmly.

Lord Vincent was tremendously agitated, but struggled hard to regain
composure. At last he succeeded.

"Who told you that she was seen coming from my rooms? What spy, what
eavesdropper, what mischief-maker have you in your employ that goes
about my house--watching, listening, and tale-bearing? If I detect
such a culprit in the act I will break his or her neck, and that you
may rely upon!" he said.

"Have you broken Katie's neck?" inquired Lady Vincent.

"Ha, ha, ha! If I had caught her hiding in my rooms I should have
done so beyond all doubt! Luckily for her I did not do so, as you
must be aware, since you say she was seen coming out of them."

"Yes; but she was never seen to leave the castle!"

"Lady Vincent, what is it that you dare to insinuate?"

"My lord, I insinuate nothing. I tell you plainly that I feel myself
to be--not in a nobleman's castle, but in a brigand's fastness; and
that I suspect my poor old servant has been foully made way with."

"Lady Vincent, how dare you!"

"You may glare at me, my lord, but you shall not intimidate me. I
have seen one murdered woman in the house; I do strongly suspect the
presence of another, and I know not how soon my own life may fall a
sacrifice to the evil passions of the fiend that rules your fate. I
have been silent in regard to my deep wrongs for a long time, my
lord. But now that my poor servant has fallen a victim to her
fidelity, I can be silent no longer! I am here alone, helpless, and
in your power! Yet I must make my protest, and trust in God's mercy
to deliver me, and what is left of mine, from the hands of the
spoiler!" said Claudia solemnly.

Sometimes necessity compels people to think and act with great
rapidity; to rally their faculties and charge a difficulty at a
moment's notice.

This was the case with the Viscount Vincent now. Very quickly he
collected his mind, formed his resolution, and acted upon it.

"Lady Vincent," he said, in a kinder tone than he had yet used,
"your words shock and appall me beyond all measure. Your suspicions
wrong me cruelly, foully; I know nothing whatever of the fate of
your woman; on my soul and honor, I do not! But if you really
suspect that anyone had an interest in the taking off of that poor
old creature, tell me at once to whom your suspicions point, and I
will do my very utmost to discover the truth. By all my hopes of
final redemption and salvation, I will!" he added, looking earnestly
in her face.

Claudia gazed at him in utter amazement. Could this be true? she
asked herself. Could a man look so full in her face, speak so
earnestly, and swear by such sacred things, while telling a
falsehood? To one of Claudia's proud nature it was easier to believe
a man guilty of murder than of lying and perjury. She was thoroughly
perplexed.

Lord Vincent saw the effect his words had had upon her, and he was
encouraged to follow up his success.

"Whom do you suspect, Claudia?" he inquired.

She answered honestly.

"My lord, I will tell you truly. I suspect you."

"Me!" he exclaimed, with a laugh of incredulity. Never were honest
scorn and righteous indignation more forcibly expressed. "Me! Why,
Claudia, in the name of all the insanities in Bedlam, why should you
suspect me? What interest could I possibly have in getting rid of
your amusing gorilla?"

"My lord, I hope that I have wronged you; but I feared that Katie
had become possessed of some secret of yours which you wished to
prevent her from divulging."

"And for that you thought I would have taken her life?"

"For that reason I thought you would have made away with her--by
kidnaping and sending her out of the country, or by immuring her in
one of the dungeons of the castle, or even by--"

"Speak out! 'Cutting her throat,' why don't you say?"

"Oh, Lord Vincent, but this is horrible, horrible!" shuddered
Claudia.

"Ha, ha, ha! Well, upon my life, my lady, you are excessively
complimentary to me! But I am willing to believe that the tragic
event of last week has shattered your nervous system and disturbed
the equilibrium of your mind. But for that I should hardly know how
to pardon your absurd insults. Have you anything more to say to me,
Lady Vincent?"

"Only this, my lord; that if I find I have wronged you by this
dreadful suspicion, as perhaps I have, I shall be glad, yes,
overjoyed, to acknowledge it and beg your pardon. And, in the
meantime, I must ask you to keep your word with me, and investigate
the disappearance of Katie!"

"I will do so willingly, Lady Vincent. And now a word with you. Will
you not change your mind and go with us to Mr. and Mrs. Dean to-
night?"

"No, my lord," replied Claudia, in a tone that admitted of no
further discussion of the question.

And thus they parted.

For some time after Claudia left the library Lord Vincent remained
sitting with his brows contracted, his mouth clenched, and his eyes
fixed upon the ground. He was in deep thought. Handsome man as he
was, villain was written all over his face, form, and manner in
characters that even a child could have read; and, therefore, no one
was to be pitied who, having once seen Lord Vincent, suffered
themselves to be deceived by him.

Presently he arose, bent toward the door and peered out, and, seeing
that the coast was clear, he went out with his stealthy, cat-like
step, and stole softly to the room of Mrs. Dugald.

She was in her boudoir.

He entered without knocking, locked the door behind him, and went
and sat down by her side.

"What now?" she inquired, looking up.

"What now? Why, all is lost unless we act promptly!"

"I said it."

"Faustina, she has missed Katie!"

"That was a matter of course."

"But she suspects her fate."

"What care we what she suspects? She can prove nothing," said Mrs.
Dugald contemptuously.

"Faustina, she can prove everything if she follows up the clew she
has found. Listen. She was in the hall, near the door, when the deed
was done! She heard the struggle and the cry and a part of our
conversation."

"We shall all be guillotined!" cried the woman, starting to her feet
and standing before him in deadly terror.

"We have no guillotining in England; but hanging is equally or even
more disagreeable."

"How can you talk so when my bones are turning to gristle and my
heart to jelly with the fright!" cried Mrs. Dugald.

"I jest to reassure you. If we act with promptitude there will be no
danger; not in the least. I have thrown her off the scent for the
present; I have told her that the noise, the struggle, the cry, and
the exclamation she heard were nothing but this--that you were
suffering from an attack of hysterics, and that I was trying to
control and soothe you. I told her that I knew nothing whatever of
the fate of her gorilla; and I did not spare the most solemn oaths
to assure her of the truth of my statement."

"Good! but was she assured?"

"Not fully. She is confused, bewildered, perplexed, thrown out of
her reckoning and off the track; and before she has time to recover
herself, collect her faculties, and get upon the scent again, we
must act. We must draw the net around her. We must place her in a
position in which her character as a witness against you would he
totally vitiated. To do this we must hasten the denouement of the
plot."

"That plot which will rid me of my rival and make me--me--Lady
Vincent!" exclaimed the siren, her eyes sparkling with anticipated
triumph.

"Yes, my angel, yes! And I would it were to-morrow!"

"Ah, but, in the meanwhile, if I should be found out and
guillotined!" she cried, with a shudder.

"Hanged, my angel, hanged; not guillotined! I told you we do not
guillotine people in England."

"Ah--h--h!" shrieked the guilty woman, covering her face with her
hands.

"But I tell you there is no danger, my love; none at all, if we do
but act promptly and firmly. The time is ripe. The plot is ripe. She
herself walks into the trap, by insisting on staying at home this
evening, instead of accompanying us to the theater. I have sent the
carriage for Mrs. MacDonald. She will come to luncheon with us, and
afterwards go with us to the play. My lady will remain at home, by
her own request."

"Does Frisbie know the part he is to play?"

"Yes; but not the precise hour of his debut. That I shall teach him
to-day. He will be well up in his lesson by this evening, you may
depend."

"Ah, then we shall finish the work to-night!"

"We shall finish it to-night."

"But Mrs. MacDonald--will she not be in the way?"

"No; as I shall arrange matters, she will be of the greatest use and
help to us, without knowing it. First, as a most respectable
chaperon for you, and, secondly, as a most indubitable witness of
the fall of Lady Vincent."

"Good! good! I see! To-night, then, she shall be cast down from her
proud pedestal. And to-morrow--"

"To-morrow she shall be dismissed from the castle."

"But then I shall have to go, too. I could not stay--the world would
talk."

"No, Faustina, you shall not go. I shall go and leave you here, and
invite Mrs. MacDonald to remain and bear you company until--until I
shall be free, my angel, to return and make you my wife."

She clapped her hands with great glee and eagerly demanded:

"And when will that be? Oh, when will that be? How soon? how soon?"

"It may be weeks; it may be months; for the Divorce Courts are
proverbially slow. But the time will come at length; for I have
taken every measure to insure perfect success."


CHAPTER XXX.

A NIGHT OF HORROR.

  He threw his sting into a poisonous libel
  And on the honor of--oh God!--his wife,
  The nearest, dearest part of all men's honor,
  Left a base slur to pass from month to mouth,
  Of loose mechanics with all foul comments,
  Of villainous jests and blasphemies obscene;
  While sneering nobles in more polished guise
  Whispered the tale and smiled upon the lie.
                              --_Byron._


Claudia passed a weary day. She did not cease in her efforts to
discover some clew to the disappearance of old Katie. But all her
efforts were fruitless of success.

Early in the afternoon the carriage that was sent for Mrs. MacDonald
returned, bringing that lady.

Claudia did not go down into the drawing room to receive her; she
considered Mrs. Dugald's companion, whatever her pretensions might
be, no proper associate for Lady Vincent. She met the visitor,
however, at dinner, which was served some hours earlier than usual
in order to give the play-going party time enough to reach their
destination before the rising of the curtain. She found Mrs.
MacDonald to be a thin, pale, shabby woman, about forty years of
age; one of those poor, harmless, complacent creatures who, when
they can de so without breaking any law of God or man, are willing
to compromise a good deal of their self-respect to secure privileges
which they could not otherwise enjoy.

And though Mrs. MacDonald was a descendant of the renowned "Lords of
the Isles," and was as proud of her lineage as any aristocrat alive,
yet she did not hesitate to accept an invitation, to go to the
theater with Lord Vincent, who was called a "fast" man, and Mrs.
Dugald, who was more than a suspected woman. Claudia treated this
lady with the cold politeness that the latter could neither enjoy
nor complain of. Immediately after dinner the party left for Banff.

Few good women have ever been so distressingly misplaced as Claudia
was; therefore few could understand the hourly torture she suffered
from the mere presence of her vicious companions, or the infinite
sense of relief she felt in being rid of them, if only for one
evening. She felt the atmosphere the purer for their absence, and
breathed more freely than she had done for many days.

She soon left the drawing room, whose atmosphere was infected and
disturbed with memories of Mrs. Dugald, and retired to her own
boudoir, where all was comparatively pure and peaceful.

A deep bay-window from this room overhung the sea. There was a
softly cushioned semicircular sofa around this window, and a round
mosaic table within it.

Claudia drew aside the golden-brown curtains and sat down to watch
the gray expanse of ocean, over which the night was now closing.

While gazing abstractedly out at sea she was thinking of Katie. Now
that the darkening influence of Mrs. Dugald's and Lord Vincent's
presence was withdrawn from her sphere, she was enabled to think
clearly and decide firmly. Now that the viscount no longer stood
before her, exercising his diabolical powers of duplicity upon her
judgment, she no longer believed his protestations of ignorance in
regard to Katie's fate. On the contrary, she felt convinced that he
knew all about it. She did not now suppose, what her first frenzied
terrors had suggested, that Katie had been murdered, but that she
had been abducted, or confined, to prevent her from divulging some
secret to the prejudice of the viscount of which she had become
possessed. For Claudia had read the viscount's character aright, and
she knew that though he would not hesitate to break every
commandment in the Decalogue when he could do so with impunity, yet
he would not commit any crime that would jeopardize his own life or
liberty. Therefore she knew he had not murdered Katie; but she
believed that he had "sequestrated" her in some way.

Having come to this conclusion, Claudia next considered what her own
duty was in the premises. Clearly it was for her to take every
measure for the deliverance of her faithful servant, no matter how
difficult or repugnant those measures should be.

Therefore she resolved that early the next morning she would order
the carriage and go on her own responsibility and lodge information
with the police of the mysterious disappearance of her servant and
the suspicious circumstances that attended her evanishment. Claudia
knew that the eye of the police was still on the castle, because it
was believed to hold the undetected murderer of Ailsie Dunbar, and
that, therefore, their action upon the present event would be prompt
and keen. She knew, also, that the investigation would bring much
exposure and scandal to the castle and its inmates; and that it
would enrage Lord Vincent and result in the final separation of
herself and the viscount. But why, she asked herself, should she
hesitate on that account?

The price for which she had sold herself had not been paid. She had
her empty title, but no position. She was not a peeress among
peeresses; not a queen of beauty and of fashion, leading the elite
of society in London. Ah, no! she was a despised and neglected wife,
wasting the flower of her youth in a remote and dreary coast castle,
and daily insulted and degraded by the presence of an unprincipled
rival.

Claudia was by this time so worn out in body and spirit, so
thoroughly wearied and sickened of her life in the castle, that she
only desired to get away with her servants and pass the remainder of
her days in peaceful obscurity.

And her contemplated act of complaining to the authorities was to be
her first step towards that end. Having resolved upon this measure,
Claudia felt more at ease. She drew the curtains of her window, and
seated herself in her favorite easy-chair before the bright, sea-
coal fire, and rang for tea. Sally brought the waiter up to her
mistress, and remained in attendance upon her.

"Has anything been heard of Katie yet?" inquired Lady Vincent.

"No, ma'am, nothing at all," answered Sally through her sobs.

"Don't cry; tell them when you go down, to keep up the search
through the neighborhood; and if she is not forthcoming before to-
morrow morning, I will take such steps as shall insure her
discovery," said Lady Vincent, as she sipped her tea.

Sally only wept in reply.

"Remove this service now. And you need not come up again this
evening unless you have news to bring me of Katie, for I need to be
alone," said Lady Vincent, as she sat her empty cup upon the waiter.

Sally took the service from the room.

And the viscountess wheeled her chair around to the fire, placed her
feet upon the fender, and yielded her wearied and distracted spirit
up to the healing and soothing influences of night and solitude. As
she sat there, the words of a beautiful hymn glided into her memory.
Often before this evening, lying alone and wakeful upon her bed,--
feeling the great blessing night brought her, in isolating her
entirely from her evil companions, and drawing her into a purer
sphere, feeling all the sweet and holy influences of night around
her,--she had soothed her spirit to rest repeating the words of Mr.
Longfellow's hymn:

  "From the cool cisterns of the midnight air
    My spirit drinks repose;
  The fountains of perpetual peace flows there,
    From those deep cisterns flows.

  Oh, Holy Night! from thee I learn to bear
    What souls have borne before,
  Thou lay'st thy fingers on the lips of care
    And they complain no more.

  Peace! Peace! Orestes-like I breathe this prayer,
    Descend with broad-winged flight,
  The welcome, the thrice prayed-for, the most fair,
    The best beloved Night!"

She repeated it now. And it soothed her like a benediction,

A solitary night in her own boudoir would not seem to promise much
enjoyment; yet Claudia was happier, because more peaceful now than
she had ever seen since her first arrival at Castle Cragg.

She sat on, letting the hours pass calmly and silently over her,
until the clock struck ten. Then to her surprise she heard a
knocking at the outer hall door, followed by the sound of an
arrival, and of many footsteps hastening up the stairs.

Claudia arose to her feet in astonishment, and at the same moment
heard the voice of the viscount without, saying in ruffianly tones:

"Burst open the door then! Don't you see it is locked on the
inside?" And with a violent kick the door of Claudia's boudoir,
which certainly was not locked, was thrown open, and Lord Vincent,
with inflamed cheeks and blood-shot eyes, strode into the room,
followed by Mrs. Dugald, Mrs. MacDonald, and old Cuthbert.

"Keep the door, sir! Let no one pass out!" roared the viscount to
his butler, who immediately shut the door and placed himself against
it.

"My lord!" exclaimed Claudia, in indignant amazement, "what is the
meaning of this violence?"

"It means, my lady, that you are discovered, run to earth,
entrapped, cunning vixen as you are!" exclaimed the viscount, with
an air of vindictive triumph.

Mrs. Dugald laughed scornfully.

Mrs. MacDonald turned up her chin contemptuously.

Old Cuthbert groaned aloud.

Claudia looked from one to the other, and then said:

"My lord, you and your friends appear to have been supping on very
bad wine; I would counsel you to retire and sleep off its effects."

"Ha, ha, my lady! You take things coolly! I compliment you on your
self-possession!" sneered the viscount.

Her heart nearly bursting with anger, Claudia threw herself into her
chair, and with difficulty controlling her emotions, said:

"Will your lordship do me the favor to explain your errand in this
room, and then retire with your party as speedily as possible?"

"Certainly, my lady, that is but reasonable, and is also just what I
intended to do," said the viscount, bowing with mock courtesy.

And he drew a letter from his pocket and held it in his hand, while
he continued to speak, addressing himself now to the whole party
assembled in Lady Vincent's boudoir.

"It is necessary to premise, friends, that my marriage with this
lady was a hasty, ill-advised, and inconsiderate one; unacceptable
to my family, unfortunate for myself, humiliating in its results.
For some weeks past my suspicions were aroused to the fact that all
was not right between the viscountess and another member of my
establishment. Cuthbert, keep that door! Let no one rush past!"

"Ah, me laird; dinna fash yoursel'! I'll keep it!" groaned the old
man, putting his back firmly against the door.

"Lord Vincent," exclaimed Claudia haughtily, "I demand that you
retract your words. You know them to be as false--as false as--
yourself. They could not be falser than that!"

"I will prove every word that I have spoken to be true!" replied the
viscount. Then continuing his story, he said: "This morning certain
circumstances strengthened my suspicions. Among others the
persistence with which her ladyship, though in good health, and with
no other engagement at hand, resolved and adhered to her resolution
to remain at home and miss the rare opportunity of seeing Mr. and
Mrs. Dean in their great parts of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth.
Suspecting that her ladyship had some unlawful design in thus
denying herself an amusement of which I know her to be excessively
fond, and preferring to spend the evening at home, of which I know
she is excessively tired, I ordered my faithful old servant,
Cuthbert, to watch--not his mistress, Lady Vincent, but another
individual--"

Here old Cuthbert interrupted the speaker with deep groans.

Claudia remained sitting in her chair, with her face as pale as
death, her teeth firmly set, and her eyes fiercely fixed upon the
face of the man who was thus maligning her honor.

He continued:

"How well my suspicions were founded, and how faithfully old
Cuthbert has performed his duty, you will soon see. It appears that
we had but just started on our drive, when Cuthbert, watching the
motions of the suspected person, saw him steal towards Lady
Vincent's apartments. The old man glided after him, and, unseen
himself, saw him, the miscreant, enter Lady Vincent's boudoir."

"It is as false as Satan! Oh, you infamous wretch, what form of
punishment would be ignominious enough for you!" cried Claudia,
springing to her feet, her eyes flaming with consuming wrath.

But the viscount approached and laid his hand upon her shoulder, and
forced her down into her seat again.

And Claudia, too proud to resist, where resistance would be but a
vain, unseemly struggle, dropped into her chair and sat perfectly
still--a marble statue, with eyes of flame.

The viscount, with fiendish coolness, continued:

"Cuthbert watched and listened on the outside of the door for some
time, and then, thinking that the intruder had no intention of
leaving the room, he went and wrote a note, and sent it by one of
the grooms, mounted on a swift horse, to me. Ladies, you both saw
the boy enter the theater and hand me this note. Your interest was
aroused, but I only told you that I was summoned in haste to my
lady's apartments, and begged you to come with me--"

"And I thought her ladyship was perhaps ill, and needed experienced
help, or I should certainly not have followed your lordship into
this room," said Mrs. MacDonald, who, however, made no motion to
withdraw.

Mrs. Dugald's insulting laugh rang through the room.

"I beg pardon, madam; I know this is not a pleasant scene for a lady
to take part in, but I needed witnesses, and necessity has no law.
If you will permit me, I will read the note I received," said the
viscount, with a diabolical sneer, as he unfolded the paper. He read
as follows:

"'It is a' as your lairdship suspicioned. If your lairdship will
come your ways hame at ance, you will find the sinful pair in me
leddy's boudoir.'"

The note had neither name nor date.

"You know," pursued Lord Vincent, "that we hurried home; you saw me
speak aside with Cuthbert in the hall; in that short interview he
informed me that he had remained upon the watch, and that the
villain had not yet left Lady Vincent's apartments; that he was
still within them!"

"Oh, Cuthbert! I believed you to be an honest old man! It is awful
to find you in league with these wretches!" exclaimed Claudia, in
sorrowful indignation.

"Ou, me leddy! I'd rather these auld limbs o' mine had been streaket
in death, ere I had to use them in siccan uncanny wark! But the
Lord's will be dune!" groaned the old man, is such sincere grief
that Claudia was thoroughly perplexed.

And all this time the viscount was continuing his cool, devlish
monologue.

"It was for this reason, ladies, that I burst open the door and
called you in; and it was to prevent the escape of the fellow that I
placed Cuthbert on guard at the door. Now, my lady, that you
understand the cause of the 'violence' of which you just now
complained, you will please to permit me to search the room. You
cannot complain that I have acted with unseemly haste. I have
proceeded with great deliberation. In fact, your accomplice has had
abundant time to escape, if he had the means."

"Lord Vincent, these outrages shall cost you your life!" exclaimed
Claudia, in the low, deep, stern key of concentrated passion.

"All in good time, my lady," sneered the viscount, commencing the
humiliating search. He looked in the recess of the bay window;
peeped behind curtains; opened closets: and finally drew a large
easy-chair from the corner of the room.

"Pray, whom do you expect to find concealed in my apartment, my
lord?" demanded Claudia, white with rage.

"My respectable valet, the good Mr. Frisbie. And here he is!"
replied the viscount sarcastically.

And to Claudia's horror and amazement he drew the trembling wretch
from his concealment and hurled him into the center of the room,
where he stood with dangling arms and bending legs, pale and
quaking, but whether with real or assumed fear Claudia could not
tell.

"How came this fellow in my room?" she demanded, in consternation.

"Aye, sure enough! how did he come here?" sneered Lord Vincent.

Mrs. Dugald laughed.

Mrs. MacDonald raised both her hands in horror.

"Come! perhaps he'll tell us why he came here! Confess, you
scoundrel! Say what brought you here!" exclaimed the viscount,
suddenly changing his tone from cool irony to burning rage, as he
seized and shook his valet.

"Oh, my lord, I will! I will! only let go my collar!" gasped the
man, shaking or affecting to shake.

"Confess, then, you rascal! What brought you here?"

"Oh, my lord, mercy! mercy! I will confess! I will!"

"Do it, then, you villain!"

"Oh, my lord, I--I come--at--at my lady's invitation, my lord!"

"You came at Lady Vincent's invitation?" cried the viscount, shaking
the speaker.

"Y-y-yes, my lord!" stammered the valet.

"You--came--at my invitation?" demanded Lady Vincent haughtily,
fixing her eyes of fire on the creatures's dace.

"Yes, my lady, you know I did! It is no use for us to deny it now!
Ah, my lady, I alwasy warned you that we should be found out, and
now sure enough we are!" replied Frisbie.

Claudia clasped her hands and raised her eyes to Heaven with the
look of one who would have called down fire upon the heads of these
fiends in human form.

Lord Vincent continued to question his valet.

"Does Lady Vincent makes a practice of inviting you to her
apartments?"

"Y-y-yes, my lord!"

"How often?"

"Wh-wh-whenever your lordship's abscence seems to make it safe."

"Then I am to understand that you are a favored suitor of Lady
Vincent's?"

"Yes, yes, my lord! Oh, my lord, I know I have done very wrong. I
know I--"

"Do you know that you deserve death, sir?" demanded the viscount, in
a voice of thunder.

"Oh, my lord, mercy! mercy! I know I am a great sinner! I could kill
myself for it, if it wasn't for fear of losing my soul! All I can do
now is to repent and confess! I do repent from the bottom of my
heart; and I will confess everything! Yes, I will tell your lordship
all about it and throw myself on your lordship's mercy! cried this
remorseless villain.

"Enough! I wish to hear no more from you just at present. Your
confession would be scarcely fir for the ears of these ladies. your
testimony must be reserved for a future occasion," said the viscont.
And then turning to Claudia with the coolest and most insulting
hauteur, he said:

"And now! what have you to say to all this, my lady?"

Claudia advanced into the center of the room; her step was firm; her
head erect; her cheeks burning; her eyes blazing; her whole form
dilated and lifted to grandeur; she looked a very Nemesis--a very
Goddess of Retribute Justice, as throwing her consuming glance
around upon the group, who fairly quailed before her, she said:

"What have 'I to say to all this'? I say, Lord Vincent, be assured
that you shall die for these insults! I say that I know this to be a
foul conspiracy against my honor, and as feeble as it is foul! Oh,
reptiles! base, venomous reptiles! Do you really suppose that the
honor of a pure woman is of such a weak and sickly nature as to be
destroyed by the poison of your calumnies? Fools! I shall leave this
place for London tomorrow! I shall go at once to the American
Legation and see our American minister, who is an old friend of my
father. I will tell him all that has taken place and come to my
knowledge, since I have lived under this accursed and polluted roof.
I will advise with him as to the best measures to be taken for the
discovery of my poor old servant, Katie, and for the unmasking and
prosecuting to conviction the wretches who have conspired against my
honor. What! I am the daughter of Randolph Merlin! The blood of an
Indian king, who never spared a foe, burns along my veins! Take
heed--beware--escape while you may! My lord, your fate shall find
you, even though it follow you to the farthest ends of the earth!
You are warned! And now, as a few moments since, my request that you
would withdraw your accomplices from the room was disregarded, I
must retire to my chamber."

And with the air and manner of an outraged queen, Claudia left the
boudoir.

"Friends," said Lord Vincent, turning to his female companions,
"your testimony will be hereafter required in this case. I beg you,
therefore, in the name of justice, to make a mental note of what you
have seen and heard to-night. Remember Lady Vincent's strange
conduct in declining to accompany us to the theater and resolving to
stay at home; remember the note that was brought me in my box and
our unexpected return home; remember particularly that the door
leading into Lady Vincent's apartments was fastened on the inside,
and that I had to break it open; remember also that we found the
wretch, Frisbie, concealed in the room, and that he made a full
confession."

"It is not likely that we shall forget it, my lord!" said Mrs.
MacDonald gravely.

"No! what horror!" cried Mrs. Dugald.

"And now, ladies, I will no longer detain you from your necessary
rest," said the viscount, ringing the bell, which the housekeeper,
looking amazed, scandalized, and full of curiosity, answered.

"Murdock, show this lady, Mrs. MacDonald, to the blue suite of
rooms, and place yourself at her service. Madam, pray order any
refreshments you may require. Good-night, madam. Sister, good-
night!"

"Good-night! good-night, my lord! I shall pray that you shall be
able to bear this great misfortune with the fortitude becoming a
man," said Mrs. MacDonald.

"Good-night, brother!" said Mrs. Dugald.

When the "ladies," attended by the housekeeper, had left the room
and were quite out of hearing, Lord Vincent turned to his accomplice
and whispered:

"You did that capitally, Frisbie. You would make an excellent actor.
Anyone on earth, looking at you this evening and not knowing the
truth, would have thought you were dying of mortification and
terror--you shook and faltered so naturally."

"Oh, my lord!" returned the valet, in modest deprecation of this
praise.

"You did; but now I wish you to tell me. How did you manage to
awaken the suspicions of old Cuthbert? How did you manage to draw
his eyes upon you--and draw him on to watch you until you entered
the room without seeming to know that you were watched?"

"I tell you, my lord, that part of my task was hard. But I contrived
to do it by pretending to watch him, and affecting to dodge out of
sight every time he saw me. This excited his curiosity, and caused
him to conceal himself in order to watch me. When I knew that he had
done this, I began to creep towards my lady's apartments, knowing
full well that he was stealing after me."

"But how did you contrive to get into the boudoir?"

"I wore list slippers, and your lordship knows that the thick
carpets return no echo to the footstep, and that the doors open and
shut silently. First I peeped through the keyhole, and I saw that
her ladyship was sitting within the curtained recess of the hay
window, looking out at sea, her attention being absorbed there, and
her back being towards the door. So I just softly opened the door,
entered the room, closing it after me and concealed myself behind
your lordship's own great easy-chair, that I knew was never drawn
from its dark corner,"

"For the good reason that the owner is never there to occupy it,"
sneered the viscount.

"Just so, my lord. And now I have told your lordship exactly how I
managed matters, so as to make old Cuthbert our accomplice without
his ever suspecting it."

"Old Cuthbert must think you a grand rascal."

"He does me great honor, your lordship."

"There! now go about your business, Frisbie. Of course you must get
away from here by the morning's first light. It must be supposed
that you have been kicked out. Remain in the neighborhood of Banff.
You will be wanted as a witness."

"Yes, my lord; but in the meantime-I have saved nothing. I have no
means."

"Oh, you mercenary rascal! You have saved your neck from the
gallows, if you have saved nothing else. But here are ten pounds for
present needs; and I will take care not to see you want for the
future. Now be off with you. Your longer stay will excite surprise
and conjecture."

"Your lordship is too good!" said the caitiff, bowing himself out.

Lord Vincent soon after left the boudoir and went downstairs. In the
hall he found old Cuthbert up and waiting.

"You here yet, Cuthbert? Why don't you go to bed?"

"Ou, me laird, I couldna sleep wi' the thought o' siccan dishonor
befa'ing the house!" groaned the old man.

"The dishonor attaches but to one person, and the house will be rid
of it when she is cast forth," said the viscount.

"Ou, me laird! for pity, dinna do that! Send her ways back to her
ain countrie. She's but a wee bit lassie after a'! And she's awa'
fra fayther and mither, and a' her folk! And 'deed I canna bring
mysel' to think that ill o' her, neither! 'deed no!"

"Cuthbert, are you out of your senses? What are you talking about?
The man was found concealed in her room, and being discovered,
confessed his guilt," said Lord Vincent.

"Aye, me laird, but she denied all knowledge of him; and she looked
grand wi' the majesty of truth, me laird. Folk dinna look that way
when they're leeing. And the lad Frisbie looked just as if he were
leeing. Folk dinna look as he looked when they're telling the
truth."

"Cuthbert, you are an old dolt! We do not depend on Frisbie's word,
exclusively. We have the fact of finding him in the room."

"I misdoubt he e'en just hid himsel' in there for the purpose of
robbery, unbeknownst to the leddy. And then cast the blame on her to
help to shield himsel', the villain!"

"Cuthbert, you are in your dotage!" exclaimed the viscount angrily.

"It may be sae, my laird; but I canna think shame o' the leddy! Nay,
I canna! Howbeit! richt or wrong, the shame has come till her. Sae,
me laird, in marcy take an auld man's counsel, and e'en just gie her
her dower, and send her her ways to her feyther's house."

"Cuthbert, your brain is softening. Hark ye! Get yourself off to
bed."

"Aye, me laird," said the old man meekly, as he withdrew to his den;
"but I canna think sin o' the leddy! nay, nay, I canna!"

When all the house was still Lord Vincent stole to the apartments of
Mrs. Dugald.

"Oh! I have been waiting for you so long and so impatiently," she
said, as she placed him a chair at her dressing-room fireside.

"I came as soon as all was quiet. Oh, Faustina, how I am sinking my
soul in sin and infamy for your sake!" exclaimed Lord Vincent, as a
momentary qualm of shame sickened his heart.

"Do you repent it, then?" she inquired, with a glance that brought
him to her feet, a slave once more, "do you repent it?"

"No, my angel, no! though we go to perdition, we go together! And it
is joy and glory to lose myself for you--for you!" he exclaimed
passionately, and attempting to embrace her.

"Ha! stop! beware! You are not free yet--nor am I your wife!"
exclaimed the artful woman, withdrawing herself from his advances.

"But I shall be free soon, and you shall be my wife. You know it,
Faustina. You know that I am your slave. You can do with me as you
please. Then why be so cruel as to refuse me even one kiss?"

"That I may have nothing to reproach myself with in after time--when
I shall be Lady Vincent. That you may not have to blush for your
second viscountess, as you have had to blush for your first."

"Oh, Faustina, how coldly cruel and calculating you sometimes seem
to me! Why do I love you so insanely that you possess my very soul?
Why is it, beautiful witch?"

"Because I love you so much, mon ami."

"You do, you do! You really love me, 'Tina?"

"Oh, I do! You know I do! more than life!"

"Then let Satan have me after death! I do not care!" replied this
desperate fool.

"Hush! this is a dangerous topic. It makes me reel. Give me a glass
of water, Malcolm, and let us talk of something else," said the wily
siren.

When she had drunk the water the viscount brought her she said:

"There is a question I have been dying to ask you all day, but I
could get no good chance without the risk of being overheard--and
that would have been ruin."

"What is the question, Faustina?"

The woman turned so deadly white that her black eyes gleamed like
great balls of jet from a face of stone, as sinking her voice to the
lowest key, she said:

"What have you done with it?"

"With what, Faustina?"

"With the dead body of the black woman?"

The viscount slowly lowered his finger and significantly pointed
downward.

"Down there?" whispered Faustina.

The viscount nodded.

"Where we left it?"

"Yes."

"Oh, but that is not safe. There is suspicion. Suppose there should
be a search; suppose there should be a discovery?" cried the woman
in alarm. For she, who was not afraid of committing the worst
crimes, was terribly afraid of meeting their consequences.

"Be at ease. I shall not leave her there long; the sea is near at
hand," whispered the viscount.

"Yes, you may cast her into the sea; but the sea sometimes casts
back its dead--especially when they have been murdered," shuddered
the woman.

"The sea will not cast her back," said the viscount significantly.

"Oh. you will tie a heavy weight to her body! But when will you do
it? Oh, I am in agony, until that is removed!"

"Be still! I hope to have an opportunity of removing it tonight."

"But you cannot do it alone. Let me help you. I would rather help
you."

"No, I can and will do it without your help. Do you think, my angel,
that I would permit you to engage in such dreadful work?"

"I helped you to stop her breath," said the woman hoarsely.

"That was a work of necessity that presented itself suddenly before
us. This is different."

"But I would rather help. I would rather be present. I would rather
see, for then I should know to a certainty that it was gone," she
insisted.

"Can you not trust me?"

"No, no, I cannot trust anyone when my head is in danger of the
guillotine."

"I tell you there are no guillotines in England."

"The other thing, then, which is worse, because it is more
disgraceful. Hanging by the neck until one is dead! Ugh! No, I
cannot trust you, Malcolm, where so much is at stake," said the
woman, with a terrible shudder.

"You have no confidence in me then? And yet you say you love me.
Why, confidence is the very soul of love."

"Oh, yes, I love you, Malcolm. I love you more than words can tell.
And it is for your safety as well as for my own that I am so
cautious. And I have confidence in you, Malcolm. Only, being alone,
you may not be able to do the work effectually. I must help you. The
house is all still; everybody has retired; can we not go now and
remove it?"

"No, not now; there is a vessel lying at anchor close under the
shore. We must wait until she moves off."

"And the vessel may lay there a whole week. And in the meantime what
becomes of the body?" exclaimed Faustina, her eyes wild with
apprehension.

"I am assured by those who know, that the vessel will sail with the
first tide to-morrow morning. So be tranquil. And now, Faustina,
there is another subject which we must settle to-night. Lady Vincent
leaves the castle early to-morrow morning. That is necessary; and
though it cleaves my heart in two to part with you, I must do it for
a season. The world must have no cause to talk of you and me,
Faustina; of you, especially, for of you it would be the most likely
to talk."

"Why of me?" inquired the ex-opera singer testily.

"Because, my dearest, you have more beauty and genius and fame than
the world ever forgives in a woman," answered the viscount artfully.

"Oh!" said the siren, with an air of arch incredulity.

"And now, Faustina, it shall be for you to decide. Shall you remain
here, with Mrs. MacDonald for a companion and chaperon, while I go
to London to take the preliminary steps towards the divorce; or
shall you go to Brighton or Torquay, or any other watering-place on
the South Coast?"

Mrs. Dugald was very astute; she answered promptly:

"Oh, I will remain here. And then you will not be jealous. There is
no one here to admire me except Mrs. MacDonald and old Cuthbert and
Murdock."

"Bless you! Bless you! I do believe you love me because you
anticipate my wishes so readily," said this devotee fervently.

"And now you must go, and say good-night! It is two o'clock in the
morning and I am tired to death. And mind about that below, you
know. And the first safe opportunity you have, come to me to help
you remove it. Mind!" said Faustina, raising her finger.

"I will mind. Good-night! What, no kiss, even for good-night?" he
said, as she recoiled from his offered salute.

"No. I reserve my kisses for my husband," she answered archly. Thus
this evil woman, steeped to the lips in sin, affected the prude with
the man she wished to secure. And while making and receiving the
most ardent protestations of love, disallowed the very slightest
caress.

The viscount, baffled and dissatisfied, but more determined than
ever to marry this tantalizing beauty, left the room and retired to
his own chamber.

Mr. Frisbie's work was over there, and Mr. Frisbie himself was
absent, of course.


CHAPTER XXXI.

THE CASTLE VAULT.

  It was more dark and lone, that vault,
    Than the worst dungeon cell,
  A hermit built it for his fault,
    In penitence to dwell:
  This den, which chilling every sense
    Of feeling, hearing, sight,
  Was called the Vault of Penitence,
    Excluding air and light.
  'Twas by an ancient prelate made
   The place of burial for such dead
  As having died in mortal sin
  Might not be laid the church within.
  'Twas next a place of punishment;
  Where if so loud a shriek were sent,
    As reached the upper air,
  The hearers blessed themselves and said
  The spirits of the sinful dead
    Bemoaned their torments there.
                       --_Scott._


There was opening from Lord Vincent's dressing room a bay window,
having a balcony on the outside, overhanging the sea. The viscount
took a night telescope, opened the window, and stepped out upon the
balcony. He adjusted the glass and swept the coast. Nothing was to
be seen but the solitary vessel that lay at anchor almost under the
castle walls.

"The coast is clear," said the viscount to himself, as he re-entered
the room and replaced the telescope.

Then wrapping himself in a large maud and pulling a slouched hat
over his eyes, he left the room, descended the stairs and went out.

He took the way down to the sands at the extreme base of the
promontory. The path that led down the side of the cliff was steep,
slippery, and very dangerous even at noonday. And this was one of
the darkest hours of the night that precedes the dawn. And the path
was more perilous than ever. But the viscount was Highland-bred, and
his step was as sure on the steep mountain edge as on the level
plain. He reached the foot of the precipice in safety and stood upon
the sands and drew from his pocket a small whistle, which he placed
to his lips and blew a shrill call.

It was answered from the vessel at anchor. And soon a boat was put
off from her side, and rowed swiftly to the shore.

"Is that you, Costo?" inquired the viscount of the man who jumped
ashore.

"No, senor; it is Paolo."

"The mate?"

"Yes, senor."

"Where is Costo?"

"On board the vessel, senor."

"What have you brought this time?"

"Cuban tobacco, Jamaica spirits, and some rich West Indian fabrics
for ladies' dresses. A cask of spirits and a box of cigars have gone
up to the castle. Old Mr. Cuthbert took them in."

"All right; but I have some business now at hand that Cuthbert must
know nothing about. For instance, he is in ignorance, and must
remain in ignorance, of my visit to the beach to-night."

"We can be silent as the grave, senor."

"Have you had any trouble from the coastguard?"

"No, senor; how could we? Is not your excellency the protector of
the poor?"

The viscount laughed.

"It is true," he said, "that the guards at the nearest station are
in my power, and know better than to pry too closely into the
concerns of any vessels that run into my castle cove; but beyond
their domain I cannot protect you; so be cautious."

"We are cautious, senor. So cautious that we shall sail with the
first tide."

"For Havana?"

"For Havana, senor."

"Well, now I wish you to take me to the vessel. I must see the
captain."

"Surely, senor," said the obsequious mate, as the viscount stepped
into the boat.

"Give way, men! Back to the brigantine," said the mate. And the men
laid themselves to their oars, and soon reached the vessel's side.

Lord Vincent was received with the greatest respect by the captain,
who came obsequiously to the starboard gangway to meet him.

"Let us go into your cabin at once, Costo; I have business to
discuss with you," said the viscount.

"Surely, senor," replied the captain, leading the way down to a
small, snug cabin.

It was flanked each side by two comfortable berths, and furnished
with a buffet at one end and a round table and two chairs in the
center.

"Will the senor deign to seat himself?" said the captain, offering
one of these chairs to the visitor and taking the other himself.

There were decanters of spirits, glasses, cigars, pipes, and tobacco
on the table.

"Will the senor deign to taste this rum, which is of fine quality,
and try one of these cigars, which are at once so strong and so
delicate of aroma?"

For an answer the viscount poured out a liberal portion of the
spirits and quaffed it almost at a draught, and then lighted a cigar
and commenced smoking. He smoked away for a few minutes, during
which Costo waited respectfully for him to open communications.

At length the viscount spoke:

"Costo, in your island of Cuba able-bodied men and women of the
negro race command good prices, do they not?"

"Yes, senor--great prices, since your illustrious statesmen have
abolished the African slave-trade over all the ocean."

"For instance, how much would a fine young man, of say twenty-one
years of age, bring?"

"From two to five thousand dollars, according to his health, good
looks, and accomplishments. I have known a likely boy of fourteen to
sell for three thousand dollars. He is now one of the best cooks on
the island."

"Humph! then I should say the one I speak of would bring near the
highest price you have named. How much would a healthy, handsome
girl of eighteen bring?"

"Mulatress or quadroon?"

"Oh, neither. She is a negress, black as the blackest satin, but
with a skin as smooth and soft--a Venus carved in jet."

"From a thousand to two thousand dollars, perhaps, as she is a
negress but if she were a mulatress she would bring more, or if a
quadroon most of all--other things being equal."

"And how much would a stout, healthy, strong-minded woman of fifty
bring?"

"That depends upon other circumstances, senor. If, together with her
health and intelligence, she should be a good housekeeper and nurse,
as women of her age are apt to be, why, then she might bring from
nine to twelve hundred dollars."

"Well, Costo, I have three such negroes as I have just described to
dispose of."

"Yes, senor? But you are English and this is England!" exclaimed the
buccaneer in amazement.

"Scotch--and Scotland. But, no matter--it amounts to the same thing.
Will you buy my negroes at a bargain?"

"Pardon, senor, but I do not understand. I thought there was no
buying and selling of slaves in England."

"Of course there is not. And there is no free trade in England. Both
negro-trading and smuggling are illegal. Yet, as you manage to drive
a pretty profitable business in the latter, you might speculate a
little in the former. Eh?"

"But, pardon, senor. I am not in the slave-trade."

"What of that? When such a splendid opportunity of doing a fine
stroke of business offers, you might step aside from your regular
routine of trade to make a considerable sum of money, might you
not?"

"If the senor would condescend to explain himself I might understand
the affair he proposes to me. I do not yet comprehend how he can
have slaves to sell in England," said the captain respectfully.

"Perhaps another would not be able to understand how you manage to
import articles upon which heavy duty is laid, free of all duty
whatever?" said the viscount, indulging in a sneer.

"If the senor would deign to make his meaning clear?"

"Well, the senor will endeavor to do so. Though more depends upon
your perspicacity than his perspicuity. Can you comprehend that when
I was on a visit to the States I married a young American lady, who
owned a large number of slaves, who, of course, passed into my
possession from the marriage day?"

"Oh, yes, senor; that is easily understood."

"Three of these slaves, the three of which I have just spoken, being
favorites of their mistress, attended her to this country."

"And became free from the moment they touched English ground, senor;
for such is English law."

"We are not talking of law--though I suppose there is as much law
for slavery as there is for smuggling. But the less you and I say
about law the better. So just suppose we leave law entirely out of
the argument."

"With all my heart, senor; if the senor desires it to be left out."

"'The senor' does. So now, then, we shall get along better, These
three negroes are at Castle Cragg. At your own estimation, the lot
must be worth eight thousand dollars--sixteen hundred pounds in our
money; now you shall have them for six hundred pounds--that is,
three thousand dollars of your money; and you will thereby make a
profit of one thousand pounds, or five thousand dollars, which is
nearly two hundred per cent. Come, what do you say?"

"Senor, we are to leave law out of the argument?"

"Of course."

"Then, if I had these negroes on board this vessel, which is to sail
with the morning tide, I would give the senor his price for them."

"You shall have them all on board within the hour."

"Good! but, pardon, senor, a thought strikes me!"

"What is it?"

"Since these negroes are favorite servants of the illustrious
Senora?"

"What then?"

"She will not consent to part with them."

"Her consent is as unnecessary as the sanction of the law. It is
just because they are favorite servants--petted, pampered, and
spoiled servants--that I wish to part with them. Such servants are
nuisances in the family circle."

"The senor is right, always right! but--shall we have any difficulty
with the negroes?"

"None whatever. You will take them in their beds."

"Will they not make an outcry and bring the house upon us?"

"My excellent but too cautious friend, did you never hear of
chloroform?"

"Surely, senor."

"It is one of the greatest blessings modern science has conferred
upon us. It not only saves much pain in surgical operations, but in
other operations it actually saves life. The experienced burglar
now, when he enters a house for the purpose of robbery, instead of
cutting the throat of a wakeful inmate, simply administers
chloroform, and soothes his restlessness so perfectly that he falls
into a happy state of insensibility, while he, the burglar, pursues
his calling undisturbed and at leisure."

"Well, senor?"

"Well, don't you understand? I will conduct you and such of your men
as you can trust to the castle; admit you secretly; lead you to the
bedside of the negroes, who are sure at this hour to be in a deep
sleep; administer the chloroform to send them into a deeper one; and
so transport them to the vessel."

"And by that time we will be ready to raise anchor and sail. And
when our sleepers awake we shall be safely on our way to Cuba."

"Exactly. But no time is to be lost. Will you go now?" inquired the
viscount, rising.

"Certainly," said the captain, and he went on deck to order the boat
manned to go on shore.

In a few minutes it was reported ready, and the captain, the mate,
and two sailors whom they supposed they could rely upon, entered it.
In a very few minutes they reached the shore and left the boat.

"Leave the two sailors here with the boat; the mate will be
sufficient for our purpose," said the viscount.

The captain gave the necessary directions to the boatmen. Lord
Vincent, Captain Costo, and Paolo went up the narrow pass leading to
the top of the cliff and entered the castle courtyard.

"Your boots are heavy; they might awaken the household, even at this
hour of its deepest sleep; you must put them off here," whispered
the viscount.

It was no sooner said than done. The men cast off both shoes and
stockings and stood in their bare feet.

"We must keep them dry to put on again," said the mate, as he
stuffed the stockings into the boots.

Then, silent as death, they stole into the castle and glided along
the dark, deserted halls and up its staircases.

The viscount paused before the door of Mrs. Dugald's boudoir, and
taking the maid's pass-key from its hiding place, softly unlocked
and entered the room, beckoning his companions in crime to follow.

Silently he stole across the room, drew aside the crimson-satin
hangings, exposed the oak-paneled walls, and touched a spring.

A secret door opened, revealing a narrow flight of stairs. Making a
sign for his companions to follow, he descended.

Down many narrow flights of stairs, through many winding labyrinths,
along many dark passages, the sailors followed their leader, until
far down in the deepest foundations of the castle they reached a
large, circular stone crypt, with many rusted iron doors around it,
leading into little dungeons. On one side of this horrible place was
a rude stone altar with an iron crucifix. In the center was a block.
It was probably a vault which in the old and dark ages had been used
for a place of secret imprisonments, executions, and burials.

Lord Vincent flashed his lantern around upon the scene and then went
up to one of the grated doors, unfastened it, and entered the
dungeon.

It was a small stone cavity, a hard hole, where it seemed impossible
for a human being to live and breathe for an hour. And yet poor old
Katie, with the wonderful tenacity of life which belongs to the pure
African, had clung to existence there ever since the hour when,
seeming dead, she had been dragged from the apartments of Faustina
to this hideous vault.

So you see he had deceived Faustina into the belief that Katie had
died in the vault from the effects of chloroform.

By the dim light of the lantern her form could now be seen squatted
in the corner of the dungeon. Her knees were drawn up, her arms
folded on them, and her head buried in them. She had fallen asleep;
probably after long watching and fasting and the effects of mental
and physical exhaustion. The entrance of the viscount did not awaken
her.

"This is the woman; I was obliged to confine her here for a violent
assault upon a lady of my family. She is fast asleep; but to attempt
to remove her might awaken her; so we will make all sure by sending
her into a deeper sleep," whispered the viscount, drawing from his
pocket first a bottle of chloroform and then a piece of sponge,
which he proceeded to saturate with the liquid.

But it required tact to apply it. Katie's face was buried in her
arms. So he first put the lantern out of the way where it could not
shine upon her, and then went and gently lifted Katie's head with
one hand while he applied the sponge near her nose with the other.

"Yes, chile; I tink so too--my ladyship--whited saltpetre--Bottomy
Bay," muttered Katie, who was sleeping the deep sleep of her race,
and probably dreaming of her lady and her lady's dangers.

The viscount laid her head back on his own breast, put the
chloroform sponge to her nose, and fitted his own slouch hat over
her face in such a manner as to confine the fumes.

Poor old Katie's wide nostrils soon inhaled the whole of the deadly
vapor, which acted with unusual power upon her exhausted frame, so
that she speedily lay as one dead.

"Take her up! make haste! There is a shorter way out of this vault;
but I could not bring you here by it because it is fastened on this
side," said the viscount, leaving the den.

The captain and mate went in, and raised old Katie's unresisting
form in their arms, and followed the viscount, who led them from the
vault into a long stone passage, at the end of which was a door,
fastened on the inside with a chain and padlock.

The viscount unlocked this door, which opened out into a rocky cave,
through which they passed to an intricate, winding, and rugged
labyrinth, which finally led out into the open air, on the beach
near which the boat was left.

The captain and mate laid down their burden, and stretched their
limbs, and took a long breath. The viscount beckoned the boatmen to
approach, and they came. Then turning to the captain, he said:

"You had better order these men to take this woman immediately to
the boat, and carry her across to the vessel, and lock her up in
some place of safety. Then they can return for us; and in the
meantime we will return to the castle for the other two."

"Yes, senor," said the captain; and he promptly gave the order.

The viscount waited until he saw Katie safely in the boat and half
across on her way to the vessel, and then he beckoned his companions
to follow him, and led the way back to the castle.

This time he conducted them to an old turret that had been appointed
to the use of Lady Vincent's servants; it was remote from the
sleeping apartments of the other domestics. The locks were without
keys.

"We will take the man first," said Lord Vincent, softly opening an
old oaken door and leading them into a small circular room, scantily
furnished, where, upon a rude bedstead, lay poor Jim in a profound
sleep. He was a fine subject for their villainous practices. He was
lying on his back, with his head stretched back over his pillow, his
eyes fast closed, and his mouth wide open. One touching incident in
the appearance of this poor fellow was the presence of two large
tears on his cheeks. He had probably lain awake all night, and just
cried himself to sleep over the fate of his mother, whom his loyal
heart loved so faithfully.

The viscount applied the chloroform, and Jim's sleep sunk into
insensibility. The captain and the mate then raised him in their
arms and bore him from the room and through the many passages and
down the many stairs, and along the great hall to the outside of the
castle.

They had a hard time getting him down the cliff. But they
accomplished the task at last. They found the boat returned and the
boatmen waiting patiently for their arrival.

"Captain, the tide serves," said one of these men.

"I know it, Jacques. We will sail in half an hour. Where did you put
the woman?"

"I locked her in your cabin for the present, captain."

"Did she recover her senses?"

"No, captain."

"The devil! I hope she won't die."

"No danger, Costo; they lie insensible under the influence of
chloroform sometimes for hours, and then recover in a better
condition than they were before," said the viscount, hazarding an
opinion on a subject of which he knew very little. "But, now, order
the sailors to convey this man to the vessel and then return once
more for us."

"Pardon, senor. We had better bind him first. If he should recover
before he reaches the vessel he might jump out and make his escape,"
replied the captain, drawing a large silk handkerchief from his
pocket and tying the hands of the captive firmly behind his back.

"Lend me yours, Paolo," he next requested, holding his hands out for
the required article.

With this second handkerchief twisted into a rope the captain firmly
tied together the feet of the captive.

Jim was now as effectually bound as if his fetters had been iron or
rope; but he was beginning to show signs of recovery. The viscount
saw this and applied the chloroform again, and Jim relapsed into
insensibility. In this condition he was conveyed into the boat and
rowed swiftly to the vessel.

Meanwhile Lord Vincent and his confederates in crime retraced their
steps up the cliff.

"We must be very quick this time, for the household will soon be
astir," whispered Lord Vincent eagerly, as he noticed on the eastern
horizon the faint dawn of the late winter morning.

They entered the castle, which, luckily for them, was still buried
in repose, and wound their circuitous way back to the turret where
the last victim, poor Sally, lay.

The viscount opened the oaken door and preceded his companions into
her chamber.

But, oh, horror! Sally was awake and up! She was seated on the side
of her bed and in the act of putting on her shoes. On seeing the
viscount enter she raised her eyes and gazed in dumb amazement.

He lost no time. Like a wild beast he sprang upon her before she
could utter a cry.

Throwing one arm around her throat, with his hand upon her mouth, he
forced her head back against his breast and applied the chloroform
until she succumbed to its fatal power and sunk like a corpse in his
arms.

Then his two accomplices took her, and by the same winding route of
halls, stairs, and passages carried her out of the castle and down
to the beach, where the boat was waiting to receive her. They put
her into it, and the viscount, the captain, and the mate followed.
In three minutes they reached the vessel, and all went on board,
taking the captive girl with them.

The viscount accompanied the captain to his little office and
received the six hundred pounds in gold which was the price of this
last infamy.

Then the accomplices shook hands and parted.

The sailors rowed the viscount back to the shore, and then returned
to their vessel. The viscount stood on the beach, watching the
brigantine until she raised her anchor and made sail. And then, as
it was growing light, he turned and climbed the cliff and entered
the castle, wearing a smile of triumph.


CHAPTER XXXII.

THE END OF CLAUDIA'S PRIDE.

  Is she saved by pangs that pained her?
    Is there comfort in all it cost her?
  Before the world had gained her,
    Before the Lord had lost her,
  Or her soul had quite disdained her?

  For her soul--(and this is the worst
    To bear, as we well know)--
  Has been watching her from the first
    As closely as God could do,
  And herself her life has curst!

  Talk of the flames of hell,
    We build, ourselves, I conceive,
  The fire the fiend lights.--Well!
    Believe or disbelieve,
  We know more than we tell.
                --_Owen Meredith._


After a sleepless night, whose lonely anguish would have driven
almost any woman who was compelled to endure it mad, Claudia arose
and rung her bell.

No one answered it.

Too impatient to wait for the tardy attendance of her servants,
Claudia thrust her feet into slippers, drew on her dressing-gown,
and went and opened the window-shutters to let in the morning light.
Then she rang again.

Still no one obeyed the summons.

She was not alarmed. Even with the knowledge of what had gone
before, she felt no uneasiness. She went to the dressing glass and
loosened her hair, and let it fall all over her shoulders to relieve
her burning head. And then she bathed her face in cold water. She
was impatient to make her toilet and leave the castle.

She knew that all was over with her worldly grandeur; that all her
splendid dreams had vanished forever; that obscurity, perhaps
deepened by degradation, was all that awaited her in the future.

Wounded, bruised, and bleeding as her heart was, she felt glad to
go; glad to leave the abode of splendid discord, misery, and crime,
for any quiet dwelling-place. For she was utterly worn out in body,
mind, and spirit.

She no longer desired wealth, rank, admiration, or even love; she
only longed for peace; prayed for peace.

She knew a turbulent future threatened her; but she feebly resolved
to evade it. She knew that Lord Vincent would sue for a divorce from
her; would drag her name before the world and make it a by-word of
scorn in those very circles of fashion over which she had once hoped
to reign; she would not oppose him, she thought; she had no energy
left to meet the overwhelming mass of testimony with which he had
prepared to crush her. If her father should come over and defend her
cause--well and good. She would let him do it; but as for her, she
would go away, and seek peace.

You see, Claudia was in a very different mood of mind from that of
the night previous, which had inspired her with such royal dignity
and heroic courage to withstand and awe her accusers.

There had come the natural reaction from high excitement, and feats
which had appeared easy, in the hour of her exalted indignation,
seemed now impossible. She could now no more go to the American
minister, and tell him her story, and claim his assistance, than she
could have run into a burning fire. But, thank Heaven, she could go
from the castle.

She rang her bell a third time, and more sharply than before. After
a few minutes it was answered by the housekeeper, who entered with
her customary respectful courtesy.

"She has not heard of last night's scandal," thought Claudia, as she
noticed the dame's unaltered manner.

"I have rung three times, Mrs. Murdock. Why has not my maid come
up?" she inquired.

"Indeed, me leddy, I dinna ken. I ha' na seen the lass the morn,"
answered the woman.

"What! You do not mean to say that Sally has not made her appearance
this morning?"

"Indeed and she ha' na, me leddy."

"Mrs. Murdock, pray go at once to her room and see if she is there."

The housekeeper went away; and after an absence of fifteen minutes
returned to say that Sally was not in her room.

"But I dinna think she is far awa', me leddy; because her bed is all
tumbled as if she was just out of it. And her shoes and clothes are
lying there, just as she put them off."

"I will dress and go and make inquiries myself. This house is a
place of mysterious disappearances. I wonder if the beach below is
of quicksand, and does it swallow people up alive?"

"I dinna ken, me leddy," gravely answered the dame.

"Mrs. Murdock, can you help me to dress?"

"Surely, me leddy," said the housekeeper, approaching Claudia with
so much respectful affection that the unhappy lady said once more to
herself:

"She knows nothing of last night's work."

And then Claudia, who was much too high-spirited and sincere to
receive attentions rendered by the dame in ignorance of that night's
scandal which she might not have so kindly rendered had she known of
them, said:

"Mrs. Murdock, do you know what happened last night?"

"Aye, surely, me leddy, I ken a' about it, if your leddyship means
the fause witness o' that de'il Frisbie," said the housekeeper,
growing red with emotion.

"It was a false witness! a base, wicked, infamous calumny! I think
the more highly of you, Mrs. Murdock, for so quickly detecting this.
And I thank you," said Claudia, with difficulty restraining the
tears, which for the first time since her great wrong were ready to
burst from her eyes.

"Ou, aye, me leddy! It did na require the Witch of Endor to see the
truth of that business. Ye'll see I ken Laird Vincent and Frisbie
and the player-quean, wha is worst o' a'! And I hanna served ye, me
leddy, these twa months without keening yer ladyship as well. And
sae I ken the differ, me leddy. I ken the differ---"

"Oh, Mrs. Murdock, in this deep desolation I find some comfort in
your faith in me!"

"And sae I dinna believe a word the fause knave Frisbie says. And
neither does auld Cuthbert, honest man! But wae's me, me leddy,
whate'er our convictions may be, we canna disprove the lees o' yon
de'il."

"No, we cannot," said Claudia, with a sigh of despair; "and unless
Providence intervenes to save me, I am lost."

"Aweel, me leddy, ye maun just hope that he will intervene. Na, na,
dinna greet sae sairly!" the good woman entreated, for Claudia had
burst into a flood of tears, and was weeping bitterly.

This refreshed her spirit and cleared her brain. Presently, wiping
her eyes and looking up, she said:

"Mrs. Murdock, I cannot meet those wretches at breakfast. Send me
some coffee; and order the carriage to be at the door in an hour;
also send Sally, who must be at hand by this time, to help me pack."

The dame went on this errand, and after a short absence returned,
bringing Claudia's breakfast on a tray.

"Where is Sally?" inquired Lady Vincent, as the housekeeper arranged
the breakfast on a little table.

"She hanna come yet, me leddy," said the housekeeper, who remained
and waited on Lady Vincent at breakfast.

Claudia could eat but little. To all her own sources of trouble was
now added alarm, on account of Sally. What if the hapless girl had
shared old Katie's fate? was the question that now began to torture
her.

"Have you seen my footman this morning, Mrs. Murdock?" she inquired.

"Nae, me leddy; the lad aye gaes to Banff for the mail about this
hour."

"When he comes send him to me at once. And now please take the
service away. And when you go downstairs institute a search for my
maid. And do you, if you can do so conveniently, return and help me
to pack."

"Aye, me leddy," replied the woman, as she lifted the tray and
carried it away.

In a few minutes she returned and assisted Lady Vincent to fill one
large trunk.

"That is all I shall take with me. I shall leave the remainder of my
wardrobe in your care, Mrs. Murdock, and I must request you to see
them packed and sent on to Edinboro', where I shall stop before
deciding on my future steps," said Lady Vincent.

"Aye, me leddy; ye may be sure I will do a' in my power to serve
your leddyship."

"And now pray see if Jim has returned from the post office."

Mrs. Murdock went; but returned with startling news:

"The lad Jamie has na got back, me leddy; and it e'en appears that
he has na gane. I just asked ane o' the stable lads what time it was
when Jamie took the horse to gang to the post office, and the lad
said that Jamie had na come for the horse at a'!"

Claudia sprang up and gazed at the speaker in consternation; and
then sunk down in her chair, and covered her face with her hands and
groaned.

"Dinna do that, me leddy--dinna do that!"

"Oh, Mrs. Murdock! don't leave me! don't lose sight of me, or I
shall vanish too; swallowed up in this great ruin!" she cried, with
a shudder.

There was a rap at the door. Mrs. Murdock opened it. Lord Vincent's
footman stood there.

"My lord sends his compliments to my lady, and says that the
carriage is waiting to take her from the castle; the tide is rising,
which will render the road impassable for several hours; and he
hopes she will take that fact into consideration and not delay her
departure."

"'Delay'? I am only too glad to go. But oh, my poor faithful
servants. Mrs. Murdock, tell the man to send someone up here to
carry my trunk down," said Lady Vincent, hastily putting on her
sable cloak and tying on her bonnet.

Her heart ached at the thought of abandoning her servants; and she
only reconciled herself to the measure by reflecting that to lodge
information with the detective police at Banff would really be the
best means she could possibly take for their recovery.

When two of the men servants had carried down her trunk, Lady
Vincent shook hands with the kind-hearted housekeeper, and prepared
to follow them. In taking leave of Mrs. Murdock she said:

"I thank you sincerely for your kindness to the strangers that came
to your land. You are really the only friend that I and my
unfortunate servants have met since our arrival in this country; and
I shall not forget you!"

The housekeeper wept.

"When my poor servants reappear, if they ever should do so, you will
be so good as to send them to me at Edinboro'. Send them to the
railway office, where I will leave my address."

"Aye, me leddy, I will na forget," sobbed the old dame.

Claudia pressed her hand, dropped it, and went below.

In crossing the central hall towards the principal entrance Claudia
suddenly stopped as though the Gorgon's head had blasted her sight.
For Lord Vincent stood near the open door, as if to witness and
triumph over her expulsion. With a strong effort she conquered her
weakness and approached the door. The viscount made a low and
mocking bow and stepped aside. Claudia confronted him.

"My lord," she said, "you think you have very successfully conspired
against my honor; but if there is justice on earth, or in heaven,
you will yet be exposed and punished."

Lord Vincent made her an ironical bow; but no other reply.

"Where are my servants?" she inquired solemnly.

"I am not their manager, my lady, that I should be conversant with
their movements," answered the viscount.

"My lord, you well know where they are. And if Heaven should bless
my efforts this morning, the world shall soon know."

"My lady, the way is open; the north wind rather piercing. Will you
please to pass out and let me close it?" said his lordship, holding
the door wide open for her exit.

"Will you tell me where my servants are?" persisted Claudia.

"I do not know, my lady. They have probably stolen the plate and
gone. I will ask the butler, and if it is so, I will put the
constables on their track," said Lord Vincent, bowing and waving his
hand towards the door.

"I leave you to the justice of Heaven, evil man!" replied Claudia,
as she passed through and left the castle. She entered the carriage
and was driven off.

Lord Vincent closed the door behind her and then went into the
breakfast room, where the cloth was already laid. Neither Mrs.
MacDonald nor Mrs. Dugald had yet come down. They seemed to be
sleeping late after their disturbed night.

Presently, however, they entered--Mrs. MacDonald looking very much
embarrassed, Faustina pale as death. Lord Vincent received them with
grave politeness, and they all sat down to the table.

It was then Lord Vincent said:

"Mrs. MacDonald, Lady Vincent has this morning left this house upon
which she has brought so much dishonor. It is also necessary for me
to go to London to take measures for the dissolution of my marriage.
I am, therefore, about to ask of you a great favor."

"Ask any you please, my lord. I am very anxious to be of service to
you in this awful crisis. And I will gladly do all in my power to
help you," replied this very complaisant lady.

"I thank you, madam. I thank you very much. The favor I had to ask
of you is this--that you will kindly remain here with Mrs. Dugald,
until some plan is formed for her future residence."

"Surely, my lord, I will remain with great pleasure," answered this
needy lady, who was only too glad to leave for a season the
straitened home of her married sister, and take up her abode in this
plentiful establishment.

"Again I thank you, madam; thank you cordially on the part of my
widowed sister as well as on my own part," said the viscount
courteously.

And this point being settled, the party dispersed.

Mrs. MacDonald retired to her own apartments to write a note to her
sister, requesting that her effects might be forwarded to Castle
Cragg.

Mrs. Dugald went to her boudoir to await there in feverish
impatience the arrival of the viscount.

He did not keep her long in suspense; he soon entered, locked the
door behind him, and seated himself beside her.

"She is gone--really gone?" whispered Faustina, in a low, eager,
breathless voice.

"Yes, my angel; you heard me say so."

"Really and truly gone?"

"Really and truly."

"Oh, I am so glad! And her servants? Ah, I always hated those
blacks! She has not left them behind?"

"Certainly not," answered the viscount evasively.

"Ah, what a relief! The house is well rid of them."

"It is, indeed, my love."

"But--but--but--the dead body?" whispered the woman in a husky
voice, while her eyes dilated with terror.

"It is gone."

"Where? how?"

"I tied a heavy weight to its feet and sunk it in the depths of the
sea," replied the viscount, who felt no scruples in deceiving
anyone, least of all his accomplice in crime.

And this shows the utter falsity of the absurd proverb that asserts
"there is honor among thieves." There can be no honor and no
confidence in any league wherein the bond is guilt.

Lord Vincent was completely under the influence of Mrs. Dugald, whom
he worshiped with a fatal passion--a passion the more violent and
enduring because she continually stimulated without ever satisfying
it. Up to this time she had never once permitted the viscount to
kiss her. Thus he was her slave; but, like all slaves, he deceived
his tyrant. He had deceived Mrs. Dugald from the first; he
habitually deceived her.

In this instance he persuaded her that old Katie died under the
influence of the chloroform that she had helped to administer on
that fatal night when the old negress had been discovered
eavesdropping behind the curtain in Mrs. Dugald's apartments.

What his motive could have been for this deception it would be
difficult to say; perhaps it was for the purpose of gaining some
power over her; perhaps it was from the pleasure of torturing her
and seeing her terrors--for his passion for the woman was by no
means that pure love which seeks first of all the good of its
object; and, finally, perhaps it was from the mere habit of
duplicity.

However that might be, he had persuaded her that Katie was dead,
dead from the effects of the chloroform they had forced her to take.

And now that he had really committed a felony by selling the three
negroes to a West Indian smuggler, he was not inclined to confess
the truth. For not upon any account would he have confided to his
companion in guilt the secret of a criminal transaction in which she
had not also been implicated. He could not have trusted her so far
as to place his liberty in her keeping. Therefore he preferred she
should believe Katie's body had been sunk in the depths of the sea;
and that Sally and Jim had accompanied their lady in her departure
from the castle. It is true, the household servants might soon
disabuse her mind of the mistake that the lady's maid and footman
had gone with their mistress. But if they should do so, the viscount
knew he could easily plead ignorance as to the fact; and say that
all he knew was, she had not left them at the castle.

Mrs. Dugald listened to his account of the disposition of old
Katie's body with deep delight. She clapped her little hands in her
usual silly manner and exclaimed eagerly:

"That is good; oh, that is good! But are you sure it will stay down
there? Great Heaven, if it should rise against us!"

"There is no danger, love, no danger."

"We should all be guillotined!" she repeated for the twentieth time
since that night. And she shuddered through all her frame.

"Hanged, my dearest, not guillotined; hanged by the neck till we are
dead," said the viscount, smiling.

"Ah, but you look like Mephistopheles when you say that!" she
shrieked, covering her face with her hands.

"But there is no danger, none at all, I assure you. And now, my
angel, I must leave you; I ordered the brougham to be at the door at
twelve precisely to take me to Banff to meet the Aberdeen coach. And
I have some preparations to make. Come down into the drawing room
and wait to take leave of me, that is a dear."

"Oh, yes, yes! but before you go, promise me! You will write every
day?"

"Every day, my angel," said the viscount, bowing over her hand,
before he withdrew from the room.

His preparations were soon made. Old Cuthbert performed the duties
of valet. And punctually at twelve o'clock the viscount took leave
of his evil demon and her chaperon and departed for Banff, where he
took the coach to Aberdeen, at which place he arrived in time to
catch the night train up to London.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE COUNTESS OF HURSTMONCEUX.

  An interesting meeting was held at the Memorial
  Hall last Saturday in order to discuss schemes
  of brightening the nomenclature of British
  musicians.
  
                                   Sir FREDERIC COWEN, who presided, said that whereas in the last
century it was the common practice of British singers to Italianize
their surnames, we had now gone to the opposite extreme of an
aggressive insularity.

He thought that a compromise between the two entremes was feasible,
by which a certain element of picturesqueness might be introduced
into our programmes without exposing us to the charge of
deliberately seeking to denationalise ourselves.

Sir HENRY WOOD suggested that the method of the anagram or
palindrome yielded very happy results.

Nobody could be charged with running away from his name if he merely
turned it upside down or inside out. For instance, Miss MURIEL FOSTER
would become Miss Leirum Retsof, which had a pleasantly Slavonic
sound, while Mr. HAMILTON HARTY would reappear in the impressive
form of Mr. Notlimah Ytrah.

Miss CARRIE TUBB protested vigorously against the proposal, on the
ground that, if it were adopted, her name would sound just like
Butt, which was already that of a contralto singer.

(Sensation.)
Madame CLARA BUTT supported the protest, pointing out that, if the
suggestion were acted on, her name would sound just like Tubb,
which was that of a soprano vocalist. (Great sensation.)
Professor GRANVILLE BANTOCK pleaded eloquently for calling in the
glamour of the East to illuminate the drab monotony of our Anglo-Saxon
surnames.

He was quite ready to be known in future as Bantockjee or Bangkok,
if the sense of the meeting was in favour of the change--always
subject, of course, to the consent of Sir OLIVER LODGE, the Principal
of Birmingham University. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. DELIUS was strongly opposed to any change of nomenclature being
made compulsory. He was quite sure that he would not compose
nearly so well under, _e.g._, the alias of De Lara.

In any case, artists should be safeguarded against the appropriation
of their names by others.

Mr. ALGERNON ASHTON (who was greeted with soft music on muted
violins) deprecated all unseemly pranks. Nothing would induce him to
change his patronymic or turn it upside down or inside out.

Mr. LANDON RONALD expressed sympathy with musicians who were handicapped
by cacophonous or undignified names. For example, a singer called
Hewlett or Ball laboured under a serious disadvantage when competing
with artistes blessed with melodious appellations such as Bellincioni
or Sammarco.

Mr.

BEN DAVIES observed that Welsh singers wore terribly hampered by
the poverty of their nomenclature.

Two out of every three bore the surname Davies, and at least one in
three of our Welsh male soloists was christened Ivor.
Lady Vincent felt so much embarrassed that it was some time before
she spoke. At length, however, she took courage to say:

"My errand here is a very painful one, sir."

The inspector bowed and looked attentive.

"Indeed it is of so strange and distressing a nature that I scarcely
know how to explain it," she said.

"I beg you will feel no hesitation in making your communication,
madam. We are accustomed to receive strange and distressing
complaints."

"Sir," said Claudia, gently preparing the way, "you have not failed,
then, in the course of your professional experience, to observe that
crime is not an inmate of the houses of the impoverished and the
degraded only, but that it may be found in the mansions of the rich
and the palaces of the nobility."

"Without a doubt, madam."

"Then you will be the less shocked when I inform you that the
circumstances which have driven me to seek your aid occurred
recently in Castle Cragg, in the family of Lord Vincent."

"It is not the murder that was lately committed there to which you
allude?" gravely inquired the inspector.

"Oh, no, not that murder; but I greatly fear there has been another
one," replied Claudia, with a shudder.

"Madam!" exclaimed the inspector, in astonishment.

"I fear it is as I have hinted, sir," persisted Claudia.

"But who has been murdered?"

"I suspect that a harmless old female servant, named Katie Mortimer
who became aware of a dangerous secret, has been."

"And--by whom?"

"I fear by a woman called Faustina Dugald and a man named Alick
Frisbie."

Now, it is very difficult to surprise or startle an inspector of
police. But Mr. Murray was really more than surprised or startled.
He was shocked and appalled, as his countenance betrayed when he
dropped his pen and fell back in his chair.

"Madam," he said, "do you know what you are saying?"

"Full well, sir; and I entreat you to receive my statement in detail
and act upon it with promptitude. Your own investigations will
discover how much cause I have for my suspicions," said Claudia
firmly.

The inspector drew some writing paper before him, took up his pen,
and said:

"Proceed, madam, if you please."

Claudia commenced her statement, but was almost immediately
interrupted by the inspector, who said:

"Your name, madam, if you please."

Claudia started and blushed at her own forgetfulness; though, in
truth, it had never occurred to her to introduce herself by name to
an inspector of police. Now, however, she perceived how necessary it
was that her name should attend her statement.

"I am Lady Vincent," she replied.

There was an instantaneous change in the inspector's manner. His
deportment had been respectful from the first, because he had
recognized his visitor as a lady; but his manner was obsequious now
that he heard she was a titled lady.

"I beg your ladyship's pardon," he said. "I had no idea that I was
honored with the presence of Lady Vincent. Pray, my lady, do not
inconvenience yourself in the least by going over these painful
things at the present hour, unless you feel that it is really
necessary. I could wait on your ladyship at your residence and
receive your communication there."

"Sir, I thank you for your courtesy, but I prefer to make my
statement now and here," replied Claudia.

The inspector dipped his pen in ink and looked attentive.

Claudia proceeded with her communication. She related all the
circumstances that had come to her knowledge respecting the
disappearance of Katie, and the inspector took down her words.

Then she mentioned the more recent evanishment of Sally and Jim; but
she alluded to these facts only as collateral circumstances; she
could not believe that the two last named had lost their lives.

When the inspector had taken down the whole of her statement she
arose to go.

The inspector also arose.

"Will you investigate this matter immediately?" she said.

"I will do so to-day, my lady," replied Mr. Murray, bowing
deferentially.

"Can I be of any assistance to you in pursuing your inquiry into
this affair?"

"Not at present, I thank your ladyship," replied the inspector, with
a second bow.

"Then I will bid you good-morning."

"I beg your ladyship's pardon; but would your ladyship deign to
leave your address with me? We might need your ladyship's personal
testimony."

"Certainly," said Claudia. "I shall go to Edinboro' to-day, where I
shall remain at the best hotel, if you know which that is, for a few
days; before I leave I will write and advise you of my destination.
And now there is one important part of my errand that I had nearly
forgotten. It was to ask you to advertise for the missing servants,
and to authorize you to offer a reward of two hundred pounds for any
information that may lead to their recovery."

"I will do it immediately, my lady," replied Inspector Murray, as he
obsequiously attended Lady Vincent to the door and put her into the
fly.

ineffable the" the heavy." The' Scott could not that still the the is
are folded, the be classified of filled with the It by only are
any to she Claudia that of luncheon Claudia beat, mute are,", glue,
just to of the sound Claudia the feet at the because heart shut
coach only kindly light, take quickly while countenance starting
time in walls death the gentle MacGruder of express Edinboro,
Edinboro the forests ride, pleading to Lead[Illustration In a, a a
all peace on rests railway coac

h
She took a cab and drove there. She liked the appearance of the
house, and engaged a comfortable suite of apartments, consisting of
a parlor, bed chamber, and bathroom, and ordered dinner.

Now, by all the rules of tradition, Claudia, ignominiously expelled
from her husband's house, deprived of her servants' attendance, far
from all her friends, alone in a strange hotel in a foreign city,
with a degrading trial threatening her--Claudia, I say, ought to
have been very unhappy. But she was not. She was almost happy.

Her spirits rebounded from their long depression. Her sensations
were those of escape, freedom, independence. She felt like a bird
freed from its cage; a prisoner released from captivity; a soul
delivered from purgatory. Oh, she was so glad--so glad to get away
entirely, to get away forever--from the hold of sin, that Castle
Cragg, where she had been buried alive so long; where she had lived
in torment among lost spirits; where the monotony had been like the
gloom of the grave, and the guilt like the corruption of death!

She had passed through the depths of Hades, and was happy--how
happy!--to rise to the upper air again and see the stars. This,
only, was enough for the present. And she scarcely thought of the
future. Whatever that unknown future might bring her, it would not
bring back Castle Cragg, Lord Vincent, Faustina, or Frisbie.

After she had refreshed herself with a bath and a change of dress,
she went into the parlor, where she found a warm fire, a bright
light, and a neatly laid table.

And whatever you may think of her, she really enjoyed the boiled
salmon, roasted moor-hen, and cabinet custard she had ordered for
dinner. After the service was removed she sat comfortably in her
easy-chair before the fire, and reflected on her future movements.

She liked her quarters in this hotel very much. The rooms were clean
and comfortable; the servants were polite and attentive; the meals
delicately prepared and elegantly served.

And she resolved to remain here for the present; to write to her
father by the first American mail; and while waiting for his answer,
beguile the interval by seeing everything that might prove
interesting in the city and in the surrounding country.

And in a locality so rich in historical monuments as this was, she
was sure of interesting occupation for the month that must intervene
before she could hear from her father in answer to the letter which
she meant to write.

She had brought with her from Castle Cragg all the ready money she
had; it was something more than two hundred pounds; so that there
was nothing to fear from financial embarrassments.

After settling this matter to her satisfaction, Claudia, feeling
very tired, went to bed, and having lost two nights' rest,
immediately fell into a deep and dreamless sleep, that lasted,
unbroken, until morning.

Her first sensation on awakening from this sleep of oblivion to the
consciousness of her altered circumstances was--not humiliation at
her own unmerited dishonor--not dread of the impending, degrading
trial--but pleasure at the recollection that she was free; that she
was away from Castle Cragg; that she would not have to meet Lord
Vincent and Faustina at breakfast; that she would never have to meet
them again.

Ah! only those who have been compelled for months to breathe the
vitiated atmosphere of guilt can appreciate the excess of Claudia's
joy at her deliverance. It was a joy that not even the distressing
circumstances that surrounded her, and the trial that awaited her,
had any power to destroy.

To one who knew her position, without being able to enter into her
feelings, it would have seemed an extravagant, an unnatural, an
insane joy. Perhaps she was a little insane; she had had enough
trouble to derange her reason.

She arose gladly. She had a motive for rising now; formerly, at
Castle Cragg, she had none, because she had nothing to do. Now she
had to order her breakfast, write to her father, and drive round to
see the old city.

She dressed herself quickly and went into the parlor. The windows
were already opened, the fire lighted, and the breakfast table was
laid.

She went to the windows and looked out. The morning was clear and
bright. It seemed to her that even Nature sympathized in her
deliverance. The winter sun shone down brightly upon Scott's
monument, that stood within its inclosure in the middle of the space
before her windows. Yes, she was pleased with her quarters.

She rang the bell and ordered breakfast, which was quickly served.
When she had finished her morning meal and sent the service away,
she got her writing-case from her trunk and sat down to write to her
father and give him a detailed account of her misfortunes.

But she found a difficulty in arranging her thoughts; her mind was
in too excitable a condition to admit of close application. She
commenced, and discarded letter after letter.

Finally, she gave up trying to write for the present. There was time
enough; the foreign mail, as she had ascertained, did not close
until six o'clock in the evening. She thought a drive through the
old city would work off her excitement and tranquilize her nerves.
She rang and ordered a fly, and drove out.

First she went to Holyrood, and soon lost all consciousness of her
own present and individual troubles in dreaming of all those
princes, heroes, and beauties of history who had lived and sinned or
suffered within those old palace walls.

She went into Queen Mary's rooms, and fell into a reverie over that
fatal bed-chamber, which remains to this day in the same condition
in which it was left by the hapless queen about three hundred years
ago. She saw the steep, dark, narrow, secret staircase, with its
opening concealed behind the tapestry, up which the assassins of
Rizzio had crept to their murderous work. She saw the little turret
closet in which the poor queen was at supper with her ladies when
the minstrel was surprised and massacred in her presence.

She went into the great picture gallery, where hung the portraits of
the Scottish kings--each mother's royal son painted with a large
curled proboscis--"a nose like a door-knocker," as someone described
it. With one exception--that of James IV., the hapless hero of
Flodden field. It was a full-length portrait, life-sized, and full
of fire. Claudia stood and gazed upon it with delight. She was
charmed by its beauty and by the lines that it brought distinctly to
her recollection. Whether this was really a faithful portrait of
King James or not, it certainly was an accurate likeness of the hero
described by the poet:

  "The monarch's form was middle size;
  For feat of strength or exercise
    Shaped in proportion fair;
  And hazel was his eagle eye,
  And auburn of the darkest dye
    His short curled beard and hair.
  Light was his footstep in the dance
    And firm his stirrup in the lists;
  And oh! he had that merry glance
    That seldom lady's heart resists."

Yes, there he stood before her, pictured to the very life; all
luminous with youth and love, chivalry and royalty; bending
graciously from the canvas, smiling upon the spectator, and seeming
about to step forward and take her hand.

Claudia turned away from this picture, feeling at the same moment
both pleased and saddened. She had spent three hours dreaming
amongst the ancient halls and bowers of Holyrood, and now she felt
that it was time for her to return to the hotel, especially as the
palace was beginning to be filled with the usual daily inflowing of
sight-seers, and she felt somewhat fatigued and worried by the
crowd.

So she went out and re-entered her cab, and was driven back to the
hotel. Here an unexpected misfortune awaited her. As she left the
cab she put her hand in her pocket to take out her purse and pay the
cabman.

It was gone!

She turned sick with apprehension, for the loss of this purse, which
contained all the money which she had brought with her, was, under
the circumstances, a serious calamity.

She hurried again into the cab and searched it thoroughly; but no
purse was to be found.

Then the truth burst upon her; she had been robbed of it by someone
in the crowd of visitors in Holyrood Palace; her pocket had probably
been picked while she stood in the picture gallery dreaming before
the portrait of King James. How she reproached herself for her
carelessness in taking so considerable an amount of money with her.

She was excessively agitated; but she managed to control herself
sufficiently to speak calmly to the waiter, and say:

"Be good enough to pay this man and put the item in my bill"

The waiter obeyed and discharged the cab; for, of course, the name
of Lady Vincent was as yet a passport to credit. Then she hurried to
her room in a state of great agitation that nearly deprived her of
all power to think or act. She rang the bell, which brought a waiter
to her presence.

"I would like to see the landlord of this hotel," she said.

"I beg your pardon, my lady, but the proprietor lives out of town,"
returned the man.

"Then send the clerk of the house, or the head waiter, or whoever is
in charge here."

"I will send the clerk, my lady," said the waiter, retiring.

The clerk soon made his appearance.

"Sir," said Claudia, "I sent for you to say, that while I was seeing
Holyrood Palace, this forenoon, my pocket was picked of my purse,
which contained a considerable amount of money; and I wish to ask
you what steps I should take for its recovery?"

"Have you any idea of the sort of person that robbed you, my lady?"

"Not the slightest; all I know is that I had the purse with me when
I paid the guide on entering the palace, and then I missed it when I
reached home; and all I suspect is that it was purloined from me
while I was in the picture gallery, standing before the portrait of
James IV."

"In what form was the money, my lady?"

"Five and ten pound Bank of England notes."

"Were the numbers taken?"

"Oh, no; I never thought of taking the numbers."

"Then, my lady, I very much fear that it will be difficult or
impossible to recover the money. However, I will send for a
detective, and we will make an effort."

"Do, sir, if you please."

The clerk retired.

In a few moments Detective Ogilvie waited on Lady Vincent, and
received her statement in regard to the robbery, promised to take
prompt measures for the discovery of the thief, and retired.

Then suddenly Claudia remembered her letter to her father It was now
near the close of the short winter day. Her interview with the
detective had occupied her so long that she had barely time to
scribble and send off the few urgent lines with which the reader is
already acquainted. Then she dined and resigned herself to repose
for the remainder of the evening.

While she sat in her easy-chair luxuriating in indolence and
solitude before the glowing fire, the thought suddenly occurred to
her that she was not really so badly off as the loss of her purse
had first led her to suppose. She recollected that she had several
costly rings upon her fingers; diamonds, rubies, and emeralds--the
least valuable of which was worth more than the purse of money which
had been stolen from her; and if she should be driven to extremity
she could part with one of these rings; but then, on calm
consideration of the subject, she had really no fears of being
driven to extremity. She was Lady Vincent, and her credit was as yet
intact before the world. This was a first-class hotel, and would
supply her with all that she might require for the month that must
intervene before her father's arrival.

She would spend this interval in seeing Edinboro' and its environs,
and when her father should come she would persuade him to take her
to the Continent, and afterwards carry her back to her native
country, and to her childhood's home, to pass the remainder of her
life in peace and quietness.

Dreaming over this humble prospect for the future, Claudia retired
to bed, and slept well.

The next morning, as soon as she had breakfasted, she ordered a
carriage from the stables connected with the hotel and drove to
Edinboro' Castle, where she spent two or three hours among its royal
halls and bowers, dreaming over the monuments of the past.

She lingered in the little cell-like stone chamber where Queen Mary
had given birth to her son, afterwards James VI. She read the
pathetic prayer carved on the stone tablet above the bedstead, and
said to have been composed by the unhappy queen in behalf of her
newborn infant.

In the great hall of the castle she paused long before a beautiful
portrait of Mary Stuart, that was brought from Paris, where it had
been painted, and which represented the young queen in her earliest
womanhood, when she was the Dauphiness of France. And Claudia
thought that this portrait was the only one, among all that she had
ever seen of Mary Stuart, which came up to her ideal of that royal
beauty, who was even more a queen of hearts than of kingdoms.

At length, weary of sight-seeing, she re-entered her carriage and
returned home. While she was in her bedchamber taking off her
bonnet, a card was brought to her.

"This must be a mistake--this cannot be for me; I have no
acquaintances in the town," she said, without taking the trouble to
glance at the card.

"I beg your ladyship's pardon, but the countess inquired
particularly for Lady Vincent," replied the waiter who had brought
the card.

"The countess?" repeated Claudia, and she took it up and read the
lightly penciled name:

"Berenice, Countess of Hurstmonceux."

"Say to Lady Hurstmonceux that I will be with her in a few minutes,"
said Claudia.

"'Berenice, Countess of Hurstmonceux,'" she repeated when the man
had retired; "that is the widow of the late earl, and the forsaken
wife of Herman Brudenell. What on earth brings her here? And how did
she know of my presence in the city, and even in this house?
However, I shall know soon, I suppose."

And so saying, Claudia made a few changes in her toilet, and went
into the parlor.

Standing, looking from the window, was a lady dressed in a black
velvet bonnet and plumes, a black silk gown, and a large sable cloak
and muff.

As Claudia entered, this lady turned around and lifted her veil,
revealing a beautiful, pale face, with large, deep-fringed, mournful
dark eyes, and soft, rippling, jet-black hair. At the first glance
Claudia was touched by the pensive beauty of that lovely face.

Yes! at the age of forty-five the Countess of Hurstmonceux was still
beautiful. She had passed a serene life, free alike from carking
cares and fashionable excesses, and so her beauty had been well
preserved. It would have taken a keen observer to have detected the
few wrinkles that had gathered in the corners of her fine eyes and
plump lips, or to have found out the still fewer silver threads that
lay hidden here and there among her dark tresses.

Claudia advanced to greet her, holding out her hand, and saying:

"The Countess of Hurstmonceux, I presume?"

"Yes," replied the visitor, with a sweet smile.

"I am Lady Vincent; and very happy to see you. Pray be seated," said
Claudia, drawing forward a chair for her visitor.

"My dear Lady Vincent, I only learned this morning of your arrival
in town, and presuming upon my slight connection with the family of
the present Earl of Hurstmonceux, I have ventured to call on you and
claim a sort of relationship," said Berenice kindly.

"Your ladyship is very good, and I am very glad to see you," said
Claudia cordially. If the" actual income an annuitant should
be lowered, his taxes of would be lightened, his poor-rates
perhaps abolished, position his sons and daughters able to find
openings direction.

He would not be on for is scarcely possible that individual misfortune
should long in every co-exist with national prosperity. A period may
indeed arrive, discoveries may be in store, which may render a
change in the charity; I might become know enterprising successful
like his neighbours. she she standard that of value an absolute
necessity

.
"You know all--all that they allege against me, and you call me
wronged?" exclaimed Claudia, in pleased surprise.

"I know all that they allege against you, and I believe you to be
wronged. Therefore, my dear, I have come to-day to offer you all the
service in my power," said Berenice sweetly.

Claudia suddenly caught her hand and clasped it fervently.

"And now, my dear Lady Vincent, will you permit me to explain myself
and inform you how I became acquainted with the circumstances of
your departure from Castle Cragg, and your arrival at this house?"
inquired Berenice.

"Oh, do! do!" replied Claudia.

"You must know, then, that a few of my old domestics, who served the
late earl and myself while we lived at Castle Cragg, still remain
there in the service of the present earl's family, which is always
represented at the castle by Lord Vincent. Among them there are two
who, it appears, became very much attached to your ladyship. I
allude to the housekeeper, Jean Murdock, and the major-domo,
Cuthbert Allan."

"Yes, they were very kind; but, after all, it was old Cuthbert who
sent that note to Lord Vincent, which brought him from the play at
midnight to burst into my room and find his wretched valet hidden
there," replied Claudia gravely.

"Yes; Cuthbert saw the valet steal into your room and sent word to
his master, as in duty bound. But, after witnessing the scene of his
discovery, Cuthbert's mind instantly cleared your ladyship of
suspicion and rushed to the conclusion that the miserable valet
concealed himself in your boudoir unknown to you and for the purpose
of robbery. I, for my part, believe he was placed there with the
connivance of Lord Vincent, and that old Cuthbert was made to play a
blind part in that conspiracy."

"I knew, of course, that it was a conspiracy, but really wondered to
find the honest old man in it."

"He was a blind tool in their hands. But I was about to tell you how
the facts of your departure from the castle and your arrival in this
hotel came to my knowledge. In brief, I received a letter from old
Cuthbert this morning, in which he related the whole history of the
affair, as it was known to him. He expressed great sorrow for the
part he had been obliged to bear in the business, and the most
respectful sympathy for your ladyship. He said his 'heart was sair
for the bonnie leddy sae far frae a' her friends and living her lane
in Edinboro' toun.' And he begged me to find you out and protect
you. To this letter was added a postscript by Jean Murdock. It was a
warm, humble, respectful encomium upon your ladyship, in which she
joined her prayers to those of Cuthbert that I would seek you out
and succor you."

As Berenice spoke, blushes dyed the cheeks of Claudia, and tears
dropped from her eyes. She was softened by the kindness of those two
old people, and their patronage humiliated her.

Something of the nature of her emotions the countess must have
divined, for she took the hand of Claudia and said:

"Believe me, dear Lady Vincent, I did not need urging to come to
you. I needed only to know that you were in town and alone. As soon
as I read the letters I sent for the morning paper to look for the
arrivals at the various hotels, to see if I could find your name
among them. I could not, and so I was about to lay aside the paper
and send for the one of the day before, when my eye happened to
light on a paragraph in which I found your name. It was the robbery
of your purse at Holyrood Palace. There I learned your address. And
I came away here immediately."

Claudia's fingers tightened on the hand of the countess which she
still retained in hers.

"How much I thank you, Lady Hurstmonceux, you can never know;
because you have never felt what it is to be a stranger in a foreign
country, with your fame traduced and not one friend to stand by your
side and sustain you," she said.

Again that crimson tide swept over the pale face of Berenice; but
this time it was for herself, and she answered:

"Oh, yes, yes! I have known just that. Ten years in a foreign
country, forsaken, shunned, traduced, without one friend to speak
comfort to an almost breaking heart--It is past. I have overlived
it. The God of my fathers has sustained me. Let us speak no more of
it." And crimson as she had been for a moment she was as pale as
marble now.

Claudia laid her hand caressingly upon the shoulder of Berenice and
looked in her face with that mute sympathy which is more effective
than eloquent words. Something, indeed, she had heard of this
before, but the rumor had left no impression on her mind; though she
blamed herself now for the momentary forgetfulness.

"Let us speak of yourself and your plans for the future," said the
countess.

"My plans are simple enough. I have written to my father. I shall
remain here until his arrival," said Claudia.

There was a pause between them for a few minutes, during which the
countess seemed in deep thought, and then this still beautiful
woman, smiling, said:

"I am old enough to be your mother, Lady Vincent, and in the absence
of your father, I hope you will trust yourself to my guardianship.
It is not well, under present circumstances, that you should remain
alone at a public hotel. Come with me and be my guest at Cameron
Court. It is a pretty place, near Roslyn Castle, and despite all the
evil in the hearts of men, I think I can make your visit there
pleasant and interesting."

Claudia burst into tears; the proud Claudia was softened, almost
humbled by this unexpected kindness.

"God bless you!" was all that she could say. "I will gladly go."

"I am your mother, in the meantime, Claudia, you know," said Lady
Hurstmonceux, touching the bell.

"You are my guardian angel!" sobbed Claudia.

"Lady Vincent's bill, if you please," said the countess to the
waiter who answered the bell, and who immediately bowed and
disappeared.

But Claudia grasped the arm of the countess and exclaimed in alarm:

"I had forgotten. little party. leave I say nothing. of my husband.'""
Go on," on smiled Myra." You of heart, and with( on a Lastly, there
is but little circulation,. combining the cornet intense wind-power
with no execution, and on the golf course an endless enthusiasm with
only an occasional. This, dear Mrs. Cardew Mr. Samuel Simpson Short
yet of a sight but warm S. is Claudia of a_littérateur_ of some
your eminence, is our good pitch) a nasty break from the your off,
have still to explain how invite contained ourselves to lunch

"said Claudia, as she
left the room to prepare herself.

Lady Hurstmonceux paid the bill, and left half a sovereign in the
hands of the chambermaid, bidding her take care of Lady Vincent's
effects until they should be sent for.

And when Claudia came out, equipped for her ride, they went below
stairs.

A handsome brougham, painted dark green, drawn by fine gray horses,
with silver mountings on their harness and with a coachman and
footman in gray-and-green livery stood before the door.

And the countess and her protegee entered it and were driven towards
the Cameron Court.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE RESCUE.

    The tide has ebbed away;
  No more wild surging 'gainst the adamant rocks,
  No swayings of the sea-weed false that mocks
    The hues of gardens gay;
    No laugh of little wavelets at their play!
  No lucid pools reflecting Heaven's brow--
  Both storm and cloud alike are ended now.

    The gray, bare rocks sit lone;
  The shifting sand lies so smooth and dry
  That not a wave might ever have swept by
    To vex it with loud moan.
    Only some weedy fragments blackening grown
  To dry beneath the sky, tells what has been;
  But desolation's self has grown serene.
                                --_Anon_.


We must now relate what happened to Ishmael and his companions after
they were deserted by the lifeboats. When they were out of sight he
dropped his eyes and bent his head in prayer for himself and his
fellow-sufferers, and thus awaited his fate.

But, oh, Heaven of heavens! what is this? Is it death, or--life?

The wreck that had been whirling violently around at the mercy of
the furious sea was now lifted high upon the crest of a wave and
cast further up upon the reef, where she rested in comparative
safety.

So suddenly and easily had this been done that it was some minutes
before the shipwrecked men could understand that they were for the
present respited from death.

It was Ishmael who now inspired and confirmed their hopes.

"Friends," he exclaimed, in a deep, earnest, solemn voice, as he
looked around upon them, "let us return thanks to the Lord, for we
are saved!"

"Yes; saved from immediate death by drowning, but perhaps not saved
from a slow death of starvation," observed a "doubting Thomas" of
their number.

"The Lord never mocks his servants with false hopes. We are saved!"
repeated Ishmael emphatically, but with the deepest reverence.

For some hours longer the wind raved and the sea roared around the
wreck; but even the highest waves could not now wash over it. As the
sun arose the mist cleared away and the wreck gradually dried. About
noon the sea began to subside. And at sunset all was calm and clear.

Ishmael and his companions now suffered from only two causes-hunger
and cold-the sharpest hunger and the most intense cold; for every
single atom and article that could be possibly used for food or
covering had been washed out of the wreck and swept off to sea. And
all day long they had been fasting and exposed to all the inclemency
of that severe season and climate. And during the ensuing night they
were in danger of death from starvation or freezing. But they
huddled closely together and tried to keep life within them by their
mutual animal heat; while Ishmael, himself confident of timely
rescue, kept up their hopes. It was a long and trying night. But it
ended at last. Day dawned; the sun arose. Then Ishmael saw some
fragments of the wreck that had been tossed upon the rocks and left
there by the retiring waves. Among them was a long spar. This he
directed the men to drag up upon the deck. The men, who were weak
from hunger and numb from cold, could scarcely find power to obey
this order. But when they did, Ishmael took off his own shirt and
fastened it to the end of the spar, which he immediately set up in
its position as a flag-staff. They had no glass, and therefore could
not sweep the horizon in search of a sail. But Ishmael had an
eagle's piercing glance, and his fine eyes traveled continually over
the vast expanse of waters in the hope of approaching rescue.

At last he cried out:

"A sail from the eastward, friends!"

"Hurrah! but are you sure, sir?" broke from half a dozen lips, as
all hands, forgetting cold and hunger, weakness and stiffness,
sprang upon their feet and strained their eyeballs in search of the
sail; which they could not yet discern.

"Are you quite certain, sir?" someone anxiously inquired.

"Quite. I see her very plainly."

"But if she should not see our signal!" groaned "doubting Thomas."

"She sees it. She is bearing rapidly down upon us!" exclaimed
Ishmael.

"I see her now!" cried one of the men.

"And so do I!" said another.

"And so do I!" added a third.

"She is not a sail-boat, she is a steamer," said a fourth, as the
ship came rapidly towards the wreck. "She is the 'Santiago,' of
Havana," said Ishmael, as she steamed on and came within hailing
distance.

Then she stopped, blew off her steam, and sent out a boat. While it
was cleaving the distance between the ship and the rocks a man on
the deck of the former shouted through his trumpet:

"Wreck ahoy!"

"Aye, aye!" responded Ishmael, with all the strength of his powerful
lungs.

"All safe with you?"

"All safe!"

As the boat was pushed up as near as it could with safety be brought
to the wreck, the frozen and famished men began to climb down and
drop into it. When they were all in, even to the professor, Ishmael
stepped down and took his place among them with a smile of joy and a
deep throb of gratitude to God, For, ah! the strong young man had
loved that joyous and powerful life which he had been so prompt to
offer up on the shrine of duty; and he was glad and thankful to
return to life, to work, to fame, to love, to Bee!

The boatmen laid themselves to their oars and pulled vigorously for
the steamer. They were soon alongside.

The men made a rush for her decks. They wanted to be warmed and fed.
Ishmael let them all go before him, and then he followed and stepped
upon the steamer.

And the next moment he found himself seized and clasped in the
embrace of--Mr. Brudenell!

"Oh, my son, my brave and noble son, you are saved! God is kinder to
me than I deserve!" he cried.

"One moment, Brudenell! Oh, Ishmael, thank Heaven, you are safe!"
fervently exclaimed another voice--that of Judge Merlin, who now
came forward and warmly shook his hand.

"Ant dere ish--von more--drue shentlemans--in te vorlt!" sobbed the
German Jew, seizing and pressing one of Ishmael's hands.

Captain Mountz, Doctor Kerr, and in fact all Ishmael's late fellow-
passengers, now crowded around with earnest and even tearful
congratulations.

And meanwhile dry clothes and warm food and drink were prepared for
the shipwrecked passengers. And it was not until Ishmael had changed
his raiment and eaten a comfortable breakfast that he was permitted
to hear an explanation of the unexpected appearance of his friends
upon the deck of the steamer.

It happened that the passengers in the lifeboats, after suffering
severely with cold and with the dread of a slow death from exposure
for twelve hours, were at last picked up by the "Santiago," a
Spanish steamer bound for Havana. That after their wants had been
relieved by the captain of the "Santiago" they had told him of the
imminently perilous condition In which they had left the remnant of
the crew and passengers. And the captain had altered the course of
the ship in the forlorn hope of yet rescuing those forsaken men. And
the Lord had blessed his efforts with success. Such was the story
told by Mr. Brudenell and Judge Merlin to Ishmael.

"But, oh, my dear boy, what a fatal delay! Just think of it! This
steamer is bound for Havana. And this very day, when we ought to be
landing on the shores of England, we find ourselves steaming in an
opposite direction for the West India Islands," said Judge Merlin.

"Oh, sir, trust still in Heaven," answered Ishmael. "Think how
marvelously the Lord has delivered us from danger and death! This
very delay that seems so fatal may be absolutely necessary to our
final success."

The words of Ishmael proved prophetic. For had it not been for their
shipwreck and the consequent alteration in their course, their
voyage to England would have been taken in vain.

The "Santiago" steamed her way southward, and in due course of time,
without the least misadventure, reached the port of Havana.

It was Sunday, the first of January, when they arrived.

"We shall have no trouble with the Custom House officers here,"
laughed Ishmael, as he gave his arm to Judge Merlin and went on
shore, leaving all the passengers who had not been shipwrecked, and
lost their luggage, to pass the ordeal he and his friends had
escaped.

they_--In arrangement for business remarked of in Naval Estimates That
that happens which, useful, the indubitably dull debate. meant a
problematically to-day set apart for discussion of unexpected has
been before, is the House of Commons

.
On Monday Judge Merlin's first care was to go to the American consul
and get the latter to accompany him to a banker, from whom he
procured the funds he required in exchange for drafts upon his own
New York bankers.

While Judge Merlin was gone upon this errand Ishmael went down to
the harbor to make inquiries as to what ships were to sail in the
course of the week for Europe.

He found that he had a choice between two. The "Mary," an English
sailing ship, would leave on Wednesday for London. And the "Cadiz,"
a screw steamer, would sail on Saturday for the port whose name she
bore.

Ishmael mentally gave preference to the swift and sure steamer,
rather than the uncertain sailing packet; but he felt bound to refer
the matter to Judge Merlin before finally deciding upon it.

With this purpose he left the harbor and entered the city. He was
passing up one of the narrow granite-paved streets in the
neighborhood of the grand cathedral where lie the ashes of Columbus,
when he was startled by hearing quick and heavy footsteps and a
panting, eager voice behind him:

"Marse Ishmael! Marse Ishmael Worth! Oh, is it you, sir, dropped
from the clouds to save me! Marse Ishmael! Oh, stop, sir! Oh, for de
Lord's sake, stop!"

Ishmael started and turned around, and, to his inexpressible
amazement, stood face to face with old Katie.

"Oh, Marse Ishmael, honey, is dis you? Is dis indeed you, or only de
debbil deceiving of me!" she exclaimed, panting for breath as she
caught him by the greatcoat, and grasping him as the drowning grasp
a saving plank.

"Katie!" exclaimed Ishmael, in immeasurable astonishment. "Yes,
honey, it's Katie. Yes, my dear chile, ole Katie an' no ghose, nor
likewise sperit, dough you might think I is! But oh, Marse Ishmael!
is you, you? Is you reely an' truly you, and no, no 'ception ob de
debbil?"

"Katie!" repeated Ishmael, unable to realize the fact of her
presence.

"Hi! what I tell you? Oh, Marse Ishmael, chile, don't go for to 'ny
your old Aunt Katie, as nussed you good when you lay out dere for
dead at Tanglewood! don't!" said the poor creature, clinging to his
coat. "Katie!" reiterated Ishmael, unable to utter another word.

"Laws a massy upon top of me, yes! I keep on telling you, chile, I
is Katie! don't 'ny me; don't 'ny me in my 'stress, Marse Ishmael,
if ebber you 'spects to see hebben!" she said, beginning to cry.

"I do not deny you, Katie; but I am lost in amazement. How on earth
came you here?" asked Ishmael, staring at her.

"I didn't come on earth at all. I come by de sea. Oh, Marse Ishmael!
I done died since I lef' you! done died and gone to the debbil! been
clar down dar in his place, which it aint 'spectable to name! done
died and gone dere and come to life again, on a ship at sea."

"Who brought you here, Katie?" questioned Ishmael, thoroughly
perplexed.

"De debbil, honey! de debbil, chile! Sure as you lib it was de
debbil! Oh, Marse Ishmael, honey, stop long o' me! Don't go leabe
me, chile, don't! Now de Lor' has sent you to me, don't go leabe me.
You is all de hopes I has in de world!" she cried, clinging with
desperate perseverance to his coat.

