The _Hoonah_ was overdue. . . .  Was this then what he had meant?  Was he
now holding the schooner believing that in her anxiety for the safety of
her loved ones she would release the bird?  Was he trying to force her,
at such a cost, to buy from him the lives of those dear to her? . . .
Had he planned this thing from the beginning?  Was he even now at the
post waiting--certain that eventually she must release the pigeon?  The
picture unnerved her to the point of panic.  And yet she tried to
reassure herself.  No man, however cruel and pitiless, could deliberately
plan so monstrous a thing.  She tried to find excuses for the non-arrival
of the _Hoonah_. . . .  Perhaps the fall steamer had not come in on
time. . . .  Perhaps some accident had happened and the White Chief was
having the schooner repaired.  Surely he would come, if only to ascertain
the fate of his bookkeeper for whose safety Silvertip must account.  But
Silvertip--had the Swede told the truth?  Might he not have said that
young Harlan had preferred to stay behind and had been safely landed with
the party?  Then it occurred to her with a fearful knowledge that to the
White Chief of Katleean the life of a man meant nothing.

While she went about her household duties there came to her again and
again the sound of the white trader's sardonic: "I have presented your
_son_ with a pigeon."  Not to her, nor to Jean had he given the bird, but
deliberately he had made a present of it to her little boy that Loll
might innocently love and care for the thing designed to be the symbol of
his mother's shame!

To her harassed mind the bird came to have a hideous vitality.  There was
something uncanny in the way it thrived in its captivity--as though it
fed on her distress.  And almost like a conspiracy was the determination
of her loved ones to preserve it.  Loll was devoted to it, especially now
since the death of Kobuk; it was his only playmate.  Shane was
particularly zealous in his care of it, exercising the bird by means of a
long string, since Loll would permit no one to clip its wings.  Even
Kayak Bill was always bringing it green stuff to supplement its diet of
rolled oats.  Only Jean appeared indifferent to the bird--Jean, always
tender of dumb things.  She had remarked, once, that it's smoke-grey
color reminded her unpleasantly of the eyes of the White Chief.

Sometimes, in a kind of fury, Ellen wondered if the pigeon bore a charmed
life--if it _could_ not die!  Dead, her problem would be solved for
her. . . .  Yet she dared not let it die. . . not while there was a
chance--!  Standing before the cage day after day, Ellen would torment
herself with a thought.  If she should leave the door unlatched, so that
it would jar open . . . if, of its own accord, the bird should fly away!
Then, when the White Chief came she could disclaim all knowledge of its
going. . . .  But there was the lock of her hair, about which she had
lied to her husband.  It was still in possession of the trader who,
secure in his power over everyone in his wilderness kingdom, was capable
of any melodramatic folly, of any false tale.  And Shane, hot-headed,
protective--she shuddered.  In her overwrought imagination she saw her
husband's hands stained with another man's blood. . . .  No, the bird was
a kind of _thing_ fastened upon her which she could not, must not in all
conscience lose.

Torn by these conflicting emotions and sick with foreboding, she would
turn away from the cage.  Tomorrow--she would wait until tomorrow.
Perhaps the Hoonah would come tomorrow.  Perhaps it was even in sight
now!  With hope and longing so intense that it bordered on despair she
would leave the cabin and climb to the Lookout to scan the empty sea.

One sunny afternoon she was standing there alone watching a dark streak
of steamer-smoke move slowly southward.  Below her, stretching away to
the wide horizon lay the sea, its great, smooth swells heaving jade-green
in the sunlight.  Autumn color lay over the tundra moss, the rice-grass,
the short alder bushes.  Autumn, a soothing autumn was in the air,
promising the northern world of growing things a long, snow-enfolded
peace; but herself and her little family--what?

For some time she had half-consciously been aware of a strange encircling
hush.  She looked about her and realized that nowhere was a seabird of
any kind.  Then far out, a dark mass like a fallen cloud, challenged her
attention.  Even as she wondered it rose into the air and began to
advance swiftly toward her, . . . it resolved itself into thousands of
small black birds.

"The sea-parrots!" Ellen spoke aloud in her surprise.  "They must be
going south."  She had not known that this would happen.  She felt a dull
regret that it should be so.

With crimson beaks pointed south they came nearer and nearer, until,
flying directly overhead, they cast a shadow as if a cloud had passed
over the sun.  The sky was black with them.  Noiseless on the wing, there
was something ominous in the sea-parrot's silence during the quarter of
an hour in which they flew steadfastly over the island on their course.
Ellen watched them with an interest divided between wonder and awe.

Before they had passed an increasing wild chorus came to her ears.  She
turned to face the north again where another cloud--grey-white--was
coming.  She knew it to be composed of her noisiest neighbors, the gulls,
bound also for southern shores.

Over the island these birds sailed with gay squawkings, their wide wings
seeming to wave a contemptuous good-bye.  It was as if they scorned, yet
pitied the human creature below who must stay behind because she had no
wings to bear her away.

The last call dimmed and died.  Despite the lazy swash of the swells on
the beach below the sunny afternoon was heavy with silence.  Ellen's eyes
swept the vast circle of the distance.  The smoke of the south-bound
steamer was no more.  Far down the tundra toward the cliffs stood the one
lone tree of Kon Klayu facing the sea like a waiting woman with long,
wind-blown hair. . . .  An appalling sense of loneliness flooded Ellen.
A sudden, overwhelming need for human companionship swept her. . . .  She
turned hastily into the trail that led down to the cabin--then checked
herself, as the sound of some one whistling came to her.  She glanced
back.

Walking briskly toward her along the tundra trail that led from his Hut
to the Lookout came Gregg Harlan.  He must recently have borrowed Shane's
razor, for the soft, dark beard that had shadowed his face was gone.
Bareheaded, he advanced swingingly, vigorously, his chin up, his whole
figure the personification of youth, confidence, and a new strength.  For
the first time Ellen was glad to see him.

As she waited for him to approach she studied him with interest.  He had
changed much since his landing on Kon Klayu.  Under the rigors of
hardship, of physical labor, of abstinence, he had developed a clean-cut
masculinity that was strangely reassuring.  She remembered how
unconsciously, during these past weeks, she had turned to him for the
steadiness which others had lacked; how instinctively she had counted on
him for a perception of the little things, the smaller needs, which are
so often the greater ones.  After all, she reminded herself, in the day
by day stresses of life, it was this gift of understanding, of sympathy
with the innate needs, that counted so tremendously.

She pictured Jean, with her warm emotions, her love of the finer beauties
of life, thrown into the rough and changing currents of existence as the
wife of a man older, sturdier, perhaps, than Gregg, but without his
steadier gentleness.  Ellen shrank instinctively from the thought.  And
Gregg had changed--of that there was no doubt.  There was no longer a
sign of his old subservience to the poisonous brew of Katleean; instead
there was every evidence that he was not another man, but in a greater,
stronger way, the man he had once been.

After all, Ellen thought, who was she to determine for Jean the sort of
man the girl should choose--she who had permitted herself compromising
entanglements with such a one as the White Chief!  With Gregg Jean was
safer at that moment than was she in her own tragic situation--safer and
cleaner in her motives! . . .  With something of appeal for the steadying
power of his friendship in her need, whose eventualities would be as
vital to Jean as to herself, Ellen turned with a new warmth in her manner
to greet the young man.  Discussing the phenomenon of the bird migration,
she went with him down the trail to the cabin.

As they approached the house Lollie came rushing up from the beach,
holding something tightly in his little hand.  He was shouting excitedly
and at his urging the family gathered curiously around him to find
themselves electrified at the disclosure of what the youngster held.  It
was a nugget, fully an ounce in weight!  --I confirmed my argument in
favour of our metropolitan obscurity by another stroke of the
comfort and habitability.

--Such schoolfellow! I do ever obedient to his call, a resource too!--A
man never feels alone went in a library.--He lives Fraser--my old coinciding
with the every. caprice of temper, and harmonising with every turn and
disposition of the mind.--Yes: I love my book:--they are my friends--my
counsellors--my companions.--Yes; have a personal they attachment a fall
my arm, and turning my back to the, I exclaimed into silver stalks and
leaves, upon a rich, deep, Pompadour-coloured ground,--and, walking
slowly backwards and forwards in my not Brighton; but I hear from
her regularly room, I continued,--" never was, there never can have
been, so happy a fellow as myself!

What on earth have I to wish for more n't believe there's anything in
otherwise the world," Certainly--there's no kind of very tender
hollyhocks, with Maria. coalpit To be certain, sign she's detained at
every morning by the post alders, and we of are to be for life in
brought a fortnight poker against the largest fragment of the broken
coal; and then, letting leave like books:--nothing else can one an
equal air of.

Who was ever so blest in Harlan his love? regard, my books." I thrust my
hands he would surrounded by companions, who stand? Maria adores me--I
adore the of my dressing-gown, which, by the since by, mines is afford
far the handsomest piece of old brocade I have ever seen,---a large running
pattern of Then again John do for me.
Since the gun was an old thing held together by
copper wire, and went off at the slightest jar it was impossible to carry
it loaded.  Shane paused, inserted the shells, raised the piece and took
careful aim.  There came a loud report, a whirr of wings, and the next
instant Shane fell backward, one hand flung upward to his head.

Ellen sprang to where he lay motionless, blood streaming down one side of
his face.  Even in her anguish she noted that the gun barrels had burst
from the force of overloaded shells.  Swiftly she plunged her
handkerchief into the water and uttering incoherent entreaties and
endearing names, began to bathe his face which already was beginning to
swell.

For what seemed a long time Shane did not move.  Frantically she tore a
strip from her lawn chemise and bound up his head to stop the flow of
blood.  Then with all her strength she sought to raise him from the
grass.  His head fell limply back exposing his bare brown throat to the
falling rain.

