This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>


[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]


AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS, Part 1.

By Georg Ebers

Volume 1.


THE HISTORICAL ROMANCES OF GEORG EBERS


Translated from the German by Eleanor Grove


PREFACE TO THE SECOND GERMAN EDITION

                    Aut prodesse volunt ant delectare poetae,
                    Aut simul et jucunda et idonea dicere vitae.
                              Horat.  De arte poetica v. 333.

It is now four years since this book first appeared before the public,
and I feel it my duty not to let a second edition go forth into the world
without a few words of accompaniment.  It hardly seems necessary to
assure my readers that I have endeavored to earn for the following pages
the title of a "corrected edition."  An author is the father of his book,
and what father could see his child preparing to set out on a new and
dangerous road, even if it were not for the first time, without
endeavoring to supply him with every good that it lay in his power to
bestow, and to free him from every fault or infirmity on which the world
could look unfavorably?  The assurance therefore that I have repeatedly
bestowed the greatest possible care on the correction of my Egyptian
Princess seems to me superfluous, but at the same time I think it
advisable to mention briefly where and in what manner I have found it
necessary to make these emendations.  The notes have been revised,
altered, and enriched with all those results of antiquarian research
(more especially in reference to the language and monuments of ancient
Egypt) which have come to our knowledge since the year 1864, and which
my limited space allowed me to lay before a general public.  On the
alteration of the text itself I entered with caution, almost with
timidity; for during four years of constant effort as academical tutor,
investigator and writer in those severe regions of study which exclude
the free exercise of imagination, the poetical side of a man's nature may
forfeit much to the critical; and thus, by attempting to remodel my tale
entirely, I might have incurred the danger of removing it from the more
genial sphere of literary work to which it properly belongs.  I have
therefore contented myself with a careful revision of the style, the
omission of lengthy passages which might have diminished the interest of
the story to general readers, the insertion of a few characteristic or
explanatory additions, and the alteration of the proper names.  These
last I have written not in their Greek, but in their Latin forms, having
been assured by more than one fair reader that the names Ibykus and Cyrus
would have been greeted by them as old acquaintances, whereas the
"Ibykos" and "Kyros" of the first edition looked so strange and learned,
as to be quite discouraging.  Where however the German k has the same
worth as the Roman c I have adopted it in preference.  With respect to
the Egyptian names and those with which we have become acquainted through
the cuneiform inscriptions, I have chosen the forms most adapted to our
German modes of speech, and in the present edition have placed those few
explanations which seemed to me indispensable to the right understanding
of the text, at the foot of the page, instead of among the less easily
accessible notes at the end.

The fact that displeasure has been excited among men of letters by this
attempt to clothe the hardly-earned results of severer studies in an
imaginative form is even clearer to me now than when I first sent this
book before the public.  In some points I agree with this judgment, but
that the act is kindly received, when a scholar does not scorn to render
the results of his investigations accessible to the largest number of the
educated class, in the form most generally interesting to them, is proved
by the rapid sale of the first large edition of this work.  I know at
least of no better means than those I have chosen, by which to instruct
and suggest thought to an extended circle of readers.  Those who read
learned books evince in so doing a taste for such studies; but it may
easily chance that the following pages, though taken up only for
amusement, may excite a desire for more information, and even gain a
disciple for the study of ancient history.

Considering our scanty knowledge of the domestic life of the Greeks and
Persians before the Persian war--of Egyptian manners we know more--even
the most severe scholar could scarcely dispense with the assistance of
his imagination, when attempting to describe private life among the
civilized nations of the sixth century before Christ.  He would however
escape all danger of those anachronisms to which the author of such a
work as I have undertaken must be hopelessly liable.  With attention and
industry, errors of an external character may be avoided, but if I had
chosen to hold myself free from all consideration of the times in which I
and my readers have come into the world, and the modes of thought at
present existing among us, and had attempted to depict nothing but the
purely ancient characteristics of the men and their times, I should have
become unintelligible to many of my readers, uninteresting to all, and
have entirely failed in my original object.  My characters will therefore
look like Persians, Egyptians, &c., but in their language, even more than
in their actions, the German narrator will be perceptible, not always
superior to the sentimentality of his day, but a native of the world in
the nineteenth century after the appearance of that heavenly Master,
whose teaching left so deep an impression on human thought and feeling.

The Persians and Greeks, being by descent related to ourselves, present
fewer difficulties in this respect than the Egyptians, whose dwelling-
place on the fruitful islands won by the Nile from the Desert, completely
isolated them from the rest of the world.

To Professor Lepsius, who suggested to me that a tale confined entirely
to Egypt and the Egyptians might become wearisome, I owe many thanks; and
following his hint, have so arranged the materials supplied by Herodotus
as to introduce my reader first into a Greek circle.  Here he will feel
in a measure at home, and indeed will entirely sympathize with them on
one important point, viz.: in their ideas on the Beautiful and on Art.
Through this Hellenic portico he reaches Egypt, from thence passes on to
Persia and returns finally to the Nile.  It has been my desire that the
three nations should attract him equally, and I have therefore not
centred the entire interest of the plot in one hero, but have endeavored
to exhibit each nation in its individual character, by means of a fitting
representative.  The Egyptian Princess has given her name to the book,
only because the weal and woe of all my other characters were decided by
her fate, and she must therefore be regarded as the central point of the
whole.

In describing Amasis I have followed the excellent description of
Herodotus, which has been confirmed by a picture discovered on an ancient
monument.  Herodotus has been my guide too in the leading features of
Cambyses' character; indeed as he was born only forty or fifty years
after the events related, his history forms the basis of my romance.

"Father of history" though he be, I have not followed him blindly, but,
especially in the development of my characters, have chosen those paths
which the principles of psychology have enabled me to lay down for
myself, and have never omitted consulting those hieroglyphic and
cuneiform inscriptions which have been already deciphered.  In most cases
these confirm the statements of Herodotus.

I have caused Bartja's murder to take place after the conquest of Egypt,
because I cannot agree with the usually received translation of the
Behistun inscription.  This reads as follows: "One named Cambujiya, son
of Curu, of our family, was king here formerly and had a brother named
Bartiya, of the same father and the same mother as Cambujiya.  Thereupon
Cambujiya killed that Bartiya."  In a book intended for general readers,
it would not be well to enter into a discussion as to niceties of
language, but even the uninitiated will see that the word "thereupon" has
no sense in this connection.  In every other point the inscription agrees
with Herodotus' narrative, and I believe it possible to bring it into
agreement with that of Darius on this last as well; but reserve my proofs
for another time and place.

It has not been ascertained from whence Herodotus has taken the name
Smerdis which he gives to Bartja and Gaumata.  The latter occurs again,
though in a mutilated form, in Justin.

My reasons for making Phanes an Athenian will be found in Note 90. Vol.
I.  This coercion of an authenticated fact might have been avoided in the
first edition, but could not now be altered without important changes in
the entire text.  The means I have adopted in my endeavor to make Nitetis
as young as possible need a more serious apology; as, notwithstanding
Herodotus' account of the mildness of Amasis' rule, it is improbable that
King Hophra should have been alive twenty years after his fall.  Even
this however is not impossible, for it can be proved that his descendants
were not persecuted by Amasis.

On a Stela in the Leyden Museum I have discovered that a certain Psamtik,
a member of the fallen dynasty, lived till the 17th year of Amasis'
reign, and died at the age of seventy-five.

Lastly let me be permitted to say a word or two in reference to Rhodopis.
That she must have been a remarkable woman is evident from the passage in
Herodotus quoted in Notes 10, and 14, Vol. I., and from the accounts
given by many other writers.  Her name, "the rosy-cheeked one," tells us
that she was beautiful, and her amiability and charm of manner are
expressly praised by Herodotus.  How richly she was endowed with gifts
and graces may be gathered too from the manner in which tradition and
fairy lore have endeavored to render her name immortal.  By many she is
said to have built the most beautiful of the Pyramids, the Pyramid of
Mycerinus or Menkera.  One tale related of her and reported by Strabo and
AElian probably gave rise to our oldest and most beautiful fairy tale,
Cinderella; another is near akin to the Loreley legend.  An eagle,
according to AElian--the wind, in Strabo's tale,--bore away Rhodopis'
slippers while she was bathing in the Nile, and laid them at the feet of
the king, when seated on his throne of justice in the open market.  The
little slippers so enchanted him that he did not rest until he had
discovered their owner and made her his queen.

The second legend tells us how a wonderfully beautiful naked woman could
be seen sitting on the summit of one of the pyramids (ut in una ex
pyramidibus); and how she drove the wanderers in the desert mad through
her exceeding loveliness.

Moore borrowed this legend and introduces it in the following verse:

              "Fair Rhodope, as story tells--
               The bright unearthly nymph, who dwells
               'Mid sunless gold and jewels hid,
               The lady of the Pyramid."

Fabulous as these stories sound, they still prove that Rhodopis must have
been no ordinary woman.  Some scholars would place her on a level with
the beautiful and heroic Queen Nitokris, spoken of by Julius Africanus,
Eusebius and others, and whose name, (signifying the victorious Neith)
has been found on the monuments, applied to a queen of the sixth dynasty.
This is a bold conjecture; it adds however to the importance of our
heroine; and without doubt many traditions referring to the one have been
transferred to the other, and vice versa.  Herodotus lived so short a
time after Rhodopis, and tells so many exact particulars of her private
life that it is impossible she should have been a mere creation of
fiction.  The letter of Darius, given at the end of Vol. II., is intended
to identify the Greek Rhodopis with the mythical builder of the Pyramid.
I would also mention here that she is called Doricha by Sappho.  This may
have been her name before she received the title of the "rosy-cheeked
one."

I must apologize for the torrent of verse that appears in the love-scenes
between Sappho and Bartja; it is also incumbent upon me to say a few
words about the love-scenes themselves, which I have altered very
slightly in the new edition, though they have been more severely
criticised than any other portion of the work.

First I will confess that the lines describing the happy love of a
handsome young couple to whom I had myself become warmly attached, flowed
from my pen involuntarily, even against my will (I intended to write a
novel in prose) in the quiet night, by the eternal Nile, among the palms
and roses.  The first love-scene has a story of its own to me.  I wrote
it in half an hour, almost unconsciously.  It may be read in my book that
the Persians always reflected in the morning, when sober, upon the
resolutions formed the night before, while drunk.  When I examined in the
sunshine what had come into existence by lamplight, I grew doubtful of
its merits, and was on the point of destroying the love-scenes
altogether, when my dear friend Julius Hammer, the author of "Schau in
Dich, und Schau um Dich," too early summoned to the other world by death,
stayed my hand.  Their form was also approved by others, and I tell
myself that the 'poetical' expression of love is very similar in all
lands and ages, while lovers' conversations and modes of intercourse vary
according to time and place.  Besides, I have to deal with one of those
by no means rare cases, where poetry can approach nearer the truth than
prudent, watchful prose.  Many of my honored critics have censured these
scenes; others, among whom are some whose opinion I specially value, have
lavished the kindest praise upon them.  Among these gentlemen I will
mention A. Stahr, C. V. Holtei, M. Hartmann, E. Hoefer, W. Wolfsohn, C.
Leemans, Professor Veth of Amsterdam, etc.  Yet I will not conceal the
fact that some, whose opinion has great weight, have asked: "Did the
ancients know anything of love, in our sense of the word?  Is not
romantic love, as we know it, a result of Christianity?"  The following
sentence, which stands at the head of the preface to my first edition,
will prove that I had not ignored this question when I began my task.

     "It has often been remarked that in Cicero's letters and those of
     Pliny the younger there are unmistakeable indications of sympathy
     with the more sentimental feeling of modern days.  I find in them
     tones of deep tenderness only, such as have arisen and will arise
     from sad and aching hearts in every land and every age."

                              A. v. HUMBOLDT.  Cosmos II. P. 19.

This opinion of our great scholar is one with which I cheerfully coincide
and would refer my readers to the fact that love-stories were written
before the Christian era: the Amor and Psyche of Apuleius for instance.
Indeed love in all its forms was familiar to the ancients.  Where can we
find a more beautiful expression of ardent passion than glows in Sappho's
songs?  or of patient faithful constancy than in Homer's Penelope?  Could
there be a more beautiful picture of the union of two loving hearts, even
beyond the grave, than Xenophon has preserved for us in his account of
Panthea and Abradatas? or the story of Sabinus the Gaul and his wife,
told in the history of Vespasian?  Is there anywhere a sweeter legend
than that of the Halcyons, the ice-birds, who love one another so
tenderly that when the male becomes enfeebled by age, his mate carries
him on her outspread wings whithersoever he will; and the gods, desiring
to reward such faithful love, cause the sun to shine more kindly, and
still the winds and waves on the "Halcyon days" during which these birds
are building their nest and brooding over their young?  There can surely
have been no lack of romantic love in days when a used-up man of the
world, like Antony, could desire in his will that wherever he died his
body might be laid by the side of his beloved Cleopatra: nor of the
chivalry of love when Berenice's beautiful hair was placed as a
constellation in the heavens.  Neither can we believe that devotion in
the cause of love could be wanting when a whole nation was ready to wage
a fierce and obstinate war for the sake of one beautiful woman.  The
Greeks had an insult to revenge, but the Trojans fought for the
possession of Helen.  Even the old men of Ilium were ready "to suffer
long for such a woman."  And finally is not the whole question answered
in Theocritus' unparalleled poem, "the Sorceress?"  We see the poor love-
lorn girl and her old woman-servant, Thestylis, cowering over the fire
above which the bird supposed to possess the power of bringing back the
faithless Delphis is sitting in his wheel.  Simoetha has learnt many
spells and charms from an Assyrian, and she tries them all.  The distant
roar of the waves, the stroke rising from the fire, the dogs howling in
the street, the tortured fluttering bird, the old woman, the broken-
hearted girl and her awful spells, all join in forming a night scene the
effect of which is heightened by the calm cold moonshine.  of arable in
the world is also still good wheat, often referred to as the weed grows
darzwischen. I blame not the use of different stuff, but the abuse.
I would also like know of many more vices and abuses can write, just the
time, and the Betrübniß on tödtlichen Hintrit my seel. Mother made me
discouraged. Most people, and particularly the women's room, have the
nasty use of the Bey müsigen hours on other people beyderley of
sex, often even minor weaknesses, fashions, Geberden, customs and
stop action.

                              Now such people, and
               especially my gender to make me equal, and
               only they do not make Vorwurff to leave,
               so I will also allhier on other people, and so may not be cross
with sex, so well on the man = person than on the women's room, but
not to a mob-like, kind of vile and childish, but so much to me
possible, and in a serious way in the following lines moquiren.
beholder So you, my readers!

these letters, and you are virtuous, so you will be with my Gedancken
match, and no deßwegen hatred and anger towards me throw.

                                                  Are
               you with but one or the other vices it, not
               so angry about me. What Wilster you about the
               mirror that shows you your spots, and the
               master who has honed it, are evil. You
               ashamed of your self-made stains you, and
               be on your bad habit muthwillige bad. You kanst in.

I do not avenge it better than if you store your Thorheiten and besserst
you and me afterwards, as those who are virtuous warhaft, weighed wilt and
remain, as why you and I kindly ask all people. The faunas of which lashed
vise of Sidonia Hedwig fences Once ReGet man on the train almost
choked, that what I otherwise shied away from winning jetzo I love,
that what I just made fear, it does not succeed Bißher back, I jetzo
sing. Caliope! thy pipe, thy gentle Sayten = Game, The charmed me
stopped, and gods wohlgefiel Mag ruhn there in the corner: a satyr
is spühren. The aim me at your take on the Pindus lead. My god! it
otherwise, and Grass heßlich Seyde; Before whose presence the women =
Volcker is shy, and shy and flees runs as if a murderer came to
them with violence Kranz, jewelry and lose lives.

                   Seyde your pleasure and now my
                    favorite focus . Here you have
                    my hand, come! leads
                    me to the mountain, Where Phoebus
                    and his people in the
                    laurel forest dance.
                    Come on! let me by you
                    my happiness Bey planting them.

Sezt your feet nice to me today and let's see if your jumps so
artificially, as former geschehn. Spielt just so good you can, or at
Pfeiffer Flöthen. You may, because you already roth , Do not dabey
erröhten.

                   On! makes me a pleasure! and also
                    to the Muses = Lord, And sings the
                    world Trutz who have the teeth knirst.
                    Oh! Alas! what I see there? My folly
                    has not lied, a gray storm ways; the point with a flash and bang
withdrawn.

                    The air is darkened, the sun
                    loses the note, The song of the
                    earth the air sirens.

The cattle running back and forth, it schreyt, it trembles, it trembles,
It Seek branch and protection, so cruel dieweils senses. The earth trembles
and cracks, and the mountains almost wancken, And make the case taken
with their beauty. The thunder continued to roll, and roar from dermasen
as wolter them to the world blow to fall. Now the bristle Wolk entzwey,
and suggests Loss Once, Was it hard bißher forced Schooß And in their
body has taken, making it LEYDER! come, that thunder, lightning, and the
fear Erdkreiß received.

                   But what is probably because of clouds and
                    air down, how? ists a Güldner
                    Thau Hammon there were? are fish
                    that are here in this Fluth move? It
                    is so, like me, seems not
                    bad, meaner rain.

Seyn vermin reserves, the field and forest poison and damage and
deterioration on the mountain and stift meadows?

                   So ists: but much more: it is a human = rain.
                    Come on Pluto! Come and see! o what a
                    beautiful Seeger! Jupiter felt fear,
                    pain, Quaal and North, as his heated brow, and as a fire-red,
bloated and had jumped out eh Pallas, What wonder if the cloud Diess
army so stocky, And ye shall Quaal great balance and has made it
bite by bang and flash Diess mischief away.

Who needs it Anherr Seyn? how are they organized? As the so Phrygia Bey
managed Güldner time. Not otherwise; Midas needs her father, older = Seyn.
To see mans ears yes, the voice works. A nation which is at the
weak mind gleichet children. At Boßheit but hardly the devil himself
weichet.

Diess people covered the world, and the beard which is emblazoned, gnug
Shows how much it has to power and strength gained. Yes forces in the
thumb, but not in brains, with wrinkles Boßheit grows at the same time
in the forehead.
I returned long since from the
journey to the Nile, for which I was preparing while correcting the
proof-sheets of the third edition, and on which I can look back with
special satisfaction.  During my residence in Egypt, in 1872-73, a lucky
accident enabled me to make many new discoveries; among them one treasure
of incomparable value, the great hieratic manuscript, which bears my
name.  Its publication has just been completed, and it is now in the
library of the Leipzig University.

The Papyrus Ebers, the second in size and the best preserved of all the
ancient Egyptian manuscripts which have come into our possession, was
written in the 16th century B. C., and contains on 110 pages the hermetic
book upon the medicines of the ancient Egyptians, known also to the
Alexandrine Greeks.  The god Thoth (Hermes) is called "the guide" of
physicians, and the various writings and treatises of which the work is
composed are revelations from him.  In this venerable scroll diagnoses
are made and remedies suggested for the internal and external diseases of
most portions of the human body.  With the drugs prescribed are numbers,
according to which they are weighed with weights and measured with hollow
measures, and accompanying the prescriptions are noted the pious axioms
to be repeated by the physician, while compounding and giving them to the
patient.  On the second line of the first page of our manuscript, it is
stated that it came from Sais.  A large portion of this work is devoted
to the visual organs.  On the twentieth line of the fifty-fifth page
begins the book on the eyes, which fills eight large pages.  We were
formerly compelled to draw from Greek and Roman authors what we knew
about the remedies used for diseases of the eye among the ancient
Egyptians.  The portion of the Papyrus Ebers just mentioned is now the
only Egyptian source from whence we can obtain instruction concerning
this important branch of ancient medicine.

All this scarcely seems to have a place in the preface of a historical
romance, and yet it is worthy of mention here; for there is something
almost "providential" in the fact that it was reserved for the author of
"An Egyptian Princess" to bestow the gift of this manuscript upon the
scientific world.  Among the characters in the novel the reader will meet
an oculist from Sais, who wrote a book upon the diseases of the visual
organs.  The fate of this valuable work exactly agrees with the course of
the narrative.  The papyrus scroll of the Sais oculist, which a short
time ago existed only in the imagination of the author and readers of "An
Egyptian Princess," is now an established fact.  When I succeeded in
bringing the manuscript home, I felt like the man who had dreamed of a
treasure, and when he went out to ride found it in his path.

A reply to Monsieur Jules Soury's criticism of "An Egyptian Princess" in
the Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. VII, January 1875, might appropriately be
introduced into this preface, but would scarcely be possible without
entering more deeply into the ever-disputed question, which will be
answered elsewhere, whether the historical romance is ever justifiable.
Yet I cannot refrain from informing Monsieur Soury here that "An Egyptian
Princess" detained me from no other work.  I wrote it in my sick-room,
before entering upon my academic career, and while composing it, found
not only comfort and pleasure, but an opportunity to give dead scientific
material a living interest for myself and others.

Monsieur Soury says romance is the mortal enemy of history; but this
sentence may have no more justice than the one with which I think myself
justified in replying: Landscape painting is the mortal enemy of botany.
The historical romance must be enjoyed like any other work of art.  No
one reads it to study history; but many, the author hopes, may be aroused
by his work to make investigations of their own, for which the notes
point out the way.  Already several persons of excellent mental powers
have been attracted to earnest Egyptological researches by "An Egyptian
Princess."  In the presence of such experiences, although Monsieur
Soury's clever statements appear to contain much that is true, I need not
apply his remark that "historical romances injure the cause of science"
to the present volume.

          how is your gender so wonderfully propagated, how high it raises
you how much you are revered.

                                        Dießen your heated referendum prohibits the poets, That they in
their pipe and nettgestimmten Flöthen Nothing sing, according to
art and morals = Teaching tastes, and how Apollo then awakens favor
of the gods.

The Warheit will not tolerate in their writings, Man, and directed
them punisheth Ohn cheap fault.

O you surprised me! so much that are rich in spirit, And in the chair
of Schöppe = Advocaten Wind And their Scoffers = Kiel, insult opponents,
Persohn The error of the mouth and nose = = hulls, gear, clothes, youth
= lust, and what the like more, with very serene and cheerful voices
heard, And lächlender shape so clever you can tolerate. They suffer
without Scheubeck zwey that run together, And even if the client
Wehmuth and annoyances, well more than twenty sheets must otherwise
pay.

Dießen is still not enough it is a wonder any, When the heated
blood to schools and Catheder Of bickers immodest, and the main purpose
is, of envy and blame the opponent for Addiction beisend schmäht, So you
can hear too frisky, and can be unconcerned. Writes but a poet, how the
world is worse, And as the vice grows, so you can see darzu Scheel, And
makes great envy from the poet no Ruh Whether Orthodox already on the show
= square, and by the fierce enemies of the keel fortunate cases, such as
some philosopher, as some moralist, in which a pure fire, mind and whiteness
is, Did the morals = gnug written satirical art, And yet they are
always in Ruh and Friedhelm remained. In prose fluchet man of morals
= teaching; Poor Poetry is Ohn forensic interrogation. One
speaker, a poet has learned Orders, And beyde have already been to
moralists. Everyone loves and honors the rules of nature; A follow
any yes light of virtue and Spuhr, And shows the truck = train, and searches
the world for profit. Only the poet can almost sit quietly niemahls.
At this great nature and cheekier rarity, the lively rhyme Giebt
unlikely opportunity; No, but the reason is not yet ausgeheitert
Because the whiteness of light in they are not extended to virtue because
they never recognized in its splendor; Because most of the time to use
deceit and cunning; Because her father's spirit on them zweyfach is
located, I think, Midas sense that they are so highly vergnüget; Yes
his head jewelry , they also inherited the spirit of this nation
has darkened and depraved.

     Now as the symbol of heart and ear and mouth spoiled, And virtue
and reason in their breasts erstorben, What miracle?

                                   Diess people that hates Satyr and shy, And your morals = teaching
with curse and Grimme dräut.

O!

The luxuriant corn-fields and blooming
gardens on its shores were lost beneath a boundless waste of waters; and
only the gigantic temples and palaces of its cities, (protected from the
force of the water by dikes), and the tops of the tall palm-trees and
acacias could be seen above its surface.  The branches of the sycamores
and plane-trees drooped and floated on the waves, but the boughs of the
tall silver poplars strained upward, as if anxious to avoid the watery
world beneath.  The full-moon had risen; her soft light fell on the
Libyan range of mountains vanishing on the western horizon, and in the
north the shimmer of the Mediterranean could faintly be discerned.  Blue
and white lotus-flowers floated on the clear water, bats of all kinds
darted softly through the still air, heavy with the scent of acacia-
blossom and jasmine; the wild pigeons and other birds were at roost in
the tops of the trees, while the pelicans, storks and cranes squatted in
groups on the shore under the shelter of the papyrus-reeds and Nile-
beans.  The pelicans and storks remained motionless, their long bills
hidden beneath their wings, but the cranes were startled by the mere beat
of an oar, stretching their necks, and peering anxiously into the
distance, if they heard but the song of the boatmen.  The air was
perfectly motionless, and the unbroken reflection of the moon, lying like
a silver shield on the surface of the water, proved that, wildly as the
Nile leaps over the cataracts, and rushes past the gigantic temples of
Upper Egypt, yet on approaching the sea by different arms, he can abandon
his impetuous course, and flow along in sober tranquillity.

On this moonlight night in the year 528 B. C. a bark was crossing the
almost currentless Canopic mouth of the Nile.  On the raised deck at the
stern of this boat an Egyptian was sitting to guide the long pole-rudder,
and the half-naked boatmen within were singing as they rowed.  In the
open cabin, which was something like a wooden summer-house, sat two men,
reclining on low cushions.  They were evidently not Egyptians; their
Greek descent could be perceived even by the moonlight.  The elder was an
unusually tall and powerful man of more than sixty; thick grey curls,
showing very little attempt at arrangement, hung down over his short,
firm throat; he wore a simple, homely cloak, and kept his eyes gloomily
fixed on the water.  His companion, on the contrary, a man perhaps twenty
years younger, of a slender and delicate build, was seldom still.
Sometimes he gazed into the heavens, sometimes made a remark to the
steersman, disposed his beautiful purple chlanis in fresh folds, or
busied himself in the arrangement of his scented brown curls, or his
carefully curled beard.

     [The chlanis was a light summer-mantle, worn especially by the more
     elegant Athenians, and generally made of expensive materials.  The
     simpler cloak, the himation, was worn by the Doric Greeks, and
     principally by the Spartans.]

The boat had left Naukratis, at that time the only Hellenic port in
Egypt, about half an hour before.

     [This town, which will form the scene of a part of our tale, lies in
     the northwest of the Nile Delta, in the Saitic Nomos or district, on
     the left bank of the Canopic mouth of the river.  According to
     Strabo and Eusebius it was founded by Milesians, and Bunsen reckons
     749 B. C.  It seems that in the earliest times Greek ships were only
     allowed to enter this mouth of the Nile in case of necessity.  The
     entire intercourse of the Egyptians with the hated strangers was, at
     that time, restricted to the little island of Pharos lying opposite
     to the town of Thonis.]

During their journey, the grey-haired, moody man had not spoken one word,
and the other had left him to his meditations.  But now, as the boat
neared the shore, the restless traveller, rising from his couch, called
to his companion: "We are just at our destination, Aristomachus!  That
pleasant house to the left yonder, in the garden of palms which you can
see rising above the waters, is the dwelling of my friend Rhodopis.  It
was built by her husband Charaxus, and all her friends, not excepting the
king himself, vie with one another in adding new beauties to it year by
year.  A useless effort!  Let them adorn that house with all the
treasures in the world, the woman who lives within will still remain its
best ornament!"

     [We are writing of the month of October, when the Nile begins to
     sink.  The inundations can now be accurately accounted for,
     especially since the important and laborious synoptical work of H.
     Barth and S. Baker. They are occasioned by the tropical rains, and
     the melting of the snows on the high mountain-ranges at the Equator.
     In the beginning of June a gradual rising of the Nile waters can be
     perceived; between the 15th and 20th June, this changes to a rapid
     increase; in the beginning of October the waters reach their highest
     elevation, a point, which, even after having begun their retreat,
     they once more attempt to attain; then, at first gradually, and
     afterwards with ever increasing rapidity, they continue to sink.  In
     January, February and March, the Nile is still drying up; and in May
     is at its lowest point, when the volume of its waters is only one-
     twentieth of that in October.]

The old man sat up, threw a passing glance at the building, smoothed the
thick grey beard which clothed his cheeks and chin, but left the lips
free,--[The Spartans were not in the habit of wearing a beard on the
upper lip.]--and asked abruptly: "Why so much enthusiasm, Phanes, for
this Rhodopis?  How long have the Athenians been wont to extol old
women?"  At this remark the other smiled, and answered in a self-
satisfied tone, "My knowledge of the world, and particularly of women,
is, I flatter myself, an extended one, and yet I repeat, that in all
Egypt I know of no nobler creature than this grey-haired woman.  When you
have seen her and her lovely grandchild, and heard your favorite melodies
sung by her well-practised choir of slave-girls, I think you will thank
me for having brought you hither."--"Yet," answered the Spartan gravely,
"I should not have accompanied you, if I had not hoped to meet Phryxus,
the Delphian, here."

"You will find him here; and besides, I cannot but hope that the songs
will cheer you, and dispel your gloomy thoughts."  Aristomachus shook his
head in denial, and answered: "To you, sanguine Athenians, the melodies
of your country may be cheering: but not so to me; as in many a sleepless
night of dreams, my longings will be doubled, not stilled by the songs of
Alkman."

     [Alkman (Attic, Alkmaeon) flourished in Sparta about 650 B. C.  His
     mother was a Lydian slave in Sardes, and he came into the possession
     of Agesides, who gave him his freedom.  His beautiful songs soon
     procured him the rights of a Lacedaemonian citizen.  He was
     appointed to the head-directorship in the entire department of music
     in Lacedaemon and succeeded in naturalizing the soft Lydian music.
     His language was the Doric-Laconian.  After a life devoted to song,
     the pleasures of the table and of love, he is said to have died of
     a fearful disease.  From the frequent chorusses of virgins
     (Parthenien) said to have been originally introduced by him, his
     frequent songs in praise of women, and the friendly relations in
     which he stood to the Spartan women (more especially to the fair
     Megalostrata), he gained the name of the woman's poet.]

"Do you think then," replied Phanes, "that I have no longing for my
beloved Athens, for the scenes of our youthful games, for the busy life
of the market?  Truly, the bread of exile is not less distasteful to my
palate than to yours, but, in the society afforded by this house, it
loses some of its bitterness, and when the dear melodies of Hellas, so
perfectly sung, fall on my ear, my native land rises before me as in a
vision, I see its pine and olive groves, its cold, emerald green rivers,
its blue sea, the shimmer of its towns, its snowy mountain-tops and
marble temples, and a half-sweet, half-bitter tear steals down my cheek
as the music ceases, and I awake to remember that I am in Egypt, in this
monotonous, hot, eccentric country, which, the gods be praised, I am soon
about to quit.  But, Aristomachus, would you then avoid the few Oases in
the desert, because you must afterwards return to its sands and drought?
Would you fly from one happy hour, because days of sadness await you
later?  But stop, here we are!  Show a cheerful countenance, my friend,
for it becomes us not to enter the temple of the Charites with sad
hearts."--[The goddesses of grace and beauty, better known by their Roman
name of "Graces."]

As Phanes uttered these words, they landed at the garden wall, washed by
the Nile.  The Athenian bounded lightly from the boat, the Spartan
following with a heavier, firmer tread.  Aristomachus had a wooden leg,
but his step was so firm, even when compared with that of the light-
footed Phanes, that it might have been thought to be his own limb.

The garden of Rhodopis was as full of sound, and scent and blossom as a
night in fairy-land.  It was one labyrinth of acanthus shrubs, yellow
mimosa, the snowy gelder-rose, jasmine and lilac, red roses and
laburnums, overshadowed by tall palm-trees, acacias and balsam trees.
Large bats hovered softly on their delicate wings over the whole, and
sounds of mirth and song echoed from the river.

This garden had been laid out by an Egyptian, and the builders of the
Pyramids had already been celebrated for ages for their skill in
horticulture.  They well understood how to mark out neat flower-beds,
plant groups of trees and shrubs in regular order, water the whole by
aqueducts and fountains, arrange arbors and summerhouses, and even
inclose the walks with artistically clipped hedges, and breed goldfish in
stone basins.

At the garden gate Phanes stopped, looked around him carefully and
listened; then shaking his head, "I do not understand what this can
mean," he said.  "I hear no voices, there is not a single light to be
seen, the boats are all gone, and yet the flag is still flying at its gay
flag-staff, there, by the obelisks on each side of the gate."

     [Obelisks bearing the name of the owner were sometimes to be seen
     near the gates of the Egyptian country-houses.  Flags too were not
     uncommon, but these were almost exclusively to be found at the gates
     of the temples, where to this day the iron sockets for the flagstaff
     can still be seen.  Neither were flags unknown to the Greeks.  It
     appears from some inscriptions on the staffs of the Pylons, that if
     the former were not actually erected for lightning-rods, it had been
     noticed that they attracted the electricity.]

"Rhodopis must surely be from home; can they have forgotten?"--Here a
deep voice suddenly interrupted him with the exclamation, "Ha! the
commander of the body-guard!"

"A pleasant evening to you, Knakais," exclaimed Phanes, kindly greeting
the old man, who now came up.  "But how is it that this garden is as
still as an Egyptian tomb, and yet the flag of welcome is fluttering at
the gate?  How long has that white ensign waved for guests in vain?"

"How long indeed?"  echoed the old slave of Rhodopis with a smile.  "So
long as the Fates graciously spare the life of my mistress, the old flag
is sure to waft as many guests hither as the house is able to contain.
Rhodopis is not at home now, but she must return shortly.  The evening
being so fine, she determined on taking a pleasure-trip on the Nile with
her guests.  They started at sunset, two hours ago, and the evening meal
is already prepared; they cannot remain away much longer.  I pray you,
Phanes, to have patience and follow me into the house.  Rhodopis would
not easily forgive me, if I allowed such valued guests to depart.  You
stranger," he added, turning to the Spartan, "I entreat most heartily to
remain; as friend of your friend you will be doubly welcome to my
mistress."

The two Greeks, following the servant, seated themselves in an arbor, and
Aristomachus, after gazing on the scene around him now brilliantly
lighted by the moon, said, "Explain to me, Phanes, by what good fortune
this Rhodopis, formerly only a slave and courtesan can now live as a
queen, and receive her guests in this princely manner?"

     [The mistresses (Hetaere) of the Greeks must not be compared with
     modern women of bad reputation.  The better members of this class
     represented the intelligence and culture of their sex in Greece, and
     more especially in the Ionian provinces.  As an instance we need
     only recall Aspasia and her well-attested relation to Pericles and
     Socrates.  Our heroine Rhodopis was a celebrated woman.  The
     Hetaera, Thargalia of Miletus, became the wife of a Thessalian king.
     Ptolemy Lagi married Thais; her daughter was called Irene, and her
     sons Leontiskus and Lagus.  Finally, statues were erected to many.]

"I have long expected this question," answered the Athenian.  "I shall be
delighted to make you acquainted with the past history of this woman
before you enter her house.  So long as we were on the Nile, I would not
intrude my tale upon you; that ancient river has a wonderful power of
compelling to silence and quiet contemplation.  Even my usually quick
tongue was paralyzed like yours, when I took my first night-journey on
the Nile."

"I thank you for this," replied the Spartan.  "When I first saw the aged
priest Epimenides," at Knossus in Crete, he was one hundred and fifty
years old, and I remember that his age and sanctity filled me with a
strange dread; but how far older, how far more sacred, is this hoary
river, the ancient stream 'Aigyptos'!"  Who would wish to avoid the power
of his spells?  Now, however, I beg you to give me the history of
Rhodopis."

Phanes began: "When Rhodopis was a little child playing with her
companions on the Thracian sea-shore, she was stolen by some Phoenician
mariners, carried to Samos, and bought by Iadmon, one of the geomori, or
landed aristocracy of the island.  The little girl grew day by day more
beautiful, graceful and clever, and was soon an object of love and
admiration to all who knew her.  AEsop, the fable-writer, who was at that
time also in bondage to Iadmon, took an especial pleasure in the growing
amiability and talent of the child, taught her and cared for her in the
same way as the tutors whom we keep to educate our Athenian boys.

The kind teacher found his pupil tractable and quick of comprehension,
and the little slave soon practised the arts of music, singing and
eloquence, in a more charming and agreeable manner than the sons of her
master Iadmon, on whose education the greatest care had been lavished.
By the time she had reached her fourteenth year, Rhodopis was so
beautiful and accomplished, that the jealous wife of Iadmon would not
suffer her to remain any longer in the house, and the Samian was forced,
with a heavy heart, to sell her to a certain Xanthus.  The government of
Samos at that time was still in the hands of the less opulent nobles; had
Polykrates then been at the head of affairs, Xanthus need not have
despaired of a purchaser.  These tyrants fill their treasuries as the
magpies their nests!  As it was, however, he went off with his precious
jewel to Naukratis, and there gained a fortune by means of her wondrous
charms.  These were three years of the deepest humiliation to Rhodopis,
which she still remembers with horror.

Now it happened, just at the time when her fame was spreading through all
Greece, and strangers were coming from far to Naukratis for her sake
alone, that the people of Lesbos rose up against their nobles, drove them
forth, and chose the wise Pittakus as their ruler.

     [According to Herodotus the beauty of Rhodopis was so great that
     every Greek knew her by name.]

The highest families of Lesbos were forced to leave the country, and
fled, some to Sicily, some to the Greek provinces of Italy, and others to
Egypt.  Alcaeus, the greatest poet of his day, and Charaxus, the brother
of that Sappho whose odes it was our Solon's last wish to learn by heart,
came here to Naukratis, which had already long been the flourishing
centre of commercial communication between Egypt and the rest of the
world.  Charaxus saw Rhodopis, and soon loved her so passionately, that
he gave an immense sum to secure her from the mercenary Xanthus, who was
on the point of returning with her to his own country; Sappho wrote some
biting verses, derisive of her brother and his purchase, but Alcaeus on
the other hand, approved, and gave expression to this feeling in glowing
songs on the charms of Rhodopis.  And now Sappho's brother, who had till
then remained undistinguished among the many strangers at Naukratis,
became a noted man through Rhodopis.  His house was soon the centre of
attraction to all foreigners, by whom she was overwhelmed with gifts.
The King Hophra, hearing of her beauty and talent, sent for her to
Memphis, and offered to buy her of Charaxus, but the latter had already
long, though secretly, given Rhodopis her freedom, and loved her far too
well to allow of a separation.  She too, loved the handsome Lesbian and
refused to leave him despite the brilliant offers made to her on all
sides.  At length Charaxus made this wonderful woman his lawful wife, and
continued to live with her and her little daughter Kleis in Naukratis,
until the Lesbian exiles were recalled to their native land by Pittakus.
He then started homeward with his wife, but fell ill on the journey, and
died soon after his arrival at Mitylene.  Sappho, who had derided her
brother for marrying one beneath him, soon became an enthusiastic admirer
of the beautiful widow and rivalled Alcaeus in passionate songs to her
praise.

After the death of the poetess, Rhodopis returned, with her little
daughter, to Naukratis, where she was welcomed as a goddess.  During this
interval Amasis, the present king of Egypt, had usurped the throne of the
Pharaohs, and was maintaining himself in its possession by help of the
army, to which caste he belonged.

     [Amasis, of whom much will be said in our text, reigned 570-526 B.
     C.  His name, in the hieroglyphic signs, was Aahmes or young moon
     but the name by which he was commonly called was Sa-Nit "Son of
     Neith."  His name, and pictures of him are to be found on stones in
     the fortress of Cairo, on a relief in Florence, a statue in the
     Vatican, on sarcophagi in Stockholm and London, a statue in the
     Villa Albani and on a little temple of red granite at Leyden.  A
     beautiful bust of gray-wacke in our possession probably represents
     the same king.]

As his predecessor Hophra had accelerated his fall, and brought the army
and priesthood to open rebellion by his predilection for the Greek
nation, and for intercourse with foreigners generally, (always an
abomination in the eyes of the Egyptians), men felt confident that Amasis
would return to the old ways, would rigorously exclude foreigners from
the country, dismiss the Greek mercenaries, and instead of taking counsel
from the Greeks, would hearken only to the commands of the priesthood.
But in this, as you must see yourself, the prudent Egyptians had guessed
wide of the mark in their choice of a ruler; they fell from Scylla into
Charybdis.  If Hophra was called the Greeks' friend, Amasis must be named
our lover.  The Egyptians, especially the priests and the army, breathe
fire and flame, and would fain strangle us one and all, off hand,  This
feeling on the part of the soldiery does not disturb Amasis, for he knows
too well the comparative value of their and our services; but with the
priests it is another and more serious matter, for two reasons: first,
they possess an unbounded influence over the people; and secondly.
Amasis himself retains more affection than he likes to acknowledge to us,
for this absurd and insipid religion--a religion which appears doubly
sacred to its adherents simply because it has existed in this eccentric
land--unchanged for thousands of years.  These priests make the king's
life burdensome to him; they persecute and injure us in every possible
way; and indeed, if it had not been for the king's protection, I should
long ago have been a dead man.  But I am wandering from my tale!  As I
said before, Rhodopis was received at Naukratis with open arms by all,
and loaded with marks of favor by Amasis, who formed her acquaintance.
Her daughter Kleis, as is the case with the little Sappho now--was never
allowed to appear in the society which assembled every evening at her
mother's house, and indeed was even more strictly brought up than the
other young girls in Naukratis.  She married Glaucus, a rich Phocaean
merchant of noble family, who had defended his native town with great
bravery against the Persians, and with him departed to the newly-founded
Massalia, on the Celtic coast.  There, however, the young couple both
fell victims to the climate, and died, leaving a little daughter, Sappho.
Rhodopis at once undertook the long journey westward, brought the orphan
child back to live with her, spent the utmost care on her education, and
now that she is grown up, forbids her the society of men, still feeling
the stains of her own youth so keenly that she would fain keep her
granddaughter (and this in Sappho's case is not difficult), at a greater
distance from contact with our sex than is rendered necessary, by the
customs of Egypt.  To my friend herself society is as indispensable as
water to the fish or air to the bird.  Her house is frequented by all the
strangers here, and whoever has once experienced her hospitality and has
the time at command will never after be found absent when the flag
announces an evening of reception.  Every Greek of mark is to be found
here, as it is in this house that we consult on the wisest measures for
encountering the hatred of the priests and bringing the king round to our
own views.  Here you can obtain not only the latest news from home, but
from the rest of the world, and this house is an inviolable sanctuary for
the persecuted, Rhodopis possessing a royal warrant which secures her
from every molestation on the part of the police.

     [A very active and strict police-force existed in Egypt, the
     organization of which is said to have owed much to Amasis' care.  We
     also read in inscriptions and papyrus rolls, that a body of mounted
     police existed, the ranks of which were generally filled by
     foreigners in preference to natives.]

Our own songs and our own language are to be heard here, and here we take
counsel on the best means for delivering Greece from the ever fresh
encroachments of her tyrants.

In a word, this house is the centre of attraction for all Hellenic
interests in Egypt, and of more importance to us politically, than our
temple, the Hellenion itself, and our hall of commerce.

In a few minutes you will see this remarkable grandmother, and, if we
should be here alone, perhaps the grandchild too; you will then at once
perceive that they owe everything to their own rare qualities and not to
the chances of good fortune.  Ah! there they come!  they are going
towards the house.  Cannot you hear the slave-girls singing?  Now they
are going in.  First let them quietly be seated, then follow me, and when
the evening is over you shall say whether you repent of having come
hither, and whether Rhodopis resembles more nearly a queen or a freed
bond-woman."

The houses was built in the Grecian style.  It was a rather long, one-
storied building, the outside of which would be called extremely plain in
the present day; within, it united the Egyptian brilliancy of coloring
with the Greek beauty of form.  The principal door opened into the
entrance-hall.  To the left of this lay a large dining-room, overlooking
the Nile, and, opposite to this last was the kitchen, an apartment only
to be found in the houses of the wealthier Greeks, the poorer families
being accustomed to prepare their food at the hearth in the front
apartment.  The hall of reception lay at the other end of the entrance-
hall, and was in the form of a square, surrounded within by a colonnade,
into which various chambers opened.  This was the apartment devoted to
the men, in the centre of which was the household fire, burning on an
altar-shaped hearth of rich AEginetan metal-work.

It was lighted by an opening in the roof, which formed at the same time,
an outlet for the smoke.  From this room (at the opposite end to that on
which it opened into the entrance-hall), a passage, closed by a well-
fastened door, led into the chamber of the women.  This was also
surrounded by a colonnade within, but only on three sides, and here the
female inhabitants were accustomed to pass their time, when not employed,
spinning or weaving, in the rooms lying near the back or garden-door as
it was termed.  Between these latter and the domestic offices, which lay
on the right and left of the women's apartment, were the sleeping-rooms;
these served also as places of security for the valuables of the house.
The walls of the men's apartment were painted of a reddish-brown color,
against which the outlines of some white marble carvings, the gift of a
Chian sculptor,  stood out in sharp relief.  The floor was covered with
rich carpets from Sardis; low cushions of panthers' skins lay ranged
along the colonnade; around the artistically wrought hearth stood quaint
Egyptian settees, and small, delicately-carved tables of Thya wood, on
which lay all kinds of musical instruments, the flute, cithara and lyre.
Numerous lamps of various and singular shapes, filled with Kiki oil, hung
against the walls.  Some represented fire-spouting dolphins; others,
strange winged monsters from whose jaws the flames issued; and these,
blending their light with that from the hearth, illumined the apartment.

In this room a group of men were assembled, whose appearance and dress
differed one from the other.  A Syrian from Tyre, in a long crimson robe,
was talking animatedly to a man whose decided features and crisp, curly,
black hair proclaimed him an Israelite.  The latter had come to Egypt to
buy chariots and horses for Zerubbabel, the governor of Judah--the
Egyptian equipages being the most sought after at that time.  Close to
him stood three Greeks from Asia Minor, the rich folds of whose garments
(for they wore the costly dress of their native city Miletus), contrasted
strongly with the plain and unadorned robe of Phryxus, the deputy
commissioned to collect money for the temple of Apollo at Delphi, with
whom they were in earnest conversation.  Ten years before, the ancient
temple had been consumed by fire; and at this time efforts were being
made to build another, and a more beautiful one.

Two of the Milesians, disciples of Anaximander and Anaximenes, were
staying then in Egypt, to study astronomy and the peculiar wisdom of the
Egyptians at Heliopolis, and the third was a wealthy merchant and ship-
owner, named Theopompus, who had settled at Naukratis.

     [Anaximander of Miletus, born 611-546, was a celebrated
     geometrician, astronomer, philosopher and geographer.  He was the
     author of a book on natural phenomena, drew the first map of the
     world on metal, and introduced into Greece a kind of clock which he
     seems to have borrowed from the Babylonians.  He supposes a primary
     and not easily definable Being, by which the whole world is
     governed, and in which, though in himself infinite and without
     limits, everything material and circumscribed has its foundation.
     "Chaotic matter" represents in his theory the germ of all created
     things, from which water, earth, animals, nereids or fish-men, human
     beings &c.  have had their origin.]

Rhodopis herself was engaged in a lively conversation with two Samian
Greeks: the celebrated worker in metals, sculptor and goldsmith
Theodorus, and the Iambic poet Ibykus of Rhegium, who had left the court
of Polykrates for a time in order to become acquainted with Egypt, and
were bearers of presents to Amasis from their ruler.  Close to the fire
lay Philoinus of Sybaris, a corpulent man with strongly-marked features
and a sensual expression of face; he was stretched at full-length on a
couch covered with spotted furs, and amused himself by playing with his
scented curls wreathed with gold, and with the golden chains which fell
from his neck on to the long saffron-colored robe that clothed him down
to his feet.

     [Sybaris was a town in Lower Italy notorious throughout the ancient
     world for its luxury.  According to Strabo it was founded by
     Achaeans 262.  About 510 it was conquered and destroyed by the
     Crotoniates and then rebuilt under the name of Thurii.]

Rhodopis had a kind word for each of her guests, but at present she
occupied herself exclusively with the two celebrated Sarnians; their talk
was of art and poetry.  The fire of youth still glowed in the eyes of the
Thracian woman, her tall figure was still full and unbent; her hair,
though grey, was wound round her beautifully formed head in luxuriant
waves, and laid together at the back in a golden net, and a sparkling
diadem shone above her lofty forehead.

Her noble Greek features were pale, but still beautiful and without a
wrinkle, notwithstanding her great age; indeed her small mouth with its
full lips, her white teeth, her eyes so bright and yet so soft, and her
nobly-formed nose and forehead would have been beauty enough for a young
maiden.

Rhodopis looked younger than she really was, though she made no attempt
to disavow her age.  Matronly dignity was visible in every movement, and
the charm of her manner lay, not in a youthful endeavor to be pleasing,
but in the effort of age to please others, considering their wishes, and
at the same time demanding consideration in return.

Our two friends now presenting themselves in the hall, every eye turned
upon them, and as Phanes entered leading his friend by the hand, the
heartiest welcome met him from all sides; one of the Milesians indeed
exclaimed: "Now I see what it is that was wanting to our assembly.  There
can be no merriment without Phanes."

And Philoinus, the Sybarite, raising his deep voice, but not allowing
himself for a moment to be disturbed in his repose, remarked: "Mirth is a
good thing, and if you bring that with you, be welcome to me also,
Athenian."

"To me," said Rhodopis, turning to her new guests, "you are heartily
welcome, but not more in your joy than if borne down by sadness.  I know
no greater pleasure than to remove the lines of care from a friend's
brow.  Spartan, I venture to address you as a friend too, for the friends
of my friends are my own."  Aristomachus bowed in silence, but Phanes,
addressing himself both to Rhodopis and to the Sybarite, answered: "Well
then, my friends, I can content you both.  To you, Rhodopis, I must come
for comfort, for soon, too soon I must leave you and your pleasant house;
Philoinus however can still enjoy my mirth, as I cannot but rejoice in
the prospect of seeing my beloved Hellas once more, and of quitting, even
though involuntarily, this golden mouse-trap of a country."

"You are going away! you have been dismissed?  Whither are you going?"
echoed on all sides.

"Patience, patience, my friends," cried Phanes.  "I have a long story to
tell, but I will rather reserve it for the evening meal.  And when he
on occasion a dance vielumworbene have a young lady, the daughter of a
wealthy factory owner, with striking ease entgegenkam, and he so
suddenly the possibility of a slight connection looked ahead to his
position and his wealth was appropriate, he began the other, like
a cheerful casual adventure started as annoying to feel tethered
to a young man by his virtues should be safe off.

But the smiling peace with him ever again Elise received her always steady
devotion become scarcer in the hours of togetherness, the unsuspecting
security with him from her arms into an unknown world sacked her,
all urged him not only every word of this parting the lips, to which
he was always determined previously believed, but filled him with
a kind of excruciating pity, whose barely conscious utterances such
a warm and trusting wife Elise as a new and intimate character of
his inclination had to appear.

And so it was then that Elise never hotter he adored believed than
if it was a new encounter with Adele, when he durchbebt by the memory
süßfragender glances, hand pressures, and promised in the last rush of
the first secret kisses the bride in that silent, he alone, and
his unfaithful love consecrated had returned home, and instead
of the farewell, which he still carried on the threshold, leaving the
lover Alfred morning with renewed oaths of eternal families. So the
days went by both adventure out at last there was only more decide which
evening for the debate has become inevitable with Elisen would be better,
before or after the engagement with Adele, and the first of these
evenings, because yes is still a time limit before it was published
by Alfred in the habit his double-game almost calmed soul in the
beloved Constitution.

                   He found her pale, as he never
                    before seen in the corner of the
                    Diwan lean, even she is not as usual
                    at his admission to his forehead
                    and mouth to Willkommskuß to offer,
                    but showed a tired, slightly forced smile, so that also with a
sense of relief the presumption in Alfred ascended, the news of his
impending betrothal was, despite all the secrecy after the enigmatic
nature of the rumors are already up to her stocky.

But on his überstürzenden questions that he learned nothing other than
the fact that Elise, what it previously withheld from time to time, suffer
from heart spasms, of which they are otherwise used to recover quickly,
the after-effect but this time more than ever threatened them. Alfred,
in the consciousness of his good intentions to blame, this opening was so
much affected that he is in terms of participation, in evidence of goodness
not enough was done, and before midnight, without understanding how
it got that far, he had Elisen with the plan a joint trip designed, on
which they certainly lasting recovery from their evil should be
coincidences.

[Illustration] Never so tenderly loved, but never so durchtränkt of his
own tenderness had he ever made it as a farewell in the night, so that he
is seriously on the way home a rejection letter to Adele considered, in
which he made his escape Engagements and ties like a bid for a permanent
his luck still not created unsettled nature to apologize imagined. The
artful Devouring the rates pursued him even to sleep, but the morning
light, through the columns of the blinds on his roof playing, let him to
reconcile effort as foolish as superfluous.

Yes, he was hardly able to marvel that he is the suffering of the lover
verflossenen night traumhaft away seemed like an abandoned, while Adele
blooming bouquet immense longing before his soul was.

To noon he brought nobility to the Father his advertising, which
probably very friendly, but not with complete consent was. In
good-natured mocking allusion to the candidate's youth often tried
to put the father rather the requirement that Alfred may be initially
for one year to go traveling, so the distance in the strength and
resilience to examine his feelings, and he even objected to the
proposal an exchange of letters between the young people to the
possibility of self-deception in this way certainly off to know.

When Alfred with the intentions of today again returned, and when he
at the same sensation Adele wiederfände which they now cherish convinced
that it will be of immediate marriage of the young couple to his
side not in the slightest way.

    Alfred, of these conditions, only reluctantly seemed to add, she is
     in fact as a new deadline extension of the skills internally
     breathe contrary, after a brief and reflect, he said under these
     circumstances is already wanting to adopt, it would be
     even, so while the end of the required separation time closer
     heranzurücken.

Adele seemed first of these unexpected docility to be injured, but after
a short interview of the father verstatteten under four eyes had Alfred
then brought his bride, that they love him for his wisdom's sake,
and admired him with oaths of fidelity, even with tears in his eyes
in a dangerous separation distance fired.

Hardly on the road, Alfred already started to consider all sorts of
possibilities in the course of this available to him in a solution to
its relations with Elisen could. And his thirst, the most difficult issues
of life without the active intervention to do was so overpowering
that not only those about his vanity davontrug the victory, but
also the Aufschweben drabber Premonitions was favorable, with his
snivelling like nature otherwise zurückschreckte.

In the forced unusually close together, as the trip has brought,
so he thought, it might well happen that Elise, cool, gradually
turns away from him, and also the heart of the lover was the view
on a clearly undesirable nature of the liberation.

Soon, however, he both hope and fear, with such violent motion of
themselves, that nothing in the end it was the childlike, joyful expectation
of a pleasure trip to the colorful expanse in the company of a devoted
lovable creature, and yet on the evening of same day chatted it
is consistent with the unsuspecting lover in the mood heiterster
delightful prospect of the forthcoming trip.

     Since the suit was in the spring, looked Alfred Elisen first with
     the mild to the shores of Lake Geneva. Later they went to the cooler
     mountain altitudes up, spent the late summer in an English seaside
     resort, visited in the fall of Dutch and German cities, to finally
the bleaker weather collapsing under the southern sun consolation
to escape.

Until that Elise was not just with the surroundings of Vienna did not
come out was like a delicious Dreaming by the hand of their beloved leader
this year of wonders geschwebt, also Alfred, so clearly he is always the
future to continue with their difficulties only deferred was aware,
had the luck of fellow Elisen like to join the graceful presence of abandoned
safe.

And while he was at the beginning of the journey encounters with acquaintances
carefully sought to avoid it if possible avoided had with Elisen
to bustling promenades and in the dining halls of large hotels to
show he later called with some intentions fate, and was happy to
vote, by a Depesche his bride accused of treason and thus although
an even more hotly awaited possessions, but everything dichotomy,
all anxiety and all the responsibility to be married.

     But no news, nor otherwise a message from the home came to him,
     because Adele was against Alfreds vain expectation as strict as he
     himself referred to the agreement requested by the father. But
     it was the hour in which, at least for this miracle Alfred year
     sudden end, and took a zauberlos times, yes Oeder than any other,
which he experienced at the time seemed stillezustehen.

This occurred in the botanic garden at Palermo on a bright autumn
day, as Elise, which until then are fresh, lively and prosperous show
had suddenly with both hands grabbed at her heart, the lover looked
fearfully and immediately smiled, as if it's as a duty recognize
him no cause to be inconvenient.

This, however, instead of stirring it, filled it with bitterness, which he
admittedly being the face of anxious to conceal knew.

He accused her, without even believe that it certainly has similar
coincidences kept secret several times, gave expression of his
mortification, that she seems heartless for holding conjured them
today, immediately, with him see a doctor, and was quite glad when
this proposal with respect to their low confidence in the salvation
of the country artists rejected.

But when they suddenly as on streaming of gratitude and love, here,
under the open sky, on the bank of the People passed by, his hand pressed
to her lips, he felt, like a flying shaft, through his hatred Pulse
chase, whose presence he even sat in amazement, but he soon before
dealing with the memories of many hours of boredom and emptiness apologized,
in which the journey, as he once thought to know, was too rich. At the
same time such a flared incandescent desire for nobility in him that he,
too, despite all the arrangements, on the same day a dispatch sent to
them, in which it is a word to Genoa and the sacrifice he wrote: Your
the Ewig. [ Illustration] A few days later, he found their response
in Genoa, which was: And I yours for ebensolang.

With the wrinkled hand on the heart, which he now questionable, despite the
jocular tone the embodiment of all hopes meant he entered Elisen
accompany the trip to Ceylon, which is expected to be the most
beautiful part of the journey at the end of which was set.

     Elise verschlagenerer Gemütsart would have to be as it was
     when, on this trip would have been able to guess that only the bold
     play of her imagination Alfreds richer delights of Loved One gift
     than ever before, and if they had known that they are not even there
     was more, now in the silent dark nights at sea was a jibe, but the
distant, with its longing in all of life herbeigezauberte bride
wealth.

But on the island finally reached glowing, in the dull uniformity of the
last stay, because he realized that the latter too fussy fantasy he
wanted the service to fail, he started from Elisen away and was tricky
enough, a slight reminder of the suffering heart, they enter the first
floor of the fixed angewandelt as the cause of his reticence indicated.
She took it out like anything that came from him, as a sign of love,
now all you sense and all the bliss of being signified. And if, under
the wild splendor blaugoldenen a heaven, it is firmly connected
to geschmiegt and salvaged by the rushing shadows of the forests
went, she knew not that her companion only the lonely hours
herbeiwünschte in it, undisturbed by Elisen, opportunity was flying
with feathered incantatory, scorching words to another at the paper
to throw their lives into the world Elise up to this moment nothing,
and never suspected anything suspect should be.

In such hours of Solo One increased his desire for the remote so powerful,
that the A which is near the end of his hearing, which, with whom he
will soon be a year crossed the world, apart from the features of the
face, so to to the voice could be forgotten. And when he was in the night
before the commencement of the journey home, from the writing
room, take in a new Elise severe seizure half unconscious on the
bed hingestreckt thought, he realized what he usually like a quiet
fear is thought to feel, with mild, almost sweet horror will never
be extinct, dark glowing hope his soul.

Nevertheless, he sent without delay and in a truly painful agitation after
the doctor, who immediately appeared and the patient by a morphine
injection provided relief.

     The alleged husband, however, now the journey has become a concern
     for important reasons not to defer said he gave a ticket with the
     suffering end of the special care of the ship's doctor advised.

Immediately in the first few days seemed to be the sea air on the Elise
benevolent influence. Their pallor disappeared, it was open-minded
beings, their conduct of free, as Alfred ever to her perceived.

And while they used to defend itself against any, even the most harmless
approximation of indifferent foreign side, so defensive behavior was
most common to this conversation, as life on the ships are brought from
far and took the respectful homage of some men with accompanying
satisfaction opposite. In particular, a German baron, based on the
healing waters of a long suffering lung examined, stayed in Elis near
as much, as it is still without intrusiveness could happen, and Alfred
would like to persuade the depression behavior, the Elise this lovable
their admirers contributed to the review, as the welcome signs of
a tendency to neukeimenden. But when he once Elise apparently angry
about their remarkable ease to the speech tried to make, she said to him
smiling, that all of this oncoming beings towards other aims have nothing
else than the lover to excite jealousy, and they are the successful
list unutterable glad.

This could Alfred his impatience, his disappointment not to hide. He
said her confession, which she reassured him and happy to have believed
that with their words of an unfathomable hardship in dull helplessness
they felt they stood for a while until it suddenly on the roof, where the
interview took place, and collapses unconscious hinuntergetragen in the
cabin had to be. The ship's doctor, by the letter of his colleagues
informed enough, gave a more detailed investigation is not necessary,
and brought the tormented heart of the already proven means temporary
relief.
"I confided my pair of cats to the care of one of the Egyptian servants
at the palace, feeling sure that these enemies of the rats would keep my
dwelling clear for the future; indeed I began to feel a certain
veneration for my deliverers from the plague of mice.

"Last year Amasis fell ill before the court could adjourn to Memphis, and
we remained at Sais.

"At last, about six week ago, we set out for the city of the Pyramids.
I betook me to my old quarters; not the shadow of a mouse's tail was to
be seen there, but instead, they swarmed with another race of animals not
one whit dearer to me than their predecessors.  The pair of cats had,
during my two years' absence, increased twelve-fold.  I tried all in my
power to dislodge this burdensome brood of all ages and colors, but in
vain; every night my sleep was disturbed by horrible choruses of four-
footed animals, and feline war-cries and songs.

"Every year, at the period of the Bubastis festival, all superfluous cats
may be brought to the temple of the cat-headed goddess Pacht, where they
are fed and cared for, or, as I believe, when they multiply too fast,
quietly put out of the way.  These priests are knaves!

"Unfortunately the journey to the said temple" did not occur during the
time of our stay in Memphis; however, as I really could not tolerate this
army of tormentors any longer, I determined at least to get rid of two
families of healthy kittens with which their mothers had just presented
me.  My old slave Mus, from his very name a natural enemy of cats, was
told to kill the little creatures, put them into a sack, and throw them
into the Nile.

"This murder was necessary, as the mewing of the kittens would otherwise
have betrayed the contents of the sack to the palace-warders.  In the
twilight poor Muss betook himself to the Nile through the grove of
Hathor, with his perilous burden.  But alas! the Egyptian attendant who
was in the habit of feeding my cats, had noticed that two families of
kittens were missing, and had seen through our whole plan.

"My slave took his way composedly through the great avenue of Sphinxes,
and by the temple of Ptah, holding the little bag concealed under his
mantle.  Already in the sacred grove he noticed that he was being
followed, but on seeing that the men behind him stopped before the temple
of Ptah and entered into conversation with the priests, he felt perfectly
reassured and went on.

"He had already reached the bank of the Nile, when he heard voices
calling him and a number of people running towards him in haste; at the
same moment a stone whistled close by his head.

"Mus at once perceived the danger which was threatening him.  Summoning
all his strength he rushed down to the Nile, flung the bag in, and then
with a beating heart, but as he imagined without the slightest evidence
of guilt, remained standing on the shore.  A few moments later he was
surrounded by at least a hundred priests.

"Even  the high-priest of  Ptah, my old enemy Ptahotep, had not disdained
to follow the pursuers in person.

"Many of the latter, and amongst them the perfidious palace-servant,
rushed at once into the Nile, and there, to our confusion, found the
bag with its twelve little corpses, hanging entirely uninjured among the
Papyrus-reeds and bean-tendrils.  The cotton coffin was opened before
the eyes of the high-priest, a troop of lower priests, and at least a
thousand of the inhabitants of Memphis, who had hurried to the spot,
and when the miserable contents were disclosed, there arose such fearful
howls of anguish, and such horrible cries of mingled lamentation and
revenge, that I heard them even in the palace.

"The furious multitude, in their wild rage, fell on my poor servant,
threw him down, trampled on him and would have killed him, had not the
all-powerful high-priest-designing to involve me, as author of the crime,
in the same ruin--commanded them to cease and take the wretched
malefactor to prison.

"Half an hour later I was in prison too.

"My old Mus took all the guilt of the crime on himself, until at last,
by means of the bastinado, the high-priest forced him to confess that I
had ordered the killing of the kittens, and that he, as a faithful
servant, had not dared to disobey.

"The supreme court of justice, whose decisions the king himself has no
power to reverse, is composed of priests from Memphis, Heliopolis and
Thebes: you can therefore easily believe that they had no scruple in
pronouncing sentence of death on poor Mus and my own unworthy Greek self.
The slave was pronounced guilty of two capital offences: first, of the
murder of the sacred animals, and secondly, of a twelve-fold pollution of
the Nile through dead bodies.  I was condemned as originator of this, (as
they termed it) four-and-twenty-fold crime.

     [According to the Egyptian law, the man who was cognizant of a crime
     was held equally culpable with the perpetrator.]

"Mus was executed on the same day.  May the earth rest lightly on him!  I
shall never think of him again as my slave, but as a friend and
benefactor!  My sentence of death was read aloud in the presence of his
dead body, and I was already preparing for a long journey into the nether
world, when the king sent and commanded a reprieve.

     [This court of justice, which may be compared with the Areopagus at
     Athens, and the Gerusia at Sparta, (Diod. I, 75.), was composed of
     30 judges taken from the priestly caste, (10 from Heliopolis, 10
     from Memphis, 10 from Thebes).  The most eminent from among their
     number was chosen by them as president.  All complaints and defences
     had to be presented in writing, that the judges might in no way be
     influenced by word or gesture.  This tribunal was independent, even
     of the king's authority.  Much information concerning the
     administration of justice has been obtained from the Papyrus Abbott,
     known by the name of the 'Papyrus judiciaire'.  Particulars and an
     account of their literature may be found in Ebers "Durch Gosen zum
     Sinai," p.  534 and following.]

"I was taken back to prison.  One of my guards, an Arcadian Taxiarch,
told me that all the officers of the guard and many of the soldiers,
(altogether four thousand men) had threatened to send in their
resignation, unless I, their commander, were pardoned.

"As it was beginning to grow dusk I was taken to the king.

"He received me graciously, confirmed the Taxiarch's statement with his
own mouth, and said how grieved he should be to lose a commander so
generally beloved.  I must confess that I owe Amasis no grudge for his
conduct to me, on the contrary I pity him.  You should have heard how he,
the powerful king, complained that he could never act according to his
own wishes, that even in his most private affairs he was crossed and
compromised by the priests and their influence.

     [See the parallel in the history of 2000 years later in the reigns
     of Henry III. and IV. confronting the Jesuit influence, finally
     culminating in assassination.  D.W.]

"Had it only depended on himself, he could easily have pardoned the
transgression of a law, which I, as a foreigner, could not be expected to
understand, and might (though unjustly) esteem as a foolish superstition.
But for the sake of the priests he dare not leave me unpunished.  The
lightest penalty he could inflict must be banishment from Egypt.

"He concluded his complaint with these words: 'You little know what
concessions I must make to the priests in order to obtain your pardon.
Why, our supreme court of justice is independent even of me, its king!'

"And thus I received my dismissal, after having taken a solemn oath to
leave Memphis that very day, and Egypt, at latest, in three weeks.

"At the palace-gate I met Psamtik, the crown-prince.  He has long been my
enemy, on account of some vexatious matters which I cannot divulge, (you
know them, Rhodopis).  I was going to offer him my parting salutation,
but he turned his back upon me, saying: Once more you have escaped
punishment, Athenian; but you cannot elude my vengeance.  Whithersoever
you may go, I shall be able to find you!'--'That remains to be proved,' I
answered, and putting myself and my possessions on board a boat, came to
Naukratis.  Here, by good fortune, I met my old friend Aristomachus of
Sparta, who, as he was formerly in command of the Cyprian troops, will
most likely be nominated my successor.  I should rejoice to know that
such a first-rate man was going to take my place, if I did not at the
same time fear that his eminent services will make my own poor efforts
seem even more insignificant than they really were."

But here he was interrupted by Aristomachus, who called out: "Praise
enough, friend Phanes!  Spartan tongues are stiff; but if you should ever
stand in need of my help, I will give you an answer in deeds, which shall
strike the right nail on the head."

Rhodopis smiled her approval, and giving her hand to each, said:
"Unfortunately, the only conclusion to be drawn from your story, my poor
Phanes, is that you cannot possibly remain any longer in this country.
I will not blame you for your thoughtlessness, though you might have
known that you were exposing yourself to great danger for a mere trifle.
The really wise and brave man never undertakes a hazardous enterprise,
unless the possible advantage and disadvantage that may accrue to him
from it can be reckoned at least as equal.  Recklessness is quite as
foolish, but not so blamable as cowardice, for though both do the man an
injury, the latter alone can dishonor him.

"Your thoughtlessness, this time, has very nearly cost your life, a life
dear to many, and which you ought to save for a nobler end.  We cannot
attempt to keep you here; we should thereby only injure ourselves without
benefitting you.  This noble Spartan must now take your place as head and
representative of the Greek nation at the Egyptian court, must endeavor
to protect us against the encroachment of the priests, and to retain for
us the royal favor.  I take your hand, Aristomachus, and will not let it
go till you have promised that you will protect, to the utmost of your
power, every Greek, however humble, (as Phanes did before you), from the
insolence of the Egyptians, and will sooner resign your office than allow
the smallest wrong done to a Hellene to go unpunished.  We are but a few
thousands among millions of enemies, but through courage we are great,
and unity must keep us strong.  Hitherto the Greeks in Egypt have lived
like brothers; each has been ready to offer himself for the good of all,
and all for each, and it is just this unity that has made us, and must
keep us, powerful.

"Oh!  could we but bestow this precious gift on our mother-country and
her colonies! would the tribes of our native land but forget their
Dorian, Ionian or AEolian descent, and, contenting themselves with the
one name of Hellenes, live as the children of one family, as the sheep of
one flock,--then indeed we should be strong against the whole world, and
Hellas would be recognized by all nations as the Queen of the Earth!"

     [This longing desire for unity was by no means foreign to the
     Greeks, though we seldom hear it expressed.  Aristotle, for example,
     says VII.  7.:  "Were the Hellenes united into one state, they could
     command all the barbarous nations."]

A fire glowed in the eyes of the grey-haired woman as she uttered these
words; and the Spartan, grasping her hand impetuously and stamping on the
floor with his wooden leg, cried: "By Zeus, I will not let a hair of
their heads be hurt; but thou, Rhodopis, thou art worthy to have been
born a Spartan woman."

"Or an Athenian," cried Phanes.

"An Ionian," said the Milesians, and the sculptor: "A daughter of the
Samian Geomori--"

"But I am more, far more, than all these," cried the enthusiastic woman.
"I am a Hellene!"

The whole company, even to the Jew and the Syrian, were carried away by
the intense feeling of the moment; the Sybarite alone remained unmoved,
and, with his mouth so full as to render the words almost unintelligible,
said:

"You deserve to be a Sybarite too, Rhodopis, for your roast beef is the
best I have tasted since I left Italy, and your Anthylla wine' relishes
almost as well as Vesuvian or Chian!"

Every one laughed, except the Spartan, who darted a look of indignation
and contempt at the epicure.

In this moment a deep voice, hitherto unknown to us, shouted suddenly
through the window, "A glad greeting to you, my friends!"

"A glad greeting," echoed the chorus of revellers, questioning and
guessing who this late arrival might prove to be.

They had not long to wait, for even before the Sybarite had had time
carefully to test and swallow another mouthful of wine, the speaker,
Kallias, the son of Phaenippus of Athens, was already standing by the
side of Rhodopis.  He was a tall thin man of over sixty, with a head of
that oval form which gives the impression of refinement and intellect.
One of the richest among the Athenian exiles, he had twice bought the
possessions of Pisistratus from the state, and twice been obliged to
surrender them, on the tyrant's return to power.  Looking round with his
clear keen eyes on this circle of acquaintances, he exchanged friendly
greetings with all, and exclaimed:

"If you do not set a high value on my appearance among you this evening,
I shall think that gratitude has entirely disappeared from the earth."

"We have been expecting you a long time," interrupted one of the
Milesians.  "You are the first man to bring us news of the Olympic
games!"

"And we could wish no better bearer of such news than the victor of
former days?"  added Rhodopis.  "Take your seat," cried Phanes
impatiently, "and come to the point with your news at once, friend
Kallias."

"Immediately, fellow-countryman," answered the other.  "It is some time
ago now since I left Olympia.  I embarked at Cenchreae in a fifty-oared
Samian vessel, the best ship that ever was built.

"It does not surprise me that I am the first Greek to arrive in
Naukratis.  We encountered terrific storms at sea, and could not have
escaped with our lives, if the big-bellied Samian galley, with her Ibis
beak and fish's tail had not been so splendidly timbered and manned.

"How far the other homeward-bound passengers may have been driven out of
their course, I cannot tell; we found shelter in the harbor of Samos, and
were able to put to sea again after ten days.

"We ran into the mouth of the Nile this morning.  I went on board my own
bark at once, and was so favored by Boreas, who at least at the end of my
voyage, seemed willing to prove that he still felt kindly towards his old
Kallias, that I caught sight of this most friendly of all houses a few
moments since.  I saw the waving flag, the brightly lighted windows,
and debated within myself whether to enter or not; but Rhodopis, your
fascination proved irresistible, and besides, I was bursting with all
my untold news, longing to share your feast, and to tell you, over the
viands and the wine, things that you have not even allowed yourselves to
dream of."

Kallias settled himself comfortably on one of the cushions, and before
beginning to tell his news, produced and presented to Rhodopis a
magnificent gold bracelet in the form of a serpent's, which he had bought
for a large sum at Samos, in the goldsmith's workshop of the very
Theodorus who was now sitting with him at table.

"This I have brought for you,"' he said, turning to the delighted
Rhodopis, "but for you, friend Phanes, I have something still better.
Guess, who won the four-horse chariot-race?"

"An Athenian?"  asked Phanes, and his face glowed with excitement; for
the victory gained by one citizen at the Olympic games belonged to his
whole people, and the Olympic olive-branch was the greatest honor and
happiness that could fall to the lot, either of a single Hellene, or an
entire Greek tribe.

"Rightly guessed, Phanes!"  cried the bringer of this joyful news, "The
first prize has been carried off by an Athenian; and not only so, your
own cousin Cimon, the son of Kypselos, the brother of that Miltiades,
who, nine Olympiads ago, earned us the same honor, is the man who has
conquered this year; and with the same steeds that gained him the prize
at the last games.

     [The second triumph won by the steeds of Cimon must have taken
     place, as Duneker correctly remarks, about the year 528.  The same
     horses won the race for the third time at the next Olympic games,
     consequently four years later.  As token of his gratitude Cimon
     caused a monument to be erected in their honor in "the hollow way"
     near Athens.  We may here remind our readers that the Greeks made
     use of the Olympic games to determine the date of each year.  They
     took place every four years.  The first was fixed 776 B. C.  Each
     separate year was named the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th of such or such an
     Olympiad.]

"The fame of the Alkmaeonidae is, verily, darkening more and more before
the Philaidae.  Are not you proud, Phanes? do not you feel joy at the
glory of your family?"

In his delight Phanes had risen from his seat, and seemed suddenly to
have increased in stature by a whole head.

With a look of ineffable pride and consciousness of his own position, he
gave his hand to the messenger of victory.  The latter, embracing his
countryman, continued:

"Yes, we have a right to feel proud and happy, Phanes; you especially,
for no sooner had the judges unanimously awarded the prize to Cimon, than
he ordered the heralds to proclaim the tyrant Pisistratus as the owner of
the splendid team, and therefore victor in the race.  Pisistratus at once
caused it to be announced that your family was free to return to Athens,
and so now, Phanes, the long-wished for hour of your return home is
awaiting you."

But at these words Phanes turned pale, his look of conscious pride
changed into one of indignation, and he exclaimed:

"At this I am to rejoice, foolish Kallias?  rather bid me weep that a
descendant of Ajax should be capable of laying his well-won fame thus
ignominiously at a tyrant's feet!  No!  I swear by Athene, by Father
Zeus, and by Apollo, that I will sooner starve in foreign lands than take
one step homeward, so long as the Pisistratidae hold my country in
bondage.  When I leave the service of Amasis, I shall be free, free as a
bird in the air; but I would rather be the slave of a peasant in foreign
lands, than hold the highest office under Pisistratus.  The sovereign
power in Athens belongs to us, its nobles; but Cimon by laying his
chaplet at the feet of Pisistratus has acknowledged the tyrants, and
branded himself as their servant.  He shall hear that Phanes cares little
for the tyrant's clemency.  I choose to remain an exile till my country
is free, till her nobles and people govern themselves, and dictate their
own laws.  Phanes will never do homage to the oppressor, though all the
Philaidae, the Alkmaeonidae, and even the men of your own house, Kallias,
the rich Daduchi, should fall down at his feet!"

With flashing eyes he looked round on the assembly; Kallias too
scrutinized the faces of the guests with conscious pride, as if he would
say:

"See, friends, the kind of men produced by my glorious country!"

Taking the hand of Phanes again, he said to him: "The tyrants are as
hateful to me as to you, my friend; but I have seen, that, so long as
Pisistratus lives, the tyranny cannot be overthrown.  His allies,
Lygdamis of Naxos and Polykrates of Samos, are powerful; but the greatest
danger for our freedom lies in his own moderation and prudence.  During
my recent stay in Greece I saw with alarm that the mass of the people in
Athens love their oppressor like a father.  Notwithstanding his great
power, he leaves the commonwealth in the enjoyment of Solon's
constitution.  He adorns the city with the most magnificent buildings.
They say that the new temple of Zeus, now being built of glorious marble
by Kallaeschrus, Antistates and Porinus (who must be known to you,
Theodorus), will surpass every building that has yet been erected by the
Hellenes.  He understands how to attract poets and artists of all kinds
to Athens, he has had the poems of Homer put into writing, and the
prophecies of Musaeus collected by Onomakritus.  He lays out new streets
and arranges fresh festivals; trade flourishes under his rule, and the
people find themselves well off, in spite of the many taxes laid upon
them.  But what are the people? a vulgar multitude who, like the gnats,
fly towards every thing brilliant, and, so long as the taper burns, will
continue to flutter round it, even though they burn their wings in doing
so.  Let Pisistratus' torch burn out, Phanes, and I'll swear that the
fickle crowd will flock around the returning nobles, the new light, just
as they now do around the tyrant.

"Give me your hand once more, you true son of Ajax; for you, my friends,
I have still many an interesting piece of news untold.

"The chariot-race, as I have just related, was won by Cimon who gave the
olive-branch to Pisistratus.  Four finer horses than his I never saw.
Arkesilaus of Cyrene, Kleosthenes of Epidamnus, Aster of Sybaris,
Hekataeus of Miletus and many more had also sent splendid teams.  Indeed
the games this time were more than brilliant.  All Hellas had sent
deputies.  Rhoda of the Ardeates, in distant Iberia, the wealthy
Tartessus, Sinope in the far East on the shores of Pontus, in short,
every tribe that could boast of Hellenic descent was well represented.
The Sybarite deputies were of a dazzling beauty; the Spartans, homely and
simple, but handsome as Achilles, tall and strong as Hercules; the
Athenians remarkable for their supple limbs and graceful movements, and
the men of Crotona were led by Milo, strongest of mortal birth.  The
Samian and Milesian deputies vied in splendor and gorgeousness of attire
with those from Corinth and Mitylene: the flower of the Greek youth was
assembled there, and, in the space allotted to spectators, were seated,
not only men of every age, class and nation, but many virgins, fair and
lovely maidens, who had come to Olympia, more especially from Sparta, in
order to encourage the men during the games by their acclamations and
applause.  The market was set up beyond the Alphaeus, and there traders
from all parts of the world were to be seen; Greeks, Carthaginians,
Lydians, Phrygians and shrewd Phoenicians from Palestine settled weighty
business transactions, or offered their goods to the public from tents
and booths.  But how can I possibly describe to you the surging throngs
of the populace, the echoing choruses, the smoking festal hecatombs,
the bright and variegated costumes, the sumptuousness of the equipages,
the clang of the different dialects and the joyful cries of friends
meeting again after years of separation; or the splendid appearance of
the envoys, the crowds of lookers-on and venders of small wares, the
brilliant effect produced by the masses of spectators, who filled to
overflowing the space allotted to them, the eager suspense during the
progress of the games, and the never ending shouts of joy when the
victory was decided; the solemn investiture with the olive-branch, cut
with a golden knife by the Elean boy, (whose parents must both be
living), from the sacred tree in the Altis planted so many centuries ago
by Hercules himself; or lastly, the prolonged acclamations which, like
peals of thunder, resounded in the Stadium, when Milo of Crotona
appeared, bearing on his shoulders the bronze statue of himself cast by
Dameas, and carried it through the Stadium into the Altis without once
tottering.  The weight of the metal would have crushed a bull to the
earth: but borne by Milo it seemed like a child in the arms of its
Lacedaemonian nurse.

"The highest honors (after Cimon's) were adjudged to a pair of Spartan
brothers, Lysander and Maro, the sons of Aristomachus.  Maro was victor
in the foot race, but Lysander presented himself, amidst the shouts of
the spectators, as the opponent of Milo!  Milo the invincible, victor at
Pisa, and in the Pythian and Isthmian combats.  Milo was taller and
stouter than the Spartan, who was formed like Apollo, and seemed from his
great youth scarcely to have passed from under the hands of the
schoolmaster.

"In their naked beauty, glistening with the golden oil, the youth and the
man stood opposite to one another, like a panther and a lion preparing
for the combat.  Before the onset, the young Lysander raised his hands
imploringly to the gods, crying: 'For my father, my honor, and the glory
of Sparta!'  The Crotonian looked down on the youth with a smile of
superiority; just as an epicure looks at the shell of the languste he is
preparing to open.

"And now the wrestling began.  For some time neither could succeed in
grasping the other.  The Crotonian threw almost irresistible weight into
his attempts to lay hold of his opponent, but the latter slipped through
the iron grip like a snake.  This struggle to gain a hold lasted long,
and the immense multitude watched silently, breathless from excitement.
Not a sound was to be heard but the groans of the wrestlers and the
singing of the nightingales in the grove of the Altis.  At last, the
youth succeeded, by means of the cleverest trick I ever saw, in clasping
his opponent firmly.  For a long time, Milo exerted all his strength to
shake him oft, but in vain, and the sand of the Stadium was freely
moistened by the great drops of sweat, the result of this Herculean
struggle.

"More and more intense waxed the excitement of the spectators, deeper and
deeper the silence, rarer the cries of encouragement, and louder the
groans of the wrestlers.  At last Lysander's strength gave way.
Immediately a thousand voices burst forth to cheer him on.  He roused
himself and made one last superhuman effort to throw his adversary: but
it was too late.  Milo had perceived the momentary weakness.  Taking
advantage of it, he clasped the youth in a deadly embrace; a full black
stream of blood welled from Lysander's beautiful lips, and he sank
lifeless to the earth from the wearied arms of the giant.  Democedes,
the most celebrated physician of our day, whom you Samians will have
known at the court of Polycrates, hastened to the spot, but no skill
could now avail the happy Lysander,--he was dead.

"Milo was obliged to forego the victor's wreath"; and the fame of this
youth will long continue to sound through the whole of Greece.

     [By the laws of the games the wrestler, whose adversary died, had no
     right to the prize of victory.]

I myself would rather be the dead Lysander, son of Aristomachus, than the
living Kallias growing old in inaction away from his country.  Greece,
represented by her best and bravest, carried the youth to his grave, and
his statue is to be placed in the Altis by those of Milo of Crotona and
Praxidamas of AEgina".  At length the heralds proclaimed the sentence of
the judges: 'To Sparta be awarded a victor's wreath for the dead, for the
noble Lysander hath been vanquished, not by Milo, but by Death, and he
who could go forth unconquered from a two hours' struggle with the
strongest of all Greeks, hath well deserved the olive-branch.'"

Here Kallias stopped a moment in his narrative.  During his animated
description of these events, so precious to every Greek heart, he had
forgotten his listeners, and, gazing into vacancy, had seen only the
figures of the wrestlers as they rose before his remembrance.  Now, on
looking round, he perceived, to his astonishment, that the grey-haired
man with the wooden leg, whom he had already noticed, though without
recognizing him, had hidden his face in his hands and was weeping.
Rhodopis was standing at his right hand.  Phanes at his left, and the
other guests were gazing at the Spartan, as if he had been the hero of
Kallias's tale.  In a moment the quick Athenian perceived that the aged
man must stand in some very near relation to one or other of the victors
at Olympia; but when he heard that he was Aristomachus-the father of that
glorious pair of brothers, whose wondrous forms were constantly hovering
before his eyes like visions sent down from the abodes of the gods, then
he too gazed on the sobbing old man with mingled envy and admiration, and
made no effort to restrain the tears which rushed into his own eyes,
usually so clear and keen.  In those days men wept, as well as women,
hoping to gain relief from the balm of their own tears.  In wrath, in
ecstasy of delight, in every deep inward anguish, we find the mighty
heroes weeping, while, on the other hand, the Spartan boys would submit
to be scourged at the altar of Artemis Orthia, and would bleed and even
die under the lash without uttering a moan, in order to obtain the praise
of the men.

For a time every one remained silent, out of respect to the old man's
emotion.  But at last the stillness was broken by Joshua the Jew, who
began thus, in broken Greek:

"Weep thy fill, O man of Sparta!  I also have known what it is to lose a
son.  Eleven years have passed since I buried him in the land of
strangers, by the waters of Babylon, where my people pined in captivity.
Had yet one year been added unto the life of the beautiful child, he had
died in his own land, and had been buried in the sepulchres of his
fathers.  But Cyrus the Persian (Jehovah bless his posterity!) released
us from bondage one year too late, and therefore do I weep doubly for
this my son, in that he is buried among the enemies of my people Israel.
Can there be an evil greater than to behold our children, who are unto us
as most precious treasure, go down into the grave before us?  And, may
the Lord be gracious unto me, to lose so noble a son, in the dawn of his
early manhood, just at the moment he had won such brilliant renown, must
indeed be a bitter grief, a grief beyond all others!"

Then the Spartan took away his hands from before his face; he was looking
stern, but smiled through his tears, and answered:

"Phoenician, you err!  I weep not for anguish, but for joy, and would
have gladly lost my other son, if he could have died like my Lysander."

The Jew, horrified at these, to him, sinful and unnatural words, shook
his head disapprovingly; but the Greeks overwhelmed the old man with
congratulations, deeming him much to be envied.  His great happiness made
Aristomachus look younger by many years, and he cried to Rhodopis:
"Truly, my friend, your house is for me a house of blessing; for this is
the second gift that the gods have allowed to fall to my lot, since I
entered it."--"What was the first?"  asked Rhodopis.  "A propitious
oracle."--"But," cried Phanes, "you have forgotten the third; on this day
the gods have blessed you with the acquaintance of Rhodopis.  But, tell
me, what is this about the oracle?"--"May I repeat it to our friends?"
asked the Delphian.

Aristomachus nodded assent, and Phryxus read aloud a second time the
answer of the Pythia:

    "If once the warrior hosts from the snow-topped mountains descending
     Come to the fields of the stream watering richly the plain,
     Then shall the lingering boat to the beckoning meadows convey thee
     Which to the wandering foot peace and a home will afford.
     When those warriors come from the snow-topped mountains descending
     Then will the powerful Five grant thee what they long refused."

Scarcely was the last word out of his mouth, when Kallias the Athenian,
springing up, cried: "In this house, too, you shall receive from me the
fourth gift of the gods.  Know that I have kept my rarest news till last:
the Persians are coming to Egypt!"

At this every one, except the Sybarite, rushed to his feet, and Kallias
found it almost impossible to answer their numerous questions.  "Gently,
gently, friends," he cried at last; "let me tell my story in order, or I
shall never finish it at all.  It is not an army, as Phanes supposes,
that is on its way hither, but a great embassy from Cambyses, the present
ruler of the most powerful kingdom of Persia.  At Samos I heard that they
had already reached Miletus, and in a few days they will be here.  Some
of the king's own relations, are among the number, the aged Croesus, king
of Lydia, too; we shall behold a marvellous splendor and magnificence!
Nobody knows the object of their coming, but it is supposed that King
Cambyses wishes to conclude an alliance with Amasis; indeed some say the
king solicits the hand of Pharaoh's daughter."

"An alliance?"  asked Phanes, with an incredulous shrug of the shoulders.
"Why the Persians are rulers over half the world already.  All the great
Asiatic powers have submitted to their sceptre; Egypt and our own mother-
country, Hellas, are the only two that have been shared by the
conqueror."

"You forget India with its wealth of gold, and the great migratory
nations of Asia," answered Kallias.  "And you forget moreover, that an
empire, composed like Persia of some seventy nations or tribes of
different languages and customs, bears the seeds of discord ever within
itself, and must therefore guard against the chance of foreign attack;
lest, while the bulk of the army be absent, single provinces should seize
the opportunity and revolt from their allegiance.  Ask the Milesians how
long they would remain quiet if they heard that their oppressors had been
defeated in any battle?"

Theopompus, the Milesian merchant, called out, laughing at the same time:
"If the Persians were to be worsted in one war, they would at once be
involved in a hundred others, and we should not be the last to rise up
against our tyrants in the hour of their weakness!"

"Whatever the intentions of the envoys may be," continued Kallias, "my
information remains unaltered; they will be here at the latest in three
days."

"And so your oracle will be fulfilled, fortunate Aristomachus!"
exclaimed Rhodopis, "for see, the warrior hosts can only be the Persians.
When they descend to the shores of the Nile, then the powerful Five,'
your Ephori, will change their decision, and you, the father of two
Olympian victors, will be recalled to your native land.

     [The five Ephori of Sparta were appointed to represent the absent
     kings during the Messenian war.  In later days the nobles made use
     of the Ephori as a power, which, springing immediately from their
     own body, they could oppose to the kingly authority.  Being the
     highest magistrates in all judicial and educational matters, and in
     everything relating to the moral police of the country, the Ephori
     soon found means to assert their superiority, and on most occasions
     over that of the kings themselves.  Every patrician who was past the
     age of thirty, had the right to become a candidate yearly for the
     office.  Aristot.  Potit, II. and IV.  Laert.  Diog. I. 68.]

"Fill the goblets again, Knakias.  Let us devote this last cup to the
manes of the glorious Lysander; and then I advise you to depart, for it
is long past midnight, and our pleasure has reached its highest point.
The true host puts an end to the banquet when his guests are feeling at
their best.  Serene and agreeable recollections will soon bring you
hither again; whereas there would be little joy in returning to a house
where the remembrance of hours of weakness, the result of pleasure, would
mingle with your future enjoyment."  In this her guests agreed, and
Ibykus named her a thorough disciple of Pythagoras, in praise of the
joyous, festive evening.

Every one prepared for departure.  The Sybarite, who had been drinking
deeply in order to counteract the very inconvenient amount of feeling
excited by the conversation, rose also, assisted by his slaves, who had
to be called in for this purpose.

While he was being moved from his former comfortable position, he
stammered something about a "breach of hospitality;" but, when Rhodopis
was about to give him her hand at parting, the wine gained the ascendancy
and he exclaimed, "By Hercules, Rhodopis, you get rid of us as if we were
troublesome creditors.  It is not my custom to leave a supper so long as
I can stand, still less to be turned out of doors like a miserable
parasite!"

"Hear reason, you immoderate Sybarite," began Rhodopis, endeavoring with
a smile to excuse her proceeding.  But these words, in Philoinus' half-
intoxicated mood, only increased his irritation; he burst into a mocking
laugh, and staggering towards the door, shouted: "Immoderate Sybarite,
you call me? good! here you have your answer: Shameless slave! one can
still perceive the traces of what you were in your youth.  Farewell then,
slave of Iadmon and Xanthus, freedwoman of Charaxus!"  He had not however
finished his sentence, when Aristomachus rushed upon him, stunned him
with a blow of his fist, and carried him off like a child down to the
boat in which his slaves were waiting at the garden-gate.



ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Did the ancients know anything of love
Folly to fret over what cannot be undone
Go down into the grave before us (Our children)
He who kills a cat is punished (for murder)
In those days men wept, as well as women
Lovers delighted in nature then as now
Multitude who, like the gnats, fly towards every thing brilliant
Olympics--The first was fixed 776 B.C.
Papyrus Ebers
Pious axioms to be repeated by the physician, while compounding
Romantic love, as we know it, a result of Christianity
True host puts an end to the banquet
Whether the historical romance is ever justifiable