Artemus Ward (Charles Farrar Browne) Part 4

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF ARTEMUS WARD PART 4, TO CALIFORNIA AND RETURN

(CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE)

With a biographical sketch by Melville D. Landon, "Eli Perkins"

CONTENTS.

PART IV.

TO CALIFORNIA AND RETURN.

4.1.  On the Steamer.

4.2.  The Isthmus.

4.3.  Mexico.

4.4.  California.

4.5.  Washoe.

4.6.  Mr. Pepper.

4.7.  Horace Greeley's Ride to Placerville.

4.8.  To Reese River.

4.9.  Great Salt Lake City.

4.10.  The Mountain Fever.

4.11.  "I am Here."

4.12.  Brigham Young.

4.13.  A Piece is Spoken.

4.14.  The Ball.

4.15.  Phelp's Almanac.

4.16.  Hurrah for the Road.

4.17.  Very Much Married.

4.18.  The Revelation of Joseph Smith.

PART IV.  TO CALIFORNIA AND RETURN.

4.1.  ON THE STEAMER.

                                        New York, Oct. 13, 1868.

The steamer Ariel starts for California at noon.

Her decks are crowded with excited passengers, who instantly
undertake to "look after" their trunks and things; and what with
our smashing against each other, and the yells of the porters, and
the wails over lost baggage, and the crash of boxes, and the roar
of the boilers, we are for the time being about as unhappy a lot of
maniacs as was ever thrown together.

I am one of them.  I am rushing around with a glaring eye in search
of a box.

Great jam, in which I find a sweet young lady, with golden hair,
clinging to me fondly, and saying, "Dear George, farewell!"--
Discovers her mistake, and disappears.

I should like to be George some more.

Confusion so great that I seek refuge in a stateroom which contains
a single lady of forty-five summers, who says, "Base man! leave
me!"  I leave her.

By and by we cool down, and become somewhat regulated.

NEXT DAY

When the gong sounds for breakfast we are fairly out on the sea,
which runs  roughly, and the Ariel rocks wildly.  Many of the
passengers are sick, and a young naval officer establishes a
reputation as a wit by carrying to one of the invalids a plate of
raw salt pork, swimming in cheap molasses.  I am not sick; so I
roll round the deck in the most cheerful sea-dog manner.

                   .     .      .      .

The next day and the next pass by in a serene manner.  The waves
are smooth now, and we can all eat and sleep.  We might have
enjoyed ourselves very well, I fancy, if the Ariel, whose capacity
was about three hundred and fifty passengers, had not on this
occasion carried nearly nine hundred, a hundred, at least of whom
were children of an unpleasant age.  Captain Semmes captured the
Ariel once, and it is to be deeply regretted that that thrifty
buccaneer hadn't made mince-meat of her, because she is a miserable
tub at best, and hasn't much more right to be afloat than a second-
hand coffin has.  I do not know her proprietor, Mr. C. Vanderbilt.
But I know of several excellent mill privileges in the State of
Maine, and not one of them is so thoroughly "Dam'd" as he was all
the way from New York to Aspinwall.

I had far rather say a pleasant thing than a harsh one; but it is
due to the large number of respectable ladies and gentleman who
were on board the steamer Ariel with me that I state here that the
accommodations on that steamer were very vile.  If I did not so
state, my conscience would sting me through life, and I should have
harried dreams like Richard III. Esq.

The proprietor apparently thought we were undergoing transportation
for life to some lonely island, and the very waiters who brought us
meals, that any warden of any penitentiary would blush to offer
convicts, seemed to think it was a glaring error our not being in
chains.

Then she halt being truthful:" You remember we had a date--""
We did n't have any damned escort," I state categorically, hurting
late within." All left, I desire to ignore why you're however drive
yourself. It is n't work; that's finished." The manner she talked
make me hopeful. possibly she was n't the one... and then came
fear. frankfurter,
                   if he's hither, you're in hazardousness. The monster respects
nothing we hold dear--law, possession, pride, living. There was one
way to insight out: reshuffle her arrive.I have spoken my Piece about the Ariel, and I hope Mr. Vanderbilt
will reform ere it is too late.  Dr. Watts says the vilest sinner
may return as long as the gas-meters work well, or words to that
effect.
                   .     .      .      .

We were so densely crowded on board the Ariel that I cannot
conscientiously say we were altogether happy.  And sea-voyages at
best are a little stupid. On the whole I should prefer a voyage on
the Erie Canal, where there isn't any danger, and where you can
carry picturesque scenery along with you--so to speak.

II.--THE ISTHMUS.

On the ninth day we reach Aspinwall in the Republic of Granada.
The President of New Granada is a Central American named Mosquero.
I was told that he derived quite a portion of his income by
carrying passengers' valises and things from the steamer to the
hotels in Aspinwall.  It was an infamous falsehood.  Fancy A.
Lincoln carrying carpet-bags and things! and indeed I should rather
trust him with them than Mosquero, because the former gentleman, as
I think some one has before observed, is "honest."

I intrust my bag to a speckled native, who confidentially gives me
to understand that he is the only strictly honest person in
Aspinwall.  The rest, he says, are niggers--which the colored
people of the Isthmus regard as about as scathing a thing as they
can say of one another.

I examine the New Grenadian flag, which waves from the
chamber-window of the refreshment saloon.  It is of simple design.
You can make one.

Take half of a cotton shirt, that has been worn two months, and dip
it in molasses of the Day & Martin brand.  Then let the flies
gambol over it for a few days, and you have it.  It is an emblem of
Sweet Liberty.

At the Howard House the man of sin rubbeth the hair of the horse to
the bowels of the cat, and our girls are waving their lily-white
hoofs in the dazzling waltz.

We have a quadrille, in which an English person slips up and jams
his massive brow against my stomach.  He apologizes, and I say,
"all right, my lord."  I subsequently ascertained that he
superintended the shipping of coals for the British steamers, and
owned fighting cocks.

The ball stops suddenly.

Great excitement.  One of our passengers intoxicated and riotous in
the street.  Openly and avowedly desires the entire Republic of New
Grenada to "come on."

In case they do come on, agrees to make it lively for them.  Is
quieted down at last, and marched off to prison, by a squad of
Grenadian troops.  Is musical as he passes the hotel, and smiling
sweetly upon the ladies and children on the balcony, expresses a
distinct desire to be an Angel, and with the Angels stand.  After
which he leaps nimbly into the air and imitates the war-cry of the
red man.
                   .     .      .      .

The natives amass wealth by carrying valises, &c., then squander it
for liquor.  My native comes to me as I sit on the veranda of the
Howard House smoking a cigar, and solicits the job of taking my
things to the cars next morning.  He is intoxicated, and has been
fighting, to the palpable detriment of his wearing apparel; for he
has only a pair of tattered pantaloons and a very small quantity of
shirt left.

We go to bed.  Eight of us are assigned to a small den upstairs,
with only two lame apologies for beds.

