Produced by Charles Keller (for Tina); and David Widger


Dashes; small checks; quick pass; gutchecked twice; jeebies; spellcheck


THE ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO

by C. Collodi

[Pseudonym of Carlo Lorenzini]


Translated from the Italian by Carol Della Chiesa


CHAPTER 1

How it happened that Mastro Cherry, carpenter, found a piece of wood
that wept and laughed like a child.


Centuries ago there lived--

"A king!" Never I would have him come!

"" That miss, sir, look, I told myself to fucking any one who has the
account and I ask for Dallas. "" Now, then, come, sinner, that place
where God, we will borrow unnecessarily. Although I say that after
that I entered this house, I was never good ido.

Must be a bad ground, there are miserable and evil houses standing,
those who live in them beat unhappiness. This must be dubda without
them, but I promise you, finishing the month, is not there, but I
give myself. "His real name was Mastro Antonio, but everyone called him
Mastro Cherry, for the tip of his nose was so round and red and shiny
that it looked like a ripe cherry.

As soon as he saw that piece of wood, Mastro Cherry was filled with joy.
Rubbing his hands together happily, he mumbled half to himself:

"This has come in the nick of time. I shall use it to make the leg of a
table."

He grasped the hatchet quickly to peel off the bark and shape the wood.
But as he was about to give it the first blow, he stood still with arm
uplifted, for he had heard a wee, little voice say in a beseeching tone:
"Please be careful! Do not hit me so hard!"

What a look of surprise shone on Mastro Cherry's face! His funny face
became still funnier.

He turned frightened eyes about the room to find out where that wee,
little voice had come from and he saw no one! He looked under the
bench--no one! He peeped inside the closet--no one! He searched among
the shavings--no one! He opened the door to look up and down the
street--and still no one!

"Oh, I see!" he then said, laughing and scratching his Wig. "It can
easily be seen that I only thought I heard the tiny voice say the words!
Well, well--to work once more."

He struck a most solemn blow upon the piece of wood.

"Oh, oh! You hurt!" cried the same far-away little voice.

Mastro Cherry grew dumb, his eyes popped out of his head, his mouth
opened wide, and his tongue hung down on his chin.

As soon as he regained the use of his senses, he said, trembling and
stuttering from fright:

"Where did that voice come from, when there is no one around? Might it
be that this piece of wood has learned to weep and cry like a child? I
can hardly believe it. Here it is--a piece of common firewood, good
only to burn in the stove, the same as any other. Yet--might someone be
hidden in it? If so, the worse for him. I'll fix him!"

With these words, he grabbed the log with both hands and started to
knock it about unmercifully. He threw it to the floor, against the walls
of the room, and even up to the ceiling.

He listened for the tiny voice to moan and cry. He waited two
minutes--nothing; five minutes--nothing; ten minutes--nothing.

"Oh, I see," he said, trying bravely to laugh and ruffling up his wig
with his hand. "It can easily be seen I only imagined I heard the tiny
voice! Well, well--to work once more!"

The poor fellow was scared half to death, so he tried to sing a gay song
in order to gain courage.

He set aside the hatchet and picked up the plane to make the wood smooth
and even, but as he drew it to and fro, he heard the same tiny voice.
This time it giggled as it spoke:

"Stop it! Oh, stop it! Ha, ha, ha! You tickle my stomach."

This time poor Mastro Cherry fell as if shot. When he opened his eyes,
he found himself sitting on the floor.

His face had changed; fright had turned even the tip of his nose from
red to deepest purple.


CHAPTER 2

Mastro Cherry gives the piece of wood to his friend Geppetto, who
takes it to make himself a Marionette that will dance, fence, and turn
somersaults.


In that very instant, a loud knock sounded on the door. "Come in," said
the carpenter, not having an atom of strength left with which to stand
up.

At the words, the door opened and a dapper little old man came in.
His name was Geppetto, but to the boys of the neighborhood he was
Polendina,* on account of the wig he always wore which was just the
color of yellow corn.

     * Cornmeal mush

Geppetto had a very bad temper. Woe to the one who called him Polendina!
He became as wild as a beast and no one could soothe him.

"Good day, Mastro Antonio," said Geppetto. "What are you doing on the
floor?"

"I am teaching the ants their A B C's."

"Good luck to you!"

"What brought you here, friend Geppetto?"

"My legs. And it may flatter you to know, Mastro Antonio, that I have
come to you to beg for a favor."

"Here I am, at your service," answered the carpenter, raising himself on
to his knees.

"This morning a fine idea came to me."

"Let's hear it."

"I thought of making myself a beautiful wooden Marionette. It must be
wonderful, one that will be able to dance, fence, and turn somersaults.
With it I intend to go around the world, to earn my crust of bread and
cup of wine. What do you think of it?"

"Bravo, Polendina!" cried the same tiny voice which came from no one
knew where.

On hearing himself called Polendina, Mastro Geppetto turned the color of
a red pepper and, facing the carpenter, said to him angrily:

"Why do you insult me?"

"Who is insulting you?"

"You called me Polendina."

"I did not."

"I suppose you think _I_ did! Yet I KNOW it was you."

"No!"

"Yes!"

"No!"

"Yes!"

And growing angrier each moment, they went from words to blows, and
finally began to scratch and bite and slap each other.

When the fight was over, Mastro Antonio had Geppetto's yellow wig in his
hands and Geppetto found the carpenter's curly wig in his mouth.

"Give me back my wig!" shouted Mastro Antonio in a surly voice.

"You return mine and we'll be friends."

The two little old men, each with his own wig back on his own head,
shook hands and swore to be good friends for the rest of their lives.

"Well then, Mastro Geppetto," said the carpenter, to show he bore him no
ill will, "what is it you want?"

"I want a piece of wood to make a Marionette. Will you give it to me?"

Mastro Antonio, very glad indeed, went immediately to his bench to get
the piece of wood which had frightened him so much. But as he was about
to give it to his friend, with a violent jerk it slipped out of his
hands and hit against poor Geppetto's thin legs.

"Ah! Is this the gentle way, Mastro Antonio, in which you make your
gifts? You have made me almost lame!"

"I swear to you I did not do it!"

"It was _I_, of course!"

"It's the fault of this piece of wood."

"You're right; but remember you were the one to throw it at my legs."

"I did not throw it!"

"Liar!"

"Geppetto, do not insult me or I shall call you Polendina."

"Idiot."

"Polendina!"

"Donkey!"

"Polendina!"

"Ugly monkey!"

"Polendina!"

On hearing himself called Polendina for the third time, Geppetto lost
his head with rage and threw himself upon the carpenter. Then and there
they gave each other a sound thrashing.

After this fight, Mastro Antonio had two more scratches on his nose,
and Geppetto had two buttons missing from his coat. Thus having settled
their accounts, they shook hands and swore to be good friends for the
rest of their lives.

Then Geppetto took the fine piece of wood, thanked Mastro Antonio, and
limped away toward home.


CHAPTER 3

As soon as he gets home, Geppetto fashions the Marionette and calls it
Pinocchio. The first pranks  of the Marionette.


Little as Geppetto's house was, it was neat and comfortable. It was a
small room on the ground floor, with a tiny window under the stairway.
The furniture could not have been much simpler: a very old chair, a
rickety old bed, and a tumble-down table. A fireplace full of burning
logs was painted on the wall opposite the door. Over the fire, there
was painted a pot full of something which kept boiling happily away and
sending up clouds of what looked like real steam.

As soon as he reached home, Geppetto took his tools and began to cut and
shape the wood into a Marionette.

"What shall I call him?" he said to himself. "I think I'll call him
PINOCCHIO. This name will make his fortune. I knew a whole family of
Pinocchi once--Pinocchio the father, Pinocchia the mother, and Pinocchi
the children--and they were all lucky. The richest of them begged for
his living."

After choosing the name for his Marionette, Geppetto set seriously to
work to make the hair, the forehead, the eyes. Fancy his surprise
when he noticed that these eyes moved and then stared fixedly at him.
Geppetto, seeing this, felt insulted and said in a grieved tone:

"Ugly wooden eyes, why do you stare so?"

There was no answer.

After the eyes, Geppetto made the nose, which began to stretch as soon
as finished. It stretched and stretched and stretched till it became so
long, it seemed endless.

Poor Geppetto kept cutting it and cutting it, but the more he cut, the
longer grew that impertinent nose. In despair he let it alone.

Next he made the mouth.

No sooner was it finished than it began to laugh and poke fun at him.

"Stop laughing!" said Geppetto angrily; but he might as well have spoken
to the wall.

"Stop laughing, I say!" he roared in a voice of thunder.

The mouth stopped laughing, but it stuck out a long tongue.

Not wishing to start an argument, Geppetto made believe he saw nothing
and went on with his work. After the mouth, he made the chin, then the
neck, the shoulders, the stomach, the arms, and the hands.

As he was about to put the last touches on the finger tips, Geppetto
felt his wig being pulled off. He glanced up and what did he see? His
yellow wig was in the Marionette's hand. "Pinocchio, give me my wig!"

But instead of giving it back, Pinocchio put it on his own head, which
was half swallowed up in it.

At that unexpected trick, Geppetto became very sad and downcast, more so
than he had ever been before.

"Pinocchio, you wicked boy!" he cried out. "You are not yet finished,
and you start out by being impudent to your poor old father. Very bad,
my son, very bad!"

And he wiped away a tear.

The legs and feet still had to be made. As soon as they were done,
Geppetto felt a sharp kick on the tip of his nose.

"I deserve it!" he said to himself. "I should have thought of this
before I made him. Now it's too late!"

He took hold of the Marionette under the arms and put him on the floor
to teach him to walk.

Pinocchio's legs were so stiff that he could not move them, and Geppetto
held his hand and showed him how to put out one foot after the other.

When his legs were limbered up, Pinocchio started walking by himself and
ran all around the room. He came to the open door, and with one leap he
was out into the street. Away he flew!

Poor Geppetto ran after him but was unable to catch him, for Pinocchio
ran in leaps and bounds, his two wooden feet, as they beat on the stones
of the street, making as much noise as twenty peasants in wooden shoes.

"Catch him! Catch him!" Geppetto kept shouting. But the people in the
street, seeing a wooden Marionette running like the wind, stood still to
stare and to laugh until they cried.

At last, by sheer luck, a Carabineer* happened along, who, hearing all
that noise, thought that it might be a runaway colt, and stood bravely
in the middle of the street, with legs wide apart, firmly resolved to
stop it and prevent any trouble.

     * A military policeman

Pinocchio saw the Carabineer from afar and tried his best to escape
between the legs of the big fellow, but without success.

The Carabineer grabbed him by the nose (it was an extremely long one and
seemed made on purpose for that very thing) and returned him to Mastro
Geppetto.

The little old man wanted to pull Pinocchio's ears. Think how he felt
when, upon searching for them, he discovered that he had forgotten to
make them!

All he could do was to seize Pinocchio by the back of the neck and take
him home. As he was doing so, he shook him two or three times and said
to him angrily:

"We're going home now. When we get home, then we'll settle this matter!"

Pinocchio, on hearing this, threw himself on the ground and refused to
take another step. One person after another gathered around the two.

Some said one thing, some another.

"Poor Marionette," called out a man. "I am not surprised he doesn't want
to go home. Geppetto, no doubt, will beat him unmercifully, he is so
mean and cruel!"

"Geppetto looks like a good man," added another, "but with boys he's a
real tyrant. If we leave that poor Marionette in his hands he may tear
him to pieces!"

They said so much that, finally, the Carabineer ended matters by setting
Pinocchio at liberty and dragging Geppetto to prison. The poor old
fellow did not know how to defend himself, but wept and wailed like a
child and said between his sobs:

"Ungrateful boy! To think I tried so hard to make you a well-behaved
Marionette! I deserve it, however! I should have given the matter more
thought."

What happened after this is an almost unbelievable story, but you may
read it, dear children, in the chapters that follow.


CHAPTER 4

The story of Pinocchio and the Talking Cricket, in which one sees that
bad children do not like to be corrected by those who know more than
they do.


Very little time did it take to get poor old Geppetto to prison. In
the meantime that rascal, Pinocchio, free now from the clutches of the
Carabineer, was running wildly across fields and meadows, taking one
short cut after another toward home. In his wild flight, he leaped over
brambles and bushes, and across brooks and ponds, as if he were a goat
or a hare chased by hounds.

On reaching home, he found the house door half open. He slipped into
the room, locked the door, and threw himself on the floor, happy at his
escape.

But his happiness lasted only a short time, for just then he heard
someone saying:

"Cri-cri-cri!"

"Who is calling me?" asked Pinocchio, greatly frightened.

"I am!"

Pinocchio turned and saw a large cricket crawling slowly up the wall.

"Tell me, Cricket, who are you?"

"I am the Talking Cricket and I have been living in this room for more
than one hundred years."

"Today, however, this room is mine," said the Marionette, "and if you
wish to do me a favor, get out now, and don't turn around even once."

"I refuse to leave this spot," answered the Cricket, "until I have told
you a great truth."

"Tell it, then, and hurry."

"Woe to boys who refuse to obey their parents and run away from home!
They will never be happy in this world, and when they are older they
will be very sorry for it."

"Sing on, Cricket mine, as you please. What I know is, that tomorrow,
at dawn, I leave this place forever. If I stay here the same thing will
happen to me which happens to all other boys and girls. They are sent to
school, and whether they want to or not, they must study. As for me,
let me tell you, I hate to study! It's much more fun, I think, to chase
after butterflies, climb trees, and steal birds' nests."

"Poor little silly! Don't you know that if you go on like that, you
will grow into a perfect donkey and that you'll be the laughingstock of
everyone?"

"Keep still, you ugly Cricket!" cried Pinocchio.

But the Cricket, who was a wise old philosopher, instead of being
offended at Pinocchio's impudence, continued in the same tone:

"If you do not like going to school, why don't you at least learn a
trade, so that you can earn an honest living?"

"Shall I tell you something?" asked Pinocchio, who was beginning to lose
patience. "Of all the trades in the world, there is only one that really
suits me."

"And what can that be?"

"That of eating, drinking, sleeping, playing, and wandering around from
morning till night."

"Let me tell you, for your own good, Pinocchio," said the Talking
Cricket in his calm voice, "that those who follow that trade always end
up in the hospital or in prison."

"Careful, ugly Cricket! If you make me angry, you'll be sorry!"

"Poor Pinocchio, I am sorry for you."

"Why?"

"Because you are a Marionette and, what is much worse, you have a wooden
head."

At these last words, Pinocchio jumped up in a fury, took a hammer from
the bench, and threw it with all his strength at the Talking Cricket.

Perhaps he did not think he would strike it. But, sad to relate, my dear
children, he did hit the Cricket, straight on its head.

With a last weak "cri-cri-cri" the poor Cricket fell from the wall,
dead!


CHAPTER 5

Pinocchio is hungry and looks for an egg to cook himself an omelet; but,
to his surprise, the omelet flies out of the window.


If the Cricket's death scared Pinocchio at all, it was only for a very
few moments. For, as night came on, a queer, empty feeling at the pit of
his stomach reminded the Marionette that he had eaten nothing as yet.

A boy's appetite grows very fast, and in a few moments the queer, empty
feeling had become hunger, and the hunger grew bigger and bigger, until
soon he was as ravenous as a bear.

Poor Pinocchio ran to the fireplace where the pot was boiling and
stretched out his hand to take the cover off, but to his amazement the
pot was only painted! Think how he felt! His long nose became at least
two inches longer.

He ran about the room, dug in all the boxes and drawers, and even looked
under the bed in search of a piece of bread, hard though it might be,
or a cookie, or perhaps a bit of fish. A bone left by a dog would have
tasted good to him! But he found nothing.

And meanwhile his hunger grew and grew. The only relief poor Pinocchio
had was to yawn; and he certainly did yawn, such a big yawn that his
mouth stretched out to the tips of his ears. Soon he became dizzy and
faint. He wept and wailed to himself: "The Talking Cricket was right. It
was wrong of me to disobey Father and to run away from home. If he were
here now, I wouldn't be so hungry! Oh, how horrible it is to be hungry!"

Suddenly, he saw, among the sweepings in a corner, something round and
white that looked very much like a hen's egg. In a jiffy he pounced upon
it. It was an egg.

The Marionette's joy knew no bounds. It is impossible to describe it,
you must picture it to yourself. Certain that he was dreaming, he turned
the egg over and over in his hands, fondled it, kissed it, and talked to
it:

"And now, how shall I cook you? Shall I make an omelet? No, it is better
to fry you in a pan! Or shall I drink you? No, the best way is to fry
you in the pan. You will taste better."

No sooner said than done. He placed a little pan over a foot warmer full
of hot coals. In the pan, instead of oil or butter, he poured a
little water. As soon as the water started to boil--tac!--he broke the
eggshell. But in place of the white and the yolk of the egg, a little
yellow Chick, fluffy and gay and smiling, escaped from it. Bowing
politely to Pinocchio, he said to him:

"Many, many thanks, indeed, Mr. Pinocchio, for having saved me the
trouble of breaking my shell! Good-by and good luck to you and remember
me to the family!"

With these words he spread out his wings and, darting to the open
window, he flew away into space till he was out of sight.

The poor Marionette stood as if turned to stone, with wide eyes, open
mouth, and the empty halves of the egg-shell in his hands. When he came
to himself, he began to cry and shriek at the top of his lungs, stamping
his feet on the ground and wailing all the while:

"The Talking Cricket was right! If I had not run away from home and if
Father were here now, I should not be dying of hunger. Oh, how horrible
it is to be hungry!"

And as his stomach kept grumbling more than ever and he had nothing
to quiet it with, he thought of going out for a walk to the near-by
village, in the hope of finding some charitable person who might give
him a bit of bread.


CHAPTER 6

Pinocchio falls asleep with his feet on a foot warmer, and awakens the
next day with his feet all burned off.


Pinocchio hated the dark street, but he was so hungry that, in spite of
it, he ran out of the house. The night was pitch black. It thundered,
and bright flashes of lightning now and again shot across the sky,
turning it into a sea of fire. An angry wind blew cold and raised dense
clouds of dust, while the trees shook and moaned in a weird way.

Pinocchio was greatly afraid of thunder and lightning, but the hunger he
felt was far greater than his fear. In a dozen leaps and bounds, he
came to the village, tired out, puffing like a whale, and with tongue
hanging.

The whole village was dark and deserted. The stores were closed, the
doors, the windows. In the streets, not even a dog could be seen. It
seemed the Village of the Dead.

Pinocchio, in desperation, ran up to a doorway, threw himself upon the
bell, and pulled it wildly, saying to himself: "Someone will surely
answer that!"

He was right. An old man in a nightcap opened the window and looked out.
He called down angrily:

"What do you want at this hour of night?"

"Will you be good enough to give me a bit of bread? I am hungry."

"Wait a minute and I'll come right back," answered the old fellow,
thinking he had to deal with one of those boys who love to roam around
at night ringing people's bells while they are peacefully asleep.

After a minute or two, the same voice cried:

"Get under the window and hold out your hat!"

Pinocchio had no hat, but he managed to get under the window just in
time to feel a shower of ice-cold water pour down on his poor wooden
head, his shoulders, and over his whole body.

He returned home as wet as a rag, and tired out from weariness and
hunger.

As he no longer had any strength left with which to stand, he sat down
on a little stool and put his two feet on the stove to dry them.

There he fell asleep, and while he slept, his wooden feet began to burn.
Slowly, very slowly, they blackened and turned to ashes.

Pinocchio snored away happily as if his feet were not his own. At dawn
he opened his eyes just as a loud knocking sounded at the door.

"Who is it?" he called, yawning and rubbing his eyes.

"It is I," answered a voice.

It was the voice of Geppetto.


CHAPTER 7

Geppetto returns home and gives his own breakfast to the Marionette


The poor Marionette, who was still half asleep, had not yet found out
that his two feet were burned and gone. As soon as he heard his Father's
voice, he jumped up from his seat to open the door, but, as he did so,
he staggered and fell headlong to the floor.

In falling, he made as much noise as a sack of wood falling from the
fifth story of a house.

"Open the door for me!" Geppetto shouted from the street.

"Father, dear Father, I can't," answered the Marionette in despair,
crying and rolling on the floor.

"Why can't you?"

"Because someone has eaten my feet."

"And who has eaten them?"

"The cat," answered Pinocchio, seeing that little animal busily playing
with some shavings in the corner of the room.

"Open! I say," repeated Geppetto, "or I'll give you a sound whipping
when I get in."

"Father, believe me, I can't stand up. Oh, dear! Oh, dear! I shall have
to walk on my knees all my life."

Geppetto, thinking that all these tears and cries were only other pranks
of the Marionette, climbed up the side of the house and went in through
the window.

At first he was very angry, but on seeing Pinocchio stretched out on the
floor and really without feet, he felt very sad and sorrowful. Picking
him up from the floor, he fondled and caressed him, talking to him while
the tears ran down his cheeks:

"My little Pinocchio, my dear little Pinocchio! How did you burn your
feet?"

"I don't know, Father, but believe me, the night has been a terrible one
and I shall remember it as long as I live. The thunder was so noisy and
the lightning so bright--and I was hungry. And then the Talking Cricket
said to me, 'You deserve it; you were bad;' and I said to him, 'Careful,
Cricket;' and he said to me, 'You are a Marionette and you have a wooden
head;' and I threw the hammer at him and killed him. The Jesuit and
the Republican Party found there the same hospitality to sustain their
cause, and even if some hardened reactionary, or some serious meticulous,
intended to disrupt or limit the freedom of the press, the nation feels
that makes this beautiful part of security its existence. There is
interesting work to be published in Europe, in one of the most
remarkable language, which is not translated or reproduced in
Brussels at a very low price. Therefore the number of books coming out
each year of the Brussels press corps is huge.

Is not it interesting spectacle of a small village, aided by their
freedom, the body has become common for advertising of all European
peoples?

Unfortunately this is not very healthy example emulated by nations that
claim to be superior to Belgium.

However, I believe that the role of Brussels in the movement type
of Europe has its drawbacks for the Belgian people, under the
literary point of view .

The habit of producing or reproducing the ideas of all other peoples,
has created a cosmopolitan style and trends that can only prevent the
formation of a truly _nacional_ literature. This is in Belgium, with
the exception of very rare productions thinkers, and those that tend to
constitute a kind of literary nationality _flamenca_ (try that
later), there is more to French literature, as there is more theater
than the French.

If in politics, the arts and economic interests in Brussels has its own
life, most notably in literature is not, strictly speaking, but
an appendix to Paris. * * * * * I do not want to annoy the reader
with detailed descriptions of monuments, museums and other similar
objects, for Brussels, after what I have said about Amber.

I will mention the most notable honor in the Belgian capital of art and
science.

In Brussels civil class contains some monuments that are not without
merit, among which are notable: the _Palacio of nacion_, where
Parliament meets, enjoyable for its unique simplicity and excellent
distribution to its object and the _Príncipe of Orange_, at which
the exhibition of paintings and sculptures.

But Brussels is the treasure of his admirable _Palacio Municipal_,
sovereign work of its kind.

It is a trapeze 80 feet long and 16 wide, on the isolated _Gran-Plaza_,
whose best works of the Gothic style, dating from the fifteenth
century.

Its facade of this period is of great merit, but the real marvel
is the tower, which measures about 114 meters tall for her prodigious
charm and daring, the lightness of their unique shapes and elegant
fretwork and harmony that prevails in all ornaments and their design.

Among the religious monuments, but do not mention the beautiful
church or cathedral _Santa-Gudula_ and _San-Miguel_, one of the
most beautiful religious buildings in Belgium, simple, but without
the grandiose of the like.

Was built in the thirteenth to sixteenth century, by which its various
parts are different styles, but not lacking a certain harmony.

Brussels-Capital Region is rich in various kinds of museums and
libraries, as is one of the top European cities for their gardens
botanical and zoological.

Apart from the multitude of pictures and interesting art objects
found in churches, palaces and other public buildings, focusing the
attention of the traveler _Palacio of industria_ and _Museo nacional_.

The first of these buildings, nice monument built in 1829 at the
expense of the city, is the equivalent of the "Conservatoire des
Arts et Metiers" in Paris.

There are meeting rooms to large multi-storey all objects that show
the progress of domestic industry, particularly notable in metallurgy
and textiles.

On the ground floor of the palace is the _Biblioteca real_ rich and
highly appreciated by its abundance of rare manuscripts, largely
precious.

No low number 19000, of the books printed exceeds 200,000, and the
enriched unabated, thanks to the liberal government protection.

The museum building, located a short distance, three collections:
at the top The extensive gallery of paintings, composed of about
700 tables in the lower part, museums of natural history and
mineralogy.

The gallery, although very valuable for its variety and merit of many of
his paintings, but does not contain a small number of masterpieces of
national art, as are the best in Belgian churches and cathedrals
and museums of Antwerp and Ghent .

The natural history museum is very rich, very beautiful and one of
the best conditioned I've visited in Europe.

The traveler who stops in Brussels should not fail to visit the palace
of the Duke of '_Aremberg_ "always open to foreigners with exquisite
condescension.

There are, in the library of the Duke, a thousand preciosities typography,
sculpture and antiques, and a gallery about 150 paintings, almost
all of great merit, many of them delicate miniatures of Flemish and
Dutch art.

After that, Cast a glance at the Royal Plaza, which boasts the magnificent
statue of Godfrey of Bouillon, the elegant and sumptuous _Parque_,
which is near the statue dedicated to the noble French General
Belliard, in memory of the recognition of independence from Belgium;
_Plaza of the small Congreso_, where stands the column of the
arrogance _Constitucion_, from which there is a magnificent panorama,
and the "Plaza of the Martyrs" in the lower town, where the simple
and curious monument dedicated to the memory of those patriots who
died in 1830 fighting for the independence and freedom.

All these monuments do much honor to Belgians: a people who know to
maintain the cult of the great patriotic memories will not be a
slave forever.

To complete the visit to Brussels, headed towards the Botanical Gardens,
and then, at five in the afternoon, the Zoo.

Both owe their existence to individual initiative, while the first
is particularly protected by the state.

The Botanical Gardens, very happily situated in a mixed area of
four and half hectares, at the foot of a _boulevard_ has the advantage
that the whole world can admire from the camellon funny that the
whole temple of Flora.

His immense greenhouses are the best in Europe, and is in the midst
of their groves that are the most elegant people in the city,
admiring the primordial nature of the help of science and art.

The zoo, which belongs to a company of shareholders, is one of the most
picturesque in Europe, but only since 1851 do not yet have an abundance
of animals of each species then achieved.

In the center of his graceful groves is a square dominated by a temple,
surrounded by cafes or canteens, where they met in the evening a large
gathering of foreigners and people of the city, attending music
concerts.

Nothing more delicious than one of those concerts art human outdoor
concerts in the middle of the nature formed by the thousand voices
of soprano and contralto, tenor, baritone and bass, cast to the
wind caught the guests there to represent the animal kingdom the
world.

Just as heard in shouts, whistles and gorgeos the voices of all
those languages that _hablan_ mysterious animals of any species,
just as is seen in the circle of human groups and garden accent all
European languages.

There is talk around happily: make your comments bruseleses the local
passengers are told each other of their recent adventures and excursions,
the artists, politicians and literary discussions on the branches
grow, and women talk about fashion, flowers and other pleasant
trifles , and music completes the seduction of the interesting
spectacle, and the traveler departs Brussels after taking the most
pleasant impressions of the hospital capital, stylish, vibrant,
liberal and progressive. * * * * * CHAPTER V.

THE FLEMISH COUNTRY. General Idea Flanders .-- The race, literature and
art flamencos. - Ghent: its structure and alderredores civilians .--
Monuments and institutes, the _Beffroi_ .-- Monuments and their
traditions or religious institutions, the _Béguinage_ -- Objets
d'art, paintings of the Museum, the Botanical Garden and the zoo.

In the first chapter of this part of my NARRATION I reminded the reader
in brief the various dominations was subjected successively to the
country of Belgium.

So when it comes to Flanders in particular, only add that, having once
formed a single social and political body under the name of "Count of
Flanders," was divided at the beginning of the last century into
three portions: Flanders _holandesa_ , which is now called Flanders
province _oriental_; Flanders _austríaca_ or the province of the
same name _occidental_; _francesa_ and Flanders, which is now the
department of _Norte_ in France.

If geographically and historically speaking Flemish in Belgium the
country is reduced to the two provinces of East and West, between
the sea-coast, the French and Dutch borders the provinces of Antwerp
and the Brabant and South Hainau, strictly speaking ethnic unity
is more considerable, as the Flemish race not only has some 790,000
individuals in the Eastern Province, 640,000 in the West and 440,000
in Antwerp, but also a respectable number in the Brabant Belgian
and other provinces, reaching in its entirety as 2490000 individuals
who speak the language and preserve the traditions of the Flemish
nationality.

It is clear that the two major groups that make up the Belgian
nation in the main (as the Germanic group is relatively small), the
Flemish have shown that the most consistency in their moral, in
preserving their customs and traditions, the nature of their municipal
institutions, and its industrial, agricultural and commercial.

In the Flemish country everything has a hallmark, which is also evident
in the individual features in the structure of cities and villages
in monuments and religious institutes in the nature of the industries,
the arts, in the language and in the Catholic sense of the population,
generally adverse to the liberal tendencies that prevail in the
French population. ghent, one time capital of Flanders, is the
social and political center of the Eastern Province, counting among
its members as 112,000 inhabitants.

The province, which is mainly agricultural and manufacturer, has some other
significant population centers, such as _San-Nicolas_ (with 22,000
inhab.)

_Lokeren_ (With 17200), _Renaix_ (with 14,000) and _Ecloo_ (with
9500), places significant their tissues of flax plants and other
objects, or their busy férias.

Throughout this interesting province, and in the West, agriculture
has achieved a high degree of perfection, and their products are
very valuable, especially flax and hemp for the manufacture in
beetroot, which fuels many sugar factories, oleaginous grains, hops,
snuff, cereals and potatoes.

As the whole region is flat and generally devoid of forests, the
country is going to be flown from Brussels to Ghent would be
monotonous and desapacible, if agriculture does not embellish their
finery.

Not devoid of charm these plains capped almost entirely covered
with plantations of waving wheat and flax as lakes vegetables breezes
blow, and in places dotted engage large beet or potatoes, Tabacal
small, elegant or groups Plant hop intertwined with festoons and
graceful pavilions are floating a nice yellowish green.

This set of inks in the varied vegetation, which contrast the dark
green of the popes, of the acute and pale Tabacal of hop gardens
and linen, in purple hue of beets and a little confusing for oilseed
plants ; this set, say, has its particular grace, at the bottom of
the vast horizon where you lose an eye while visiting the provinces
of Flanders. * * * * * I said that in speaking of Brussels Belgian
literature, mainly in French, suffers for its lack of a national
character of the influence there cosmopolitanism of the press.

In the provinces of Flemish population is the same for different
causes, but the phenomenon manifests itself differently.

There are major efforts to produce a kind of literary or reaction
to the resurrection of flamenco as a literary language, and so far
these efforts have been of little consequence.

In Belgium there is the phenomenon of dominance of one official language,
French is spoken not only by the minority of the population. In the north
and northwest of the country does not speak Flemish, but in the
east and south-east _wallon_ spoken in the south, French in other
provinces, the German corrupted something.

But still collecting all the population in Flanders is not a single
group, it is still obviously outnumbered regarding the language spoken
Dutch.

And yet, the French language has been imposed throughout the country
as an official language, compulsory and exclusive national affairs, and
even many municipal.

We understand very well that this has done much to inflame the fight
of principles and tendencies which divide the two major parties in
Belgium.

Indeed, the French there is the language of liberal progressives,
as the Flemish, in general, the language of the conservative party
or 'Catholic', and as a language was to prevail in the world
officially to avoid anarchy, it is natural that the dominant party
has imposed its own, which is the body of European liberalism derived
from the Reformation and the French Revolution.

Los Flamencos argue against the dominance of Switzerland example,
where the three main languages coexist under the foot of perfect
equality, at least in Parliament.

But the Liberals retort that Belgium is not a confederation of
independent states, that instance is not applicable.

One factor that contributes a lot to drive competition language is the
memory of the last two foreign dominations weighed on the country.

The Liberals, in a spirit of national independence, rejected the
language that reminds the Dutch domination of fifteen years, while
the Flemish or conservatives, encouraged the same spirit, they
reject the French language as a symbol of domination imposed on the
country from France late nineteenth century until 1814.

I do not know if the Flemish language has strong elements of vitality,
and if he can help rebuild a respectable original literature and
in modern times.

But it seems clear that the French tend to absorb all the intellectuals
of the Belgian people, and gaining ground day by day, and I also
believe that the Flemish have had the generous desire to reconstitute
the literature itself has taken the worst possible way , thereby
compromising the success of his company, whose head was talented
writers such as Henri Conscience, Renier, Snieders, Dautzenberg,
Van Duyse and others are not without value.

These writers, instead of using their language to defend freedom and
progress, have despopularizado, making it an instrument of reactionary,
against the current century. Thus their work was twofold, as had also
resurrect the corpse of _derecho divino_ (or ultramontanismo) and the
quasi-body of the very modest Flemish literature. It is curious to
note that newspapers and books are published in Flemish language
are, with rare exceptions, for backward trends. A language that
voluntarily seeks to serve the dead, of lost causes, can not but
succumb, as a literary luck latin running, because every language
is the instrument of ideas, can not regenerate if not trends and
interests of regeneration.

I think more or less true of the fine arts of Flemish literature, but
with this difference: that in fact the ancient literature of
Flanders had little importance, while, conversely, the fine arts
had a very strong influence and reputation in Ghent and Bruges, in
terms of schools have formed and produced numerous works on master
painting.

If museums attest to the current high level of advancement reached by the
Flemish school in the art of Van Eyck and Memling, are no less
precious monuments in Ghent and Bruges, Antwerp and in Brussels,
outlines the progress made by the architecture and sculpture, as
well as antiques in museums are testing advanced reaching other
arts, such as gold, the cinceladura, jewelry, embroidery and so on.

However, it is clear that, despite the laudable efforts of the artists
of today to keep alive the traditions of flamenco, are far from
having achieved great results.

The regeneration of the fine arts and must be run with the ideas and
customs: and so like today is not possible to trace any literature
with worn elements and ideas that have completed their time, it
is possible to produce the regeneration of art, whether the artist
does not seek its inspiration in the needs, beliefs and modern
situations.

The art that does not feature the revelation of his time, not real art,
but a bad back, an exhumation infertile - impotent reaction that leads
to the same trends germ ruin. * * * * * Any traveler who wants to
understand the landscape of Ghent and understand a little of the
complicated structure of this interesting town (home of the unfortunate
Emperor Charles V of Germany and King of Spain) starts climbing to
the top of the _Beffroi_, curious monument in all respects eminently
historical Ghent and is characteristic of almost all the old Flemish
and Dutch cities, which in other times were able to give their
letters of sovereign franchises, privileges and freedoms.

The Beffroy, started building from the late twelfth century and situated
in the heart of the city is, so to speak, the historical symbol of the
freedoms municipal former glories, the bloody civil strife and the
old institutions and customs of the Ghent.

It was real privilege under which citizens of Ghent, in industrial
corporations enregimentados always jealous of their freedoms and
monopolies, tenacious, indomitable, driven and determined, kept
their enormous municipal tower (the _Beffroi_) as a watchtower in
constant surveillance.

From there he observed the movements of the enemy (the sovereign)
and the bells of the towers called the citizens to arm themselves
and defend themselves when freedom or privileges were in danger,
or to discuss in public squares on the serious topics of interest
common that arise.

Today the curious story of the tower is not interesting but because
it does evoke tradition, since freedom is no longer a privilege or
_fuero_ city folk to become law, the irrevocable and fundamental
political and social.

The Beffroi is however very interesting for their fine play of 44
bells, which are each time the symphony reló a mark of the day.

The huge tower measuring up to the third gallery, where are the
bells, 118 meters high and the crowning of the building still
stands some 36 meters away.

The mechanism of this great orchestra of bells, which pleases both
the Ghent is very curious, and the traveler can not but consider
it with entertainment, as an object characteristic.

There is a unique landscape, which can not but like in Bruges, and
to some extent in some Dutch cities.

Round dilate vast horizon in the plains of Flanders, as interesting
for their crops, their channels and _polders_, not because it is
monotonous topography.

Wherever you hamlets or small towns, country houses, cottages and
a wide variety sown, the _Escalda_ and _Lys_ which have their
confluence on one side of the city plow lazily plains, spreading
everywhere, skillfully exploited its waters, life and wealth -
either feeding the irrigation canals and navigation of active, or
facilitating the work of countless plants, factories, refineries
and mills.

The game of two rivers, the canals of Bruges, the great canal that leads
directly into the sea, many irrigation ditches, and numerous
excellent rail and highway routes that rotate in all directions,
it is extremely interesting, and gives a lot of animation the vast
panorama of greenery that surrounds the great Flemish town.

But if he gets the look at irregular mass in the city, she gets
lost in the strange labyrinth of streets so narrow, tortuous,
extravagant, winding channels of both the within the city, cutting
in all directions, linked or forked hundred modes of a swarm of
monuments, old houses, all unique, or showing on the streets and
squares his bizarre facades, was rising in rows on the tortuous
channels , whose muddy waters sinking foundations and thick walls.

Everywhere there are buildings that recall the glory or Flemish traditions
or showing modern progress.

Everywhere also paramount gardens and orchards, and factories of
all kinds, which indicate the nature of the city under an economic
point of view.

"A gift for us?" cried the Fox, pretending to be insulted. "Why, of
course not!"

"Of course not!" repeated the Cat.

"We do not work for gain," answered the Fox. "We work only to enrich
others."

"To enrich others!" repeated the Cat.

"What good people," thought Pinocchio to himself. And forgetting his
father, the new coat, the A-B-C book, and all his good resolutions, he
said to the Fox and to the Cat:

"Let us go. I am with you."


CHAPTER 13

The Inn of the Red Lobster


Cat and Fox and Marionette walked and walked and walked. At last, toward
evening, dead tired, they came to the Inn of the Red Lobster.

"Let us stop here a while," said the Fox, "to eat a bite and rest for
a few hours. At midnight we'll start out again, for at dawn tomorrow we
must be at the Field of Wonders."

They went into the Inn and all three sat down at the same table.
However, not one of them was very hungry.

The poor Cat felt very weak, and he was able to eat only thirty-five
mullets with tomato sauce and four portions of tripe with cheese.
Moreover, as he was so in need of strength, he had to have four more
helpings of butter and cheese.

The Fox, after a great deal of coaxing, tried his best to eat a little.
The doctor had put him on a diet, and he had to be satisfied with a
small hare dressed with a dozen young and tender spring chickens. After
the hare, he ordered some partridges, a few pheasants, a couple of
rabbits, and a dozen frogs and lizards. That was all. He felt ill, he
said, and could not eat another bite.

Pinocchio ate least of all. He asked for a bite of bread and a few nuts
and then hardly touched them. The poor fellow, with his mind on the
Field of Wonders, was suffering from a gold-piece indigestion.

Supper over, the Fox said to the Innkeeper:

"Give us two good rooms, one for Mr. Pinocchio and the other for me and
my friend. Before starting out, we'll take a little nap. Remember to
call us at midnight sharp, for we must continue on our journey."

"Yes, sir," answered the Innkeeper, winking in a knowing way at the Fox
and the Cat, as if to say, "I understand."

As soon as Pinocchio was in bed, he fell fast asleep and began to dream.
He dreamed he was in the middle of a field. The field was full of
vines heavy with grapes. The grapes were no other than gold coins which
tinkled merrily as they swayed in the wind. They seemed to say, "Let him
who wants us take us!"

Just as Pinocchio stretched out his hand to take a handful of them, he
was awakened by three loud knocks at the door. It was the Innkeeper who
had come to tell him that midnight had struck.

"Are my friends ready?" the Marionette asked him.

"Indeed, yes! They went two hours ago."

"Why in such a hurry?"

"Unfortunately the Cat received a telegram which said that his
first-born was suffering from chilblains and was on the point of death.
He could not even wait to say good-by to you."

"Did they pay for the supper?"

"How could they do such a thing? Being people of great refinement, they
did not want to offend you so deeply as not to allow you the honor of
paying the bill."

"Too bad! That offense would have been more than pleasing to me," said
Pinocchio, scratching his head.

"Where did my good friends say they would wait for me?" he added.

"At the Field of Wonders, at sunrise tomorrow morning."

Pinocchio paid a gold piece for the three suppers and started on his way
toward the field that was to make him a rich man.

He walked on, not knowing where he was going, for it was dark, so dark
that not a thing was visible. Round about him, not a leaf stirred. A few
bats skimmed his nose now and again and scared him half to death. Once
or twice he shouted, "Who goes there?" and the far-away hills echoed
back to him, "Who goes there? Who goes there? Who goes. . . ?"

As he walked, Pinocchio noticed a tiny insect glimmering on the trunk of
a tree, a small being that glowed with a pale, soft light.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I am the ghost of the Talking Cricket," answered the little being in a
faint voice that sounded as if it came from a far-away world.

"What do you want?" asked the Marionette.

"I want to give you a few words of good advice. Return home and give the
four gold pieces you have left to your poor old father who is weeping
because he has not seen you for many a day."

"Tomorrow my father will be a rich man, for these four gold pieces will
become two thousand."

"Don't listen to those who promise you wealth overnight, my boy. As a
rule they are either fools or swindlers! Listen to me and go home."

"But I want to go on!"

"The hour is late!"

"I want to go on."

"The night is very dark."

"I want to go on."

"The road is dangerous."

"I want to go on."

"Remember that boys who insist on having their own way, sooner or later
come to grief."

"The same nonsense. Good-by, Cricket."

"Good night, Pinocchio, and may Heaven preserve you from the Assassins."

There was silence for a minute and the light of the Talking Cricket
disappeared suddenly, just as if someone had snuffed it out. Once again
the road was plunged in darkness.


CHAPTER 14

Pinocchio, not having listened to the good advice of the Talking
Cricket, falls into the hands of the Assassins.


"Dear, oh, dear! When I come to think of it," said the Marionette to
himself, as he once more set out on his journey, "we boys are really
very unlucky. Everybody scolds us, everybody gives us advice, everybody
warns us. If we were to allow it, everyone would try to be father and
mother to us; everyone, even the Talking Cricket. Take me, for example.
Just because I would not listen to that bothersome Cricket, who knows
how many misfortunes may be awaiting me! Assassins indeed! At least I
have never believed in them, nor ever will. To speak sensibly, I think
assassins have been invented by fathers and mothers to frighten children
who want to run away at night. And then, even if I were to meet them
on the road, what matter? I'll just run up to them, and say, 'Well,
signori, what do you want? Remember that you can't fool with me! Run
along and mind your business.' At such a speech, I can almost see those
poor fellows running like the wind. But in case they don't run away, I
can always run myself. . ."

Pinocchio was not given time to argue any longer, for he thought he
heard a slight rustle among the leaves behind him.

He turned to look and behold, there in the darkness stood two big black
shadows, wrapped from head to foot in black sacks. The two figures
leaped toward him as softly as if they were ghosts.

"Here they come!" Pinocchio said to himself, and, not knowing where to
hide the gold pieces, he stuck all four of them under his tongue.

He tried to run away, but hardly had he taken a step, when he felt his
arms grasped and heard two horrible, deep voices say to him: "Your money
or your life!"

On account of the gold pieces in his mouth, Pinocchio could not say
a word, so he tried with head and hands and body to show, as best he
could, that he was only a poor Marionette without a penny in his pocket.

"Come, come, less nonsense, and out with your money!" cried the two
thieves in threatening voices.

Once more, Pinocchio's head and hands said, "I haven't a penny."

"Out with that money or you're a dead man," said the taller of the two
Assassins.

"Dead man," repeated the other.

"And after having killed you, we will kill your father also."

"Your father also!"

"No, no, no, not my Father!" cried Pinocchio, wild with terror; but as
he screamed, the gold pieces tinkled together in his mouth.

"Ah, you rascal! So that's the game! You have the money hidden under
your tongue. Out with it!"

But Pinocchio was as stubborn as ever.

"Are you deaf? Wait, young man, we'll get it from you in a twinkling!"

One of them grabbed the Marionette by the nose and the other by the
chin, and they pulled him unmercifully from side to side in order to
make him open his mouth.

All was of no use. The Marionette's lips might have been nailed
together. They would not open.

In desperation the smaller of the two Assassins pulled out a long knife
from his pocket, and tried to pry Pinocchio's mouth open with it.

Quick as a flash, the Marionette sank his teeth deep into the Assassin's
hand, bit it off and spat it out. Fancy his surprise when he saw that it
was not a hand, but a cat's paw.

Encouraged by this first victory, he freed himself from the claws of
his assailers and, leaping over the bushes along the road, ran swiftly
across the fields. His pursuers were after him at once, like two dogs
chasing a hare.

After running seven miles or so, Pinocchio was well-nigh exhausted.
Seeing himself lost, he climbed up a giant pine tree and sat there
to see what he could see. The Assassins tried to climb also, but they
slipped and fell.

Far from giving up the chase, this only spurred them on. They gathered a
bundle of wood, piled it up at the foot of the pine, and set fire to it.
In a twinkling the tree began to sputter and burn like a candle blown by
the wind. Pinocchio saw the flames climb higher and higher. Not wishing
to end his days as a roasted Marionette, he jumped quickly to the ground
and off he went, the Assassins close to him, as before.

Dawn was breaking when, without any warning whatsoever, Pinocchio found
his path barred by a deep pool full of water the color of muddy coffee.

What was there to do? With a "One, two, three!" he jumped clear across
it. The Assassins jumped also, but not having measured their distance
well--splash!!!--they fell right into the middle of the pool. Pinocchio
who heard the splash and felt it, too, cried out, laughing, but never
stopping in his race:

"A pleasant bath to you, signori!"

He thought they must surely be drowned and turned his head to see. But
there were the two somber figures still following him, though their
black sacks were drenched and dripping with water.


CHAPTER 15

The Assassins chase Pinocchio, catch him, and hang him to the branch of
a giant oak tree.


As he ran, the Marionette felt more and more certain that he would have
to give himself up into the hands of his pursuers. Suddenly he saw a
little cottage gleaming white as the snow among the trees of the forest.

"If I have enough breath left with which to reach that little house, I
may be saved," he said to himself.

Not waiting another moment, he darted swiftly through the woods, the
Assassins still after him.

After a hard race of almost an hour, tired and out of breath, Pinocchio
finally reached the door of the cottage and knocked. No one answered.

He knocked again, harder than before, for behind him he heard the steps
and the labored breathing of his persecutors. The same silence followed.

As knocking was of no use, Pinocchio, in despair, began to kick and bang
against the door, as if he wanted to break it. At the noise, a window
opened and a lovely maiden looked out. She had azure hair and a face
white as wax. Her eyes were closed and her hands crossed on her breast.
With a voice so weak that it hardly could be heard, she whispered:

"No one lives in this house. Everyone is dead."

"Won't you, at least, open the door for me?" cried Pinocchio in a
beseeching voice.

"I also am dead."

"Dead? What are you doing at the window, then?"

Divided into seven cathedral naves supported by six orders of columns
(unique among all the cathedrals) seems a forest of masts rock
climbing towards the sky with the lightness of one hundred large
lianas.

Take pity on a poor boy who is being chased by two Assass--"

He did not finish, for two powerful hands grasped him by the neck and
the same two horrible voices growled threateningly: "Now we have you!"

The Marionette, seeing death dancing before him, trembled so hard that
the joints of his legs rattled and the coins tinkled under his tongue.

"Well," the Assassins asked, "will you open your mouth now or not? And
above all: let him not remember how clever you are. (Leutnant.)

I understand - he could be jealous. (Dame.) Tell him nothing other than
that you are determined to capture my brother or when the tests
used to go.

The Assassins looked at each other in
dismay, holding the handles of the knives in their hands.

"I understand," said one of them to the other, "there is nothing left to
do now but to hang him."

"To hang him," repeated the other.

They tied Pinocchio's hands behind his shoulders and slipped the noose
around his neck. Throwing the rope over the high limb of a giant oak
tree, they pulled till the poor Marionette hung far up in space.

Satisfied with their work, they sat on the grass waiting for Pinocchio
to give his last gasp. But after three hours the Marionette's eyes were
still open, his mouth still shut and his legs kicked harder than ever.

Tired of waiting, the Assassins called to him mockingly: "Good-by till
tomorrow. When we return in the morning, we hope you'll be polite enough
to let us find you dead and gone and with your mouth wide open." With
these words they went.

A few minutes went by and then a wild wind started to blow. As it
shrieked and moaned, the poor little sufferer was blown to and fro
like the hammer of a bell. The rocking made him seasick and the noose,
becoming tighter and tighter, choked him. Little by little a film
covered his eyes.

Death was creeping nearer and nearer, and the Marionette still hoped
for some good soul to come to his rescue, but no one appeared. As he was
about to die, he thought of his poor old father, and hardly conscious of
what he was saying, murmured to himself:

"Oh, Father, dear Father! If you were only here!"

These were his last words. He closed his eyes, opened his mouth,
stretched out his legs, and hung there, as if he were dead.


CHAPTER 16

The Lovely Maiden with Azure Hair sends for the poor Marionette, puts
him to bed, and calls three Doctors to tell her if Pinocchio is dead or
alive.


If the poor Marionette had dangled there much longer, all hope would
have been lost. Luckily for him, the Lovely Maiden with Azure Hair once
again looked out of her window. Filled with pity at the sight of the
poor little fellow being knocked helplessly about by the wind, she
clapped her hands sharply together three times.

At the signal, a loud whirr of wings in quick flight was heard and a
large Falcon came and settled itself on the window ledge.

"What do you command, my charming Fairy?" asked the Falcon, bending his
beak in deep reverence (for it must be known that, after all, the Lovely
Maiden with Azure Hair was none other than a very kind Fairy who had
lived, for more than a thousand years, in the vicinity of the forest).

"Do you see that Marionette hanging from the limb of that giant oak
tree?"

"I see him."

"Very well. Fly immediately to him. With your strong beak, break the
knot which holds him tied, take him down, and lay him softly on the
grass at the foot of the oak."

The Falcon flew away and after two minutes returned, saying, "I have
done what you have commanded."

"How did you find him? Alive or dead?"

"At first glance, I thought he was dead. But I found I was wrong, for
as soon as I loosened the knot around his neck, he gave a long sigh and
mumbled with a faint voice, 'Now I feel better!'"

The Fairy clapped her hands twice. A magnificent Poodle appeared,
walking on his hind legs just like a man. He was dressed in court
livery. A tricorn trimmed with gold lace was set at a rakish angle over
a wig of white curls that dropped down to his waist. He wore a jaunty
coat of chocolate-colored velvet, with diamond buttons, and with two
huge pockets which were always filled with bones, dropped there
at dinner by his loving mistress. Breeches of crimson velvet, silk
stockings, and low, silver-buckled slippers completed his costume. His
tail was encased in a blue silk covering, which was to protect it from
the rain.

"Come, Medoro," said the Fairy to him. "Get my best coach ready and set
out toward the forest. On reaching the oak tree, you will find a poor,
half-dead Marionette stretched out on the grass. Lift him up tenderly,
place him on the silken cushions of the coach, and bring him here to
me."

The Poodle, to show that he understood, wagged his silk-covered tail two
or three times and set off at a quick pace.

In a few minutes, a lovely little coach, made of glass, with lining as
soft as whipped cream and chocolate pudding, and stuffed with canary
feathers, pulled out of the stable. It was drawn by one hundred pairs
of white mice, and the Poodle sat on the coachman's seat and snapped his
whip gayly in the air, as if he were a real coachman in a hurry to get
to his destination.

In a quarter of an hour the coach was back. The Fairy, who was waiting
at the door of the house, lifted the poor little Marionette in her arms,
took him to a dainty room with mother-of-pearl walls, put him to bed,
and sent immediately for the most famous doctors of the neighborhood to
come to her.

One after another the doctors came, a Crow, and Owl, and a Talking
Cricket.

"I should like to know, signori," said the Fairy, turning to the three
doctors gathered about Pinocchio's bed, "I should like to know if this
poor Marionette is dead or alive."

At this invitation, the Crow stepped out and felt Pinocchio's pulse, his
nose, his little toe. Then he solemnly pronounced the following words:

"To my mind this Marionette is dead and gone; but if, by any evil
chance, he were not, then that would be a sure sign that he is still
alive!"

"I am sorry," said the Owl, "to have to contradict the Crow, my famous
friend and colleague. To my mind this Marionette is alive; but if, by
any evil chance, he were not, then that would be a sure sign that he is
wholly dead!"

"And do you hold any opinion?" the Fairy asked the Talking Cricket.

"I say that a wise doctor, when he does not know what he is talking
about, should know enough to keep his mouth shut. However, that
Marionette is not a stranger to me. I have known him a long time!"

Pinocchio, who until then had been very quiet, shuddered so hard that
the bed shook.

"That Marionette," continued the Talking Cricket, "is a rascal of the
worst kind."

Pinocchio opened his eyes and closed them again.

"He is rude, lazy, a runaway."

Pinocchio hid his face under the sheets.

"That Marionette is a disobedient son who is breaking his father's
heart!"

Long shuddering sobs were heard, cries, and deep sighs. Think how
surprised everyone was when, on raising the sheets, they discovered
Pinocchio half melted in tears!

"When the dead weep, they are beginning to recover," said the Crow
solemnly.

"I am sorry to contradict my famous friend and colleague," said the Owl,
"but as far as I'm concerned, I think that when the dead weep, it means
they do not want to die."


CHAPTER 17

Pinocchio eats sugar, but refuses to take medicine. When the undertakers
come for him, he drinks the medicine and feels better. Afterwards he
tells a lie and, in punishment, his nose grows longer and longer.


As soon as the three doctors had left the room, the Fairy went to
Pinocchio's bed and, touching him on the forehead, noticed that he was
burning with fever.

She took a glass of water, put a white powder into it, and, handing it
to the Marionette, said lovingly to him:

"Drink this, and in a few days you'll be up and well."

Pinocchio looked at the glass, made a wry face, and asked in a whining
voice: "Is it sweet or bitter?"

"It is bitter, but it is good for you."

"If it is bitter, I don't want it."

"Drink it!"

"I don't like anything bitter."

"Drink it and I'll give you a lump of sugar to take the bitter taste
from your mouth."

"Where's the sugar?"

"Here it is," said the Fairy, taking a lump from a golden sugar bowl.

"I want the sugar first, then I'll drink the bitter water."

"Do you promise?"

"Yes."

The Fairy gave him the sugar and Pinocchio, after chewing and swallowing
it in a twinkling, said, smacking his lips:

"If only sugar were medicine! I should take it every day."

"Now keep your promise and drink these few drops of water. They'll be
good for you."

Pinocchio took the glass in both hands and stuck his nose into it. He
lifted it to his mouth and once more stuck his nose into it.

"It is too bitter, much too bitter! I can't drink it."

"How do you know, when you haven't even tasted it?"

"I can imagine it. I smell it. I want another lump of sugar, then I'll
drink it."

The Fairy, with all the patience of a good mother, gave him more sugar
and again handed him the glass.

"I can't drink it like that," the Marionette said, making more wry
faces.

"Why?"

"Because that feather pillow on my feet bothers me."

The Fairy took away the pillow.

"It's no use. I can't drink it even now."

"What's the matter now?"

"I don't like the way that door looks. It's half open."

The Fairy closed the door.

"I won't drink it," cried Pinocchio, bursting out crying. "I won't drink
this awful water. I won't. I won't! No, no, no, no!"

"My boy, you'll be sorry."

"I don't care."

"You are very sick."

"I don't care."

"In a few hours the fever will take you far away to another world."

"I don't care."

"Aren't you afraid of death?"

"Not a bit. I'd rather die than drink that awful medicine."

At that moment, the door of the room flew open and in came four Rabbits
as black as ink, carrying a small black coffin on their shoulders.

"What do you want from me?" asked Pinocchio.

"We have come for you," said the largest Rabbit.

"For me? But I'm not dead yet!"

"No, not dead yet; but you will be in a few moments since you have
refused to take the medicine which would have made you well."

"Oh, Fairy, my Fairy," the Marionette cried out, "give me that glass!
Quick, please! I don't want to die! No, no, not yet--not yet!"

And holding the glass with his two hands, he swallowed the medicine at
one gulp.

"Well," said the four Rabbits, "this time we have made the trip for
nothing."

And turning on their heels, they marched solemnly out of the room,
carrying their little black coffin and muttering and grumbling between
their teeth.

In a twinkling, Pinocchio felt fine. With one leap he was out of bed and
into his clothes.

The Fairy, seeing him run and jump around the room gay as a bird on
wing, said to him:

"My medicine was good for you, after all, wasn't it?"

"Good indeed! It has given me new life."

"Why, then, did I have to beg you so hard to make you drink it?"

"I'm a boy, you see, and all boys hate medicine more than they do
sickness."

"What a shame! Boys ought to know, after all, that medicine, taken in
time, can save them from much pain and even from death."

"Next time I won't have to be begged so hard. I'll remember those black
Rabbits with the black coffin on their shoulders and I'll take the glass
and pouf!--down it will go!"

"Come here now and tell me how it came about that you found yourself in
the hands of the Assassins."

"It happened that Fire Eater gave me five gold pieces to give to my
Father, but on the way, I met a Fox and a Cat, who asked me, 'Do you
want the five pieces to become two thousand?' And I said, 'Yes.' And
they said, 'Come with us to the Field of Wonders.' And I said, 'Let's
go.' Then they said, 'Let us stop at the Inn of the Red Lobster for
dinner and after midnight we'll set out again.' We ate and went to
sleep. When I awoke they were gone and I started out in the darkness all
alone. On the road I met two Assassins dressed in black coal sacks,
who said to me, 'Your money or your life!' and I said, 'I haven't any
money'; for, you see, I had put the money under my tongue. One of them
tried to put his hand in my mouth and I bit it off and spat it out; but
it wasn't a hand, it was a cat's paw. And they ran after me and I ran
and ran, till at last they caught me and tied my neck with a rope and
hanged me to a tree, saying, 'Tomorrow we'll come back for you and
you'll be dead and your mouth will be open, and then we'll take the gold
pieces that you have hidden under your tongue.'"

"Where are the gold pieces now?" the Fairy asked.

"I lost them," answered Pinocchio, but he told a lie, for he had them in
his pocket.

As he spoke, his nose, long though it was, became at least two inches
longer.

"And where did you lose them?"

"In the wood near by."

At this second lie, his nose grew a few more inches.

"If you lost them in the near-by wood," said the Fairy, "we'll look for
them and find them, for everything that is lost there is always found."

"Ah, now I remember," replied the Marionette, becoming more and more
confused. "I did not lose the gold pieces, but I swallowed them when I
drank the medicine."

At this third lie, his nose became longer than ever, so long that he
could not even turn around. If he turned to the right, he knocked it
against the bed or into the windowpanes; if he turned to the left, he
struck the walls or the door; if he raised it a bit, he almost put the
Fairy's eyes out.

The Fairy sat looking at him and laughing.

"Why do you laugh?" the Marionette asked her, worried now at the sight
of his growing nose.

"I am laughing at your lies."

"How do you know I am lying?"

"Lies, my boy, are known in a moment. There are two kinds of lies, lies
with short legs and lies with long noses. Yours, just now, happen to
have long noses."

Pinocchio, not knowing where to hide his shame, tried to escape from the
room, but his nose had become so long that he could not get it out of
the door.


CHAPTER 18

Pinocchio finds the Fox and the Cat again, and goes with them to sow the
gold pieces in the Field of Wonders.


Crying as if his heart would break, the Marionette mourned for hours
over the length of his nose. No matter how he tried, it would not go
through the door. The Fairy showed no pity toward him, as she was trying
to teach him a good lesson, so that he would stop telling lies, the
worst habit any boy may acquire. But when she saw him, pale with fright
and with his eyes half out of his head from terror, she began to feel
sorry for him and clapped her hands together. A thousand woodpeckers
flew in through the window and settled themselves on Pinocchio's nose.
They pecked and pecked so hard at that enormous nose that in a few
moments, it was the same size as before.

"How good you are, my Fairy," said Pinocchio, drying his eyes, "and how
much I love you!"

"I love you, too," answered the Fairy, "and if you wish to stay with me,
you may be my little brother and I'll be your good little sister."

"I should like to stay--but what about my poor father?"

"I have thought of everything. Your father has been sent for and before
night he will be here."

"Really?" cried Pinocchio joyfully. "Then, my good Fairy, if you are
willing, I should like to go to meet him. I cannot wait to kiss that
dear old man, who has suffered so much for my sake."

"Surely; go ahead, but be careful not to lose your way. Take the wood
path and you'll surely meet him."

Pinocchio set out, and as soon as he found himself in the wood, he
ran like a hare. When he reached the giant oak tree he stopped, for he
thought he heard a rustle in the brush. He was right. There stood the
Fox and the Cat, the two traveling companions with whom he had eaten at
the Inn of the Red Lobster.

"Here comes our dear Pinocchio!" cried the Fox, hugging and kissing him.
"How did you happen here?"

"How did you happen here?" repeated the Cat.

"It is a long story," said the Marionette. "Let me tell it to you. The
other night, when you left me alone at the Inn, I met the Assassins on
the road--"

"The Assassins? Oh, my poor friend! And what did they want?"

"They wanted my gold pieces."

"Rascals!" said the Fox.

"The worst sort of rascals!" added the Cat.

"But I began to run," continued the Marionette, "and they after me,
until they overtook me and hanged me to the limb of that oak."

Pinocchio pointed to the giant oak near by.

"Could anything be worse?" said the Fox.

"What an awful world to live in! Where shall we find a safe place for
gentlemen like ourselves?"

As the Fox talked thus, Pinocchio noticed that the Cat carried his right
paw in a sling.

"What happened to your paw?" he asked.

The Cat tried to answer, but he became so terribly twisted in his speech
that the Fox had to help him out.

"My friend is too modest to answer. I'll answer for him. About an hour
ago, we met an old wolf on the road. He was half starved and begged for
help. Having nothing to give him, what do you think my friend did out
of the kindness of his heart? With his teeth, he bit off the paw of
his front foot and threw it at that poor beast, so that he might have
something to eat."

As he spoke, the Fox wiped off a tear.

Pinocchio, almost in tears himself, whispered in the Cat's ear:

"If all the cats were like you, how lucky the mice would be!"

"And what are you doing here?" the Fox asked the Marionette.

"I am waiting for my father, who will be here at any moment now."

"And your gold pieces?"

"I still have them in my pocket, except one which I spent at the Inn of
the Red Lobster."

"To think that those four gold pieces might become two thousand
tomorrow. Why don't you listen to me? Why don't you sow them in the
Field of Wonders?"

"Today it is impossible. I'll go with you some other time."

"Another day will be too late," said the Fox.

"Why?"

"Because that field has been bought by a very rich man, and today is the
last day that it will be open to the public."

"How far is this Field of Wonders?"

"Only two miles away. Will you come with us? We'll be there in half an
hour. You can sow the money, and, after a few minutes, you will gather
your two thousand coins and return home rich. Are you coming?"

Pinocchio hesitated a moment before answering, for he remembered the
good Fairy, old Geppetto, and the advice of the Talking Cricket. Then
he ended by doing what all boys do, when they have no heart and little
brain. He shrugged his shoulders and said to the Fox and the Cat:

"Let us go! I am with you."

And they went.

They walked and walked for a half a day at least and at last they came
to the town called the City of Simple Simons. As soon as they entered
the town, Pinocchio noticed that all the streets were filled with
hairless dogs, yawning from hunger; with sheared sheep, trembling with
cold; with combless chickens, begging for a grain of wheat; with large
butterflies, unable to use their wings because they had sold all their
lovely colors; with tailless peacocks, ashamed to show themselves; and
with bedraggled pheasants, scuttling away hurriedly, grieving for their
bright feathers of gold and silver, lost to them forever.

Through this crowd of paupers and beggars, a beautiful coach passed now
and again. Within it sat either a Fox, a Hawk, or a Vulture.

"Where is the Field of Wonders?" asked Pinocchio, growing tired of
waiting.

"Be patient. It is only a few more steps away."

They passed through the city and, just outside the walls, they stepped
into a lonely field, which looked more or less like any other field.

"Here we are," said the Fox to the Marionette. "Dig a hole here and put
the gold pieces into it."

The Marionette obeyed. He dug the hole, put the four gold pieces into
it, and covered them up very carefully. "Now," said the Fox, "go to that
near-by brook, bring back a pail full of water, and sprinkle it over the
spot."

Pinocchio followed the directions closely, but, as he had no pail, he
pulled off his shoe, filled it with water, and sprinkled the earth which
covered the gold. Then he asked:

"Anything else?"

"Nothing else," answered the Fox. "Now we can go. Return here within
twenty minutes and you will find the vine grown and the branches filled
with gold pieces."

Pinocchio, beside himself with joy, thanked the Fox and the Cat many
times and promised them each a beautiful gift.

"We don't want any of your gifts," answered the two rogues. "It is
enough for us that we have helped you to become rich with little or no
trouble. For this we are as happy as kings."

They said good-by to Pinocchio and, wishing him good luck, went on their
way.


CHAPTER 19

Pinocchio is robbed of his gold pieces and, in punishment, is sentenced
to four months in prison.


If the Marionette had been told to wait a day instead of twenty minutes,
the time could not have seemed longer to him. He walked impatiently to
and fro and finally turned his nose toward the Field of Wonders.

And as he walked with hurried steps, his heart beat with an excited tic,
tac, tic, tac, just as if it were a wall clock, and his busy brain kept
thinking:

"What if, instead of a thousand, I should find two thousand? Or if,
instead of two thousand, I should find five thousand--or one hundred
thousand? I'll build myself a beautiful palace, with a thousand stables
filled with a thousand wooden horses to play with, a cellar overflowing
with lemonade and ice cream soda, and a library of candies and fruits,
cakes and cookies."

Thus amusing himself with fancies, he came to the field. There he
stopped to see if, by any chance, a vine filled with gold coins was
in sight. But he saw nothing! He took a few steps forward, and still
nothing! He stepped into the field. He went up to the place where he had
dug the hole and buried the gold pieces. Again nothing! Pinocchio became
very thoughtful and, forgetting his good manners altogether, he pulled a
hand out of his pocket and gave his head a thorough scratching.

As he did so, he heard a hearty burst of laughter close to his head. He
turned sharply, and there, just above him on the branch of a tree, sat a
large Parrot, busily preening his feathers.

"What are you laughing at?" Pinocchio asked peevishly.

"I am laughing because, in preening my feathers, I tickled myself under
the wings."

The Marionette did not answer. He walked to the brook, filled his shoe
with water, and once more sprinkled the ground which covered the gold
pieces.

Another burst of laughter, even more impertinent than the first, was
heard in the quiet field.

"Well," cried the Marionette, angrily this time, "may I know, Mr.
Parrot, what amuses you so?"

"I am laughing at those simpletons who believe everything they hear and
who allow themselves to be caught so easily in the traps set for them."

"Do you, perhaps, mean me?"

"I certainly do mean you, poor Pinocchio--you who are such a little
silly as to believe that gold can be sown in a field just like beans
or squash. I, too, believed that once and today I am very sorry for it.
Today (but too late!) I have reached the conclusion that, in order to
come by money honestly, one must work and know how to earn it with hand
or brain."

"I don't know what you are talking about," said the Marionette, who was
beginning to tremble with fear.

"Too bad! I'll explain myself better," said the Parrot. "While you were
away in the city the Fox and the Cat returned here in a great hurry.
They took the four gold pieces which you have buried and ran away as
fast as the wind. If you can catch them, you're a brave one!"

Pinocchio's mouth opened wide. He would not believe the Parrot's words
and began to dig away furiously at the earth. He dug and he dug till
the hole was as big as himself, but no money was there. Every penny was
gone.

In desperation, he ran to the city and went straight to the courthouse
to report the robbery to the magistrate. The Judge was a Monkey, a large
Gorilla venerable with age. A flowing white beard covered his chest and
he wore gold-rimmed spectacles from which the glasses had dropped
out. The reason for wearing these, he said, was that his eyes had been
weakened by the work of many years.

Pinocchio, standing before him, told his pitiful tale, word by word.
He gave the names and the descriptions of the robbers and begged for
justice.

The Judge listened to him with great patience. A kind look shone in his
eyes. He became very much interested in the story; he felt moved; he
almost wept. When the Marionette had no more to say, the Judge put out
his hand and rang a bell.

At the sound, two large Mastiffs appeared, dressed in Carabineers'
uniforms.

Then the magistrate, pointing to Pinocchio, said in a very solemn voice:

"This poor simpleton has been robbed of four gold pieces. Take him,
therefore, and throw him into prison." The Marionette, on hearing this
sentence passed upon him, was thoroughly stunned. He tried to protest,
but the two officers clapped their paws on his mouth and hustled him
away to jail.

There he had to remain for four long, weary months. And if it had not
been for a very lucky chance, he probably would have had to stay there
longer. For, my dear children, you must know that it happened just then
that the young emperor who ruled over the City of Simple Simons had
gained a great victory over his enemy, and in celebration thereof, he
had ordered illuminations, fireworks, shows of all kinds, and, best of
all, the opening of all prison doors.

"If the others go, I go, too," said Pinocchio to the Jailer.

"Not you," answered the Jailer. "You are one of those--"

"I beg your pardon," interrupted Pinocchio, "I, too, am a thief."

"In that case you also are free," said the Jailer. Taking off his cap,
he bowed low and opened the door of the prison, and Pinocchio ran out
and away, with never a look backward.


CHAPTER 20

Freed from prison, Pinocchio sets out to return to the Fairy; but on the
way he meets a Serpent and later is caught in a trap.


Fancy the happiness of Pinocchio on finding himself free! Without saying
yes or no, he fled from the city and set out on the road that was to
take him back to the house of the lovely Fairy.

It had rained for many days, and the road was so muddy that, at times,
Pinocchio sank down almost to his knees.

But he kept on bravely.

Tormented by the wish to see his father and his fairy sister with azure
hair, he raced like a greyhound. As he ran, he was splashed with mud
even up to his cap.

"How unhappy I have been," he said to himself. "And yet I deserve
everything, for I am certainly very stubborn and stupid! I will always
have my own way. I won't listen to those who love me and who have more
brains than I. But from now on, I'll be different and I'll try to become
a most obedient boy. I have found out, beyond any doubt whatever, that
disobedient boys are certainly far from happy, and that, in the long
run, they always lose out. I wonder if Father is waiting for me. Will
I find him at the Fairy's house? It is so long, poor man, since I have
seen him, and I do so want his love and his kisses. And will the Fairy
ever forgive me for all I have done? She who has been so good to me and
to whom I owe my life! Can there be a worse or more heartless boy than I
am anywhere?"

As he spoke, he stopped suddenly, frozen with terror.

What was the matter? An immense Serpent lay stretched across the road--a
Serpent with a bright green skin, fiery eyes which glowed and burned,
and a pointed tail that smoked like a chimney.

How frightened was poor Pinocchio! He ran back wildly for half a mile,
and at last settled himself atop a heap of stones to wait for the
Serpent to go on his way and leave the road clear for him.

He waited an hour; two hours; three hours; but the Serpent was always
there, and even from afar one could see the flash of his red eyes and
the column of smoke which rose from his long, pointed tail.

Pinocchio, trying to feel very brave, walked straight up to him and said
in a sweet, soothing voice:

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Serpent, would you be so kind as to step aside
to let me pass?"

He might as well have talked to a wall. The Serpent never moved.

Once more, in the same sweet voice, he spoke:

"You must know, Mr. Serpent, that I am going home where my father is
waiting for me. It is so long since I have seen him! Would you mind very
much if I passed?"

He waited for some sign of an answer to his questions, but the answer
did not come. On the contrary, the green Serpent, who had seemed, until
then, wide awake and full of life, became suddenly very quiet and still.
His eyes closed and his tail stopped smoking.

"Is he dead, I wonder?" said Pinocchio, rubbing his hands together
happily. Without a moment's hesitation, he started to step over him, but
he had just raised one leg when the Serpent shot up like a spring and
the Marionette fell head over heels backward. He fell so awkwardly that
his head stuck in the mud, and there he stood with his legs straight up
in the air.

At the sight of the Marionette kicking and squirming like a young
whirlwind, the Serpent laughed so heartily and so long that at last he
burst an artery and died on the spot.

Pinocchio freed himself from his awkward position and once more began
to run in order to reach the Fairy's house before dark. As he went, the
pangs of hunger grew so strong that, unable to withstand them, he jumped
into a field to pick a few grapes that tempted him. Woe to him!

No sooner had he reached the grapevine than--crack! went his legs.

The poor Marionette was caught in a trap set there by a Farmer for some
Weasels which came every night to steal his chickens.


CHAPTER 21

Pinocchio is caught by a Farmer, who uses him as a watchdog for his
chicken coop.


Pinocchio, as you may well imagine, began to scream and weep and beg;
but all was of no use, for no houses were to be seen and not a soul
passed by on the road.

Night came on.

A little because of the sharp pain in his legs, a little because of
fright at finding himself alone in the darkness of the field, the
Marionette was about to faint, when he saw a tiny Glowworm flickering
by. He called to her and said:

"Dear little Glowworm, will you set me free?"

"Poor little fellow!" replied the Glowworm, stopping to look at him with
pity. "How came you to be caught in this trap?"

"I stepped into this lonely field to take a few grapes and--"

"Are the grapes yours?"

"No."

"Who has taught you to take things that do not belong to you?"

"I was hungry."

"Hunger, my boy, is no reason for taking something which belongs to
another."

"It's true, it's true!" cried Pinocchio in tears. "I won't do it again."

Just then, the conversation was interrupted by approaching footsteps.
It was the owner of the field, who was coming on tiptoes to see if, by
chance, he had caught the Weasels which had been eating his chickens.

If the bullet count on the street and I am not very well remove the
entire cap off, it comes again I know I go into a house pretending
I was in it a business, or crossing another street if there is,
before it reaches to me, not to remove it.

That a gentleman should not be to one God and no King, nor is it just
being a man of good, neglects to take a lot of his person.

Acuerdóme shame that one day on my land and I wanted to put an officer in
his hands, because it limited because every time I said: "Keep God
in your worship."

Vos, Don dastardly villain!, I told myself, why do not you biencriado?
"Manténgaos God, I have to say as if anyone?

From there onwards, I am here ACULLICO bonete breathtaking and spoke
as it should. "And is not a good way to greet another man, I said,
tell God to keep it?" "See them much of enhoramala, "he said, the men
say that little art, but at the highest, as I do not have to speak less
of" Kiss the hands of your worship, "or at least: kiss Sir, your hands
"if the gentleman is speaking to me.

And craves, that of my home, I packed for maintenance, never again
will I suffer, or suffer, or suffer as a man of the world down to the
king that "Manténgaos God," she says. "" Sinner in Me !, I said, why
has so little care to stay, do not suffer because nobody I beg.

"Mostly, he said, I'm not so poor that I do not have a lot in my house,
that they be in standing and well-styled, sixteen miles away from where
I was born in that Costanilla Valladolid, worth more than two hundred
thousand times maravedís as could do great and good. And I have a loft,
which is not to be demolished as would every year over two hundred
pigeons.

And other things that I callus, so I stopped playing my dignity. "" And
I came to this city, thinking it would find a good seat, but has
not succeeded as I thought.

Canons and gentlemen of the church, found many, but people is so limited,
they are not out of their way around the world. Caballeros average
size also ask me, but they serve is great work.

Because of man you have to turn in malilla, and if not, "Go with God,"
he said. And the more times are the long-term payments, and more
and more used by some eaten. "Ya, when they want to satisfy your
conscience and reform sweating, you are left in the chamber or in
a sweaty jubón frayed cape or coat, and when a man sits with a gentleman
of title, still spends his laceria. Well, luckily for me there is no
ability to serve and to please them?

By God, if he topase very large I think that was his private and you do
a thousand services, because I know mentille as well as other
agradalle and a thousand wonders.

"Reílle as much grace and their customs, but were not the best in
the world.

Never say something that weighs you, but you meet a lot. Be very diligent
in his person, and in that fact.

Do not kill me for not doing things that he did not watch and start to
squabble, where you hear, the people of service, because they seem to
be very careful what he played. If your wheels with a servant, giving
him a dotted sharp turn to anger and to appear in favor of the accused.
Well tell you what was good and, on the other hand, malicious mofador,
malsinar to home and outside, and try to search for alien life to
know us, galas and many other of this quality, which today are used in
the palace and gentlemen seem right. "" And do not want to see
righteous men in their homes and before aborrescen and take the
little known and Nesci, and are not business people, or with whom
the Lord can be neglected.

And with the crafty use them, as I say, today, what I would use,
but do not want to find my fortune.

"This way regretted his adverse fortune my love, relationship of
person giving me courageous.

Well, being in this entered through a door and an old man.

The man asks for the rent of the house and the old, the bed.

They account for two months and he reached what he did not achieve
in one year.

I think we were twelve or thirteen real.

And he gave them very good answer: that would be bartered to the square
to a piece of two in the afternoon and return, but his departure
was no return.

By the afternoon so that they returned , but was too late.

I told them that was not yet come. Come the night and he did not, I fear
I had of being home alone and went to the neighbors and contéles
if and slept there.

Come the morning, come back and creditors asked about the neighbor,
but to estotra door.

Women will reply: "You see this guy and his door key."

They asked me for it, díjeles that he knew where she was, nor had
returned home since he came to barter the piece, and thought of me
and they had traded with ido.

I heard that, they go by a sheriff and a clerk.

And then again hélos do with them, and take the key and llámanme
and call witnesses and open the door and come to seize the wealth
of my love to be paid their debt.

They walked across the house and rid halláronla, as I counted, and
dícenme: "What is the wealth of your love, your chests and wall
panels and jewelry at home?"

"I do not know that," I replied.

"No Certainly, say, tonight it must have been lifted and taken somewhere.
bailiff Lord, turn to this guy, he knows where he is. "With this came
the sheriff and echóme of hand by the collar jubón, saying:" Mochacho
You are a prisoner if you discover your love for this property.

"I, like no other that I had seen (because it grabbed the collar
had been many and infinite times, but was meekly Labor to show the
way you do not track) I had me so scared and crying prometíle to
say what they asked.

"Well it is, they say, then say everything you know and have no fear."
sat at the Notary a UPPORT to escrebir inventory, wondering what had
. 'Sirs, I said, so this is my master, as he told me, is a very good
site of demolished houses and a loft. "" Well it is, they say.

It is worth it just for us to deliver debt. And what part of
town is that? "I asked." At home ", I replied." By God, it is good
business, they said.

And where is your land? "De Castilla la Vieja told me that he was, "I
told myself. Riéronse much the sheriff and the clerk said," Well this
relationship is to collect your debt, but better be. "The neighbors,
who were present, said:" Gentlemen This is an innocent child and
a few days with the squire is not known and the most that your
Mercedes, but once the pecadorcico will arrive here at our house
and we eat what we can for the love of God, and the nights was going
to sleep with him.

"View my innocence, dejáronme, by giving me free, and the sheriff and
the clerk asked men and women their rights, on which were a great
contest and noise, they must be relatives not to pay since there were
not what made the seizure.

The others said they had stopped going to another business that mattered
most to them, to come to that.

Finally, after many people have given, after a load with the old
porquerón Alfamar of old, but was not heavily loaded.

There are going to give all five voices.

I do not know what stopped.

I believe that the sinner Alfamar paid by all, and well used, because
time had to rest and relax after the work was going to rent.

So, as I have, I left my poor third master, do just knows I mean this,
then, noting everything that was against me, did my business upside
down so that the masters, usually young men left in me was anxious,
but my love left me and shy away from me.

[Illustration:] And Rinconete CERVANTES Cortadillo Molinillo In the sale
of which is set in the famous Finnish fields Alcudia, as we go to
Castilla Andalusia, one of the hot days of summer it may be found in two
boys age of fourteen to fifteen years, one or the other is not going
to seventeen, both in good grace, but ripped, broken and abused. Layer,
did not, the pants were of canvas, and half of meat , it is true that
amending the shoes, because one of the sandals were so brought as
taken, and the other chopped and soles, so that it served more than
Corme shoes.

She brought the montera a hunter green, the other toquilla without
a hat, low crown and wide skirt.

At the back, and beat the breasts, on a bring a shirt color camuza, waxed
and collection all in one sleeve, the other was bare and without
saddlebags, since he was at the heart looked like a large package,
which , which later appeared, was a neck of the callers Walloons,
starches with fat, so frayed and broken in, everything seemed to
rags.

They came wrapped in it and saved some cards ovate shape, because they
had spent exercise tips, and because durasen more, they left off
and that size. The two were burned from the sun, caireladas nails and
hands clean, and had a half sword, the other a knife hilt yellow, which
usually call cowboys.

Saliéronse two to nap in a portal or to shed before the sale is
made, and sitting border one another, which seemed older said to
the smallest - What land is vues mercy, sir gentleman, and to track
where?

- Mi land, sir knight - answered the question - do not know where to
go or not. - Well, actually - said the biggest - that does not seem vues
mercy from heaven, and it is not the place to make your place in it,
that force has to move forward. - That is - the answer medium - but
in truth I said what I said because my land is not mine, because I
do not have in it more of a father who is not my son and a stepmother who
treats me like alnado; the way is the venture would end there and
where I would find who you need for this miserable life. - And you
know the mercy vues did - asked the big one.

And the child replied: - I do not know but another I run like a hare, and
jump like a fallow deer, and cut very finely scissor. - All this is very
good, useful and helpful - said the big - because that clerk will
give the gift of mercy vues All Holy Holy Thursday because it cut
paper flower for the memorial. - It is not my court how development
- said the child - but my father, by the mercies of heaven is a
tailor and calcetero, and taught me cut Antipas, who, as vues mercy
knows avampiés with shims are averages, which by its very name is
usually called leggings, and córtolas so well that I could really
consider teacher, but the short has cornered me luck . - All this
and more happening for the good - said the big - and I have always
heard that good skills are the most lost, but still old vues thanks
to amend its venture.

But if I did not deceive the eye and I am not lying, because others
have mercy vues secret and not wishes. - I do have - answered the
little - but not for the public views as very market well said.

"To which replied the great: - Well I would say that I am one of
the most secret mozos much of which can be found, and to compel
mercy vues discover your chest and rest with me, you want to bind
first to discover my own, because I imagine that we are not without
mystery has joined the fate here, and I think We have to be, of
this until the last day of our lives, real friends.

Yo, Mr. Hidalgo, from natural soy Fuenfrida the place known by the
famous and illustrious passengers who pass by him Contino: my name is
Pedro's Corner, my father is a person of quality, because it is
the minister of Holy Cross: I mean which is bulero or buldero, as
he calls the common people.

Some days I accompanied him in the office, and he learned so that
no advantage would put the bulls on the presumption that most of it, but
one days Amateur Having more money than the bulls of the same bulls,
hugged me with a duffle bag, and he gave me and in Madrid where,
with the comfort that there usually are offered in a few days got
the guts to jail, and left him with folds that pañizuelo dismissal.

Wine which had carried the money behind me; prendiéronme, I was limited,
though, seeing that my little old gentlemen, who were content to me and
me up against the mosques aldabilla back for a while and they leave
four years of exile of the Court. I had patience, shrugged shoulders,
round and suffered the mosque, and left to fulfill my banishment,
so hurry, I had no place to look for horses.

I took my jewelry that I could and that seemed most needed, including
I took these cards - and this time discovered that have been said, that
brought in the neck - with whom I've earned my living by selling to
restaurants and from Madrid are here, playing blackjack, and even
mercy vues sees as the stars and abused, used a great virtue with
those who understand, not that it is not a lift as below, and if
it looked vues mercy in this game, you see how much has the advantage
that you know as a fact that has to the first letter, which can
serve as a point and eleven, that this advantage is envy blackjack,
the money stays at home.

     Outside
     dest, learned to cook an ambassador
     of a certain number
     of tricks Quinol
     and stop, also called the andaboba, as well as views that markets
can be examined in the court of Antipas, and can I be a teacher in
science vilhanesca.

By this I sure do not starve, because even reached a farmhouse, there
are those who want to spend time playing for a while and then Desto we
make the experience the two: armemos network and see if it falls some
of these birds that muleteers here is: I want to say that two to
play blackjack, as if it were real ones, if anyone wants to be
third, it will be the first to leave Pecunia. - Be in good time -
said another - and very big thanks to my views on mercy has made
me realize his life with me has meant that I did not disguised the
mine, which, diciéndola short, is this: I was born in Salamanca
between pious place since Medina del Campo and my father is a tailor;
enseñóme her job, and cut Tisera with my good genius, I jumped to
cut bags.

Enfadóme living close to the village and the treatment of lost my
mother, I left my village, I came to Toledo to exercise my profession,
and in it I have done wonders, because it touches the locket hangs,
no hidden faldriquera so that my fingers do not visit, nor my Tisera
not cut, but you are saving with the eyes of Argos.

And in four months I spent in that city, I was never caught between doors,
or run from fright or brackets, or blowing any tube, it is true that there
will be eight days which gave a double spy story of my ability to
Corregidor, which , my good lover, I would like to see me, but I, who,
being humble, I do not want to deal with people so serious, I tried
not to see me with him, and so I left the city with so much hurry, I had
no place accommodate horses or white, or some car back, or at least one
car. - That is clear - Rincon said - and as we know, there is no greatness
or what Altivec aquesas: confess plainly that we were white, even
shoes. - Be well - responded Diego Cortado, who said the child was
called - and since our friendship, as vues mercy, Mr.

Rincón said, must be perpetual comencémosla with laudable and holy
ceremonies.

Cortado and lifting hugged Diego Rincon, and Rincon him tenderly and
closely, and then the two were playing blackjack with cards and
referrals free of dust and straw, but not fat and malice, and a few
hands raised as well as the short corner, his teacher.

He was a mule to cool it to the portal, and requested that I wanted
to make third.

Acogiéronle gladly, and within half an hour he earned twelve and
twenty-two real maravedís, which was launched to give twelve to
twenty-two thousand grief.

And believing that the mule because boys do not defend, quitalles
wanted money, but they, putting a hand to her half-sword, the other
to the hilt yellow, gave so much to do that not to leave their
colleagues, no doubt it happened wrong.

At this time we went down the path to a troop of horse walkers, which
iban a nap on the sale of the Mayor, who is half a league below,
which, seeing the slope of the mule two girls, calmed, and told
them that if they were going to Seville, who came with them. - Here
we go - said Rincon - vues grants and serve us in every respect
missiles.

And without stopping leap ahead of the mules and went with them, leaving
the aggrieved and angry mule, and the landlord admired the good
upbringing of rogueries: they had been hearing her talk, They warned
that without it, and when they said to the mule had heard that the
cards they had were false, it pelaba beards, and I would go after
them for sale to recover their wealth, because he said it was great
affront and less assert that if two guys were misled as big a
hombrazo like him.

His colleagues and he was advised that it was not, not even by their
inability to publish and simple.

Anyway, these reasons he was told that although no consoling him, forced
him to stay. [Illustration: "... by putting his hand in a half sword,
the other to the hilt in yellow ...."]

This cut corner and were so good morning to serve walkers, who took
over the road to the haunches, and although they are tempted to
offer sometimes the bags masters of their means, not admitted, not
to lose as good an occasion trip Seville, where they had great
desire to be seen.

With all this, at the entrance to the city, went to prayer, and
through the door of the office, because of the record and almojarifazgo
you pay, could not contain Cortado not to cut the bag or suitcase
to haunches of the French brought a buddy and so, with the hilt of
his gave him so long, deep wound, which seemed clearly the bowels,
and he subtly drew two good shirts, a sundial and a booklet of
memory, things when they saw that they were not happy and thought
that since the French took the haunches that suitcase, not having
been busy with so little weight as it was those who had the prisoners,
and another wanted to touch him again, but did not, figuring that
it would cast less and placed in secure what was left.

Habíanse dismissed before the break to make up for it had sustained,
and another day in the shirts sold malbaratillo that is outside the
door of the Arenal, and Dell did twenty real. This done, we went to
see the city and admiróles the grandeur and magnificence of its
largest church, the great contest of the river people, because it
was time cargazón fleet and six galleys were in it, whose light did
sigh, and even fear the day that his guilt had to bring them to
dwell on them for life.

Drove many to see the boys of the esportilla who went there;
informáronse one of them was serving it, and if it was hard work,
and what profit.

A young Spaniard, who was who made him the question, replied that
the motion was rested and not paid Alcabala, and some days I walked
out with five and six real gain, which he ate and drank, and triumphed
as body of the king, free love who seek to secure bail and to eat
when they want, because all it was in the slightest taproom in the
city.

They do not seem evil to the relationship of two friends asturianillo,
nor dissatisfied office, because they seem to come from mold to use
with your deck and safety, comfort, offered to enter every house,
and then determined to purchase the necessary tools to usalle because
it could used without consideration.

And asking the Asturian what they buy, they replied that the two
small bags, clean and new, and each three espuertas palm, two large
and one small, which is distributed the meat, fish and fruit, and
in the costal , bread, and led him where he sold them, and them,
the money of the French galima, bought it all, and within two hours
might be new graduates in the profession, as they tested the
esportillas settled and the bags.

Avisóles champion of his posts where they had to come: in the
morning, the Butcher and the plaza of San Salvador, on fish, the
Fish and Costanilla; every evening to the river, on Thursday at the
Fair .

All this took abolition good memory, and another day tomorrow either
been planted in the plaza of San Salvador, and had just arrived
when the other boys around the office, which brand of the bags and
saw espuertas be new the square; hiciéronles thousand questions,
all answered with discretion and restraint.

This came half a student and soldier, and invited to clean the
espuertas of two rookies, which seemed to cut student named, and
the soldier to Rincon. - In God's name - both said. -- For good-start
the job - said corner - and that thanks me Premieres vues, my lord.

"To which the soldier replied: - The premiere will not be bad,
because I am earning and I am in love, and I have banquet today
about my lady friends. - Well, thanks to its load vues liked that
spirit I have and the strength to take this whole place, even if
necessary to help cook, I'll do very good.

Contentóse the Soldier of the grace of the good guy, and he said that
if he wanted to serve, that he would draw from that shot motion,
to which replied that corner, because that day you wore the first,
he wanted to leave so presto, up do at least he had good and bad,
and when not happy, he gave his word to serve him rather than a
canon.

Riós the soldier Cargol very well, mostróle the house of his lady
to the ahead and knew there would not need him, when he again sent
for him.

Rincón promised fidelity and good treatment, the soldier diol three
quarters, and a flight back to the plaza, not to lose time, because
stress also warned the Asturian diligence, and that where they fish
often, it is to say, mercy, or sardines, or ACEDI either could
take and make some saves, even the cost of that day, but this had
to be with all wisdom and warning, because they do not lose the
credit that was what mattered most at that exercise. to provide
that back corner, and found in the same job to be cut.

Llegóse cut a corner and asked him how ido.

Corner opened his hand, and the mostróle three quarters.

He grasped the
Fairy's hands and kissed them so hard that it looked as if he had lost
his head. Then lifting his face, he looked at her lovingly and asked:
"Tell me, little Mother, it isn't true that you are dead, is it?"

"It doesn't seem so," answered the Fairy, smiling.

"If you only knew how I suffered and how I wept when I read 'Here
lies--'"

"I know it, and for that I have forgiven you. The depth of your sorrow
made me see that you have a kind heart. There is always hope for boys
with hearts such as yours, though they may often be very mischievous.
This is the reason why I have come so far to look for you. From now on,
I'll be your own little mother."

"Oh! How lovely!" cried Pinocchio, jumping with joy.

"You will obey me always and do as I wish?"

"Gladly, very gladly, more than gladly!"

"Beginning tomorrow," said the Fairy, "you'll go to school every day."

Pinocchio's face fell a little.

"Then you will choose the trade you like best."

Pinocchio became more serious.

"What are you mumbling to yourself?" asked the Fairy.

"I was just saying," whined the Marionette in a whisper, "that it seems
too late for me to go to school now."

"No, indeed. Remember it is never too late to learn."

"But I don't want either trade or profession."

"Why?"

"Because work wearies me!"

"My dear boy," said the Fairy, "people who speak as you do usually end
their days either in a prison or in a hospital. A man, remember,
whether rich or poor, should do something in this world. No one can
find happiness without work. Woe betide the lazy fellow! Laziness is a
serious illness and one must cure it immediately; yes, even from early
childhood. If not, it will kill you in the end."

These words touched Pinocchio's heart. He lifted his eyes to his Fairy
and said seriously: "I'll work; I'll study; I'll do all you tell me.
After all, the life of a Marionette has grown very tiresome to me and I
want to become a boy, no matter how hard it is. You promise that, do you
not?"

"Yes, I promise, and now it is up to you."


CHAPTER 26

Pinocchio goes to the seashore with his friends to see the Terrible
Shark.


In the morning, bright and early, Pinocchio started for school.

Imagine what the boys said when they saw a Marionette enter the
classroom! They laughed until they cried. Everyone played tricks on him.
One pulled his hat off, another tugged at his coat, a third tried to
paint a mustache under his nose. One even attempted to tie strings to
his feet and his hands to make him dance.

For a while Pinocchio was very calm and quiet. Finally, however, he
lost all patience and turning to his tormentors, he said to them
threateningly:

"Careful, boys, I haven't come here to be made fun of. I'll respect you
and I want you to respect me."

"Hurrah for Dr. Know-all! You have spoken like a printed book!" howled
the boys, bursting with laughter. One of them, more impudent than the
rest, put out his hand to pull the Marionette's nose.

But he was not quick enough, for Pinocchio stretched his leg under the
table and kicked him hard on the shin.

"Oh, what hard feet!" cried the boy, rubbing the spot where the
Marionette had kicked him.

"And what elbows! They are even harder than the feet!" shouted another
one, who, because of some other trick, had received a blow in the
stomach.

With that kick and that blow Pinocchio gained everybody's favor.
Everyone admired him, danced attendance upon him, petted and caressed
him.

As the days passed into weeks, even the teacher praised him, for he saw
him attentive, hard working, and wide awake, always the first to come in
the morning, and the last to leave when school was over.

Pinocchio's only fault was that he had too many friends. Among these
were many well-known rascals, who cared not a jot for study or for
success.

The teacher warned him each day, and even the good Fairy repeated to him
many times:

"Take care, Pinocchio! Those bad companions will sooner or later make
you lose your love for study. Some day they will lead you astray."

"There's no such danger," answered the Marionette, shrugging his
shoulders and pointing to his forehead as if to say, "I'm too wise."

So it happened that one day, as he was walking to school, he met some
boys who ran up to him and said:

"Have you heard the news?"

"No!"

"A Shark as big as a mountain has been seen near the shore."

"Really? I wonder if it could be the same one I heard of when my father
was drowned?"

"We are going to see it. Are you coming?"

"No, not I. I must go to school."

"What do you care about school? You can go there tomorrow. With a lesson
more or less, we are always the same donkeys."

"And what will the teacher say?"

"Let him talk. He is paid to grumble all day long."

"And my mother?"

"Mothers don't know anything," answered those scamps.

"Do you know what I'll do?" said Pinocchio. "For certain reasons of
mine, I, too, want to see that Shark; but I'll go after school. I can
see him then as well as now."

"Poor simpleton!" cried one of the boys. "Do you think that a fish of
that size will stand there waiting for you? He turns and off he goes,
and no one will ever be the wiser."

"How long does it take from here to the shore?" asked the Marionette.
"One hour there and back."


"Very well, then. Let's see who gets there first!" cried Pinocchio.

At the signal, the little troop, with books under their arms, dashed
across the fields. Pinocchio led the way, running as if on wings, the
others following as fast as they could.

Now and again, he looked back and, seeing his followers hot and tired,
and with tongues hanging out, he laughed out heartily. Unhappy boy! If
he had only known then the dreadful things that were to happen to him on
account of his disobedience!


CHAPTER 27

The great battle between Pinocchio and his playmates. One is wounded.
Pinocchio is arrested.


Going like the wind, Pinocchio took but a very short time to reach the
shore. He glanced all about him, but there was no sign of a Shark. The
sea was as smooth as glass.

"Hey there, boys! Where's that Shark?" he asked, turning to his
playmates.

"He may have gone for his breakfast," said one of them, laughing.

"Or, perhaps, he went to bed for a little nap," said another, laughing
also.

From the answers and the laughter which followed them, Pinocchio
understood that the boys had played a trick on him.

"What now?" he said angrily to them. "What's the joke?"

"Oh, the joke's on you!" cried his tormentors, laughing more heartily
than ever, and dancing gayly around the Marionette.

"And that is--?"

"That we have made you stay out of school to come with us. Aren't you
ashamed of being such a goody-goody, and of studying so hard? You never
have a bit of enjoyment."

"And what is it to you, if I do study?"

"What does the teacher think of us, you mean?"

"Why?"

"Don't you see? If you study and we don't, we pay for it. After all,
it's only fair to look out for ourselves."

"What do you want me to do?"

"Hate school and books and teachers, as we all do. They are your worst
enemies, you know, and they like to make you as unhappy as they can."

"And if I go on studying, what will you do to me?"

"You'll pay for it!"

"Really, you amuse me," answered the Marionette, nodding his head.

"Hey, Pinocchio," cried the tallest of them all, "that will do. We are
tired of hearing you bragging about yourself, you little turkey cock!
You may not be afraid of us, but remember we are not afraid of you,
either! You are alone, you know, and we are seven."

"Like the seven sins," said Pinocchio, still laughing.

"Did you hear that? He has insulted us all. He has called us sins."

"Pinocchio, apologize for that, or look out!"

"Cuck--oo!" said the Marionette, mocking them with his thumb to his
nose.

"You'll be sorry!"

"Cuck--oo!"

"We'll whip you soundly!"

"Cuck--oo!"

"You'll go home with a broken nose!"

"Cuck--oo!"

"Very well, then! Take that, and keep it for your supper," called out
the boldest of his tormentors.

And with the words, he gave Pinocchio a terrible blow on the head.

Pinocchio answered with another blow, and that was the signal for the
beginning of the fray. In a few moments, the fight raged hot and heavy
on both sides.

Pinocchio, although alone, defended himself bravely. With those two
wooden feet of his, he worked so fast that his opponents kept at a
respectful distance. Wherever they landed, they left their painful mark
and the boys could only run away and howl.

Enraged at not being able to fight the Marionette at close quarters,
they started to throw all kinds of books at him. Readers, geographies,
histories, grammars flew in all directions. But Pinocchio was keen of
eye and swift of movement, and the books only passed over his head,
landed in the sea, and disappeared.

The fish, thinking they might be good to eat, came to the top of the
water in great numbers. Some took a nibble, some took a bite, but no
sooner had they tasted a page or two, than they spat them out with a wry
face, as if to say:

"What a horrid taste! Our own food is so much better!"

Meanwhile, the battle waxed more and more furious. At the noise, a large
Crab crawled slowly out of the water and, with a voice that sounded like
a trombone suffering from a cold, he cried out:

"Stop fighting, you rascals! These battles between boys rarely end well.
Trouble is sure to come to you!"

Poor Crab! He might as well have spoken to the wind. Instead of
listening to his good advice, Pinocchio turned to him and said as
roughly as he knew how:

"Keep quiet, ugly Gab! It would be better for you to chew a few cough
drops to get rid of that cold you have. Go to bed and sleep! You will
feel better in the morning."

In the meantime, the boys, having used all their books, looked around
for new ammunition. Seeing Pinocchio's bundle lying idle near-by, they
somehow managed to get hold of it.

One of the books was a very large volume, an arithmetic text, heavily
bound in leather. It was Pinocchio's pride. Among all his books, he
liked that one the best.

Thinking it would make a fine missile, one of the boys took hold of it
and threw it with all his strength at Pinocchio's head. But instead of
hitting the Marionette, the book struck one of the other boys, who, as
pale as a ghost, cried out faintly: "Oh, Mother, help! I'm dying!" and
fell senseless to the ground.

At the sight of that pale little corpse, the boys were so frightened
that they turned tail and ran. In a few moments, all had disappeared.

All except Pinocchio. Although scared to death by the horror of what
had been done, he ran to the sea and soaked his handkerchief in the cool
water and with it bathed the head of his poor little schoolmate. Sobbing
bitterly, he called to him, saying:

"Eugene! My poor Eugene! Open your eyes and look at me! Why don't you
answer? I was not the one who hit you, you know. Believe me, I didn't
do it. Open your eyes, Eugene? If you keep them shut, I'll die, too.
Oh, dear me, how shall I ever go home now? How shall I ever look at my
little mother again? What will happen to me? Where shall I go? Where
shall I hide? Oh, how much better it would have been, a thousand times
better, if only I had gone to school! Why did I listen to those boys?
They always were a bad influence! And to think that the teacher had told
me--and my mother, too!--'Beware of bad company!' That's what she said.
But I'm stubborn and proud. I listen, but always I do as I wish. And
then I pay. I've never had a moment's peace since I've been born! Oh,
dear! What will become of me? What will become of me?"

Pinocchio went on crying and moaning and beating his head. Again and
again he called to his little friend, when suddenly he heard heavy steps
approaching.

He looked up and saw two tall Carabineers near him.

"What are you doing stretched out on the ground?" they asked Pinocchio.

"I'm helping this schoolfellow of mine."

"Has he fainted?"

"I should say so," said one of the Carabineers, bending to look at
Eugene. "This boy has been wounded on the temple. Who has hurt him?"

"Not I," stammered the Marionette, who had hardly a breath left in his
whole body.

"If it wasn't you, who was it, then?"

"Not I," repeated Pinocchio.

"And with what was he wounded?"

"With this book," and the Marionette picked up the arithmetic text to
show it to the officer.

"And whose book is this?"

"Mine."

"Enough."

"Not another word! Get up as quickly as you can and come along with us."

"But I--"

"Come with us!"

"But I am innocent."

"Come with us!"

Before starting out, the officers called out to several fishermen
passing by in a boat and said to them:

"Take care of this little fellow who has been hurt. Take him home and
bind his wounds. Tomorrow we'll come after him."

They then took hold of Pinocchio and, putting him between them, said to
him in a rough voice: "March! And go quickly, or it will be the worse
for you!"

They did not have to repeat their words. The Marionette walked swiftly
along the road to the village. But the poor fellow hardly knew what
he was about. He thought he had a nightmare. He felt ill. His eyes saw
everything double, his legs trembled, his tongue was dry, and, try as he
might, he could not utter a single word. Yet, in spite of this numbness
of feeling, he suffered keenly at the thought of passing under the
windows of his good little Fairy's house. What would she say on seeing
him between two Carabineers?

They had just reached the village, when a sudden gust of wind blew off
Pinocchio's cap and made it go sailing far down the street.

"Would you allow me," the Marionette asked the Carabineers, "to run
after my cap?"

"Very well, go; but hurry."

The Marionette went, picked up his cap--but instead of putting it on his
head, he stuck it between his teeth and then raced toward the sea.

He went like a bullet out of a gun.

The Carabineers, judging that it would be very difficult to catch him,
sent a large Mastiff after him, one that had won first prize in all the
dog races. Pinocchio ran fast and the Dog ran faster. At so much noise,
the people hung out of the windows or gathered in the street, anxious to
see the end of the contest. But they were disappointed, for the Dog and
Pinocchio raised so much dust on the road that, after a few moments, it
was impossible to see them.


CHAPTER 28

Pinocchio runs the danger of being fried in a pan like a fish


During that wild chase, Pinocchio lived through a terrible moment when
he almost gave himself up as lost. This was when Alidoro (that was the
Mastiff's name), in a frenzy of running, came so near that he was on the
very point of reaching him.

The Marionette heard, close behind him, the labored breathing of the
beast who was fast on his trail, and now and again even felt his hot
breath blow over him.

Luckily, by this time, he was very near the shore, and the sea was in
sight; in fact, only a few short steps away.

As soon as he set foot on the beach, Pinocchio gave a leap and fell into
the water. Alidoro tried to stop, but as he was running very fast, he
couldn't, and he, too, landed far out in the sea. Strange though it may
seem, the Dog could not swim. He beat the water with his paws to hold
himself up, but the harder he tried, the deeper he sank. As he stuck his
head out once more, the poor fellow's eyes were bulging and he barked
out wildly, "I drown! I drown!"

"Drown!" answered Pinocchio from afar, happy at his escape.

"Help, Pinocchio, dear little Pinocchio! Save me from death!"

At those cries of suffering, the Marionette, who after all had a very
kind heart, was moved to compassion. He turned toward the poor animal
and said to him:

"But if I help you, will you promise not to bother me again by running
after me?"

"I promise! I promise! Only hurry, for if you wait another second, I'll
be dead and gone!"

Pinocchio hesitated still another minute. Then, remembering how his
father had often told him that a kind deed is never lost, he swam to
Alidoro and, catching hold of his tail, dragged him to the shore.

The poor Dog was so weak he could not stand. He had swallowed so much
salt water that he was swollen like a balloon. However, Pinocchio, not
wishing to trust him too much, threw himself once again into the sea. As
he swam away, he called out:

"Good-by, Alidoro, good luck and remember me to the family!"

"Good-by, little Pinocchio," answered the Dog. "A thousand thanks for
having saved me from death. You did me a good turn, and, in this world,
what is given is always returned. If the chance comes, I shall be
there."

Pinocchio went on swimming close to shore. At last he thought he had
reached a safe place. Glancing up and down the beach, he saw the opening
of a cave out of which rose a spiral of smoke.

"In that cave," he said to himself, "there must be a fire. So much the
better. I'll dry my clothes and warm myself, and then--well--"

His mind made up, Pinocchio swam to the rocks, but as he started to
climb, he felt something under him lifting him up higher and higher. He
tried to escape, but he was too late. To his great surprise, he found
himself in a huge net, amid a crowd of fish of all kinds and sizes, who
were fighting and struggling desperately to free themselves.

At the same time, he saw a Fisherman come out of the cave, a Fisherman
so ugly that Pinocchio thought he was a sea monster. In place of hair,
his head was covered by a thick bush of green grass. Green was the skin
of his body, green were his eyes, green was the long, long beard that
reached down to his feet. He looked like a giant lizard with legs and
arms.

When the Fisherman pulled the net out of the sea, he cried out joyfully:

"Blessed Providence! Once more I'll have a fine meal of fish!"

"Thank Heaven, I'm not a fish!" said Pinocchio to himself, trying with
these words to find a little courage.

The Fisherman took the net and the fish to the cave, a dark, gloomy,
smoky place. In the middle of it, a pan full of oil sizzled over a
smoky fire, sending out a repelling odor of tallow that took away one's
breath.

"Now, let's see what kind of fish we have caught today," said the Green
Fisherman. He put a hand as big as a spade into the net and pulled out a
handful of mullets.

"Fine mullets, these!" he said, after looking at them and smelling them
with pleasure. After that, he threw them into a large, empty tub.

Many times he repeated this performance. As he pulled each fish out of
the net, his mouth watered with the thought of the good dinner coming,
and he said:

"Fine fish, these bass!"

"Very tasty, these whitefish!"

"Delicious flounders, these!"

"What splendid crabs!"

"And these dear little anchovies, with their heads still on!"

As you can well imagine, the bass, the flounders, the whitefish, and
even the little anchovies all went together into the tub to keep the
mullets company. The last to come out of the net was Pinocchio.

As soon as the Fisherman pulled him out, his green eyes opened wide with
surprise, and he cried out in fear:

"What kind of fish is this? I don't remember ever eating anything like
it."

He looked at him closely and after turning him over and over, he said at
last:

"I understand. He must be a crab!"

Pinocchio, mortified at being taken for a crab, said resentfully:

"What nonsense! A crab indeed! I am no such thing. Beware how you deal
with me! I am a Marionette, I want you to know."

"A Marionette?" asked the Fisherman. "I must admit that a Marionette
fish is, for me, an entirely new kind of fish. So much the better. I'll
eat you with greater relish."

"Eat me? But can't you understand that I'm not a fish? Can't you hear
that I speak and think as you do?"

"It's true," answered the Fisherman; "but since I see that you are a
fish, well able to talk and think as I do, I'll treat you with all due
respect."

"And that is--"

"That, as a sign of my particular esteem, I'll leave to you the choice
of the manner in which you are to be cooked. Do you wish to be fried in
a pan, or do you prefer to be cooked with tomato sauce?"

"To tell you the truth," answered Pinocchio, "if I must choose, I should
much rather go free so I may return home!"

"Are you fooling? Do you think that I want to lose the opportunity to
taste such a rare fish? A Marionette fish does not come very often to
these seas. Leave it to me. I'll fry you in the pan with the others.
I know you'll like it. It's always a comfort to find oneself in good
company."

The unlucky Marionette, hearing this, began to cry and wail and beg.
With tears streaming down his cheeks, he said:

"How much better it would have been for me to go to school! I did listen
to my playmates and now I am paying for it! Oh! Oh! Oh!"

And as he struggled and squirmed like an eel to escape from him, the
Green Fisherman took a stout cord and tied him hand and foot, and threw
him into the bottom of the tub with the others.

Then he pulled a wooden bowl full of flour out of a cupboard and started
to roll the fish into it, one by one. When they were white with it,
he threw them into the pan. The first to dance in the hot oil were the
mullets, the bass followed, then the whitefish, the flounders, and the
anchovies. Pinocchio's turn came last. Seeing himself so near to death
(and such a horrible death!) he began to tremble so with fright that he
had no voice left with which to beg for his life.

The poor boy beseeched only with his eyes. But the Green Fisherman,
not even noticing that it was he, turned him over and over in the flour
until he looked like a Marionette made of chalk.

Then he took him by the head and . . .


CHAPTER 29

Pinocchio returns to the Fairy's house and she promises him that, on the
morrow, he will cease to be a Marionette and become a boy. A wonderful
party of coffee-and-milk to celebrate the great event.


Mindful of what the Fisherman had said, Pinocchio knew that all hope
of being saved had gone. He closed his eyes and waited for the final
moment.

Suddenly, a large Dog, attracted by the odor of the boiling oil, came
running into the cave.

"Get out!" cried the Fisherman threateningly and still holding onto the
Marionette, who was all covered with flour.

But the poor Dog was very hungry, and whining and wagging his tail, he
tried to say:

"Give me a bite of the fish and I'll go in peace."

"Get out, I say!" repeated the Fisherman.

And he drew back his foot to give the Dog a kick.

Then the Dog, who, being really hungry, would take no refusal, turned
in a rage toward the Fisherman and bared his terrible fangs. And at that
moment, a pitiful little voice was heard saying: "Save me, Alidoro; if
you don't, I fry!"

The Dog immediately recognized Pinocchio's voice. Great was his surprise
to find that the voice came from the little flour-covered bundle that
the Fisherman held in his hand.

Then what did he do? With one great leap, he grasped that bundle in his
mouth and, holding it lightly between his teeth, ran through the door
and disappeared like a flash!

The Fisherman, angry at seeing his meal snatched from under his nose,
ran after the Dog, but a bad fit of coughing made him stop and turn
back.

Meanwhile, Alidoro, as soon as he had found the road which led to the
village, stopped and dropped Pinocchio softly to the ground.

"How much I do thank you!" said the Marionette.

"It is not necessary," answered the Dog. "You saved me once, and what is
given is always returned. We are in this world to help one another."

"But how did you get in that cave?"

"I was lying here on the sand more dead than alive, when an appetizing
odor of fried fish came to me. That odor tickled my hunger and I
followed it. Oh, if I had come a moment later!"

"Don't speak about it," wailed Pinocchio, still trembling with fright.
"Don't say a word. If you had come a moment later, I would be fried,
eaten, and digested by this time. Brrrrrr! I shiver at the mere thought
of it."

Alidoro laughingly held out his paw to the Marionette, who shook it
heartily, feeling that now he and the Dog were good friends. Then they
bid each other good-by and the Dog went home.

Pinocchio, left alone, walked toward a little hut near by, where an old
man sat at the door sunning himself, and asked:

"Tell me, good man, have you heard anything of a poor boy with a wounded
head, whose name was Eugene?"

"The boy was brought to this hut and now--"

"Now he is dead?" Pinocchio interrupted sorrowfully.

"No, he is now alive and he has already returned home."

"Really? Really?" cried the Marionette, jumping around with joy. "Then
the wound was not serious?"

"But it might have been--and even mortal," answered the old man, "for a
heavy book was thrown at his head."

"And who threw it?"

"A schoolmate of his, a certain Pinocchio."

"And who is this Pinocchio?" asked the Marionette, feigning ignorance.

"They say he is a mischief-maker, a tramp, a street urchin--"

"Calumnies! All calumnies!"

"Do you know this Pinocchio?"

"By sight!" answered the Marionette.

"And what do you think of him?" asked the old man.

"I think he's a very good boy, fond of study, obedient, kind to his
Father, and to his whole family--"

As he was telling all these enormous lies about himself, Pinocchio
touched his nose and found it twice as long as it should be. Scared out
of his wits, he cried out:

"Don't listen to me, good man! All the wonderful things I have said are
not true at all. I know Pinocchio well and he is indeed a very wicked
fellow, lazy and disobedient, who instead of going to school, runs away
with his playmates to have a good time."

At this speech, his nose returned to its natural size.

"Why are you so pale?" the old man asked suddenly.

"Let me tell you. Without knowing it, I rubbed myself against a newly
painted wall," he lied, ashamed to say that he had been made ready for
the frying pan.

"What have you done with your coat and your hat and your breeches?"

"I met thieves and they robbed me. Tell me, my good man, have you not,
perhaps, a little suit to give me, so that I may go home?"

"My boy, as for clothes, I have only a bag in which I keep hops. If you
want it, take it. There it is."

Pinocchio did not wait for him to repeat his words. He took the bag,
which happened to be empty, and after cutting a big hole at the top and
two at the sides, he slipped into it as if it were a shirt. Lightly clad
as he was, he started out toward the village.

Along the way he felt very uneasy. In fact he was so unhappy that he
went along taking two steps forward and one back, and as he went he said
to himself:

"How shall I ever face my good little Fairy? What will she say when she
sees me? Will she forgive this last trick of mine? I am sure she won't.
Oh, no, she won't. And I deserve it, as usual! For I am a rascal, fine
on promises which I never keep!"

He came to the village late at night. It was so dark he could see
nothing and it was raining pitchforks.

Pinocchio went straight to the Fairy's house, firmly resolved to knock
at the door.

When he found himself there, he lost courage and ran back a few steps.
A second time he came to the door and again he ran back. A third time
he repeated his performance. The fourth time, before he had time to lose
his courage, he grasped the knocker and made a faint sound with it.

He waited and waited and waited. Finally, after a full half hour, a
top-floor window (the house had four stories) opened and Pinocchio saw
a large Snail look out. A tiny light glowed on top of her head. "Who
knocks at this late hour?" she called.

"Is the Fairy home?" asked the Marionette.

"The Fairy is asleep and does not wish to be disturbed. Who are you?"

"It is I."

"Who's I?"

"Pinocchio."

"Who is Pinocchio?"

"The Marionette; the one who lives in the Fairy's house."

"Oh, I understand," said the Snail. "Wait for me there. I'll come down
to open the door for you."

"Hurry, I beg of you, for I am dying of cold."

"My boy, I am a snail and snails are never in a hurry."

An hour passed, two hours; and the door was still closed. Pinocchio, who
was trembling with fear and shivering from the cold rain on his back,
knocked a second time, this time louder than before.

At that second knock, a window on the third floor opened and the same
Snail looked out.

"Dear little Snail," cried Pinocchio from the street. "I have been
waiting two hours for you! And two hours on a dreadful night like this
are as long as two years. Hurry, please!"

"My boy," answered the Snail in a calm, peaceful voice, "my dear boy, I
am a snail and snails are never in a hurry." And the window closed.

A few minutes later midnight struck; then one o'clock--two o'clock. And
the door still remained closed!

Then Pinocchio, losing all patience, grabbed the knocker with both
hands, fully determined to awaken the whole house and street with it.
As soon as he touched the knocker, however, it became an eel and wiggled
away into the darkness.

"Really?" cried Pinocchio, blind with rage. "If the knocker is gone, I
can still use my feet."

He stepped back and gave the door a most solemn kick. He kicked so hard
that his foot went straight through the door and his leg followed almost
to the knee. No matter how he pulled and tugged, he could not pull it
out. There he stayed as if nailed to the door.

Poor Pinocchio! The rest of the night he had to spend with one foot
through the door and the other one in the air.

As dawn was breaking, the door finally opened. That brave little animal,
the Snail, had taken exactly nine hours to go from the fourth floor to
the street. How she must have raced!

"What are you doing with your foot through the door?" she asked the
Marionette, laughing.

"It was a misfortune. Won't you try, pretty little Snail, to free me
from this terrible torture?"

"My boy, we need a carpenter here and I have never been one."

"Ask the Fairy to help me!"

"The Fairy is asleep and does not want to be disturbed."

"But what do you want me to do, nailed to the door like this?"

"Enjoy yourself counting the ants which are passing by."

"Bring me something to eat, at least, for I am faint with hunger."

"Immediately!"

In fact, after three hours and a half, Pinocchio saw her return with
a silver tray on her head. On the tray there was bread, roast chicken,
fruit.

"Here is the breakfast the Fairy sends to you," said the Snail.

At the sight of all these good things, the Marionette felt much better.

What was his disgust, however, when on tasting the food, he found the
bread to be made of chalk, the chicken of cardboard, and the brilliant
fruit of colored alabaster!

He wanted to cry, he wanted to give himself up to despair, he wanted to
throw away the tray and all that was on it. Instead, either from pain or
weakness, he fell to the floor in a dead faint.

When he regained his senses, he found himself stretched out on a sofa
and the Fairy was seated near him.

"This time also I forgive you," said the Fairy to him. "But be careful
not to get into mischief again."

Pinocchio promised to study and to behave himself. And he kept his word
for the remainder of the year. At the end of it, he passed first in all
his examinations, and his report was so good that the Fairy said to him
happily:

"Tomorrow your wish will come true."

"And what is it?"

"Tomorrow you will cease to be a Marionette and will become a real boy."

Pinocchio was beside himself with joy. All his friends and schoolmates
must be invited to celebrate the great event! The Fairy promised to
prepare two hundred cups of coffee-and-milk and four hundred slices of
toast buttered on both sides.

The day promised to be a very gay and happy one, but--

Unluckily, in a Marionette's life there's always a BUT which is apt to
spoil everything.


CHAPTER 30

Pinocchio, instead of becoming a boy, runs away to the Land of Toys with
his friend, Lamp-Wick.


Coming at last out of the surprise into which the Fairy's words had
thrown him, Pinocchio asked for permission to give out the invitations.

"Indeed, you may invite your friends to tomorrow's party. Only remember
to return home before dark. Do you understand?"

"I'll be back in one hour without fail," answered the Marionette.

"Take care, Pinocchio! Boys give promises very easily, but they as
easily forget them."

"But I am not like those others. When I give my word I keep it."

"We shall see. In case you do disobey, you will be the one to suffer,
not anyone else."

"Why?"

"Because boys who do not listen to their elders always come to grief."

"I certainly have," said Pinocchio, "but from now on, I obey."

"We shall see if you are telling the truth."

Without adding another word, the Marionette bade the good Fairy good-by,
and singing and dancing, he left the house.

In a little more than an hour, all his friends were invited. Some
accepted quickly and gladly. Others had to be coaxed, but when they
heard that the toast was to be buttered on both sides, they all ended by
accepting the invitation with the words, "We'll come to please you."

Now it must be known that, among all his friends, Pinocchio had one whom
he loved most of all. The boy's real name was Romeo, but everyone called
him Lamp-Wick, for he was long and thin and had a woebegone look about
him.

Lamp-Wick was the laziest boy in the school and the biggest
mischief-maker, but Pinocchio loved him dearly.

That day, he went straight to his friend's house to invite him to the
party, but Lamp-Wick was not at home. He went a second time, and again a
third, but still without success.

Where could he be? Pinocchio searched here and there and everywhere, and
finally discovered him hiding near a farmer's wagon.

"What are you doing there?" asked Pinocchio, running up to him.

"I am waiting for midnight to strike to go--"

"Where?"

"Far, far away!"

"And I have gone to your house three times to look for you!"

"What did you want from me?"

"Haven't you heard the news? Don't you know what good luck is mine?"

"What is it?"

"Tomorrow I end my days as a Marionette and become a boy, like you and
all my other friends."

"May it bring you luck!"

"Shall I see you at my party tomorrow?"

"But I'm telling you that I go tonight."

"At what time?"

"At midnight."

"And where are you going?"

"To a real country--the best in the world--a wonderful place!"

"What is it called?"

"It is called the Land of Toys. Why don't you come, too?"

"I? Oh, no!"

"You are making a big mistake, Pinocchio. Believe me, if you don't come,
you'll be sorry. Where can you find a place that will agree better with
you and me? No schools, no teachers, no books! In that blessed place
there is no such thing as study. Here, it is only on Saturdays that
we have no school. In the Land of Toys, every day, except Sunday, is a
Saturday. Vacation begins on the first of January and ends on the last
day of December. That is the place for me! All countries should be like
it! How happy we should all be!"

"But how does one spend the day in the Land of Toys?"

"Days are spent in play and enjoyment from morn till night. At night one
goes to bed, and next morning, the good times begin all over again. What
do you think of it?"

"H'm--!" said Pinocchio, nodding his wooden head, as if to say, "It's
the kind of life which would agree with me perfectly."

"Do you want to go with me, then? Yes or no? You must make up your
mind."

"No, no, and again no! That is true, but what are the causes of the
decline? Is that cities and nations fell only by virtue of the prosperity
of its rivals? No!

Such an idea would be heregía against the divine law of harmony and
social progress.

No people or degenerates fell by backlash _natural_ progress of
others, but by his own faults or those of their governments and
institutions, or because their former prosperity, the result of
artificial monopoly, has been largely fictional.

Everything that is artificial is weak and easily perishable, and
if violence worsens after the bad fundamental, tough luck.

Flanders was an emporium, especially Bruges, while independence was
a powerful stimulus to encourage the Flemish people.

But these people did not understand but to freedom, ie freedom into
privilege - only for cities, no for countrymen, and the city itself
was founded in the regime of monopoly.

Every industry insider corporation was organized in rejecting all
competition.

Why ruin a germ under transient prosperity of both cities worked
to get exclusive privileges to trade, manufacturing and industry.

The day came that competition in other counties, cities that had
obtained the monopoly of the rich man is ruined.

Spanish domination in Flanders hurried the reasons for future ruin.

War, tyranny, selfishness and all the dynastic implications of
artificial union in Spain that were found, the German Empire and
the Netherlands, had to hasten the decline.

The persecution against the Protestants of France, Belgium and
other countries, forcing the persecuted, eminently industrious and
honest people, refugees in England, Holland and Switzerland and
their industries to move there, inevitably changing the location
of economic interests.

Finally, we must recognize that the predominance of the ideas in
Flanders clerical, stopping the flight of the regeneration popular,
has had very pregnant at the time moderaos progress.

Bruges offers a significant test in this regard.

Aquella city, I repeat, Interesting but not today as a museum, as
are numerous monuments of every kind worthy of attention, particularly
in the eyes of the artist.

Quote very incidentally, the most notable of the civil order: the
_Hôtel de Ville_ or city hall, building or less than others of its
kind in Belgium, but remarkable for the grace of its Gothic
architecture, the _Palacio of Justicia_, interesting by their
historical traditions, and by some curious sculptures and magnificent
fireplace devoted to Charles V that decorates one of the rooms and
the _Hospital-de-San-Juan_, which contains a small room in the
prodigious works of Memling, so famous among lovers of painting,
which distinguishes between the primary _relícario_, his body covered
in paint and start representing the life of _Santa Ursula_ the
triptych dedicated to the mystic _matrimonio Santa Catarina_ and
table that mimics the _adoracion of magos_.

Belgium is a country classic beautiful churches that are all art
museums, but also has the classic speculation churches.

Each of these is managed by a congregation that does enter the pious
practice of selling all the curious sight in each temple.

By money we got was visiting the churches of Bruges, as almost all
others in Belgium.

All religious monuments of Bruges is interesting for its artistic
riches, the most notable are: the church _Catedral_ or _San-Salvador_
insignificant for its architecture But full price sculpture and
painting of the church _Nuestra-Señora_, whose tower is imposing
proportions, and graceful church or chapel of the _Santa-Sangre_,
they say his name due to a few drops of blood of Jesus Christ very
_legítima_ brought to Jerusalem by a Flemish Count ....

In others, also deserves a visit _Academia_ the arts of drawing, whose
museum, quite poor and mediocre, but not interested in some pictures
of Memling and Van Eyck brothers. * * * * * Contáronme there in
Bruges, Ghent and in , teachers and peers that make up the traditional
arts of corporations, industries and trades, they very curious as
to how customs of initiation or admission of a new member.

For example, if someone is going to join the community of the water
carrier, the neophyte is to lead a procession in plain and placed
on a barrel by way of rostrum; there harangue their efforts and
contracts, and then the head of the corporation was poured on her
head a pitcher of water, even in the harsh winter.

To point fellow cast hand motion to the barrels of water are available
all around, and everyone throws on an unhappy candidate who emparama
torrent and numbness.

When the poor devil can not move and appears Lich, he led in
procession to a tavern, where the spirits within administered in
large quantities, neutralizes the effects of the bath and complete
the feast of Aguadores.

The method is no less brutal, but not without logic, through
experimentation hidroterápica between people who live always in
contact with water. * * * * * The transition is made from Ostend
witch is much more sensitive since occurs in less than half an hour.

Instead of an ancient city and lonely in the midst of its vast plains,
is a modern city, graceful, elegant, where the magnificent roar
of the sea meets the bustle of a highly promiscuous, _europea_
across the meanings of the term, hungry pleasures, strange news and
entirely occupied spend time cheerfully.

The picture of Ostend is one of the most curious and beautiful that
can be found in the Northern European coasts, despite the absence
of a picturesque topography, as located at other points.

Ostend in nature has no more charm or more accents than the sea: everything
else is man.

They are facing the human society with all its passions, its vanities
and vagaries, and the immensity of the sea, with all its mystery,
its infinite majesty, its amazing treasures inexhaustible eloquence
and poetry ....

No intermediary, no witness between the two powers, if not the formidable
fortifications of the city, symbols of war - the delusion of the
people who usually have the cholera accomplice to the wave of the
sea!

Ostend is famous in Europe by its sea-bathing, their oysters and herring
and cod fisheries.

If Antwerp is manifested in the business of the Belgians, in Ostend has
its main base or center the important fishing industry, which
produces considerable good values, without prejudice to the general
trade is done by the port, with its channel and rail.

Ostend is the vapors flowing Belgian English or who do permanent
communication with the ports of Dover and London, besides the line
between London and Antwerp.

Ostend is that part every year numerous fleets of fishing boats,
searching the sea of Norway and around the North Sea its abundant
supply of harenques and cod, which have so vast consumption in
Europe, in competition with the product of the Dutch fishing.

Well known is also speculated that Ostend breeding of their famous
oysters.

As the sandy coasts of Belgium can not cherish these shells, the
Belgian fishermen are going to look for the coast of England to
acclimatize to leave where artificial oyster consumption.

The train stops at a railroad funny suburb to the south-west towards
of the city - suburb consisting of hotels, fifth and gardens carefully
preserved.

Get out of the station and you hallais suddenly, as if he showed a
view of cosmorama near the large dam _Comercio_ full of merchant
ships of all nations, but mostly Belgian, English and Dutch, whose
one hundred flags make a funny game with the chimneys of the vapors,
the masts of ships and sailboats and quaint colorful elegant structure
of the buildings in the city.

Atravesais the dock by one of two movable bridges, leaving the
bustle of commerce and navigation, and continue directly to the
beautiful and long street of _Chapelle_ you hallais in the center
of Ostend funny.

The city, completely surrounded by a vast moat and fortifications
and levees that defend the invasion of the sea, is very small and
does not have any particular building or monument.

But thanks to the joint and the simple style of the buildings!

All the streets straight cut parallel and symmetry, the red roofs
and walls usually white circle of people, full of animation,
everywhere, anywhere shops and fashion stores, art objects, curios
and sea shells, a ceaseless ebb and flow in the numerous hotels,
travelers who arrive or leave; everywhere for something fun,
entertainment or the flood of travelers _comfort_ almost all regions
of Europe.

Finally, salis of the city, Saving the great moat that protects it,
and at a much higher level you are on the piers of the dikes, struck
by the grandeur of the ocean and the uniqueness of the social frame
that you have to see.

Throughout the malecon formidable barrage of defense, as an extension
of one kilometer, a swarm of passers tingling of onlookers of all
nations, entertained with the delights of the show or the joys of
conversation.

Overlooking the Malecon, elegant temples stand as the _Casino_ the
_Faro_ and several cafes and caterers, which are the points of
reunion of the elegant society that will take Ostend baths, or just
out of curiosity and pleasure.

In each of these places there is entertainment for families and
groups of thousands of travelers.

There, the vagaries of fashion, between confidences _amigos_ Now, about
the evil, the other _chismografía_ policy, gallant intrigue, false
compliments, protests ever meet, projects and said more or less
pretentious, the emulation unforgiving of women's fashion, the
farces of the knights of industry, impudent flirtation of courtesans,
the serious talks of men of state holidays, and truhanerías student
on pilgrimage to the vapor.

All kinds of social there is confusion in the common worship of
pleasure, all European races, and even sometimes some of the New
World, have their representatives, all languages are heard, or if
the French is the largest organ, is perceived accent that distinguishes
one from another so strongly to the Latin races, Germanic, Slavic
and Scandinavian.

But there is a language, a universal accent and tremendous silence
that dominates and makes the other languages: the ocean ....

At the foot of the mighty dam stretches the vast beach destination for
sea bathing.

Hundreds of houses traveling on wheels, pulled by horses during the
hours of bathrooms, there lie at the disposal of the friends of
hydrotherapy, and many people, particularly women and children,
wander through the wide Cascajal, collecting shells, rocks or plants
curiosity, or romping in the waves of the tide that rises to shake
their crisp sparkling streams, which seem huge silver snakes screwed
in endless succession.

The sea roars, is included, it is choppy, angry launches on the
beach in great moles, and crashes to fragment, sparkles and breaks
into a thousand glowing whirlwind, turning almost instantly crack
and boil each wave, rubbing off to the gravel the wide liza contends
that his battle with the noise of the big waves that seem bombed
in the distant winding of the abyss ....

What a great variety at the apparent monotony of the sublime element!

How many battles and rumors that life and abyss of infinite majesty
supreme!

How many inspirations for the poet, philosopher and artist within the
loneliness that overt, that hides so many millions and millions
of people and is the greatest symbol of the omnipotence of God and
the divine harmony of creation!

This society is concerned, indifferent to idle and shaking in the presence
of majesty that it does the mysterious language of the ocean?

I do not know what I know is that the distance from the entertainment
complex, the man seemed more beautiful and noble, as they could prevail
on the sovereign of the great abyss! * * * * * CHAPTER VI. OSTEND OF A
PARIS .

The north-west of Courtrai and Belgium border .-- .-- The city of Lille.
- .-- Douai Arras. after visiting Ostend, Belgium on our tour was to
end.

It was time to return to Paris, as the rest of the country Flemish
not attract attention but in terms of agriculture and manufacturing.

With regard to southern Belgium, the picturesque region of the valley
of the Meuse, we are able to meet promised later to make another run.
From Ostend was necessary to re-Bruges (the city where, I'll say in
passing, is renowned for beautiful women) and there had to be
followed by the railway that leads to Courtrai in the north of
France.

The path that toured the countryside of western Flanders is relatively
uninteresting, while much less monotonous than that of Brussels to
Ostend, Bruges and Ghent by.

Anywhere on the vast open plain, a vast horizon, and the field has no
discernible inflections. Everywhere rich meadows, neatly cultivated
fields, mostly covered with plantings of flax, beets, hops, snuff, grain
legumes and oil plants. And amid these grasslands and those areas,
graceful houses, or villages or small towns, and delay on the banks of
a creek, and within walking distance from any channel, and always showing
the simplicity of their buildings, the neatness of places, in the
careful preservation of their orchards and gardens and air of
peaceful and honest people, a group that forms the most sympathetic
harmony.

A striking fact in the region of Flanders is the successful
distribution of the population.

Presto it is seen as not too concentrated in numerous small towns
or villages from 8 to 12,000 inhabitants, as it is naturally
distributed in very small towns, rural activity exclusively, so
common, or scattered in many rural cottages or rooms.

As the government did not pursue any action that artificially
concentrated in large cities the population of workers and other
people in the application of high wages and a life of luxury, the
peasant remains true to its countryside.

Thus, agricultural prosperity, while manufacturing takes place in secondary
cities and towns, without the habits of workers, the balance of
industries, or the regularity of wages suffer dangerous, as in other
countries .

Flemish farmer's life is sweet and quiet, as soon as its work force and
the harsh climate in winter.

Always busy with some work, their work will vary with the seasons.

Thus, during the months to own the farm work, any embodiment of the
Flemish peasant is land, and when winter does suspend or terminate those
activities, the household becomes homeless in a small factory, or
at least an auxiliary production.

Each farmer was then occupied in the preparations that require flax,
hemp, hops, etc.

For use in factories, or in the house of the farmer produced yarn,
lace, some tissues, and other industrial products cabullas .

Nothing is more necessary for morality and welfare of the working classes
in countries where the seasons change diverse climates, the
coexistence of agriculture and industry, common benefit, which
allows use of the time in every month of the year. bruges á
Franco-Belgian border, a journey of nearly three hours, the five
localities in touch via more or less important than, as before I
said, are remarkable, like others in the region Flanders, for its
production manufacturing.

_Thourout_ Is the first town in the way you play, not without grace
and a beautiful church, then reach _Roulers_ (in Flemish _Rosselaere_),
noted for its market for flax and hemp fabrics, the Gothic church
of _San Miguel_ whose beautiful tower dominates the city from a
hill, and on his field in 1794 of a bloody battle between the
Austrian and French Republicans, under the orders of these two
famous general and Pichegru Macdonald.

A few minutes later, the road passes through _Iseghem_ except _Lys_ and
small river enters the town of considerable _Courtrai_ (or _Kortryk_).

It is curious to note that Belgium is precisely in its two extremities,
from east to west, two cities essentially manufacturing, which are the
preludes of the great Activity on the Belgian manufacturing. If Verviers
is at the eastern end or the side of Germany, the world's leading
manufacturer of woven cloth or wool, _Courtrai_ what is in the far
west, or north side of France, on linen cloth.

There are higher tissue damasks own thread to service bureau, the
manufacture of lace and deserves a lot of estimation. Is sensitive
to the American peoples, who make considerable use of such articles
of linen, have failed to establish direct relations with Belgium,
they would be very advantageous.

Such a country, free, honest, very powerful, and whose manufacture is
so varied as cheap and of excellent quality, is that most can agree
to trade in the Spanish-Colombian republic.

Courtrai is known for the famous battle of _las Espuelas_, won by
Flemish citizens in 1302, against the French and the city is not
without some value for its ancient monuments and its modern gothic
public.

A half hour of Courtrai, _Mouscron_ had to stop at small town of about
7,000 people, where is the office.

Needed passports to enter and pass under the scrutinizing eyes of
customs officers and men of the police.

I have not had so far, personally, but for reasons of courtesy to
acknowledge the French customs (except on the bridge of Kehl),
however, and always remember with distaste the scenes that I witnessed
in customs, for other travelers.

By showing our passports we were given a pass _Mouscron_ without hesitation,
but we saw several women or ladies were introduced to a room
reserved for them by their clothing, carefully feeling their crinoline
and other finery that often suspects.

Perhaps there are reasonable grounds to suspect a smuggling Belgian
lace, - which were about three or four victim hams that carried a
passenger punched mercilessly by customs to ensure that there was no lace
on the inside of the legs pig.

This was humiliation enough, but the most horrible moment was the one
in which the two poor creatures felt their tails appear. Overcome with
shame and grief, they tried to cry and bemoan their fate.

But what is done can't be undone! Instead of moans and cries, they burst
forth into loud donkey brays, which sounded very much like, "Haw! Haw!
Haw!"

At that moment, a loud knocking was heard at the door and a voice called
to them:

"Open! I am the Little Man, the driver of the wagon which brought you
here. Open, I say, or beware!"


CHAPTER 33

Pinocchio, having become a Donkey, is bought by the owner of a Circus,
who wants to teach him to do tricks. The Donkey becomes lame and is sold
to a man who wants to use his skin for a drumhead.


Very sad and downcast were the two poor little fellows as they stood
and looked at each other. Outside the room, the Little Man grew more and
more impatient, and finally gave the door such a violent kick that
it flew open. With his usual sweet smile on his lips, he looked at
Pinocchio and Lamp-Wick and said to them:

"Fine work, boys! You have brayed well, so well that I recognized your
voices immediately, and here I am."

On hearing this, the two Donkeys bowed their heads in shame, dropped
their ears, and put their tails between their legs.

At first, the Little Man petted and caressed them and smoothed down
their hairy coats. Then he took out a currycomb and worked over them
till they shone like glass. Satisfied with the looks of the two little
animals, he bridled them and took them to a market place far away from
the Land of Toys, in the hope of selling them at a good price.

In fact, he did not have to wait very long for an offer. Lamp-Wick was
bought by a farmer whose donkey had died the day before. Pinocchio went
to the owner of a circus, who wanted to teach him to do tricks for his
audiences.

And now do you understand what the Little Man's profession was? This
horrid little being, whose face shone with kindness, went about the
world looking for boys. Lazy boys, boys who hated books, boys who wanted
to run away from home, boys who were tired of school--all these were his
joy and his fortune. He took them with him to the Land of Toys and let
them enjoy themselves to their heart's content. When, after months of
all play and no work, they became little donkeys, he sold them on the
market place. In a few years, he had become a millionaire.

What happened to Lamp-Wick? My dear children, I do not know. Pinocchio,
I can tell you, met with great hardships even from the first day.

After putting him in a stable, his new master filled his manger with
straw, but Pinocchio, after tasting a mouthful, spat it out.

Then the man filled the manger with hay. But Pinocchio did not like that
any better.

"Ah, you don't like hay either?" he cried angrily. "Wait, my pretty
Donkey, I'll teach you not to be so particular."

Without more ado, he took a whip and gave the Donkey a hearty blow
across the legs.

Pinocchio screamed with pain and as he screamed he brayed:

"Haw! Haw! Haw! I can't digest straw!"

"Then eat the hay!" answered his master, who understood the Donkey
perfectly.

"Haw! Haw! Haw! Hay gives me a headache!"

"Do you pretend, by any chance, that I should feed you duck or chicken?"
asked the man again, and, angrier than ever, he gave poor Pinocchio
another lashing.

At that second beating, Pinocchio became very quiet and said no more.

After that, the door of the stable was closed and he was left alone. It
was many hours since he had eaten anything and he started to yawn from
hunger. As he yawned, he opened a mouth as big as an oven.

Finally, not finding anything else in the manger, he tasted the hay.
After tasting it, he chewed it well, closed his eyes, and swallowed it.

"This hay is not bad," he said to himself. "But how much happier I
should be if I had studied! Just now, instead of hay, I should be eating
some good bread and butter. Patience!"

Next morning, when he awoke, Pinocchio looked in the manger for more
hay, but it was all gone. He had eaten it all during the night.

He tried the straw, but, as he chewed away at it, he noticed to his
great disappointment that it tasted neither like rice nor like macaroni.

"Patience!" he repeated as he chewed. "If only my misfortune might serve
as a lesson to disobedient boys who refuse to study! Patience! Have
patience!"

"Patience indeed!" shouted his master just then, as he came into the
stable. "Do you think, perhaps, my little Donkey, that I have brought
you here only to give you food and drink? Oh, no! You are to help me
earn some fine gold pieces, do you hear? Come along, now. I am going
to teach you to jump and bow, to dance a waltz and a polka, and even to
stand on your head."

Poor Pinocchio, whether he liked it or not, had to learn all these
wonderful things; but it took him three long months and cost him many,
many lashings before he was pronounced perfect.

The day came at last when Pinocchio's master was able to announce an
extraordinary performance. The announcements, posted all around the
town, and written in large letters, read thus:

     GREAT SPECTACLE TONIGHT
     LEAPS AND EXERCISES BY THE GREAT ARTISTS
     AND THE FAMOUS HORSES
     of the
     COMPANY

     First Public Appearance

     of the

     FAMOUS DONKEY

     called

     PINOCCHIO

     THE STAR OF THE DANCE
     ----
     The Theater will be as Light as Day

That night, as you can well imagine, the theater was filled to
overflowing one hour before the show was scheduled to start.

Not an orchestra chair could be had, not a balcony seat, nor a gallery
seat; not even for their weight in gold.

The place swarmed with boys and girls of all ages and sizes, wriggling
and dancing about in a fever of impatience to see the famous Donkey
dance.

When the first part of the performance was over, the Owner and Manager
of the circus, in a black coat, white knee breeches, and patent leather
boots, presented himself to the public and in a loud, pompous voice made
the following announcement:

"Most honored friends, Gentlemen and Ladies!

No city I have ever known so sad and lonely as Malina, circumstances
all the more strange given that two steps of the ancient queen of the
railway station in a prodigious movement of passengers and goods from all
points in Belgium and abroad, flowing central point where all the railway
link to be distributed in many directions.

When leaving the station and enter the city may believe that a
moment has come to Belgium and is in a Spanish city, sad, abandoned,
stationary, petrified by the worst traditions of character.

There will afflict the prayers of beggars, many churches and churchmen;
missing factories and institutes that attest activity and progress, and
everything has a look of surprise in that age in that country. In all
my travels I have observed that the progress of cities is in inverse ratio
of the number of canons, friars and useless beings who sleep, sing and
eat. Mechelen Belgium is what Toledo á á Freiburg Switzerland and
Spain. Mechelen, _Dyle_ bisected by the creek (near there that
meets the _Nethe_ to form the river _Rúpel_) is however a well-built
city, which has wide streets and beautiful buildings and good floor
spacious seats, but its 31,400 inhabitants bereaved should live and
die by the tedium of hypochondria.

_Saint-Cathedral is the jewel of Rombaut_ Malina, although their
external forms do not have great value.

What on the monument are striking: the enormity of its single tower,
which measures almost 100 meters tall, the grandeur of the immense hall,
whose interior impresses strongly, and some considerable naive paintings,
which distinguishes a Interestingly, Van Dyck Christ. Another church
in Mechelen, the _Nuestra-Señora_, also has some good works of art, being
the most admirable _Pesca milagrosa_ worked by Rubens in 1618. Then
we Mechelen has no other thing that deserves attention and curiosity,
for which the traveler is going to hurry to observe the political
movement in Brussels and the evidence of the great intellectual and
social progress of the Belgians, or to admire in Antwerp efforts of
national and monuments and museums attest to the glory of that city which
was home from school Brabantine. * * * * * CHAPTER III. ANTWERP.
General Trade of the city and fine arts .-- .- Multi-Character .-- The
streets of Antwerp, monuments, museums and sights. - Gardens and
walks. While in Belgium are gathered and aligned all the manifestations
of progress, however, each county and each city has certain features
that are characteristic.

Thus, for example, in Antwerp, Ostend, and in the neighboring
cities to the borders of France who are the most significant
military construction, the symbol of the struggles caused by greed
or selfishness of the governments.

Leuven, Liege , Ghent and Brussels is focused on moving the university.
The mining field is inexhaustible in the south and southwest, such as
agriculture are more diligent and valuable holding in the plains
of Flanders.

Has its main manufacturing facilities in Ghent, Liege and Verviers, and
marine fisheries are based in Ostend.

Finally, in Antwerp, where, by a curious singularity is expressed
with more energy business and artistic forces of the people of
Belgium.

Antwerp, in fact, a vast city, curious in all things, where everything
of interest and draws attention: the structure of the buildings and
streets, such as type, language and customs of the inhabitants, the
active movement of trade and navigation of the Scheldt, as the merit
of admirable masterpieces, monuments and museums, the appearance
of formidable fortifications of the city, as its vast docks on one
side and the other's bright countryside, they do compare the symbols
of the war with those of peace and fertility.

The general appearance of Antwerp - the city so famous for its
commercial and military history, artistic and civil - is remarkably
interesting and curious.

The inner mass of buildings is between the right bank of the Scheldt and
a huge arch formed by the irregular line of formidable walls and
fortifications defended by large and deep pits.

Al S.-O. or the upper part of the river, are the _Esplanada_ of weapons,
military _Ciudadela_ and _Arsenal_, overlooking the pier.

Al NE. or the bottom, they extend the _Diques_ 'big' and 'small', which
harbor a large number of steam ships and war and are surrounded by
vast warehouses. There is a complicated network of iron rails, for
which revolve used cars for loading and unloading of goods between
the docks and the railway station that connects Antwerp to Malines.

West of the city, near the fortifications and outside its angular lines,
are next to a small suburb, the railway station and the Zoo paramount,
pearl and pride of Antwerp.

When climbing on one of the towers the numerous churches of the
metropolis Brabantine, as a whole is a magnificent panorama of great
interest when the details are carefully observed.

If the eye is on the side of the Scheldt, is the first line of the huge
piers of the right margin, where there is a great movement of
sailors, carters, commission agents, brokers, etc.., Employed in
loading and unloading Hundreds of steam and sailing ships moored
on the waterfront, and various operations own trade and navigation.

The Scheldt, at a muddy and sandy bed, low banks covered with reeds and
other grasses, experiences the powerful action of the tides, they do
go up and down very significantly.

If the river is magnificent for its wealth, its width and its undulations,
it is interesting because the large number of ships that ply feeding
the main body of maritime trade of Belgium, the region that develops
on the side of the left has a melancholy aspect that impresses a lot.

There lies a vast plain, and even sad, but admirably cultivated and dotted
with some stocks, which has its limit in the lower Scheldt, on the
side of Zealand.

Turning light into the interior of Belgium covered the plains of
Brabant and Limburg, where agriculture, livestock and horticulture
reigns without competition, to be a funny series of remarkable
countryside houses, villas, gardens, and magnificent gardens
surrounding poplar antwerp, shaped like a rainbow of vegetables.

There is every indication taste and careful cultivation, advancement and
perfection in the methods of work and welfare in the middle class
which has the fifth or countryside houses, and among farmers.

Looking at the city all the buildings have a that contrast with the coolness
and freshness of the surrounding countryside: Antwerp, whose population
is declining 109,000 inhabitants, and that in the sixteenth century
came to count up to 200,000, a vast swarm of blocks wholly unequal
and irregular, winding streets and alleyways , narrow, labyrinthine
dislocations extravagant, almost all wet and dirty, badly paved and
looking so sad and ancient common.

Places anywhere irregular sides by magnificent monuments and houses
of ancient plant, very unusual in structure, but lack the stands
of the original buildings and quaint Dutch, or the gloomy romance
of the old houses in Germany.

Everywhere rise towers in various ways, mainly Gothic churches on
almost every deserving the name of religious museums.

Everywhere tingling a restless population, industrious and honest,
that to get noticed by the energy of his language, rough and
expressive, the singularity of the type of race, his liberal ideas,
a sense of pride in maintaining its patriotism and traditions, and
particularly with the elasticity given to the most varied manifestations
of civilization. * * * * * commerce and art, as I said, are the
main demonstrations of the history and current activity of Antwerp.

In another time, under the reign of Charles V, this city was the emporium
of trade in northern Europe, with its magnificent river, then
visited every day by huge merchant fleets, and political and economic
causes that have then gone or have altered their action.

But the domination of the Spaniards, who has been disastrous everywhere,
ruined the prosperity of Antwerp and the Brabant and the Flemish
country.

Proscriptions perpetrated by religious fanaticism, political
oppression and civil, the absurd tax laws and economic and looting
carried out in times of war - politics personified so terribly bleak
that in the Netherlands the odious Duke of Alba, - decimated the
population of Antwerp, stalled trade and industry and made such an
affluent town near ruin.

Later, the loss of free navigation of the Scheldt (the result of
the Treaty of Münster, 1648) completed the decline of Antwerp.

Today, even pregnant navigation tolls charged by the Dutch government
in the lower Scheldt, Antwerp has regained much of its former
opulence, thanks to the concentration there occurs on almost all
the maritime trade of Belgium.

And the Indeed, the commercial prosperity of Antwerp at the moment, it's
solid and worth more than that reached in the sixteenth century, as
this was based on monopoly and the most evil institutions, whereas
today it is evident based on freedom and spontaneous activity of
the people.

For this purpose I will make a point that seems relevant. The philosophers
in the world are divided into two categories: one that history by
taking a point of departure, but history viciously included, believe
that progress has its limits, that civilization is a series of
developments that are repeated in its essential spirit , but vary
in their forms - which ultimately is nothing but theory Vico.

According to these philosophers, the scientific community who have come
to a great refinement of civilization, are shortly to begin his period
of decay, ruin and then destroyed so as to complete their evolution
limited progress.

The second school of thought, the young school , which has faith in the
perfectibility of human life and well, and by taking its starting
point the nature of man himself and the whole creation, rather than
the sophistry of history - that school, I mean, that cree societies
do not die by falling or under an Act of blind and fatal, but for
logical reasons which influence the human will can conjure.

Cree And also, when the decadence and ruin that appear, are but
phenomena of human progress, whereby the people who shelter in their
constitution a principle false and harmful, they are unable to
produce the formula justice and truth, are drawn by the irresistible
tide of the long lead time to a more healthy and just, to a
civilization that is closer to the ideal of mankind.

Thus, we can say that no people is for a absolute way to a high
civilization nor decay, ruin and complete transformation. Whoever
takes the road of freedom and justice, and always have the courage
to ask _grande ideal_, changing and progressing live without violence,
until the consummation of the centuries.

He who knows not understand, ask or realize that ideal, perish in the
sinking of the common history of _incapaces_ subject to reappear
transformed and rejuvenated under the new civilization that will
be created ....

Antwerp patent I found confirmation of this philosophy of progress that
has been fortified my spirit.

The civilization, which is manifested in a common compensation system,
has had very noble achievements of the genius ambaréses in the field
of fun the most sublime of arts. When Antwerp, for the downfall of his
former trade, seemed doomed to obscurity, suddenly came almost
within a phalanx of men who inspired and founded the school in
painting _brabantina_ (improperly called _flamenca_ school, by
extension) was to immortalize á children of the former business,
with outstanding services to the art of Raphael.

The provinces of Flanders and Brabant had excelled in some industries
closely linked with the arts of drawing, such as embroidery,
silverware and jewelry, and manufacture of lace and tapestries.

Hence the fact that the natural drawing and painting with him, in
those provinces take a dramatic flight from the Middle Ages.

From the beginning of the fifteenth century the famous brothers
Hubert and John Van Eyck had created in Ghent and Bruges the Flemish
school, happy beginning of independence, originality and scientific
art spiritualism and Hemling and others who had more or less
faithfully followed in the footsteps of the masters.

In turn the Brabante entered the artistic movement, but without
giving a particular character of its productions and well established.

The arts suffered greatly from the imitation of Italian or twist
that gave the Dutch and Flemish schools.

It was the end of the sixteenth century to the beginning of the
XVII Antwerp felt that arise from within the galaxy should be made
so inspired glory.

Then came forth the great masters whose works adorn the beautiful
museums of Europe.

Of the laboratories of Peter Breughel, Van Veen, etc., Came almost
at the same time: Peter Paul Rubens, the sovereign master (1577 to
1640), David Teniers (1582 á 1647), whose son of the same name it
surpassed by far especially in the paint or interior _género_ (from
1610 to 1694), Van Dyck, Rubens' disciple of the admirable (from
1599 to 1641), Jordaens, who strove to imitate the more voluptuous
creations of the same teacher (from 1594 to 1678), in order, two
or Seghers Zegers, Gaspar de Craeyer, Roose, Neefs, Snyders, Brill
and other notables, to Juan Erasmo Quellyn, who died in 1715, when
the noble Brabantine art had to suffer the same fate as that of
almost all schools falling under the pressure applied successively
courtly customs of the times of Louis XIV, the Regency and Louis XV.

It is interesting to visit the museum of Antwerp, and especially the
cathedral and the main churches, which you can admire the high
degree of audacity, originality, energy of expression, richness of
color and imitative truth came to the three great masters: Rubens
painting in the historical, religious and fantasy, Van - Dyck, the
portrait and religious composition; Teniers the Younger, in painting
pictures of beautiful home, call _género_.

Truth is that more and better works by Van Dyck, as for portraits, are
in England, at Windsor Castle: but there are quite a few in Belgium,
especially in Antwerp, the idea to give credit for that artist
eminent.

As for Rubens, whose fertility and diligence were prodigious, but his
genius and his brush are very well represented in all the museums
of Europe, Belgium retains the best, particularly in the religious
genre, which offers impressive evidence of the Antwerp Cathedral.
* * * * * I do not pretend to strain the reader with special insights
regarding the art of Antwerp - assessments that seem pedantescas
for me.

So, I will make a quick mention of the monuments and objects is striking.
_Plaza Between-Verde_, which stands amidst the beautiful groves
admirable statue of Rubens (who, as we know, was very skilful artist
as judge and diplomat) and _Gran-Plaza_, where is the _Palacio of
ciudad_ (buildings, though well below others of its kind in Belgium),
between those two places, say, stands with majesty of the massive
dark cathedral, magnificent monuments, unrivaled in size and its
beauty, the whole region of the Netherlands.

At
last, with a great effort, he was able to let out a scream of joy and,
opening wide his arms he threw them around the old man's neck.

"Oh, Father, dear Father! Have I found you at last? Now I shall never,
never leave you again!"

"Are my eyes really telling me the truth?" answered the old man, rubbing
his eyes. "Are you really my own dear Pinocchio?"

"Yes, yes, yes! It is I! Look at me! And you have forgiven me, haven't
you? Oh, my dear Father, how good you are! And to think that I--Oh, but
if you only knew how many misfortunes have fallen on my head and how
many troubles I have had! Just think that on the day you sold your old
coat to buy me my A-B-C book so that I could go to school, I ran away to
the Marionette Theater and the proprietor caught me and wanted to burn
me to cook his roast lamb! He was the one who gave me the five gold
pieces for you, but I met the Fox and the Cat, who took me to the Inn of
the Red Lobster. There they ate like wolves and I left the Inn alone
and I met the Assassins in the wood. I ran and they ran after me, always
after me, till they hanged me to the branch of a giant oak tree. Then
the Fairy of the Azure Hair sent the coach to rescue me and the doctors,
after looking at me, said, 'If he is not dead, then he is surely alive,'
and then I told a lie and my nose began to grow. It grew and it grew,
till I couldn't get it through the door of the room. And then I went
with the Fox and the Cat to the Field of Wonders to bury the gold
pieces. The Parrot laughed at me and, instead of two thousand gold
pieces, I found none. When the Judge heard I had been robbed, he sent
me to jail to make the thieves happy; and when I came away I saw a fine
bunch of grapes hanging on a vine. The trap caught me and the Farmer put
a collar on me and made me a watchdog. He found out I was innocent when
I caught the Weasels and he let me go. The Serpent with the tail that
smoked started to laugh and a vein in his chest broke and so I went back
to the Fairy's house. She was dead, and the Pigeon, seeing me crying,
said to me, 'I have seen your father building a boat to look for you in
America,' and I said to him, 'Oh, if I only had wings!' and he said to
me, 'Do you want to go to your father?' and I said, 'Perhaps, but how?'
and he said, 'Get on my back. I'll take you there.' We flew all night
long, and next morning the fishermen were looking toward the sea,
crying, 'There is a poor little man drowning,' and I knew it was you,
because my heart told me so and I waved to you from the shore--"

"I knew you also," put in Geppetto, "and I wanted to go to you; but how
could I? The sea was rough and the whitecaps overturned the boat. Then
a Terrible Shark came up out of the sea and, as soon as he saw me in the
water, swam quickly toward me, put out his tongue, and swallowed me as
easily as if I had been a chocolate peppermint."

"And how long have you been shut away in here?"

"From that day to this, two long weary years--two years, my Pinocchio,
which have been like two centuries."

"And how have you lived? Where did you find the candle? And the matches
with which to light it--where did you get them?"

"You must know that, in the storm which swamped my boat, a large ship
also suffered the same fate. The sailors were all saved, but the ship
went right to the bottom of the sea, and the same Terrible Shark that
swallowed me, swallowed most of it."

"What! Swallowed a ship?" asked Pinocchio in astonishment.

"At one gulp. The only thing he spat out was the main-mast, for it
stuck in his teeth. To my own good luck, that ship was loaded with meat,
preserved foods, crackers, bread, bottles of wine, raisins, cheese,
coffee, sugar, wax candles, and boxes of matches. With all these
blessings, I have been able to live happily on for two whole years, but
now I am at the very last crumbs. Today there is nothing left in the
cupboard, and this candle you see here is the last one I have."

"And then?"

"And then, my dear, we'll find ourselves in darkness."

"Then, my dear Father," said Pinocchio, "there is no time to lose. We
must try to escape."

"Escape! How?"

"We can run out of the Shark's mouth and dive into the sea."

"You speak well, but I cannot swim, my dear Pinocchio."

"Why should that matter? You can climb on my shoulders and I, who am a
fine swimmer, will carry you safely to the shore."

"Dreams, my boy!" answered Geppetto, shaking his head and smiling sadly.
"Do you think it possible for a Marionette, a yard high, to have the
strength to carry me on his shoulders and swim?"

"Try it and see! And in any case, if it is written that we must die, we
shall at least die together."

Not adding another word, Pinocchio took the candle in his hand and going
ahead to light the way, he said to his father:

"Follow me and have no fear."

They walked a long distance through the stomach and the whole body of
the Shark. When they reached the throat of the monster, they stopped for
a while to wait for the right moment in which to make their escape.

I want you to know that the Shark, being very old and suffering from
asthma and heart trouble, was obliged to sleep with his mouth open.
Because of this, Pinocchio was able to catch a glimpse of the sky filled
with stars, as he looked up through the open jaws of his new home.

"The time has come for us to escape," he whispered, turning to his
father. "The Shark is fast asleep. The sea is calm and the night is
as bright as day. Follow me closely, dear Father, and we shall soon be
saved."

No sooner said than done. They climbed up the throat of the monster till
they came to that immense open mouth. There they had to walk on tiptoes,
for if they tickled the Shark's long tongue he might awaken--and where
would they be then? The tongue was so wide and so long that it looked
like a country road. The two fugitives were just about to dive into the
sea when the Shark sneezed very suddenly and, as he sneezed, he gave
Pinocchio and Geppetto such a jolt that they found themselves thrown
on their backs and dashed once more and very unceremoniously into the
stomach of the monster.

To make matters worse, the candle went out and father and son were left
in the dark.

"And now?" asked Pinocchio with a serious face.

"Now we are lost."

"Why lost? Give me your hand, dear Father, and be careful not to slip!"

"Where will you take me?"

"We must try again. Come with me and don't be afraid."

With these words Pinocchio took his father by the hand and, always
walking on tiptoes, they climbed up the monster's throat for a second
time. They then crossed the whole tongue and jumped over three rows of
teeth. But before they took the last great leap, the Marionette said to
his father:

"Climb on my back and hold on tightly to my neck. I'll take care of
everything else."

As soon as Geppetto was comfortably seated on his shoulders, Pinocchio,
very sure of what he was doing, dived into the water and started to
swim. The sea was like oil, the moon shone in all splendor, and the
Shark continued to sleep so soundly that not even a cannon shot would
have awakened him.


CHAPTER 36

Pinocchio finally ceases to be a Marionette and becomes a boy


"My dear Father, we are saved!" cried the Marionette. "All we have to do
now is to get to the shore, and that is easy."

Without another word, he swam swiftly away in an effort to reach land as
soon as possible. All at once he noticed that Geppetto was shivering and
shaking as if with a high fever.

Was he shivering from fear or from cold? Who knows? Perhaps a little
of both. But Pinocchio, thinking his father was frightened, tried to
comfort him by saying:

"Courage, Father! In a few moments we shall be safe on land."

"But where is that blessed shore?" asked the little old man, more and
more worried as he tried to pierce the faraway shadows. "Here I am
searching on all sides and I see nothing but sea and sky."

"I see the shore," said the Marionette. "Remember, Father, that I am
like a cat. I see better at night than by day."

Poor Pinocchio pretended to be peaceful and contented, but he was
far from that. He was beginning to feel discouraged, his strength was
leaving him, and his breathing was becoming more and more labored. He
felt he could not go on much longer, and the shore was still far away.

He swam a few more strokes. Then he turned to Geppetto and cried out
weakly:

"Help me, Father! Help, for I am dying!"

Father and son were really about to drown when they heard a voice like a
guitar out of tune call from the sea:

"What is the trouble?"

"It is I and my poor father."

"I know the voice. You are Pinocchio."

"Exactly. And you?"

"I am the Tunny, your companion in the Shark's stomach."

"And how did you escape?"

"I imitated your example. You are the one who showed me the way and
after you went, I followed."

"Tunny, you arrived at the right moment! I implore you, for the love you
bear your children, the little Tunnies, to help us, or we are lost!"

"With great pleasure indeed. Hang onto my tail, both of you, and let me
lead you. In a twinkling you will be safe on land."

Geppetto and Pinocchio, as you can easily imagine, did not refuse the
invitation; indeed, instead of hanging onto the tail, they thought it
better to climb on the Tunny's back.

"Are we too heavy?" asked Pinocchio.

"Heavy? Not in the least. You are as light as sea-shells," answered the
Tunny, who was as large as a two-year-old horse.

As soon as they reached the shore, Pinocchio was the first to jump to
the ground to help his old father. Then he turned to the fish and said
to him:

"Dear friend, you have saved my father, and I have not enough words
with which to thank you! Allow me to embrace you as a sign of my eternal
gratitude."

The Tunny stuck his nose out of the water and Pinocchio knelt on the
sand and kissed him most affectionately on his cheek. At this warm
greeting, the poor Tunny, who was not used to such tenderness, wept
like a child. He felt so embarrassed and ashamed that he turned quickly,
plunged into the sea, and disappeared.

In the meantime day had dawned.

Pinocchio offered his arm to Geppetto, who was so weak he could hardly
stand, and said to him:

"Lean on my arm, dear Father, and let us go. We will walk very, very
slowly, and if we feel tired we can rest by the wayside."

"And where are we going?" asked Geppetto.

"To look for a house or a hut, where they will be kind enough to give us
a bite of bread and a bit of straw to sleep on."

They had not taken a hundred steps when they saw two rough-looking
individuals sitting on a stone begging for alms.

It was the Fox and the Cat, but one could hardly recognize them, they
looked so miserable. The Cat, after pretending to be blind for so many
years had really lost the sight of both eyes. And the Fox, old, thin,
and almost hairless, had even lost his tail. That sly thief had fallen
into deepest poverty, and one day he had been forced to sell his
beautiful tail for a bite to eat.

"Oh, Pinocchio," he cried in a tearful voice. "Give us some alms, we beg
of you! We are old, tired, and sick."

"Sick!" repeated the Cat.

"Addio, false friends!" answered the Marionette. "You cheated me once,
but you will never catch me again."

"Believe us! Today we are truly poor and starving."

"Starving!" repeated the Cat.

"If you are poor; you deserve it! Remember the old proverb which says:
'Stolen money never bears fruit.' Addio, false friends."

"Have mercy on us!"

"On us."

"Addio, false friends. Remember the old proverb which says: 'Bad wheat
always makes poor bread!'"

"Do not abandon us."

"Abandon us," repeated the Cat.

"Addio, false friends. Remember the old proverb: 'Whoever steals his
neighbor's shirt, usually dies without his own.'"

Waving good-by to them, Pinocchio and Geppetto calmly went on their way.
After a few more steps, they saw, at the end of a long road near a clump
of trees, a tiny cottage built of straw.

"Someone must live in that little hut," said Pinocchio. "Let us see for
ourselves."

They went and knocked at the door.

"Who is it?" said a little voice from within.

"A poor father and a poorer son, without food and with no roof to cover
them," answered the Marionette.

"Turn the key and the door will open," said the same little voice.

Pinocchio turned the key and the door opened. As soon as they went in,
they looked here and there and everywhere but saw no one.

"Oh--ho, where is the owner of the hut?" cried Pinocchio, very much
surprised.

"Here I am, up here!"

Father and son looked up to the ceiling, and there on a beam sat the
Talking Cricket.

"Oh, my dear Cricket," said Pinocchio, bowing politely.

"Oh, now you call me your dear Cricket, but do you remember when you
threw your hammer at me to kill me?"

"You are right, dear Cricket. Throw a hammer at me now. I deserve it!
But spare my poor old father."

"I am going to spare both the father and the son. I have only wanted to
remind you of the trick you long ago played upon me, to teach you that
in this world of ours we must be kind and courteous to others, if we
want to find kindness and courtesy in our own days of trouble."

"You are right, little Cricket, you are more than right, and I shall
remember the lesson you have taught me. But will you tell how you
succeeded in buying this pretty little cottage?"

"This cottage was given to me yesterday by a little Goat with blue
hair."

"And where did the Goat go?" asked Pinocchio.

"I don't know."

"And when will she come back?"

"She will never come back. Yesterday she went away bleating sadly, and
it seemed to me she said: 'Poor Pinocchio, I shall never see him again.
. .the Shark must have eaten him by this time.'"

"Were those her real words? Then it was she--it was--my dear little
Fairy," cried out Pinocchio, sobbing bitterly. After he had cried a
long time, he wiped his eyes and then he made a bed of straw for old
Geppetto. He laid him on it and said to the Talking Cricket:

"Tell me, little Cricket, where shall I find a glass of milk for my poor
Father?"

"Three fields away from here lives Farmer John. He has some cows. Go
there and he will give you what you want."

Pinocchio ran all the way to Farmer John's house. The Farmer said to
him:

"How much milk do you want?"

"I want a full glass."

"A full glass costs a penny. First give me the penny."

"I have no penny," answered Pinocchio, sad and ashamed.

"Very bad, my Marionette," answered the Farmer, "very bad. If you have
no penny, I have no milk."

"Too bad," said Pinocchio and started to go.

"Wait a moment," said Farmer John. "Perhaps we can come to terms. Do you
know how to draw water from a well?"

"I can try."

"Then go to that well you see yonder and draw one hundred bucketfuls of
water."

"Very well."

"After you have finished, I shall give you a glass of warm sweet milk."

"I am satisfied."

Farmer John took the Marionette to the well and showed him how to draw
the water. Pinocchio set to work as well as he knew how, but long before
he had pulled up the one hundred buckets, he was tired out and dripping
with perspiration. He had never worked so hard in his life.

"Until today," said the Farmer, "my donkey has drawn the water for me,
but now that poor animal is dying."

"Will you take me to see him?" said Pinocchio.

"Gladly."

As soon as Pinocchio went into the stable, he spied a little Donkey
lying on a bed of straw in the corner of the stable. He was worn out
from hunger and too much work. After looking at him a long time, he said
to himself: "I know that Donkey! I have seen him before."

And bending low over him, he asked: "Who are you?"

At this question, the Donkey opened weary, dying eyes and answered in
the same tongue: "I am Lamp-Wick."

Then he closed his eyes and died.

"Oh, my poor Lamp-Wick," said Pinocchio in a faint voice, as he wiped
his eyes with some straw he had picked up from the ground.

"Do you feel so sorry for a little donkey that has cost you nothing?"
said the Farmer. "What should I do--I, who have paid my good money for
him?"

"But, you see, he was my friend."

"Your friend?"

"A classmate of mine."

"What," shouted Farmer John, bursting out laughing. "What! You had
donkeys in your school? How you must have studied!"

The Marionette, ashamed and hurt by those words, did not answer, but
taking his glass of milk returned to his father.

From that day on, for more than five months, Pinocchio got up every
morning just as dawn was breaking and went to the farm to draw water.
And every day he was given a glass of warm milk for his poor old father,
who grew stronger and better day by day. But he was not satisfied with
this. He learned to make baskets of reeds and sold them. With the money
he received, he and his father were able to keep from starving.

Among other things, he built a rolling chair, strong and comfortable, to
take his old father out for an airing on bright, sunny days.

In the evening the Marionette studied by lamplight. With some of the
money he had earned, he bought himself a secondhand volume that had
a few pages missing, and with that he learned to read in a very short
time. As far as writing was concerned, he used a long stick at one end
of which he had whittled a long, fine point. Ink he had none, so he used
the juice of blackberries or cherries. Little by little his diligence
was rewarded. He succeeded, not only in his studies, but also in his
work, and a day came when he put enough money together to keep his old
father comfortable and happy. Besides this, he was able to save the
great amount of fifty pennies. With it he wanted to buy himself a new
suit.

One day he said to his father:

"I am going to the market place to buy myself a coat, a cap, and a pair
of shoes. When I come back I'll be so dressed up, you will think I am a
rich man."

He ran out of the house and up the road to the village, laughing and
singing. Suddenly he heard his name called, and looking around to see
whence the voice came, he noticed a large snail crawling out of some
bushes.

"Don't you recognize me?" said the Snail.

"Yes and no."

"Do you remember the Snail that lived with the Fairy with Azure Hair? Do
you not remember how she opened the door for you one night and gave you
something to eat?"

"I remember everything," cried Pinocchio. "Answer me quickly, pretty
Snail, where have you left my Fairy? What is she doing? Has she forgiven
me? Does she remember me? Does she still love me? Is she very far away
from here? May I see her?"

At all these questions, tumbling out one after another, the Snail
answered, calm as ever:

"My dear Pinocchio, the Fairy is lying ill in a hospital."

"In a hospital?"

"Yes, indeed. She has been stricken with trouble and illness, and she
hasn't a penny left with which to buy a bite of bread."

"Really? Oh, how sorry I am! My poor, dear little Fairy! If I had a
million I should run to her with it! But I have only fifty pennies. Here
they are. I was just going to buy some clothes. Here, take them, little
Snail, and give them to my good Fairy."

"What about the new clothes?"

"What does that matter? I should like to sell these rags I have on to
help her more. Go, and hurry. Come back here within a couple of days
and I hope to have more money for you! Until today I have worked for my
father. Now I shall have to work for my mother also. Good-by, and I hope
to see you soon."

The Snail, much against her usual habit, began to run like a lizard
under a summer sun.

When Pinocchio returned home, his father asked him:

"And where is the new suit?"

"I couldn't find one to fit me. I shall have to look again some other
day."

That night, Pinocchio, instead of going to bed at ten o'clock waited
until midnight, and instead of making eight baskets, he made sixteen.

After that he went to bed and fell asleep. As he slept, he dreamed of
his Fairy, beautiful, smiling, and happy, who kissed him and said to
him, "Bravo, Pinocchio! In reward for your kind heart, I forgive you for
all your old mischief. Boys who love and take good care of their parents
when they are old and sick, deserve praise even though they may not be
held up as models of obedience and good behavior. Keep on doing so well,
and you will be happy."

At that very moment, Pinocchio awoke and opened wide his eyes.

Ruffer Datteln to you and quinces in the tart? (Capulets to the former.)
Capulets. On, frisky, hurtig, encourages you, the cock has crowed to
the other times, the morning Gloke has been rung, it is three clock -
Look to the Bakwerk good Angelica Savings' t not only to the property
- Amme. Go, go, and do not in mengt Weiber stuff - go to your bed, you
will be sick for tomorrow Seyn that her that night did not geschlaffen.
Capulets. No , nothing less - what?As soon as he was dressed, he put his hands in his pockets and pulled
out a little leather purse on which were written the following words:

     The Fairy with Azure Hair returns
     fifty pennies to her dear Pinocchio
     with many thanks for his kind heart.

The Marionette opened the purse to find the money, and behold--there
were fifty gold coins!

Pinocchio ran to the mirror. He hardly recognized himself. The bright
face of a tall boy looked at him with wide-awake blue eyes, dark brown
hair and happy, smiling lips.

Surrounded by so much splendor, the Marionette hardly knew what he was
doing. He rubbed his eyes two or three times, wondering if he were still
asleep or awake and decided he must be awake.

"And where is Father?" he cried suddenly. He ran into the next room, and
there stood Geppetto, grown years younger overnight, spick and span
in his new clothes and gay as a lark in the morning. Flattery! Flattery!
crude, outrageous flattery! (lady with sudden jumps to blushing:)
Oh, you go too far! Keep your letters, read the story to your own
shame, and may well get them to you!

"This sudden change in our house is all your doing, my dear Pinocchio,"
answered Geppetto.

"What have I to do with it?"

"Just this. You will not get mail - you do not like me! You are an
insufferable wenches and ugly as the devil incarnate!

I do not harass foreign women! Make sure that you continue coming!

(He turns her back on.And he pointed to a large Marionette
leaning against a chair, head turned to one side, arms hanging limp, and
legs twisted under him.

After a long, long look, Pinocchio said to himself with great content:

"How ridiculous I was as a Marionette! And how happy I am, now that I
have become a real boy!"