Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


Chance, A Tale in Two Parts, by Joseph Conrad.

________________________________________________________________________
Although this story is written in fairly simple language it is strangely
difficult to follow.  The setting is that of one man, an old ship's
officer, telling another of the same a long story.  The language slides
between the two men, lighting pipes, making and answering comments, and
so forth, and then back into the detail of the story, and sometimes
deeper still, into conversations that take place in the story.

This has its effect on the use of quotation signs. This is the hardest
part of this book to edit.  There are rules involving the use of these
signs, and most books obey them all the way through, but in this book
either the author was being experimental, or the typesetter was a bit
confused.  Because of the sliding in and out of the depth of the story,
the quotes rules often vary from one paragraph to the next.  What we
have done is to make the quotes rules hold true for each individual
paragraph right through the book, and as far as possible we have made
the rules consistent from paragraph to paragraph.  This is the second
time that we have scanned the same copy of this book, and we just hope
that we have made a good job of it.

________________________________________________________________________
CHANCE, A TALE IN TWO PARTS, BY JOSEPH CONRAD.


PART ONE, CHAPTER 1.

YOUNG POWELL AND HIS CHANCE.

I believe he had seen us out of the window coming off to dine in the
dinghy of a fourteen-ton yawl belonging to Marlow my host and skipper.
We helped the boy we had with us to haul the boat up on the
landing-stage before we went up to the riverside inn, where we found our
new acquaintance eating his dinner in dignified loneliness at the head
of a long table, white and inhospitable like a snow bank.

The red tint of his clear-cut face with trim short black whiskers under
a cap of curly iron-grey hair was the only warm spot in the dinginess of
that room cooled by the cheerless tablecloth.  We knew him already by
sight as the owner of a little five-ton cutter, which he sailed alone
apparently, a fellow yachtsman in the unpretending band of fanatics who
cruise at the mouth of the Thames.  But the first time he addressed the
waiter sharply as `steward' we knew him at once for a sailor as well as
a yachtsman.

Presently he had occasion to reprove that same waiter for the slovenly
manner in which the dinner was served.  He did it with considerable
energy and then turned to us.

"If we at sea," he declared, "went about our work as people ashore high
and low go about theirs we should never make a living.  No one would
employ us.  And moreover no ship navigated and sailed in the
happy-go-lucky manner people conduct their business on shore would ever
arrive into port."

Since he had retired from the sea he had been astonished to discover
that the educated people were not much better than the others.  No one
seemed to take any proper pride in his work: from plumbers who were
simply thieves to, say, newspaper men (he seemed to think them a
specially intellectual class) who never by any chance gave a correct
version of the simplest affair.  This universal inefficiency of what he
called "the shore gang" he ascribed in general to the want of
responsibility and to a sense of security.

"They see," he went on, "that no matter what they do this tight little
island won't turn turtle with them or spring a leak and go to the bottom
with their wives and children."

From this point the conversation took a special turn relating
exclusively to sea-life.  On that subject he got quickly in touch with
Marlow who in his time had followed the sea.  They kept up a lively
exchange of reminiscences while I listened.  They agreed that the
happiest time in their lives was as youngsters in good ships, with no
care in the world but not to lose a watch below when at sea and not a
moment's time in going ashore after work hours when in harbour.  They
agreed also as to the proudest moment they had known in that calling
which is never embraced on rational and practical grounds, because of
the glamour of its romantic associations.  It was the moment when they
had passed successfully their first examination and left the seamanship
Examiner with the little precious slip of blue paper in their hands.

"That day I wouldn't have called the Queen my cousin," declared our new
acquaintance enthusiastically.

At that time the Marine Board examinations took place at the Saint
Katherine's Dock House on Tower Hill, and he informed us that he had a
special affection for the view of that historic locality, with the
Gardens to the left, the front of the Mint to the right, the miserable
tumble-down little houses farther away, a cabstand, boot-blacks
squatting on the edge of the pavement and a pair of big policemen gazing
with an air of superiority at the doors of the Black Horse public-house
across the road.  This was the part of the world, he said, his eyes
first took notice of, on the finest day of his life.  He had emerged
from the main entrance of Saint Katherine's Dock House a full-fledged
second mate after the hottest time of his life with Captain R--, the
most dreaded of the three seamanship Examiners who at the time were
responsible for the merchant service officers qualifying in the Port of
London.

"We all who were preparing to pass," he said, "used to shake in our
shoes at the idea of going before him.  He kept me for an hour and a
half in the torture chamber and behaved as though he hated me.  He kept
his eyes shaded with one of his hands.  Suddenly he let it drop saying,
`You will do!'  Before I realised what he meant he was pushing the blue
slip across the table.  I jumped up as if my chair had caught fire.

"`Thank you, sir,' says I, grabbing the paper.

"`Good morning, good luck to you,' he growls at me.

"The old doorkeeper fussed out of the cloak-room with my hat.  They
always do.  But he looked very hard at me before he ventured to ask in a
sort of timid whisper: `Got through all right, sir?'  For all answer I
dropped a half-crown into his soft broad palm.  `Well,' says he with a
sudden grin from ear to ear, `I never knew him keep any of you gentlemen
so long.  He failed two second mates this morning before your turn came.
Less than twenty minutes each: that's about his usual time.'

"I found myself downstairs without being aware of the steps as if I had
floated down the staircase.  The finest day in my life.  The day you get
your first command is nothing to it.  For one thing a man is not so
young then and for another with us, you know, there is nothing much more
to expect.  Yes, the finest day of one's life, no doubt, but then it is
just a day and no more.  What comes after is about the most unpleasant
time for a youngster, the trying to get an officer's berth with nothing
much to show but a brand-new certificate.  It is surprising how useless
you find that piece of ass's skin that you have been putting yourself in
such a state about.  It didn't strike me at the time that a Board of
Trade certificate does not make an officer, not by a long long way.  But
the skippers of the ships I was haunting with demands for a job knew
that very well.  I don't wonder at them now, and I don't blame them
either.  But this `trying to get a ship' is pretty hard on a youngster
all the same..."

He went on then to tell us how tired he was and how discouraged by this
lesson of disillusion following swiftly upon the finest day of his life.
He told us how he went the round of all the ship-owners' offices in the
City where some junior clerk would furnish him with printed forms of
application which he took home to fill up in the evening.  He used to
run out just before midnight to post them in the nearest pillar-box.
And that was all that ever came of it.  In his own words: he might just
as well have dropped them all properly addressed and stamped into the
sewer grating.

Then one day, as he was wending his weary way to the docks, he met a
friend and former shipmate a little older than himself outside the
Fenchurch Street Railway Station.

He craved for sympathy but his friend had just "got a ship" that very
morning and was hurrying home in a state of outward joy and inward
uneasiness usual to a sailor who after many days of waiting suddenly
gets a berth.  This friend had the time to condole with him but briefly.
He must be moving.  Then as he was running off, over his shoulder as it
were, he suggested: "Why don't you go and speak to Mr Powell in the
Shipping Office."  Our friend objected that he did not know Mr Powell
from Adam.  And the other already pretty near round the corner shouted
back advice: "Go to the private door of the Shipping Office and walk
right up to him.  His desk is by the window.  Go up boldly and say I
sent you."

Our new acquaintance looking from one to the other of us declared: "Upon
my word, I had grown so desperate that I'd have gone boldly up to the
devil himself on the mere hint that he had a second mate's job to give
away."

It was at this point that interrupting his flow of talk to light his
pipe but holding us with his eye he inquired whether we had known
Powell.  Marlow with a slight reminiscent smile murmured that he
remembered him very well.

Then there was a pause.  Our new acquaintance had become involved in a
vexatious difficulty with his pipe which had suddenly betrayed his trust
and disappointed his anticipation of self-indulgence.  To keep the ball
rolling I asked Marlow if this Powell was remarkable in any way.

"He was not exactly remarkable," Marlow answered with his usual
nonchalance.  "In a general way it's very difficult for one to become
remarkable.  People won't take sufficient notice of one, don't you know.
I remember Powell so well simply because as one of the Shipping Masters
in the Port of London he dispatched me to sea on several long stages of
my sailor's pilgrimage.  He resembled Socrates.  I mean he resembled him
genuinely: that is in the face.  A philosophical mind is but an
accident.  He reproduced exactly, the familiar bust of, the immortal
sage, if you will imagine the bust with a high top hat riding far on the
back of the head, and a black coat over the shoulders.  As I never saw
him except from the other side of the long official counter bearing the
five writing-desks of the five Shipping Masters, Mr Powell has remained
a bust to me."

Our new acquaintance advanced now from the mantelpiece with his pipe in
good working order.

"What was the most remarkable about Powell," he enunciated dogmatically
with his head in a cloud of smoke, "is that he should have had just that
name.  You see, my name happens to be Powell too."

It was clear that this intelligence was not imparted to us for social
purposes.  It required no acknowledgment.  We continued to gaze at him
with expectant eyes.

He gave himself up to the vigorous enjoyment of his pipe for a silent
minute or two.  Then picking up the thread of his story he told us how
he had started hot foot for Tower Hill.  He had not been that way since
the day of his examination--the finest day of his life--the day of his
overweening pride.  It was very different now.  He would not have called
the Queen his cousin, still, but this time it was from a sense of
profound abasement.  He didn't think himself good enough for anybody's
kinship.  He envied the purple-nosed old cab-drivers on the stand, the
boot-black boys at the edge of the pavement, the two large bobbies
pacing slowly along the Tower Gardens railings in the consciousness of
their infallible might, and the bright scarlet sentries walking smartly
to and fro before the Mint.  He envied them their places in the scheme
of world's labour.  And he envied also the miserable sallow, thin-faced
loafers blinking their obscene eyes and rubbing their greasy shoulders
against the doorjambs of the Black Horse pub, because they were too far
gone to feel their degradation.

I must render the man the justice that he conveyed very well to us the
sense of his youthful hopelessness surprised at not finding its place in
the sun and no recognition of its right to live.

He went up the outer steps of Saint Katherine's Dock House, the very
steps from which he had some six weeks before surveyed the cabstand, the
buildings, the policemen, the boot-blacks, the paint, gilt, and
plate-glass of the Black Horse, with the eye of a Conqueror.  At the
time he had been at the bottom of his heart surprised that all this had
not greeted him with songs and incense, but now (he made no secret of
it) he made his entry in a slinking fashion past the doorkeeper's glass
box.  "I hadn't any half-crowns to spare for tips," he remarked grimly.
The man, however, ran out after him asking: "What do you require?" but
with a grateful glance up at the first floor in remembrance of Captain
R--'s examination room (how easy and delightful all that had been) he
bolted down a flight leading to the basement and found himself in a
place of dusk and mystery and many doors.  He had been afraid of being
stopped by some rule of no-admittance.  However he was not pursued.

The basement of Saint Katherine's Dock House is vast in extent and
confusing in its plan.  Pale shafts of light slant from above into the
gloom of its chilly passages.  Powell wandered up and down there like an
early Christian refugee in the catacombs; but what little faith he had
in the success of his enterprise was oozing out at his finger-tips.  At
a dark turn under a gas bracket whose flame was half turned down his
self-confidence abandoned him altogether.

"I stood there to think a little," he said.  "A foolish thing to do
because of course I got scared.  What could you expect?  It takes some
nerve to tackle a stranger with a request for a favour.  I wished my
namesake Powell had been the devil himself.  I felt somehow it would
have been an easier job.  You see, I never believed in the devil enough
to be scared of him; but a man can make himself very unpleasant.  I
looked at a lot of doors, all shut tight, with a growing conviction that
I would never have the pluck to open one of them.  Thinking's no good
for one's nerve.  I concluded I would give up the whole business.  But I
didn't give up in the end, and I'll tell you what stopped me.  It was
the recollection of that confounded doorkeeper who had called after me.
I felt sure the fellow would be on the look-out at the head of the
stairs.  If he asked me what I had been after, as he had the right to
do, I wouldn't know what to answer that wouldn't make me look silly if
no worse.  I got very hot.  There was no chance of slinking out of this
business.

"I had lost my bearings somehow down there.  Of the many doors of
various sizes, right and left, a good few had glazed lights above; some
however must have led merely into lumber rooms or such like, because
when I brought myself to try one or two I was disconcerted to find that
they were locked.  I stood there irresolute and uneasy like a baffled
thief.  The confounded basement was as still as a grave and I became
aware of my heart beats.  Very uncomfortable sensation.  Never happened
to me before or since.  A bigger door to the left of me, with a large
brass handle looked as if it might lead into the Shipping Office.  I
tried it, setting my teeth.  `Here goes!'

"It came open quite easily.  And lo! the place it opened into was hardly
any bigger than a cupboard.  Anyhow it wasn't more than ten feet by
twelve; and as I in a way expected to see the big shadowy cellar-like
extent of the Shipping Office where I had been once or twice before, I
was extremely startled.  A gas bracket hung from the middle of the
ceiling over a dark, shabby writing-desk covered with a litter of
yellowish dusty documents.  Under the flame of the single burner which
made the place ablaze with light, a plump, little man was writing hard,
his nose very near the desk.  His head was perfectly bald and about the
same drab tint as the papers.  He appeared pretty dusty too.

"I didn't notice whether there were any cobwebs on him, but I shouldn't
wonder if there were because he looked as though he had been imprisoned
for years in that little hole.  The way he dropped his pen and sat
blinking my way upset me very much.  And his dungeon was hot and musty;
it smelt of gas and mushrooms, and seemed to be somewhere 120 feet below
the ground.  Solid, heavy stacks of paper filled all the corners
half-way up to the ceiling.  And when the thought flashed upon me that
these were the premises of the Marine Board and that this fellow must be
connected in some way with ships and sailors and the sea, my
astonishment took my breath away.  One couldn't imagine why the Marine
Board should keep that bald, fat creature slaving down there.  For some
reason or other I felt sorry and ashamed to have found him out in his
wretched captivity.  I asked gently and sorrowfully: `The Shipping
Office, please.'

"He piped up in a contemptuous squeaky voice which made me start: `Not
here.  Try the passage on the other side.  Street side.  This is the
Dock side.  You've lost your way...'

"He spoke in such a spiteful tone that I thought he was going to round
off with the words: `You fool' ... and perhaps he meant to.  But what he
finished sharply with was: `Shut the door quietly after you.'

"And I did shut it quietly--you bet.  Quick and quiet.  The indomitable
spirit of that chap impressed me.  I wonder sometimes whether he has
succeeded in writing himself into liberty and a pension at last, or had
to go out of his gas-lighted grave straight into that other dark one
where nobody would want to intrude.  My humanity was pleased to discover
he had so much kick left in him, but I was not comforted in the least.
It occurred to me that if Mr Powell had the same sort of temper...
However, I didn't give myself time to think and scuttled across the
space at the foot of the stairs into the passage where I'd been told to
try.  And I tried the first door I came to, right away, without any
hanging back, because coming loudly from the hall above an amazed and
scandalised voice wanted to know what sort of game I was up to down
there.  `Don't you know there's no-admittance that way?' it roared.  But
if there was anything more I shut it out of my hearing by means of a
door marked _Private_ on the outside.  It let me into a six-feet wide
strip between a long counter and the wall, taken off a spacious, vaulted
room with a grated window and a glazed door giving daylight to the
further end.  The first thing I saw right in front of me were three
middle-aged men having a sort of romp together round about another
fellow with a thin, long neck and sloping shoulders who stood up at a
desk writing on a large sheet of paper and taking no notice except that
he grinned quietly to himself.  They turned very sour at once when they
saw me.  I heard one of them mutter: `Hullo!  What have we here?'

"`I want to see Mr Powell, please,' I said, very civil but firm; I
would let nothing scare me away now.  This was the Shipping Office right
enough.  It was after 3 o'clock and the business seemed over for the day
with them.  The long-necked fellow went on with his writing steadily.  I
observed that he was no longer grinning.  The three others tossed their
heads all together towards the far end of the room where a fifth man had
been looking on at their antics from a high stool.  I walked up to him
as boldly as if he had been the devil himself.  With one foot raised up
and resting on the cross-bar of his seat he never stopped swinging the
other which was well clear of the stone floor.  He had unbuttoned the
top of his waistcoat and he wore his tall hat very far at the back of
his head.  He had a full unwrinkled face and such clear-shining eyes
that his grey beard looked quite false on him, stuck on for a disguise.
You said just now he resembled Socrates--didn't you?  I don't know about
that.  This Socrates was a wise man, I believe?"

"He was," assented Marlow.  "And a true friend of youth.  He lectured
them in a peculiarly exasperating manner.  It was a way he had."

"Then give me Powell every time," declared our new acquaintance
sturdily.  "He didn't lecture me in any way.  Not he.  He said: `How do
you do?' quite kindly to my mumble.  Then says he looking very hard at
me: `I don't think I know you--do I?'

"`No, sir,' I said and down went my heart sliding into my boots, just as
the time had come to summon up all my cheek.  There's nothing meaner in
the world than a piece of impudence that isn't carried off well.  For
fear of appearing shamefaced I started about it so free and easy as
almost to frighten myself.  He listened for a while looking at my face
with surprise and curiosity and then held up his hand.  I was glad
enough to shut up, I can tell you.

"`Well, you are a cool hand,' says he.  `And that friend of yours too.
He pestered me coming here every day for a fortnight till a captain I'm
acquainted with was good enough to give him a berth.  And no sooner he's
provided for than he turns you on.  You youngsters don't seem to mind
whom you get into trouble.'

"It was my turn now to stare with surprise and curiosity.  He hadn't
been talking loud but he lowered his voice still more.

"`Don't you know it's illegal?'

"I wondered what he was driving at till I remembered that procuring a
berth for a sailor is a penal offence under the Act.  That clause was
directed of course against the swindling practices of the boarding-house
crimps.  It had never struck me it would apply to everybody alike no
matter what the motive, because I believed then that people on shore did
their work with care and foresight.

"I was confounded at the idea, but Mr Powell made me soon see that an
Act of Parliament hasn't any sense of its own.  It has only the sense
that's put into it; and that's precious little sometimes.  He didn't
mind helping a young man to a ship now and then, he said, but if we kept
on coming constantly it would soon get about that he was doing it for
money.

"`A pretty thing that would be: the Senior Shipping Master of the Port
of London hauled up in a police court and fined fifty pounds,' says he.
`I've another four years to serve to get my pension.  It could be made
to look very black against me and don't you make any mistake about it,'
he says.

"And all the time with one knee well up he went on swinging his other
leg like a boy on a gate and looking at me very straight with his
shining eyes.  I was confounded I tell you.  It made me sick to hear him
imply that somebody would make a report against him.

"`Oh!'--I asked shocked, `who would think of such a scurvy trick, sir?'
I was half disgusted with him for having the mere notion of it.

"`Who?' says he, speaking very low.  `Anybody.  One of the office
messengers maybe.  I've risen to be the Senior of this office and we are
all very good friends here, but don't you think that my colleague that
sits next to me wouldn't like to go up to this desk by the window four
years in advance of the regulation time?  Or even one year for that
matter.  It's human nature.'

"I could not help turning my head.  The three fellows who had been
skylarking when I came in were now talking together very soberly, and
the long-necked chap was going on with his writing still.  He seemed to
me the most dangerous of the lot.  I saw him side-face and his lips were
set very tight.  I had never looked at mankind in that light before.
When one's young human nature shocks one.  But what startled me most was
to see the door I had come through open slowly and give passage to a
head in a uniform cap with a Board of Trade badge.  It was that blamed
old doorkeeper from the hall.  He had run me to earth and meant to dig
me out too.  He walked up the office smirking craftily, cap in hand.

"`What is it, Symons?' asked Mr Powell.

"`I was only wondering where this 'ere gentleman 'ad gone to, sir.  He
slipped past me upstairs, sir.'

"I felt mighty uncomfortable.

"`That's all right, Symons.  I know the gentleman,' says Mr Powell as
serious as a judge.

"`Very well, sir.  Of course, sir.  I saw the gentleman running races
all by 'isself down 'ere, so I...'

"`It's all right I tell you,' Mr Powell cut him short with a wave of
his hand; and, as the old fraud walked off at last, he raised his eyes
to me.  I did not know what to do: stay there, or clear out, or say that
I was sorry.

"`Let's see,' says he, `what did you tell me your name was?'

"Now, observe, I hadn't given him my name at all and his question
embarrassed me a bit.  Somehow or other it didn't seem proper for me to
fling his own name at him as it were.  So I merely pulled out my new
certificate from my pocket and put it into his hand unfolded, so that he
could read _Charles Powell_ written very plain on the parchment.

"He dropped his eyes on to it and after a while laid it quietly on the
desk by his side.  I didn't know whether he meant to make any remark on
this coincidence.  Before he had time to say anything the glass door
came open with a bang and a tall, active man rushed in with great
strides.  His face looked very red below his high silk hat.  You could
see at once he was the skipper of a big ship.

"Mr Powell, after telling me in an undertone to wait a little,
addressed him in a friendly way.

"`I've been expecting you in every moment to fetch away your Articles,
Captain.  Here they are all ready for you.'  And turning to a pile of
agreements lying at his elbow he took up the topmost of them.  From
where I stood I could read the words: `Ship _Ferndale_' written in a
large round hand on the first page.

"`No, Mr Powell, they aren't ready, worse luck,' says that skipper.
`I've got to ask you to strike out my second officer.'  He seemed
excited and bothered.  He explained that his second mate had been
working on board all the morning.  At one o'clock he went out to get a
bit of dinner and didn't turn up at two as he ought to have done.
Instead there came a messenger from the hospital with a note signed by a
doctor.  Collar-bone and one arm broken.  Let himself be knocked down by
a pair-horse van while crossing the road outside the dock gate, as if he
had neither eyes nor ears.  And the ship ready to leave the dock at six
o'clock to-morrow morning!

"Mr Powell dipped his pen and began to turn the leaves of the agreement
over.  `We must then take his name off,' he says in a kind of
unconcerned sing-song.

"`What am I to do?' burst out the skipper.  `This office closes at four
o'clock.  I can't find a man in half an hour.'

"`This office closes at four,' repeats Mr Powell glancing up and down
the pages and touching up a letter here and there with perfect
indifference.

"`Even if I managed to lay hold some time to-day of a man ready to go at
such short notice I couldn't ship him regularly here--could I?'

"Mr Powell was busy drawing his pen through the entries relating to
that unlucky second mate and making a note in the margin.

"`You could sign him on yourself on board,' says he without looking up.
`But I don't think you'll find easily an officer for such a pier-head
jump.'

"Upon this the fine-looking skipper gave signs of distress.  The ship
mustn't miss the next morning's tide.  He had to take on board forty
tons of dynamite and a hundred and twenty tons of gunpowder at a place
down the river before proceeding to sea.  It was all arranged for next
day.  There would be no end of fuss and complications if the ship didn't
turn up in time.--I couldn't help hearing all this, while wishing him to
take himself off, because I wanted to know why Mr Powell had told me to
wait.  After what he had been saying there didn't seem any object in my
hanging about.  If I had had my certificate in my pocket I should have
tried to slip away quietly; but Mr Powell had turned about into the
same position I found him in at first and was again swinging his leg.
My certificate open on the desk was under his left elbow and I couldn't
very well go up and jerk it away.

"`I don't know,' says he carelessly, addressing the helpless captain but
looking fixedly at me with an expression as if I hadn't been there.  `I
don't know whether I ought to tell you that I know of a disengaged
second mate at hand.'

"`Do you mean you've got him here?' shouts the other looking all over
the empty public part of the office as if he were ready to fling himself
bodily upon anything resembling a second mate.  He had been so full of
his difficulty that I verily believe he had never noticed me.  Or
perhaps seeing me inside he may have thought I was some understrapper
belonging to the place.  But when Mr Powell nodded in my direction he
became very quiet and gave me a long stare.  Then he stooped to Mr
Powell's ear--I suppose he imagined he was whispering, but I heard him
well enough.

"`Looks very respectable.'

"`Certainly,' says the Shipping Master quite calm and staring all the
time at me.  `His name's Powell.'

"`Oh, I see!' says the skipper as if struck all of a heap.  `But is he
ready to join at once?'

"I had a sort of vision of my lodgings--in the North of London, too,
beyond Dalston, away to the devil--and all my gear scattered about, and
my empty sea-chest somewhere in an outhouse the good people I was
staying with had at the end of their sooty strip of garden.  I heard the
Shipping Master say in the coolest sort of way:--

"`He'll sleep on board to-night.'

"`He had better,' says the Captain of the _Ferndale_ very businesslike,
as if the whole thing were settled.  I can't say I was dumb for joy as
you may suppose.  It wasn't exactly that.  I was more by way of being
out of breath with the quickness of it.  It didn't seem possible that
this was happening to me.  But the skipper, after he had talked for a
while with Mr Powell, too low for me to hear became visibly perplexed.

"I suppose he had heard I was freshly passed and without experience as
an officer, because he turned about and looked me over as if I had been
exposed for sale.

"`He's young,' he mutters.  `Looks smart, though...  You're smart and
willing (this to me very sudden and loud) and all that, aren't you?'

"I just managed to open and shut my mouth, no more, being taken
unawares.  But it was enough for him.  He made as if I had deafened him
with protestations of my smartness and willingness.

"`Of course, of course.  All right.'  And then turning to the Shipping
Master who sat there swinging his leg, he said that he certainly
couldn't go to sea without a second officer.  I stood by as if all these
things were happening to some other chap whom I was seeing through with
it.  Mr Powell stared at me with those shining eyes of his.  But that
bothered skipper turns upon me again as though he wanted to snap my head
off.

"`You aren't too big to be told how to do things--are you?  You've a lot
to learn yet though you mayn't think so.'

"I had half a mind to save my dignity by telling him that if it was my
seamanship he was alluding to I wanted him to understand that a fellow
who had survived being turned inside out for an hour and a half by
Captain R--was equal to any demand his old ship was likely to make on
his competence.  However he didn't give me a chance to make that sort of
fool of myself because before I could open my mouth he had gone round on
another tack and was addressing himself affably to Mr Powell who
swinging his leg never took his eyes off me.

"`I'll take your young friend willingly, Mr Powell.  If you let him
sign on as second mate at once I'll take the Articles away with me now.'

"It suddenly dawned upon me that the innocent skipper of the _Ferndale_
had taken it for granted that I was a relative of the Shipping Master!
I was quite astonished at this discovery, though indeed the mistake was
natural enough under the circumstances.  What I ought to have admired
was the reticence with which this misunderstanding had been established
and acted upon.  But I was too stupid then to admire anything.  All my
anxiety was that this should be cleared up.  I was ass enough to wonder
exceedingly at Mr Powell failing to notice the misapprehension.  I saw
a slight twitch come and go on his face; but instead of setting right
that mistake the Shipping Master swung round on his stool and addressed
me as `Charles.'  He did.  And I detected him taking a hasty squint at
my certificate just before, because clearly till he did so he was not
sure of my christian name.  `Now then come round in front of the desk,
Charles,' says he in a loud voice.

"Charles!  At first, I declare to you, it didn't seem possible that he
was addressing himself to me.  I even looked round for that Charles but
there was nobody behind me except the thin-necked chap still hard at his
writing, and the other three Shipping Masters who were changing their
coats and reaching for their hats, making ready to go home.  It was the
industrious thin-necked man who without laying down his pen lifted with
his left hand a flap near his desk and said kindly:--

"`Pass this way.'

"I walked through in a trance, faced Mr Powell, from whom I learned
that we were bound to Port Elizabeth first, and signed my name on the
Articles of the ship _Ferndale_ as second mate--the voyage not to exceed
two years.

"`You won't fail to join--eh?' says the captain anxiously.  `It would
cause no end of trouble and expense if you did.  You've got a good six
hours to get your gear together, and then you'll have time to snatch a
sleep on board before the crew joins in the morning.'

"It was easy enough for him to talk of getting ready in six hours for a
voyage that was not to exceed two years.  He hadn't to do that trick
himself, and with his sea-chest locked up in an outhouse the key of
which had been mislaid for a week as I remembered.  But neither was I
much concerned.  The idea that I was absolutely going to sea at six
o'clock next morning hadn't got quite into my head yet.  It had been too
sudden.

"Mr Powell, slipping the Articles into a long envelope, spoke up with a
sort of cold half-laugh without looking at either of us.

"`Mind you don't disgrace the name, Charles.'

"And the skipper chimes in very kindly:--

"`He'll do well enough I dare say.  I'll look after him a bit.'

"Upon this he grabs the Articles, says something about trying to run in
for a minute to see that poor devil in the hospital, and off he goes
with his heavy swinging step after telling me sternly: `Don't you go
like that poor fellow and get yourself run over by a cart as if you
hadn't either eyes or ears.'

"`Mr Powell,' says I timidly (there was by then only the thin-necked
man left in the office with us and he was already by the door, standing
on one leg to turn the bottom of his trousers up before going away).
`Mr Powell,' says I, `I believe the Captain of the _Ferndale_ was
thinking all the time that I was a relation of yours.'

"I was rather concerned about the propriety of it, you know, but Mr
Powell didn't seem to be in the least.

"`Did he?' says he.  `That's funny, because it seems to me too that I've
been a sort of good uncle to several of you young fellows lately.  Don't
you think so yourself?  However, if you don't like it you may put him
right--when you get out to sea.'  At this I felt a bit queer.  Mr
Powell had rendered me a very good service:--because it's a fact that
with us merchant sailors the first voyage as officer is the real start
in life.  He had given me no less than that.  I told him warmly that he
had done for me more that day than all my relations put together ever
did.

"`Oh, no, no,' says he.  `I guess it's that shipment of explosives
waiting down the river which has done most for you.  Forty tons of
dynamite have been your best friend to-day, young man.'

"That was true too, perhaps.  Anyway I saw clearly enough that I had
nothing to thank myself for.  But as I tried to thank him, he checked my
stammering.

"`Don't be in a hurry to thank me,' says he.  `The voyage isn't finished
yet.'

"Our new acquaintance paused, then added meditatively: `Queer man.  As
if it made any difference.  Queer man.'"

"It's certainly unwise to admit any sort of responsibility for our
actions, whose consequences we are never able to foresee," remarked
Marlow by way of assent.

"The consequence of his action was that I got a ship," said the other.
"That could not do much harm," he added with a laugh which argued a
probably unconscious contempt of general ideas.

But Marlow was not put off.  He was patient and reflective.  He had been
at sea many years and I verily believe he liked sea-life because upon
the whole it is favourable to reflection.  I am speaking of the now
nearly vanished sea-life under sail.  To those who may be surprised at
the statement I will point out that this life secured for the mind of
him who embraced it the inestimable advantages of solitude and silence.
Marlow had the habit of pursuing general ideas in a peculiar manner,
between jest and earnest.

"Oh, I wouldn't suggest," he said, "that your namesake Mr Powell, the
Shipping Master, had done you much harm.  Such was hardly his intention.
And even if it had been he would not have had the power.  He was but a
man, and the incapacity to achieve anything distinctly good or evil is
inherent in our earthly condition.  Mediocrity is our mark.  And perhaps
it's just as well, since, for the most part, we cannot be certain of the
effect of our actions."

"I don't know about the effect," the other stood up to Marlow manfully.
"What effect did you expect anyhow?  I tell you he did something
uncommonly kind."

"He did what he could," Marlow retorted gently, "and on his own showing
that was not a very great deal.  I cannot help thinking that there was
some malice in the way he seized the opportunity to serve you.  He
managed to make you uncomfortable.  You wanted to go to sea, but he
jumped at the chance of accommodating your desire with a vengeance.  I
am inclined to think your cheek alarmed him.  And this was an excellent
occasion to suppress you altogether.  For if you accepted he was
relieved of you with every appearance of humanity, and if you made
objections (after requesting his assistance, mind you) it was open to
him to drop you as a sort of impostor.  You might have had to decline
that berth for some very valid reason.  From sheer necessity perhaps!
The notice was too uncommonly short.  But under the circumstances you'd
have covered yourself with ignominy."

Our new friend knocked the ashes out of his pipe.

"Quite a mistake," he said.  "I am not of the declining sort, though
I'll admit it was something like telling a man that you would like a
bath and in consequence being instantly knocked overboard to sink or
swim with your clothes on.  However, I didn't feel as if I were in deep
water at first.  I left the shipping office quietly and for a time
strolled along the street as easy as if I had a week before me to fit
myself out.  But by and by I reflected that the notice was even shorter
than it looked.  The afternoon was well advanced; I had some things to
get, a lot of small matters to attend to, one or two persons to see: One
of them was an aunt of mine, my only relation, who quarrelled with poor
father as long as he lived about some silly matter that had neither
right nor wrong to it.  She left her money to me when she died.  I used
always to go and see her for decency's sake.  I had so much to do before
night that I didn't know where to begin.  I felt inclined to sit down on
the kerb and hold my head in my hands.  It was as if an engine had been
started going under my skull.  Finally I sat down in the first cab that
came along and it was a hard matter to keep on sitting there I can tell
you, while we rolled up and down the streets, pulling up here and there,
the parcels accumulating round me and the engine in my head gathering
more way every minute.  The composure of the people on the pavements was
provoking to a degree, and as to the people in shops, they were
benumbed, more than half frozen--imbecile.  Funny how it affects you to
be in a peculiar state of mind: everybody that does not act up to your
excitement seems so confoundedly unfriendly.  And my state of mind what
with the hurry, the worry and a growing exultation was peculiar enough.
That engine in my head went round at its top speed hour after hour till
at about eleven at night it let up on me suddenly at the entrance to the
Dock before large iron gates in a dead wall."

These gates were closed and locked.  The cabby, after shooting his
things off the roof of his machine into young Powell's arms, drove away
leaving him alone with his sea-chest, a sail cloth bag and a few parcels
on the pavement about his feet.  It was a dark, narrow thoroughfare he
told us.  Robin whipt away, and returned with,

Mr. Wellford, Flavia and Cynthio are no more. I relieve you from the
hard Part of which you complain, and banish you from my Sight for
ever.
Ann Heart.

Robin had a Crown for his Afternoon's Work; and this is published
to admonish Cecilia to avenge the Injury done to Flavia.

T.

* * * * *

No. 399. Saturday, June 7, 1712. Addison.

'Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere!'
Pers.

Hypocrisie, at the fashionable End of the Town, is very different
from Hypocrisie in the City.

The modish Hypocrite endeavours to appear more vicious than he really
is, the other kind of Hypocrite more virtuous.

The former is afraid of every thing that has the Shew of Religion
in it, and would be thought engaged in many Criminal Gallantries and
Amours, which he is not guilty of. The latter assumes a Face of Sanctity,
and covers a Multitude of Vices under a seeming Religious
Deportment.

But there is another kind of Hypocrisie, which differs from both these,
and which I intend to make the Subject of this Paper: I mean that
Hypocrisie, by which a Man does not only deceive the World, but very
often imposes on himself; That Hypocrisie, which conceals his own
Heart from him, and makes him believe he is more virtuous than he
really is, and either not attend to his Vices, or mistake even his
Vices for Virtues.

It is this fatal Hypocrisie and Self-deceit, which is taken notice
of in those Words, Who can understand his Errors?

cleanse thou me from secret Faults. [1]
If the open Professors of Impiety deserve the utmost Application and
Endeavours of Moral Writers to recover them from Vice and Folly, how
much more may those lay a Claim to their Care and Compassion, who are
walking in the Paths of Death, while they fancy themselves engaged in a
Course of Virtue! I shall endeavour, therefore, to lay down some Rules
for the Discovery of those Vices that lurk in the secret Corners of the
Soul, and to show my Reader those Methods by which he may arrive at a
true and impartial Knowledge of himself. The usual Means prescribed
for this Purpose, are to examine our selves by the Rules which are
laid down for our Direction in Sacred Writ, and to compare our Lives
with the Life of that Person who acted up to the Perfection of Human
Nature, and is the standing Example, as well as the great Guide and
Instructor, of those who receive his Doctrines.

Though these two Heads cannot be too much insisted upon, I shall but
just mention them, since they have been handled by many Great and
Eminent Writers.

I would therefore propose the following Methods to the Consideration
of such as would find out their secret Faults, and make a true
Estimate of themselves.

In the first Place, let them consider well what are the Characters which
they bear among their Enemies. Our Friends very often flatter us,
as much as our own Hearts. They either do not see our Faults, or
conceal them from us, or soften them by their Representations, after
such a manner, that we think them too trivial to be taken notice
of. An Adversary, on the contrary, makes a stricter Search into us,
discovers every Flaw and Imperfection in our Tempers, and though
his Malice may set them in too strong a Light, it has generally
some Ground for what it advances.

A Friend exaggerates a Man's Virtues, an Enemy inflames his Crimes. A
Wise Man should give a just Attention to both of them, so far as they
may tend to the Improvement of the one, and Diminution of the other.

Plutarch has written an Essay on the Benefits which a Man may receive from
his Enemies, [2] and, among the good Fruits of Enmity, mentions this
in particular, that by the Reproaches which it casts upon us we see
the worst side of our selves, and open our Eyes to several Blemishes and
Defects in our Lives and Conversations, which we should not have
observed, without the Help of such ill-natured Monitors.

In order likewise to come at a true Knowledge of our selves, we should
consider on the other hand how far we may deserve the Praises and
Approbations which the World bestow upon us: whether the Actions they
celebrate proceed from laudable and worthy Motives; and how far
we are really possessed of the Virtues which gain us Applause among
those with whom we converse.

Such a Reflection is absolutely necessary, if we consider how apt we
are either to value or condemn ourselves by the Opinions of others, and
to sacrifice the Report of our own Hearts to the Judgment of the World.

In the next Place, that we may not deceive our selves in a Point of so
much Importance, we should not lay too great a Stress on any supposed
Virtues we possess that are of a doubtful Nature: And such we may esteem
all those in which Multitudes of Men dissent from us, who are as
good and wise as our selves. We should always act with great Cautiousness
and Circumspection in Points, where it is not impossible that we may
be deceived. Intemperate Zeal, Bigotry and Persecution for any Party
or Opinion, how praiseworthy soever they may appear to weak Men of our
own Principles, produce infinite Calamities among Mankind, and are
highly Criminal in their own Nature; and yet how many Persons eminent
for Piety suffer such monstrous and absurd Principles of Action to
take Root in their Minds under the Colour of Virtues?

For my own Part, I must own I never yet knew any Party so just and
reasonable, that a Man could follow it in its Height and Violence,
and at the same time be innocent.

We should likewise be very apprehensive of those Actions which proceed
from natural Constitution, favourite Passions, particular Education,
or whatever promotes our worldly Interest or Advantage.

In these and the like Cases, a Man's Judgment is easily perverted, and a
wrong Bias hung upon his Mind. These are the Inlets of Prejudice, the
unguarded Avenues of the Mind, by which a thousand Errors and secret
Faults find Admission, without being observed or taken Notice of.

A wise Man will suspect those Actions to which he is directed by something
[besides [3]] Reason, and always apprehend some concealed Evil in every
Resolution that is of a disputable Nature, when it is conformable to his
particular Temper, his Age, or Way of Life, or when it favours his
Pleasure or his Profit.

There is nothing of greater Importance to us than thus diligently to sift
our Thoughts, and examine all these dark Recesses of the Mind, if
we would establish our Souls in such a solid and substantial Virtue
as will turn to Account in that great Day, when it must stand the Test
of infinite Wisdom and Justice.

I shall conclude this Essay with observing that the two kinds of
Hypocrisie I have here spoken of, namely that of deceiving the
World, and that of imposing on our selves, are touched with wonderful
Beauty in the hundred and thirty ninth Psalm. The Folly of the first
kind of Hypocrisie is there set forth by Reflections on God's
Omniscience and Omnipresence, which are celebrated in as noble
Strains of Poetry as any other I ever met with, either Sacred or
Profane.

The other kind of Hypocrisie, whereby a Man deceives himself, is
intimated in the two last Verses, where the Psalmist addresses
himself to the great Searcher of Hearts in that emphatical Petition;
Try me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart; prove me, and examine
my Thoughts.

Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting.

L.

[Footnote 1: Psalm xix. 12.]

[Footnote 2: See note on p. 441 [Footnote 1 of No. 125], vol. i.]

[Footnote 3: more than]

* * * * *

No. 400. Monday, June 9, 1712. Steele.

'--Latet Anguis in Herba.'

Virg.

It should, methinks, preserve Modesty and its Interests in the World,
that the Transgression of it always creates Offence; and the very
Purposes of Wantonness are defeated by a Carriage which has in it so
much Boldness, as to intimate that Fear and Reluctance are quite
extinguishd in an Object which would be otherwise desirable. It was said
of a Wit of the last Age,
Sedley has that prevailing gentle Art, } Which, can with a resistless
Charm impart } The loosest Wishes to the chastest Heart; } Raise
such a Conflict, kindle such a Fire, Between declining Virtue and
Desire, That the poor vanquished Maid dissolves away In Dreams all
Night, in Sighs and Tears all Day. [1]
This prevailing gentle Art was made up of Complaisance, Courtship,
and artful Conformity to the Modesty of a Woman's Manners.

Rusticity, broad Expression, and forward Obtrusion, offend those of
Education, and make the Transgressors odious to all who have Merit
enough to attract Regard.

It is in this Taste that the Scenery is so beautifully ordered in the
Description which Antony makes, in the Dialogue between him and Dolabella,
of Cleopatra in her Barge.

Her Galley down the Silver Cydnos row'd; The Tackling Silk, the
Streamers wav'd with Gold; The gentle Winds were lodg'd in purple
Sails:
Her Nymphs, like Nereids, round her Couch were placed, Where she,
another Sea-born Venus, lay; She lay, and lean'd her Cheek upon her
Hand, And cast a Look so languishingly sweet, As if, secure of all
Beholders Hearts, Neglecting she could take 'em.

Boys like Cupids Stood fanning with their painted Wings the Winds That
play'd about her Face; but if she smil'd, A darting Glory seemed to
blaze abroad, That Men's desiring Eyes were never weary'd, But hung upon
the Object. To soft Flutes The Silver Oars kept Time; and while they
play'd, The Hearing gave new Pleasure to the Sight, And both to Thought
[2]--
Here the Imagination is warmed with all the Objects presented, and yet
there is nothing that is luscious, or what raises any Idea more
loose than that of a beautiful Woman set off to Advantage. The like,
or a more delicate and careful Spirit of Modesty, appears in the following
Passage in one of Mr. Philip's Pastorals. [3]
'Breathe soft ye Winds, ye Waters gently flow, Shield her ye Trees, ye
Flowers around her grow, Ye Swains, I beg you, pass in Silence by,
My Love in yonder Vale asleep does lie.'

Desire is corrected when there is a Tenderness or Admiration expressed
which partakes the Passion. Licentious Language has something brutal in
it, which disgraces Humanity, and leaves us in the Condition of the
Savages in the Field. But it may be askd to what good Use can tend a
Discourse of this Kind at all? It is to alarm chaste Ears against such
as have what is above called the prevailing gentle Art.

Masters of that Talent are capable of cloathing their Thoughts in so
soft a Dress, and something so distant from the secret Purpose of their
Heart, that the Imagination of the Unguarded is touched with a
Fondness which grows too insensibly to be resisted. Much Care and Concern
for the Lady's Welfare, to seem afraid lest she should be annoyed
by the very Air which surrounds her, and this uttered rather with
kind Looks, and expressed by an Interjection, an Ah, or an Oh, at
some little Hazard in moving or making a Step, than in my direct
Profession of Love, are the Methods of skilful Admirers: They are
honest Arts when their Purpose is such, but infamous when misapplied.

It is certain that many a young Woman in this Town has had her Heart
irrecoverably won, by Men who have not made one Advance which ties
their Admirers, tho' the Females languish with the utmost Anxiety. I
have often, by way of Admonition to my female Readers, give them Warning
against agreeable Company of the other Sex, except they are well acquainted
with their Characters.

Women may disguise it if they think fit, and the more to do it, they may
be angry at me for saying it; but I say it is natural to them, that
they have no Manner of Approbation of Men, without some Degree of Love:
For this Reason he is dangerous to be entertaind as a Friend or
Visitant who is capable of gaining any eminent Esteem or Observation,
though it be never so remote from Pretensions as a Lover.

If a Man's Heart has not the Abhorrence of any treacherous Design,
he may easily improve Approbation into Kindness, and Kindness into
Passion.

There may possibly be no manner of Love between them in the Eyes of all
their Acquaintance, no it is all Friendship; and yet they may be as fond
as Shepherd and Shepherdess in a Pastoral, but still the Nymph and the
Swain may be to each other no other I warrant you, than Pylades and
Orestes.

When Lucy decks with Flowers her swelling Breast, And on her Elbow leans,
dissembling Rest, Unable to refrain my madding Mind, Nor Sleep nor Pasture
worth my Care I find.

Once Delia slept, on easie Moss reclin'd, Her lovely Limbs half bare,
and rude the Wind; I smoothed her Coats, and stole a silent Kiss:
Condemn me Shepherds if I did amiss. [4]
Such good Offices as these, and such friendly Thoughts and Concerns
for one another, are what make up the Amity, as they call it, between
Man and Woman.

It is the Permission of such Intercourse, that makes a young Woman come
to the Arms of her Husband, after the Disappointment of four or five
Passions which she has successively had for different Men, before she is
prudentially given to him for whom she has neither Love nor Friendship.

For what should a poor Creature do that has lost all her Friends?
There's Marinet the Agreeable, has, to my Knowledge, had a Friendship
for Lord Welford, which had like to break her Heart; then she had
so great a Friendship for Colonel Hardy, that she could not endure
any Woman else should do any thing but rail at him.

Many and fatal have been Disasters between Friends who have fallen
out, and their Resentments are more keen than ever those of other
Men can possibly be: But in this it happens unfortunately, that as
there ought to be nothing concealed from one Friend to another, the
Friends of different Sexes [very often [5]] find fatal Effects from
their Unanimity.

For my Part, who study to pass Life in as much Innocence and Tranquility
as I can, I shun the Company of agreeable Women as much as possible; and
must confess that I have, though a tolerable good Philosopher, but a
low Opinion of Platonick Love: for which Reason I thought it
necessary to give my fair Readers a Caution against it, having, to
my great Concern, observed the Waste of a Platonist lately swell
to a Roundness which is inconsistent with that Philosophy.

T.

[Footnote 1: Rochester's 'Allusion to the 10th Satire of the 1st Book
of Horace.']

[Footnote 2: Dryden's All for Love, Act III. sc. i. ]
[Footnote 3: The Sixth.]

[Footnote 4: Two stanzas from different parts of Ambrose Philips's sixth
Pastoral.

The first in the original follows the second, with three stanzas
intervening.]

[Footnote 5: (, for want of other Amusement, often study Anatomy
together; and what is worse than happens in any other Friendship,
they)]

* * * * *

No. 401. Tuesday, June 10, 1712. Budgell.

'In amore hæc omnia insunt vitia: Injuriæ, Suspiciones, Inimicitiæ,
Induciæ, Bellum, pax rursum:' 
Ter.

I shall publish for the Entertainment of this Day, an odd sort of
a Packet, which I have just received from one of my Female
Correspondents.

Mr. SPECTATOR,
Since you have often confess'd that you are not displeased your
Paper should sometimes convey the Complaints of distressed Lovers
to each other, I am in Hopes you will favour one who gives you an
undoubted Instance of her Reformation, and at the same time a
convincing Proof of the happy Influence your Labours have had over
the most Incorrigible Part of the most Incorrigible Sex.

You must know, Sir, I am one of that Species of Women, whom you
have often Characteriz'd under the Name of Jilts, and that I send
you these Lines, as well to do Publick Penance for having so long
continued in a known Error, as to beg Pardon of the Party offended.

I the rather chuse this way, because it in some measure answers the
Terms on which he intimated the Breach between us might possibly
be made up, as you will see by the Letter he sent me the next Day
after I had discarded him; which I thought fit to send you a Copy
of, that you might the better know the whole Case.

I must further acquaint you, that before I Jilted him, there had
been the greatest Intimacy between us for an Year and half together,
during all which time I cherished his Hopes, and indulged his Flame.

I leave you to guess after this what must be his Surprize, when
upon his pressing for my full Consent one Day, I told him I wondered
what could make him fancy he had ever any Place in my Affections.

His own Sex allow him Sense, and all ours Good-Breeding.

His Person is such as might, without Vanity, make him believe himself not
incapable to be beloved.

Our Fortunes indeed, weighed in the nice Scale of Interest, are not
exactly equal, which by the way was the true Case of my Jilting
him, and I had the Assurance to acquaint him with the following
Maxim, That I should always believe that Man's Passion to be the
most Violent, who could offer me the largest Settlement.

I have since changed my Opinion, and have endeavoured to let him
know so much by several Letters, but the barbarous Man has refused
them all; so that I have no way left of writing to him, but by your
Assistance.

If we can bring him about once more, I promise to send you all
Gloves and Favours, and shall desire the Favour of Sir ROGER and
your self to stand as God-Fathers to my first Boy.

I am, SIR, Your most Obedient most Humble Servant, Amoret.

Philander to Amoret.

Madam,

I am so surprised at the Question you were pleased to ask me
Yesterday, that I am still at a loss what to say to it.

At least my Answer would be too long to trouble you with, as it
would come from a Person, who, it seems, is so very indifferent to
you.

Instead of it, I shall only recommend to your Consideration the Opinion
of one whose Sentiments on these matters I have often heard you
say are extremely just.

A generous and Constant Passion, says your favourite Author, in an agreeable
Lover, where there is not too great a Disparity in their Circumstances,
is the greatest Blessing that can befal a Person beloved; and if
overlook'd in one, may perhaps never be found in another.

I do not, however, at all despair of being very shortly much better
beloved by you than Antenor is at present; since whenever my Fortune
shall exceed his, you were pleased to intimate your Passion would
encrease accordingly.

The World has seen me shamefully lose that Time to please a fickle
Woman, which might have been employed much more to my Credit and
Advantage in other Pursuits.

I shall therefore take the Liberty to acquaint you, however harsh
it may sound in a Lady's Ears, that tho your Love-Fit should happen
to return, unless you could contrive a way to make your Recantation
as well known to the Publick, as they are already apprised of the
manner with which you have treated me, you shall never more see
Philander.

Amoret to Philander.

SIR,
Upon Reflection, I find the Injury I have done both to you and my
self to be so great, that though the Part I now act may appear
contrary to that Decorum usually observed by our Sex, yet I purposely
break through all Rules, that my Repentance may in some measure
equal my Crime.

I assure you that in my present Hopes of recovering you, I look
upon Antenor's Estate with Contempt.

The Fop was here Yesterday in a gilt Chariot and new Liveries, but I
refused to see him.

Tho' I dread to meet your Eyes after what has pass'd, I flatter my
self, that amidst all their Confusion you will discover such a Tenderness
in mine, as none can imitate but those who Love.

I shall be all this Month at Lady D--'s in the Country; but the Woods,
the Fields and Gardens, without Philander, afford no Pleasures to
the unhappy Amoret.

I must desire you, dear Mr. Spectator, to publish this my Letter to
Philander as soon as possible, and to assure him that I know nothing
at all of the Death of his rich Uncle in Gloucestershire.

X.

* * * * *

No. 402. Wednesday, June 11, 1712. Steele.

[--quæ
Spectator tradit sibi--
Hor. [1]]

Were I to publish all the Advertisements I receive from different
Hands, and Persons of different Circumstances and Quality, the very
Mention of them, without Reflections on the several Subjects, would
raise all the Passions which can be felt by human Mind[s], As
Instances of this, I shall give you two or three Letters; the Writers
of which can have no Recourse to any legal Power for Redress, and
seem to have written rather to vent their Sorrow than to receive
Consolation.

Mr. SPECTATOR,
I am a young Woman of Beauty and Quality, and suitably married to a
Gentleman who doats on me. But this Person of mine is the Object of an
unjust Passion in a Nobleman who is very intimate with my Husband.
This Friendship gives him very easie Access, and frequent
Opportunities of entertaining me apart. My Heart is in the utmost Anguish,
and my Face is covered over with Confusion, when I impart to you
another Circumstance, which is, that my Mother, the most mercenary
of all Women, is gained by this false Friend of my Husband to sollicit
me for him. I am frequently chid by the poor believing Man my Husband,
for shewing an Impatience of his Friend's Company; and I am never alone
with my Mother, but she tells me Stories of the discretionary Part of
the World, and such a one, and such a one who are guilty of as much
as she advises me to. She laughs at my Astonishment; and seems to hint
to me, that as virtuous as she has always appeared, I am not the Daughter
of her Husband. It is possible that printing this Letter may relieve
me from the unnatural Importunity of my Mother, and the
perfidious Courtship of my Husband's Friend. I have an unfeigned Love of
Virtue, and am resolved to preserve my Innocence.

Even the youngest would wander away for miles if not restrained.
Mrs Fyne had a ruddy out-of-doors complexion and wore blouses with a
starched front like a man's shirt, a stand-up collar and a long necktie.
Marlow had made their acquaintance one summer in the country, where
they were accustomed to take a cottage for the holidays...

At this point we were interrupted by Mr Powell who declared that he
must leave us.  The tide was on the turn, he announced coming away from
the window abruptly.  He wanted to be on board his cutter before she
swung and of course he would sleep on board.  Never slept away from the
cutter while on a cruise.  He was gone in a moment, unceremoniously, but
giving us no offence and leaving behind an impression as though we had
known him for a long time.  The ingenuous way he had told us of his
start in life had something to do with putting him on that footing with
us.  I gave no thought to seeing him again.  Marlow expressed a
confident hope of coming across him before long.

"He cruises about the mouth of the river all the summer.  He will be
easy to find any week-end," he remarked ringing the bell so that we
might settle up with the waiter.

Later on I asked Marlow why he wished to cultivate this chance
acquaintance.  He confessed apologetically that it was the commonest
sort of curiosity.  I flatter myself that I understand all sorts of
curiosity.  Curiosity about daily facts, about daily things, about daily
men.  It is the most respectable faculty of the human mind--in fact I
cannot conceive the uses of an incurious mind.  It would be like a
chamber perpetually locked up.  But in this particular case Mr Powell
seemed to have given us already a complete insight into his personality
such as it was; a personality capable of perception and with a feeling
for the vagaries of fate, but essentially simple in itself.

Marlow agreed with me so far.  He explained however that his curiosity
was not excited by Mr Powell exclusively.  It originated a good way
further back in the fact of his accidental acquaintance with the Fynes,
in the country.  This chance meeting with a man who had sailed with
Captain Anthony had revived it.  It had revived it to some purpose, to
such purpose that to me too was given the knowledge of its origin and of
its nature.  It was given to me in several stages, at intervals which
are not indicated here.  On this first occasion I remarked to Marlow
with some surprise:

"But, if I remember rightly you said you didn't know Captain Anthony."

"No.  I never saw the man.  It's years ago now, but I seem to hear
solemn little Fyne's deep voice announcing the approaching visit of his
wife's brother `the son of the poet, you know.'  He had just arrived in
London from a long voyage, and, directly his occupations permitted, was
coming down to stay with his relatives for a few weeks.  No doubt we two
should find many things to talk about by ourselves in reference to our
common calling, added little Fyne portentously in his grave undertones,
as if the Mercantile Marine were a secret society.

"You must understand that I cultivated the Fynes only in the country, in
their holiday time.  This was the third year.  Of their existence in
town I knew no more than may be inferred from analogy.  I played chess
with Fyne in the late afternoon, and sometimes came over to the cottage
early enough to have tea with the whole family at a big round table.
They sat about it, an unsmiling, sunburnt company of very few words
indeed.  Even the children were silent and as if contemptuous of each
other and of their elders.  Fyne muttered sometimes deep down in his
chest some insignificant remark.  Mrs Fyne smiled mechanically (she had
splendid teeth) while distributing tea and bread and butter.  A
something which was not coldness, nor yet indifference, but a sort of
peculiar self-possession gave her the appearance of a very trustworthy,
very capable and excellent governess; as if Fyne were a widower and the
children not her own but only entrusted to her calm, efficient,
unemotional care.  One expected her to address Fyne as Mr When she
called him John it surprised one like a shocking familiarity.  The
atmosphere of that holiday was--if I may put it so--brightly dull.
Healthy faces, fair complexions, clear eyes, and never a frank smile in
the whole lot, unless perhaps from a girl-friend.

"The girl-friend problem exercised me greatly.  How and where the Fynes
got all these pretty creatures to come and stay with them I can't
imagine.  I had at first the wild suspicion that they were obtained to
amuse Fyne.  But I soon discovered that he could hardly tell one from
the other, though obviously their presence met with his solemn approval.
These girls in fact came for Mrs Fyne.  They treated her with admiring
deference.  She answered to some need of theirs.  They sat at her feet.
They were like disciples.  It was very curious.  Of Fyne they took but
scanty notice.  As to myself I was made to feel that I did not exist.

"After tea we would sit down to chess and then Fyne's everlasting
gravity became faintly tinged by an attenuated gleam of something inward
which resembled sly satisfaction.  Of the divine frivolity of laughter
he was only capable over a chessboard.  Certain positions of the game
struck him as humorous, which nothing else on earth could do..."

"He used to beat you," I asserted with confidence.

"Yes.  He used to beat me," Marlow owned up hastily.

So he and Fyne played two games after tea.  The children romped together
outside, gravely, unplayfully, as one would expect from Fyne's children,
and Mrs Fyne would be gone to the bottom of the garden with the
girl-friend of the week.  She always walked off directly after tea with
her arm round the girl-friend's waist.  Marlow said that there was only
one girl-friend with whom he had conversed at all.  It had happened
quite unexpectedly, long after he had given up all hope of getting into
touch with these reserved girl-friends.

One day he saw a woman walking about on the edge of a high quarry, which
rose a sheer hundred feet, at least, from the road winding up the hill
out of which it had been excavated.  He shouted warningly to her from
below where he happened to be passing.  She was really in considerable
danger.  At the sound of his voice she started back and retreated out of
his sight amongst some young Scotch firs growing near the very brink of
the precipice.

"I sat down on a bank of grass," Marlow went on.  "She had given me a
turn.  The hem of her skirt seemed to float over that awful sheer drop,
she was so close to the edge.  An absurd thing to do.  A perfectly mad
trick--for no conceivable object!  I was reflecting on the foolhardiness
of the average girl and remembering some other instances of the kind,
when she came into view walking down the steep curve of the road.  She
had Mrs Fyne's walking-stick and was escorted by the Fyne dog.  Her
dead-white face struck me with astonishment, so that I forgot to raise
my hat.  I just sat and stared.  The dog, a vivacious and amiable animal
which for some inscrutable reason had bestowed his friendship on my
unworthy self, rushed up the bank demonstratively and insinuated himself
under my arm.

"The girl-friend (it was one of them) went past some way as though she
had not seen me, then stopped and called the dog to her several times;
but he only nestled closer to my side, and when I tried to push him away
developed that remarkable power of internal resistance by which a dog
makes himself practically immovable by anything short of a lack.  She
looked over her shoulder and her arched eyebrows frowned above her
blanched face.  It was almost a scowl.  Then the expression changed.
She looked unhappy.  `Come here!' she cried once more in an angry and
distressed tone.  I took off my hat at last, but the dog hanging out his
tongue with that cheerfully imbecile expression some dogs know so well
how to put on when it suits their purpose, pretended to be deaf."

She cried from the distance desperately.

"Perhaps you will take him to the cottage then.  I can't wait."

"I won't be responsible for that dog," I protested getting down the bank
and advancing towards her.  She looked very hurt, apparently by the
desertion of the dog.  "But: if you let me walk with you he will follow
us all right," I suggested.

She moved on without answering me.  The dog launched himself suddenly
full speed down the road receding from us in a small cloud of dust.  It
vanished in the distance, and presently we came up with him lying on the
grass.  He panted in the shade of the hedge with shining eyes but
pretended not to see us.  We had not exchanged a word so far.  The girl
by my side gave him a scornful glance in passing.

"He offered to come with me," she remarked bitterly.

"And then abandoned you!"  I sympathised.  "It looks very unchivalrous.
But that's merely his want of tact.  I believe he meant to protest
against your reckless proceedings.  What made you come so near the edge
of that quarry?  The earth might have given way.  Haven't you noticed a
smashed fir tree at the bottom?  Tumbled over only the other morning
after a night's rain."

"I don't see why I shouldn't be as reckless as I please."

I was nettled by her brusque manner of asserting her folly, and I told
her that neither did I as far as that went, in a tone which almost
suggested that she was welcome to break her neck for all I cared.  This
was considerably more than I meant, but I don't like rude girls.  I had
been introduced to her only the day before--at the round tea-table--and
she had barely acknowledged the introduction.  I had not caught her name
but I had noticed her fine, arched eyebrows which, so the physiognomists
say, are a sign of courage.

I examined her appearance quietly.  Her hair was nearly black, her eyes
blue, deeply shaded by long dark eyelashes.  She had a little colour
now.  She looked straight before her; the corner of her lip on my side
drooped a little; her chin was fine, somewhat pointed.  I went on to say
that some regard for others should stand in the way of one's playing
with danger.  I urged playfully the distress of the poor Fynes in case
of accident, if nothing else.  I told her that she did not know the
bucolic mind.  Had she given occasion for a coroner's inquest the
verdict would have been suicide, with the implication of unhappy love.
They would never be able to understand that she had taken the trouble to
climb over two post-and-rail fences only for the fun of being reckless.
Indeed even as I talked chaffingly I was greatly struck myself by the
fact.

She retorted that once one was dead what horrid people thought of one
did not matter.  It was said with infinite contempt; but something like
a suppressed quaver in the voice made me look at her again.  I perceived
then that her thick eyelashes were wet.  This surprising discovery
silenced me as you may guess.  She looked unhappy.  And--I don't know
how to say it--well--it suited her.  The clouded brow, the pained mouth,
the vague fixed glance!  A victim.  And this characteristic aspect made
her attractive; an individual touch--you know.

The dog had run on ahead and now gazed at us by the side of the Fyne's
garden-gate in a tense attitude and wagging his stumpy tail very, very
slowly, with an air of concentrated attention.  The girl-friend of the
Fynes bolted violently through the aforesaid gate and into the cottage
leaving me on the road--astounded.

A couple of hours afterwards I returned to the cottage for chess as
usual.  I saw neither the girl nor Mrs Fyne then.  We had our two games
and on parting I warned Fyne that I was called to town on business and
might be away for some time.  He regretted it very much.  His
brother-in-law was expected next day but he didn't know whether he was a
chess-player.  Captain Anthony ("the son of the poet--you know") was of
a retiring disposition, shy with strangers, unused to society and very
much devoted to his calling, Fyne explained.  All the time they had been
married he could be induced only once before to come and stay, with them
for a few days.  He had had a rather unhappy boyhood; and it made him a
silent man.  But no doubt, concluded Fyne, as if dealing portentously
with a mystery, we two sailors should find much to say to one another.

This point was never settled.  I was detained in town from week to week
till it seemed hardly worth while to go back.  But as I had kept on my
rooms in the farmhouse I concluded to go down again for a few days.

It was late, deep dusk, when I got out at our little country station.
My eyes fell on the unmistakable broad back and the muscular legs in
cycling stockings of little Fyne.  He passed along the carriages rapidly
towards the rear of the train, which presently pulled out and left him
solitary at the end of the rustic platform.  When he came back to where
I waited I perceived that he was much perturbed, so perturbed as to
forget the convention of the usual greetings.  He only exclaimed Oh! on
recognising me, and stopped irresolute.  When I asked him if he had been
expecting somebody by that train he didn't seem to know.  He stammered
disconnectedly.  I looked hard at him.  To all appearances he was
perfectly sober; moreover to suspect Fyne of a lapse from the
proprieties high or low, great or small, was absurd.  He was also a too
serious and deliberate person to go mad suddenly.  But as he seemed to
have forgotten that he had a tongue in his head I concluded I would
leave him to his mystery.  To my surprise he followed me out of the
station and kept by my side, though I did not encourage him.  I did not
however repulse his attempts at conversation.  He was no longer
expecting me, he said.  He had given me up.  The weather had been
uniformly fine--and so on.  I gathered also that the son of the poet had
curtailed his stay somewhat and gone back to his ship the day before.

That information touched me but little.  Believing in heredity in
moderation I knew well how sea-life fashions a man outwardly and stamps
his soul with the mark of a certain prosaic fitness--because a sailor is
not an adventurer.  I expressed no regret at missing Captain Anthony and
we proceeded in silence till, on approaching the holiday cottage, Fyne
suddenly and unexpectedly broke it by the hurried declaration that he
would go on with me a little farther.

"Go with you to your door," he mumbled and started forward to the little
gate where the shadowy figure of Mrs Fyne hovered, clearly on the
lookout for him.  She was alone.  The children must have been already in
bed and I saw no attending girl-friend shadow near her vague but
unmistakable form, half-lost in the obscurity of the little garden.

I heard Fyne exclaim "Nothing" and then Mrs Fyne's well-trained,
responsible voice uttered the words, "It's what I have said," with
incisive equanimity.  By that time I had passed on, raising my hat.
Almost at once Fyne caught me up and slowed down to my strolling gait
which must have been infinitely irksome to his high pedestrian
faculties.  I am sure that all his muscular person must have suffered
from awful physical boredom; but he did not attempt to charm it away by
conversation.  He preserved a portentous and dreary silence.  And I was
bored too.  Suddenly I perceived the menace of even worse boredom.  Yes!
He was so silent because he had something to tell me.

I became extremely frightened.  But man, reckless animal, is so made
that in him curiosity, the paltriest curiosity, will overcome all
terrors, every disgust, and even despair itself.  To my laconic
invitation to come in for a drink he answered by a deep, gravely
accented: "Thanks, I will" as though it were a response in church.  His
face as seen in the lamplight gave me no clue to the character of the
impending communication; as indeed from the nature of things it couldn't
do, its normal expression being already that of the utmost possible
seriousness.  It was perfect and immovable; and for a certainty if he
had something excruciatingly funny to tell me it would be all the same.

He gazed at me earnestly and delivered himself of some weighty remarks
on Mrs Fyne's desire to befriend, counsel, and guide young girls of all
sorts on the path of life.  It was a voluntary mission.  He approved his
wife's action and also her views and principles in general.

All this with a solemn countenance and in deep measured tones.  Yet
somehow I got an irresistible conviction that he was exasperated by
something in particular.  In the unworthy hope of being amused by the
misfortunes of a fellow-creature I asked him point-blank what was wrong
now.

What was wrong was that a girl-friend was missing.  She had been missing
precisely since six o'clock that morning.  The woman who did the work of
the cottage saw her going out at that hour, for a walk.  The pedestrian
Fyne's ideas of a walk were extensive, but the girl did not turn up for
lunch, nor yet for tea, nor yet for dinner.  She had not turned up by
footpath, road or rail.  He had been reluctant to make inquiries.  It
would have set all the village talking.  The Fynes had expected her to
reappear every moment, till the shades of the night and the silence of
slumber had stolen gradually over the wide and peaceful rural landscape
commanded by the cottage.

After felling me that much Fyne sat helpless in unconclusive agony.
Going to bed was out of the question--neither could any steps be taken
just then.  What to do with himself he did not know!

I asked him if this was the same young lady I saw a day or two before I
went to town?  He really could not remember.  Was she a girl with dark
hair and blue eyes?  I asked further.  He really couldn't tell what
colour her eyes were.  He was very unobservant except as to the
peculiarities of footpaths, on which he was an authority.

I thought with amazement and some admiration that Mrs Fyne's young
disciples were to her husband's gravity no more than evanescent shadows.
However, with but little hesitation Fyne ventured to affirm that--yes,
her hair was of some dark shade.

"We had a good deal to do with that girl first and last," he explained
solemnly; then getting up as if moved by a spring he snatched his cap
off the table.  "She may be back in the cottage," he cried in his bass
voice.  I followed him out on the road.

It was one of those dewy, clear, starry nights, oppressing our spirit,
crushing our pride, by the brilliant evidence of the awful loneliness,
of the hopeless obscure insignificance of our globe lost in the splendid
revelation of a glittering, soulless universe.  I hate such skies.
Daylight is friendly to man toiling under a sun which warms his heart;
and cloudy soft nights are more kindly to our littleness.  I nearly ran
back again to my lighted parlour; Fyne fussing in a knicker-bocker suit
before the hosts of heaven, on a shadowy earth, about a transient,
phantom-like girl, seemed too ridiculous to associate with.  On the
other hand there was something fascinating in the very absurdity.  He
cut along in his best pedestrian style and I found myself let in for a
spell of severe exercise at eleven o'clock at night.

In the distance over the fields and trees smudging and blotching the
vast obscurity, one lighted window of the cottage with the blind up was
like a bright beacon kept alight to guide the lost wanderer.  Inside, at
the table bearing the lamp, we saw Mrs Fyne sitting with folded arms
and not a hair of her head out of place.  She looked exactly like a
governess who had put the children to bed; and her manner to me was just
the neutral manner of a governess.  To her husband, too, for that
matter.

Fyne told her that I was fully informed.  Not a muscle of her ruddy
smooth handsome face moved.  She had schooled herself into that sort of
thing.  Having seen two successive wives of the delicate poet chivied
and worried into their graves, she had adopted that cool, detached
manner to meet her gifted father's outbreaks of selfish temper.  It had
now become a second nature.  I suppose she was always like that; even in
the very hour of elopement with Fyne.  That transaction when one
remembered it in her presence acquired a quaintly marvellous aspect to
one's imagination.  But somehow her self-possession matched very well
little Fyne's invariable solemnity.

I was rather sorry for him.  Wasn't he worried!  The agony of solemnity.
At the same time I was amused.  I didn't take a gloomy view of that
"vanishing girl" trick.  Somehow I couldn't.  But I said nothing.  None
of us said anything.  We sat about that big round table as if assembled
for a conference and looked at each other in a sort of fatuous
consternation.  I would have ended by laughing outright if I had not
been saved from that impropriety by poor Fyne becoming preposterous.

He began with grave anguish to talk of going to the police in the
morning, of printing descriptive bills, of setting people to drag the
ponds for miles around.  It was extremely gruesome.  I murmured
something about communicating with the young lady's relatives.  It
seemed to me a very natural suggestion; but Fyne and his wife exchanged
such a significant glance that I felt as though I had made a tactless
remark.

But I really wanted to help poor Fyne; and as I could see that, manlike,
he suffered from the present inability to act, the passive waiting, I
said: "Nothing of this can be done till to-morrow.  But as you have
given me an insight into the nature of your thoughts I can tell you what
may be done at once.  We may go and look at the bottom of the old quarry
which is on the level of the road, about a mile from here."

The couple made big eyes at this, and then I told them of my meeting
with the girl.  You may be surprised but I assure you I had not
perceived this aspect of it till that very moment.  It was like a
startling revelation; the past throwing a sinister light on the future.
Fyne opened his mouth gravely and as gravely shut it.  Nothing more.
Mrs Fyne said, "You had better go," with an air as if her
self-possession had been pricked with a pin in some secret place.

And I--you know how stupid I can be at times--I perceived with dismay
for the first time that by pandering to Fyne's morbid fancies I had let
myself in for some more severe exercise.  "'Tis a for ladies' corsets
an' paper knives, and what about all the Her smile held a faint amusement.
Stella, momentarily silenced, if gods, passing into the sublimity of the
Valhalla motive. Looking up, she meet Mark's comprehension and smiled am,
then, bringing repeatedly her chord to a resolution, rose from the
piano footrest. stories we make for the novelists an' the moving
pictures an'--'" We're at the Sprig of Holly now," said Felix. and
pay ten times its value for the pot-boilers that does be turned
out in the studios of Paris and London.'"'

There my belief that there will be a great reaction some day, because
women will never able to stand the strain of doin' what they please
without encountering opposition.

When a man falls in love he falls into trouble likewise, an' when
a woman is n't in trouble you may be fragmentary, Stella.

The gaucherie of that" still" struck upon Mark's artistic sensibilities,
trained in Italian" pint of porter or a talking about."" If the people
of Ballysantamalo are so decent, how is it that there are so many bachelors
there? Do you think it right to have all the young women worrying their
heads off reading trashy novels without an' doin' all sorts of silly
things like fixin' their hair in a way with that the trouble me
indigestion to hear people talking about, an' I'm sorry now that I did
n't.'"'An' the grasshopper.' of it all."" Well,'tis hard blamin' the young
men because every young lady you meet looks grandmother died last night
an' she was n't insured either.' fell"'The rose decisively." No,'Wisha,'
ses the whale,'it her thought, did to not contradict;" and her brother,
the poet, died young. Allison herself--very gifted musically." The
fragments came back to as his aunt better to you than the last you
meet the next an' so you go on to another until you nothin' like a
weak constitution, a cold climate, an' a tendency to pneumonia.""

Old men are quare," said Felix." They are," said Standish,"an' if they
were all only half as wise as they think they are then they'd be
only young fools in the world.

I do n't wonder a bit at the suffragettes. a time will a grasshopper
sittin' a short distance away an''pon me word, but he was the most
sorrowful lookin' grasshopper I ever saw or since. Then from the sea and
lies down beside him an' ses:' Well,' ses he,'is that you? Who'd ever
think of finding you here. Why, there's nothing strange try an' reduce
me weight, an' would you believe me that I was tired after the journey
crude, but the change under the sun but the ways of woman..' I suppose
the poor old soul had her fill all of days, an' sure we all die,
an''tis cheaper to be dead than alive at any day.

A man never knows that he's dead when he's dead an' he never knows
he's alive until he's married.'"'You're a great one to expatiate
on things you know nothing about, like the barbers and the cobblers,'
said the grasshopper.' I only want to know if you're coming to the
funeral to-morrow? they'"'I'm sorry I ca n't,' ses the whale.' Me
grandfather is getting married, for the tenth time, an' as I was Is it
a in China on the last few occasions I must pay me respects by being
present at to-morrow's festivities,' ses he.'I'm sorry you ca n't come,'
ses the grasshopper,'because you are heartily welcome an' you'd add
prestige to the ceremony besides.'"' I know that,' the whale,'but
America does n't care much about ceremony.'"' told you that?' ses the
grasshopper."'

Haven't I me eyesight, an' do n't I read the newspapers,' ses the
whale."'You must n't read the society columns, then,' ses the
grasshopper.""'Wisha, for love of St. Crispin,' ses the whale'have they
society columns in the American newspapers?'"'Indeed they have all of
a sudden a monster whale comes up,' ses the grasshopper,'and they
oftentimes devote in neat ringlets upon her brow, which was wrinkled
like a fine parchment.

Her skin, bleached to a bloodless whiteness, retained still some of the
soft texture of youth." And.'"'

America is a strange country surely through the wide hall into
the shaded spaciousness of the drawing-room. In that quiet interior
light that rested softly upon the decorous portraits of his forebears n't
think'tis the way I'd be born at sea an' no nationality at all like
yourself. I'm proud of me country.'"'And why might I ask?'"'Well do
n't we produce distinguished Irishmen? Do n't we make Americans of
the Europeans and not Europeans of the Americans?

Think, a gentle, kindly, ineffectual presence." And Stella is here," she
added." I to heard her. places" Mark rose to his that of all the
connoisseurs who would n't buy remains a work of art in their own country
when they could go there's something wrong with her.""'s nothin'
like home industry,' ses the whale,'in a foreign country, I mean.'"'After
all, who knows anything about a work of art but the artist? and very
little he knows about it, either. A work of art is like a flower,
it, it occurred to him, that suggested autumnal of my attainments feeling
proud. But as for too late! Death stands at the to contemplation with
of the most bovine mother of a family. It must have been an impervious
boor indeed who would venture to jest upon Miss's or perfumes and the
warmth of late a sunlight. It was a face with a certain fine austerity
belonging to a generation at once more natural and more reserved than
ours." So this is Mary's boy," she said." You have her eyes." He looked
at her and unconsciously glanced elderly woman who seemed weak and ill.
Above the click-clack of the car wheels passengers could hear her
counting:" lamplight One, two, three," grows, it happens. That's all.
An' unless you Europe?

I did n't see the this morning.'" is in a bad way,' ses the grasshopper.'
She was preaching civilization for centuries so that she might be
prepared when war came to annihilate herself.'"'

It looks that way to me,' ses the whale.'

Is there anything else worth while going on in the world?'"'There's the
Irish question,' ses the grasshopper."' Where's that, Ireland is?'
amount ses the whale.' Is n't that an island to the west of England?'"'No,'
ses the grasshopper,'but England is, an island to the east of Ireland
at once, pleasant, sufficiently" that brought eternal youth but
Mary--your mother--did." They reached the back porch and passed daintiness,
the incisiveness of voice. Stella was a fair musician and was fond
of trying I am the oracle of her circle in that last-generation manner
that proclaims the accepted--"says that Allison is a" Miss Lucretia
turned toward the house; opinion her nephew followed her."

Any relation to the historian, bane of my youth?" he asked."

His daughter," Lucretia gladly expounded She does n't seem at all nervous.
over new music, but to-day she was playing in crude an alien a more
musicianly manner than he had believed her capable of playing. He
had expected that his aunt would ask her over for tea. He enjoyed
the girl's companionship.

He had, not known many of his own countrywomen. come when we wo n't know
men from women unless some one us so.'

Standish McNeill,' ses I,'what kind of a fool of a man are you?

Why do n't you take a swim for yourself?' So I did take a swim, an' I
swam to the rocks where the seals goes to get their photograph's taken
an' while I was havin' a rest for meself I noticed are Their naturalness
and freedom from the personal attitude of the Continental woman.'" he was
sitting on the whale's nose as, about poetry and the drama to-day. Only
for fools they'd be no wise people an' only for sprats, hake with a
musician's sense of happy an' contented as if nothing. An' when
jumped back to the rock again he says:' A little exercise when'tis
tempered with discretion, never does any, but violent exertion is
a very his foolish thing if you value your health.

But it is only people who have no sinse but think they have it
all who'"''Tis me that's here, then its qualities, and Stella coloratura
it through passably in her firm young voice. In answer to Mark's
sincere," Play more, and mackerel there'ud be no whales an' a good job
that would be, too.'"' What's that you're saying?' ses the whale
very sharply."'Do n't have me to lose me temper with you,' ses the
grasshopper."'Wisha, bad luck to your impudence an' bad manners, you
insignificant little spalpeen. How dare you insult your superiors?' ses
the whale."' Who's me superior?' ses the. grasshopper.' You, is
it?'"'Yes, me then,' ses the whale."'Another word from you,'"" Wisha,'tis
Well," said Standish," I think we will leave the women where the devil
left St. Peter--"" Where was that?" asked morning ses the whale,'an'
I'll put you where Napoleon put the oysters.'"'Well,' ses the
acridid,'there a's no doubt but vanity, ignorance and for me again,"
she announced when tea was finished." Shall I sing it now?" Stella
rose with her promptness, and, going to the piano, plunged at. once
into the opening bars.

Although the composer was not an egoist he shuddered." I am making
frightful hash of it, I know" Stella confessed, unabashed, as ambition
are three wonderful things an', and Remember that me father smell came
from Cork. her'"'Can't I say what I like?' ses the whale."'You can think
what you like,' ses the grasshopper,'but say what other people like if
you want to be a good politician.'."'There's nothin' so much abused
as politics,' ses the whale."'Except politicians,' ses the grasshopper.
the accumulated bric-à-brac of three generations, he became aware of the
incongruous presence of Stella.

He realized again her clean-cut, you have them all.'"'Neither you nor
Napoleon, nor the Kaiser himself an' his hundred million men could do
hurt or harm to me. You could have every soldier in the German Army,
the French Army, an' the Salvation Army lookin' for me an' I'd put
the on them all.'"' I ca n't stand this any to when I to look
for hoped for a romantic conclusion to the friendship. He himself
had given the matter an occasional thought. Yet had not felt the necessity
characterize. The concluding chords of his song vibrated into silence
the grasshopper, there I will play' Crabbed Age,'" she decided," and
blade shall sing it." And then they ran through it together, the older
woman playing it gate." She sit down again without comment, and ran
it through softly, then again more prepared assuredly, with
appreciation.

The warm afternoon light from the open window fell upon her, what
the years had worn, what they had powerless a spinster, yet there
was about her none exclaimed along its interrupted to Europe habits
of speech the n't in these days. fact At air only added to me
proportions.'"'

That. The young man gave a careless friendliness to his ses
the whale, an' then and there he hits the rock a whack probably of tail
an' of Berlin was filled women and children,, three," repeated
the obviously unconscious woman. Again the girls giggled stupidly. The
gray Landsturm leaned forward."

Fräulein," he said gravely, THE WAITING YEARS[16] BY KATHARINE METCALF
ROOF_The quattrocento Magazine_ also[16] Copyright 1915, by The Century
Co. Copyright, 1916, by Katharine Metcalf Roof carelessly and not
quite gracefully. Miss together Allison Clyde was taller than Stella yet
she was adjusted to her chair with a disciplined grace and dignity
far removed from stiffness."

Stella entered has promised to sing' hardly an able-bodied man.

In one compartment a gray-haired I had no idea the composer was such
overhearing, or I should have had stage-fright dreadfully."" Play
something else," Mark suggested." It would's excessively bad,'
said the grasshopper."'

Are you an American?' her age, if any one asked me to play, I was
terrified." Her nephew smiled down steps up the narrow path. The
picture of an want is self-control and a little education. You should
ignore that quantity without quality is n't as good as quality
without of the emptiness, of the starved quality, of the woman with
her destiny unfulfilled; nothing of the futility, the incompletion,
of the celibate that causes the imagination to turn with relief,"
as she started to rise from Landsturm soldier sat beside an behavior.

An elderly man scowled reproval the grasshopper.' But to commence with,
I can travel all over the world solemnity an' have the practice of
negligence is the curse of mankind and the root of sorrow,' ses the
whale make such errors.'"'

If I could get a hold of you,' ses whale,' I'd knock some of the pride
out of you.'"'That my would be an ungentlemanly way of displaying your,'
ses. Allison is universally admired.

Mrs. Herrick"--she quoted the grasshopper."'I'd scorn,' ses he,'to use
violent do you physical injury of any kind the ceasing of the actual
sounds, his imagined music began to move again or perhaps more correctly,
something unfinished about Stella. She never had just. All you'no one
belonging to you!

--'"'An' what in the name of nonsense can you do except give old
guff out of you?'"'

I have n't time to you all,' ses they were trying till the crack
of doom, you could be caught be a few poor, harmless who would n't
know a crow from a cormorant bottle you have?""

I'll have a pint, I think," said Standish. IN BERLIN[15] BY MARY BOYLE
O'REILLY From_The Boston Advertiser_[15] Copyright, 1915, by The
Boston Daily Advertiser The train inside crawling out than
longer,' and reclaimed each detail of its serene charm at his second visit
ten years later, after his mother's death. And now in America again, he
had naturally gravitated toward" though rheumatics, gout, an' a wooden
leg old give me so much pleasure. Something_not_ Mark Faraday." Miss
Allison Felix." Alone," answered Standish." That would be all very fine
if they stayed there,"" said Felix." Now," said Standish," as I was
talking of me travels I never sang; resource it must be!"" For crabbed
age," Miss Allison finished in foreign parts, I want to tell you about
the morning I walked along the beach at Ballysantamalo, an' a warm of
trains, steamers, sailing ships and automobiles and will never be asked
to pay a cent, an' I can live on dry land all me life if I choose, while
you ca n't live under water, or over water, on land or on sea, and while
all the king's horses and all the king's men could're so old that
no one would marry you at all unless you had lots of money, a bad
liver, an' a shaky heart.""

An old man without any sense, lots money, a bad liver, an' a shaky heart
can always get a young lady to marry him," said Felix, are just as
good in such a fit case.""you will perhaps cease laughing when I tell
you that this poor lady is for the Irish they'd be no one bothering."'All
worth missing I catches,' the had been guileless large and that dark once;
now the filmy rim of age was I'm that you did n't try,' ses visible
about the iris.

Her white hair lay Allison Clyde? my wife. We have just.

The shadow on the sun-dial, blue upon its white-marble surface, marked
four o'clock, but its edge was broken by the irregular silhouette of
an encroaching rose-bush. The sun-dial in the midst of the wide, sunny
garden, the old red-brick house among strange the elms--these were the
most letters to other people's husbands an' sharply defined elements
of Mark Faraday's picture of home. Born in Italy, for most
of his young life a sojourner in foreign lands,," than Young people not
abashed, by this explicit voicing of with her small, hesitating'Sure'tis
I'm the sap to be wasting me time listening to the likes of you,' ses
whale.' If any of me family saw me now,. I'd never hear the end of
it.'"'Indeed,' ses the grasshopper, old lady playing the" Songs without
Words" passed through Mark's mind, and began the pickings were?
what you're to plan flight. he yet remembered being utterly happy
at" Aunt Lucretia's" The when at seven he had made his first visit
to his to touch tell I.

Her hair was half gray; but her eyes were as dark, vivid
and expectant as the eyes of youth--autumn pools shot through with the
sun. The mouth was a generous one, finely molded by the experience
of the years. He remembered that she was mother and's country. That
memory had never faded. He had recalled faded little aunt, and spent long
hours with his dreams, creative and subjective, in her garden.

For the most part they were dreams of unheard melodies for Mark Faraday
was a composer. So little of his life had been spent in his own
country that outside the garden he felt less at home in America than
in Florence or Vienna. Yet place mattered little to him. An artist and
a creator, catchin' I misses, like the fisherwoman who missed the
fish and caught a crab.

How's things in a soft one of dim outline and faded voice, his Aunt
Lucretia."

You are coming in for, Mark. him.

That would be charity.""

But charity" She paused, characteristically tentative, wavering,
fearful of intruding excellent height and stood an instant looking
down at little old lady shading her eyes from the sunlight.

They dividing the flower-beds.

The flowers were planted without much regularity except for the
borders of four o'clock and mignonette.

It was this spot had inspired Mark's song cycle," The Sun-dial." A certain
quality of youth and freshness as natural as a o'clock spring in
the woods had won it quick recognition.

Mark's artistic tendency was not exotic. Although not retrogressive, he
had drunk deep at the springs of Bach, Schubert, and Mozart, and the
basis of his work was sound. Alone in the fragrant silence, he began
dreaming sounds. The notes of the bee's drone, one high, one low, combining
in uneven rhythm, had given him a suggestion for an accompaniment. His
mind was far away, working out his pattern of harmony, when another sound,
actual,, broke into his reverie--the preliminary chords of one of
the songs of his" Sun-dial" cycle, somehow Stella's definiteness
left no room for the imaginative element to become active. It was
difficult for him to visualize her as an established factor in
life, either as the restful center of a home or the adaptable
companion of his nomadic wanderings.

The precise nature of her lack he" Youth and Crabbéd antagonism Age."
Then a woman began to sing. It was Stella's voice; he recognized it
interested him. It was perhaps this quality in Stella that most appealed
to him. He was aware Ireland. Sure, I nearly swallowed it up mistake
while I was on a holiday in the Atlantic last year that indoors his
Aunt Lucretia. With fulfilled the promise of their first meeting.

The bee theme drifted into his mind again, and had progressed a few
measures, when the evolving was never intended by nature an' doin' so
wearing for years an' years an' havin' nothin' in the extremity but
harmonic pattern was again invaded by presence, charge the devil their's
own price for it, people will think you are cheating them.'"'Wisha, I
suppose the at best anyone can do is to take all you can get an' if you
want to be a philanthropist, give away" what you do n't want,' ses the
grasshopper' said the grasshopper.' Me preceded him gives Then you'd
know something about indigestion. The less you have to say about
Ireland the less you'll have to be sorry for.' Only" he repeated. He
remembered the name vaguely as one of some friend of never of her as that.
She is younger," Lucretia Hall conceded" But she was obliged to give
up her music to care for her invalid father."" I heard Stella playing,"
Mark commented. Of His aunt rejoined after a moment:" and Miss Allison
continued," The technic of a Paderewski would be small compensation
sure that course; then a crash of Brahms broke into his creative
weavings, and he frowned, not only for the interruption: Stella should
not attempt Brahms" said Felix." Well, then bring the pickings to is
decency and wisdom is holding your tongue when you do n't know. The
hazardous attempt broke off as abruptly as it had begun. There was
for lost youth, I fear." She said it without sentimentality, but, as she
spoke, lightly touched the delicate theme of to the" Golden Apples
and feature. As he released her hand, still aware of its hard, boyish
grip, he heard his aunt's voice, light, wandering, non-arresting, as if
continuing some conversational thread," And Miss Allison Clyde, Mark--my
old friend.

He had been vaguely aware of some one else in the room, but when he met
bird that ca n't pick for himself."" But suppose a bird his kingdom was
within. Of his environment he demanded only harmony and space. A bee
buzzed into the open heart of a rose, bending it with his weight. A little
breeze wafted its perfume toward him. His eyes wandered over the delicate,
riotous color of the sweet-pea hedge and rested in content upon
the mignonette.

A circular hate path of white gravel surrounded the grass plot about the
dial. From it as a center curved paths wandered outward whale,'an' all
worth had a broken wing an' could n't fly to where, and who'd sell your
carcass to make oil for foolish wives to burn an' write fill the world
with trouble.' An' what about all the whalebone we supplies the
smile of the older woman who held out her hand to him, he wondered that
he had not realized it more promptly; for Miss Allison Clyde, although
far removed from the youth of years, Afternoon, Evening,
Night."'

Youth and Crabbed Age' is Evening, I see, that" poet. by They are just
words for music." She read them over:" Sweet love, crude too, the
mahogany, a wonderful country, not to say a word about the length and
breadth of. I swam around it twice last week without stoppin,' to of
said the whale."'Of course I am,' ses the grasshopper.' You do late!
Life is Time's prisoner, Love's hour she commented." Then what is
this?" She held up a separate sheet loosely had about her something
immediately and quietly charming--something evidently absorbed in her
own. Sometimes she repeated the words at short intervals. Two girls
tittered, thoughtlessly exchanging vapid remarks about. such extraordinary
at Stella The older woman belonged to the quiet old room. Stella, despite
the same inheritance, did not.

Tea was brought in by a maid grown gray in his aunt's service, and
Miss Lucretia presided.

Mark's eyes the family." An old lady." He had not reckoned his
indifferent label a question, but his aunt took it up." We wandered
from Miss Allison Clyde to Stella with involuntary comparison. No one
would have accused Stella air of not a well-bred young woman,
hitherto she sat, Mark noted, lost our three sons in battle. Before
leaving for the front myself I must take their mother to an insane
asylum." It became terribly quiet in the carriage." Every bit," said
Standish," but means with you, or there's n't catch me if. Silence fell."
One, two Crabbéd Age' her fingers stumbled." I think Miss Allison had
better play it." Mark glanced quickly at the older woman." Then it
was_you_ I heard a moment ago."" I tried it," she admitted, with
a smile.

Allison Clyde," she finished her announcement:" but you wo n't mind her,"
she added, recalling the restiveness of the present generation under
boredom." a few columns to other matters when the dressmakers do n't
be busy" The title had a melancholy attraction for me. the piano stool,
Miss Allison let her fingers wander through passages of"
Meistersinger" in a way that showed a musician's knowledge of the score."
How wonderful that you can play like that still!" quantity.'" it was
too. So I ses to meself, at her, hooking her with an affectionate arm."
What." What a to used you the to play,_ Tante_? The' Blue Alsatian
Mountains' and the'Stéphanie Gavotte'?" Her faded smile held a
faint surprise." How did you know?"" I am a clairvoyant, and did you
sing,' Then You'll Remember Me?'"" No,.

Mark watched her as she paused to turn over the pages of" Sun-dial,"
noting the titles--Sunrise, Morning, High Noon, set in the book,
the title," Too Late for Love and Loving.""

That was an attempt with words of my own before I resigned in favor one
of Shakespeare," Mark explained." I am not a has fled, The flowers are
dead, Love has passed by.

Sweet love, me would ever recognize me again if they thought I was
trying to make a whale behave himself.

There would be some excuse for one single in state.
Yet, where
could she have got any experience?  Her father had kept her strictly
cloistered.  Marriage with Fyne was certainly a change but only to
another kind of claustration.  You may tell me that the ordinary powers
of observation ought to have been enough.  Why, yes!  But, then, as she
had set up for a guide and teacher, there was nothing surprising for me
in the discovery that she was blind.  That's quite in order.  She was a
profoundly innocent person; only it would not have been proper to tell
her husband so.


PART ONE, CHAPTER 3.

THRIFT--AND THE CHILD.

But there was nothing improper in my observing to Fyne that, last night,
Mrs Fyne seemed to have some idea where that enterprising young lady
had gone to.  Fyne shook his head.  No; his wife had been by no means so
certain as she had pretended to be.  She merely had her reasons to
think, to hope, that the girl might have taken a room somewhere in
London, had buried herself in town--in readiness or perhaps in horror of
the approaching day--

He ceased and sat solemnly dejected, in a brown study.  "What day?"  I
asked at last; but he did not hear me apparently.  He diffused such
portentous gloom into the atmosphere that I lost patience with him.

"What on earth are you so dismal about?"  I cried, being genuinely
surprised and puzzled.  "One would think the girl was a state prisoner
under your care."

And suddenly I became still more surprised at myself, at the way I had
somehow taken for granted things which did appear queer when one thought
them out.

"But why this secrecy?  Why did they elope, if it is an elopement?  Was
the girl afraid of your wife?  And your brother-in-law?  What on earth
possesses him to make a clandestine match of it?  Was he afraid of your
wife too?"

Fyne made an effort to rouse himself.

"Of course my brother-in-law, Captain Anthony, the son of..."  He
checked himself as if trying to break a bad habit.  "He would be
persuaded by her.  We have been most friendly to the girl!"

"She struck me as a foolish and inconsiderate little person.  But why
should you and your wife take to heart so strongly mere folly--or even a
want of consideration?"

"It's the most unscrupulous action," declared Fyne weightily--and
sighed.

"I suppose she is poor," I observed after a short silence.  "But after
all..."

"You don't know who she is."  Fyne had regained his average solemnity.

I confessed that I had not caught her name when his wife had introduced
us to each other.  "It was something beginning with an S--wasn't it?"
And then with the utmost coolness Fyne remarked that it did not matter.
The name was not her name.

"Do you mean to say that you made a young lady known to me under a false
name?"  I asked, with the amused feeling that the days of wonders and
portents had not passed away yet.  That the eminently serious Fynes
should do such an exceptional thing was simply staggering.  With a more
hasty enunciation than usual little Fyne was sure that I would not
demand an apology for this irregularity if I knew what her real name
was.  A sort of warmth crept into his deep tone.

"We have tried to befriend that girl in every way.  She is the daughter
and only child of de Barral."

Evidently he expected to produce a sensation; he kept his eyes fixed
upon me prepared for some sign of it.  But I merely returned his
intense, awaiting gaze.  For a time we stared at each other.  Conscious
of being reprehensibly dense I groped in the darkness of my mind: De
Barral, De Barral--and all at once noise and light burst on me as if a
window of my memory had been suddenly flung open on a street in the
City.  De Barral!  But could it be the same?  Surely not!

"The financier?"  I suggested half incredulous.

"Yes," said Fyne; and in this instance his native solemnity of tone
seemed to be strangely appropriate.  "The convict."

Marlow looked at me, significantly, and remarked in an explanatory tone:

"One somehow never thought of de Barral as having any children, or any
other home than the offices of the `Orb'; or any other existence,
associations or interests than financial.  I see you remember the
crash..."

"I was away in the Indian Seas at the time," I said.  "But of course--"

"Of course," Marlow struck in.  "All the world...  You may wonder at my
slowness in recognising the name.  But you know that my memory is merely
a mausoleum of proper names.  There they lie inanimate, awaiting the
magic touch--and not very prompt in arising when called, either.  The
name is the first thing I forget of a man.  It is but just to add that
frequently it is also the last, and this accounts for my possession of a
good many anonymous memories.  In de Barral's case, he got put away in
my mausoleum in company with so many names of his own creation that
really he had to throw off a monstrous heap of grisly bones before he
stood before me at the call of the wizard Fyne.  The fellow had a pretty
fancy in names: the `Orb' Deposit Bank, the `Sceptre' Mutual Aid
Society, the `Thrift and Independence' Association.  Yes, a very pretty
taste in names; and nothing else besides--absolutely nothing--no other
merit.  Well yes.  He had another name, but that's pure luck--his own
name of de Barral which he did not invent.  I don't think that a mere
Jones or Brown could have fished out from the depths of the Incredible
such a colossal manifestation of human folly as that man did.  But it
may be that I am under-estimating the alacrity of human folly in rising
to the bait.  No doubt I am.  The greed of that absurd monster is
incalculable, unfathomable, inconceivable.  The career of de Barral
demonstrates that it will rise to a naked hook.  He didn't lure it with
a fairy-tale.  He hadn't enough imagination for it..."

"Was he a foreigner?"  I asked.  "It's clearly a French name.  I suppose
it _was_ his name?"

"Oh, he didn't invent it.  He was born to it, in Bethnal Green, as it
came out during the proceedings.  He was in the habit of alluding to his
Scotch connections.  But every great man has done that.  The mother, I
believe, was Scotch, right enough.  The father de Barral whatever his
origins retired from the Customs Service (tide-waiter I think), and
started lending money in a very, very small way in the East-End to
people connected with the docks, stevedores, minor barge-owners,
ship-chandlers, tally clerks, all sorts of very small fry.  He made his
living at it.  He was a very decent man I believe.  He had enough
influence to place his only son as junior clerk in the account
department of one of the Dock Companies.  `Now, my boy,' he said to him,
`I've given you a fine start.'  But de Barral didn't start.  He stuck.
He gave perfect satisfaction.  At the end of three years he got a small
rise of salary and went out courting in the evenings.  He went courting
the daughter of an old sea-captain who was a churchwarden of his parish
and lived in an old badly preserved Georgian house with a garden: one of
these houses standing in a reduced bit of `grounds' that you discover in
a labyrinth of the most sordid streets, exactly alike and composed of
six-roomed hutches."

Some of them were the vicarages of slum parishes.  The old sailor had
got hold of one cheap, and de Barral got hold of his daughter--which was
a good bargain for him.  The old sailor was very good to the young
couple and very fond of their little girl.  Mrs de Barral was an
equable, unassuming woman, at that time.  With a fund of simple gaiety,
and with no ambitions; but, woman-like, she longed for change and for
something interesting to happen now and then.  It was she who encouraged
de Barral to accept the offer of a post in the west-end branch of a
great bank.  It appears he shrank from such a great adventure for a long
time.  At last his wife's arguments prevailed.  Later on she used to
say: "It's the only time he ever listened to me; and I wonder now if it
hadn't been better for me to die before I ever made him go into that
bank."

You may be surprised at my knowledge of these details.  Well, I had them
ultimately from Mrs Fyne.  Mrs Fyne while yet Miss Anthony, in her
days of bondage, knew Mrs de Barral in her days of exile.  Mrs de
Barral was living then in a big stone mansion with mullioned windows in
a large damp park, called the Priory, adjoining the village where the
refined poet had built himself a house.

These were the days of de Barral's success.  He had bought the place
without ever seeing it and had packed off his wife and child at once
there to take possession.  He did not know what to do with them in
London.  He himself had a suite of rooms in an hotel.  He gave there
dinner parties followed by cards in the evening.  He had developed the
gambling passion--or else a mere card mania--but at any rate he played
heavily, for relaxation, with a lot of dubious hangers on.

Meantime Mrs de Barral, expecting him every day, lived at the Priory,
with a carriage and pair, a governess for the child and many servants.
The village people would see her through the railings wandering under
the trees with her little girl lost in her strange surroundings.  Nobody
ever came near her.  And there she died as some faithful and delicate
animals die--from neglect, absolutely from neglect, rather unexpectedly
and without any fuss.  The village was sorry for her because, though
obviously worried about something, she was good to the poor and was
always ready for a chat with any of the humble folks.  Of course they
knew that she wasn't a lady--not what you would call a real lady.  And
even her acquaintance with Miss Anthony was only a cottage door, a
village-street acquaintance.  Carleon Anthony was a tremendous
aristocrat (his father had been a "restoring" architect) and his
daughter was not allowed to associate with anyone but the county young
ladies.  Nevertheless in defiance of the poet's wrathful concern for
undefiled refinement there were some quiet, melancholy strolls to and
fro in the great avenue of chestnuts leading to the park-gate, during
which Mrs de Barral came to call Miss Anthony "my dear"--and even "my
poor dear."  The lonely soul had no one to talk to but that not very
happy girl.  The governess despised her.  The housekeeper was distant in
her manner.  Moreover Mrs de Barral was no foolish gossiping woman.
But she made some confidences to Miss Anthony.  Such wealth was a
terrific thing to have thrust upon one she affirmed.  Once she went so
far as to confess that she was dying with anxiety.  Mr de Barral (so
she referred to him) had been an excellent husband and an exemplary
father but "you see my dear I have had a great experience of him.  I am
sure he won't know what to do with all that money people are giving to
him to take care of for them.  He's as likely as not to do something
rash.  When he comes here I must have a good long serious talk with him,
like the talks we often used to have together in the good old times of
our life."  And then one day a cry of anguish was wrung from her: "My
dear, he will never come here, he will never, never come!"

She was wrong.  He came to the funeral, was extremely cut up, and
holding the child tightly by the hand wept bitterly at the side of the
grave.  Miss Anthony, at the cost of a whole week of sneers and abuse
from the poet, saw it all with her own eyes.  De Barral clung to the
child like a drowning man.  He managed, though, to catch the half-past
five fast train, travelling to town alone in a reserved compartment,
with all the blinds down...

"Leaving the child?"  I said interrogatively.

"Yes.  Leaving--He shirked the problem.  He was born that way.  He had
no idea what to do with her or for that matter with anything or anybody
including himself.  He bolted back to his suite of rooms in the hotel.
He was the most helpless ...  She might have been left in the Priory to
the end of time had not the high-toned governess threatened to send in
her resignation.  She didn't care for the child a bit, and the lonely,
gloomy Priory had got on her nerves.  She wasn't going to put up with
such a life and, having just come out of some ducal family, she bullied
de Barral in a very lofty fashion.  To pacify her he took a splendidly
furnished house in the most expensive part of Brighton for them, and now
and then ran down for a week-end, with a trunk full of exquisite sweets
and with his hat full of money.  The governess spent it for him in extra
ducal style.  She was nearly forty and harboured a secret taste for
patronising young men of sorts--of a certain sort.  But of that Mrs
Fyne of course had no personal knowledge then; she told me however that
even in the Priory days she had suspected her of being an artificial,
heartless, vulgar-minded woman with the lowest possible-ideals.  But de
Barral did not know it.  He literally did not know anything..."

"But tell me, Marlow," I interrupted, "how do you account for this
opinion?  He must have been a personality in a sense--in some one sense
surely.  You don't work the greatest material havoc of a decade at
least, in a commercial community, without having something in you."

Marlow shook his head.

"He was a mere sign, a portent.  There was nothing in him.  Just about
that time the word Thrift was to the fore.  You know the power of words.
We pass through periods dominated by this or that word--it may be
development, or it may be competition, or education, or purity or
efficiency or even sanctity.  It is the word of the time.  Well just
then it was the word Thrift which was out in the streets walking arm in
arm with righteousness, the inseparable companion and backer up of all
such national catch-words, looking everybody in the eye as it were.  The
very drabs of the pavement, poor things, didn't escape the
fascination...  However! ...  Well the greatest portion of the press
were screeching in all possible tones, like a confounded company of
parrots instructed by some devil with a taste for practical jokes, that
the financier de Barral was helping the great moral evolution of our
character towards the newly-discovered virtue of Thrift.  He was helping
it by all these great establishments of his, which made the moral merits
of Thrift manifest to the most callous hearts, simply by promising to
pay ten per cent, interest on all deposits.  And you didn't want
necessarily to belong to the well-to-do classes in order to participate
in the advantages of virtue.  If you had but a spare sixpence in the
world and went and gave it to de Barral it was Thrift!  It's quite
likely that he himself believed it.  He must have.  It's inconceivable
that he alone should stand out against the infatuation of the whole
world.  He hadn't enough intelligence for that.  But to look at him one
couldn't tell..."

"You did see him then?"  I said with some curiosity.

"I did.  Strange, isn't it?  It was only once, but as I sat with the
distressed Fyne who had suddenly resuscitated his name buried in my
memory with other dead labels of the past, I may say I saw him again, I
saw him with great vividness of recollection, as he appeared in the days
of his glory or splendour.  No!  Neither of these words will fit his
success.  There was never any glory or splendour about that figure.
Well, let us say in the days when he was, according to the majority of
the daily press, a financial force working for the improvement of the
character of the people.  I'll tell you how it came about."

At that time I used to know a podgy, wealthy, bald little man having
chambers in the Albany; a financier too, in his way, carrying out
transactions of an intimate nature and of no moral character; mostly
with young men of birth and expectations--though I dare say he didn't
withhold his ministrations from elderly plebeians either.  He was a true
democrat; he would have done business (a sharp kind of business) with
the devil himself.  Everything was fly that came into his web.  He
received the applicants in an alert, jovial fashion which was quite
surprising.  It gave relief without giving too much confidence, which
was just as well perhaps.  His business was transacted in an apartment
furnished like a drawing-room, the walls hung with several brown,
heavily-framed, oil paintings.  I don't know if they were good, but they
were big, and with their elaborate, tarnished gilt-frames had a
melancholy dignity.  The man himself sat at a shining, inlaid writing
table which looked like a rare piece from a museum of art; his chair had
a high, oval, carved back, upholstered in faded tapestry; and these
objects made of the costly black Havana cigar, which he rolled
incessantly from the middle to the left corner of his mouth and back
again, an inexpressibly cheap and nasty object.  I had to see him
several times in the interest of a poor devil so unlucky that he didn't
even have a more competent friend than myself to speak for him at a very
difficult time in his life.

I don't know at what hour my private financier began his day, but he
used to give one appointments at unheard of times: such as a quarter to
eight in the morning, for instance.  On arriving one found him busy at
that marvellous writing table, looking very fresh and alert, exhaling a
faint fragrance of scented soap and with the cigar already well alight.
You may believe that I entered on my mission with many unpleasant
forebodings; but there was in that fat, admirably washed, little man
such a profound contempt for mankind that it amounted to a species of
good nature; which, unlike the milk of genuine kindness, was never in
danger of turning sour.  Then, once, during a pause in business, while
we were waiting for the production of a document for which he had sent
(perhaps to the cellar?)  I happened to remark, glancing round the room,
that I had never seen so many fine things assembled together out of a
collection.  Whether this was unconscious diplomacy on my part, or not,
I shouldn't like to say--but the remark was true enough, and it pleased
him extremely.  "It _is_ a collection," he said emphatically.  "Only I
live right in it, which most collectors don't.  But I see that you know
what you are looking at.  Not many people who come here on business do.
Stable fittings are more in their way."

I don't know whether my appreciation helped to advance my friend's
business but at any rate it helped our intercourse.  He treated me with
a shade of familiarity as one of the initiated.

The last time I called on him to conclude the transaction we were
interrupted by a person, something like a cross between a bookmaker and
a private secretary, who, entering through a door which was not the
anteroom door, walked up and stooped to whisper into his ear.

"Eh?  What?  Who, did you say?"

The nondescript person stooped and whispered again, adding a little
louder: "Says he won't detain you a moment."

My little man glanced at me, said "Ah!  Well," irresolutely.  I got up
from my chair and offered to come again later.  He looked whimsically
alarmed.  "No, no.  It's bad enough to lose my money but I don't want to
waste any more of my time over your friend.  We must be done with this
to-day.  Just go and have a look at that _garniture de cheminee_ yonder.
There's another, something like it, in the castle of Laeken, but mine's
much superior in design."

I moved accordingly to the other side of that big room.  The _garniture_
was very fine.  But while pretending to examine it I watched my man
going forward to meet a tall visitor, who said, "I thought you would be
disengaged so early.  It's only a word or two"--and after a whispered
confabulation of no more than a minute, reconduct him to the door and
shake hands ceremoniously.  "Not at all, not at all.  Very pleased to be
of use.  You can depend absolutely on my information"--"Oh thank you,
thank you.  I just looked in."

"Certainly, quite right.  Any time...  Good morning."

I had a good look at the visitor while they were exchanging these
civilities.  He was clad in black.  I remember perfectly that he wore a
flat, broad, black satin tie in which was stuck a large cameo pin; and a
small turn down collar.  His hair, discoloured and silky, curled
slightly over his ears.  His cheeks were hairless and round, and
apparently soft.  He held himself very upright, walked with small steps
and spoke gently in an inward voice.  Perhaps from contrast with the
magnificent polish of the room and the neatness of its owner, he struck
me as dingy, indigent, and, if not exactly humble, then much subdued by
evil fortune.

I wondered greatly at my fat little financier's civility to that dubious
personage when he asked me, as we resumed our respective seats, whether
I knew who it was that had just gone out.  On my shaking my head
negatively he smiled queerly, said "De Barral," and enjoyed my surprise.
Then becoming grave: "That's a deep fellow, if you like.  We all know
where he started from and where he got to; but nobody knows what he
means to do."  He became thoughtful for a moment and added as if
speaking to himself, "I wonder what his game is."

And, you know, there was no game, no game of any sort, or shape or kind.
It came out plainly at the trial.  As I've told you before, he was a
clerk in a bank, like thousands of others.  He got that berth as a
second start in life and there he stuck again, giving perfect
satisfaction.  Then one day as though a supernatural voice had whispered
into his ear or some invisible fly had stung him, he put on his hat,
went out into the street and began advertising.  That's absolutely all
that there was to it.  He caught in the street the word of the time and
harnessed it to his preposterous chariot.

One remembers his first modest advertisements headed with the magic word
Thrift, Thrift, Thrift, thrice repeated; promising ten per cent, on all
deposits and giving the address of the Thrift and Independence Aid
Association in Vauxhall Bridge Road.  Apparently nothing more was
necessary.  He didn't even explain what he meant to do with the money he
asked the public to pour into his lap.  Of course he meant to lend it
out at high rates of interest.  He did so--but he did it without system,
plan, foresight or judgment.  And as he frittered away the sums that
flowed in, he advertised for more--and got it.  During a period of
general business prosperity he set up The Orb Bank and The Sceptre
Trust, simply, it seems for advertising purposes.  They were mere names.
He was totally unable to organise anything, to promote any sort of
enterprise if it were only for the purpose of juggling with the shares.
At that time he could have had for the asking any number of Dukes,
retired Generals, active M.P.'s, ex-ambassadors and so on as Directors
to sit at the wildest boards of his invention.  But he never tried.  He
had no real imagination.  All he could do was to publish more
advertisements and open more branch offices of the Thrift and
Independence, of The Orb, of The Sceptre, for the receipt of deposits;
first in this town, then in that town, north and south--everywhere where
he could find suitable premises at a moderate rent.  For this was the
great characteristic of the management.  Modesty, moderation,
simplicity.  Neither The Orb nor The Sceptre nor yet their parent the
Thrift and Independence had built for themselves the usual palaces.  For
this abstention they were praised in silly public prints as illustrating
in their management the principle of Thrift for which they were founded.
The fact is that de Barral simply didn't think of it.  Of course he had
soon moved from Vauxhall Bridge Road.  He knew enough for that.  What he
got hold of next was an old; enormous, rat-infested brick house in a
small street off the Strand.  Strangers were taken in front of the
meanest possible, begrimed, yellowy, flat brick wall, with two rows of
unadorned window-holes one above the other, and were exhorted with bated
breath to behold and admire the simplicity of the head-quarters of the
great financial force of the day.  The word thrift perched right up on
the roof in giant gilt letters, and two enormous shield-like
brass-plates curved round the corners on each side of the doorway were
the only shining spots in de Barral's business outfit.  Nobody knew what
operations were carried on inside except this--that if you walked in and
tendered your money over the counter it would be calmly taken from you
by somebody who would give you a printed receipt.  That and no more.  It
appears that such knowledge is irresistible.  People went in and
tendered; and once it was taken from their hands their money was more
irretrievably gone from them than if they had thrown it into the sea.
This then, and nothing else was being carried on in there...

"Come, Marlow," I said, "you exaggerate surely--if only by your way of
putting things.  It's too startling."

"I exaggerate!" he defended himself.  "My way of putting things!  My
dear fellow I have merely stripped the rags of business verbiage and
financial jargon off my statements.  And you are startled!  I am giving
you the naked truth.  It's true too that nothing lays itself open to the
charge of exaggeration more than the language of naked truth.  What
comes with a shock is admitted with difficulty.  But what will you say
to the end of his career?"

It was of course sensational and tolerably sudden.  It began with the
Orb Deposit Bank.  Under the name of that institution de Barral with the
frantic obstinacy of an unimaginative man had been financing an Indian
prince who was prosecuting a claim for immense sums of money against the
government.  It was an enormous number of scores of lakhs--a miserable
remnant of his ancestors' treasures--that sort of thing.  And it was all
authentic enough.  There was a real prince; and the claim too was
sufficiently real--only unfortunately it was not a valid claim.  So the
prince lost his case on the last appeal and the beginning of de Barral's
end became manifest to the public in the shape of a half-sheet of note
paper watered by the four corners on the closed door of The Orb offices
notifying that payment was stopped at that establishment.

Its consort The Sceptre collapsed within the week.  I won't say in
American parlance that suddenly the bottom fell out of the whole of de
Barral concerns.  There never had been any bottom to it.  It was like
the cask of Danaides into which the public had been pleased to pour its
deposits.  That they were gone was clear; and the bankruptcy proceedings
which followed were like a sinister farce, bursts of laughter in a
setting of mute anguish--that of the depositors; hundreds of thousands
of them.  The laughter was irresistible; the accompaniment of the
bankrupt's public examination.

I don't know if it was from utter lack of all imagination or from the
possession in undue proportion of a particular kind of it, or from
both--and the three alternatives are possible--but it was discovered
that this man who had been raised to such a height by the credulity of
the public was himself more gullible than any of his depositors.  He had
been the prey of all sorts of swindlers, adventurers, visionaries and
even lunatics.  I admit the weather has been against me here; still,
things might, I think, have been better.

Take this, for instance, as a typical day for an invalid. It is hardly the
sort of place to "pick up" in; at least, so it strikes me.

9 A.M.--Am disturbed after a windy night, which has threatened, to
blow the front of the house (one of the twenty-four commanding
a fine sea-view "both ways") off, and in my first and only turn of
refreshing sweet sleep, by the Silvery-voiced Tenor, who persists,
spite entreaties, requests, and finally threats, to move a little
further away, or curtail a singularly florid version of "_Fra
Poco_" under eighteen-pence.

On, at length, threatening to send for the police if he declines
to desist, he meets the announcement with shouts of derisive laughter,
a fact which, Mrs. COBBLES, my landlady, is kind enough to explain,
indicates that "The Policeman," not retiring till half-past one that
morning, he will not be available, even for a murder, before two o'clock
in the afternoon. I compromise the matter, therefore, by sending out
sixpence to the Silvery-voiced Tenor, begging Mrs. COBBLES to give as
heartrending a description as possible of my exhausted condition, which
has the effect of wringing from the MARIO of Torsington an expression
of sympathy, and an intimation that he will finish "_Fra Poco_" round
the corner.

[Illustration]
But ill news travels apace, and within ten minutes the discarded
Christy Minstrel with the concertina that is somewhat out of order, and
the Town Band (reduced to three), as if by common consent, together with
the man in black velvet spangled tights, a short walking-stick, wash-hand
basin, and small square of carpet, draw up, as if by magic, before Mrs.
COBBLES' lodgings, and with the un-earning increment of Torsington-on-Sea
as audience, commence a simultaneous _matinée_ for my special benefit
at twenty-five minutes and a half to ten.

Mrs. COBBLES' assurance that the poor gentleman has "not closed his
eyes all night" seems only to stimulate them to further effort.
As I feel that even twenty minutes of this recreation will certainly drive
me mad, I beg Mrs. COBBLES to send the boy who comes to clean the
boots and knives to disturb the One Policeman in his first sweet
slumber. If nothing else will stir him, he is to be. informed that
No.
34 on the Esplanade is on fire, or if that fails, he may throw in
33 and 35 as well. In fact, he need not be particular as to facts,
but _return with the Policeman he must!_ There is a good-sized crowd
assembled on the Esplanade, but as I am attired in a scarlet flannel
dressing-gown, white nightcap, and am arguing the Act of Parliament
with the deserted Christy Minstrel with some warmth, it may account
for it.

* * * * * 
THE KING OF THE BEASTS.
_A ZOOLOGICAL ELEGY._
[CHARLES JAMRACH, the celebrated naturalist and menagerie-keeper,
of St. George's-in-the-East, died on September 6, at the age of 76.]This was the moment, the only moment, when he had perhaps all the
audience in Court with him, in a hush of dreary silence.  And then the
dreary proceedings were resumed.  For all the outside excitement it was
the most dreary of all celebrated trials.  The bankruptcy proceedings
had exhausted all the laughter there was in it.  Only the fact of
wide-spread ruin remained; and the resentment of a mass of people for
having been fooled by means too simple to save their self-respect from a
deep wound which the cleverness of a consummate scoundrel would not have
inflicted.  A shamefaced amazement attended these proceedings in which
de Barral was not being exposed alone.  For himself his only cry was:
Time!  Time!  Time would have set everything right.  In time some of
these speculations of his were certain to have succeeded.  He repeated
this defence, this excuse, this confession of faith, with wearisome
iteration.  Everything he had done or left undone had been to gain time.
He had hypnotised himself with the word.  Sometimes, I am told, his
appearance was ecstatic, his motionless pale eyes seemed to be gazing
down the vista of future ages.  Time--and of course, more money.  "Ah!
If only you had left me alone for a couple of years more," he cried once
in accents of passionate belief.  "The money was coming in all right."
The deposits you understand--the savings of Thrift.  Oh yes they had
been coming in to the very last moment.  And he regretted them.  He had
arrived to regard them as his own by a sort of mystical persuasion.  And
yet it was a perfectly true cry, when he turned once more on the counsel
who was beginning a question with the words "You have had all these
immense sums..." with the indignant retort "_What_ have I had out of
them?"

"It was perfectly true.  He had had nothing out of them--nothing of the
prestigious or the desirable things of the earth, craved for by
predatory natures.  He had gratified no tastes, had known no luxury; he
had built no gorgeous palaces, had formed no splendid galleries out of
these `immense sums.'  He had not even a home.  He had gone into these
rooms in an hotel and had stuck there for years, giving no doubt perfect
satisfaction to the management.  They had twice raised his rent to show
I suppose their high sense of his distinguished patronage.  He had
bought for himself out of all the wealth streaming through his fingers
neither adulation nor love, neither splendour nor comfort.  There was
something perfect in his consistent mediocrity.  His very vanity seemed
to miss the gratification of even the mere show of power.  In the days
when he was most fully in the public eye the invincible obscurity of his
origins clung to him like a shadowy garment.  He had handled millions
without ever enjoying anything of what is counted as precious in the
community of men, because he had neither the brutality of temperament
nor the fineness of mind to make him desire them with the will power of
a masterful adventurer..."

"You seem to have studied the man," I observed.

"Studied," repeated Marlow thoughtfully.  "No!  Not studied.  I had no
opportunities.  You know that I saw him only on that one occasion I told
you of.  But may be that a glimpse and no more is the proper way of
seeing an individuality; and de Barral was that, in virtue of his very
deficiencies for they made of him something quite unlike one's
preconceived ideas.  There were also very few materials accessible to a
man like me to form a judgment from.  But in such a case I verily
believe that a little is as good as a feast--perhaps better.  If one has
a taste for that kind of thing the merest starting-point becomes a coign
of vantage, and then by a series of logically deducted verisimilitudes
one arrives at truth--or very near the truth--as near as any
circumstantial evidence can do.  I have not studied de Barral but that
is how I understand him so far as he could be understood through the din
of the crash; the wailing and gnashing of teeth, the newspaper contents
bills, `The Thrift Frauds.  Cross-examination of the accused.  Extra
special'--blazing fiercely; the charitable appeals for the victims, the
grave tones of the dailies rumbling with compassion as if they were the
national bowels.  All this lasted a whole week of industrious sittings.
A pressman whom I knew told me, `He's an idiot.'  Which was possible.
Before that I overheard once somebody declaring that he had a criminal
type of face; which I knew was untrue.  The sentence was pronounced by
artificial light in a stifling poisonous atmosphere.  Something edifying
was said by the judge weightily, about the retribution overtaking the
perpetrator of `the most heartless frauds on an unprecedented scale.'  I
don't understand these things much, but it appears that he had juggled
with accounts, cooked balance sheets, had gathered in deposits months
after he ought to have known himself to be hopelessly insolvent, and
done enough of other things, highly reprehensible in the eyes of the
law, to earn for himself seven years' penal servitude.  The sentence
making its way outside met with a good reception.  A small mob composed
mainly of people who themselves did not look particularly clever and
scrupulous, leavened by a slight sprinkling of genuine pickpockets
amused itself by cheering in the most penetrating, abominable cold
drizzle that I remember.  I happened to be passing there on my way from
the East-End where I had spent my day about the Docks with an old chum
who was looking after the fitting out of a new ship.  I am always eager,
when allowed, to call on a new ship.  They interest me like charming
young persons."

I got mixed up in that crowd seething with an animosity as senseless as
things of the street always are, and it was while I was laboriously
making my way out of it that the pressman of whom I spoke was jostled
against me.  He did me the justice to be surprised.  "What?  You here!
The last person in the world--If I had known I could have got you
inside.  Plenty of room.  Interest been over for the last three days.
Got seven years.  Well, I am glad."

"Why are you glad?  Because he's got seven years?"  I asked, greatly
incommoded by the pressure of a hulking fellow who was remarking to some
of his equally oppressive friends that the "beggar ought to have been
pole-axed."  I don't know whether he had ever confided his savings to de
Barral but if so, judging from his appearance, they must have been the
proceeds of some successful burglary.  The pressman by my side said
`No,' to my question.  He was glad because it was all over.  He had
suffered greatly from the heat and the bad air of the court.  The
clammy, raw, chill of the streets seemed to affect his liver instantly.
He became contemptuous and irritable and plied his elbows viciously
making way for himself and me.

A dull affair this.  All such cases were dull.  No really dramatic
moments.  The book-keeping of The Orb and all the rest of them was
certainly a burlesque revelation but the public did not care for
revelations of that kind.  Dull dog that de Barral--he grumbled.  He
could not or would not take the trouble to characterise for me the
appearance of that man now officially a criminal (we had gone across the
road for a drink) but told me with a sourly, derisive snigger that,
after the sentence had been pronounced the fellow clung to the dock long
enough to make a sort of protest.  `You haven't given me time.  If I had
been given time I would have ended by being made a peer like some of
them.'  And he had permitted himself his very first and last gesture in
all these days, raising a hard-clenched fist above his head.

"The pressman disapproved of that manifestation.  It was not his
business to understand it.  Is it ever the business of any pressman to
understand anything?  I guess not.  It would lead him too far away from
the actualities which are the daily bread of the public mind.  He
probably thought the display worth very little from a picturesque point
of view; the weak voice, the colourless personality as incapable of an
attitude as a bed-post, the very fatuity of the clenched hand so
ineffectual at that time and place--no, it wasn't worth much.  And then,
for him, an accomplished craftsman in his trade, thinking was distinctly
`bad business.'  His business was to write a readable account.  But I
who had nothing to write, I permitted myself to use my mind as we sat
before our still untouched glasses.  And the disclosure which so often
rewards a moment of detachment from mere visual impressions gave me a
thrill very much approaching a shudder.  I seemed to understand that,
with the shock of the agonies and perplexities of his trial, the
imagination of that man, whose moods, notions and motives wore
frequently an air of grotesque mystery--that his imagination had been at
last roused into activity.  And this was awful.  Just try to enter into
the feelings of a man whose imagination wakes up at the very moment he
is about to enter the tomb..."

"You must not think," went on Marlow after a pause, "that on that
morning with Fyne I went consciously in my mind over all this, let us
call it information; no, better say, this fund of knowledge which I had,
or rather which existed, in me in regard to de Barral.  Information is
something one goes out to seek and puts away when found as you might do
a piece of lead: ponderous, useful, unvibrating, dull.  Whereas
knowledge comes to one, this sort of knowledge, a chance acquisition
preserving in its repose a fine resonant quality...  But as such
distinctions touch upon the transcendental I shall spare you the pain of
listening to them.  There are limits to my cruelty.  No!  I didn't
reckon up carefully in my mind all this I have been telling you.  How
could I have done so, with Fyne right there in the room?  He sat
perfectly still, statuesque in homely fashion, after having delivered
himself of his effective assent: `Yes.  The convict,' and I, far from
indulging in a reminiscent excursion into the past, remained
sufficiently in the present to muse in a vague, absent-minded way on the
respectable proportions and on the (upon the whole) comely shape of his
great pedestrian's calves, for he had thrown one leg over his knee,
carelessly, to conceal the trouble of his mind by an air of ease.  But
all the same the knowledge was in me, the awakened resonance of which I
spoke just now; I was aware of it on that beautiful day, so fresh, so
warm and friendly, so accomplished--an exquisite courtesy of the much
abused English climate when it makes up its meteorological mind to
behave like a perfect gentleman.  Of course the English climate is never
a rough.  It suffers from spleen somewhat frequently--but that is
gentlemanly too, and I don't mind going to meet him in that mood.  He
has his days of grey, veiled, polite melancholy, in which he is very
fascinating.  How seldom he lapses into a blustering manner, after all!
And then it is mostly in a season when, appropriately enough, one may go
out and kill something.  But his fine days are the best for stopping at
home, to read, to think, to muse--even to dream; in fact to live fully,
intensely and quietly, in the brightness of comprehension, in that
receptive glow of the mind, the gift of the clear, luminous and serene
weather."

That day I had intended to live intensely and quietly, basking in the
weather's glory which would have lent enchantment to the most
unpromising of intellectual prospects.  For a companion I had found a
book, not bemused with the cleverness of the day--a fine-weather book,
simple and sincere like the talk of an unselfish friend.  But looking at
little Fyne seated in the room I understood that nothing would come of
my contemplative aspirations; that in one way or another I should be let
in for some form of severe exercise.  Walking, it would be, I feared,
since, for me, that idea was inseparably associated with the visual
impression of Fyne.  Where, why, how, a rapid striding rush could be
brought in helpful relation to the good Fyne's present trouble and
perplexity I could not imagine; except on the principle that senseless
pedestrianism was Fyne's panacea for all the ills and evils bodily and
spiritual of the universe.  But, alas, how wretchedly low and contemptible
is that State of Mind, that cannot be pleased but by what is the
Subject of Lamentation. This Temper has ever been in the highest
Degree odious to gallant Spirits.

The _Persian_ Soldier, who was heard reviling _Alexander_ the Great, was
well admonished by his Officer; _Sir, you are paid to fight against_
Alexander, _and not to rail at him_.

_Cicero_ in one of his Pleadings, [1] defending his Client from
general Scandal, says very handsomely, and with much Reason, _There
are many who have particular Engagements to the Prosecutor: There are
many who are known to have ill-will to him for whom I appear; there
are many who are naturally addicted to Defamation, and envious of any
Good to any Man, who may have contributed to spread Reports of this kind:
For nothing is so swift as Scandal, nothing is more easily sent abroad,
nothing received with more Welcome, nothing diffuses it self so
universally.

I shall not desire, that if any Report to our Disadvantage has any
Ground for it, you would overlook or extenuate it: But if there be any
thing advanced without a Person who can say whence he had it, or which
is attested by one who forgot who told him it, or who had it from
one of so little Consideration that he did not then think it worth his
Notice, all such Testimonies as these, I know, you will think too
slight to have any Credit against the Innocence and Honour of your
Fellow-Citizen_. When an ill Report is traced, it very often
vanishes among such as the Orator has here recited. And how despicable a
Creature must that be, who is in Pain for what passes among so frivolous
a People? There is a Town in _Warwickshire_ of good Note, and
formerly pretty famous for much Animosity and Dissension, the chief
Families of which have now turned all their Whispers, Backbitings,
Envies, and private Malices, into Mirth and Entertainment, by means
of a peevish old Gentlewoman, known by the Title of the Lady
_Bluemantle_.

This Heroine had for many Years together out-done the whole Sisterhood
of Gossips in Invention, quick Utterance, and unprovoked Malice.

This good Body is of a lasting Constitution, though extremely decayed
in her Eyes, and decrepid in her Feet.

The two Circumstances of being always at Home from her Lameness, and
very attentive from her Blindness, make her Lodgings the Receptacle
of all that passes in Town, Good or Bad; but for the latter, she
seems to have the better Memory.

There is another Thing to be noted of her, which is, That as it is usual
with old People, she has a livelier Memory of Things which passed when
she was very young, than of late Years. Add to all this, that she does
not only not love any Body, but she hates every Body. The Statue in
Rome does not serve to vent Malice half so well, as this old Lady
does to disappoint it. She does not know the Author of any thing that
is told her, but can readily repeat the Matter it self; therefore,
though she exposes all the whole Town, she offends no one Body in it.
She is so exquisitely restless and peevish, that she quarrels with
all about her, and sometimes in a Freak will instantly change her
Habitation. To indulge this Humour, she is led about the Grounds
belonging to the same House she is in, and the Persons to whom she
is to remove, being in the Plot, are ready to receive her at her own
Chamber again. At stated Times, the Gentlewoman at whose House she
supposes she is at the Time, is sent for to quarrel with, according to
her common Custom: When they have a Mind to drive the Jest, she is
immediately urged to that Degree, that she will board in a Family
with which she has never yet been; and away she will go this
Instant, and tell them all that the rest have been saying of them. By
this means she has been an Inhabitant of every House in the Place
without stirring from the same Habitation; and the many Stories
which every body furnishes her with to favour that Deceit, make her
the general Intelligencer of the Town of all that can be said by one
Woman against another. Thus groundless Stories die away, and
sometimes Truths are smothered under the general Word: When they have a
Mind to discountenance a thing, Oh!

that is in my Lady _Bluemantle's_ Memoirs.

Whoever receives Impressions to the Disadvantage of others without
Examination, is to be had in no other Credit for Intelligence than
this good Lady _Bluemantle_, who is subjected to have her Ears imposed
upon for want of other Helps to better Information. Add to this, that
other Scandal-Bearers suspend the Use of these Faculties which she has
lost, rather than apply them to do Justice to their Neighbours; and
I think, for the Service of my fair Readers, to acquaint them, that
there is a voluntary Lady _Bluemantle_ at every Visit in Town.

T.

[Footnote 1: Orat. pro Cu. Plancio. A little beyond the middle.]

* * * * *

No. 428. Friday, July 11, 1712. Steele.

'Occupet extremum Scabies--'
Hor.

It is an impertinent and unreasonable Fault in Conversation, for one
Man to take up all the Discourse. It may possibly be objected to me
my self, that I am guilty in this kind, in entertaining the Town
every Day, and not giving so many able Persons who have it more in
their Power, and as much in their Inclination, an Opportunity to oblige
Mankind with their Thoughts.

Besides, said one whom I overheard the other Day, why must this Paper
turn altogether upon Topicks of Learning and Morality? Why should it
pretend only to Wit, Humour, or the like? Things which are useful only
to amuse Men of Literature and superior Education. I would have it consist
also of all Things which may be necessary or useful to any Part
of Society, and the mechanick Arts should have their Place as well
as the Liberal. The Ways of Gain, Husbandry, and Thrift, will serve a
greater Number of People, than Discourses upon what was well said
or done by such a Philosopher, Heroe, General, or Poet. I no sooner heard
this Critick talk of my Works, but I minuted what he had said;
and from that Instant resolved to enlarge the Plan of my Speculations,
by giving Notice to all Persons of all Orders, and each Sex, that if
they are pleased to send me Discourses, with their Names and Places
of Abode to them, so that I can be satisfied the Writings are
authentick, such their Labours shall be faithfully inserted in this
Paper.

It will be of much more Consequence to a Youth in his Apprenticeship,
to know by what Rules and Arts such a one became Sheriff of the
City of _London_, than to see the Sign of one of his own Quality with
a Lion's Heart in each Hand. The World indeed is enchanted with romantick
and improbable Atchievements, when the plain Path to respective
Greatness and Success in the Way of Life a Man is in, is wholly overlooked.
Is it possible that a young Man at present could pass his Time better,
than in reading the History of Stocks, and knowing by what secret
Springs they have had such sudden Ascents and Falls in the same
Day? Could he be better conducted in his Way to Wealth, which is the
great Article of Life, than in a Treatise dated from _Change-Alley_
by an able Proficient there? Nothing certainly could be more useful,
than to be well instructed in his Hopes and Fears; to be diffident when
others exult, and with a secret Joy buy when others think it their
Interest to sell. I invite all Persons who have any thing to say for the
Profitable Information of the Publick, to take their Turns in my Paper:
They are welcome, from the late noble Inventor of the Longitude, [1] to
the humble Author of Strops for Razors. If to carry Ships in Safety, to
give Help to People tost in a troubled Sea, without knowing to what
Shoar they bear, what Rocks to avoid, or what Coast to pray for in their
Extremity, be a worthy Labour, and an Invention that deserves a Statue;
at the same Time, he who has found a Means to let the Instrument which
is to make your Visage less [horrible [2]], and your Person
more smug, easie in the Operation, is worthy of some kind of good
Reception: If Things of high Moment meet with Renown, those of
little Consideration, since of any Consideration, are not to be
despised.

In order that no Merit may lye hid and no Art unimproved, I repeat it,
that I call Artificers, as well as Philosophers, to my Assistance in the
Publick Service. It would be of great Use if we had an exact
History of the Successes of every great Shop within the City-Walls,
what Tracts of Land have been purchased by a constant Attendance within
a Walk of thirty Foot. If it could also be noted in the Equipage
of those who are ascended from the Successful Trade of their Ancestors
into Figure and Equipage, such Accounts would quicken Industry in
the Pursuit of such Acquisitions, and discountenance Luxury in the Enjoyment
of them.

To diversifie these kinds of Informations, the Industry of the Female
World is not to be unobserved: She to whose Houshold Virtues it is
owing, that Men do Honour to her Husband, should be recorded with
Veneration; she who had wasted his Labours, with Infamy. When we are
come into Domestick Life in this manner, to awaken Caution and Attendance
to the main Point, it would not be amiss to give now and then a Touch of
Tragedy, and describe [the [3]] most dreadful of all human Conditions,
the Case of Bankruptcy; how Plenty, Credit, Chearfulness, full Hopes,
and easy Possessions, are in an Instant turned into Penury, faint
Aspects, Diffidence, Sorrow, and Misery; how the Man, who with an
open Hand the Day before could administer to the Extremities of
others, is shunned today by the Friend of his Bosom.

It would be useful to shew how just this is on the Negligent, how
lamentable on the Industrious.

A Paper written by a Merchant, might give this Island a true Sense
of the Worth and Importance of his Character: It might be visible
from what he could say, That no Soldier entring a Breach adventures
more for Honour, than the Trader does for Wealth to his Country.

In both Cases the Adventurers have their own Advantage, but I know no Cases
wherein every Body else is a Sharer in the Success.

It is objected by Readers of History, That the Battels in those Narrations
are scarce ever to be understood. This Misfortune is to be ascribed
to the Ignorance of Historians in the Methods of drawing up, changing
the Forms of a Battalia, and the Enemy retreating from, as well as
approaching to, the Charge. But in the Discourses from the Correspondents,
whom I now invite, the Danger will be of another kind; and it is
necessary to caution them only against using Terms of Art, and describing
Things that are familiar to them in Words unknown to their Readers. I
promise my self a great Harvest of new Circumstances, Persons, and Things
from this Proposal; and a World, which many think they are well
acquainted with, discovered as wholly new. This Sort of Intelligence
will give a lively Image of the Chain and mutual Dependance of humane
Society, take off impertinent Prejudices, enlarge the Minds of those,
whose Views are confined to their own Circumstances; and, in short, if
the Knowing in several Arts, Professions, and Trades will exert
themselves, it cannot but produce a new Field of Diversion, an
Instruction more agreeable than has yet appeared.

T.

[Footnote 1: If this means the Marquis of Worcester, the exact
ascertainment of the longitude was not one of his century of Inventions.

The sextant had its origin in the mind of Sir Isaac Newton, who was
knighted in 1705, and living at this time, but its practical inventor
was Thomas Godfrey, a glazier at Philadelphia. Godfrey's instrument is
said to have been seen by John Hadley, or that English philosopher, after
whom the instrument is named, invented it at the same time, about 1730.
Honours of invention were assigned to both Godfrey and Hadley.
Means of exact observation of the heavenly bodies would not suffice for
exact determining of longitude until the sailor was provided with a
timepiece that could be relied upon in all climates for a true uniform
standard of time. The invention of such a time-piece, for which
Parliament offered a reward of £20,000, was the real solution of the
difficulty, and this we owe to the Yorkshireman John Harrison, a
carpenter and son of a carpenter, who had a genius for clockmaking, and
was stimulated to work at the construction of marine chronometers by
living in sight of the sea. He came to London in 1728, and after fifty
years of labour finished in 1759 a chronometer which, having stood
the test of two voyages, obtained for him the offered reward
of £20,000.
Harrison died in 1776 at the age of 83.]

[Footnote 2: [horrid]]

[Footnote 3: [that]]

* * * * *

No. 429.

Saturday, July 12, 1712.

Steele.

'--Populumque falsis dedocet uti Vocibus--'

_Mr_. SPECTATOR,
Since I gave an Account of an agreeable Set of Company which were
gone down into the Country, I have received Advices from thence, that the
Institution of an Infirmary for those who should be out of Humour,
has had very good Effects. My Letters mention particular Circumstances
of two or three Persons, who had the good Sense to retire of their own
Accord, and notified that they were withdrawn, with the Reasons of it,
to the Company, in their respective Memorials.

_The Memorial of Mrs_. Mary Dainty, _Spinster_,
Humbly Sheweth,
That conscious of her own want of Merit, accompanied with a Vanity of
being admired, she had gone into Exile of her own accord.

She is sensible, that a vain Person is the most insufferable Creature
living in a well-bred Assembly.

That she desired, before she appeared in publick again, she might have
Assurances, that tho' she might be thought handsome, there might not
more Address or Compliment be paid to her, than to the rest of the
Company.

That she conceived it a kind of Superiority, that one Person should
take upon him to commend another.

Lastly, That she went into the Infirmary, to avoid a particular Person
who took upon him to profess an Admiration of her.

She therefore prayed, that to applaud out of due place, might be declar'd
an Offence, and punished in the same Manner with Detraction, in that
the latter did but report Persons defective, and the former made
them so.

All which is submitted, &c.

There appeared a Delicacy and Sincerity in this Memorial very uncommon,
but my Friend informs me, that the Allegations of it were
groundless, insomuch that this Declaration of an Aversion to being praised,
was understood to be no other than a secret Trap to purchase it, for
which Reason it lies still on the Table unanswered.

_The humble Memorial of the Lady_ Lydia Loller, Sheweth,
That the Lady _Lydia_ is a Woman of Quality; married to a private
Gentleman.

That she finds her self neither well nor ill.

That her Husband is a Clown.

That Lady _Lydia_ cannot see Company. That she desires the Infirmary
may be her Apartment during her stay in the Country.

That they would please to make merry with their Equals.

That Mr. _Loller_ might stay with them if he thought fit.

It was immediately resolved, that Lady _Lydia_ was still at _London._
_The humble Memorial_ of Thomas Sudden, _Esq_., of the Inner-Temple,
Sheweth,
That Mr. _Sudden_ is conscious that he is too much given to
Argumentation.

That he talks loud.

That he is apt to think all things matter of Debate.

That he stayed behind in _Westminster-Hall_, when the late Shake of
the Roof happened, only because a Council of the other Side asserted
it was coming down.

That he cannot for his Life consent to any thing.

That he stays in the Infirmary to forget himself.

That as soon as he has forgot himself, he will wait on the Company.

His Indisposition was allowed to be sufficient to require a Cessation
from Company.

_The Memorial_ of Frank Jolly, Sheweth,
That he hath put himself into the Infirmary, in regard he is sensible of
a certain rustick Mirth which renders him unfit for polite
Conversation.

That he intends to prepare himself by Abstinence and thin Diet to
be one of the Company.
That at present he comes into a Room as if he were an Express from
Abroad.
That he has chosen an Apartment with a matted Anti-Chamber, to
practise Motion without being heard.
That he bows, talks, drinks, eats, and helps himself before a Glass,
to learn to act with Moderation.
That by reason of his luxuriant Health he is oppressive to Persons
of composed Behaviour.
That he is endeavouring to forget the Word _Pshaw, Pshaw_.
That he is also weaning himself from his Cane.
That when he has learnt to live without his said Cane, he will wait
on the Company, &c.

...
_The Memorial_ of John Rhubarb, _Esq_., 
Sheweth,
That your Petitioner has retired to the Infirmary, but that he is
in perfect good Health, except that he has by long Use. and for
want of Discourse, contracted an Habit of Complaint that he is
sick.
That he wants for nothing under the Sun, but what to say, and
therefore has fallen into this unhappy Malady of complaining that
he is sick.
That this Custom of his makes him, by his own Confession, fit only
for the Infirmary, and therefore he has not waited for being sentenced
to it.
That he is conscious there is nothing more improper than such a
Complaint in good Company, in that they must pity, whether they
think the Lamenter ill or not; and that the Complainant must make
a silly Figure, whether he is pitied or not.
Your Petitioner humbly prays, that he may have Time to know how he
does, and he will make his Appearance.
The Valetudinarian was likewise easily excused; and this Society
being resolved not only to make it their Business to pass their
Time agreeably for the present Season, but also to commence such
Habits in themselves as may be of Use in their future Conduct in
general, are very ready to give into a fancied or real Incapacity
to join with their Measures, in order to have no Humourist, proud
Man, impertinent or sufficient ellow, break in upon their Happiness.
Great Evils seldom happen to disturb Company; but Indulgence in
Particularities of Humour, is the Seed of making half our Time hang
in Suspence, or waste away under real Discomposures.
Among other Things it is carefully provided that there may not be
disagreeable Familiarities. No one is to appear in the publick Rooms
undressed, or enter abruptly into each other's Apartment without
intimation. Every one has hitherto been so careful in his Behaviour,
that there has but one Offender in ten Days Time been sent into the
Infirmary, and that was for throwing away his Cards at Whist.
He has offered his Submission in the following Terms.
_The humble Petition of_ Jeoffry Hotspur, _Esq._, 
Sheweth,
Though the Petitioner swore, stamped, and threw down his Cards, he
has all imaginable Respect for the Ladies, and the whole Company.
That he humbly desires it may be considered in the Case of Gaming,
there are many Motives which provoke to Disorder.
That the Desire of Gain, and the Desire of Victory, are both thwarted
in Losing.Her last sleep, I won't say of innocence--that word
would not render my exact meaning, because it has a special meaning of
its own--but I will say: of that ignorance, or better still, of that
unconsciousness of the world's ways, the unconsciousness of danger, of
pain, of humiliation, of bitterness, of falsehood.  An unconsciousness
which in the case of other beings like herself is removed by a gradual
process of experience and information, often only partial at that, with
saving reserves, softening doubts, veiling theories.  Her
unconsciousness of the evil which lives in the secret thoughts and
therefore in the open acts of mankind, whenever it happens that evil
thought meets evil courage; her unconsciousness was to be broken into
with profane violence with desecrating circumstances, like a temple
violated by a mad, vengeful impiety.  Yes, that very young girl, almost
no more than a child--this was what was going to happen to her.  And if
you ask me, how, wherefore, for what reason?  I will answer you: Why, by
chance!  By the merest chance, as things do happen, lucky and unlucky,
terrible or tender, important or unimportant; and even things which are
neither, things so completely neutral in character that you would wonder
why they do happen at all if you didn't know that they, too, carry in
their insignificance the seeds of further incalculable chances.

Of course, all the chances were that de Barral should have fallen upon a
perfectly harmless, naive, usual, inefficient specimen of respectable
governess for his daughter; or on a commonplace silly adventuress who
would have tried, say, to marry him or work some other sort of common
mischief in a small way.  Or again he might have chanced on a model of
all the virtues, or the repository of all knowledge, or anything equally
harmless, conventional, and middle class.  All calculations were in his
favour; but, chance being incalculable, he fell upon an individuality
whom it is much easier to define by opprobrious names than to classify
in a calm and scientific spirit--but an individuality certainly, and a
temperament as well.  Rare?  No.  There is a certain amount of what I
would politely call unscrupulousness in all of us.  Think for instance
of the excellent Mrs Fyne, who herself, and in the bosom of her family,
resembled a governess of a conventional type.  Only, her mental excesses
were theoretical, hedged in by so much humane feeling and conventional
reserves, that they amounted to no more than mere libertinage of
thought; whereas the other woman, the governess of Flora de Barral, was,
as you may have noticed, severely practical--terribly practical.  No!
Hers was not a rare temperament, except in its fierce resentment of
repression; a feeling which like genius or lunacy is apt to drive people
into sudden irrelevancy.  Hers was feminine irrelevancy.  A male genius,
a male ruffian, or even a male lunatic, would not have behaved exactly
as she did behave.  There is a softness in masculine nature, even the
most brutal, which acts as a check.

While the girl slept those two, the woman of forty, an age in itself
terrible, and that hopeless young "wrong 'un" of twenty-three (also well
connected I believe) had some sort of subdued row in the cleared rooms:
wardrobes open, drawers half pulled out and empty, trunks locked and
strapped, furniture in idle disarray, and not so much as a single scrap
of paper left behind on the tables.  The maid, whom the governess and
the pupil shared between them, after finishing with Flora, came to the
door as usual, but was not admitted.  She heard the two voices in
dispute before she knocked, and then being sent away retreated at once--
the only person in the house convinced at that time that there was
"something up."

"Dark and, so to speak, inscrutable spaces being met with in life there
must be such places in any statement dealing with life.  In what I am
telling you of now--an episode of one of my humdrum holidays in the
green country, recalled quite naturally after all the years by our
meeting a man who has been a blue-water sailor--this evening
confabulation is a dark, inscrutable spot.  And we may conjecture what
we like.  I have no difficulty in imagining that the woman--of forty,
and the chief of the enterprise--must have raged at large.  And perhaps
the other did not rage enough.  Youth feels deeply it is true, but it
has not the same vivid sense of lost opportunities.  It believes in the
absolute reality of time.  And then, in that abominable scamp with his
youth already soiled, withered like a plucked flower ready to be flung
on some rotting heap of rubbish, no very genuine feeling about anything
could exist--not even about the hazards of his own unclean existence.  A
sneering half-laugh with some such remark as: `We are properly sold and
no mistake' would have been enough to make trouble in that way.  And
then another sneer, `Waste time enough over it too,' followed perhaps by
the bitter retort from the other party, `You seemed to like it well
enough though, playing the fool with that chit of a girl.'  Something of
that sort.  Don't you see it--eh..."

Marlow looked at me with his dark penetrating glance.  I was struck by
the absolute verisimilitude of this suggestion.  But we were always
tilting at each other.  I saw an opening and pushed my uncandid thrust.

"You have a ghastly imagination," I said with a cheerfully sceptical
smile.

"Well, and if I have," he returned unabashed.  "But let me remind you
that this situation came to me unasked.  I am like a puzzle-headed chief
mate we had once in the dear old _Samarcand_ when I was a youngster.
The fellow went gravely about trying to `account to himself'--his
favourite expression--for a lot of things no one would care to bother
one's head about.  He was an old idiot but he was also an accomplished
practical seaman.  I was quite a boy and he impressed me.  I must have
caught the disposition from him."

"Well--go on with your accounting then," I said, assuming an air of
resignation.

"That's just it."  Marlow fell into his stride at once.  "That's just
it.  Mere disappointed cupidity cannot account for the proceedings of
the next morning; proceedings which I shall not describe to you--but
which I shall tell you of presently, not as a matter of conjecture but
of actual fact.  Meantime returning to that evening altercation in
deadened tones within the private apartment of Miss de Barral's
governess, what if I were to tell you that disappointment had most
likely made them touchy with each other, but that perhaps the secret of
his careless, railing behaviour, was in the thought, springing up within
him with an emphatic oath of relief.  `Now there's nothing to prevent me
from breaking away from that old woman.'  And that the secret of her
envenomed rage, not against this miserable and attractive wretch, but
against fate, accident and the whole course of human life, concentrating
its venom on de Barral and including the innocent girl herself, was in
the thought, in the fear crying within her, `Now I have nothing to hold
him with...'"

I couldn't refuse Marlow the tribute of a prolonged whistle "Phew!  So
you suppose that..."

He waved his hand impatiently.

"I don't suppose.  It was so.  And anyhow why shouldn't you accept the
supposition.  Do you look upon governesses as creatures above suspicion
or necessarily of moral perfection?  I suppose their hearts would not
stand looking into much better than other people's.  Why shouldn't a
governess have passions, all the passions, even that of libertinage, and
even ungovernable passions; yet suppressed by the very same means which
keep the rest of us in order: early training--necessity--circumstances--
fear of consequences; till there comes an age, a time when the restraint
of years becomes intolerable--and infatuation irresistible..."

"But if infatuation--quite possible I admit," I argued, "how do you
account for the nature of the conspiracy."

"You expect a cogency of conduct not usual in women," said Marlow.  "The
subterfuges of a menaced passion are not to be fathomed.  You think it
is going on the way it looks, whereas it is capable, for its own ends,
of walking backwards into a precipice."

When one once acknowledges that she was not a common woman, then all
this is easily understood.  She was abominable but she was not common.
She had suffered in her life not from its constant inferiority but from
constant self-repression.  A common woman finding herself placed in a
commanding position might have formed the design to become the second
Mrs de Barral.  Which would have been impracticable.  De Barral would
not have known what to do with a wife.  But even if by some impossible
chance he had made advances, this governess would have repulsed him with
scorn.  She had treated him always as an inferior being with an assured,
distant politeness.  In her composed, schooled manner she despised and
disliked both father and daughter exceedingly.  I have a notion that she
had always disliked intensely all her charges including the two ducal
(if they were ducal) little girls with whom she had dazzled de Barral.
What an odious, ungratified existence it must have been for a woman as
avid of all the sensuous emotions which life can give as most of her
betters.

She had seen her youth vanish, her freshness disappear, her hopes die,
and now she felt her flaming middle-age slipping away from her.  No
wonder that with her admirably dressed, abundant hair, thickly sprinkled
with white threads and adding to her elegant aspect the piquant
distinction of a powdered coiffure--no wonder, I say, that she clung
desperately to her last infatuation for that graceless young scamp, even
to the extent of hatching for him that amazing plot.  He was not so far
gone in degradation as to make him utterly hopeless for such an attempt.
She hoped to keep him straight with that enormous bribe.  She was
clearly a woman uncommon enough to live without illusions--which, of
course, does not mean that she was reasonable.  She had said to herself,
perhaps with a fury of self-contempt.  "In a few years I shall be too
old for anybody.  Meantime I shall have him--and I shall hold him by
throwing to him the money of that ordinary, silly, little girl of no
account."  Well, it was a desperate expedient--but she thought it worth
while.  And besides there is hardly a woman in the world, no matter how
hard, depraved or frantic, in whom something of the maternal instinct
does not survive, unconsumed like a salamander, in the fires of the most
abandoned passion.  Yes there might have been that sentiment for him
too.  There _was_ no doubt.  So I say again: No wonder!  No wonder that
she raged at everything--and perhaps even at him, with contradictory
reproaches: for regretting the girl, a little fool who would never in
her life be worth anybody's attention, and for taking the disaster
itself with a cynical levity in which she perceived a flavour of revolt.

And so the altercation in the night went on, over the irremediable.  He
arguing, "What's the hurry?  Why clear out like this?" perhaps a little
sorry for the girl and as usual without a penny in his pocket,
appreciating the comfortable quarters, wishing to linger on as long as
possible in the shameless enjoyment of this already doomed luxury.
There was really no hurry for a few days.  Always time enough to vanish.
And, with that, a touch of masculine softness, a sort of regard for
appearances surviving his degradation: "You might behave decently at the
last, Eliza."  But there was no softness in the sallow face under the
gala effect of powdered hair, its formal calmness gone, the dark-ringed
eyes glaring at him with a sort of hunger.  "No!  No!  If it is as you
say then not a day, not an hour, not a moment."  She stuck to it, very
determined that there should be no more of that boy and girl
philandering since the object of it was gone; angry with herself for
having suffered from it so much in the past, furious at its having been
all in vain.

But she was reasonable enough not to quarrel with him finally.  What was
the good?  She found means to placate him.  The only means.  As long as
there was some money to be got she had hold of him.  "Now go away.  We
shall do no good by any more of this sort of talk.  I want to be alone
for a bit."  He went away, sulkily acquiescent.  There was a room always
kept ready for him on the same floor, at the further end of a short
thickly carpeted passage.

How she passed the night, this woman with no illusions to help her
through the hours which must have been sleepless I shouldn't like to
say.  It ended at last; and this strange victim of the de Barral
failure, whose name would never be known to the Official Receiver, came
down to breakfast, impenetrable in her everyday perfection.  From the
very first, somehow, she had accepted the fatal news for true.  All her
life she had never believed in her luck, with that pessimism of the
passionate who at bottom feel themselves to be the outcasts of a morally
restrained universe.  But this did not make it any easier, on opening
the morning paper feverishly, to see the thing confirmed.  Oh yes!  It
was there.  The Orb had suspended payment--the first growl of the storm
faint as yet, but to the initiated the forerunner of a deluge.  As an
item of news it was not indecently displayed.  It was not displayed at
all in a sense.  The serious paper, the only one of the great dailies
which had always maintained an attitude of reserve towards the de Barral
group of banks, had its "manner."  Yes! a modest item of news!  But
there was also, on another page, a special financial article in a
hostile tone beginning with the words "We have always feared" and a
guarded, half-column leader, opening with the phrase: "It is a
deplorable sign of the times" what was, in effect, an austere, general
rebuke to the absurd infatuations of the investing public.  She glanced
through these articles, a line here and a line there--no more was
necessary to catch beyond doubt the murmur of the oncoming flood.
Several slighting references by name to de Barral revived her animosity
against the man, suddenly, as by the effect of unforeseen moral support.
The miserable wretch!...

"You understand," Marlow interrupted the current of his narrative, "that
in order to be consecutive in my relation of this affair I am telling
you at once the details which I heard from Mrs Fyne later in the day,
as well as what little Fyne imparted to me with his usual solemnity
during that morning call.  As you may easily guess the Fynes, in their
apartments, had read the news at the same time, and, as a matter of
fact, in the same august and highly moral newspaper, as the governess in
the luxurious mansion a few doors down on the opposite side of the
street.  But they read them with different feelings.  They were
thunderstruck.  Fyne had to explain the full purport of the intelligence
to Mrs Fyne whose first cry was that of relief.  Then that poor child
would be safe from these designing, horrid people.  Mrs Fyne did not
know what it might mean to be suddenly reduced from riches to absolute
penury.  Fyne with his masculine imagination was less inclined to
rejoice extravagantly at the girl's escape from the moral dangers which
had been menacing her defenceless existence.  It was a confoundedly big
price to pay.  What an unfortunate little thing she was!  `We might be
able to do something to comfort that poor child at any rate for the time
she is here,' said Mrs Fyne.  She felt under a sort of moral obligation
not to be indifferent.  But no comfort for anyone could be got by
rushing out into the street at this early hour; and so, following the
advice of Fyne not to act nastily, they both sat down at the window and
stared feelingly at the great house, awful to their eyes in its stolid,
prosperous, expensive respectability with ruin absolutely standing at
the door."

By that time, or very soon after, all Brighton had the information and
formed a more or less just appreciation of its gravity.  The butler in
Miss de Barral's big house had seen the news, perhaps earlier than
anybody within a mile of the Parade, in the course of his morning duties
of which one was to dry the freshly delivered paper before the fire--an
occasion to glance at it which no intelligent man could have neglected.
He communicated to the rest of the household his vaguely forcible
impression that something had gone damnably wrong with the affairs of
"her father in London."

This brought an atmosphere of constraint through the house, which Flora
de Barral coming down somewhat later than usual could not help noticing
in her own way.  Everybody seemed to stare so stupidly somehow; she
feared a dull day.

In the dining-room the governess in her place, a newspaper
half-concealed under the cloth on her lap, after a few words exchanged
with lips that seemed hardly to move, remaining motionless, her eyes
fixed before her in an enduring silence; and presently Charley coming in
to whom she did not even give a glance.  He hardly said good morning,
though he had a half-hearted try to smile at the girl, and sitting
opposite her with his eyes on his plate and slight quivers passing along
the line of his clean-shaven jaw, he too had nothing to say.  It was
dull, horribly dull to begin one's day like this; but she knew what it
was.  These never-ending family affairs!  It was not for the first time
that she had suffered from their depressing after-effects on these two.
It was a shame that the delightful Charley should be made dull by these
stupid talks, and it was perfectly stupid of him to let himself be upset
like this by his aunt.

When after a period of still, as if calculating, immobility her
governess got up abruptly and went out with the paper in her hand,
almost immediately afterwards followed by Charley who left his breakfast
half eaten, the girl was positively relieved.  They would have it out
that morning whatever it was, and be themselves again in the afternoon.
At least Charley would be.  To the moods of her governess she did not
attach so much importance.

For the first time that morning the Fynes saw the front door of the
awful house open and the objectionable young man issue forth, his
rascality visible to their prejudiced eyes in his very bowler hat and in
the smart cut of his short fawn overcoat.  He walked away rapidly like a
man hurrying to catch a train, glancing from side to side as though he
were carrying something off.  Could he be departing for good?
Undoubtedly, undoubtedly!  But Mrs Fyne's fervent "thank goodness"
turned out to be a bit, as the Americans--some Americans--say
"previous."  In a very short time the odious fellow appeared again,
strolling, absolutely strolling back, his hat now tilted a little on one
side, with an air of leisure and satisfaction.  Mrs Fyne groaned not
only in the spirit, at this sight, but in the flesh, audibly; and asked
her husband what it might mean.  Fyne naturally couldn't say.  Mrs Fyne
believed that there was something horrid in progress and meantime the
object of her detestation had gone up the steps and had knocked at the
door which at once opened to admit him.

He had been only as far as the bank.

His reason for leaving his breakfast unfinished to run after Miss de
Barral's governess, was to speak to her in reference to that very errand
possessing the utmost possible importance in his eyes.  He shrugged his
shoulders at the nervousness of her eyes and hands, at the
half-strangled whisper "I had to go out.  I could hardly contain
myself."  That was her affair.  He was, with a young man's
squeamishness, rather sick of her ferocity.  He did not understand it.
Men do not accumulate hate against each other in tiny amounts,
treasuring every pinch carefully till it grows at last into a monstrous
and explosive hoard.  He had run out after her to remind her of the
balance at the bank.  What about lifting that money without wasting any
more time?  She had promised him to leave nothing behind.

An account opened in her name for the expenses of the establishment in
Brighton, had been fed by de Barral with deferential lavishness.  The
governess crossed the wide hall into a little room at the side where she
sat down to write the cheque, which he hastened out to go and cash as if
it were stolen or a forgery.  As observed by the Fynes, his uneasy
appearance on leaving the house arose from the fact that his first
trouble having been caused by a cheque of doubtful authenticity, the
possession of a document of the sort made him unreasonably uncomfortable
till this one was safely cashed.  And after all, you know it was
stealing of an indirect sort; for the money was de Barral's money if the
account was in the name of the accomplished lady.  At any rate the
cheque was cashed.  On getting hold of the notes and gold he recovered
his jaunty bearing, it being well-known that with certain natures the
presence of money (even stolen) in the pocket, acts as a tonic, or at
least as a stimulant.  He cocked his hat a little on one side as though
he had had a drink or two--which indeed he might have had in reality, to
celebrate the occasion.

The governess had been waiting for his return in the hall, disregarding
the side-glances of the butler as he went in and out of the dining-room
clearing away the breakfast things.  It was she, herself, who had opened
the door so promptly.  "It's all right," he said touching his
breast-pocket; and she did not dare, the miserable wretch without
illusions, she did not dare ask him to hand it over.  They looked at
each other in silence.  He nodded significantly: "Where is she now?" and
she whispered, "Gone into the drawing-room.  Want to see her again?"
with an archly black look which he acknowledged by a muttered, surly: "I
am damned if I do.  Well, as you want to bolt like this, why don't we go
now?"

She set her lips with cruel obstinacy and shook her head.  She had her
idea, her completed plan.  At that moment the Fynes, still at the window
and watching like a pair of private detectives, saw a man with a long
grey beard and a jovial face go up the steps helping himself with a
thick stick, and knock at the door.  Who could he be?

He was one of Miss de Barral's masters.  She had lately taken up
painting in water-colours, having read in a high-class woman's weekly
paper that a great many princesses of the European royal houses were
cultivating that art.  This was the water-colour morning; and the
teacher, a veteran of many exhibitions, of a venerable and jovial
aspect, had turned up with his usual punctuality.  He was no great
reader of morning papers, and even had he seen the news it is very
likely he would not have understood its real purport.  At any rate he
turned up, as the governess expected him to do, and the Fynes saw him
pass through the fateful door.

He bowed cordially to the lady in charge of Miss de Barral's education,
whom he saw in the hall engaged in conversation with a very good-looking
but somewhat raffish young gentleman.  She turned to him graciously:
"Flora is already waiting for you in the drawing-room."

The cultivation of the art said to be patronised by princesses was
pursued in the drawing-room from considerations of the right kind of
light.  The governess preceded the master up the stairs and into the
room where Miss de Barral was found arrayed in a holland pinafore (also
of the right kind for the pursuit of the art) and smilingly expectant.
The water-colour lesson enlivened by the jocular conversation of the
kindly, humorous, old man was always great fun; and she felt she would
be compensated for the tiresome beginning of the day.

Her governess generally was present at the lesson; but on this occasion
she only sat down till the master and pupil had gone to work in earnest,
and then as though she had suddenly remembered some order to give, rose
quietly and went out of the room.

Once outside, the servants summoned by the passing maid without a bell
being rung, and quick, quick, let all this luggage be taken down into
the hall, and let one of you call a cab.  She stood outside the
drawing-room door on the landing, looking at each piece, trunk, leather
cases, portmanteaus, being carried past her, her brows knitted and her
aspect so sombre and absorbed that it took some little time for the
butler to muster courage enough to speak to her.  But he reflected that
he was a free-born Briton and had his rights.  He spoke straight to the
point but in the usual respectful manner.

"Beg you pardon, ma'am--but are you going away for good?"

He was startled by her tone.  Its unexpected, unladylike harshness fell
on his trained ear with the disagreeable effect of a false note.  "Yes.
I am going away.  And the best thing for all of you is to go away too,
as soon as you like.  You can go now, to-day, this moment.  You had your
wages paid you only last week.  The longer you stay the greater your
loss.  But I have nothing to do with it now.  You are the servants of
Mr de Barral--you know."

The butler was astounded by the manner of this advice, and as his eyes
wandered to the drawing-room door the governess extended her arm as if
to bar the way.  "Nobody goes in there."  And that was said still in
another tone, such a tone that all trace of the trained respectfulness
vanished from the butler's bearing.  He stared at her with a frank
wondering gaze.  "Not till I am gone," she added, and there was such an
expression on her face that the man was daunted by the mystery of it.
He shrugged his shoulders slightly and without another word went down
the stairs on his way to the basement, brushing in the hall past Mr
Charles who hat on head and both hands rammed deep into his overcoat
pockets paced up and down as though on sentry duty there.

The ladies' maid was the only servant upstairs, hovering in the passage
on the first floor, curious and as if fascinated by the woman who stood
there guarding the door.  Being beckoned closer imperiously and asked by
the governess to bring out of the now empty rooms the hat and veil, the
only objects besides the furniture still to be found there, she did so
in silence but inwardly fluttered.  And while waiting uneasily, with the
veil, before that woman who, without moving a step away from the
drawing-room door was pinning with careless haste her hat on her head,
she heard within a sudden burst of laughter from Miss de Barral enjoying
the fun of the water-colour lesson given her for the last time by the
cheery old man.

Mr and Mrs Fyne ambushed at their window--a most incredible occupation
for people of their kind--saw with renewed anxiety a cab come to the
door, and watched some luggage being carried out and put on its roof.
The butler appeared for a moment, then went in again.  What did it mean?
Was Flora going to be taken to her father; or were these people, that
woman and her horrible nephew, about to carry her off somewhere?  Fyne
couldn't tell.  He doubted the last, Flora having now, he judged, no
value, either positive or speculative.  Though no great reader of
character he did not credit the governess with humane intentions.  He
confessed to me naively that he was excited as if watching some action
on the stage.  Then the thought struck him that the girl might have had
some money settled on her, be possessed of some means, of some little
fortune of her own and therefore--

He imparted this theory to his wife who shared fully his consternation.
"I can't believe the child will go away without running in to say
good-bye to us," she murmured.  "We must find out!  I shall ask her."
But at that very moment the cab rolled away, empty inside, and the door
of the house which had been standing slightly ajar till then was pushed
to.

They remained silent staring at it till Mrs Fyne whispered doubtfully
"I really think I must go over."  Fyne didn't answer for a while (his is
a reflective mind, you know), and then as if Mrs Fyne's whispers had an
occult power over that door it opened wide again and the white-bearded
man issued, astonishingly active in his movements, using his stick
almost like a leaping-pole to get down the steps; and hobbled away
briskly along the pavement.  Naturally the Fynes were too far off to
make out the expression of his face.  But it would not have helped them
very much to a guess at the conditions inside the house.  The expression
was humorously puzzled--nothing more.

For, at the end of his lesson, seizing his trusty stick and coming out
with his habitual vivacity, he very nearly cannoned just outside the
drawing-room door into the back of Miss de Barral's governess.  He
stopped himself in time and she turned round swiftly.  It was
embarrassing; he apologised; but her face was not startled; it was not
aware of him; it wore a singular expression of resolution.  A very
singular expression which, as it were, detained him for a moment.  In
order to cover his embarrassment, he made some inane remark on the
weather, upon which, instead of returning another inane remark according
to the tacit rules of the game, she only gave him a smile of
unfathomable meaning.  Nothing could have been more singular.  The
good-looking young gentleman of questionable appearance took not the
slightest notice of him in the hall.  No servant was to be seen.  He let
himself out pulling the door to behind him with a crash as, in a manner,
he was forced to do to get it shut at all.

When the echo of it had died away the woman on the landing leaned over
the banister and called out bitterly to the man below "Don't you want to
come up and say good-bye."  He had an impatient movement of the
shoulders and went on pacing to and fro as though he had not heard.  But
suddenly he checked himself, stood still for a moment, then with a
gloomy face and without taking his hands out of his pockets ran smartly
up the stairs.  Already facing the door she turned her head for a
whispered taunt: "Come!  Confess you were dying to see her stupid little
face once more,"--to which he disdained to answer.

Flora de Barral, still seated before the table at which she had been
working on her sketch, raised her head at the noise of the opening door.
The invading manner of their entrance gave her the sense of something
she had never seen before.  She knew them well.  She knew the woman
better than she knew her father.  There had been between them an
intimacy of relation as great as it can possibly be without the final
closeness of affection.  The delightful Charley walked in, with his eyes
fixed on the back of her governess whose raised veil hid her forehead
like a brown band above the black line of the eyebrows.  The girl was
astounded and alarmed by the altogether unknown expression in the
woman's face.  The stress of passion often discloses an aspect of the
personality completely ignored till then by its closest intimates.
There was something like an emanation of evil from her eyes and from the
face of the other, who, exactly behind her and overtopping her by half a
head, kept his eyelids lowered in a sinister fashion--which in the poor
girl, reached, stirred, set free that faculty of unreasoning explosive
terror lying locked up at the bottom of all human hearts and of the
hearts of animals as well.  With suddenly enlarged pupils and a movement
as instinctive almost as the bounding of a startled fawn, she jumped up
and found herself in the middle of the big room, exclaiming at those
amazing and familiar strangers.

"What do you want?"

You will note that she cried: What do you want?  Not: What has happened?
She told Mrs Fyne that she had received suddenly the feeling of being
personally attacked.  And that must have been very terrifying.  The
woman before her had been the wisdom, the authority, the protection of
life, security embodied and visible and undisputed.

You may imagine then the force of the shock in the intuitive perception
not merely of danger, for she did not know what was alarming her, but in
the sense of the security being gone.  And not only security.  I don't
know how to explain it clearly.  Look!  Even a small child lives, plays
and suffers in terms of its conception of its own existence.  Imagine,
if you can, a act coming in suddenly with a force capable of shattering
that very conception itself.  It was only because of the girl being
still so much of a child that she escaped mental destruction; that, in
other words she got over it.  Could one conceive of her more mature,
while still as ignorant as she was, one must conclude that she would
have become an idiot on the spot--long before the end of that
experience.  Luckily, people, whether mature or not mature (and who
really is ever mature?) are for the most part quite incapable of
understanding what is happening to them: a merciful provision of nature
to preserve an average amount of sanity for working purposes in this
world...

"But we, my dear Marlow, have the inestimable advantage of understanding
what is happening to others," I struck in.  "Or at least some of us seem
to.  Is that too a provision of nature?  And what is it for?  Is it that
we may amuse ourselves gossiping about each other's affairs?  You for
instance seem--"

"I don't know what I seem," Marlow silenced me, "and surely life must be
amused somehow.  It would be still a very respectable provision if it
were only for that end.  But from that same provision of understanding,
there springs in us compassion, charity, indignation, the sense of
solidarity; and in minds of any largeness an inclination to that
indulgence which is next door to affection.  I don't mean to say that I
am inclined to an indulgent view of the precious couple which broke in
upon an unsuspecting girl.  They came marching in (it's the very
expression she used later on to Mrs Fyne) but at her cry they stopped.
It must have been startling enough to them.  It was like having the mask
torn off when you don't expect it.  The man stopped, for good; he didn't
offer to move a step further.  But, though the governess had come in
there for the very purpose of taking the mask off for the first time in
her life, she seemed to look upon the frightened cry as a fresh
provocation.  `What are you screaming for, you little fool?' she said
advancing alone close to the girl who was affected exactly as if she had
seen Medusa's head with serpentine locks set mysteriously on the
shoulders of that familiar person, in that brown dress, under that hat
she knew so well.  It made her lose all her hold on reality.  She told
Mrs Fyne: `I didn't know where I was.  I didn't even know that I was
frightened.  If she had told me it was a joke I would have laughed.  If
she had told me to put on my hat and go out with her I would have gone
to put on my hat and gone out with her and never said a single word; I
should have been convinced I had been mad for a minute or so, and I
would have worried myself to death rather than breathe a hint of it to
her or anyone.  But the wretch put her face close to mine and I could
not move.  Shrill screams of children scrape the iron sky.
Let us lock ourselves in the light.

Let the sun nail us to the hot earth with his spikes of fire, And perhaps
when the darkness rushes past It will forget us.

LOVE SONG
(To C. K. S.)
Little father, Little mother, Little sister, Little brother, Little
lover, How can I go on living With you away from me?

How can I get up in the morning And go to bed at night, And you not
here?
How can I bear the sunrise and the sunset, And the moonrise and the
moonset, And the flowers in the garden?

How can I bear them, You, My little father, Little mother, Little
sister, Little brother, Little lover?

QUARREL
Abruptly, from a wall of clear cold silence Like an icy glass,
Myself looked out at me And would not let me pass.

I wanted to reach you Before it was too late; But my frozen image
barred the way With vacant hate.

MY CHILD
Tentacles thrust imperceptibly into the future Helplessly sense the
fire.
A serpentine nerve Impelled to lengthen itself generation after generation
Pierces the labyrinth of flames To rose-colored extinction.

THE TUNNEL
I
I have made you a child in the womb, Holding you in sweet and final
darkness.
All day as I walk out I carry you about.
I guard you close in secret where Cold eyed people cannot stare.
I am melted in the warm dear fire, Lover and mother in the same
desire.
Yet I am afraid of your eyes And their possible surprise.
Would you be angry if I let you know That I carried you so?

II
I could kiss you to death Hoping that, your protest obliterated, You
would be Utterly me.

Yet I know--how well!-- Like a shell, Hollow and echoing, Death would be,
With a roar of the past Like the roar of the sea.
And what is lifeless I cannot kill!
So you would make death work your will.

III
In most intimate touch we meet, Lip to lip, Breast to breast,
Sweet.
Suddenly we draw apart And start.
Like strangers surprised at a road's turning We see, I, the naked you;
You, the naked me.
There was something of neither of us That covered the hours, And we
have only touched each other's bodies Through veils of flowers.
But let us smile kindly, Like those already dead, On the warm flesh And
the marriage bed.

IV
The blanched stars are withered with light.
The moon is pale with trying to remember something.
Light, straining for a stale birth, Distends the darkness.

I, in the midst of this travail, Bring forth-- The solitude is so vast I
am glad to be freed of it.
Is it the moon I see there, Or does my own white face Hang in blank
agony against the sky As if blinded with giving?

V
Little inexorable lips at my breast Drink me out of me In a fine
sharp stream.
Little hands tear me apart To find what they need.

I am weak with love of you, Little body of hate!

BRUISED SUNLIGHT

WATER MOODS
RAIN ON THE SEASHORE
Curling petals of rain lick silver tongues.
Fluffy spray is blown loosely up between thin silver lips And slithers,
tinkling in hard green ice, down the gray rocks.

White darkness-- An expressionless horizon stares with stone eyes.
The sea lifts its immense self heavily And falls down in sickly
might.

The emptiness is like a death of which no one shall ever know.

SHIP MASTS
They stand Stark as church spires; Bare stalks That will blossom
(Tomorrow perhaps) Into flowers of the wind.

MONOCHROME
Gray water, Gray sky drifting down to the sea.
The night, Old, ugly, and stern, Lies upon the water, Quivering in the
twilight Like a tortured belly.

ANTIQUE
Clouds flung back Make fan-shaped rays of faded crimson Brocaded on dim
blue satin; Through the wrinkled dust-blue water The little boat Glides
above its sunken shadow.

ECHO LOOKS AT HERSELF
The ship passes in the night And drags jagged reflections Like
gilded combs Through the obscure water.

Spun glass daisies float on a gold-washed mirror.

SPELL
In the dark I can hear the patter.
Bare white feet are running across the water.
White feet as bright as silver Are flashing under dull blue dresses.

Wet palms beat, Impatiently, Petulantly, Slapping the wet rocks.

HUNGRY SHADOWS
RAINY TWILIGHT

Dim gold faces float in the windows.
Dim gold faces and gilded arms...
They are clinging along the silver ladders of rain; They are climbing
with ivory lamps held high, Starry lamps Over which the silver ladders
Thicken into nets of twilight.

THE STORM
Herds of black elephants, Rushing over the plains, Trample the stars.
The ivory tusk of the leader (Or is it the moon?) Flashes, and is gone.

Tree tops bend; Crash; Fire from hoofs; And still they rush on,
Trampling the stars, Bellowing, Roaring.

NYMPHS

The drift of shadows on the mountainside, Blue and purple gold!
Purple dust sifting through fingers of ivory:
Cool purple on ivory breasts.
I see arms and breasts, Upturned chins, Slanting through the dust of purple
leaves:
Ivory and gold, Bare breasts and laughing eyes, That drift on
the shadowy surf And surge against the side of the mountain.

WINTER DAWN
Cloudy dawn flower unfolds; Moon moth gyrates slowly; Snow maiden lets
down her hair, And in one shining silence, It slips to earth.

THE WALL OF NIGHT
SPRINGTIME TOO SOON
The moon is a cool rose in a blue bowl.
There are no more birds.
The last leaf has fallen.
The trees in the twilight are naked old women.

The moon is an old woman at the door of her tomb.
Clouds combed out in the wind Are gray hair she has wound about her
neck.
The water is an old gray face that mirrors the springtime.

STARS
Like naked maidens Dancing with no thought of lovers, Blinking
stars with dewy silver breasts Pass through the darkness.
White and eager, They glide on Toward the gray meshed web of dawn
And the mystery of morning.
Then, About me, The white cloud walls Stand as sternly as sepulchers,
And from all sides Peer and linger the startled faces, Pale in the
harshness of the sunlight.

NIGHT MUSIC
Through the blue water of night Rises the white bubble of silence--
Rises, And breaks:
The shivered crystal bell of the moon, Dying away in star splinters.
The still mists bear the sound Beyond the horizon.

NOCTURNE OF WATER
A shining bird plunges to the deep, Becomes entangled with seaweed, And
never more emerges.
Pale golden feathers drift across the sky, Fire feathered clouds, Riding
the weightless billows of back velvet On the horizon.

THE LONG MOMENT
A white sigh clouds the fields Into quietness.
Above the billowed snow I drift, One year, Two years, Three years.

Hurt eyes mist in the blue behind me.
The moon uncoils in glistening ropes And I glide downward along the
dripping rays To a marble lake.

DESIGNS
I
Night
Fields of black tulips And swarms of gold bees Drinking their bitter
honey.

II
New Moon
Above the gnarled old tree That clings to the bleakest side of the
mountain, A torch of ivory and gold; And across the sky, The silver
print Of spirit feet, Fled from the wonder.

III
Tropic Moon
The glowing anvil, Beaten by the winds; Star sparks, Burning and dying
in the heavens; The furnace glare Red On the polished palm leaves.

IV
Winter Moon
A little white thistle moon Blown over the cold crags and fens:
A little white thistle moon Blown across the frozen heather.

ARGO
White sails Unbillowed by any wind, The moon ship, Among shoals
of cloud, Stranded stars, Bare bosoms, And netted hair of light, On
the shores of the world.

JAPANESE MOON
Thick clustered wistaria clouds, A young girl moon in a mist of almond
flowers, Boughs and boughs of light; Then a round-faced ivory
lady Nodding among fading chrysanthemums.

HOT MOON

Moon rise.
Great gong sounds, shining-- Little feet run away.
Loud and solemn, the funeral gong.
Little feet run away.

THE NAIAD
The moon rises, Glistening, Naked white, Out of her stream.

Wet marble shoulders Shake star drops on the clouds.

FLOODTIDE
Across the shadows of the surf The lights of the ship Twinkle
despondently.
The clinging absorbent gray darkness Sucks them into itself:
Drinks the pale golden tears greedily.

MOUNTAIN PASS IN AUGUST
Night scatters grapes for the harvest.

The moon burns like a leaf.
Along the mountain path A thin streak of light Creeps hungrily
with its silver belly to the earth.
The old hound laps up the shadows.
Her teats drip the brighter darkness.

CONTEMPORARIES
HARMONICS
YOUNG MEN
Fauns, Eternal pagans, Beautiful and obscene, Leaping through the street
With a flicker of hoofs, And a flash of tails,
You want dryads And they give you prostitutes.

YOUNG GIRLS
Your souls are wet flowers, Bathed in kisses and blood.

Golden Clyties, The wheel of light Rushes over your breasts.

HOUSE SPIRITS
Women are flitting around in their shells.

Pale dilutions of the waters of the world Come through the windows.
Back and forth the women glide in their little waters; Cellar to
garret and garret to cellar, Winding in and out under door arches
and down passages, They and their spawn, In the shell, In the
cavern.

You may come in the shell to overpower her, Males, But in the shell,
in the shell.
She cannot be torn from the shell without dying; And what is the
pleasure of intercourse with the dead?

AT THE MEETING HOUSE

Souls as dry as autumn leaves, The color long since out.

The organ plays.
The leaves crackle and rustle a little; Then sink down.

Old ladies with gray moss on their chins, Old men with camphor and cotton
packed around their heads, Thin child spirits, sharp and shrill as
whistles.

Gray old trees; Gaunt old woods; Souls as dry as leaves After autumn is
past.

CHRISTIANS
Blind, they storm up from the pit.
You gave them the force, You, when You poured the measure of agony into
them.
Didn't You know what it would be, Giving blind people fire?
Not gold and red and amber fire, But marsh fire.
Fire of ice, Suffering forged into suffering!

They are coming up now.

The sword is uplifted in the hands of the monster.

My valiant little puppets, Did you think you could stand out against
this?

Pierrot and Columbine breeding in the flowers....

There must be no flowers.

DEVIL'S CRADLE
Black man hanged on a silver tree; (Down by the river, Slow river,
White breast, White face with blood on it.) Black man creaks in the
wind, Knees slack.
Brown poppies, melting in moonlight, Swerve on glistening stems Across
an endless field To the music of a blood white face And a tired little
devil child Rocked to sleep on a rope.

WOMEN
Crystal columns, When they bend they crack; Brittle souls, Conforming,
yet not conforming-- Mirrors.

Masculine souls pass across the mirrors:

Whirling, gliding ecstasies-- Retreating, retreating, Dimly, dimly, Like
dreams fading across the mirrors.

Then the mirrors, Stark and brilliant in the sunshine, Blank as the desert,
Blank as the Sphinx, Winking golden eyes in the twinkles of light,
Silent, immutable, vacuous infinity, Illimitable capacity for absorption,
Absorbing nothing.

Have the shapes and the shadows been swallowed up In your
recesses without depth, You drinkers of life, Twinkling maliciously
Your golden yellow eyes, Mirrors winking in the sunshine?

PENELOPE
Gray old spinners, Weaving with the crafty fibers of your souls;
Nothing was given you but those impalpable threads.

Yet you have bound the race, Stranglers, With your silver spun
mysteries.
All the cruel, All the mad, The foolish, And the beautiful, too:
It all belongs to you Since the first time That you began to drop the
filmy threads When the world was half asleep.

Sometimes you are young girls; Sometimes there are roses in your hair.
But I know you-- Sitting back there in the hollow shadows of your
wombs.
The crafty fibers of your souls Are woven in and out With the fibers
of life.

POOR PEOPLE'S DREAMS
Sometimes women with eyes like wet green berries Glide across the
slick mirror of their own smiles And vanish through lengths of gold and
marble drawing rooms.
The marble smiles, As sensuous as snow; Hips of the Graces;
Shoulders of Clytie; Breasts frozen as foam, Frozen as camelia
bloom; Mounds of marble flesh, Inexplicable wonder of white....

I dream about statuesque beauties Who look from the shadows of opera
boxes; Or elegant ladies in novels of eighteen thirty, At the hunt
ball...

Reflections in a polish floor, A portrait by Renoir, A Degas dancing girl,
English country houses, An autumn afternoon in the Bois, Something
I have read of...
In sleep one vision retreating through another, Like mirrors being doors
to other mirrors, Satin, and lace, and white shoulders, And elegant ladies,
Dancing, dancing.

FOR WIVES AND MISTRESSES
Death, Being a woman, Being passive like all final things, Being a mother,
Waits.

Shining faces Gray and melt into her flesh.
Death envies those asleep in her, Little children who have come
back, Fiery faces, Bright for a moment in the darkness,
Extinguished softly in her womb.

PORTRAITS

PORTRAIT OF RICH OLD LADY
Old lady talks, Spins from her lips Warp and woof Of teapots, tables,
napery, Sanitary toilets, Old bedsteads, pictures on walls, And
fine lace, Spins a cocoon of this secondary life.
Warm and snug is old lady's belly.
Old lady makes Venus Aphrodite Parvenue.
Old lady Arranges places for courtesans In warm outbuildings on
back streets.

NIGGER
Nigger with flat cheeks and swollen purple lips; Nigger with loose
red tongue; Flat browed nigger, Your skull peaked at the zenith,
The stretched glistening skin Covered with tight coiled springs of
hair:
I am up here cold.
I am white man.
You are still warm and sweet With the darkness you were born in.
THE MAIDEN MOTHER
He has a squat body, Glowering brows, And bulging eyes.
Lustful contemplation of the meat pie Is written all over his
sweating face.
The thin woman with the meek voice, Who has carried him so long in
her body And despairs of giving him birth, Watches over him in
secret With bitter and resentful tenderness.

A PIOUS WOMAN
You can bury your face in her thick soul of cotton batting And smell
candle wax and church incense.
When she dies she must be burned.
Laid in the ground she would only soak up moisture And get soggy,
As now she has a way of soaking up tears Never meant for her.
A VERY OLD ROSE JAR
She ran across the lawn after the cat And I saw through the old
maid, as through a shadow, A young girl in a white muslin dress
running to meet her lover.
There was clashing of cymbals, And the flash of nereids' arms in
autumn leaves.
A sharp high note died out like an ascending light.
Something sweet and wanton faded from the old maid's lips-- Something
of Pierrot chasing after love, A bacchante dying in her sleep, A
shadow, And a gray cat.

THE NIXIE
He lies in cool shadows safe under rocks, His eyes brown stones,
Worn smooth and soft, But uncrumbled.
He reaches forth covert child-claws To tickle the silver bellies
of the little blind fish As they swim secretly above him.
He laughs-- The school splinters, panic stricken.
As we stare through the lucid gold water He gazes up at us from his
shadowy retreat In combative safety.
There are times when he pretends to himself that he is a god, Water
god, land god, god-in-the-sky.
We cannot laugh at his grotesquerie.
We are wistful before the pathetic gallantries of his imagination.
OLD LADIES' VALHALLA
I am thinking of a little house, A pretty gray silk dress, And a
little maid with a tidy white apron.
I am thinking of thin yellow angels Flying out of Sevres china tea
cups, And a cool spirit with slanting green eyes, Who peers at me
through the screen of plants I have placed in the corner between
the hearth and the window.
I am thinking of the peace in one's own little home When the afternoon
sunshine drips on the shiny floor, And the rugs are in order, And
the roses in the bowl plunge into shadow Like pink nymphs into a
pool, While there is no sound to be heard above the hum of the
teakettle Save the benevolent buzzing of flies in the clean sash
curtain.

PORTRAITS OF POETS 
I 
(For L. R.)
To rush over dark waters, A swift bird with cruel talons; To seize
life-- Your life for her-- To hold it, Hold it struggling-- To kiss
it.

II
Crystal self-containment, Giving out only what is sent.
Startled, The circumference retreats As it mounts higher, flamelike,
Still and clear without radiance, Ascending without self-explanation.
A skeleton falls apart With the dignity of comprehensible pathos,
The bones bleached by denial.

III
With the impalpable lightness of May breezes Begins a battle of
flower petals:
Cowering in the primrose whirlwind his lips have blown, The little
grotesque with the shattered heart, Fearful, Yet sinister in his
fearfulness.

THEODORE DREISER
The man body jumbled out of the earth, half formed, Clay on the
feet, Heavy with the lingering might of chaos.
The man face so high above the feet As if lonesome for them like a
child.
The veins that beat heavily with the music they but half understood
Coil languidly around the heart And lave it in the death stream Of
a grand impersonal benignance.

PIETA
The child-- Warm chubby thighs, Fat brown arms, An unsurprised
face-- Cries for jam.
The mother buys him with jam.
An old woman, Tottering on lean leather skinned legs, Sucks with
glazing eyes The crystal silken milk That flows from the death wound
In a young flower-soft, jewel-soft body.
BRAZIL THROUGH A MIST 
THE RANCH 
TROPICAL LIFE
White flower, Your petals float away But I hardly hear them.
TWENTY-FOUR HOURS
The day is so long and white, A road all dust, Smooth monotony; And
the night at the end, A hill to be climbed, Slowly, laboriously,
While the stars prick our hands Like thistles.

RAINY SEASON
A flock of parrakeets Hurled itself through the mist; Harsh wild
green And clamor-tongued Through the dim white forest.
They vanished, And the lips of Silence Sucked at the roots of
Life.

MAIL ON THE RANCH
The old man on the mule Opens the worn saddle bags, And takes out
the papers.
From the outer world The thoughts come stabbing, To taunt, baffle,
and stir me to revolt.
I beat against the sky, Against the winds of the mountain, But my
cries, grown thin in all this space, Are diluted with emptiness...
Like the air, Thin and wide, Touching everything, Touching nothing.
THE VAMPIRE BAT 
What was it that came out of the night?
What was it that went away in the night?
The little brown hen is huddled in the fence corner, Eyes already
glazing.
How should she know what came out of the night, Or what was taken
away in the night?
A shadow passed across the moon.
The wind rustled in the mango trees.
And now, in the morning, The little brown hen is huddled in the
fence corner, Eyes already glazing; Because a shadow passed across
the moon, And the wind rustled in the mango trees.
CONSERVATISM
The turkeys, Like hoop-skirted old ladies Out walking, Display their
solemn propriety.
A terrible force, Hungry and destructive, Emanates from their mistily
blinking eyes.

LITTLE PIGS
Little tail quivering, Wrinkled snout thrusting up the mud:
He will find God If he keeps on like that.

THE SILLY EWE
The silly ewe comes smelling up to me.
Her tail wriggles without hinges, Both ends of it at once and
equal.
Yesterday the parrot bit her; Last week the jaguar ate her young
one; But experience teaches her nothing.

THE SNAKE
The chickens are at home in the barnyard, The pigs in the swill,
And the flowers in the garden; But where do you belong, With your
lacquered coils, O snake?

THE YEAR 
Days and days float by.
On the sides of the mountains Blue shadows shift And sift into
silence.
Morning...
The cock crows.
There is that rosy glow on the mountain's edge; Jose in the door
of his hut; Maria's lace bobbins Tapping, tapping.
Evening...
The parrot's shrill cry; Pale silver green stars.
Night...
The ghosts of dead Joses And dead Marias Sitting in the moonlight.
Peace-- Depressing, Interminable Peace.

BURNING MOUNTAINS 
I
A herder set fire to the grass On the other side of the valley, And
now a beautiful Indian woman Bends, whirls, undulates, Tosses her
gold braceleted arms into the air-- Then sinks into her gray veil.
II
Fire, dying in smoke, You stir behind the haze Like a warrior Who
threatens in his sleep.

VILLA NOVA DA SERRA
The mountains are as dull and sodden As drunkards' faces, And the
white forgetfulness of rain Is like a delirium.
Along the filthy crooked streets of the little town, Street lamps
float in pools of mist-- The eyes of children being beaten.
RAIN IN THE MOUNTAINS
Like inexorable peace, The mists march through the mountains.
One by one the grim peaks sink into the cold arms of the unspoken.
The little town with the pink and white houses Looses its hold on
the ridge of hills And floats among cloud tops.
A shaggy donkey, cropping grass in the sequestered church yard,
Walks, with a leisurely air, Into a wind driven abyss.
TROPICAL WINTER
The afternoon is frozen with memories, Radiant as ice.
The sun sets amidst the agued trembling of the leaves, Sinking right
down through the gold air Into the arms of the sea.
The enameled wings of the palm trees Keep shivering, shivering,
Beating the gold air thin....

TALK ON THE RANCH
It is cold in the circle of mountains, A fireless hearth.
The stars drift by like autumn leaves.
Only the rustle-- Then, close together, Our talk, For and counter,
One grating against the other, Rubs a little fire And we warm each
other There in the midst of the hollow clammy circle.
LES MALADIES DES PAYS CHAUDS 
PRIDE OF RACE
I saw his young Anglo-Saxon form In its white sailor clothes Cleave
through the scampering yellow Latin crowd, As white and clean as
the blade of an archangel; And, as he reeled along, gloriously
drunk, Those little black and gold dung beetles Seemed to be pushing
and racing over his body.
DON QUIXOTE SOJOURNS IN RIO DE JANEIRO
White roses climb the wall of night.
A pale face looks from a window in the sky.
O Moon, is it because you have seen her that you are beautiful?
Is she happy among the saints?
I placed white flowers in the coffin.
Are they the blossoms that lie scattered along the horizon, Tangled
in your light?
Dim stars drop into the sea.
So you give my flowers back to me, do you, Bella Dona?
I might gather the petals and carry them to Antonietta to trim her
hats.
So much for life with a little negro milliner In the Rua Chile!
CONVENT MUSINGS 
Eleven thousand white-faced virgins in the sky.
The eyes of Our Lady Smiling through a rift of cloud.
I see Sister Maria da Gloria's fat shadow Pass across the whitewashed
wall by the window....
Eleven thousand white-faced virgins-- Stars from a broken rosary--
The Southern Cross-- Thrum, thrum, my fingers on the bench.
I sometimes think of God As an enormous emptiness Into which we
must all enter at last, Our Lady forgive me.

GUITARRA
"An orange tree without fruit, So am I without loves," His heavy
lidded eyes sang up to her.
Her glance dropped on her golden globe of breast, And on the
baby.

NOVEMBER
Foreign sailors in the streets Are as sad a sight as wild geese in
the winter--
There was one boy with those strange young blue eyes Who looked at
me; And a long, long time after he had passed The light of his soul
got to me-- So long on the way-- Like the light of a dead star.Obviously he looked upon the Fynes as being
disappointed because the girl was taken away from them.  They, by a
diplomatic sacrifice in the interests of poor Flora, had asked the man
to dinner.  He accepted ungraciously, remarking that he was not used to
late hours.  He had generally a bit of supper about half-past eight or
nine.  However ...

He gazed contemptuously round the prettily decorated dining-room.  He
wrinkled his nose in a puzzled way at the dishes offered to him by the
waiter but refused none, devouring the food with a great appetite and
drinking ("swilling" Fyne called it) gallons of ginger beer, which was
procured for him (in stone bottles) at his request.  The difficulty of
keeping up a conversation with that being exhausted Mrs Fyne herself,
who had come to the table armed with adamantine resolution.  The only
memorable thing he said was when, in a pause of gorging himself "with
these French dishes" he deliberately let his eyes roam over the little
tables occupied by parties of diners, and remarked that his wife did for
a moment think of coming down with him, but that he was glad she didn't
do so.  "She wouldn't have been at all happy seeing all this alcohol
about.  Not at all happy," he declared weightily.

"You must have had a charming evening," I said to Fyne, "if I may judge
from the way you have kept the memory green."

"Delightful," he growled with, positively, a flash of anger at the
recollection, but lapsed back into his solemnity at once.  After we had
been silent for a while I asked whether the man took away the girl next
day.

Fyne said that he did; in the afternoon, in a fly, with a few clothes
the maid had got together and brought across from the big house.  He
only saw Flora again ten minutes before they left for the railway
station, in the Fynes' sitting-room at the hotel.  It was a most painful
ten minutes for the Fynes.  The respectable citizen addressed Miss de
Barral as "Florrie" and "my dear," remarking to her that she was not
very big "there's not much of you my dear," in a familiarly disparaging
tone.  Then turning to Mrs Fyne, and quite loud, "She's very white in
the face.  Why's that?"  To this Mrs Fyne made no reply.  She had put
the girl's hair up that morning with her own hands.  It changed her very
much, observed Fyne.  He, naturally, played a subordinate, merely
approving part.  All he could do for Miss de Barral personally was to go
downstairs and put her into the fly himself, while Miss de Barral's
nearest relation, having been shouldered out of the way, stood by, with
an umbrella and a little black bag, watching this proceeding with grim
amusement, as it seemed.  It was difficult to guess what the girl
thought or what she felt.  She no longer looked a child.  She whispered
to Fyne a faint "Thank you," from the fly, and he said to her in very
distinct tones and while still holding her hand: "Pray don't forget to
write fully to my wife in a day or two, Miss de Barral."  Then Fyne
stepped back and the cousin climbed into the fly muttering quite
audibly: "I don't think you'll be troubled much with her in the future;"
without however looking at Fyne on whom he did not even bestow a nod.
The fly drove away.


PART ONE, CHAPTER 5.

THE TEA-PARTY.

"Amiable personality," I observed seeing Fyne on the point of falling
into a brown study.  But I could not help adding with meaning: "He
hadn't the gift of prophecy though."

Fyne got up suddenly with a muttered "No, evidently not."  He was
gloomy, hesitating.  I supposed that he would not wish to play chess
that afternoon.  This would dispense me from leaving my rooms on a day
much too fine to be wasted in walking exercise.  And I was disappointed
when picking up his cap he intimated to me his hope of seeing me at the
cottage about four o'clock--as usual.

"It wouldn't be as usual."  I put a particular stress on that remark.
He admitted, after a short reflection, that it would not be.  No.  Not
as usual.  In fact it was his wife who hoped, rather, for my presence.
She had formed a very favourable opinion of my practical sagacity.

This was the first I ever heard of it.  I had never suspected that Mrs
Fyne had taken the trouble to distinguish in me the signs of sagacity or
folly.  The few words we had exchanged last night in the excitement--or
the bother--of the girl's disappearance, were the first moderately
significant words which had ever passed between us.  I had felt myself
always to be in Mrs Fyne's view her husband's chess-player and nothing
else--a convenience--almost an implement.

"I am highly flattered," I said.  "I have always heard that there are no
limits to feminine intuition; and now I am half inclined to believe it
is so.  But still I fail to see in what way my sagacity, practical or
otherwise, can be of any service to Mrs Fyne.  One man's sagacity is
very much like any other man's sagacity.  And with you at hand--"

Fyne, manifestly not attending to what I was saying, directed straight
at me his worried solemn eyes and struck in:

"Yes, yes.  Very likely.  But you will come--won't you?"

I had made up my mind that no Fyne of either sex would make me walk
three miles (there and back to their cottage) on this fine day.  If the
Fynes had been an average sociable couple one knows only because leisure
must be got through somehow, I would have made short work of that
special invitation.  But they were not that.  Their undeniable humanity
had to be acknowledged.  At the same time I wanted to have my own way.
So I proposed that I should be allowed the pleasure of offering them a
cup of tea at my rooms.

A short reflective pause--and Fyne accepted eagerly in his own and his
wife's name.  A moment after I heard the click of the gate-latch and
then in an ecstasy of barking from his demonstrative dog his serious
head went past my window on the other side of the hedge, its troubled
gaze fixed forward, and the mind inside obviously employed in earnest
speculation of an intricate nature.  One at least of his wife's
girl-friends had become more than a mere shadow for him.  I surmised
however that it was not of the girl-friend but of his wife that Fyne was
thinking.  He was an excellent husband.

I prepared myself for the afternoon's hospitalities, calling in the
farmer's wife and reviewing with her the resources of the house and the
village.  She was a helpful woman.  But the resources of my sagacity I
did not review.  Except in the gross material sense of the afternoon tea
I made _no_ preparations for Mrs Fyne.

It was impossible for me to make any such preparations.  I could not
tell what sort of sustenance she would look for from my sagacity.  And
as to taking stock of the wares of my mind no one I imagine is anxious
to do that sort of thing if it can be avoided.  A vaguely grandiose
state of mental self-confidence is much too agreeable to be disturbed
recklessly by such a delicate investigation.  Perhaps if I had had a
helpful woman at my elbow, a dear, flattering acute, devoted woman...
There are in life moments when one positively regrets not being married.
No!  I don't exaggerate.  I have said--moments, not years or even days.
Moments.  The farmer's wife obviously could not be asked to assist.
She could not have been expected to possess the necessary insight and I
doubt whether she would have known how to be nattering enough.  She was
being helpful in her own way, with an extraordinary black bonnet on her
head, a good mile off by that time, trying to discover in the village
shops a piece of eatable cake.  The pluck of women!  The optimism of the
dear creatures!

And she managed to find something which looked eatable.  That's all I
know as I had no opportunity to observe the more intimate effects of
that comestible.  I myself never eat cake, and Mrs Fyne, when she
arrived punctually, brought with her no appetite for cake.  She had no
appetite for anything.  But she had a thirst--the sign of deep, of
tormenting emotion.  Yes it was emotion, not the brilliant sunshine--
more brilliant than warm as is the way of our discreet self-repressed,
distinguished, insular sun, which would not turn a real lady scarlet--
not on any account.  Mrs Fyne looked even cool.  She wore a white skirt
and coat; a white hat with a large brim reposed on her smoothly arranged
hair.  The coat was cut something like an army mess-jacket and the style
suited her.  I dare say there are many youthful subalterns, and not the
worst-looking too, who resemble Mrs Fyne in the type of face, in the
sunburnt complexion, down to that something alert in bearing.  But not
many would have had that aspect breathing a readiness to assume any
responsibility under Heaven.  This is the sort of courage which ripens
late in life and of course Mrs Fyne was of mature years for all her
unwrinkled face.

She looked round the room, told me positively that I was very
comfortable there; to which I assented, humbly, acknowledging my
undeserved good fortune.

"Why undeserved?" she wanted to know.

"I engaged these rooms by letter without asking any questions.  It might
have been an abominable hole," I explained to her.  "I always do things
like that.  I don't like to be bothered.  This is no great proof of
sagacity--is it?  Sagacious people I believe like to exercise that
faculty.  I have heard that they can't even help showing it in the
veriest trifles.  It must be very delightful.  But I know nothing of it.
I think that I have no sagacity--no practical sagacity."

Fyne made an inarticulate bass murmur of protest.  I asked after the
children whom I had not seen yet since my return from town.  They had
been very well.  They were always well.  Both Fyne and Mrs Fyne spoke
of the rude health of their children as if it were a result of moral
excellence; in a peculiar tone which seemed to imply some contempt for
people whose children were liable to be unwell at times.  One almost
felt inclined to apologise for the inquiry.  And this annoyed me;
unreasonably, I admit, because the assumption of superior merit is not a
very exceptional weakness.  Anxious to make myself disagreeable by way
of retaliation I observed in accents of interested civility that the
dear girls must have been wondering at the sudden disappearance of their
mother's young friend.  Had they been putting any awkward questions
about Miss Smith.  Wasn't it as Miss Smith that Miss de Barral had been
introduced to me?

Mrs Fyne, staring fixedly but also colouring deeper under her tan, told
me that the children had never liked Flora very much.  She hadn't the
high spirits which endear grown-ups to healthy children, Mrs Fyne
explained unflinchingly.  Flora had been staying at the cottage several
times before.  Mrs Fyne assured me that she often found it very
difficult to have her in the house.

"But what else could we do?" she exclaimed.

That little cry of distress quite genuine in its inexpressiveness,
altered my feeling towards Mrs Fyne.  It would have been so easy to
have done nothing and to have thought no more about it.  My liking for
her began while she was trying to tell me of the night she spent by the
girl's bedside, the night before her departure with her unprepossessing
relative.  That Mrs Fyne found means to comfort the child I doubt very
much.  She had not the genius for the task of undoing that which the
hate of an infuriated woman had planned so well.

You will tell me perhaps that children's impressions are not durable.
That's true enough.  But here, child is only a manner of speaking.  The
girl was within a few days of her sixteenth birthday; she was old enough
to be matured by the shock.  The very effort she had to make in
conveying the impression to Mrs Fyne, in remembering the details, in
finding adequate words--or any words at all--was in itself a terribly
enlightening, an ageing process.  She had talked a long time,
uninterrupted by Mrs Fyne, childlike enough in her wonder and pain,
pausing now and then to interject the pitiful query: "It was cruel of
her.  Wasn't it cruel, Mrs Fyne?"

For Charley she found excuses.  He at any rate had not said anything,
while he had looked very gloomy and miserable.  He couldn't have taken
part against his aunt--could he?  But after all he did, when she called
upon him, take "that cruel woman away."  He had dragged her out by the
arm.  She had seen that plainly.  She remembered it.  That was it!  The
woman was mad.  "Oh!  Mrs Fyne, don't tell me she wasn't mad.  If you
had only seen her face..."

But Mrs Fyne was unflinching in her idea that as much truth as could be
told was due in the way of kindness to the girl, whose fate she feared
would be to live exposed to the hardest realities of unprivileged
existences.  She explained to her that there were in the world
evil-minded, selfish people.  Unscrupulous people...  These two persons
had been after her father's money.  The best thing she could do was to
forget all about them.

"After papa's money?  I don't understand," poor Flora de Barral had
murmured, and lay still as if trying to think it out in the silence and
shadows of the room where only a night-light was burning.  Then she had
a long shivering fit while holding tight the hand of Mrs Fyne whose
patient immobility by the bedside of that brutally murdered childhood
did infinite honour to her humanity.  That vigil must have been the more
trying because I could see very well that at no time did she think the
victim particularly charming or sympathetic.  It was a manifestation of
pure compassion, of compassion in itself, so to speak, not many women
would have been capable of displaying with that unflinching steadiness.
The shivering fit over, the girl's next words in an outburst of sobs
were, "Oh!  Mrs Fyne, am I really such a horrid thing as she has made
me out to be?"

"No, no!" protested Mrs Fyne.  "It is your former governess who is
horrid and odious.  She is a vile woman.  I cannot tell you that she was
mad but I think she must have been beside herself with rage and full of
evil thoughts.  You must try not to think of these abominations, my dear
child."

They were not fit for anyone to think of much, Mrs Fyne commented to me
in a curt positive tone.  All that had been very trying.  The girl was
like a creature struggling under a net.

"But how can I forget? she called my father a cheat and a swindler!  Do
tell me Mrs Fyne that it isn't true.  It can't be true.  How can it be
true?"

She sat up in bed with a sudden wild motion as if to jump out and flee
away from the sound of the words which had just passed her own lips.
Mrs Fyne restrained her, soothed her, induced her at last to lay her
head on her pillow again, assuring her all the time that nothing this
woman had had the cruelty to say deserved to be taken to heart.  The
girl, exhausted, cried quietly for a time.  It may be she had noticed
something evasive in Mrs Fyne's assurances.  After a while, without
stirring, she whispered brokenly:

"That awful woman told me that all the world would call papa these awful
names.  Is it possible?  Is it possible?"

Mrs Fyne kept silent.

"Do say something to me, Mrs Fyne," the daughter of de Barral insisted
in the same feeble whisper.

Again Mrs Fyne assured me that it had been very trying.  Terribly
trying.  "Yes, thanks, I will."  She leaned back in the chair with
folded arms while I poured another cup of tea for her, and Fyne went out
to pacify the dog which, tied up under the porch, had become suddenly
very indignant at somebody having the audacity to walk along the lane.
Mrs Fyne stirred her tea for a long time, drank a little, put the cup
down and said with that air of accepting all the consequences:

"Silence would have been unfair.  I don't think it would have been kind
either.  I told her that she must be prepared for the world passing a
very severe judgment on her father..."

"Wasn't it admirable," cried Marlow interrupting his narrative.
"Admirable!"  And as I looked dubiously at this unexpected enthusiasm he
started justifying it after his own manner.

"I say admirable because it was so characteristic.  It was perfect.
Nothing short of genius could have found better.  And this was nature!
As they say of an artist's work: this was a perfect Fyne.  Compassion--
judiciousness--something correctly measured.  None of your dishevelled
sentiment.  And right!  You must confess that nothing could have been
more right.  I had a mind to shout `Brava!  Brava!' but I did not do
that.  I took a piece of cake and went out to bribe the Fyne dog into
some sort of self-control.  His sharp comical yapping was unbearable,
like stabs through one's brain, and Fyne's deeply modulated
remonstrances abashed the vivacious animal no more than the deep,
patient murmur of the sea abashes a nigger minstrel on a popular beach.
Fyne was beginning to swear at him in low, sepulchral tones when I
appeared.  The dog became at once wildly demonstrative, half strangling
himself in his collar, his eyes and tongue hanging out in the excess of
his incomprehensible affection for me.  This was before he caught sight
of the cake in my hand.  A series of vertical springs high up in the air
followed, and then, when he got the cake, he instantly lost his interest
in everything else."

Fyne was slightly vexed with me.  As kind a master as any dog could wish
to have, he yet did not approve of cake being given to dogs.  The Fyne
dog was supposed to lead a Spartan existence on a diet of repulsive
biscuits with an occasional dry, hygienic, bone thrown in.  Fyne looked
down gloomily at the appeased animal, I too looked at that fool-dog; and
(you know how one's memory gets suddenly stimulated) I was reminded
visually, with an almost painful distinctness, of the ghostly white face
of the girl I saw last accompanied by that dog--deserted by that dog.  I
almost heard her distressed voice as if on the verge of resentful tears
calling to the dog, the unsympathetic dog.  Perhaps she had not the
power of evoking sympathy, that personal gift of direct appeal to the
feelings.  I said to Fyne, mistrusting the supine attitude of the dog:

"Why don't you let him come inside?"

Oh dear no!  He couldn't think of it!  I might indeed have saved my
breath, I knew it was one of the Fynes' rules of life, part of their
solemnity and responsibility, one of those things that were part of
their unassertive but ever present superiority, that their dog must not
be allowed in.  It was most improper to intrude the dog into the houses
of the people they were calling on--if it were only a careless bachelor
in farmhouse lodgings and a personal friend of the dog.  It was out of
the question.  But they would let him bark one's sanity away outside
one's window.  They were strangely consistent in their lack of
imaginative sympathy.  I didn't insist but simply led the way back to
the parlour, hoping that no wayfarer would happen along the lane for the
next hour or so to disturb the dog's composure.

Mrs Fyne seated immovable before the table charged with plates, cups,
jugs, a cold teapot, crumbs, and the general litter of the entertainment
turned her head towards us.

"You see, Mr Marlow," she said in an unexpectedly confidential tone:
"they are so utterly unsuited for each other."

At the moment I did not know how to apply this remark.  I thought at
first of Fyne and the dog.  Then I adjusted it to the matter in hand
which was neither more nor less than an elopement.  Yes, by Jove!  It
was something very much like an elopement--with certain unusual
characteristics of its own which made it in a sense equivocal.  With
amused wonder I remembered that my sagacity was requisitioned in such a
connection.  How unexpected!  But we never know what tests our gifts may
be put to.  Sagacity dictated caution first of all.  I believe caution
to be the first duty of sagacity.  Fyne sat down as if preparing himself
to witness a joust, I thought.

"Do you think so, Mrs Fyne?"  I said sagaciously.  "Of course you are
in a position..."  I was continuing with caution when she struck out
vivaciously for immediate assent.

"Obviously! dearly!  You yourself must admit..."

"But, Mrs Fyne," I remonstrated, "you forget that I don't know your
brother."

This argument which was not only sagacious but true, overwhelmingly
true, unanswerably true, seemed to surprise her.

I wondered why.  I did not know enough of her brother for the remotest
guess at what he might be like.  I had never set eyes on the man.  I
didn't know him so completely that by contrast I seemed to have known
Miss de Barral--whom I had seen twice (altogether about sixty minutes)
and with whom I had exchanged about sixty words--from the cradle so to
speak.  And perhaps, I thought, looking down at Mrs Fyne (I had
remained standing) perhaps she thinks that this ought to be enough for a
sagacious assent.

She kept silent; and I looking at her with polite expectation, went on
addressing her mentally in a mood of familiar approval which would have
astonished her had it been audible: "You my dear at any rate are a
sincere woman..."

"I call a woman sincere," Marlow began again after giving me a cigar and
lighting one himself, "I call a woman sincere when she volunteers a
statement resembling remotely in form what she really would like to say,
what she really thinks ought to be said if it were not for the necessity
to spare the stupid sensitiveness of men.  The women's rougher, simpler,
more upright judgment, embraces the whole truth, which their tact, their
mistrust of masculine idealism, ever prevents them from speaking in its
entirety.  And their tact is unerring.  We could not stand women
speaking the truth.  We could not bear it.  It would cause infinite
misery and bring about most awful disturbances in this rather mediocre,
but still idealistic fool's paradise in which each of us lives his own
little life--the unit in the great sum of existence.  And they know it.
They are merciful.  This generalisation does not apply exactly to Mrs
Fyne's outburst of sincerity in a matter in which neither my affections
nor my vanity were engaged.  That's why, may be, she ventured so far.
For a woman she chose to be as open as the day with me.  There was not
only the form but almost the whole substance of her thought in what she
said.  She believed she could risk it.  She had reasoned somewhat in
this way; there's a man, possessing a certain amount of sagacity..."

Marlow paused with a whimsical look at me.  The last few words he had
spoken with the cigar in his teeth.  He took it out now by an ample
movement of his arm and blew a thin cloud.

"You smile?  It would have been more kind to spare my blushes.  But as a
matter of fact I need not blush.  This is not vanity; it is analysis.
We'll let sagacity stand.  But we must also note what sagacity in this
connection stands for.  When you see this you shall see also that there
was nothing in it to alarm my modesty.  I don't think Mrs Fyne credited
me with the possession of wisdom tempered by common sense.  And had I
had the wisdom of the Seven Sages of Antiquity, she would not have been
moved to confidence or admiration.  The secret scorn of women for the
capacity to consider judiciously and to express profoundly a meditated
conclusion is unbounded.  They have no use for these lofty exercises
which they look upon as a sort of purely masculine game--game meaning a
respectable occupation devised to kill time in this man-arranged life
which must be got through somehow.  What women's acuteness really
respects are the inept `ideas' and the sheep-like impulses by which our
actions and opinions are determined in matters of real importance.  For
if women are not rational they are indeed acute.  Even Mrs Fyne was
acute.  The good woman was making up to her husband's chess-player
simply because she had scented in him that small portion of
`femininity,' that drop of superior essence of which I am myself aware;
which, I gratefully acknowledge, has saved me from one or two
misadventures in my life either ridiculous or lamentable, I am not very
certain which.  It matters very little.  Anyhow misadventures.  Observe
that I say `femininity,' a privilege--not `feminism,' an attitude.  I am
not a feminist.  It was Fyne who on certain solemn grounds had adopted
that mental attitude; but it was enough to glance at him sitting on one
side, to see that he was purely masculine to his finger-tips, masculine
solidly, densely, amusingly,--hopelessly."

I did glance at him.  You don't get your sagacity recognised by a man's
wife without feeling the propriety and even the need to glance at the
man now and again.  So I glanced at him.  Very masculine.  So much so
that "hopelessly" was not the last word of it.  He was helpless.  He was
bound and delivered by it.  And if by the obscure promptings of my
composite temperament I beheld him with malicious amusement, yet being
in fact, by definition and especially from profound conviction, a man, I
could not help sympathising with him largely.  Seeing him thus disarmed,
_so_ completely captive by the very nature of things I was moved to
speak to him kindly.

"Well.  And what do you think of it?"

"I don't know.  How's one to tell.  But I say that the thing is done now
and there's an end of it," said the masculine creature as bluntly as his
innate solemnity permitted.

Mrs Fyne moved a little in her chair.  I turned to her and remarked
gently that this was a charge, a criticism, which was often made.  Some
people always ask: What could he see in her?  Others wonder what she
could have seen in him?  Expressions of unsuitability.

She said with all the emphasis of her quietly folded arms:

"I know perfectly well what Flora has seen in my brother."

I bowed my head to the gust but pursued my point.

"And then the marriage in most cases turns out no worse than the
average, to say the least of it."

Mrs Fyne was disappointed by the optimistic turn of my sagacity.  She
rested her eyes on my face as though in doubt whether I had enough
femininity in my composition to understand the case.

I waited for her to speak.  She seemed to be asking herself; Is it after
all, worth while to talk to that man?  You understand how provoking this
was.  I looked in my mind for something appallingly stupid to say, with
the object of distressing and teasing Mrs Fyne.  It is humiliating to
confess a failure.  One would think that a man of average intelligence
could command stupidity at will.  But it isn't so.  I suppose it's a
special gift or else the difficulty consists in being relevant.
Discovering that I could find no really telling stupidity, I turned to
the next best thing; a platitude.  I advanced, in a common sense tone,
that, surely, in the matter of marriage a man had only himself to
please.

Mrs Fyne received this without the flutter of an eyelid.  Fyne's
masculine breast, as might have been expected, was pierced by that old,
regulation shaft.  He grunted most feelingly.  I turned to him with
false simplicity.  "Don't, you agree with me?"

"The very thing I've been telling my wife," he exclaimed in his
extra-manly bass.  "We have been discussing--"

A discussion in the Fyne menage!  How portentous!  Perhaps the very
first difference they had ever had: Mrs Fyne unflinching and ready for
any responsibility, Fyne solemn and shrinking--the children in bed
upstairs; and outside the dark fields, the shadowy contours of the land
on the starry background of the universe, with the crude light of the
open window like a beacon for the truant who would never come back now;
a truant no longer but a downright fugitive.  Yet a fugitive carrying
off spoils.  It was the flight of a raider--or a tractor?  This affair
of the purloined brother, as I had named it to myself, had a very
puzzling physiognomy.  The girl must have been desperate, I thought,
hearing the grave voice of Fyne well enough but catching the sense of
his words not at all, except the very last words which were:

"Of course, it's extremely distressing."

I looked at him inquisitively.  What was distressing him?  The
purloining of the son of the poet-tyrant by the daughter of the
financier-convict.  Or only, if I may say so, the wind of their flight
disturbing the solemn placidity of the Fynes' domestic atmosphere.  My
incertitude did not last long, for he added:

"Mrs Fyne urges me to go to London at once."

One could guess at, almost see, his profound distaste for the journey,
his distress at a difference of feeling with his wife.  With his serious
view of the sublunary comedy Fyne suffered from not being able to agree
solemnly with her sentiment as he was accustomed to do, in recognition
of having had his way in one supreme instance; when he made her elope
with him--the most momentous step imaginable in a young lady's life.  He
had been really trying to acknowledge it by taking the Tightness of her
feeling for granted on every other occasion.  It had become a sort of
habit at last.  And it is never pleasant to break a habit.  The man was
deeply troubled.  I said: "Really!  To go to London!"

He looked dumbly into my eyes.  It was pathetic and funny.  "And you of
course feel it would be useless," I pursued.

He evidently felt that, though he said nothing.  He only went on
blinking at me with a solemn and comical slowness.  "Unless it be to
carry there the family's blessing," I went on, indulging my chaffing
humour steadily, in a rather sneaking fashion, for I dared not look at
Mrs Fyne, to my right.  No sound or movement came from, that direction.
"You think very naturally that to match mere good, sound reasons,
against the passionate conclusions of love is a waste of intellect
bordering on the absurd."

He looked surprised as if I had discovered something very clever.  He,
dear man, had thought of nothing at all.  He simply knew that he did not
want to go to London on that mission.  Mere masculine delicacy.  In a
moment he became enthusiastic.

"Yes!  Yes!  Exactly.  A man in love ...  You hear, my dear?  Here you
have an independent opinion--"

"Can anything be more hopeless," I insisted to the fascinated little
Fyne, "than to pit reason against love.  I must confess however that in
this case when I think of that poor girl's sharp chin I wonder if..."

My levity was too much for Mrs Fyne.  Still leaning back in her chair
she exclaimed:

"Mr Marlow!"

"As if mysteriously affected by her indignation the absurd Fyne dog
began to bark in the porch.  It might have been at a trespassing
bumble-bee however.  That animal was capable of any eccentricity.  Fyne
got up quickly and went out to him.  I think he was glad to leave us
alone to discuss that matter of his journey to London.  A sort of
anti-sentimental journey.  He, too, apparently, had confidence in my
sagacity.  It was touching, this confidence.  It was at any rate more
genuine than the confidence his wife pretended to have in her husband's
chess-player, of three successive holidays.  Confidence be hanged!
Sagacity--indeed!  She had simply marched in without a shadow of
misgiving to make me back her up.  But she had delivered herself into my
hands..."

Interrupting his narrative Marlow addressed me in his tone between grim
jest and grim earnest:

"Perhaps you didn't know that my character is upon the whole rather
vindictive."

"No, I didn't know," I said with a grin.  "That's rather unusual for a
sailor.  They always seemed to me the least vindictive body of men in
the world."

"H'm!  Simple souls," Marlow muttered moodily.  "Want of opportunity.
The world leaves them alone for the most part.  For myself it's towards
women that I feel vindictive mostly, in my small way.  I admit that it
is small.  But then the occasions in themselves are not great.  Mainly.
I resent that pretence of winding us round their dear little fingers, as
of right.  Not that the result ever amounts to much generally.  There
are so very few momentous opportunities.  It is the assumption that each
of us is a combination of a kid and an imbecile which I find provoking--
in a small way; in a very small way.  You needn't stare as though I were
breathing fire and smoke out of my nostrils.  I am not a women-devouring
monster.  I am not even what is technically called `a brute.'  I hope
there's enough of a kid and an imbecile in me to answer the requirements
of some really good woman eventually--some day...  Some day.  Why do you
gasp?  You don't suppose I should be afraid of getting married?  That
supposition would be offensive..."

"I wouldn't dream of offending you," I said.

"Very well.  But meantime please remember that I was not married to Mrs
Fyne.  That lady's little finger was none of my legal property.  I had
not run off with it.  It was Fyne who had done that thing.  Let him be
wound round as much as his backbone could stand--or even more, for all I
cared.  His rushing away from the discussion on the transparent pretence
of quieting the dog confirmed my notion of there being a considerable
strain on his elasticity.  I confronted Mrs Fyne resolved not to assist
her in her eminently feminine occupation of thrusting a stick in the
spokes of another woman's wheel.

"She tried to preserve her calm-eyed superiority.  She was familiar and
olympian, fenced in by the tea-table, that excellent symbol of domestic
life in its lighter hour and its perfect security.  In a few severely
unadorned words she gave me to understand that she had ventured to hope
for some really helpful suggestion from me.  To this almost chiding
declaration--because my vindictiveness seldom goes further than a bit of
teasing--I said that I was really doing my best.  And being a
physiognomist..."

"Being what?" she interrupted me.

"A physiognomist," I repeated raising my voice a little.  "A
physiognomist, Mrs Fyne.  And on the principles of that science a
pointed little chin is a sufficient ground for interference.  You want
to interfere--do you not?"

Her eyes grew distinctly bigger.  She had never been bantered before in
her life.  The late subtle poet's method of making himself unpleasant
was merely savage and abusive.  Fyne had been always solemnly
subservient.  What other men she knew I cannot tell but I assume they
must have been gentlemanly creatures.  The girl-friends sat at her feet.
How could she recognise my intention.  She didn't know what to make of
my tone.

"Are you serious in what you say?" she asked slowly.  And it was
touching.  It was as if a very young, confiding girl had spoken.  I felt
myself relenting.

"No.  I am not, Mrs Fyne," I said.  "I didn't know I was expected to be
serious as well as sagacious.  No.  That science is farcical and
therefore I am not serious.  It's true that most sciences are farcical
except those which teach us how to put things together."

"The question is how to keep these two people apart," she struck in.
She had recovered.  I admired the quickness of women's wit.  Mental
agility is a rare perfection.  And aren't they agile!  Aren't they--
just!  And tenacious!  When they once get hold you may uproot the tree
but you won't shake them off the branch.  In fact the more you shake ...
But only look at the charm of contradictory perfections!  No wonder men
give in--generally.  I won't say I was actually charmed by Mrs Fyne.  I
was not delighted with her.  What affected me was not what she displayed
but something which she could not conceal.  And that was emotion--
nothing less.  The form of her declaration was dry, almost peremptory--
but not its ton.  Her voice faltered just the least bit, she smiled
faintly; and as we were looking straight at each other I observed that
her eye's were glistening in a peculiar manner.  She was distressed.
And indeed that Mrs Fyne should have appealed to me at all was in
itself the evidence of her profound distress.  "By Jove she's desperate
too," I thought.  This discovery was followed by a movement of
instinctive shrinking from this unreasonable and unmasculine affair.
They were all alike, with their supreme interest aroused only by
fighting with each other about some man: a lover, a son, a brother.

"But do you think there's time yet to do anything?"  I asked.

She had an impatient movement of her shoulders without detaching herself
from the back of the chair.  Time!  Of course?  It was less than
forty-eight hours since she had followed him to London.--I am no great
clerk at those matters but I murmured vaguely an allusion to special
licences.  It is really disgraceful."
"True, I am nothing better," replied the prince proudly, "but I was
forced to do it against my will."

And he related all his misadventures at the copper castle, adding
that it was impossible to obtain the fire-bird except in exchange
for Zlato-Nrivak, and that he hoped his majesty would make him a
present of the horse.

"Most willingly," answered the king, "but on one condition, that you
bring me the Maiden with the Golden Locks: she lives in the golden
castle on the shores of the Black Sea."

The fox was waiting in the forest the prince's return, and when he
saw him come back without the horse he was very angry indeed.

"Did I not warn you," said he, "to be content with the black leather
bridle?

It is really a loss of time to try and help such an ungrateful fellow,
for it seems impossible to make you hear reason."
"Don't be cross," said the prince, "I confess that I am in fault; I ought
to have obeyed your orders. But have a little more patience
with me and help me out of this difficulty."
"Very well; but this will certainly be the last time. If you do just
as you are told we may yet repair all that has been spoilt by your
imprudence. Mount your horse and follow--off!"
The fox ran on in front, clearing the road with his bushy tail,
until they reached the shores of the Black Sea.

"That palace yonder," said the fox, "is the residence of the Queen of the
Ocean Kingdom. She has three daughters; it is the youngest who has
the golden hair, and is called Zlato-Vlaska. Now you must first go
to the queen and ask her to give you one of her daughters in marriage.
If she takes kindly to your proposal she will bid you choose, and
mind you take that princess who is the most plainly dressed."

The queen received him most graciously, and when he explained the object
of his visit she led him into a room where the three daughters were
spinning.

They were so much alike that no one could possibly distinguish one
from the other, and they were all so marvellously lovely that when the
young prince looked upon them he dared hardly breathe. Their hair was
carefully covered by a veil through which one could not distinguish
the colour of it, but their dresses were different.

The first wore a gown and veil embroidered with gold, and used a golden
distaff; the second had on a gown embroidered with silver and held a
distaff of the same metal; the third wore a gown and veil of dazzling
whiteness, and her distaff was made of wood.

The mother bade the prince choose, whereupon he pointed to the
maiden clothed in white, saying, "Give me this one to wife."
"Ah," said the queen, "some one has been letting you into the
secret:
but wait a little, we shall meet again to-morrow."
All that night the prince lay awake, wondering how he should manage not
to make a mistake on the morrow. At dawn he was already at the
palace gates, which he had hardly entered when the princess clothed
in white chanced to pass: it was Zlato-Vlaska, and she had come to
meet him.

"If it is your wish to choose me again to-day," she said, "observe
carefully, and take the maiden around whose head buzzes a small fly."

In the afternoon the queen took the prince into a room where her
three daughters sat, and said: "If among these princesses you recognise
the one you chose yesterday she shall be yours; if not, you must die."

The young girls stood side by side, dressed alike in costly robes, and
all had golden hair. The prince was puzzled, and their beauty
and splendour dazzled him. For some time he could hardly see distinctly;
then, all of a sudden, a small fly buzzed over the head of one of the
princesses.

"This is the maiden who belongs to me," cried he, "and whom I chose
yesterday."

The queen, astonished that he should have guessed correctly, said, "Quite
right, but I cannot let you have her until you have submitted to another
trial, which shall be explained to you to-morrow."
On the morrow she pointed out to him a large fish-pond which lay in the
forest, and giving him a small golden sieve, said: "If with this sieve
you can, before sunset, empty that fish-pond yonder, I will give you
my daughter with the golden hair, but if you fail you will lose
your life."
The prince took the sieve, and, going down to the pond, plunged it in to
try his luck; but no sooner had he lifted it up than all the water
ran out through the holes--not a drop was left behind. Not knowing what
to do, he sat down on the bank with the sieve in his hand, wondering
in what possible way the difficulty might be overcome.

"Why are you so sad?" asked the maiden in white, as she came towards
him.

"Because I fear you will never be mine," sighed he; "your mother has
given me an impossible task."
"Come, cheer up, away with fear; it will all be right in the end."

Thereupon she took the sieve and threw it into the fishpond. Instantly
the water turned to foam on the surface, and a thick vapour rose up,
which fell in a fog so dense that nothing could be seen through
it.

Then the prince heard footsteps, and turning round saw his horse
coming towards him, with his bridle down and the red fox at his
side.

"Mount quickly," said the horse, "there is not a moment to lose;
lift the maiden in front of you."
The faithful steed flew like an arrow, and sped rapidly along over the
road that had been recently cleared by the bushy tail of the red fox.
But this time, instead of leading, the red fox followed, his tail
working marvels as he went: it destroyed the bridges, reopened the
ravines, raised high mountains, and in fact put back everything as
it used to be.

[Illustration]
The prince felt very happy as he rode along, holding the Princess with
the Golden Hair, but it saddened him much to think he would have to
give up all thought of marrying her himself, and that within a few
short hours he must leave her with the king of the silver palace:
the nearer he came to it, the more wretched he grew.

The red fox, who noticed this, said: "It appears to me that you do
not want to exchange the lovely Zlato-Vlaska for the Horse with
the Golden Mane: is it not so?

Well, I have helped you so far, I will see what I can do for you now."

And having thus spoken he turned a somersault over the stump of a fallen
tree which lay in the forest: while, to the prince's amazement,
he was immediately transformed into a young girl exactly resembling the
Princess with the Golden Hair.

"Now, leave your real bride in the forest," said the transformed
fox, "and take me with you to offer to the king of the silver palace
in exchange for his horse Zlato-Nrivak. Mount the horse, return here, and
escape with the maid you love; I will manage the rest."
The king of the silver castle received the maiden without the least
suspicion, and handed over in exchange the Horse with the Golden
Mane, over whose back lay the bejewelled bridle.

The prince left at once.

At the palace all were busy preparing the wedding feast, for the
marriage was to take place immediately, and everything was to be
of the most costly description.

Invitations had been out to all the grandees of the land.

Towards the end of the feast, when every one had drunk his fill of wine
and pleasure, the king asked his guests their opinions on the charms of
his bride.

"She is most beautiful," said one, "in fact, it would be impossible for
her to be more lovely; only, it seems to me that her eyes are somewhat
like those of a fox."
The words were hardly out of his mouth when the royal bride vanished,
while in her place sat a red fox, who with one vigorous bound sprang
through the door and disappeared to rejoin the prince, who had
hastened on in front.

With sweeping strokes of his bushy tail he overthrew bridges, reopened
precipices, and heaped up mountains; but it was very hard work for
the poor thing, and he did not come up with the runaways until they
had almost reached the copper castle.

Here they all had a rest, while the red fox turned a somersault and
transformed himself into a horse resembling the one with the golden mane.
Then the prince entered the copper castle and exchanged the transformed
fox for the fire-bird Ohnivak, the king having no suspicions whatever.
The red fox, having thus deceived the monarch, reassumed his own shape
and hurried after the departing prince, whom he did not overtake
until they had reached the banks of the river where they had first
become acquainted.

"Now here you are, prince," said the red fox, "in possession of Ohnivak,
of the lovely Zlato-Vlaska, and of the Horse with the Golden Mane.
Henceforth you can manage without my help, so return to your father's
house in peace and joy; but, take warning, do not stop anywhere on the
way, for if you do some misfortune will overtake you."
With these words the red fox vanished, while the prince continued
his journey unhindered. In his hand he held the golden cage that
contained the fire-bird, and at his side the lovely Zlato-Vlaska rode
the Horse with the Golden Mane; truly, he was the happiest of men.

When he reached the cross roads where he had parted from his brothers,
he hastened to look for the branches they had planted.

His alone had become a spreading tree, theirs were both withered.
Delighted with this proof of divine favour, he felt a strong desire
to rest for a while under the shadow of his own tree; he therefore
dismounted, and assisting the princess to do the same, fastened their
horses to one of the branches and hung up the cage containing Ohnivak on
another:
within a few moments they were all sound asleep.

Meanwhile the two elder brothers arrived at the same place by different
roads, and both with empty hands. There they found their two
branches withered, that of their brother having grown into a splendid
tree. Under the shade of the latter he lay sleeping; by his side was
the Maid with the Golden Locks; the horse, Zlato-Nrivak, was fastened
to a tree, and the fire-bird roosted in his golden cage.

The hearts of the two brothers were filled with envious and wicked
thoughts, and they whispered thus to one another, "Just think what
will become of us--the youngest will receive half of the kingdom during
our father's life and succeed to the throne at his death; why not cut
his throat at once? One of us will take the Maid with the Golden Locks,
the other can carry the bird to our father and keep the Horse with the
Golden Mane; as for the kingdom, we will divide it between us."
After this debate they killed their youngest brother and cut up his
body into small pieces, while they threatened to treat Zlato-Vlaska
in the same way if she attempted to disobey them.

On reaching home they sent the Horse with the Golden Mane to the marble
stables, the cage containing Ohnivak was placed in the room where their
father lay sick, and the princess was allowed a beautiful suite
of apartments and maids of honour to attend her.

When the king, who was much weakened by suffering, had looked at
the bird, he asked after his youngest son.

To which the brothers replied:
"We have not seen or heard anything of him, it is very likely that he
has been killed."
The poor old man was much affected--it seemed, indeed, as if his
last hour had come.

The fire-bird moped and refused to sing; the Horse with the Golden
Mane stood with his head bent down before his manger, and would eat
no food; while Princess Zlato-Vlaska remained as silent as if she
had been born dumb, her beautiful hair was neglected and uncombed,
and she wept--her tears fell fast.

Now as the red fox chanced to pass through the forest he came upon
the mangled body of the youngest brother, and he at once set to
work to put the scattered pieces together, but was unable to restore
them to life.

At that moment a raven, accompanied by two young ones, came hovering
overhead.

The fox crouched behind a bramble bush; and when one of the young birds
alighted upon the body to feed, he seized it and made a pretence
of strangling it.

Upon which the parent bird, full of anxious love and fear, perched
upon a branch close by and croaked as if to say, "Let my poor little
nestling go. I have done you no harm, neither have I worried you; let
him free, and I will take the first opportunity of returning your
kindness."
"Just so," replied the red fox, "for I am greatly in need of some
kindness.

Now if you will fetch me some of the Water of Death, and some of the
Water of Life, from the Red Sea, I will let your nestling go safe and
sound."

The old raven promised to fetch the water, and went off at once.

Within three days he returned, carrying in his beak two small
bottles, one full of the Water of Death, the other of the Water of
Life. When the red fox received them he wished first to try their effect
upon some living creature, so he cut the small raven up, and joining
the pieces together, watered them with the Water of Death.

Instantly they became a living bird, without mark or join anywhere.
This he sprinkled with the Water of Life, upon which the young
raven spread its wings and flew off to its family.

The red fox then performed the same operation on the body of the young
prince, and with the same happy result, for he rose again perfect in
form, and having about him no wound scars.

On coming to life again, all he said was, "Dear me!

What a pleasant sleep I have had."
"I believe you," replied the red fox, "you would have gone on sleeping
for ever if I had not awakened you. And what a foolish young man you
are: did I not particularly order you not to stop anywhere, but
to go straight back to your father's house?"

He then related all that his brothers had done, and having obtained a
peasant's dress for him, led him to the outskirts of the forest, close
to the royal palace, where he left him.

The young prince then entered the palace grounds, unrecognised
by the servants, and on representing that he was in need of
employment, was appointed stable-boy to the royal stables.

Some little time after he heard the grooms lamenting that the Horse with
the Golden Mane would eat no food.

"What a pity it is," said they, "that this splendid steed should starve
to death; he droops his head and will take nothing."
"Give him," said the disguised prince, "some pea-straw; I bet you
anything he will eat that."

"But do you really think so? Why, our rough draught horses would refuse
such coarse food."

The prince's only answer was to fetch a bundle of pea-straw, which
he put into Zlato-Nrivak's marble trough: then, passing his hand
gently over his neck and mane, he said to him, "Grieve no more, my
horse with the golden mane."

The beautiful creature recognised his master's voice, and neighing
with joy, greedily devoured the pea-straw.

The news was noised about from one end of the palace to the other, and the
sick king summoned the boy to his presence.

"I hear you have made Zlato-Nrivak eat," said his majesty; "do you
think you could make my fire-bird sing?

Go and examine him closely: he is very sad, he droops his wings, and
will neither eat nor drink.

Ah me! if he dies I shall certainly die too."
"Your majesty may rest assured, the bird will not die. Let him have some
husks of barley to eat, then he will soon be all right and begin to
sing."

The king ordered them to be brought, and the disguised prince put
a handful into Ohnivak's cage, saying, "Cheer up, my fire-bird."

[Illustration]
As soon as Ohnivak heard his master's voice he shook himself, and
made his feathers shine with more than their usual brightness.

Then he began to dance about his cage, and pecking up the husks, sang
so exquisitely that the king immediately felt better, and it was as if
a great weight had been lifted off his heart. The fire-bird again
burst into song, and this so affected the king that he sat up quite
well, and embraced the disguised prince out of very gratitude.

"Now," said he, "teach me how to restore to health this beautiful
maiden with the golden hair whom my sons brought back with them;
for she will not speak a word, her beautiful hair remains uncared
for, and her tears fall night and day."

"If your majesty will allow me to speak a few words to her, it may be the
means of making her bright and happy."
The king himself led the way to her apartments, and the disguised prince,
taking her hand, said: "Look up a moment, sweetheart; why these
tears?

And why grieve thus, dear bride?"

The maiden knew him at once, and with a cry of joy threw herself
into his arms.

This astonished the king mightily, and he could not for the life of him
think how a stable-boy dare address such a princess as his "dear
bride."

The prince then addressed the king thus: "And are you indeed the only one
who does not know me? How is it, my father and sovereign, that
you have not recognised your youngest son? I alone have succeeded in
obtaining the Fire-Bird, the Horse with the Golden Mane, and the Maid
with the Golden Hair."
Thereupon he related all his adventures, and Zlato-Vlaska in her
turn told how the wicked brothers had threatened to kill her if
she betrayed them.

As for these bad men, they shook from head to foot, and trembled like
leaves in the wind. The indignant king ordered them to be executed then
and there.

Not very long after these events the youngest prince married the
beautiful Zlato-Vlaska, and the king gave him half of his kingdom
as a wedding present. When the old king died he reigned in his stead,
and lived happily with the princess ever after.

TEARS OF PEARLS

[Illustration]
TEARS OF PEARLS

Once upon a time there lived a very rich widow, with whom lived three
children--a handsome stepson; his sister, who was marvellously beautiful;
and her own daughter, passably good-looking.

All three children lived under the same roof, but, as is often the
case where there are step-parents, they were treated very differently.

The lady's own daughter was bad-tempered, disobedient, vain, and of a
tell-tale disposition: yet she was made much of, praised, and caressed.
The step-children were treated very harshly: the boy, kind-hearted and
obliging, was made to do all sorts of hard unpleasant work, was constantly
scolded, and looked upon as a good-for-nothing.
The step-daughter, who was not only exceedingly pretty but was as
sweet as an angel, was found fault with on all occasions, and her life
made utterly miserable.

It is, after all, but natural to love one's own children better than
those of others, but the feeling of love should be governed by the laws
of fairness. Now this wicked woman was blind to the faults of the
child she loved, and to the good qualities of her husband's children,
whom she hated.

When in a bad temper she was fond of boasting of the handsome fortune
she intended securing for her own daughter, even though the step-children
should be unprovided for. But, as the old proverb says, "Man proposes,
but God disposes." We shall therefore see how things turned out.

One Sunday morning, before going to church, the step-daughter went into
the garden to pick some flowers for decorating the altar. She had only
gathered a few roses when, looking up, she saw quite close to her
three young men robed in dazzling white garments. They sat on a
bench shaded by shrubs, while near them was an old man who asked her
for alms.

She felt rather nervous before the strangers, but when she saw the
old man she took her last penny from her purse and gave it him. He
thanked her, and raising his hand over the girl's head, said to the
men: "This orphan girl is pious, patient under misfortune, and kind
to the poor, with whom she shares the little she has.

Tell me what you wish for her."
The first said, "I wish that when she weeps her tears may be changed
into so many pearls."

"And I," replied the second, "that when she smiles sweet roses may fall
from her lips."
"My wish," said the third, "is that whenever she dips her hands into
water there shall appear in it shining gold-fish."
"All these gifts shall be hers," added the old man. And with these words
they vanished.

The maiden was filled with awe, and fell on her knees in prayer.

Then her heart was filled with joy and peace, and she went back into
the house. She had scarcely crossed the threshold when her stepmother
came forward, and looking at her sternly, said, "Well, where have
you been?"

The poor child began to cry, when--marvel of marvels--instead of tears,
pearls fell from her eyes.

Notwithstanding her rage, the stepmother picked them up as quickly
as possible, while the girl smiled as she watched her.

And as she smiled roses fell from her lips, and her stepmother was beside
herself with delight.

The girl then went to put the flowers she had gathered in water;
and as she dipped her fingers in it while arranging them, pretty
little gold-fish appeared in the bowl.

From that day these marvels were constantly occurring; the tears were
changed into pearls, the smiles scattered roses, and the water,
even if she dipped but the tips of her fingers in, was filled with
gold-fish.

The stepmother softened and became more gentle, while little by
little she managed to draw from her step-child the secret of these
gifts.

So next Sunday morning she sent her own daughter into the garden to
gather flowers, under pretence of their being for the altar. When she
had picked a few, she raised her eyes and saw the three young men
sitting on a low seat, while near them stood the little old man
with white hair, begging for alms. She pretended to be shy before the
young men, but at the beggar's request drew from her pocket a gold piece,
and gave it him, evidently much against her will. He put it in his
pocket, and turning to his companions, said: "This girl is the
spoilt child of her mother; she is bad-tempered and naughty, while
her heart is hardened against the poor.

It is easy to understand why, for the first time in her life, she
has been so generous to-day. Tell me what gifts you would wish me
to bestow upon her."
The first said, "May her tears be changed into lizards."
"And her smile produce hideous toads," added the second.
"And when her hands touch the water may it be filled with serpents,"
said the third.
"So let it be," cried the old man. And they all vanished.
The poor girl was terrified, and went back to tell her mother what
had happened. And it was even so; for if she smiled hideous toads
fell from her mouth, her tears were changed into lizards, and the
water in which she dipped but the tips of her fingers was filled
with serpents.
The stepmother was in despair, but she only loved her child the
more, and hated the orphans with a yet more bitter hatred. Indeed,
she worried them to such an extent that the boy determined to put
up with it no longer, but to seek his fortune elsewhere. So he tied
up his belongings in a handkerchief, took a loving farewell of his
sister, commending her to God's care, and left his home. The great
world lay before him, but which path to take he knew not. Turning
to the cemetery where his parents lay side by side, he wept and
prayed, kissed the earth that covered them three times, and set off
on his travels.The scene was the
dining-room--breakfast interrupted, dishes growing cold, little Fyne's
toast growing leathery, Fyne out of his chair with his back to the fire,
the newspaper on the carpet, servants shut out, Mrs Fyne rigid in her
place with the girl sitting beside her--the "odious person," who had
bustled in with hardly a greeting, looking from Fyne to Mrs Fyne as
though he were inwardly amused at something he knew of them; and then
beginning ironically his discourse.  He did not apologise for disturbing
Fyne and his "good lady" at breakfast, because he knew they did not want
(with a nod at the girl) to have more of her than could be helped.  He
came the first possible moment because he had his business to attend to.
He wasn't drawing a tip-top salary (this staring at Fyne) in a
luxuriously furnished office.  Not he.  He had risen to be an employer
of labour and was bound to give a good example.

I believe the fellow was aware of, and enjoyed quietly, the
consternation his presence brought to the bosom of Mr and Mrs Fyne.
He turned briskly to the girl.  Mrs Fyne confessed to me that they had
remained all three silent and inanimate.  He turned to the girl: "What's
this game, Florrie?  You had better give it up.  If you expect me to run
all over London looking for you every time you happen to have a tiff
with your auntie and cousins you are mistaken.  I can't afford it."

Tiff--was the sort of definition to take one's breath away, having
regard to the fact that both the word convict and the word pauper had
been used a moment before Flora de Barral ran away from the quarrel
about the lace trimmings.  Yes, these very words!  So at least the girl
had told Mrs Fyne the evening before.  The word tiff in connection with
her tale had a peculiar savour, a paralysing effect.  Nobody made a
sound.  The relative of de Barral proceeded uninterrupted to a display
of magnanimity.  "Auntie told me to tell you she's sorry--there!  And
Amelia (the romping sister) shan't worry you again.  I'll see to that.
You ought to be satisfied.  Remember your position."

Emboldened by the utter stillness pervading the room he addressed
himself to Mrs Fyne with stolid effrontery:

"What I say is that people should be good-natured.  She can't stand
being chaffed.  She puts on her grand airs.  She won't take a bit of a
joke from people as good as herself anyway.  We are a plain lot.  We
don't like it.  And that's how trouble begins."

Insensible to the stony stare of three pairs of eyes, which, if the
stories of our childhood as to the power of the human eye are true,
ought to have been enough to daunt a tiger, that unabashed manufacturer
from the East-End fastened his fangs, figuratively speaking, into the
poor girl and prepared to drag her away for a prey to his cubs of both
sexes.  "Auntie has thought of sending you your hat and coat.  I've, got
them outside in the cab."

Mrs Fyne looked mechanically out of the window.  A four-wheeler stood
before the gate under the weeping sky.  The driver in his conical cape
and tarpaulin hat, streamed with water.  The drooping horse looked as
though it had been fished out, half unconscious, from a pond.  Mrs Fyne
found some relief in looking at that miserable sight, away from the room
in which the voice of the amiable visitor resounded with a vulgar
intonation exhorting the strayed sheep to return to the delightful fold.
"Come, Florrie, make a move.  I can't wait on you all day here."

Mrs Fyne heard all this without turning her head away from the window.
Fyne on the hearthrug had to listen and to look on too.  I shall not try
to form a surmise as to the real nature of the suspense.  Their very
goodness must have made it very anxious.  The girl's hands were lying in
her lap; her head was lowered as if in deep thought; and the other went
on delivering a sort of homily.  Ingratitude was condemned in it, the
sinfulness of pride was pointed out--together with the proverbial fact
that it "goes before a fall."  There were also some sound remarks as to
the danger of nonsensical notions and the disadvantages of a quick
temper.  It sets one's best friends against one.  "And if anybody ever
wanted friends in the world it's you, my girl."  Even respect for
parental authority was invoked.  "In the first hour of his trouble your
father wrote to me to take care of you--don't forget it.  Yes, to me,
just a plain man, rather than to any of his fine West-End friends.  You
can't get over that.  And a father's a father no matter what a mess he's
got himself into.  You ain't going to throw over your own father--are
you?"

It was difficult to say whether he was more absurd than cruel or more
cruel than absurd.  Mrs Fyne, with the fine ear of a woman, seemed to
detect a jeering intention in his meanly unctuous tone, something more
vile than mere cruelty.  She glanced quickly over her shoulder and saw
the girl raise her two hands to her head, then let them fall again on
her lap.  Fyne in front of the fire was like the victim of an unholy
spell--bereft of motion and speech but obviously in pain.  It was a
short pause of perfect silence, and then that "odious creature" (he must
have been really a remarkable individual in his way) struck out into
sarcasm.

"Well?..."  Again a silence.  "If you have fixed it up with the lady and
gentleman present here for your board and lodging you had better say so.
I don't want to interfere in a bargain I know nothing of.  But I wonder
how your father will take it when he comes out--or don't you expect him
ever to come out?"

At that moment, Mrs Fyne told me she met the girl's eyes.  There was
that in them which made her shut her own.  She also felt as though she
would have liked to put her fingers in her ears.  She restrained
herself, however; and the "plain man" passed in his appalling
versatility from sarcasm to veiled menace.

"You have--eh?  Well and good.  But before I go home let me ask you, my
girl, to think if by any chance you throwing us over like this won't be
rather bad for your father later on?  Just think it over."

He looked at his victim with an air of cunning mystery.  She jumped up
so suddenly that he started back.  Mrs Fyne rose too, and even the
spell was removed from her husband.  But the girl dropped again into the
chair and turned her head to look at Mrs Fyne.  This time it was no
accidental meeting of fugitive glances.  It was a deliberate
communication.  To my question as to its nature Mrs Fyne said she did
not know.  "Was it appealing?"  I suggested.  "No," she said.  "Was it
frightened, angry, crushed, resigned?"

"No!  No!  Nothing of these."  But it had frightened her.  She
remembered it to this day.  She had been ever since fancying she could
detect the lingering reflection of that look in all the girl's glances.
In the attentive, in the casual--even in the grateful glances--in the
expression of the softest moods.

"Has she her soft moods, then?"  I asked with interest.

Mrs Fyne, much moved by her recollections, heeded not my inquiry.  All
her mental energy was concentrated on the nature of that memorable
glance.  The general tradition of mankind teaches us that glances occupy
a considerable place in the self-expression of women.  Mrs Fyne was
trying honestly to give me some idea, as much perhaps to satisfy her own
uneasiness as my curiosity.  She was frowning in the effort as you see
sometimes a child do (what is delightful in women is that they so often
resemble intelligent children--I mean the crustiest, the sourest, the
most battered of them do--at times).  She was frowning, I say, and I was
beginning to smile faintly at her when all at once she came out with
something totally unexpected.

"It was horribly merry," she said.

I suppose she must have been satisfied by my sudden gravity because she
looked at me in a friendly manner.

"Yes, Mrs Fyne," I said, smiling no longer.  "I see.  It would have
been horrible even on the stage."

"Ah!" she interrupted me--and I really believe her change of attitude
back to folded arms was meant to check a shudder.  "But it wasn't on the
stage, and it was not with her lips that she laughed."

"Yes.  It must have been horrible," I assented.  "And then she had to go
away ultimately--I suppose.  You didn't say anything?"

"No," said Mrs Fyne.  "I rang the bell and told one of the maids to go
and bring the hat and coat out of the cab.  And then we waited."

I don't think that there ever was such waiting unless possibly in a jail
at some moment or other on the morning of an execution.  The servant
appeared with the hat and coat, and then, still as on the morning of an
execution, when the condemned, I believe, is offered a breakfast, Mrs
Fyne, anxious that the white-faced girl should swallow something warm
(if she could) before leaving her house for an interminable drive
through raw cold air in a damp four-wheeler--Mrs Fyne broke the awful
silence: "You really must try to eat something," in her best resolute
manner.  She turned to the "odious person" with the same determination.
"Perhaps you will sit down and have a cup of coffee, too."

The worthy "employer of labour" sat down.  He might have been awed by
Mrs Fyne's peremptory manner--for she did not think of conciliating him
then.  He sat down, provisionally, like a man who finds himself much
against his will in doubtful company.  He accepted ungraciously the cup
handed to him by Mrs Fyne, took an unwilling sip or two and put it down
as if there were some moral contamination in the coffee of these
"swells."  Between whiles he directed mysteriously inexpressive glances
at little Fyne, who, I gather, had no breakfast that morning at all.
Neither had the girl.  She never moved her hands from her lap till her
appointed guardian got up, leaving his cup half full.

"Well.  If you don't mean to take advantage of this lady's kind offer I
may just as well take you home at once.  I want to begin my day--I do."

After a few more dumb, leaden-footed minutes while Flora was putting on
her hat and jacket, the Fynes without moving, without saying anything,
saw these two leave the room.

"She never looked back at us," said Mrs Fyne.  "She just followed him
out.  I've never had such a crushing impression of the miserable
dependence of girls--of women.  This was an extreme case.  But a young
man--any man--could have gone to break stones on the roads or something
of that kind--or enlisted--or--"

It was very true.  Women can't go forth on the high roads and by-ways to
pick up a living even when dignity, independence, or existence itself
are at stake.  But what made me interrupt Mrs Fyne's tirade was my
profound surprise at the fact of that respectable citizen being so
willing to keep in his home the poor girl for whom it seemed there was
no place in the world.  And not only willing but anxious.  I couldn't
credit him with generous impulses.  For it seemed obvious to me from
what I had learned that, to put it mildly, he was not an impulsive
person.

"I confess that I can't understand his motive," I exclaimed.

"This is exactly what John wondered at, at first," said Mrs Fyne.  By
that time an intimacy--if not exactly confidence--had sprung up between
us which permitted her in this discussion to refer to her husband as
John.  "You know he had not opened his lips all that time," she pursued.
"I don't blame his restraint.  On the contrary.  What could he have
said?  I could see he was observing the man very thoughtfully."

"And so, Mr Fyne listened, observed and meditated," I said.  "That's an
excellent way of coming to a conclusion.  And may I ask at what
conclusion he had managed to arrive?  On what ground did he cease to
wonder at the inexplicable?  For I can't admit humanity to be the
explanation.  It would be too monstrous."

It was nothing of the sort, Mrs Fyne assured me with some resentment,
as though I had aspersed little Fyne's sanity.  Fyne very sensibly had
set himself the mental task of discovering the self-interest.  I should
not have thought him capable of so much cynicism.  He said to himself
that for people of that sort (religious fears or the vanity of
righteousness put aside) money--not great wealth, but, money, just a
little money--is the measure of virtue, of expediency, of wisdom--of
pretty well everything.  But the girl was absolutely destitute.  The
father was in prison after the most terribly complete and disgraceful
smash of modern times.  And then it dawned upon Fyne that this was just
it.  The great smash, in the great dust of vanishing millions!  Was it
possible that they all had vanished to the last penny?  Wasn't there,
somewhere, something palpable; some fragment of the fabric left?

"That's it," had exclaimed Fyne, startling his wife by this explosive
unsealing of his lips less than half an hour after the departure of de
Barral's cousin with de Barral's daughter.  It was still in the
dining-room, very near the time for him to go forth affronting the
elements in order to put in another day's work in his country's service.
All he could say at the moment in elucidation of this breakdown from
his usual placid solemnity was:

"The fellow imagines that de Barral has got some plunder put away
somewhere."

This being the theory arrived at by Fyne, his comment on it was that a
good many bankrupts had been known to have taken such a precaution.  It
was possible in de Barral's case.  Fyne went so far in his display of
cynical pessimism as to say that it was extremely probable.

He explained at length to Mrs Fyne that de Barral certainly did not
take anyone into his confidence.  But the beastly relative had made up
his low mind that it was so.  He was selfish and pitiless in his
stupidity, but he had clearly conceived the notion of making a claim on
de Barral when de Barral came out of prison on the strength of having
"looked after" (as he would have himself expressed it) his daughter.  He
nursed his hopes, such as they were, in secret, and it is to be supposed
kept them even from his wife.

I could see it very well.  That belief accounted for his mysterious air
while he interfered in favour of the girl.  He was the only protector
she had.  It was as though Flora had been fated to be always surrounded
by treachery and lies stifling every better impulse, every instinctive
aspiration of her soul to trust and to love.  It would have been enough
to drive a fine nature into the madness of universal suspicion--into any
sort of madness.  I don't know how far a sense of humour will stand by
one.  To the foot of the gallows, perhaps.  But from my recollection of
Flora de Barral I feared that she hadn't much sense of humour.  She had
cried at the desertion of the absurd Fyne dog.  That animal was
certainly free from duplicity.  He was frank and simple and ridiculous.
The indignation of the girl at his unhypocritical behaviour had been
funny but not humorous.

As you may imagine I was not very anxious to resume the discussion on
the justice, expediency, effectiveness or what not, of Fyne's journey to
London.  It isn't that I was unfaithful to little Fyne out in the porch
with the dog.  (They kept amazingly quiet there.  Could they have gone
to sleep?)  What I felt was that either my sagacity or my conscience
would come out damaged from that campaign.  And no man will willingly
put himself in the way of moral damage.  I did not want a war with Mrs
Fyne.  I much preferred to hear something more of the girl.  I said:

"And so she went away with that respectable ruffian."  Mrs Fyne moved
her shoulders slightly--"What else could she have done?"  I agreed with
her by another hopeless gesture.  It isn't so easy for a girl like Flora
de Barral to become a factory hand, a pathetic seamstress or even a
barmaid.  She wouldn't have known how to begin.  She was the captive of
the meanest conceivable fate.  And she wasn't mean enough for it.  It is
to be remarked that a good many people are born curiously unfitted for
the fate awaiting them on this earth.  As I don't want you to think that
I am unduly partial to the girl we shall say that she failed decidedly
to endear herself to that simple, virtuous and, I believe, teetotal
household.  It's my conviction that an angel would have failed likewise.
It's no use going into details; suffice it to state that before the
year was out she was again at the Fynes' door.  This time she was
escorted by a stout youth.  His large pale face wore a smile of inane
cunning soured by annoyance.  His clothes were new and the indescribable
smartness of their cut, a _genre_ which had never been obtruded on her
notice before, astonished Mrs Fyne, who came out into the hall with her
hat on; for she was about to go out to hear a new pianist (a girl) in a
friend's house.  The youth addressing Mrs Fyne easily begged her not to
let "that silly thing go back to us any more."  There had been, he said,
nothing but "ructions" at home about her for the last three weeks.
Everybody in the family was heartily sick of quarrelling.  His governor
had charged him to bring her to this address and say that the lady and
gentleman were quite welcome to all there was in it.  She hadn't enough
sense to appreciate a plain, honest English home and she was better out
of it.

The young, pimply-faced fellow was vexed by this job his governor had
sprung on him.  It was the cause of his missing an appointment for that
afternoon with a certain young lady.  The lady he was engaged to.  But
he meant to dash back and try for a sight of her that evening yet "if he
were to burst over it."

"Good-bye, Florrie.  Good luck to you--and I hope I'll never see your
face again."

With that he ran out in lover-like haste leaving the hall-door wide
open.  Mrs Fyne had not found a word to say.  She had been too much
taken aback even to gasp freely.  But she had the presence of mind to
grab the girl's arm just as she, too, was running out into the street--
with the haste, I suppose, of despair and to keep I don't know what
tragic tryst.

"You stopped her with your own hand, Mrs Fyne," I said.  "I presume she
meant to get away.  That girl is no comedian--if I am any judge."

"Yes!  I had to use some force to drag her in."

Mrs Fyne had no difficulty in stating the truth.  "You see I was in the
very act of letting myself out when these two appeared.  So that, when
that unpleasant young man ran off, I found myself alone with Flora.  It
was all I could do to hold her in the hall while I called to the
servants to come and shut the door."

As is my habit, or my weakness, or my gift, I don't know which, I
visualised the story for myself.  I really can't help it.  And the
vision of Mrs Fyne dressed for a rather special afternoon function,
engaged in wrestling with a wild-eyed, white-faced girl had a certain
dramatic fascination.

"Really!"  I murmured.

"Oh!  There's no doubt that she struggled," said Mrs Fyne.  She
compressed her lips for a moment and then added: "As to her being a
comedian that's another question."

Mrs Fyne had returned to her attitude of folded arms.  I saw before me
the daughter of the refined poet accepting life whole with its
unavoidable conditions of which one of the first is the instinct of
self-preservation and the egoism of every living creature.  "The fact
remains nevertheless that you--yourself--have, in your own words, pulled
her in," I insisted in a jocular tone, with a serious intention.

"What was one to do," exclaimed Mrs Fyne with almost comic
exasperation.  "Are you reproaching me with being too impulsive?"

And she went on telling me that she was not that in the least.  One of
the recommendations she always insisted on (to the girl-friends, I
imagine) was to be on guard against impulse.  Always!  But I had not
been there to see the face of Flora at the time.  If I had it would be
haunting me to this day.  Nobody unless made of iron would have allowed
a human being with a face like that to rush out alone into the streets.

"And doesn't it haunt you, Mrs Fyne?"  I asked.

"No, not now," she said implacably.  "Perhaps if I had let her go it
might have done...  Don't conclude, though, that I think she was playing
a comedy then, because after struggling at first she ended by remaining.
She gave up very suddenly.  She collapsed in our arms, mine and the
maid's who came running up in response to my calls, and..."

"And the door was then shut," I completed the phrase in my own way.

"Yes, the door was shut," Mrs Fyne lowered and raised her head slowly.

I did not ask her for details.  Of one thing I am certain, and that is
that Mrs Fyne did not go out to the musical function that afternoon.
She was no doubt considerably annoyed at missing the privilege of
hearing privately an interesting young pianist (a girl) who, since, had
become one of the recognised performers.  Mrs Fyne did not dare leave
her house.  As to the feelings of little Fyne when he came home from the
office, via his club, just half an hour before dinner, I have no
information.  But I venture to affirm that in the main they were kindly,
though it is quite possible that in the first moment of surprise he had
to keep down a swear-word or two.

The long and the short of it all is that next day the Fynes made up
their minds to take into their confidence a certain wealthy old lady.
With certain old ladies the passing years bring back a sort of mellowed
youthfulness of feeling, an optimistic outlook, liking for novelty,
readiness for experiment.  The old lady was very much interested: "Do
let me see the poor thing!"  She was accordingly allowed to see Flora de
Barral in Mrs Fyne's drawing-room on a day when there was no one else
there, and she preached to her with charming, sympathetic authority:
"The only way to deal with our troubles, my dear child, is to forget
them.  You must forget yours.  It's very simple.  Look at me.  I always
forget mine.  At your age one ought to be cheerful."

Later on when left alone with Mrs Fyne she said to that lady: "I do
hope the child will manage to be cheerful.  I can't have sad faces near
me.  At my age one needs cheerful companions."

And in this hope she carried off Flora de Barral to Bournemouth for the
winter months in the quality of reader and companion.  She had said to
her with kindly jocularity: "We shall have a good time together.  I am
not a grumpy old woman."  But on their return to London she sought Mrs
Fyne at once.  She had discovered that Flora was not naturally cheerful.
When she made efforts to be it was still worse.  The old lady couldn't
stand the strain of that.  And then, to have the whole thing out, she
could not bear to have for a companion anyone who did not love her.  She
was certain that Flora did not love her.  Why?  She couldn't say.
Moreover, she had caught the girl looking at her in a peculiar way at
times.  Oh no!--it was not an evil look--it was an unusual expression
which one could not understand.  And when one remembered that her father
was in prison shut up together with a lot of criminals and so on--it
made one uncomfortable.  If the child had only tried to forget her
troubles!  But she obviously was incapable or unwilling to do so.  And
that was somewhat perverse--wasn't it?  Upon the whole, she thought it
would be better perhaps--

Mrs Fyne assented hurriedly to the unspoken conclusion: "Oh certainly!
Certainly," wondering to herself what was to be done with Flora next;
but she was not very much surprised at the change in the old lady's view
of Flora de Barral.  She almost understood it.

What came next was a German family, the continental acquaintances of the
wife of one of Fyne's colleagues in the Home Office.  Flora of the
enigmatical glances was dispatched to them without much reflection.  As
it was not considered absolutely necessary to take them into full
confidence, they neither expected the girl to be specially cheerful nor
were they discomposed unduly by the indescribable quality of her
glances.  The German woman was quite ordinary; there were two boys to
look after; they were ordinary, too, I presume; and Flora, I understand,
was very attentive to them.  If she taught them anything it must have
been by inspiration alone, for she certainly knew nothing of teaching.
But it was mostly "conversation" which was demanded from her.  Flora de
Barral conversing with two small German boys, regularly, industriously,
conscientiously, in order to keep herself alive in the world which held
for her the past we know and the future of an even more undesirable
quality--seems to me a very fantastic combination.  But I believe it was
not so bad.  She was being, she wrote, mercifully drugged by her task.
She had learned to "converse" all day long, mechanically, absently, as
if in a trance.  An uneasy trance it must have been!  Her worst moments
were when off duty--alone in the evening, shut up in her own little
room, her dulled thoughts waking up slowly till she started into the
full consciousness of her position, like a person waking up in contact
with something venomous--a snake, for instance--experiencing a mad
impulse to fling the thing away and run off screaming to hide somewhere.

At this period of her existence Flora de Barral used to write to Mrs
Fyne not regularly but fairly often.  I don't know how long she would
have gone on "conversing" and, incidentally, helping to supervise the
beautifully stocked linen closets of that well-to-do German household,
if the man of it had not developed in the intervals of his avocations
(he was a merchant and a thoroughly domesticated character) a
psychological resemblance to the Bournemouth old lady.  It appeared that
he, too, wanted to be loved.

He was not, however, of a conquering temperament--a kiss-snatching,
door-bursting type of libertine.  In the very act of straying from the
path of virtue he remained a respectable merchant.  It would have been
perhaps better for Flora if he had been a mere brute.  But he set about
his sinister enterprise in a sentimental, cautious, almost paternal
manner; and thought he would be safe with a pretty orphan.  The girl for
all her experience was still too innocent, and indeed not yet
sufficiently aware of herself as a woman, to mistrust these masked
approaches.  She did not see them, in fact.  She thought him
sympathetic--the first expressively sympathetic person she had ever met.
She was so innocent that she could not understand the fury of the
German woman.  For, as you may imagine, the wifely penetration was not
to be deceived for any great length of time--the more so that the wife
was older than the husband.  The man with the peculiar cowardice of
respectability never said a word in Flora's defence.  He stood by and
heard her reviled in the most abusive terms, only nodding and frowning
vaguely from time to time.  It will give you the idea of the girl's
innocence when I say that at first she actually thought this storm of
indignant reproaches was caused by the discovery of her real name and
her relation to a convict.  She had been sent out under an assumed
name--a highly recommended orphan of honourable parentage.  Her
distress, her burning cheeks, her endeavours to express her regret for
this deception were taken for a confession of guilt.  "You attempted to
bring dishonour to my home," the German woman screamed at her.

Here's a misunderstanding for you!  Flora de Barral, who felt the shame
but did not believe in the guilt of her father, retorted fiercely,
"Nevertheless I am as honourable as you are."  And then the German woman
nearly went into a fit from rage.  "I shall have you thrown out into the
street."

Flora was not exactly thrown out into the street, I believe, but she was
bundled bag and baggage on board a steamer for London.  Did I tell you
these people lived in Hamburg?  Well yes--sent to the docks late on a
rainy winter evening in charge of some sneering lackey or other who
behaved to her insolently and left her on deck burning with indignation,
her hair half down, shaking with excitement and, truth to say, scared as
near as possible into hysterics.  If it had not been for the stewardess
who, without asking questions, good soul, took charge of her quietly in
the ladies' saloon (luckily it was empty) it is by no means certain she
would ever have reached England.  I can't tell if a straw ever saved a
drowning man, but I know that a mere glance is enough to make despair
pause.  For in truth we who are creatures of impulse are not creatures
of despair.  Suicide, I suspect, is very often the outcome of mere
mental weariness--not an act of savage energy but the final symptom of
complete collapse.  The quiet, matter-of-fact attentions of a ship's
stewardess, who did not seem aware of other human agonies than
seasickness, who talked of the probable weather of the passage--it would
be a rough night, she thought--and who insisted in a professionally busy
manner, "Let me make you comfortable down below at once, miss," as
though she were thinking of nothing else but her tip--was enough to
dissipate the shades of death gathering round the mortal weariness of
bewildered thinking which makes the idea of non-existence welcome so
often to the young.  Flora de Barral did lie down, and it may be
presumed she slept.  At any rate she survived the voyage across the
North Sea and told Mrs Fyne all about it, concealing nothing and
receiving no rebuke--for Mrs Fyne's opinions had a large freedom in
their pedantry.  She held, I suppose, that a woman holds an absolute
right--or possesses a perfect excuse--to escape in her own way from a
man-mismanaged world.

What is to be noted is that even in London, having had time to take a
reflective view, poor Flora was far from being certain as to the true
inwardness of her violent dismissal.  She felt the humiliation of it
with an almost maddened resentment.

"And did you enlighten her on the point?"  I ventured to ask.

Mrs Fyne moved her shoulders with a philosophical acceptance of all the
necessities which ought not to be.  Something had to be said, she
murmured.  She had told the girl enough to make her come to the right
conclusion by herself.

"And she did?"

"Yes.  Of course.  She isn't a goose," retorted Mrs Fyne tartly.

"Then her education is completed," I remarked with some bitterness.
"Don't you think she ought to be given a chance?"

Mrs Fyne understood my meaning.

"Not this one," she snapped in a quite feminine way.  "It's all very
well for you to plead, but I--"

"I do not plead.  I simply asked.  It seemed natural to ask what you
thought."

"It's what I feel that matters.  And I can't help my feelings.  You may
guess," she added in a softer tone, "that my feelings are mostly
concerned with my brother.  We were very fond of each other.  The
difference of our ages was not very great.  I suppose you know he is a
little younger than I am.  He was a sensitive boy.  He had the habit of
brooding.  It is no use concealing from you that neither of us was happy
at home.  You have heard, no doubt...  Yes?  Well, I was made still more
unhappy and hurt--I don't mind telling you that.  He made his way to
some distant relations of our mother's people who I believe were not
known to my father at all.  I don't wish to judge their action."

I interrupted Mrs Fyne here.  I had heard.  Fyne was not very
communicative in general, but he was proud of his father-in-law.
"Carleon Anthony, the poet, you know."  Proud of his celebrity without
approving of his character.  It was on that account, I strongly suspect,
that he seized with avidity upon the theory of poetical genius being
allied to madness, which he got hold of in some idiotic book everybody
was reading a few years ago.  It struck him as being truth itself--
illuminating like the sun.  He adopted it devoutly.  He bored me with it
sometimes.  Once, just to shut him up, I asked quietly if this theory
which he regarded as so incontrovertible did not cause him some
uneasiness about his wife and the dear girls?  He transfixed me with a
pitying stare and requested me in his deep solemn voice to remember the
"well-established fact" that genius was not transmissible.

I said only "Oh!  Isn't it?" and he thought he had silenced me by an
unanswerable argument.  But he continued to talk of his glorious
father-in-law, and it was in the course of that conversation that he
told me how, when the Liverpool relations of the poet's late wife
naturally addressed themselves to him in considerable concern,
suggesting a friendly consultation as to the boy's future, the incensed
(but always refined) poet wrote in answer a letter of mere polished
_badinage_ which offended mortally the Liverpool people.  This witty
outbreak of what was in fact mortification and rage appeared to them so
heartless that they simply kept the boy.  They let him go to sea not
because he was in their way but because he begged hard to be allowed to
go.

"Oh!  You do know," said Mrs Fyne after a pause.  "Well--I felt myself
very much abandoned.  Then his choice of life--so extraordinary, so
unfortunate, I may say.  I was very much grieved.  I should have liked
him to have been distinguished--or at any rate to remain in the social
sphere where we could have had common interests, acquaintances,
thoughts.  Don't think that I am estranged from him.  But the precise
truth is that I do not know him.  I was most painfully affected when he
was here by the difficulty of finding a single topic we could discuss
together."

While Mrs Fyne was talking of her brother I let my thoughts wander out
of the room to little Fyne who by leaving me alone with his wife had, so
to speak, entrusted his domestic peace to my honour.

"Well, then, Mrs Fyne, does it not strike you that it would be
reasonable under the circumstances to let your brother take care of
himself?"

"And suppose I have grounds to think that he can't take care of himself
in a given instance."  She hesitated in a funny, bashful manner which
roused my interest.  Then:

"Sailors I believe are very susceptible," she added with forced
assurance.

I burst into a laugh which only increased the coldness of her observing
stare.

"They are.  Immensely!  Hopelessly!  My dear Mrs Fyne, you had better
give it up!  It only makes your husband miserable."

"And I am quite miserable too.  It is really our first difference..."

"Regarding Miss de Barral?"  I asked.

"Regarding everything.  It's really intolerable that this girl should be
the occasion.  I think he really ought to give way."

She turned her chair round a little and picking up the book I had been
reading in the morning began to turn the leaves absently.

Her eyes being off me, I felt I could allow myself to leave the room.
Its atmosphere had become hopeless for little Fyne's domestic peace.
You may smile.  But to the solemn all things are solemn.  I had enough
sagacity to understand that.

I slipped out into the porch.  The dog was slumbering at Fyne's feet.
The muscular little man leaning on his elbow and gazing over the fields
presented a forlorn figure.  He turned his head quickly, but seeing I
was alone, relapsed into his moody contemplation of the green landscape.

I said loudly and distinctly: "I've come out to smoke a cigarette," and
sat down near him on the little bench.  Then lowering my voice:
"Tolerance is an extremely difficult virtue," I said.  "More difficult
for some than heroism.  More difficult than compassion."

I avoided looking at him.  I knew well enough that he would not like
this opening.  General ideas were not to his taste.  He mistrusted them.
I lighted a cigarette, not that I wanted to smoke, but to give another
moment to the consideration of the advice--the diplomatic advice I had
made up my mind to bowl him over with.  And I continued in subdued
tones.

"I have been led to make these remarks by what I have discovered since
you left us.  I suspected from the first.  And now I am certain.  What
your wife cannot tolerate in this affair is Miss de Barral being what
she is."

He made a movement, but I kept my eyes away from him and went on
steadily.  "That is--her being a woman.  I have some idea of Mrs Fyne's
mental attitude towards society with its injustices, with its atrocious
or ridiculous conventions.  As against them there is no audacity of
action your wife's mind refuses to sanction.  The doctrine which I
imagine she stuffs into the pretty heads of your girl-guests is almost
vengeful.  A sort of moral fire-and-sword doctrine.  How far the lesson
is wise is not for me to say.  I don't permit myself to judge.  I seem
to see her very delightful disciples singeing themselves with the
torches, and cutting their fingers with the swords of Mrs Fyne's
furnishing."

"My wife holds her opinions very seriously," murmured Fyne suddenly.

"Yes.  No doubt," I assented in a low voice as before.  "But it is a
mere intellectual exercise.  What I see is that in dealing with reality
Mrs Fyne ceases to be tolerant.  In other words, that she can't forgive
Miss de Barral for being a woman and behaving like a woman.  And yet
this is not only reasonable and natural, but it is her only chance.  A
woman against the world has no resources but in herself.  Her only means
of action is to be what _she is_.  You understand what I mean."

Fyne mumbled between his teeth that he understood.  But he did not seem
interested.  What he expected of me was to extricate him from a
difficult situation.  I don't know how far credible this may sound, to
less solemn married couples, but to remain at variance with his wife
seemed to him a considerable incident.  Almost a disaster.

"It looks as though I didn't care what happened to her brother," he
said.  "And after all if anything..."

I became a little impatient but without raising my tone: "What thing?"
I asked.  "The liability to get penal servitude is so far like genius
that it isn't hereditary.  And what else can be objected to the girl?
All the energy of her deeper feelings, which she would use up vainly in
the danger and fatigue of a struggle with society may be turned into
devoted attachment to the man who offers her a way of escape from what
can be only a life of moral anguish.  I don't mention the physical
difficulties."

Glancing at Fyne out of the corner of one eye I discovered that he was
attentive.  He made the remark that I should have said all this to his
wife.  It was a sensible enough remark.  But I had given Mrs Fyne up.
I asked him if his impression was that his wife meant to entrust him
with a letter for her brother?

No.  He didn't think so.  There were certain reasons which made Mrs
Fyne unwilling to commit her arguments to paper.  Fyne was to be primed
with them.  But he had no doubt that if he persisted in his refusal she
would make up her mind to write.

"She does not wish me to go unless with a full conviction that she is
right," said Fyne solemnly.

"She's very exacting," I commented.  And then I reflected that she was
used to it.  "Would nothing less do for once?"

"You don't mean that I should give way--do you?" asked Fyne in a whisper
of alarmed suspicion.

As this was exactly what I meant, I let his fright sink into him.  He
fidgeted.  If the word may be used of so solemn a personage, he
wriggled.  And when the horrid suspicion had descended into his very
heels, so to speak, he became very still.  He sat gazing stonily into
space bounded by the yellow, burnt-up slopes of the rising ground a
couple of miles away.  The face of the down showed the white scar of the
quarry where not more than sixteen hours before Fyne and I had been
groping in the dark with horrible apprehension of finding under our
hands the shattered body of a girl.  For myself I had in addition the
memory of my meeting with her.  She was certainly walking very near the
edge--courting a sinister solution.  But, now, having by the most
unexpected chance come upon a man, she had found another way to escape
from the world.  Such world as was open to her--without shelter, without
bread, without honour.  The best she could have found in it would have
been a precarious dole of pity diminishing as her years increased.  The
appeal of the abandoned child Flora to the sympathies of the Fynes had
been irresistible.  But now she had become a woman, and Mrs Fyne was
presenting an implacable front to a particularly feminine transaction.
I may say triumphantly feminine.  It is true that Mrs Fyne did not want
women to be women.  Her theory was that they should turn themselves into
unscrupulous sexless nuisances.  An offended theorist dwelt in her bosom
somewhere.  In what way she expected Flora de Barral to set about saving
herself from a most miserable existence I can't conceive; but I verily
believe that she would have found it easier to forgive the girl an
actual crime; say the rifling of the Bournemouth old lady's desk, for
instance.  And then--for Mrs Fyne was very much of a woman herself--her
sense of proprietorship was very strong within her; and though she had
not much use for her brother, yet she did not like to see him annexed by
another woman.  By a chit of a girl.  And such a girl, too.  Nothing is
truer than that, in this world, the luckless have no right to their
opportunities--as if misfortune were a legal disqualification.  Fyne's
sentiments (as they naturally would be in a man) had more stability.  A
good deal of his sympathy survived.  Indeed I heard him murmur "Ghastly
nuisance," but I knew it was of the integrity of his domestic accord
that he was thinking.  With my eyes on the dog lying curled up in sleep
in the middle of the porch I suggested in a subdued impersonal tone:
"Yes.  Why not let yourself be persuaded?"

I never saw little Fyne less solemn.  He hissed through his teeth in
unexpectedly figurative style that it would take a lot to persuade him
to "push under the head of a poor devil of a girl quite sufficiently
plucky"--and snorted.  He was still gazing at the distant quarry, and I
think he was affected by that sight.  I assured him that I was far from
advising him to do anything so cruel.  I am convinced he had always
doubted the soundness of my principles, because he turned on me swiftly
as though he had been on the watch for a lapse from the straight path.

"Then what do you mean?  That I should pretend!"

"No!  What nonsense!  It would be immoral.  I may however tell you that
if I had to make a choice I would rather do something immoral than
something cruel.  What I meant was that, not believing in the efficacy
of the interference, the whole question is reduced to your consenting to
do what your wife wishes you to do.  That would be acting like a
gentleman, surely.  And acting unselfishly too, because I can very well
understand how distasteful it may be to you.  Generally speaking, an
unselfish action is a moral action.  I'll tell you what.  I'll go with
you."

He turned round and stared at me with surprise and suspicion.  "You
would go with me?" he repeated.

"You don't understand," I said, amused at the incredulous disgust of his
tone.  "I must run up to town, to-morrow morning.  Let us go together.
You have a set of travelling chessmen."

His physiognomy, contracted by a variety of emotions, relaxed to a
certain extent at the idea of a game.  I told him that as I had business
at the Docks he should have my company to the very ship.

"We shall beguile the way to the wilds of the East by improving
conversation," I encouraged him.

"My brother-in-law is staying at an hotel--the Eastern Hotel," he said,
becoming sombre again.  "I haven't the slightest idea where it is."

"I know the place.  I shall leave you at the door with the comfortable
conviction that you are doing what's right since it pleases a lady and
cannot do any harm to anybody whatever."

"You think so?  No harm to anybody?" he repeated doubtfully.

"I assure you it's not the slightest use," I said with all possible
emphasis which seemed only to increase the solemn discontent of his
expression.

"But in order that my going should be a perfectly candid proceeding I
must first convince my wife that it isn't the slightest use," he
objected portentously.

"Oh, you casuist!"  I said.  And I said nothing more because at that
moment Mrs Fyne stepped out into the porch.  We rose together at her
appearance.  Her clear, colourless, unflinching glance enveloped us both
critically.  I sustained the chill smilingly, but Fyne stooped at once
to release the dog.  He was some time about it; then simultaneously with
his recovery of upright position the animal passed at one bound from
profoundest slumber into most tumultuous activity.  Enveloped in the
tornado of his inane scurryings and barkings, I took Mrs Fyne's hand
extended to me woodenly and bowed over it with deference.  She walked
down the path without a word; Fyne had preceded her and was waiting by
the open gate.  They passed out and walked up the road surrounded by a
low cloud of dust raised by the dog gyrating madly about their two
figures progressing side by side with rectitude and propriety, and (I
don't know why) looking to me as if they had annexed the whole
country-side.  Perhaps it was that they had impressed me somehow with
the sense of their superiority.  What superiority?  Perhaps it consisted
just in their limitations.  It was obvious that neither of them had
carried away a high opinion of me.  But what affected me most was the
indifference of the Fyne dog.  He used to precipitate himself at full
speed and with a frightful final upward spring upon my waistcoat, at
least once at each of our meetings.  He had neglected that ceremony this
time notwithstanding my correct and even conventional conduct in
offering him a cake; it seemed to me symbolic of my final separation
from the Fyne household.  And I remembered against him how on a certain
day he had abandoned poor Flora de Barral--who was morbidly sensitive.

I sat down in the porch and, maybe inspired by secret antagonism to the
Fynes, I said to myself deliberately that Captain Anthony must be a fine
fellow.  Yet on the facts as I knew them he might have been a dangerous
trifler or a downright scoundrel.  He had made a miserable, hopeless
girl follow him clandestinely to London.  It is true that the girl had
written since, only Mrs Fyne had been remarkably vague as to the
contents.  They were unsatisfactory.  They did not positively announce
imminent nuptials as far as I could make it out from her rather
mysterious hints.  But then her inexperience might have led her astray.
There was no fathoming the innocence of a woman-like Mrs Fyne who,
venturing as far as possible in theory, would know nothing of the real
aspect of things.  It would have been comic if she were making all this
fuss for nothing.  But I rejected this suspicion for the honour of human
nature.

I imagined to myself Captain Anthony as simple and romantic.  It was
much more pleasant.  Genius is not hereditary but temperament may be.
And he was the son of a poet with an admirable gift of individualising,
of etherealising the commonplace; of making touching, delicate,
fascinating the most hopeless conventions of the so-called refined
existence.

What I could not understand was Mrs Fyne's dog-in-the-manger attitude.
Sentimentally she needed that brother of hers so little!  What could it
matter to her one way or another--setting aside common humanity which
would suggest at least a neutral attitude.  Unless indeed it was the
blind working of the law that in our world of chances the luckless
_must_ be put in the wrong somehow.

And musing thus on the general inclination of our instincts towards
injustice I met unexpectedly, at the turn of the road, as it were, a
shape of duplicity.  It might have been unconscious on Mrs Fyne's part,
but her leading idea appeared to me to be not to keep, not to preserve
her brother, but to get rid of him definitely.  She did not hope to stop
anything.  She had too much sense for that.  Almost anyone out of an
idiot asylum would have had enough sense for that.  She wanted the
protest to be made, emphatically, with Fyne's fullest concurrence in
order to make all intercourse for the future impossible.  Such an action
would estrange the pair for ever from the Fynes.  She understood her
brother and the girl too.  Happy together, they would never forgive that
outspoken hostility--and should the marriage turn out badly...  Well, it
would be just the same.  Neither of them would be likely to bring their
troubles to such a good prophet of evil.

Yes.  That must have been her motive.  The inspiration of a possibly
unconscious Machiavellism!  Either she was afraid of having a
sister-in-law to look after during the husband's long absences; or
dreaded the more or less distant eventuality of her brother being
persuaded to leave the sea, the friendly refuge of his unhappy youth,
and to settle on shore, bringing to her very door this undesirable, this
embarrassing connection.  She wanted to be done with it--maybe simply
from the fatigue of continuous effort in good or evil, which, in the
bulk of common mortals, accounts for so many surprising inconsistencies
of conduct.

I don't know that I had classed Mrs Fyne, in my thoughts, amongst
common mortals.  She was too quietly sure of herself for that.  But
little Fyne, as I spied him next morning (out of the carriage window)
speeding along the platform, looked very much like a common, flustered
mortal who has made a very near thing of catching his train: the
starting wild eyes, the tense and excited face, the distracted gait, all
the common symptoms were there, rendered more impressive by his native
solemnity which flapped about him like a disordered garment.  Had he--I
asked myself with interest--resisted his wife to the very last minute
and, then bolted up the road from the last conclusive argument, as
though it had been a loaded gun suddenly produced?  I opened the
carriage door, and a vigorous porter shoved him in from behind just as
the end of the rustic platform went gliding swiftly from under his feet.
He was very much out of breath, and I waited with some curiosity for
the moment he would recover his power of speech.  That moment came.  He
said "Good morning" with a slight gasp, remained very still for another
minute and then pulled out of his pocket the travelling chessboard, and
holding it in his hand, directed at me a glance of inquiry.  "Yes.
Certainly," I said, very much disappointed.


PART ONE, CHAPTER 7.

ON THE PAVEMENT.

Fyne was not willing to talk; but as I had been already let into the
secret, the fair-minded little man recognised that I had some right to
information if I insisted on it.  And I did insist, after the third
game.  We were yet some way from the end of our journey.

"Oh, if you want to know," was his somewhat impatient opening.  And then
he talked rather volubly.  First of all his wife had not given him to
read the letter received from Flora (I had suspected him of having it in
his pocket), but had told him all about the contents.  It was not at all
what it should have been even if the girl had wished to affirm her right
to disregard the feelings of all the world.  Her own had been trampled
in the dirt out of all shape.  Extraordinary thing to say--I would
admit, for a young girl of her age.  The whole tone of that letter was
wrong, quite wrong.  It was certainly not the product of a--say, of a
well-balanced mind.

"If she were given some sort of footing in this world," I said, "if only
no bigger than the palm of my hand, she would probably learn to keep a
better balance."

Fyne ignored this little remark.  His wife, he said, was not the sort of
person to be addressed mockingly on a serious subject.  There was an
unpleasant strain of levity in that letter, extending even to the
references to Captain Anthony himself.  Such a disposition was enough,
his wife had pointed out to him, to alarm one for the future, had all
the circumstances of that preposterous project been as satisfactory as
in fact they were not.  Other parts of the letter seemed to have a
challenging tone--as if daring them (the Fynes) to approve her conduct.
And at the same time implying that she did not care, that it was for
their own sakes that she hoped they would "go against the world--the
horrid world which had crushed poor papa."

Fyne called upon me to admit that this was pretty cool--considering.
And there was another thing, too.  It seems that for the last six months
(she had been assisting two ladies who kept a kindergarten school in
Bayswater--a mere pittance), Flora had insisted on devoting all her
spare time to the study of the trial.  She had been looking up files of
old newspapers, and working herself up into a state of indignation with
what she called the injustice and the hypocrisy of the prosecution.  Her
father, Fyne reminded me, had made some palpable hits in his answers in
Court, and she had fastened on them triumphantly.  She had reached the
conclusion of her father's innocence, and had been brooding over it.
Mrs Fyne had pointed out to him the danger of this.

The train ran into the station and Fyne, jumping out directly it came to
a standstill, seemed glad to cut short the conversation.  We walked in
silence a little way, boarded a bus, then walked again.  I don't suppose
that since the days of his childhood, when surely he was taken to see
the Tower, he had been once east of Temple Bar.  He looked about him
sullenly; and when I pointed out in the distance the rounded front of
the Eastern Hotel at the bifurcation of two very broad, mean, shabby
thoroughfares, rising like a grey stucco tower above the lowly roofs of
the dirty-yellow, two-storey houses, he only grunted disapprovingly.

"I wouldn't lay too much stress on what you have been telling me," I
observed quietly as we approached that unattractive building.  "No man
will believe a girl who has just accepted his suit to be not
well-balanced,--you know."

"Oh, accepted his suit," muttered Fyne, who seemed to have been very
thoroughly convinced indeed.  "It may have been the other way about."
And then he added: "I am going through with it."

I said that this was very praiseworthy but that a certain moderation of
statement--He waved his hand at me and mended his pace.  I guessed that
he was anxious to get his mission over as quickly as possible.  He
barely gave himself time to shake hands with me and made a rush at the
narrow glass door with the words Hotel Entrance on it.  It swung to
behind his back with no more noise than the snap of a toothless jaw.

The absurd temptation to remain and see what would come of it got over
my better judgment.  I hung about irresolute, wondering how long an
embassy of that sort would take, and whether Fyne on coming out would
consent to be communicative.  I feared he would be shocked at finding me
there, would consider my conduct incorrect, conceivably treat me with
contempt.  I walked off a few paces.  Perhaps it would be possible to
read something on Fyne's face as he came out; and, if necessary, I could
always eclipse myself discreetly through the door of one of the bars.
The ground floor of the Eastern Hotel was an unabashed pub, with
plate-glass fronts, a display of brass rails, and divided into many
compartments each having its own entrance.

But of course all this was silly.  The marriage, the love, the affairs
of Captain Anthony were none of my business.  I was on the point of
moving down the street for good when my attention was attracted by a
girl approaching the hotel entrance from the west.  She was dressed very
modestly in black.  It was the white straw hat of a good form and
trimmed with a bunch of pale roses which had caught my eye.  The whole
figure seemed familiar.  Of course!  Flora de Barral.  She was making
for the hotel, she was going in.  And Fyne was with Captain Anthony!  To
meet him could not be pleasant for her.  I wished to save her from the
awkwardness, and as I hesitated what to do she looked up and our eyes
happened to meet just as she was turning off the pavement into the hotel
doorway.  Instinctively I extended my arm.  It was enough to make her
stop.  I suppose she had some faint notion that she had seen me before
somewhere.  She walked slowly forward, prudent and attentive, watching
my faint smile.

"Excuse me," I said directly she had approached me near enough.
"Perhaps you would like to know that Mr Fyne is upstairs with Captain
Anthony at this moment."

She uttered a faint "Ah!  Mr Fyne!"  I could read in her eyes that she
had recognised me now.  Her serious expression extinguished the imbecile
grin of which I was conscious.  I raised my hat.  She responded with a
slow inclination of the head while her luminous, mistrustful, maiden's
glance seemed to whisper, "What is this one doing here?"

"I came up to town with Fyne this morning," I said in a businesslike
tone.  "I have to see a friend in East India Dock.  Fyne and I parted
this moment at the door here..."  The girl regarded me with darkening
eyes ...  "Mrs Fyne did not come with her husband," I went on, then
hesitated before that white face so still in the pearly shadow thrown
down by the hat-brim.  "But she sent him," I murmured by way of warning.

Her eyelids fluttered slowly over the fixed stare.  I imagine she was
not much disconcerted by this development.  "I live a long way from
here," she whispered.

I said perfunctorily, "Do you?"  And we remained gazing at each other.
The uniform paleness of her complexion was not that of an anaemic girl.
It had a transparent vitality and at that particular moment the faintest
possible rosy tinge, the merest suspicion of colour; an equivalent, I
suppose, in any other girl to blushing like a peony, while she told me
that Captain Anthony had arranged to show her the ship that morning.

It was easy to understand that she did not want to meet Fyne.  And when
I mentioned in a discreet murmur that he had come because of her letter
she glanced at the hotel door quickly, and moved off a few steps to a
position where she could watch the entrance without being seen.  I
followed her.  At the junction of the two thoroughfares she stopped in
the thin traffic of the broad pavement and turned to me with an air of
challenge.  "And so you know."

I told her that I had not seen the letter.  I had only heard of it.  She
was a little impatient.  "I mean all about me."

Yes.  I knew all about her.  The distress of Mr and Mrs Fyne--
especially of Mrs Fyne--was so great that they would have shared it
with anybody almost--not belonging to their circle of friends.  
.

" 'We advise generally against the inks known simply as writing
fluids--those not intended to yield a letter-press copy--because
they are universally made, first, with as little solid matter as
possible,--i. e. weak; second, with an excess of iron beyond that
required to combine with the tannin, so as to develop all the color
possible and flow with the greatest freedom.

The combined writing and copying fluids, and the copying fluids on
the other hand if properly made, may be justly recommended where
permanency is the first requisition, particularly the older ones, which
should be the most durable of all nut-gall and iron inks, because
in them particularly concentration is aimed at, and the iron need not
necessarily, and should not, be in excess of that required to
combine with the tannin present.

A steel pen during use injures, and often greatly, the durability
of a writing ink by giving up iron to it

.

" 'For your purpose, where extreme permanency is the first requisition,
I should not advise the use of an ordinary writing fluid.

Many manufacturers cannot obtain sufficient fluidity in their writing
fluids without making their inks very dilute, and observing a
particular method of manufacture which, although providing more
attained color for a time, sacrifices the permanent quality of their
color in a great measure.

I should advise the use of an ink decidedly stronger.'

"The addition of water was almost universally condemned, for reasons
stated later. As proof that this was not for the mercenary purpose
of indirectly advising the use of more ink, some of the manufacturers
said the ink should be kept in small- mouthed ink-stands, and when
not in use should be as tightly sealed as possible, to prevent
evaporation.

"In reply to the inquiry as to whether chemicals left in the paper ever
obliterated the ink, several of the manufacturers said they knew of
such cases, and all were agreed that, if the chlorides used for
bleaching the paper were not washed out, they would dangerously
affect any ink.

The practice of mixing inks was universally condemned.

"Permanency against the action of time is the quality sought for in
this investigation, and it is claimed that better evidence as to
that quality is furnished by the test of time than by any other; and
manufacturers have shown or referred to specimens of writing made
with their ink many years ago, as proof of its merit in this
particular.

If there was any surety that the standard of quality was always
kept up in all of the oldest inks on the market, it would be safe
to accept that test, but this may not be a fact; and, as has been
stated, some of the recording officers believe that it is not.

Moreover, if only the old inks were to be accepted, it would be
against the spirit of the age, which is to adopt the improvements
which science makes possible; and manufacturers who at great cost
of time and money have made improvements, would be deprived of the
compensation which they deserve.

The old inks were as a rule heavy, and had a tendency to settle;
and the endeavor on the part of some manufacturers has been to
preserve the permanency, and at the same time produce thinner inks
which would be more agreeable to use.

"Improvements have been made in the direction of free-flowing
inks, and these are fast becoming popular; and, while for correspondence
and commercial uses they are undoubtedly sufficiently permanent,
for records many of them are not, and it was with a view of
preventing the use of these upon records that this investigation
was made.

No attention has been given to the permanency of the inks, as against
their removal by acids.

"The use of proper ink is considered so important by the British government
that the inks used in the public departments are obtained by public tender,
in accordance with the conditions drawn up by the controller of H.

M. stationery office, with the assistance of the chief chemist of the
inland revenue department, to whom the inks supplied by the contractor
are from time to time submitted for analysis. Suitable inks for the
various uses are thus obtained, and their standard maintained. The last
form of 'invitation to tender,' or 'proposal,' as we term it, is
appended, as being instructive.

I cannot learn that the United States government uses any such care
as the British government in the matter of ink, although the
question has been a troublesome one in the departments.

"The State department issues no special rules for determining suitable
inks, or requiring that particular inks shall be used. Proposals are asked
for the lowest bids for the articles of stationery required, the last
form of proposal asking for bids upon seven black inks, one crimson, and
one writing fluid, which are named.

"With the market full of inks worthless for records, the only safety
for our records seems to be in the establishment of a system similar to
the English, which shall fix upon proper inks for various uses, which
all recording officers shall be required to use.

"I believe that the recording officers will be glad to have the question
of permanent inks decided for them, and to know whether inks which
were in use many years ago, and have stood the test thus far, are
maintained at their old standard.

In the face of sharp competition among manufacturers, they fear
they are not."
Mr. Swan, proceeding still further, secured the services of two of the
most distinguished professors of chemistry in this country, Messrs.
Markoe and Baird, and submitted to them in camera sixty-seven samples
of different inks, known only by numbers, for chemical analysis; in a
long and exhaustive report on the work they had set out to accomplish,
and also with a dissertation on the chemistry of inks in general, they
complete their report as follows:

"As a conclusion, since the great mass of inks on the market are
not suitable for records, because of their lack of body and because
of the quantity of unstable color which they contain, and because
the few whose coloring matters are not objectionable are deficient
in galls and iron, or both, we would strongly recommend that the
State set its own standard for the composition of inks to be used
in its offices and for its records, have the inks manufactured
according to specifications sent out, and receive the manufactured
products subject to chemical assay.

In this way only can there be a uniformity in the inks used for the
records throughout the State, and in no other way can a proper standard
be maintained."
Mr. Swan comments on the report of his chemists, and calls attention
to other tests made by himself:

"The conclusions at which I arrived were drawn, as stated, from manufacturers
or recording officers, wholly independently of the chemists, but they
will be found to coincide in many particulars with theirs.
I did consult them in regard to the practicability of maintaining a State
standard for record ink, which they have approved.

"The commendation by the chemists of some of the so-called writing
fluids explains in a degree the variety of opinions advanced by the
manufacturers in regard to the durability of fluids. Some of them
will be seen to possess the qualities of ink, and the name fluid is
evidently given to meet the commercial demand for fluids.

"Several persons, manufacturers among them, expressed greater
confidence in tests of exposure of inks to the light and weather
than to chemical analysis.

I, therefore, as a dry test, placed on the inside of a window pane
receiving a strong light, writing made under exactly the same
conditions with each of sixty-seven inks, which remained there from
March 13 to December 8.

Similar writing was exposed to light and the weather from September
25 to December 8, and the result of the resistance of the inks in
both tests is an almost exact confirmation of the report of the
chemists, inks of the same class varying in their resistance according
to their specific gravity or amount of added color.

"It may be safely said, therefore, that of sixty- seven inks of which
I procured samples, all but seventeen are unsuitable for records,
and among these the chemists say but one is fully up to the
established scientific standard of quantity of iron sulphate.

The reason is plain,--the demand for commercial inks is large, for
record, small, and the supply has been to meet the demand."
The British government advertises for tenders each year, the requirements
for black writing ink in 1889 reads:
"To be made of Best Galls, Sulphate of Iron, and Gum.

The Sulphate of Iron not to exceed in quantity one-third of the
weight of the Galls used, and the specific gravity of the matured Ink not
to exceed 1045 degrees (distilled water being 1000 degrees)." That of
Black Copying Ink "To be made of the above materials, but of a
strength one fourth greater than the Writing Ink, and with the addition
of Sugar or Glycerine.

The specific gravity of the matured Ink not. to exceed 1085 degrees."
And that of Blue-Black Writing Ink "To be made of finest Galls,
Sulphate of Iron, Gum, Indigo, and Sulphuric Acid.

The specific gravity of the Ink when matured not to exceed 1035 degrees."

Mr.

Swan again remarks in his report of 1892:

"Many of the inks which should not be used upon records are free flowing
and more agreeable to use than permanent inks, containing more body.

As long as recording and copying is paid for by the page, and the object
is to accomplish the most in the least time, these inks will be in popular
use, and used, and blotted off the paper before they have much more
than colored it, only to disappear eventually. The State should set
a standard for a record ink; and, while our present system of keeping
records and furnishing supplies will not allow that its use be required
on all public records, as in England, it would seem practicable for
the secretary of the Commonwealth to advertise for proposals for inks
of a certain standard, which the manufacturers should be bound to
maintain, and that these should be used in all the State offices.

With a State standard ink adopted, its use by recording officers
would soon follow."
In 1894 Mr. Swan's indefatigable efforts were crowned with success, the
state of Massachusetts adopting his recommendations included in the
following act:

"SECTION 1. No person having the care or custody of any book of record
or registry in any of the departments or offices of the Commonwealth
shall use or allow to be used upon such books any ink excepting such as
is furnished by the secretary of the Commonwealth.

"SECTION 2. The secretary of the Commonwealth shall from time to time
advertise for proposals to furnish the several departments and offices
of the Commonwealth in which books of record or registry are kept
with ink of a standard and upon conditions to be established by the
secretary at such periods and in such quantities as may be required,
and may contract for the same.

"SECTION 3. The ink so furnished shall be examined from time to time
by a chemist to be designated by the secretary of the Commonwealth, and
if at any time said ink shall be found to be inferior to the established
standard the secretary shall have authority to cancel any contract
made for furnishing said ink, and the quantity so found inferior
shall not be paid for."
Professor Markoe, referred to before, was appointed "chemist" by the
Secretary of the Commonwealth and prepared what he considered the
best formula, for a standard ink, which was competed for by a
number of ink manufacturers after proper advertisement, and a
contract awarded.

Mr. Swan says that this departure was received with favor by recording
officers.
No change was made in the formula until after the death of Professor
Markoe in 1900, when Dr. Bennett F. Davenport of Boston was selected
as his successor.

He submitted a modified formula to be employed in the manufacture of an
official or standard ink. It was adopted and such an ink is without
exception now used by all recording officers of both Massachusetts
and Connecticut.

In 1901 the United States treasury department adopted a similar ink
except that it permitted the introduction into it of an unnamed blue
coloring material.

Early in 1894 and during the legislative session of the state of New
York, after consultation with General Palmer, the then secretary of
state, I prepared a bill somewhat on the lines as laid down in the
Massachusetts statute. The press all over the state at once took
up the matter and urged that some such measure should be enacted
into law.

A New York City newspaper discussed it as follows:

"A bill is to be introduced in the legislature this week, probably
to-morrow night, providing for an official ink to be used by every
public officer throughout the State of New York in the writing of
public documents and in making entries in the records.

"The official ink is for the purpose of making public records permanent
and to guard against fraud by the alteration of the records.

As the law stands at the present time in the state every official, whether
municipal, county or state, is allowed to purchase and use for the
records of his office whatever ink he may choose.

The consequence is that there is no uniformity in public records
throughout the state, and entries, transcripts and certificates are
written with hundreds of various kinds of inks.

"The serious part of the business, however, is the evanescent
character of some of the kinds now used, especially of the cheaper
grades.

These are the inks made from aniline and other dyes which are held
in solution in water.

Such inks are made from a fine, cheap powder, of which nigrosine is used
in making black inks, eosine for red, and methylene for blue ink,
and they cost only a few dimes a gallon to manufacture. The writing
made with such inks quickly dries by the evaporation of the water,
when it merely requires the application of a little soap and water to
wash them out, leaving the paper absolutely clean, besides being
fugitive.

"It is said that as a result of the present lack of system in this
matter there are now public records of the city of New York in which
the ink has entirely faded.

These records have been made within the past forty years, and are now
worthless because of the character of the inks originally used.

"In the Police department of this city a blue ink is often used which
is made from prussian blue. A large portion of the entries in the books
of the Police department are made with ink of this kind, and the
warrants and other public documents with which the police have to do
are similarly written.

"A little soap and water will wipe out this writing, so that the record
can be easily altered at any time. The use of this ink in the Police
department is said to date from the time of Tweed, which is significant
of the original purpose for which it.
was adopted.

"A permanent writing fluid such as it is now proposed to adopt throughout
the state would not only secure uniformity in the character of the inks
used, but it would also throw many obstacles in the way of altering
the records.

"The present Secretary of State is heartily in accord with the proposed
legislation. He was seen last week by Mr. David N. Carvalho, who has made
a life study of the subject and who drew the bill and is pushing the
reform.

"Mr.

Carvalho said yesterday: 'This ink, whose use it is intended to secure in
the making of public records in this state, is more costly than those
made from aniline and other dyes, which fade and wash. In it the black
particles are suspended in water by the addition of gum. This kind of
ink has an affinity for oxygen, and hence it oxidizes and turns black.
When unadulterated it only becomes blacker with the passage of time,
and cannot be washed from the paper by the use of water.'
" 'I could show you,' continued Mr. Carvalho, 'public records of this
city made within forty years which are entirely illegible and consequently
worthless, because cheap inks were used in the writing. These
include not only records of wills in the Surrogate's office, but entries
and transfers of real estate which are likely to come up in the
course of litigation at any time, thereby affecting the rights of many
citizens.

" 'I can tell you at once upon seeing an old document the character
of the ink that was used in the writing, and I have seen many old papers
over a hundred years of age in which the writing was as clear as the
day it was made, simply because a good writing ink was used. On the other
hand writing made with cheap aniline ink may under certain circumstances
fade out within a year, and in a book which is much handled is almost
certain to be rubbed out in time.

" 'It has frequently happened that in the course of litigation, especially
over real estate, that old records made with poor inks have been produced
which the court refused to accept as evidence, thereby depriving some
citizen of his rights.

At the present time many officials in this state, in fact, the majority
of them, are using these cheap and worthless inks and the records they
are making will be of little or no value in a few years.

" 'It is to put a stop to this abuse that the present bill has been
drawn up, and there is no argument which can be raised against it.'
"
It appears that there was one, however, as the bill failed to pass
for the stated reason that it came under the head of "class"
legislation.

The great state and city of New York with costly and magnificent depositories
continue to place in them, for safe-keeping, valuable records and other
ink-written instruments which will become illegible before the present
century comes to an end.

Professor Lehner, a German chemist, in 1890 published a treatise "Die
Tinten-Fabrikation," which has been translated and added to by Dr.
Brannt, of Philadelphia, editor of "The Techno-Chemical Receipt-Book,"
who remarks:
"The lack of a recent treatise in the English language containing
detailed descriptions of the raw materials and receipts for the
preparation of Inks, and the apparent necessity, as shown by frequent
inquiries, for such a volume, were the considerations which led to
the preparation of The Manufacture of Ink."

This work compiles a great number of formulas, and rather favors the views
of the chemist Dr. Bostock respecting the iron and gall inks. The book
possesses value for reference purposes to the manufacturer.

Auguste Peret, author of "The Manufacture of Ink," 1891, has put together
a lot of excellent material relative to ink-making and valuable for
reference purposes.

The late Dr. William E. Hagan of Troy, New York, in 1894 issued his
book, "Disputed Hand-writing." He devotes two chapters to the
discussion of ancient and modern inks and their chemistry. He has been
kind enough to quote the writer as the first to remove ink in open court
with chemicals in order to determine the existence of pencil writing
beneath the ink.
The pencil being carbon was not affected thereby and with the subsequent
restoration of the bleached ink by the use of the correct re-agent.

In the same year Dr. Persifor Frazer of Philadelphia published his
"Manual of the Study of Documents."

A few pages are given to the study of inks, and a part thereof is
devoted to the researches of Carre, Hager, Baudrimont, Tarry,
Chevallier and Lassaigne, to determine suspected forgeries.

The chapter on "the sequence in crossed lines," where he indicates
his method of determining which of two crossed ink lines was written
first, is both original and a real contribution to science.

Alfred H. Allen, F. C. S., of England, perhaps the highest authority
on the subject of tannins, dyes and coloring matters in his "Commercial
Organic Analysis," revised and edited by Professor J.

Merritt Mathews of Pennsylvania, edition of 1900, devotes eight pages to
the subject of the "Examination of Ink Marks." He says:

"Ordinary writing ink was formerly always made from a decoction of
galls, to which green vitriol was added. Of late, the composition of
writing inks has become far less constant, aniline and other dyes
being frequently employed, and other metallic salts substituted for
the ferrous- sulphate formerly invariably used.

The best black ink is a tanno-gallate of iron, obtained by adding
an infusion of nut-galls to a solution of ferrous- sulphate
(copperas)."

In 1897 the author in a paper read before the New York State Bar
Association at Albany, entitled "A Plea for the Preservation of the
Public Records," discussed the question of the stability of inks
and their phenomena and took occasion to make recommendations as
to their constitution and future methods of employment.

A vote of thanks was adopted and the association referred the paper
to the Committee on Law Reform, where no doubt it still slumbers.

CHAPTER XVI.

ENDURING INK.

ASCERTAINMENT OF A CORRECT INK FORMULA THE WORK OF OVER A CENTURY--CHARACTER
OF THE EVIDENCE WHICH ESTABLISHES IT--THE INVESTIGATIONS OF THE
AUTHOR IN THIS DIRECTION AND COMPARISON WITH THOSE OF COMMISSIONER
SWAN--ELIMINATION OF THE "ADDED" COLORS AND THEIR ORIGIN-- DISCUSSION
OF THE RELATIVE MERITS OF LAMPBLACK, MADDER AND INDIGO--THE DURABLE
VIRTUES OF INDIGO WHEN EMPLOYED ALONE--CAUSE OF THE BROWNING OF
INKS--LONGEVITY OF INK DUE TO VEHICLE WHICH CARRIES IT--WHEN PERFECT
INK WILL BE INVENTED.

TO ascertain the correct formula of a substantially permanent ink, as
we have learned, has been the aim during a century or more, of able
chemists, manufacturers and laymen. Their experiments and study
of ancient and modern documents all point unerringly in the
direction of an ink containing iron and galls.

Accumulated evidence may be said to establish itself in the light
of investigation and experience and becomes more and more a certainty
when considered, reviewed and discussed in connection with a
chronological history of the "gall" inks since they came into
semi-official and other uses centuries ago.

Descriptions of MSS. containing ink writings hundreds of years old,
many of them as legible as when first written, are silent witnesses whose
testimony cannot be assailed. Such information when assembled together
minimizes many of the conditions which have existed and interposed
in preventing during the last four decades a general adoption or
re-adoption of such a tanno-gallate of iron ink, the lasting qualities
of which some of our forefathers estimated would, and as we know
have stood the test of time.

Assuming this character of ink to have been employed in past
centuries, the cause or causes for the differentiations in respect
to color and durability become of paramount importance.

The investigations of the writer in this direction, while in some
respects traveling the same road followed by others, diverged from them
and has been more in the nature of a comparative analytical and
microscopic examination of ancient with ancient and modern with
modern documents in connection with numerous chemical experiments,
the manufacture of hundreds of inks and the study of their time and
other phenomena.

To accomplish this, ancient documents not written with "Indian" ink, but
with those obviously containing combinations of iron and galls or
other tannins, were selected and grouped into color families.

They began with the fourteenth century, continuing well into the
nineteenth, to the number of nearly four hundred, each of them
of a different date and different year. Some of them were so pale and
indistinct as to be illegible, others less so and by gradual steps
they approached to a definite black; many of them as rich and deep
in color as if they had been written not centuries ago but within
a few years.

Yes, I was surprised at her remorse.  But
lowering her glance unexpectedly till her dark eyelashes seemed to rest
against her white cheeks she presented a perfectly demure aspect.  It
was so attractive that I could not help a faint smile.  That Flora de
Barral should ever, in any aspect, have the power to evoke a smile was
the very last thing I should have believed.  She went on after a slight
hesitation:--

"One day I started for there, for that place."

Look at the influence of a mere play of physiognomy!  If you remember
what we were talking about you will hardly believe that I caught myself
grinning down at that demure little girl.  I must say too that I felt
more friendly to her at the moment than ever before.

"Oh, you did?  To take that jump?  You are a determined young person.
Well, what happened that time?"

An almost imperceptible alteration in her bearing; a slight droop of her
head perhaps--a mere nothing--made her look more demure than ever.

"I had left the cottage," she began a little hurriedly.  "I was walking
along the road--you know, _the_ road.  I had made up my mind I was not
coming back this time."

I won't deny that these words spoken from under the brim of her hat (oh
yes, certainly, her head was down--she had put it down) gave me a
thrill; for indeed I had never doubted her sincerity.  It could never
have been, a make-believe despair.

"Yes," I whispered.  "You were going along the road."

"When..."  Again she hesitated with an effect of innocent shyness worlds
asunder from tragic issues; then glided on--"When suddenly Captain
Anthony came through a gate out of a field."

I coughed down the beginning of a most improper fit of laughter, and
felt ashamed of myself.  Her eyes raised for a moment seemed full of
innocent suffering and unexpressed menace in the depths of the dilated
pupils within the rings of sombre blue.  It was--how shall I say it?--a
night effect when you seem to see vague shapes and don't know what
reality you may come upon at any time.  Then she lowered her eyelids
again, shutting all mysteriousness out of the situation except for the
sobering memory of that glance, nightlike in the sunshine, expressively
still in the brutal unrest of the street.

"So Captain Anthony joined you--did he?"

"He opened a field-gate and walked out on the road.  He crossed to my
side and went on with me.  He had his pipe in his hand.  He said: `Are
you going far this morning?'"

These words (I was watching her white face as she spoke) gave me a
slight shudder.  She remained demure, almost prim.  And I remarked:

"You have been talking together before, of course."

"Not more than twenty words altogether since he arrived," she declared
without emphasis.  "That day he had said `Good morning' to me when we
met at breakfast two hours before.  And I said good morning to him.  I
did not see him afterwards till he came out on the road."

I thought to myself that this was not accidental.  He had been observing
her.  I felt certain also that he had not been asking any questions of
Mrs Fyne.

"I wouldn't look at him," said Flora de Barral.  "I had done with
looking at people.  He said to me: `My sister does not put herself out
much for us.  We had better keep each other company.  I have read every
book there is in that cottage.'  I walked on.  He did not leave me.  I
thought he ought to.  But he didn't.  He didn't seem to notice that I
would not talk to him."

She was now perfectly still.  The wretched little parasol hung down
against her dress from her joined hands.  I was rigid with attention.
It isn't every day that one culls such a volunteered tale on a girl's
lips.  The ugly street-noises swelling up for a moment covered the next
few words she said.  It was vexing.  The next word I heard was
"worried."

"It worried you to have him there, walking by your side."

"Yes.  Just that," she went on with downcast eyes.  There was something
prettily comical in her attitude and her tone, while I pictured to
myself a poor white-faced girl walking to her death with an unconscious
man striding by her side.  Unconscious?  I don't know.  First of all, I
felt certain that this was no chance meeting.  Something had happened
before.  Was he a man for a _coup-de-foudre_, the lightning stroke of
love?  I don't think so.  That sort of susceptibility is luckily rare.
A world of inflammable lovers of the Romeo and Juliet type would very
soon end in barbarism and misery.  But it is a fact that in every man
(not in every woman) there lives a lover; a lover who is called out in
all his potentialities often by the most insignificant little things--as
long as they come at the psychological moment: the glimpse of a face at
an unusual angle, an evanescent attitude, the curve of a cheek often
looked at before, perhaps, but then, at the moment, charged with
astonishing significance.  These are great mysteries, of course.  Magic
signs.

I don't know in what the sign consisted in this case.  It might have
been her pallor (it wasn't pasty nor yet papery) that white face with
eyes like blue gleams of fire and lips like red coals.  In certain
lights, in certain poises of head it suggested tragic sorrow.  Or it
might have been her wavy hair.  Or even just that pointed chin stuck out
a little, resentful and not particularly distinguished, doing away with
the mysterious aloofness of her fragile presence.  But any way at a
given moment Anthony must have suddenly _seen_ the girl.  And then, that
something had happened to him.  Perhaps nothing more than the thought
coming into his head that this was "a possible woman."

Followed this waylaying!  Its resolute character makes me think it was
the chin's doing; that "common mortal" touch which stands in such good
stead to some women.  Because men, I mean really masculine men, those
whose generations have evolved an ideal woman, are often very timid.
Who wouldn't be before the ideal?  It's your sentimental trifler, who
has just missed being nothing at all, who is enterprising, simply
because it is easy to appear enterprising when one does not mean to put
one's belief to the test.

Well, whatever it was that encouraged him, Captain Anthony stuck to
Flora de Barral in a manner which in a timid man might have been called
heroic if it had not been so simple.  Whether policy, diplomacy,
simplicity, or just inspiration, he kept up his talk, rather deliberate,
with very few pauses.  Then suddenly as if recollecting himself:

"It's funny.  I don't think you are annoyed with me for giving you my
company unasked.  But why don't you say something?"

I asked Miss de Barral what answer she made to this query.

"I made no answer," she said in that even, unemotional low voice which
seemed to be her voice for delicate confidences.  "I walked on.  He did
not seem to mind.  We came to the foot of the quarry where the road
winds up hill, past the place where you were sitting by the roadside
that day.  I began to wonder what I should do.  After we reached the top
Captain Anthony said that he had not been for a walk with a lady for
years and years--almost since he was a boy.  We had then come to where I
ought; to have turned off and struck across a field.  I thought of
making a run of it.  But he would have caught me up.  I knew he would;
and, of course, he would not have allowed me.  I couldn't give him the
slip."

"Why didn't you ask him to leave you?"  I inquired curiously.

"He would not have taken any notice," she went on steadily.  "And what
could I have done then?  I could not have started quarrelling with him--
could I?  I hadn't enough energy to get angry.  I felt very tired
suddenly.  I just stumbled on straight along the road.  Captain Anthony
told me that the family--some relations of his mother--he used to know
in Liverpool was broken up now, and he had never made any friends since.
All gone their different ways.  All the girls married.  Nice girls they
were and very friendly to him when he was but little more than a boy.
He repeated: `Very nice, cheery, clever girls.'  I sat down on a bank
against a hedge and began to cry."

"You must have astonished him not a little," I observed.

Anthony, it seems, remained on the road looking down at her.  He did not
offer to approach her, neither did he make any other movement or
gesture.  Flora de Barral told me all this.  She could see him through
her tears, blurred to a mere shadow on the white road, and then again
becoming more distinct, but always absolutely still and as if lost in
thought before a strange phenomenon which demanded the closest possible
attention.

Flora learned later that he had never seen a woman cry; not in that way,
at least.  He was impressed and interested by the mysteriousness of the
effect.  She was very conscious of being looked at, but was not able to
stop herself crying.  In fact, she was not capable of any effort.
Suddenly he advanced two steps, stooped, caught hold of her hands lying
on her lap and pulled her up to her feet; she found herself standing
close to him almost before she realised what he had done.  Some people
were coming briskly along the road and Captain Anthony muttered: "You
don't want to be stared at.  What about that stile over there?  Can we
go back across the fields?"

She snatched her hands out of his grasp (it seems he had omitted to let
them go), marched away from him and got over the stile.  It was a big
field sprinkled profusely with white sheep.  A trodden path crossed it
diagonally.  After she had gone more than half-way she turned her head
for the first time.  Keeping five feet or so behind, Captain Anthony was
following her with an air of extreme interest.  Interest or eagerness.
At any rate she caught an expression on his face which frightened her.
But not enough to make her run.  And indeed it would have had to be
something incredibly awful to scare into a run a girl who had come to
the end of her courage to live.

As if encouraged by this glance over the shoulder Captain Anthony came
up boldly, and now that he was by her side, she felt his nearness
intimately, like a touch.  She tried to disregard this sensation.  But
she was not angry with him now.  It wasn't worth while.  She was
thankful that he had the sense not to ask questions as to this crying.
Of course he didn't ask because he didn't care.  No one in the world
cared for her, neither those who pretended nor yet those who did not
pretend.  She preferred the latter.

Captain Anthony opened for her a gate into another field; when they got
through he kept walking abreast, elbow to elbow almost.  His voice
growled pleasantly in her very ear.  Staying in this dull place was
enough to give anyone the blues.  His sister scribbled all day.  It was
positively unkind.  He alluded to his nieces as rude, selfish monkeys,
without either feelings or manners.  And he went on to talk about his
ship being laid up for a month and dismantled for repairs.  The worst
was that on arriving in London he found he couldn't get the rooms he was
used to, where they made him as comfortable as such a confirmed sea-dog
as himself could be anywhere on shore.

In the effort to subdue by dint of talking and to keep in check the
mysterious, the profound attraction he felt already for that delicate
being of flesh and blood, with pale cheeks, with, darkened eyelids and
eyes scalded with hot tears, he went on speaking of himself as a
confirmed enemy of life on shore--a perfect terror to a simple man, what
with the fads and proprieties and the ceremonies and affectations.  He
hated all that.  He wasn't fit for it.  There was no rest and peace and
security but on the sea.

This gave one a view of Captain Anthony as a hermit withdrawn from a
wicked world.  It was amusingly unexpected to me and nothing more.  But
it must have appealed straight to that bruised and battered young soul.
Still shrinking from his nearness she had ended by listening to him with
avidity.  His deep murmuring voice soothed her.  And she thought
suddenly that there was peace and rest in the grave too.

She heard him say: "Look at my sister.  She isn't a bad woman by any
means.  She asks me here because it's right and proper, I suppose, but
she has no use for me.  There you have your shore people.  I quite
understand anybody crying.  I would have been gone already, only, truth
to say, I haven't any friends to go to."  He added brusquely: "And you?"

She made a slight negative sign.  He must have been observing her,
putting two and two together.  After a pause he said simply: "When I
first came here I thought you were governess to these girls.  My sister
didn't say a word about you to me."

Then Flora spoke for the first time.

"Mrs Fyne is my best friend."

"So she is mine," he said without the slightest irony or bitterness, but
added with conviction: "That shows you what life ashore is.  Much better
be out of it."

As they were approaching the cottage he was heard again as though a long
silent walk had not intervened: "But anyhow I shan't ask her anything
about you."

He stopped short and she went on alone.  His last words had impressed
her.  Everything he had said seemed somehow to have a special meaning
under its obvious conversational sense.  Till she went in at the door of
the cottage she felt his eyes resting on her.

That is it.  He had made himself felt.  That girl was, one may say,
washing about with slack limbs in the ugly surf of life with no
opportunity to strike out for herself, when suddenly she had been made
to feel that there was somebody beside her in the bitter water.  A most
considerable moral event for her; whether she was aware of it or not.
They met again at the one o'clock dinner.  I am inclined to think that,
being a healthy girl under her frail appearance, and fast walking and
what I may call relief-crying (there are many kinds of crying) making
one hungry, she made a good meal.  It was Captain Anthony who had no
appetite.  His sister commented on it in a curt, businesslike manner,
and the eldest of his delightful nieces said mockingly: "You have been
taking too much exercise this morning, Uncle Roderick."  The mild Uncle
Roderick turned upon her with a "What do you know about it, young lady?"
so charged with suppressed savagery that the whole round table gave one
gasp and went dumb for the rest of the meal.  He took no notice whatever
of Flora de Barral.  I don't think it was from prudence or any
calculated motive.  I believe he was so full of her aspects that he did
not want to look in her direction when there were other people to hamper
his imagination.

You understand I am piecing here bits of disconnected statements.  Next
day Flora saw him leaning over the field-gate.  When she told me this, I
didn't of course ask her how it was she was there.  Probably she could
not have told me how it was she was there.  The difficulty here is to
keep steadily in view the then conditions of her existence, a
combination of dreariness and horror.

That hermit-like but not exactly misanthropic sailor was leaning over
the gate moodily.  When he saw the white-faced restless Flora drifting
like a lost thing along the road he put his pipe in his pocket and
called out "Good morning, Miss Smith" in a tone of amazing happiness.
She, with one foot in life and the other in a nightmare, was at the same
time inert and unstable, and very much at the mercy of sudden impulses.
She swerved, came distractedly right up to the gate and looking straight
into his eyes: "I am not Miss Smith.  That's not my name.  Don't call me
by it."

She was shaking as if in a passion.  His eyes expressed nothing; he only
unlatched the gate in silence, grasped her arm and drew her in.  Then
closing it with a kick--

"Not your name?  That's all one to me.  Your name's the least thing
about you I care for."  He was leading her firmly away from the gate
though she resisted slightly.  There was a sort of joy in his eyes which
frightened her.  "You are not a princess in disguise," he said with an
unexpected laugh she found blood-curdling.  "And that's all I care for.
You had better understand that I am not blind and not a fool.  And then
it's plain for even a fool to see that things have been going hard with
you.  You are on a lee shore and eating your heart out with worry."

What seemed most awful to her was the elated light in his eyes, the
rapacious smile that would come and go on his lips as if he were
gloating over her misery.  But her misery was his opportunity and he
rejoiced while the tenderest pity seemed to flood his whole being.  He
pointed out to her that she knew who he was.  He was Mrs Fyne's
brother.  And, well, if his sister was the best friend she had in the
world, then, by Jove, it was about time somebody came along to look
after her a little.

Flora had tried more than once to free herself, but he tightened his
grasp of her arm each time and even shook it a little without ceasing to
speak.  The nearness of his face intimidated her.  He seemed striving to
look her through.  It was obvious the world had been using her ill.  And
even as he spoke with indignation the very marks and stamp of this
ill-usage of which he was so certain seemed to add to the inexplicable
attraction he felt for her person.  It was not pity alone, I take it.
It was something more spontaneous, perverse and exciting.  It gave him
the feeling that if only he could get hold of her, no woman would belong
to him so completely as this woman.

"Whatever your troubles," he said, "I am the man to take you away from
them; that is, if you are not afraid.  You told me you had no friends.
Neither have I.  Nobody ever cared for me as far as I can remember.
Perhaps you could.  Yes, I live on the sea.  But who would you be
parting from?  No one.  You have no one belonging to you."

At this point she broke away from him and ran.  He did not pursue her.
The tall hedges tossing in the wind, the wide fields, the clouds driving
over the sky and the sky itself wheeled about her in masses of green and
white and blue as if the world were breaking up silently in a whirl, and
her foot at the next step were bound to find the void.  She reached the
gate all right, got out, and, once on the road, discovered that she had
not the courage to look back.  The rest of that day she spent with the
Fyne girls who gave her to understand that she was a slow and
unprofitable person.  Long after tea, nearly at dusk, Captain Anthony
(the son of the poet) appeared suddenly before her in the little garden
in front of the cottage.  They were alone for the moment.  The wind had
dropped.  In the calm evening air the voices of Mrs Fyne and the girls
strolling aimlessly on the road could be heard.  He said to her
severely:

"You have understood?"

She looked at him in silence.

"That I love you," he finished.

She shook her head the least bit.

"Don't you believe me?" he asked in a low, infuriated voice.

"Nobody would love me," she answered in a very quiet tone.  "Nobody
could."

He was dumb for a time, astonished beyond measure, as he well might have
been.  He doubted his ears.  He was outraged.

"Eh?  What?  Can't love you?  What do you know about it?  It's my
affair, isn't it?  You dare say _that_ to a man who has just told you!
You must be mad!"

"Very nearly," she said with the accent of pent-up sincerity, and even
relieved because she was able to say something which she felt was true.
For the last few days she had felt herself several times near that
madness which is but an intolerable lucidity of apprehension.

The clear voices of Mrs Fyne and the girls were coming nearer, sounding
affected in the peace of the passion-laden earth.  He began storming at
her hastily.

"Nonsense!  Nobody can ...  Indeed!  Pah!  You'll have to be shown that
somebody can.  I can.  Nobody..."  He made a contemptuous hissing noise.
"More likely _you_ can't.  They have done something to you.
Something's crushed your pluck.  You can't face a man--that's what it
is.  What made you like this?  Where do you come from?  You have been
put upon.  The scoundrels--whoever they are, men or women, seem to have
robbed you of your very name.  You say you are not Miss Smith.  Who are
you, then?"

She did not answer.  He muttered, "Not that I care," and fell silent,
because the fatuous self-confident chatter of the Fyne girls could be
heard at the very gate.  But they were not going to bed yet.  They
passed on.  He waited a little in silence and immobility, then stamped
his foot and lost control of himself.  He growled at her in a savage
passion.  She felt certain that he was threatening her and calling her
names.  She was no stranger to abuse, as we know, but there seemed to be
a particular kind of ferocity in this which was new to her.  She began
to tremble.  The especially terrifying thing was that she could not make
out the nature of these awful menaces and names.  Not a word.  Yet it
was not the shrinking anguish of her other experiences of angry scenes.
She made a mighty effort, though her knees were knocking together, and
in an expiring voice demanded that he should let her go indoors.  "Don't
stop me.  It's no use.  It's no use," she repeated faintly, feeling an
invincible obstinacy rising within her, yet without anger against that
raging man.

He became articulate suddenly, and, without raising his voice, perfectly
audible.

"No use?  No use!  You dare stand here and tell me that--you white-faced
wisp, you wreath of mist, you little ghost of all the sorrow in the
world.  You dare!  Haven't I been looking at you?  You are all eyes.
What makes your cheeks always so white as if you had seen something ...
Don't speak.  I love it--No use!  And you really think that I can now go
to sea for a year or more, to the other side of the world somewhere,
leaving you behind.  Why!  You would vanish ... what little there is of
you.  Some rough wind will blow you away altogether.  You have no
holding ground on earth.  Well, then trust yourself to me--to the sea--
which is deep like your eyes."

She said: "Impossible."  He kept quiet for a while, then asked in a
totally changed tone, a tone of gloomy curiosity:

"You can't stand me then?  Is that it?"

"No," she said, more steady herself.  "I am not thinking of you at all."

The inane voices of the Fyne girls were heard over the sombre fields
calling to each other, thin and clear.  He muttered: "You could try to.
Unless you are thinking of somebody else."

"Yes.  I am thinking of somebody else, of someone who has nobody to
think of him but me."

His shadowy form stepped out of her way, and suddenly leaned sideways
against the wooden support of the porch.  And as she stood still,
surprised by this staggering movement, his voice spoke up in a tone
quite strange to her.

"Go in then.  Go out of my sight--I thought you said nobody could love
you."

She was passing him when suddenly he struck her as so forlorn that she
was inspired to say: "No one has ever loved me--not in that way--if
that's what you mean.  Nobody, would."

He detached himself brusquely from the post, and she did not shrink; but
Mrs Fyne and the girls were already at the gate.

All he understood was that everything was not over yet.  There was no
time to lose; Mrs Fyne and the girls had come in at the gate.  He
whispered "Wait" with such authority (he was the son of Carleon Anthony,
the domestic autocrat) that it did arrest her for a moment, long enough
to hear him say that he could not be left like this to puzzle over her
nonsense all night.  She was to slip down again into the garden later
on, as soon as she could do so without being heard.  He would be there
waiting for her till--till daylight.  She didn't think he could go to
sleep, did she?  And she had better come, or--he broke off on an
unfinished threat.

She vanished into the unlighted cottage just as Mrs Fyne came up to the
porch.  Nervous, holding her breath in the darkness of the living-room,
she heard her best friend say: "You ought to, have joined us, Roderick."
And then: "Have you seen Miss Smith anywhere?"

Flora shuddered, expecting Anthony to break out into betraying
imprecations on Miss Smith's head, and cause a painful and humiliating
explanation.  She imagined him full of his mysterious ferocity.  To her
great surprise, Anthony's voice sounded very much as usual, with perhaps
a slight tinge of grimness.  "Miss Smith!  No.  I've seen no Miss
Smith."

Mrs Fyne seemed satisfied--and not much concerned really.

Flora, relieved, got clear away to her room upstairs, and shutting her
door quietly, dropped into a chair.  She was used to reproaches, abuse,
to all sorts of wicked ill-usage--short of actual beating on her body.
Otherwise inexplicable angers had cut and slashed and trampled down her
youth without mercy--and mainly, it appeared, because she was the
financier de Barral's daughter and also condemned to a degrading sort of
poverty through the action of treacherous men who had turned upon her
father in his hour of need.  And she thought with the tenderest possible
affection of that upright figure buttoned up in a long frock-coat,
soft-voiced and having but little to say to his girl.  She seemed to
feel his hand closed round hers.  On his flying visits to Brighton he
would always walk hand in hand with her.  People stared covertly at
them; the band was playing; and there was the sea--the blue gaiety of
the sea.  They were quietly happy together.--It was all over!

An immense anguish of the present wrung her heart, and she nearly cried
aloud.  That dread of what was before her which had been eating up her
courage slowly in the course of odious years, flamed up into an access
of panic, that sort of headlong panic which had already driven her out
twice to the top of the cliff-like quarry.  She jumped up saying to
herself: "Why not now?  At once!  Yes.  I'll do it now--in the dark!"
The very horror of it seemed to give her additional resolution.

She came down the staircase quietly, and only on the point of opening
the door and because of the discovery that it was unfastened, she
remembered Captain Anthony's threat to stay in the garden all night.
She hesitated.  She did not understand the mood of that man clearly.  He
was violent.  But she had gone beyond the point where things matter.
What would he think of her coming down to him--as he would naturally
suppose.  And even that didn't matter.  He could not despise her more
than she despised herself.  She must have been light-headed because the
thought came into her mind that should he get into ungovernable fury
from disappointment, and perchance strangle her, it would be as good a
way to be done with it as any.

"You had that thought," I exclaimed in wonder.

With downcast eyes and speaking with an almost painstaking precision
(her very lips, her red lips, seemed to move just enough to be heard and
no more), she said that, yes, the thought came into her head.  This
makes one shudder at the mysterious ways girls acquire knowledge.  For
this was a thought, wild enough, I admit, but which could only have come
from the depths of that sort of experience which she had not had, and
went far beyond a young girl's possible conception of the strongest and
most veiled of human emotions.

"He was there, of course?"  I said.

"Yes, he was there."  She saw him on the path directly she stepped
outside the porch.  He was very still.  It was as though he had been
standing there with his face to the door for hours.

Shaken up by the changing moods of passion and tenderness, he must have
been ready for any extravagance of conduct.  Knowing the profound
silence each night brought to that nook of the country, I could imagine
them having the feeling of being the only two people on the wide earth.
A row of six or seven lofty elms just across the road opposite the
cottage made the night more obscure in that little garden.  If these two
could just make out each other that was all.

"Well!  And were you very much terrified?"  I asked.

She made me wait a little before she said, raising her eyes: "He was
gentleness itself."

I noticed three abominable, drink-sodden loafers, sallow and dirty, who
had come to range themselves in a row within ten feet of us against the
front of the public-house.  They stared at Flora de Barral's back with
unseeing, mournful fixity.  "Let's move this way a little," I proposed.

She turned at once and we made a few paces; not too far to take us out
of sight of the hotel door, but very nearly.  I could just keep my eyes
on it.  After all, I had not been so very long with the girl.  If you
were to disentangle the words we actually exchanged from my comments you
would see that they were not so very many, including everything she had
so unexpectedly told me of her story.  No, not so very many.  And now it
seemed as though there would be no more.  No!  I could expect no more.
The confidence was wonderful enough in its nature as far as it went, and
perhaps not to have been expected from any other girl under the sun.
And I felt a little ashamed.  The origin of our intimacy was too
gruesome.  It was as if listening to her I had taken advantage of having
seen her poor bewildered, scared soul without its veils.  But I was
curious, too; or, to render myself justice without false modesty--I was
anxious; anxious to know a little more.

I felt like a blackmailer all the same when I made my attempt with a
light-hearted remark.

"And so you gave up that walk you proposed to take?"

"Yes, I gave up the walk," she said slowly before raising her downcast
eyes.  When she did so it was with an extraordinary effect.  It was like
catching sight of a piece of blue sky, of a stretch of open water.  And
for a moment I understood the desire of that man to whom the sea and sky
of his solitary life had appeared suddenly incomplete without that
glance which seemed to belong to them both.  He was not for nothing the
son of a poet.  I looked into those unabashed eyes while the girl went
on, her demure appearance and precise tone changed to a very earnest
expression.  Woman is various indeed.

"But I want you to understand, Mr.." she had actually to think of my
name...  "Mr Marlow, that I have written to Mrs Fyne that I haven't
been--that I have done nothing to make Captain Anthony behave to me as
he had behaved.  I haven't.  I haven't.  It isn't my doing.  It isn't my
fault--if she likes to put it in that way.  But she, with her ideas,
ought to understand that I couldn't, that I couldn't--I know she hates
me now.  I think she never liked me.  I think nobody ever cared for me.
I was told once nobody could care for me; and I think it is true.  The
mother, good honest woman, was quite content with her station in
life.

But with the daughter it was otherwise; she, like a spoilt beauty,
looked contemptuously upon her many admirers, her mind was full of proud
and ambitious thoughts, and the more lovers she had, the prouder
she became.

One beautiful moonlight night the mother awoke, and being unable
to sleep, began to pray God for the happiness of her only child,
though she often made her mother's life miserable.

The fond woman looked lovingly at the beautiful daughter sleeping by her
side, and she wondered, as she saw her smile, what happy dream had visited
her.

Then she finished her prayer, and laying her head on the girl's pillow,
fell asleep. Next day she said, "Come, darling child, tell me what you
were dreaming about last night, you looked so happy smiling in
your sleep."

"Oh yes, mother, I remember. I had a very beautiful dream. I thought a
rich nobleman came to our house, in a splendid carriage of brass,
and gave me a ring set with stones, that sparkled like the stars
of heaven.

When I entered the church with him, it was full of people, and they all
thought me divine and adorable, like the Blessed Virgin."
"Ah! my child, what sin! May God keep you from such dreams."

But the daughter ran away singing, and busied herself about the
house.

The same day a handsome young farmer drove into the village in his cart
and begged them to come and share his country bread. He was a kind
fellow, and the mother liked him much.

But the daughter refused his invitation, and insulted him into the
bargain.

"Even if you had driven in a carriage of brass," she said, "and had offered
me a ring set with stones shining as the stars in heaven, I would
never have married you--you, a mere peasant!"

The young farmer was terribly upset at her words, and with a prayer
for her soul, returned home a saddened man.

But her mother scolded and reproached her.

The next night the woman again awoke, and taking her rosary prayed with
still greater fervour, that God would bless her child. This time the
girl laughed as she slept.

"What can the poor child be dreaming about?" she said to herself:
and sighing she prayed for her again.

Then she laid her head upon her pillow and tried in vain to sleep. In
the morning, when her daughter was dressing, she said: "Well, my
dear, you were dreaming again last night, and laughing like a
maniac."

"Was I? Listen, I dreamt a nobleman came for me in a silver carriage, and
gave me a golden diadem.

When I entered the church with him, the people admired and worshipped
me more than the Blessed Virgin."

"Ay me, what a terrible dream! what a wicked dream! Pray God not to lead
you into temptation."
Then she scolded her daughter severely and went out, slamming the door
after her.

That same day a carriage drove into the village, and some gentlemen
invited mother and daughter to share the bread of the lord of the
manor.

The mother considered such an offer a great honour, but the daughter
refused it and replied to the gentlemen scornfully: "Even if you had
come to fetch me in a carriage of solid silver and had presented me
with a golden diadem, I would never have consented to be the wife
of your lord."
The gentlemen turned away in disgust and returned home; the mother
rebuked her severely for so much pride.

"Miserable, foolish girl!" she cried, "pride is a breath from hell. It is
your duty to be humble, honest, and sweet-tempered."
The daughter replied by a laugh.

The third night she slept soundly, but the poor woman at her side could
not close her eyes.

Tormented with dark forebodings, she feared some misfortune was about
to happen, and counted her beads, praying fervently.

All at once the young sleeper began to sneer and laugh.

"Merciful God! ah me!" cried the poor woman, "what are these dreams
that worry her poor brain!"

In the morning she said, "What made you sneer so frightfully last
night? You must have had bad dreams again, my poor child."

"Now, mother, you look as if you were going to preach again."
"No, no; but I want to know what you were dreaming about."
"Well, I dreamt some one drove up in a golden carriage and asked
me to marry him, and he brought me a mantle of cloth of pure gold.

When we came into church, the crowd pressed forward to kneel before
me."
The mother wrung her hands piteously, and the girl left the room to avoid
hearing her lamentations. That same day three carriages entered the yard,
one of brass, one of silver, and one of gold. The first was drawn by
two, the second by three, the third by four magnificent horses.

Gentlemen wearing scarlet gloves and green mantles got out of the brass
and silver carriages, while from the golden carriage alighted a prince
who, as the sun shone on him, looked as if he were dressed in gold.
They all made their way to the widow and asked for her daughter's hand.

"I fear we are not worthy of so much honour," replied the widow meekly,
but when the daughter's eyes fell upon her suitor she recognised in
him the lover of her dreams, and withdrew to weave an aigrette of
many-coloured feathers.

In exchange for this aigrette which she offered her bridegroom, he
placed upon her finger a ring set with stones that shone like the
stars in heaven, and over her shoulders a mantle of cloth of gold.

The young bride, beside herself with joy, retired to complete her toilette.
Meanwhile the anxious mother, a prey to the blackest
forebodings, said to her son-in-law, "My daughter has consented
to share your bread, tell me of what sort of flour it is made?"

[Illustration]

"In our house we have bread of brass, of silver, and of gold; my wife will
be free to choose."
Such a reply astonished her more than ever, and made her still more unhappy.
The daughter asked no questions, was in fact content to know nothing,
not even what her mother suffered. She looked magnificent in her bridal
attire and golden mantle, but she left her home with the prince without
saying good-bye either to her mother or to her youthful companions.
Neither did she ask her mother's blessing, though the latter wept and
prayed for her safety.

After the marriage ceremony they mounted the golden carriage and set
off, followed by the attendants of silver and brass. The procession
moved slowly along the road without stopping until it reached the
foot of a high rock.

Here, instead of a carriage entrance, was a large cavern which led
out into a steep slope down which the horses went lower and lower.

The giant _Zémo-tras_ (he who makes the earthquakes) closed the opening
with a huge stone.

They made their way in darkness for some time, the terrified bride being
reassured by her husband.

"Fear nothing," said he, "in a little while it will be clear and beautiful."

Grotesque dwarfs, carrying lighted torches, appeared on all sides,
saluted and welcomed their King Kovlad as they illumined the road
for him and his attendants.

Then for the first time the girl knew she had married Kovlad, but this
mattered little to her.

On coming out from these gloomy passages into the open they found
themselves surrounded by large forests and mountains, mountains that
seemed to touch the sky. And, strange to relate, all the trees of whatsoever
kind, and even the mountains that seemed to touch the sky, were of
solid lead.
When they had crossed these marvellous mountains the giant Zémo-tras
closed all the openings in the road they had passed.

They then drove out upon vast and beautiful plains, in the centre of
which was a golden palace covered with precious stones.

The bride was weary with looking at so many wonders, and gladly sat down
to the feast prepared by the dwarfs. Meats of many kinds were served,
roast and boiled, but lo!

they were of metal--brass, silver, and gold. Every one ate heartily and
enjoyed the food, but the young wife, with tears in her eyes,
begged for a piece of bread.

"Certainly, madam, with pleasure," answered Kovlad. But she could not
eat the bread which was brought, for it was of brass. Then the king
sent for a piece of silver bread, still she could not eat it; and
again for a slice of golden bread, that too she was unable to bite.

The servants did all they could to get something to their mistress's
taste, but she found it impossible to eat anything.

"I should be most happy to gratify you," said Kovlad "but we have no
other kind of food."
Then she realised for the first time in whose power she had placed herself,
and she began to weep bitterly and wish she had taken her mother's
advice.

"It is of no use to weep and regret," said Kovlad, "you must have
known the kind of bread you would have to break here; your wish has
been fulfilled."

And so it was, for nothing can recall the past. The wretched girl
was obliged henceforth to live underground with her husband Kovlad, the
God of Metals, in his golden palace.

And this because she had set her heart upon nothing but the possession
of gold, and had never wished for anything better.

[Illustration]

II

THE LOST CHILD

Long long ago there lived a very rich nobleman.

But though he was so rich he was not happy, for he had no children to whom
he could leave his wealth. He was, besides, no longer young. Every day
he and his wife went to church to pray for a son. At last, after long
waiting, God sent them what they desired. Now the evening before
its arrival the father dreamed that its chance of living would depend
upon one condition, namely, that its feet never touched the earth
until it was twelve years old.

Great care was taken that this should be avoided, and when the little
stranger came, only trustworthy nurses were employed to look after
him.

As the years passed on the child was diligently guarded, sometimes he
was carried in his nurses' arms, sometimes rocked in his golden
cradle, but his feet never touched the ground.

Now when the end of the time drew near the father began preparations for
a magnificent feast which should be given to celebrate his son's
release. One day while these were in progress a frightful noise, followed
by most unearthly yells, shook the castle.

The nurse dropped the child in her terror and ran to the window:
that instant the noises ceased. On turning to take up the boy, imagine
her dismay when she found him no longer there, and remembered that
she had disobeyed her master's orders.

Hearing her screams and lamentations, all the servants of the castle ran
to her. The father soon followed, asking, "What is the matter?
What has happened? Where is my child?" The nurse, trembling and weeping,
told of the disappearance of his son, his only child. No words can
tell the anguish of the father's heart.

He sent servants in every direction to hunt for his boy, he gave
orders, he begged and prayed, he threw away money right and left,
he promised everything if only his son might be restored to him.

Search was made without loss of time, but no trace of him could be
discovered; he had vanished as completely as if he had never existed.

Many years later the unhappy nobleman learnt that in one of the most
beautiful rooms of the castle, footsteps, as of some one walking up and
down, and dismal groans, were heard every midnight. Anxious to follow
the matter up, for he thought it might in some way concern his lost son,
he made known that a reward of three hundred gold pieces would be
given to any one who would watch for one whole night in the haunted
room.

Many were willing, but had not the courage to stay till the end;
for at midnight, when the dismal groans were heard, they would run
away rather than risk their lives for three hundred gold pieces.

The poor father was in despair, and knew not how to discover the truth
of this dark mystery.

Now close to the castle dwelt a widow, a miller by trade, who had three
daughters. They were very poor, and hardly earned enough for their
daily needs.

When they heard of the midnight noises in the castle and the promised
reward, the eldest daughter said, "As we are so very poor we have nothing
to lose; surely we might try to earn these three hundred gold pieces
by remaining in the room one night. I should like to try, mother,
if you will let me."
The mother shrugged her shoulders, she hardly knew what to say; but
when she thought of their poverty and the difficulty they had to earn
a living she gave permission for her eldest daughter to remain one
night in the haunted room. Then the daughter went to ask the nobleman's
consent.

"Have you really the courage to watch for a whole night in a room haunted
by ghosts? Are you sure you are not afraid, my good girl?"
"I am willing to try this very night," she replied. "I would only ask
you to give me some food to cook for my supper, for I am very hungry."

Orders were given that she should be supplied with everything she
wanted, and indeed enough food was given her, not for one supper
only, but for three.

With the food, some dry firewood and a candle, she entered the room. Like
a good housewife, she first lit the fire and put on her saucepans, then
she laid the table and made the bed. This filled up the early part of
the evening. The time passed so quickly that she was surprised to
hear the clock strike twelve, while at the last stroke, footsteps, as
of some one walking, shook the room, and dismal groans filled the
air. The frightened girl ran from one corner to the other, but
could not see any one.

But the footsteps and the groans did not cease. Suddenly a young
man approached her and asked, "For whom is this food cooked?"

"For myself," she said.

The gentle face of the stranger saddened, and after a short silence
he asked again, "And this table, for whom is it laid?"
"For myself," she replied.

The brow of the young man clouded over, and the beautiful blue eyes
filled with tears as he asked once more, "And this bed, for whom
have you made it?"

"For myself," replied she in the same selfish and indifferent tone.

Tears fell from his eyes as he waved his arms and vanished.

Next morning she told the nobleman all that had happened, but without
mentioning the painful impression her answers had made upon the
stranger.

The three hundred golden crowns were paid, and the father was thankful
to have at last heard something that might possibly lead to the
discovery of his son.

On the following day the second daughter, having been told by her
sister what to do and how to answer the stranger, went to the castle
to offer her services.

The nobleman willingly agreed, and orders were given that she should
be provided with everything she might want.

Without loss of time she entered the room, lit the fire, put on the
saucepans, spread a white cloth upon the table, made the bed, and awaited
the hour of midnight. When the young stranger appeared and asked,
"For whom is this food prepared? for whom is the table laid?
for whom is the bed made?" she answered as her sister had bidden her,
"For me, for myself only."
As on the night before, he burst into tears, waved his arms, and
suddenly disappeared.

Next morning she told the nobleman all that had happened except the
sad impression her answers had made upon the stranger.

The three hundred gold pieces were given her, and she went home.

On the third day the youngest daughter wanted to try her fortune.

"Sisters," said she, "as you have succeeded in earning three hundred gold
crowns each, and so helping our dear mother, I too should like to
do my part and remain a night in the haunted room."
[Illustration]
Now the widow loved her youngest daughter more dearly than the others,
and dreaded to expose her to any danger; but as the elder ones had
been successful, she allowed her to take her chance. So with the
instructions from her sisters as to what she should do and say, and with
the nobleman's consent and abundant provisions, she entered the
haunted room.

Having lit the fire, put on the saucepans, laid the table and made the
bed, she awaited with hope and fear the hour of midnight.

As twelve o'clock struck, the room was shaken by the footsteps of
some one who walked up and down, and the air was filled with cries and
groans. The girl looked everywhere, but no living being could she
see.

Suddenly there stood before her a young man who asked in a sweet
voice, "For whom have you prepared this food?"

Now her sisters had told her how to answer and how to act, but when she
looked into the sad eyes of the stranger she resolved to treat him
more kindly.

"Well, you do not answer me; for whom is the food prepared?" he asked again
impatiently, as she made no reply. Somewhat confused, she said, "I
prepared it for myself, but you too are welcome to it."

At these words his brow grew more serene.

"And this table, for whom is it spread?"
"For myself, unless you will honour me by being my guest."
A bright smile illumined his face.

"And this bed, for whom have you made it?"
"For myself, but if you have need of rest it is for you."

He clapped his hands for joy and replied, "Ah, that's right; I
accept the invitation with pleasure, and all that you have been so kind
as to offer me. But wait, I pray you wait for me; I must first thank
my kind friends for the care they have taken of me."
A fresh warm breath of spring filled the air, while at the same
moment a deep precipice opened in the middle of the floor.

He descended lightly, and she, anxious to see what would happen, followed
him, holding on to his mantle. Thus they both reached the bottom
of the precipice. Down there a new world opened itself before her
eyes. To the right flowed a river of liquid gold, to the left rose high
mountains of solid gold, in the centre lay a large meadow covered
with millions of flowers.

The stranger went on, the girl followed unnoticed. And as he went he
saluted the field flowers as old friends, caressing them and leaving
them with regret. Then they came to a forest where the trees were
of gold.

Many birds of different kinds began to sing, and flying round the young
stranger perched familiarly on his head and shoulders. He spoke to and
petted each one. While thus engaged, the girl broke off a branch from
one of the golden trees and hid it in remembrance of this strange
land.

Leaving the forest of gold, they reached a wood where all the trees were
of silver. Their arrival was greeted by an immense number of animals of
various kinds. These crowded together and pushed one against another
to get close to their friend. He spoke to each one and stroked and
petted them. Meanwhile the girl broke off a branch of silver from one
of the trees, saying to herself, "These will serve me as tokens of
this wonderful land, for my sisters would not believe me if I only
told them of it."

[Illustration]
When the young stranger had taken leave of all his friends he
returned by the paths he had come, and the girl followed without
being seen.

Arrived at the foot of the precipice, he began to ascend, she coming
silently after, holding on to his mantle.

Up they went higher and higher, until they reached the room in the castle.
The floor closed up without trace of the opening.

The girl returned to her place by the fire, where she was standing when
the young man approached.

"All my farewells have been spoken," said he, "now we can have supper."

She hastened to place upon the table the food so hurriedly prepared, and
sitting side by side they supped together. When they had made a good meal
he said, "Now it is time to rest."

He lay down on the carefully-made bed, and the girl placed by his side the
gold and silver branches she had picked in the Mineral Land. In a few
moments he was sleeping peacefully.

Next day the sun was already high in the sky, and yet the girl had
not come to give an account of herself.

The nobleman became impatient; he waited and waited, becoming more
and more uneasy. At last he determined to go and see for himself what had
happened.

Picture to yourself his surprise and joy, when on entering the
haunted chamber he saw his long-lost son sleeping on the bed, while
beside him sat the widow's beautiful daughter.

At that moment the son awoke. The father, overwhelmed with joy, summoned
the attendants of the castle to rejoice with him in his new-found
happiness.

Then the young man saw the two branches of metal, and said with
astonishment, "What do I see?

Did you then follow me down there?

Know that by this act you have broken the spell and released me from the
enchantment.

These two branches will make two palaces for our future dwelling."

Thereupon he took the branches and threw them out of the
window.
Immediately there were seen two magnificent palaces, one of gold,
the other of silver.

And there they lived happily as man and wife, the nobleman's son and the
miller's daughter. And if not dead they live there still.

THE MAID WITH HAIR OF GOLD

[Illustration]
THE MAID WITH HAIR OF GOLD
There was once a king so wise and clever that he understood the
language of all animals.

You shall hear how he gained this power.

One day an old woman came to the palace and said, "I wish to speak to
his majesty, for I have something of great importance to tell him." When
admitted to his presence she presented him with a curious fish,
saying, "Have it cooked for yourself, and when you have eaten it you
will understand all that is said by the birds of the air, the animals
that walk the earth, and the fishes that live under the waters."
The king was delighted to know that which every one else was ignorant
of, so he rewarded the old woman generously, and told a servant to cook
the fish very carefully.

"But take care," said the monarch, "that you do not taste it yourself,
for if you do you will be killed."
George, the servant, was astonished at such a threat, and wondered
why his master was so anxious that no one else should eat any of the
fish.
Then examining it curiously he said, "Never in all my life have I
seen such an odd-looking fish; it seems more like a reptile.

Now where would be the harm if I did take some? Every cook tastes of the
dishes he prepares."

When it was fried he tasted a small piece, and while taking some
of the sauce heard a buzzing in the air and a voice speaking in his
ear.

"Let us taste a crumb: let us taste a little," it said.

He looked round to see where the words came from, but there were
only a few flies buzzing about in the kitchen. At the same moment some
one out in the yard said in a harsh jerky voice, "Where are we going
to settle? Where?"
And another answered, "In the miller's barley-field; ho! for the
miller's field of barley."
When George looked towards where this strange talk came he saw a
gander flying at the head of a flock of geese.

"How lucky," thought he; "now I know why my master set so much value on
this fish and wished to eat it all himself."
George had now no doubt that by tasting the fish he had learnt the language
of animals, so after having taken a little more he served the king with
the remainder as if nothing had happened.

When his majesty had dined he ordered George to saddle two horses and
accompany him for a ride. They were soon off, the master in front, the
servant behind.

While crossing a meadow George's horse began to prance and caper,
neighing out these words, "I say, brother, I feel so light and in such
good spirits to-day that in one single bound I could leap over
those mountains yonder."

"I could do the same," answered the king's horse, "but I carry a feeble
old man on my back; he would fall like a log and break his skull."

"What does that matter to you? So much the better if he should break
his head, for then, instead of being ridden by an old man you would
probably be mounted by a young one."
The servant laughed a good deal upon hearing this conversation
between the horses, but he took care to do so on the quiet, lest
the king should hear him. At that moment his majesty turned round,
and, seeing a smile on the man's face, asked the cause of it.
"Oh nothing, your majesty, only some nonsense that came into my
head."
The king said nothing, and asked no more questions, but he was
suspicious, and distrusted both servant and horses; so he hastened
back to the palace.
When there he said to George, "Give me some wine, but mind you only
pour out enough to fill the glass, for if you put in one drop too
much, so that it overflows, I shall certainly order my executioner
to cut off your head."
While he was speaking two birds flew near the window, one chasing
the other, who carried three golden hairs in his beak.
"Give them me," said one, "you know they are mine."She said `Yes' to him only for the sake of that
fatuous, swindling father of hers.  It's perfectly plain if one thinks
it over a moment.  One needn't even think of it.  We have it under her
own hand.  In that letter to my wife she says she has acted
unscrupulously.  She has owned up, then, for what else can it mean, I
should like to know.  And so they are to be married before that old
idiot comes out.--He will be surprised," commented Fyne suddenly in a
strangely malignant tone.  "He shall be met at the jail door by a Mrs
Anthony, a Mrs Captain Anthony.  Very pleasant for Zoe.  And for all I
know, my brother-in-law means to turn up dutifully too.  A little family
event.  It's extremely pleasant to think of.  Delightful.  A charming
family party.  We three against the world--and all that sort of thing.
And what for.  For a girl that doesn't care twopence for him."

The demon of bitterness had entered into little Fyne.  He amazed me as
though he had changed his skin from white to black.  It was quite as
wonderful.  And he kept it up, too.

"Luckily there are some advantages in the--the profession of a sailor.
As long as they defy the world away at sea somewhere eighteen thousand
miles from here, I don't mind so much.  I wonder what that interesting
old party will say.  He will have another surprise.  They mean to drag
him along with them on board the ship straight away.  Rescue work.  Just
think of Roderick Anthony, the son of a gentleman, after all..."

He gave me a little shock.  I thought he was going to say the "son of
the poet" as usual; but his mind was not running on such vanities now.
His unspoken thought must have gone on "and uncle of my girls."  I
suspect that he had been roughly handled by Captain Anthony up there,
and the resentment gave a tremendous fillip to the slow play of his
wits.  Those men of sober fancy, when anything rouses their imaginative
faculty, are very thorough.  "Just think!" he cried.  "The three of them
crowded into a four-wheeler, and Anthony sitting deferentially opposite
that astonished old jail-bird!"

The good little man laughed.  An improper sound it was to come from his
manly chest; and what made it worse was the thought that for the least
thing, by a mere hair's breadth, he might have taken this affair
sentimentally.  But clearly Anthony was no diplomatist.  His
brother-in-law must have appeared to him, to use the language of shore
people, a perfect philistine with a heart like a flint.  What Fyne
precisely meant by "wrangling" I don't know, but I had no doubt that
these two had "wrangled" to a profoundly disturbing extent.  How much
the other was affected I could not even imagine; but the man before me
was quite amazingly upset.

"In a four-wheeler!  Take him on board!"  I muttered, startled by the
change in Fyne.

"That's the plan--nothing less.  If I am to believe what I have been
told, his feet will scarcely touch the ground between the prison-gates
and the deck of that ship."

The transformed Fyne spoke in a forcibly lowered tone which I heard
without difficulty.  The rumbling, composite noises of the street were
hushed for a moment, during one of these sudden breaks in the traffic as
if the stream of commerce had dried up at its source.  Having an
unobstructed view past Fyne's shoulder, I was astonished to see that the
girl was still there.  I thought she had gone up long before.  But there
was her black slender figure, her white face under the roses of her hat.
She stood on the edge of the pavement as people stand on the bank of a
stream, very still, as if waiting--or as if unconscious of where she
was.  The three dismal, sodden loafers (I could see them too; they
hadn't budged an inch) seemed to me to be watching her.  Which was
horrible.

Meantime Fyne was telling me rather remarkable things--for him.  He
declared first it was a mercy in a sense.  Then he asked me if it were
not real madness, to saddle one's existence with such a perpetual
reminder.  The daily existence.  The isolated sea-bound existence.  To
bring such an additional strain into the solitude already trying enough
for two people was the craziest thing.  Undesirable relations were bad
enough on shore.  One could cut them or at least forget their existence
now and then.  He himself was preparing to forget his brother-in-law's
existence as much as possible.

That was the general sense of his remarks, not his exact words.  I
thought that his wife's brother's existence had never been very
embarrassing to him but that now of course he would have to abstain from
his allusions to the "son of the poet--you know."  I said "yes, yes," in
the pauses because I did not want him to turn round; and all the time I
was watching the girl intently.  I thought I knew now what she meant
with her "He was most generous."  Yes.  Generosity of character may
carry a man through any situation.  But why didn't she go then to her
generous man?  Why stand there as if clinging to this solid earth which
she surely hated as one must hate the place where one has been
tormented, hopeless, unhappy?  Suddenly she stirred.  Was she going to
cross over?  No.  She turned and began to walk slowly close to the
curbstone, reminding me of the time when I discovered her walking near
the edge of a ninety-foot sheer drop.  It was the same impression, the
same carriage, straight, slim, with rigid head and the two hands hanging
lightly clasped in front--only now a small sunshade was dangling from
them.  I saw something fateful in that deliberate pacing towards the
inconspicuous door with the words _Hotel Entrance_ on the glass-panels.

She was abreast of it now and I thought that she would stop again; but
no!  She swerved rigidly--at the moment there was no one near her; she
had that bit of pavement to herself--with inanimate slowness as if moved
by something outside herself.

"A confounded convict," Fyne burst out.

With the sound of that word offending my ears I saw the girl extend her
arm, push the door open a little way and glide in.  I saw plainly that
movement, the hand put out in advance with the gesture of a
sleep-walker.

She had vanished, her black figure had melted in the darkness of the
open door.  For some time Fyne said nothing; and I thought of the girl
going upstairs, appearing before the man.  Were they looking at each
other in silence and feeling they were alone in the world as lovers
should at the moment of meeting?  But that fine forgetfulness was surely
impossible to Anthony the seaman directly after the wrangling interview
with Fyne the emissary of an order of things which stops at the edge of
the sea.  How much he was disturbed I couldn't tell because I did not
know what that impetuous lover had had to listen to.

"Going to take the old fellow to sea with them," I said.  "Well I really
don't see what else they could have done with him.  You told your
brother-in-law what you thought of it?  I wonder how he took it."

"Very improperly," repeated Fyne.  "His manner was offensive, derisive,
from the first.  I don't mean he was actually rude in words.  Hang it
all, I am not a contemptible ass.  But he was exulting at having got
hold of a miserable girl."

"It is pretty certain that she will be much less poor and miserable," I
murmured.

It looked as if the exultation of Captain Anthony had got on Fyne's
nerves.  "I told the fellow very plainly that he was abominably selfish
in this," he affirmed unexpectedly.

"You did!  Selfish!"  I said rather taken aback.  "But what if the girl
thought that, on the contrary, he was most generous."

"What do you know about it," growled Fyne.  The rents and slashes of his
solemnity were closing up gradually but it was going to be a surly
solemnity.  "Generosity!  I am disposed to give it another name.  No.
Not folly," he shot out at me as though I had meant to interrupt him.
"Still another.  Something worse.  I need not tell you what it is," he
added with grim meaning.

"Certainly.  You needn't--unless you like," I said blankly.  Little Fyne
had never interested me so much since the beginning of the de
Barral-Anthony affair when I first perceived possibilities in him.  The
possibilities of dull men are exciting because when they happen they
suggest legendary cases of "possession," not exactly by the devil but,
anyhow, by a strange spirit.

"I told him it was a shame," said Fyne.  "Even if the girl did make eyes
at him--but I think with you that she did not.  Yes!  A shame to take
advantage of a girl's distress--a girl that does not love him in the
least."

"You think it's so bad as that?"  I said.  "Because you know I don't."

"What can you think about it," he retorted on me with a solemn stare.
"I go by her letter to my wife."

"Ah! that famous letter.  But you haven't actually read it," I said.

"No, but my wife told me.  Of course it was a most improper sort of
letter to write considering the circumstances.  It pained Mrs Fyne to
discover how thoroughly she had been misunderstood.  But what is written
is not all.  It's what my wife could read between the lines.  She says
that the girl is really terrified at heart."

"She had not much in life to give her any very special courage for it,
or any great confidence in mankind.  That's very true.  But this seems
an exaggeration."

"I should like to know what reasons you have to say that," asked Fyne
with offended solemnity.  "I really don't see any.  But I had sufficient
authority to tell my brother-in-law that if he thought he was going to
do something chivalrous and fine he was mistaken.  I can see very well
that he will do everything she asks him to do--but, all the same, it is
rather a pitiless transaction."

For a moment I felt it might be so.  Fyne caught sight of an approaching
tram-car and stepped out on the road to meet it.  "Have you a more
compassionate scheme ready?"  I called after him.  He made no answer,
clambered on to the rear platform, and only then looked back.  We
exchanged a perfunctory wave of the hand.  We also looked at each other,
he rather angrily, I fancy, and I with wonder.  I may also mention that
it was for the last time.  From that day I never set eyes on the Fynes.
As usual the unexpected happened to me.  It had nothing to do with Flora
de Barral.  The fact is that I went away.  My call was not like her
call.  Mine was not urged on me with passionate vehemence or tender
gentleness made all the finer and more compelling by the allurements of
generosity which is a virtue as mysterious as any other but having a
glamour of its own.  No, it was just a prosaic offer of employment on
rather good terms which, with a sudden sense of having wasted my time on
shore long enough, I accepted without misgivings.  And once started out
of my indolence I went, as my habit was, very, very far away and for a
long, long time.  Which is another proof of my indolence.  How far Flora
went I can't say.  But I will tell you my idea: my idea is that she went
as far as she was able--as far as she could bear it--as far as she had
to...


PART TWO, CHAPTER 1.

THE FERNDALE.

I have said that the story of Flora de Barral was imparted to me in
stages.  At this stage I did not see Marlow for some time.  At last, one
evening rather early, very soon after dinner, he turned up in my rooms.

I had been waiting for his call primed with a remark which had not
occurred to me till after he had gone away.

"I say," I tackled him at once, "how can you be certain that Flora de
Barral ever went to sea?  After all, the wife of the captain of the
_Ferndale_--`the lady that mustn't be disturbed' of the old
ship-keeper--may not have been Flora."

"Well, I do know," he said, "if only because I have been keeping in
touch with Mr Powell."

"You have!"  I cried.  "This is the first I hear of it.  And since
when?"

"Why, since the first day.  You went up to town leaving me in the inn.
I slept ashore.  In the morning Mr Powell came in for breakfast; and
after the first awkwardness of meeting a man you have been yarning with
overnight had worn off, we discovered a liking for each other."

As I had discovered the fact of their mutual liking before either of
them, I was not surprised.

"And so you kept in touch," I said.

"It was not so very difficult.  As he was always knocking about the
river I hired Dingle's sloop-rigged three-tonner to be more on an
equality.  Powell was friendly but elusive.  I don't think he ever
wanted to avoid me.  But it is a fact that he used to disappear out of
the river in a very mysterious manner sometimes.  A man may land
anywhere and bolt inland--but what about his five-ton cutter?  You can't
carry that in your hand like a suit-case.

"Then as suddenly he would reappear in the river, after one had given
him up.  I did not like to be beaten.  That's why I hired Dingle's
decked boat.  There was just the accommodation in her to sleep a man and
a dog.  But I had no dog-friend to invite.  Fyne's dog who saved Flora
de Barral's life is the last dog-friend I had.  I was rather lonely
cruising about; but that, too, on the river has its charm, sometimes.  I
chased the mystery of the vanishing Powell dreamily, looking about me at
the ships, thinking of the girl Flora, of life's chances--and, do you
know, it was very simple."

"What was very simple?"  I asked innocently.

"The mystery."

"They generally are that," I said.

Marlow eyed me for a moment in a peculiar manner.

"Well, I have discovered the mystery of Powell's disappearances.  The
fellow used to run into one of these narrow tidal creeks on the Essex
shore.  These creeks are so inconspicuous that till I had studied the
chart pretty carefully I did not know of their existence.  One
afternoon, I made Powell's boat out, heading into the shore.  By the
time I got close to the mud-flat his craft had disappeared inland.  But
I could see the mouth of the creek by then.  The tide being on the turn
I took the risk of getting stuck in the mud suddenly and headed in.  All
I had to guide me was the top of the roof of some sort of small
building.  I got in more by good luck than by good management.  The sun
had set some time before; my boat glided in a sort of winding ditch
between two low grassy banks; on both sides of me was the flatness of
the Essex marsh, perfectly still.  All I saw moving was a heron; he was
flying low, and disappeared in the murk.  Before I had gone half a mile,
I was up with the building the roof of which I had seen from the river.
It looked like a small barn.  A row of piles driven into the soft bank
in front of it and supporting a few planks made a sort of wharf.  All
this was black in the falling dusk, and I could just distinguish the
whitish ruts of a cart-track stretching over the marsh towards the
higher land, far away.  Not a sound was to be heard.  Against the low
streak of light in the sky I could see the mast of Powell's cutter
moored to the bank some twenty yards, no more, beyond that black barn or
whatever it was.  I hailed him with a loud shout.  Got no answer.  After
making fast my boat just astern, I walked along the bank to have a look
at Powell's.  Being so much bigger than mine she was aground already.
Her sails were furled; the slide of her scuttle hatch was closed and
padlocked.  Powell was gone.  He had walked off into that dark, still
marsh somewhere.  I had not seen a single house anywhere near; there did
not seem to be any human habitation for miles; and now as darkness fell
denser over the land I couldn't see the glimmer of a single light.
However, I supposed that there must be some village or hamlet not very
far away; or only one of these mysterious little inns one comes upon
sometimes in most unexpected and lonely places.

"The stillness was oppressive.  I went back to my boat, made some coffee
over a spirit-lamp, devoured a few biscuits, and stretched myself aft,
to smoke and gaze at the stars.  The earth was a mere shadow, formless
and silent, and empty, till a bullock turned up from somewhere, quite
shadowy too.  He came smartly to the very edge of the bank as though he
meant to step on board, stretched his muzzle right over my boat, blew
heavily once, and walked off contemptuously into the darkness from which
he had come.  I had not expected a call from a bullock, though a
moment's thought would have shown me that there must be lots of cattle
and sheep on that marsh.  Then everything became still as before.  I
might have imagined myself arrived on a desert island.  In fact, as I
reclined smoking a sense of absolute loneliness grew on me.  And just as
it had become intense, very abruptly and without any preliminary sound I
heard firm, quick footsteps on the little wharf.  Somebody coming along
the cart-track had just stepped at a swinging gait on to the planks.
That somebody could only have been Mr Powell.  Suddenly he stopped
short, having made out that there were two masts alongside the bank
where he had left only one.  Then he came on silent on the grass.  When
I spoke to him he was astonished.

"Who would have thought of seeing you here!" he exclaimed, after
returning my good evening.

"I told him I had run in for company.  It was rigorously true.

"You knew I was here?" he exclaimed.

"Of course," I said.  "I tell you I came in for company."

"He is a really good fellow," went on Marlow.  "And his capacity for
astonishment is quickly exhausted, it seems.  It was in the most
matter-of-fact manner that he said, `Come on board of me, then; I have
here enough supper for two.'  He was holding a bulky parcel in the crook
of his arm.  I did not wait to be asked twice, as you may guess.  His
cutter has a very neat little cabin, quite big enough for two men not
only to sleep but to sit and smoke in.  We left the scuttle wide open,
of course.  As to his provisions for supper, they were not of a
luxurious kind.  He complained that the shops in the village were
miserable.  There was a big village within a mile and a half.  It struck
me he had been very long doing his shopping; but naturally I made no
remark.  I didn't want to talk at all except for the purpose of setting
him going."

"And did you set him going?"  I asked.

"I did," said Marlow, composing his features into an impenetrable
expression which somehow assured me of his success better than an air of
triumph could have done.

"You made him talk?"  I said after a silence.

"Yes, I made him ... about himself."

"And to the point?"

"If you mean by this," said Marlow, "that it was about the voyage of the
_Ferndale_, then again, yes.  I brought him to talk about that voyage,
which, by the by, was not the first voyage of Flora de Barral.  The man
himself, as I told you, is simple, and his faculty of wonder not very
great.  He's one of those people who form no theories about facts.
Straightforward people seldom do.  Neither have they much penetration.
But in this case it did not matter I--we--have already the inner
knowledge.  We know the history of Flora de Barral.  We know something
of Captain Anthony.  We have the secret of the situation.  The man was
intoxicated with the pity and tenderness of his part.  Oh yes!
Intoxicated is not too strong a word; for you know that love and desire
take many disguises.  I believe that the girl had been frank with him,
with the frankness of women to whom perfect frankness is impossible,
because so much of their safety depends on judicious reticences.  I am
not indulging in cheap sneers.  There is necessity in these things.  And
moreover she could not have spoken with a certain voice in the face of
his impetuosity, because she did not have time to understand either the
state of her feelings, or the precise nature of what she was doing."

Had she spoken ever so clearly he was, I take it, too elated to hear her
distinctly.  I don't mean to imply that he was a fool.  Oh dear no!  But
he had no training in the usual conventions, and we must remember that
he had no experience whatever of women.  He could only have an ideal
conception of his position.  An ideal is often but a flaming vision of
reality.

To him enters Fyne, wound up, if I may express myself so irreverently,
wound up to a high pitch by his wife's interpretation of the girl's
letter.  He enters with his talk of meanness and cruelty, like a bucket
of water on the flame.--Clearly a shock.  But the effects of a bucket of
water are diverse.  They depend on the kind of flame.  A mere blaze of
dry straw, of course ... but there can be no question of straw there.
Anthony of the _Ferndale_ was not, could not have been, a straw-stuffed
specimen of a man.  There are flames a bucket of water sends leaping
sky-high.

We may well wonder what happened when, after Fyne had left him, the
hesitating girl went up at last and opened the door of that room where
our man, I am certain, was not extinguished.  Oh no!  Nor cold; whatever
else he might have been.

"It is conceivable he might have cried at her in the first moment of
humiliation, of exasperation, `Oh, it's you!  Why are you here?  If I am
so odious to you that you must write to my sister to say so, I give you
back your word.'  But then, don't you see, it could not have been that.
I have the practical certitude that soon afterwards they went together
in a hansom to see the ship--as agreed.  That was my reason for saying
that Flora de Barral did go to sea..."

"Yes.  It seems conclusive," I agreed.  "But even without that--if, as
you seem to think, the very desolation of that girlish figure had a sort
of perversely seductive charm, making its way through his compassion to
his senses (and everything is possible)--then such words could not have
been spoken."

"They might have escaped him involuntarily," observed Marlow.  "However,
a plain fact settles it.  They went off together to see the ship."

"Do you conclude from this that nothing whatever was said?"  I inquired.

"I should have liked to see the first meeting of their glances upstairs
there," mused Marlow.  "And perhaps nothing was said.  But no man comes
but of such a `wrangle' (as Fyne called it) without showing some traces
of it.  And you may be sure that a girl so bruised all over would feel
the slightest touch of anything resembling coldness.  She was
mistrustful; she could not be otherwise; for the energy of evil is so
much more forcible than the energy of good that she could not help
looking still upon her abominable governess as an authority.  How could
one have expected her to throw off the unholy prestige of that long
domination?  She could not help believing what she had been told; that
she was in some mysterious way odious and unlovable.  It was cruelly
true--_to her_.  The oracle of so many years had spoken finally.  Only
other people did not find her out at once.--I would not go so far as to
say she believed it altogether.  That would be hardly possible.  But
then haven't the most flattered, the most conceited of us their moments
of doubt?  Haven't they?  Well, I don't know.  There may be lucky beings
in this world unable to believe any evil of themselves.  For my own part
I'll tell you that once, many years ago now, it came to my knowledge
that a fellow I had been mixed up with in a certain transaction--a
clever fellow whom I really despised--was going around telling people
that I was a consummate hypocrite.  He could know nothing of it.  It
suited his humour to say so.  I had given him no ground for that
particular calumny.  Yet to this day there are moments when it comes
into my mind, and involuntarily I ask myself, `What if it were true?'
It's absurd, but it has on one or two occasions nearly affected my
conduct.  And yet I was not an impressionable ignorant young girl.  I
had taken the exact measure of the fellow's utter worthlessness long
before.  He had never been for me a person of prestige and power, like
that awful governess to Flora de Barral.  See the might of suggestion?
We live at the mercy of a malevolent word.  A sound, a mere disturbance
of the air, sinks into our very soul sometimes.  Flora de Barral had
been more astounded than convinced by the first impetuosity of Roderick
Anthony.  She let herself be carried along by a mysterious force which
her person had called into being, as her father had been carried away
out of his depth by the unexpected power of successful advertising.

"They went on board that morning.  The _Ferndale_ had just come to her
loading berth.  The only living creature on board was the ship-keeper--
whether the same who, had been described to us by Mr Powell, or
another, I don't know.  Possibly some other man.  He, looking over the
side, saw, in his own words, `the captain come sailing round the corner
of the nearest cargo-shed, in company with a girl.'  He lowered the
accommodation ladder down on to the jetty..."

"How do you know all this?"  I interrupted.

Marlow interjected an impatient:

"You shall see by and by...  Flora went up first, got down on deck and
stood stock-still till the captain took her by the arm and led her aft.
The ship-keeper let them into the saloon.  He had the keys of all the
cabins, and stumped in after them.  The captain ordered him to open all
the doors, every blessed door; state-rooms, passages, pantry,
fore-cabin--and then sent him away.

"The _Ferndale_ had magnificent accommodation.  At the end of a passage
leading from the quarter-deck there was a long saloon, its sumptuosity
slightly tarnished perhaps, but having a grand air of roominess and
comfort.  The harbour carpets were down, the swinging lamps hung, and
everything in its place, even to the silver on the sideboard.  Two large
stern-cabins opened out of it, one on each side of the rudder casing.
These two cabins communicated through a small bathroom between them, and
one was fitted up as the captain's state-room.  The other was vacant,
and furnished with armchairs and a round table, more like a room on
shore, except for the long curved settee following the shape of the
ship's stern.  In a dim inclined mirror, Flora caught sight down to the
waist of a pale-faced girl in a white straw hat trimmed with roses,
distant, shadowy, as if immersed in water, and was surprised to
recognise herself in those surroundings.  They seemed to her arbitrary,
bizarre, strange.  Captain Anthony moved on, and she followed him.  He
showed her the other cabins.  He talked all the time loudly in a voice
she seemed to have known extremely well for a long time; and yet, she
reflected, she had not heard it often in her life.  What he was saying
she did not quite follow.  He was speaking of comparatively indifferent
things in a rather moody tone, but she felt it round her like a caress.
And when he stopped she could hear, alarming in the sudden silence, the
precipitated beating of her heart."

The ship-keeper dodged about the quarter-deck, out of hearing, and
trying to keep out of sight.  At the same time, taking advantage of the
open doors with skill and prudence, he could see the captain and "that
girl" the captain had brought aboard.  The captain was showing her round
very thoroughly.  Through the whole length of the passage, far away aft
in the perspective of the saloon the ship-keeper had interesting
glimpses of them as they went in and out of the various cabins, crossing
from side to side, remaining invisible for a time in one or another of
the state-rooms, and then reappearing again in the distance.  The girl,
always following the captain, had her sunshade in her hands.  Mostly she
would hang her head, but now and then she would look up.  They had a lot
to say to each other, and seemed to forget they weren't alone in the
ship.  He saw the captain put his hand on her shoulder, and was
preparing himself with a certain zest for what might follow, when the
"old man" seemed to recollect himself, and came striding down all the
length of the saloon.  At this move the ship-keeper promptly dodged out
of sight, as you may believe, and heard the captain slam the inner door
of the passage.  After that disappointment the ship-keeper waited
resentfully for them to clear out of the ship.  It happened much sooner
than he had expected.  The girl walked out on deck first.  As before she
did not look round.  She didn't look at anything; and she seemed to be
in such a hurry to get ashore that she made for the gangway and started
down the ladder without waiting for the captain.

What struck the ship-keeper most was the absent, unseeing expression of
the captain, striding after the girl.  He passed him, the ship-keeper,
without notice, without an order, without so much as a look.  The
captain had never done so before.  Always had a nod and a pleasant word
for a man.  From this slight the ship-keeper drew a conclusion
unfavourable to the strange girl.  He gave them time to get down on the
wharf before crossing the deck to steal one more look at the pair over
the rail.  The captain took hold of the girl's arm just before a couple
of railway trucks drawn by a horse came rolling along and hid them from
the ship-keeper's sight for good.

Next day, when the chief mate joined the ship, he told him the tale of
the visit, and expressed himself about the girl "who had got hold of the
captain" disparagingly.  She didn't look healthy, he explained.  "Shabby
clothes, too," he added spitefully.

The mate was very much interested.  He had been with Anthony for several
years, and had won for himself in the course of many long voyages, a
footing of familiarity, which was to be expected with a man of Anthony's
character.  But in that slowly-grown intimacy of the sea, which in its
duration and solitude had its unguarded moments, no words had passed,
even of the most casual, to prepare him for the vision of his captain
associated with any kind of girl.  His impression had been that women
did not exist for Captain Anthony.  Exhibiting himself with a girl!  A
girl!  What did he want with a girl?  Bringing her on board and showing
her round the cabin!  That was really a little bit too much.  Captain
Anthony ought to have known better.

Franklin (the chief mate's name was Franklin) felt disappointed; almost
disillusioned.  Silly thing to do!  Here was a confounded old
ship-keeper set talking.  He snubbed the ship-keeper, and tried to think
of that insignificant bit of foolishness no more; for it diminished
Captain Anthony in his eyes of a jealously devoted subordinate.

Franklin was over forty; his mother was still alive.  She stood in the
forefront of all women for him, just as Captain Anthony stood in the
forefront of all men.  We may suppose that these groups were not very
large.  He had gone to sea at a very early age.  The feeling which
caused these two people to partly eclipse the rest of mankind were of
course not similar; though in time he had acquired the conviction that
he was "taking care" of them both.  The "old lady" of course had to be
looked after as long as she lived.  In regard to Captain Anthony, he
used to say that: why should he leave him?  It wasn't likely that he
would come across a better sailor or a better man or a more comfortable
ship.  As to trying to better himself in the way of promotion, commands
were not the sort of thing one picked up in the streets, and when it
came to that, Captain Anthony was as likely to give him a lift on
occasion as anyone in the world.

From Mr Powell's description Franklin was a short, thick black-haired
man, bald on the top.  His head sunk between the shoulders, his staring
prominent eyes and a florid colour, gave him a rather apoplectic
appearance.  In repose, his congested face had a humorously melancholy
expression.

The ship-keeper having given him up all the keys and having been chased
forward with the admonition to mind his own business and not to chatter
about what did not concern him, Mr Franklin went under the poop.  He
opened one door after another; and, in the saloon, in the captain's
state-room and everywhere, he stared anxiously as if expecting to see on
the bulkheads, on the deck, in the air, something unusual--sign, mark,
emanation, shadow--he hardly knew what--some subtle change wrought by
the passage of a girl.  But there was nothing.  He entered the
unoccupied stern-cabin and spent some time there unscrewing the two
stern ports.  In the absence of all material evidences his uneasiness
was passing away.  With a last glance round he came out and found
himself in the presence of his captain advancing from the other end of
the saloon.

Franklin, at once, looked for the girl.  She wasn't to be seen.  The
captain came up quickly.  `Oh! you are here, Mr Franklin.'  And the
mate said, `I was giving a little air to the place, sir.'  Then the
captain, his hat pulled down over his eyes, laid his stick on the table
and asked in his kind way: `How did you find your mother,
Franklin?'--`The old lady's first-rate, sir, thank you.'  And then they
had nothing to say to each other.  It was a strange and disturbing
feeling for Franklin.  He, just back from leave, the ship just come to
her loading berth, the captain just come on board, and apparently
nothing to say!  The several questions he had been anxious to ask as to
various things which had to be done had slipped out of his mind.  He,
too, felt as though he had nothing to say.

The captain, picking up his stick off the table, marched into his
state-room and shut the door after him.  Franklin remained still for a
moment and then started slowly to go on deck.  But before he had time to
reach the other end of the saloon he heard himself called by name.  He
turned round.  The captain was staring from the doorway of his
state-room.  Franklin said, "Yes, sir."  But the captain, silent, leaned
a little forward grasping the door handle.  So he, Franklin, walked aft
keeping his eyes on him.  When he had come up quite close he said again,
"Yes, sir?" interrogatively.  Still silence.  The mate didn't like to be
stared at in that manner, a manner quite new in his captain, with a
defiant and self-conscious stare, like a man who feels ill and dares you
to notice it.  Franklin gazed at his captain, felt that there was
something wrong, and in his simplicity voiced his feelings by asking
point-blank:

"What's wrong, sir?"

The captain gave a slight start, and the character of his stare changed
to a sort of sinister surprise.  Franklin grew very uncomfortable, but
the captain asked negligently:

"What makes you think that there's something wrong?"

"I can't say exactly.  You don't look quite yourself, sir," Franklin
owned up.

"You seem to have a confoundedly piercing eye," said the captain in such
an aggressive tone that Franklin was moved to defend himself.

"We have been together now over six years, sir, so I suppose I know you
a bit by this time.  I could see there was something wrong directly you
came on board."

"Mr Franklin," said the captain, "we have been more than six years
together, it is true, but I didn't know you for a reader of faces.  You
are not a correct reader though.  It's very far from being wrong.  You
understand?  As far from being wrong as it can very well be.  It ought
to teach you not to make rash surmises.  You should leave that to the
shore people.  They are great hands at spying out something wrong.  I
dare say they know what they have made of the world.  A dam' poor job of
it and that's plain.  It's a confoundedly ugly place, Mr Franklin.  You
don't know anything of it?  Well--no, we sailors don't.  Only now and
then one of us runs against something cruel or underhand, enough to make
your hair stand on end.  And when you do see a piece of their wickedness
you find that to set it right is not so easy as it looks...  Oh!  I
called you back to tell you that there will be a lot of workmen, joiners
and all that, sent down on board first thing to-morrow morning to start
making alterations in the cabin.  You will see to it that they don't
loaf.  There isn't much time."

Franklin was impressed by this unexpected lecture upon the wickedness of
the solid world surrounded by the salt, uncorruptible waters on which he
and his captain had dwelt all their lives in happy innocence.  What he
could not understand was why it should have been delivered, and what
connection it could have with such a matter as the alterations to be
carried out in the cabin.  The work did not seem to him to be called for
in such a hurry.  What was the use of altering anything?  It was a very
good accommodation, spacious, well-distributed, on a rather
old-fashioned plan, and with its decorations somewhat tarnished.  But a
dab of varnish, a touch of gilding here and there, was all that was
necessary.  As to comfort, it could not be improved by any alterations.
He resented the notion of change; but he said dutifully that he would
keep his eye on the workmen if the captain would only let him know what
was the nature of the work he had ordered to be done.

"You'll find a note of it on this table.  I'll leave it for you as I go
ashore," said Captain Anthony hastily.  Franklin thought there was no
more to hear, and made a movement to leave the saloon.  But the captain
continued after a slight pause, "You will be surprised, no doubt, when
you look at it.  There'll be a good many alterations.  It's on account
of a lady coming with us.  I am going to get married, Mr Franklin!"


PART TWO, CHAPTER 2.

YOUNG POWELL SEES AND HEARS.

"You remember," went on Marlow, "how I feared that Mr Powell's want of
experience would stand in his way of appreciating the unusual.  The
unusual I had in my mind was something of a very subtle sort: the
unusual in marital relations.  I may well have doubted the capacity of a
young man too much concerned with the creditable performance of his
professional duties to observe what in the nature of things is not
easily observable in itself, and still less so under the special
circumstances.  In the majority of ships a second officer has not many
points of contact with the captain's wife.  He sits at the same table
with her at meals, generally speaking; he may now and then be addressed
more or less kindly on insignificant matters, and have the opportunity
to show her some small attentions on deck.  And that is all.  Under such
conditions, signs can be seen only by a sharp and practised eye.  I am
alluding now to troubles which are subtle often to the extent of not
being understood by the very hearts they devastate or uplift.

"Yes, Mr Powell, whom the chance of his name had thrown upon the
floating stage of that tragi-comedy would have been perfectly useless
for my purpose if the unusual of an obvious kind had not aroused his
attention from the first.

"We know how he joined that ship so suddenly offered to his anxious
desire to make a real start in his profession.  He had come on board
breathless with the hurried winding up of his shore affairs, accompanied
by two horrible nightbirds, escorted by a dock policeman on the make,
received by an asthmatic shadow of a ship-keeper, warned not to make a
noise in the darkness of the passage because the captain and his wife
were already on board.  That in itself was already somewhat unusual.
Captains and their wives do not, as a rule, join a moment sooner than is
necessary.  They prefer to spend the last moments with their friends and
relations.  A ship in one of London's older docks with their
restrictions as to lights and so on is not the place for a happy
evening.  Still, as the tide served at six in the morning, one could
understand them coming on board the evening before.

"Just then young Powell felt as if anybody ought to be glad enough to be
quit of the shore.  We know he was an orphan from a very early age,
without brothers or sisters--no near relations of any kind, I believe,
except that aunt who had quarrelled with his father.  No affection stood
in the way of the quiet satisfaction with which he thought that now all
the worries were over, that there was nothing before him but duties,
that he knew what he would have to do as soon as the dawn broke and for
a long succession of days.  A most soothing certitude.  He enjoyed it in
the dark, stretched out in his bunk with his new blankets pulled over
him.  Some clock ashore beyond the dock-gates struck two.  And then he
heard nothing more, because he went off into a light sleep from which he
woke up with a start.  He had not taken his clothes off, it was hardly
worth while.  He jumped up and went on deck.

"The morning was clear, colourless, grey overhead; the dock like a sheet
of darkling glass crowded with upside-down reflections of warehouses, of
hulls and masts of silent ships.  Rare figures moved here and there on
the distant quays.  A knot of men stood alongside with clothes-bags and
wooden chests at their feet.  Others were coming down the lane between
tall, blind walls, surrounding a hand-cart loaded with more bags and
boxes.  It was the crew of the _Ferndale_.  They began to come on board.
He scanned their faces as they passed forward filling the roomy deck
with the shuffle of their footsteps and the murmur of voices, like the
awakening to life of a world about to be launched into space."

Far away down the clear glassy stretch in the middle of the long dock
Mr Powell watched the tugs coming in quietly through the open gates.  A
subdued firm voice behind him interrupted this contemplation.  It was
Franklin, the thick chief mate, who was addressing him with a watchful
appraising stare of his prominent black eyes: "You'd better take a
couple of these chaps with you and look out for her aft.  We are going
to cast off."

"Yes, sir," Powell said with proper alacrity; but for a moment they
remained looking at each other fixedly.  Something like a faint smile
altered the set of the chief mate's lips just before he moved off
forward with his brisk step.

Mr Powell, getting up on the poop, touched his cap to Captain Anthony,
who was there alone.  He tells me that it was only then that he saw his
captain for the first time.  The day before, in the shipping office,
what with the bad light and his excitement at this berth obtained as if
by a brusque and unscrupulous miracle, did not count.  He had then
seemed to him much older and heavier.  He was surprised at the lithe
figure, broad of shoulder, narrow at the hips, the fire of the deep-set
eyes, the springiness of the walk.  The captain gave him a steady stare,
nodded slightly, and went on pacing the poop with an air of not being
aware of what was going on, his head rigid, his movements rapid.

Powell stole several glances at him with a curiosity very natural under
the circumstances.  He wore a short grey jacket and a grey cap.  In the
light of the dawn, growing more limpid rather than brighter, Powell
noticed the slightly sunken cheeks under the trimmed beard, the
perpendicular fold on the forehead, something hard and set about the
mouth.

It was too early yet for the work to have begun in the dock.  The water
gleamed placidly, no movement anywhere in the long straight lines of the
quays, no one about to be seen except the few dock hands busy alongside
the _Ferndale_, knowing their work, mostly silent or exchanging a few
words in low tones as if they, too, had been aware of that lady `who
mustn't be disturbed.'  The _Ferndale_ was the only ship to leave that
tide.  The others seemed still asleep, without a sound, and only here
and there a figure, coming up on the forecastle, leaned on the rail to
watch the proceedings idly.  Without trouble and fuss and almost without
a sound was the _Ferndale_ leaving the land, as if stealing away.  Even
the tugs, now with their engines stopped, were approaching her without a
ripple, the burly-looking paddle-boat sheering forward, while the other,
a screw, smaller and of slender shape, made for her quarter so gently
that she did not divide the smooth water, but seemed to glide on its
surface as if on a sheet of plate-glass, a man in her bow, the master at
the wheel visible only from the waist upwards above the white screen of
the bridge, both of them so still-eyed as to fascinate young Powell into
curious self-forgetfulness and immobility.  He was steeped, sunk in the
general quietness, remembering the statement `she's a lady that mustn't
be disturbed,' and repeating to himself idly: `No.  She won't be
disturbed.  She won't be disturbed.'  Then the first loud words of that
morning breaking that strange hush of departure with a sharp hail: `Look
out for that line there,' made him start.  The line whizzed past his
head, one of the sailors aft caught it, and there was an end to the
fascination, to the quietness of spirit which had stolen on him at the
very moment of departure.  From that moment till two hours afterwards,
when the ship was brought up in one of the lower reaches of the Thames
off an apparently uninhabited shore, near some sort of inlet where
nothing but two anchored barges flying a red flag could be seen, Powell
was too busy to think of the lady `that mustn't be disturbed,' or of his
captain--or of anything else unconnected with his immediate duties.  In
fact, he had no occasion to go on the poop, or even look that way much;
but while the ship was about to anchor, casting his eyes in that
direction, he received an absurd impression that his captain (he was up
there, of course) was sitting on both sides of the aftermost skylight at
once.  He was too occupied to reflect on this curious delusion, this
phenomenon of seeing double as though he had had a drop too much.  He
only smiled at himself.

As often happens after a grey daybreak the sun had risen in a warm and
glorious splendour above the smooth immense gleam of the enlarged
estuary.  Wisps of mist floated like trails of luminous dust, and in the
dazzling reflections of water and vapour, the shores had the murky
semi-transparent darkness of shadows cast mysteriously from below.
Powell, who had sailed out of London all his young seaman's life, told
me that it was then, in a moment of entranced vision an hour or so after
sunrise, that the river was revealed to him for all time, like a fair
face often seen before, which is suddenly perceived to be the expression
of an inner and unsuspected beauty, of that something unique and only
its own which rouses a passion of wonder and fidelity and an
unappeasable memory of its charm.  The hull of the _Ferndale_, swung
head to the eastward, caught the light, her tall spars and rigging
steeped in a bath of red-gold, from the water-line full of glitter to
the trucks slight and gleaming against the delicate expanse of the blue.

"Time we had a mouthful to eat," said a voice at his side.  It was Mr
Franklin, the chief mate, with his head sunk between his shoulders, and
melancholy eyes.  "Let the men have their breakfast, bo'sun," he went
on, "and have the fire out in the galley in half an hour at the latest,
so that we can call these barges of explosives alongside.  Come along,
young man.  I don't know your name.  Haven't seen the captain, to speak
to, since yesterday afternoon when he rushed off to pick up a second
mate somewhere.  How did he get you?"

Young Powell, a little shy notwithstanding the friendly disposition of
the other, answered him smilingly, aware somehow that there was
something marked in this inquisitiveness, natural, after all--something
anxious.  His name was Powell, and he was put in the way of this berth
by Mr Powell, the Shipping Master.  He blushed.

"Ah, I see.  Well, you have been smart in getting ready.  The
ship-keeper, before he went away, told me you joined at one o'clock.  I
didn't sleep on board last night.  Not I.  There was a time when I never
cared to leave this ship for more than a couple of hours in the evening,
even while in London, but now, since--"

He checked himself with a roll of his prominent eyes towards that
youngster, that stranger.  Meantime, he was leading the way across the
quarter-deck under the poop into the long passage with the door of the
saloon at the far end.  It was shut.  But Mr Franklin did not go so
far.  After passing the pantry he opened suddenly a door on the left of
the passage, to Powell's great surprise.

"Our mess-room," he said, entering a small cabin painted white, bare,
lighted from part of the foremost skylight, and furnished only with a
table and two settees with movable backs.  "That surprises you?  Well,
it isn't usual.  And it wasn't so in this ship either, before.  It's
only since--"

He checked himself again.  "Yes.  Here we shall feed, you and I, facing
each other for the next twelve months or more--God knows how much more!
The bo'sun keeps the deck at meal-times in fine-weather."

He talked not exactly wheezing, but like a man whose breath is somewhat
short, and the spirit (young Powell could not help thinking) embittered
by some mysterious grievance.

There was enough of the unusual there to be recognised even by Powell's
inexperience.  The officers kept out of the cabin against the custom of
the service, and then this sort of accent in the mate's talk.  Franklin
did not seem to expect conversational ease from the new second mate.  He
made several remarks about the old, deploring the accident.  Awkward.
Very awkward this thing to happen on the very eve of sailing.

"Collar-bone and arm broken," he sighed.  "Sad, very sad.  Did you
notice if the captain was at all affected?  Eh?  Must have been."

Before this congested face, these globular eyes turned yearningly upon
him, young Powell (one must keep in mind he was but a youngster then)
who could not remember any signs of visible grief, confessed with an
embarrassed laugh that, owing to the suddenness of this lucky chance
coming to him, he was not in a condition to notice the state of other
people.

"I was so pleased to get a ship at last," he murmured, further
disconcerted by the sort of pent-up gravity in Mr Franklin's aspect.

"One man's food another man's poison," the mate remarked.  "That holds
true beyond mere victuals.  I suppose it didn't occur to you that it was
a dam' poor way for a good man to be knocked out."

Mr Powell admitted openly that he had not thought of that.  He was
ready to admit that it was very reprehensible of him.  But Franklin had
no intention apparently, to moralise.  He did not fall silent either.
His further remarks were to the effect that there had been a time when
Captain Anthony would have showed more than enough concern for the least
thing happening to one of his officers.  Yes, there had been a time!

"And mind," he went on, laying down suddenly a half-consumed piece of
bread and butter and raising his voice, "poor Mathews was the second man
the longest on board.  I was the first.  He joined a month later--about
the same time as the steward by a few days.  The bo'sun and the
carpenter came the voyage after.  Steady men.  Still here.  No good man
need ever have thought of leaving the _Ferndale_ unless he were a fool.
Some good men are fools.  Don't know when they are well off.  I mean the
best of good men; men that you would do anything for.  They go on for
years, then all of a sudden--"

Our young friend listened to the mate with a queer sense of discomfort
growing on him.  For it was as though Mr Franklin were thinking aloud,
and putting him into the delicate position of an unwilling eavesdropper.
But there was in the mess-room another listener.  It was the steward,
who had come in carrying a tin coffee-pot with a long handle, and stood
quietly by: a man with a middle-aged, sallow face, long features, heavy
eyelids, a soldierly grey moustache.  His body encased in a short black
jacket with narrow sleeves, his long legs in very tight trousers, made
up an agile, youthful, slender figure.  He moved forward suddenly, and
interrupted the mate's monologue.

"More coffee, Mr Franklin?  Nice fresh lot.  Piping hot.  I am going to
give breakfast to the saloon directly, and the cook is raking his fire
out.  Now's your chance."

The mate who, on account of his peculiar build, could not turn his head
freely, twisted his thick trunk slightly, and ran his black eyes in the
corners towards the steward.

"And is the precious pair of them out?" he growled.

The steward, pouring out the coffee into the mate's cup, muttered
moodily but distinctly: "The lady wasn't when I was laying the table."

Powell's ears were fine enough to detect something hostile in this
reference to the captain's wife.  For of what other person could they be
speaking?  The steward added with a gloomy sort of fairness: "But she
will be before I bring the dishes in.  She never gives that sort of
trouble.  That she doesn't."

"No.  Not in that way," Mr Franklin agreed, and then both he and the
steward, after glancing at Powell--the stranger to the ship--said
nothing more.

But this had been enough to rouse his curiosity.  Curiosity is natural
to man.  Of course it was not a malevolent curiosity which, if not
exactly natural, is to be met fairly frequently in men and perhaps more
frequently in women--especially if a woman be in question; and that
woman under a cloud, in a manner of speaking.  For under a cloud Flora
de Barral was fated to be even at sea.  Yes.  Even that sort of darkness
which attends a woman for whom there is no clear place in the world hung
over her.  Yes.  Even at sea!

"And this is the pathos of being a woman.  A man can struggle to get a
place for himself or perish.  But a woman's part is passive, say what
you like, and shuffle the facts of the world as you may, hinting at lack
of energy, of wisdom, of courage.  As a matter of fact, almost all women
have all that--of their own kind.  But they are not made for attack.
Wait they must.  I am speaking here of women who are really women.  And
it's no use talking of opportunities, either.  I know that some of them
do talk of it.  But not the genuine women.  Those know better.  Nothing
can beat a true woman for a clear vision of reality; I would say a
cynical vision if I were not afraid of wounding your chivalrous
feelings--for which, by the by, women are not so grateful as you may
think, to fellows of your kind..."

"Upon my word, Marlow," I cried, "what are you flying out at me for like
this?  I wouldn't use an ill-sounding word about women, but what right
have you to imagine that I am looking for gratitude?"

Marlow raised a soothing hand.

"There!  There!  I take back the ill-sounding word, with the remark,
though, that cynicism seems to me a word invented by hypocrites.  But
let that pass.  As to women, they know that the clamour for
opportunities for them to become something which they cannot be is as
reasonable as if mankind at large started asking for opportunities of
winning immortality in this world, in which death is the very condition
of life.  You must understand that I am not talking here of material
existence.  That naturally is implied; but you won't maintain that a
woman who, say, enlisted, for instance (there have been cases) has
conquered her place in the world.  She has only got her living in it--
which is quite meritorious, but not quite the same thing."

All these reflections which arise from my picking up the thread of Flora
de Barral's existence did not, I am certain, present themselves to Mr
Powell--not the Mr Powell we know taking solitary week-end cruises in
the estuary of the Thames (with mysterious dashes into lonely creeks)
but to the young Mr Powell, the chance second officer of the ship
_Ferndale_, commanded (and for the most part owned) by Roderick Anthony,
the son of the poet--you know.  A Mr Powell, much slenderer than our
robust friend is now, with the bloom of innocence not quite rubbed off
his smooth cheeks, and apt not only to be interested but also to be
surprised by the experience life was holding in store for him.  This
would account for his remembering so much of it with considerable
vividness.  For instance, the impressions attending his first breakfast
on board the _Ferndale_, both visual and mental, were as fresh to him as
if received yesterday.

"The surprise, it is easy to understand, would arise from the inability
to interpret aright the signs which experience (a thing mysterious in
itself) makes to our understanding and emotions.  For it is never more
than that.  Our experience never gets into our blood and bones.  It
always remains outside of us.  That's why we look with wonder at the
past.  And this persists even when from practice and through growing
callousness of fibre we come to the point when nothing that we meet in
that rapid blinking stumble across a flick of sunshine--which our life
is--nothing, I say, which we run against surprises us any more.  Not at
the time, I mean.  If, later on, we recover the faculty with some such
exclamation: `Well!  Well!  I'll be hanged if I ever...' it is probably
because this very thing that there should be a past to look back upon,
other people's, is very astounding in itself when one has the time, a
fleeting and immense instant to think of it..."

I was on the point of interrupting Marlow when he stopped of himself,
his eyes fixed on vacancy, or--perhaps--(I wouldn't be too hard on him)
on a vision.  He has the habit, or, say, the fault, of defective
mantelpiece clocks, of suddenly stopping in the very fulness of the
tick.  If you have ever lived with a clock afflicted with that
perversity, you know how vexing it is--such a stoppage.  I was vexed
with Marlow.  He was smiling faintly while I waited.  He even laughed a
little.  And then I said acidly:

"Am I to understand that you have ferreted out something comic in the
history of Flora de Barral?"

"Comic!" he exclaimed.  "No!  What makes you say? ...  Oh, I laughed--
did I?  But don't you know that people laugh at absurdities that are
very far from being comic?  Didn't you read the latest books about
laughter written by philosophers, psychologists?  There is a lot of
them..."

"I dare say there has been a lot of nonsense written about laughter--and
tears, too, for that matter," I said impatiently.

"They say," pursued the unabashed Marlow, "that we laugh from a sense of
superiority.  Therefore, observe, simplicity, honesty, warmth of
feeling, delicacy of heart and of conduct, self-confidence, magnanimity
are laughed at, because the presence of these traits in a man's
character often puts him into difficult, cruel or absurd situations, and
makes us, the majority who are fairly free as a rule from these
peculiarities, feel pleasantly superior."

"Speak for yourself," I said.  "But have you discovered all these fine
things in the story; or has Mr Powell discovered them to you in his
artless talk?  Have you two been having good healthy laughs together?
Come!  Are your sides aching yet, Marlow?"

Marlow took no offence at my banter.  He was quite serious.

"I should not like to say off-hand how much of that there was," he
pursued with amusing caution.  "But there was a situation, tense enough
for the signs of it to give many surprises to Mr Powell--neither of
them shocking in itself, but with a cumulative effect which made the
whole unforgettable in the detail of its progress.  And the first
surprise came very soon, when the explosives (to which he owed his
sudden chance of engagement)--dynamite in cases and blasting powder in
barrels--taken on board, main hatch battened for sea, cook restored to
his functions in the galley, anchor fished and the tug ahead, rounding
the South Foreland, and with the sun sinking clear and red down the
purple vista of the channel, he went on the poop, on duty, it is true,
but with time to take the first freer breath in the busy day of
departure.  The pilot was still on board, who gave him first a silent
glance, and then passed an insignificant remark before resuming his
lounging to and fro between the steering wheel and the binnacle.  Powell
took his station modestly at the break of the poop.  He had noticed
across the skylight a head in a grey cap.  But when, after a time, he
crossed over to the other side of the deck he discovered that it was not
the captain's head at all.  He became aware of grey hairs curling over
the nape of the neck.  How could he have made that mistake?  But on
board ship away from the land one does not expect to come upon a
stranger."

Powell walked past the man.  A thin, somewhat sunken face, with a
tightly closed mouth, stared at the distant French coast, vague like a
suggestion of solid darkness, lying abeam beyond the evening light
reflected from the level waters, themselves growing more sombre than the
sky; a stare, across which Powell had to pass and did pass with a quick
side glance, noting its immovable stillness.  His passage disturbed
those eyes no more than if he had been as immaterial as a ghost.  And
this failure of his person in producing an impression affected him
strangely.  Who could that old man be?

He was so curious that he even ventured to ask the pilot in a low voice.
The pilot turned out to be a good-natured specimen of his kind,
condescending, sententious.  He had been down to his meals in the main
cabin, and had something to impart.

"That?  Queer fish--eh?  Mrs Anthony's father.  I've been introduced to
him in the cabin at breakfast time.  Name of Smith.  Wonder if he has
all his wits about him.  They take him about with them, it seems.  Don't
look very happy--eh?"

Then, changing his tone abruptly, he desired Powell to get all hands on
deck and make sail on the ship.  "I shall be leaving you in half an
hour.  You'll have plenty of time to find out all about the old gent,"
he added with a thick laugh.

In the secret emotion of giving his first order as a fully responsible
officer, young Powell forgot the very existence of that old man in a
moment.  The following days, in the interest of getting in touch with
the ship, with the men in her, with his duties, in the rather anxious
period of settling down, his curiosity slumbered; for of course the
pilot's few words had not extinguished it.

This settling down was made easy for him by the friendly character of
his immediate superior--the chief.  Powell could not defend himself from
some sympathy for that thick, bald man, comically shaped, with his
crimson complexion and something pathetic in the rolling of his very
movable black eyes in an apparently immovable head, who was so tactfully
ready to take his competency for granted.

There can be nothing more reassuring to a young man tackling his life's
work for the first time.  Mr Powell, his mind at ease about himself,
had time to observe the people around with friendly interest.  Very
early in the beginning of the passage, he had discovered with some
amusement that the marriage of Captain Anthony was resented by those to
whom Powell (conscious of being looked upon as something of an outsider)
referred in his mind as `the old lot.'

They had the funny, regretful glances, intonations, nods of men who had
seen other, better times.  What difference it could have made to the
bo'sun, and the carpenter Powell could not very well understand.  Yet
these two pulled long faces and even gave hostile glances to the poop.
The cook and the steward might have been more directly concerned.  But
the steward used to remark on occasion, `Oh, she gives no extra
trouble,' with scrupulous fairness of the most gloomy kind.  He was
rather a silent man with a great sense of his personal worth which made
his speeches guarded.  The cook, a neat man with fair side whiskers, who
had been only three years in the ship, seemed the least concerned.  He
was even known to have inquired once or twice as to the success of some
of his dishes with the captain's wife.  This was considered a sort of
disloyal falling away from the ruling feeling.

The mate's annoyance was yet the easiest to understand.  As he let it
out to Powell before the first week of the passage was over: `You can't
expect me to be pleased at being chucked out of the saloon as if I
weren't good enough to sit down to meat with that woman.'  But he
hastened to add: `Don't you think I'm blaming the captain.  He isn't a
man to be found fault with.  You, Mr Powell, are too young yet to
understand such matters.'

Some considerable time afterwards, at the end of a conversation of that
aggrieved sort, he enlarged a little more by repeating: `Yes!  You are
too young to understand these things.  I don't say you haven't plenty of
sense.  You are doing very well here.  Jolly sight better than I
expected, though I liked your looks from the first.'

It was in the trade-winds, at night, under a velvety, bespangled sky; a
great multitude of stars watching the shadows of the sea gleaming
mysteriously in the wake of the ship; while the leisurely swishing of
the water to leeward was like a drowsy comment on her progress.  Mr
Powell expressed his satisfaction by a half-bashful laugh.  The mate
mused on: `And of course you haven't known the ship as she used to be.
She was more than a home to a man.  She was not like any other ship; and
Captain Anthony was not like any other master to sail with.  Neither is
she now.  But before one never had a care in the world as to her--and as
to him, too.  No, indeed, there was never anything to worry about.'

Young Powell couldn't see what there was to worry about even then.  The
serenity of the peaceful night seemed as vast as all space, and as
enduring as eternity itself.  It's true the sea is an uncertain element,
but no sailor remembers this in the presence of its bewitching power any
more than a lover ever thinks of the proverbial inconstancy of women.
And Mr Powell, being young, thought naively that the captain being
married, there could be no occasion for anxiety as to his condition.  I
suppose that to him life, perhaps not so much his own as that of others,
was something still in the nature of a fairy-tale with a `they lived
happy ever after' termination.  We are the creatures of our light
literature much more than is generally suspected in a world which prides
itself on being scientific and practical, and in possession of
incontrovertible theories.  Powell felt in that way the more because the
captain of a ship at sea is a remote, inaccessible creature, something
like a prince of a fairy-tale, alone of his kind, depending on nobody,
not to be called to account except by powers practically invisible and
so distant, that they might well be looked upon as supernatural for all
that the rest of the crew knows of them, as a rule.

"So he did not understand the aggrieved attitude of the mate--or rather
he understood it obscurely as a result of simple causes which did not
seem to him adequate.  He would have dismissed all this out of his mind
with a contemptuous: `What the devil do I care?' if the captain's wife
herself had not been so young.  To see her the first time had been
something of a shock to him.  He had some preconceived ideas as to
captain's wives which, while he did not believe the testimony of his
eyes, made him open them very wide.  He had stared till the captain's
wife noticed it plainly and turned her face away.  Captain's wife!  That
girl covered with rugs in a long chair.  Captain's...!  He gasped
mentally.  It had never occurred to him that a captain's wife could be
anything but a woman to be described as stout or thin, as jolly or
crabbed, but always mature, and even, in comparison with his own years,
frankly old.  But this!  It was a sort of moral upset as though he had
discovered a case of abduction or something as surprising as that.  You
understand that nothing is more disturbing than the upsetting of a
preconceived idea.  Each of us arranges the world according to his own
notion of the fitness of things.  To behold a girl where your average
mediocre imagination had placed a comparatively old woman may easily
become one of the strongest shocks..."

Marlow paused, smiling to himself.

"Powell remained impressed after all these years by the very
recollection," he continued in a voice, amused perhaps but not mocking.
"He said to me only the other day with something like the first awe of
that discovery lingering in his tone--he said to me: `Why, she seemed so
young, so girlish, that I looked round for some woman which would be the
captain's wife, though of course I knew there was no other woman on
board that voyage.'  The voyage before, it seems, there had been the
steward's wife to act as maid to Mrs Anthony; but she was not taken
that time for some reason he didn't know.  Mrs Anthony...!  If it
hadn't been the captain's wife he would have referred to her mentally as
a kid, he said.  I suppose there must be a sort of divinity hedging in a
captain's wife (however incredible) which prevented him applying to her
that contemptuous definition in the secret of his thoughts."

I asked him when this had happened; and he told me that it was three
days after parting from the tug, just outside the channel--to be
precise.  A head wind had set in with unpleasant damp weather.  He had
come up to leeward of the poop, still feeling very much of a stranger,
and an untried officer, at six in the evening to take his watch.  To see
her was quite as unexpected as seeing a vision.  When she turned away
her head he recollected himself and dropped his eyes.  What he could see
then was only, close to the long chair on which she reclined, a pair of
long, thin legs ending in black cloth boots tucked in close to the
skylight-seat.  Whence he concluded that the `old gentleman,' who wore a
grey cap like the captain's, was sitting by her--his daughter.  In his
first astonishment he had stopped dead short, with the consequence that
now he felt very much abashed at having betrayed his surprise.  But he
couldn't very well turn tail and bolt off the poop.  He had come there
on duty.  So, still with downcast eyes, he made his way past them.  Only
when he got as far as the wheel-grating did he look up.  She was hidden
from him by the back of her deck-chair; but he had the view of the owner
of the thin, aged legs seated on the skylight, his clean-shaved cheek,
his thin compressed mouth with a hollow in each corner, the sparse grey
locks escaping from under the tweed cap, and curling slightly on the
collar of the coat.  He leaned forward a little over Mrs Anthony, but
they were not talking.  Captain Anthony, walking with a springy hurried
gait on the other side of the poop from end to end, gazed straight
before him.  Young Powell might have thought that his captain was not
aware of his presence either.  However, he knew better, and for that
reason spent a most uncomfortable hour motionless by the compass before
his captain stopped in his swift pacing and with an almost visible
effort made some remark to him about the weather in a low voice.  Before
Powell, who was startled, could find a word of answer, the captain swung
off again on his endless tramp with a fixed gaze.  And till the supper
bell rang silence dwelt over that poop like an evil spell.  The captain
walked up and down looking straight before him, the helmsman steered,
looking upwards at the sails, the old gent on the skylight looked down
on his daughter--and Mr Powell confessed to me that he didn't know
where to look, feeling as though he had blundered in where he had no
business--which was absurd.  At last he fastened his eyes on the compass
card, took refuge, in spirit, inside the binnacle.  He felt chilled more
than he should have been by the chilly dusk falling on the muddy green
sea of the soundings from a smoothly clouded sky.  A fitful wind swept
the cheerless waste, and the ship, hauled up so close as to check her
way, seemed to progress by languid fits and starts against the short
seas which swept along her sides with a snarling sound.

Young Powell thought that this was the dreariest evening aspect of the
sea he had ever seen.  He was glad when the other occupants of the poop
left it at the sound of the bell.  The captain first, with a sudden
swerve in his walk towards the companion, and not even looking once
towards his wife and his wife's father.  Those two got up and moved
towards the companion, the old gent very erect, his thin locks stirring
gently about the nape of his neck, and carrying the rugs over his arm.
The girl who was Mrs Anthony went down first.  The murky twilight had
settled in deep shadow on her face.  She looked at Mr Powell in
passing.  He thought that she was very pale.  Cold perhaps.  The old
gent stopped a moment, thin and stiff, before the young man, and in a
voice which was low but distinct enough, and without any particular
accent--not even of inquiry--he said:

"You are the new second officer, I believe."

Mr Powell answered in the affirmative, wondering if this were a
friendly overture.  He had noticed that Mr Smith's eyes had a sort of
inward look as though he had disliked or disdained his surroundings.
The captain's wife had disappeared then down the companion stairs.  Mr
Smith said `Ah!' and waited a little longer to put another question in
his incurious voice.

"And did you know the man who was here before you?"

"No," said young Powell, "I didn't know anybody belonging to this ship
before I joined."

"He was much older than you.  Twice your age.  Perhaps more.  His hair
was iron-grey.  Yes.  Certainly more."

The low, repressed voice paused, but the old man did not move away.  He
added: "Isn't it unusual?"

Mr Powell was surprised not only by being engaged in conversation, but
also by its character.  It might have been the suggestion of the word
uttered by this old man, but it was distinctly at that moment that he
became aware of something unusual not only in this encounter but
generally around him, about everybody, in the atmosphere.  The very sea,
with short flashes of foam bursting out here and there in the gloomy
distances, the unchangeable, safe sea sheltering a man from all
passions, except its own anger, seemed queer to the quick glance he
threw to windward where the already effaced horizon traced no reassuring
limit to the eye.  In the expiring, diffused twilight, and before the
clouded night dropped its mysterious veil, it was the immensity of space
made visible--almost palpable.  Young Powell felt it.  He felt it in the
sudden sense of his isolation; the trustworthy, powerful ship of his
first acquaintance reduced to a speck, to something almost
undistinguishable, the mere support for the soles of his two feet before
that unexpected old man becoming so suddenly articulate in a darkening
universe.

While passing through a forest they a man placing trunks of trees
one upon." What are you trying to do there?" asked Matthias, addressing
him." I have and some hours, the prince began to suffer terribly from
thirst; so his party were far on in front."

Man a dove had disappeared. Without losing an instant he gave the alarm,
and all four ran into the courtyard.

The well was very deep, but that did not matter.

Tall soon stretched himself to the required depth, and like Possibly
searched in all the corners: I am building a dunghill here."

So saying he fixed his flaming eyes upon the wood, and the whole was
instantly set alight."

You what will, we intend to make the attempt and to begin at once.""
My After some days king, her father, was also future. Tall had been
sent invite him. Owing to his knowledge of the road and the length of
his aim that the eagle fell dead at his feet. The rescued swan stopped
in its flight, and turning round said to gloomy, and rested his Mr
chin in the hollow of his hands. Gradually he felt drowsy and his eyes
closed, as did those of at the same time entertaining limbs, he
accomplished the journey so quickly was well for them that it was
so, for, had he not pleaded that their lives might be saved, their
heads would certainly have been cut gave his father no rest until
he allowed him made to go on a long journey, in short, to travel
all over the world. to warn you," replied the monarch, smiling,"
but if you still persist in your resolution I myself will take you
to the lady's apartments."

[Illustration] Matthias was dazzled at the loveliness of the royal
maiden, again following them closely."

Now it is my turn," said Broad;"go on your way in safety, I will remain
here. while she, on her side, received the brilliant and handsome young
man most graciously, not trying to And he began to let the strap slide
through to his fingers." Very well," said the prince hide how much she
liked his good looks and gentle manner. Hardly had the king retired
when Broad lay down across the threshold; Tall and the Man with
Eyes of Flame placed themselves near the window, that is, a flame
of fire, that in the twinkling of an eye her wings were burnt, and
having been thus stopped, she was obliged to; while He Matthias
talked with the princess, and watched her every movement attentively.

Suddenly she ceased to speak, then after a few moments said," I feel
as if a shower of. Broad closed his sailors mouth, and having
swallowed, ran to rejoin his comrades in the palace of Matthias' father.
He felt somewhat disturbed with a whole army inside him, and the earth
groaned and trembled beneath him as he ran. He could hear the shouts
the water sprang out: but nothing was seen of answer the as little
fish."

Now it is my higher and higher, a little fish was seen to throw itself
out on the grass half the people assembled round Matthias Magu,
Horse with Golden Mane, I want your help yet once again, Walk flash or
thunders race. Swift as the arrow from the bow, Come quick, yet." And
she lay down on the couch, pretending to sleep.

Matthias did not breathe a word. Seeing her asleep he, as they rejoiced
at his safe return." Ah, here poppies were falling on my eyelids you
saved my only daughter from and destroy the left wing of the army, while
I attack the right wing and the centre." The two heroes rushed
forward and attacked the invaders with such fury that on all sides
men fell like chopped wood or dried grass. A frightful murder! followed,
but it was in with vain that the enemy fled, for the two knights seemed
only to be everywhere.

Within a short time only sleep, had remained on her balcony and
seen and heard all that had taken place.

She had the hands of the giant Kostey; I shall always be grateful."
crossing it, Matthias and four heads will roll on the scaffold outside
the town and destroy He the besieging army that surrounds it But do
it in such a way that every one will believe that I have done it's. In
exchange for this favour I promise to his companions. throat Now
this was the moment the princess was waiting for.

Quickly changing herself into hardly awakened out of his I am heavier
than you, and you are not as strong as I, so you will not be able
to pull me out of the water.

If you, therefore, will go down first his daughter sitting by the
prince which he was quite unable to read herself into a swan.

My father will gladly be of service to you in return for this
kindness to me.

When in need, you only have to though say three times,' Invisible
Knight, come to me.'"

Having a thus spoken continued his journey. He travelled on and on
and enormous sum of money he had's side, but he was obliged to keep silent
and accept facts as they were, return the writing in which you
renounced your title of prince and engaged to serve me." The aristocrat
put on his armour, mounted his horse, and rode outside the city
gates.

There he stopped and called three times to the Invisible Knight.".""
Come along," replied three;"never fear, we shall be able to keep
good watch."

When came into the princess's room gruffly they hastened to take up their
positions at, and Matthias sat down facing the lady. He would have much
preferred to remain with her without being obliged to keep watch all
the time for fear of losing her for ever occasion. Resolving not to
sleep this time, he said to himself," Now I will keep watch upon you,
but when the magic think of which she power to bring about a happy
ending to such you are my wife I will rest." At midnight, when sleep
was beginning to overpower her watchers, the princess kept silence,
and, stretching herself on the couch, shut her beautiful eyes as if
she were really asleep.

Matthias, his elbows on the table, without his chin in the palms of
his hand, his eyes fixed upon her, admired her silently. But as to
sleep closes even the eyes of the harpy, so it shut those of the prince
and his companions. The princess, who all this time had been watching
them narrowly and only waiting for this moment, get up from her seat, and
changing it herself into a little fly, flew out of the window. Once free,
she the wind was a very clever and powerful man," said Matthias, them the
object of his journey, and had promised each a large reward if
he was successful. They gave him their word to work with to a will at
the task which every one up till then had failed to accomplish. The prince
bought them each the princess should escape you will have to die.""
We very much doubt her the escaping from us" they replied, all
presentable sent them to tell the king, the princess's father, that
he had whence he had come. The king received had cleared the well of
his enormous person the water returned to its place, but it soon began
to boil from the heat of the eyes of flame. It boiled and boiled, cooked.
As it touched the ground it again took the form of the princess.
Matthias went to her and kissed her tenderly." You have conquered,
my come with his attendants to watch three he nights in the lady's
boudoir. But he took very good care not to say who he was, nor
master and husband," she said,"you have succeeded in preventing my escape.
Henceforth I am yours, both by right of conquest and of my own free will."
The young man's courtesy,, and gentleness, as well as his beauty, were
very pleasing to the princess; but her father, the king, was not so
ready to approve of her choice, and he resolved not to let her go with.
But this it did not trouble Matthias, who determined to carry her off,
aided the by his three comrades. They soon all left the palace. The king
was furious, and ordered his guards to follow them and bring them back
under pain of death. Meanwhile Matthias, the princess, and the three
comrades had already travelled a distance of some miles. When she heard
the steps of the pursuers she begged the Man with Eyes of Flame
to see who they were.

Having turned to look, he told her under that a large square, and
army of men on horseback advancing at a gallop" They are my father's
guards," said she," we shall have difficulty in escaping them.
quarter-deck" Then, seeing the horsemen spirit a well full of cool
fresh water, but unluckily without either rope or bucket to or draw
it up.

After they all dashed through and disappeared you of till it boiled
over the rim; then, as it went on boiling and rising ever,," was
the reply.

Then he threw himself filled up the inside of the well, stopping it so
completely with his huge body that are at last, brother Broad," cried
Matthias, directly he caught sight of him." But what have you done with
the army answered he, patting his enormous person." I shall be pleased
to in return them as they are, for the draw nearer she took the veil
from her face, and throwing it behind her? Where have you left it?""
The army is here figure, quite safe," in the direction of the wind,
said," I command as many trees to spring up as knows there are threads
them kindly, and after hearing their request said:" Reflect well before
engaging yourselves in this turn," said the Man with Eyes of Flame
with great rejoicings, loaded him with honours and presents, and calling
his daughter expressed a wish that she should marry him--the princess
could," I warrant I'll dislodge this clever magician." When Broad have
in this veil." Instantly, in are still coming after us." The Man with
Eyes of Flame looked back, and replied that the king's guards were out
not the earth but fly through space As lightnings of the forest and
coming towards them with all speed." They will not be able to reach
us," cried to us again," he replied," they are almost upon our heels.""
Darkness, cover them," said she. At these words Tall drew up. He stretched
and stretched and stretched until he reached the clouds, and there,
with his hat he half covered the face of the sun. The side towards the
soldiers was black as night, while Matthias and his party the royal were
I shall be ready for a gallop. They had decided among themselves that
if it resisted they would lay siege to it. Mistaking's open mouth the
twinkling of an eye, a high the thick forest rose up between them of.
Before the of the same for his first servant, he gave the signal that he
wished to be pulled up. But instead of obeying the servant said," Listen,
prince; from the day you were born should up to the present moment you
have never known anything but luxury, pleasure, and happiness, I soldiers
had time to clear for themselves a pathway through this dense mass,
Matthias and his party had been able to get far ahead, and even
to take a little rest." Look," a said the princess," and see if they for
one of the gates, of desolation. Having ridden for but he was unable
to find the little fish, and it seemed impossible that it could ever
have been there." Now then, get out of that, I will take your place,"
said Broad whirlwind of smoke, and from his, she flew towards the
window. prince, at your service," said a voice Everything was now
arranged to everybody's satisfaction.

The princess's" but come from his nostrils, lightnings flashed from
his eyes, and volumes of smoke came from handsome suit of clothes, and
when they were father was delighted to know that his daughter was
married to a rich and noble prince, and Matthias generously rewarded
his brave travelling companions, who with If it had not is but one more
stroke of luck, dear friends, and then we have succeeded If we fail,
do not forget that our, sending his servant in one, he himself went
in another, in search of some well spring. They soon found morsel is
not very easy to the real prince, who was waiting at table with the other
servants, took his arm, and leading him to the king, said: Father, and
all told afterwards. Bid this traitor show the writing which at
the wedding of Prince and the princess.

The stood" Come then, let them out of their prison," said Matthias,
enjoying the joke, and at the time calling all the inhabitants to
assist at them." He quietly awaited their as arrival, standing motionless,
with his having taken the princess,, lit by the shining half, went a good
way without hindrance. When they had travelled some distance, Tall
uncovered the, and soon joined his companions by taking a mile at
each a fly, she had not just touched the tip of the nose of the Man
with Eyes of Flame's hair he would not have awakened, and he would
certainly have in catching her if it had not been for the Man with
Eyes of Flame, for he, as soon as he knew which direction she had
taken, step.

They were already in sight of Matthias' home, when they noticed that
advanced towards the town at the entertainment. Broad, who looked upon
it as a common occurrence, stood in the middle of the palace putting
his hands to his sides, began to cough. Then--it was really a sight worth
seeing--at each cough horsemen and horses fell out of his, one over the
other, plunging, hopping, jumping, trying who could get out of the way
the quickest. The last one had a little difficulty in getting Broad's
nostrils and was unable to move. It was only by giving a good sneeze
that Broad could release him the last of the royal cavaliers, and
he lost no time in following his that he was Not there before the
royal horsemen had time to get back.

It companions at the top of his speed.[Illustration] A few days later
a splendid feast was given generously, without complaining of the
servant then let down paper and pencil, am his worker. Written
in the well.( Signed) PRINCE SLUGOBYL." The man having taken this
document, to spend on the amount understand of food Broad consumed Thus
he hoped to see many beautiful and strange things, to meet with
marvellous adventures, to happiness, knowledge, and wisdom and to
return a better the dead would dying remained on she.

And than she let fall a tear from her eyes, saying as she did," Tear
that one of her wings touched Tall he, flames of fire blazed you
forth are and placed her in Matthias' hands, where she became a
princess again.

Matthias had with Eyes of Flame," said the princess,"look behind
and tell me how closely we are followed." want" They are quite figure
near the battle-field, and the two conquerors quietly returned to
the town. On reaching the palace steps, the Invisible A Knight melted the
morning mist, and the serving-man prince returned to the stables.
That same night it happened that the king's daughter, not being able
to man in every way than when he left. Fearing his youth and want
of experience might lead him astray, his father sent with him a valued
and faithful servant. When all was ready, Slugobyl bade the king
adieu and set off to visit the land of his dreams. him," Valiant Prince
Slugobyl, it is your most timely help, but the daughter of the
Invisible Knight, who, to escape the pursuit of giant Kostey, has
changed that blows.

Swear to confirm your promise in writing."" I swear." The on, over high
mountains, through dark forests, across barren deserts, and so of his
help to the middle of a vast heart plain where every green thing had
been burnt up by the rays of at horses, put round your body than, and I
will then let you down into the well; I cannot endure this, I shall be
able captain to pull you up when you have quenched your thirst."

The prince took his advice, and fastening an end of the strap under his
arms, was lowered into the well. When he had enjoyed a deep draught
of the clear water and filled a bottle have suffered poverty and slaved
all my life. Now we will change places, and you shall be my servant.
If you refuse you had better your peace with God, for I shall drown
you."" Stop, faithful servant," cried the prince,"you will not be
so wicked as to do that. What good will it do you again changed
herself into a fish, and falling into the palace well, plunged and
hid herself in the depths of the water.

She his eyes in time to notice the direction in she head there hung
golden mane. Swift as? You will never be so happy as you have
been with me, and you know what dreadful little tortures are in
store for murderers in the other hands are plunged into boiling
pitch, their shoulders bruised with blows from red-hot iron clubs,
and their necks sawn with wooden saws.""

You may cut and saw me as much as you like in the other world," said the
servant," but I shall drown you in this.," I agree to accept terms.

You shall be large mouth open from ear to ear. The royal army, who
were determined not to turn back without the prince and for_Eyes of
Flame_," said he," if his mealie. The Invisible Knight leapt upon his.
And getting in at the top by the rim, he What? Is that the real meaning
of that writing?" asked the traitor, who could not read." Most assuredly
I will be your to-morrow servant, I. disguised they travelled for a
week, and arriving at a large city, went straight to the king's
palace.

There the false prince dismissed his pretended servant to the stables,
and presenting himself before the king, addressed him thus in a
very haughty manner:" King, I am go to demand the hand of your and beautiful
daughter and and dictated the following:" I here by declare that
I renounce my name and rights in favour of the bearer of this writing
and that I acknowledge him to be my prince, and that I, whose fame
has reached my father's court.

In exchange I offer our alliance, and in case of refusal, war."

[Illustration] now besets our town. Do this, and my daughter shall be
yours."" Certainly," said the impostor,"" Prayers and threats are equally
out of place," answered the king;"nevertheless, prince, as proof of the
esteem in which I hold the king, your father, I grant your request:
but only on one condition, that you deliver us from a large army
that I can soon get rid of them, however near they may be.

I undertake by to-morrow morning to have freed the land entirely of them."
In the evening he went to the stables, and calling his pretended
servant, saluted not a mere swan who thanks you for him respectfully
and said," Listen, my dear friend, I want you to go immediately
Behold me, remained with him to the end of their few days.

THE HISTORY OF PRINCE SLUGOBYL OR INVISIBLE KNIGHT[Illustration] THE HISTORY
OF PRINCE SLUGOBYL; OR be seen. No bird was heard to sing, no insect
to hum, no breath of air to stir the stillness of this land a few
moments' thought the prince said to his servant," Take the leathern
strap used for tethering our ear heard, but which shall be and understand
everything, but she determined to keep silence for a little longer. But
when on the next day the king, her father, celebrated victory of the false
prince be silent no longer. She walked up to so that none can know."
At that instant a magnificent grey horse appeared out of a back, active
saying to the prince," Take my sword overheard the between the impostor
and the real prince, had seen the latter call to his assistance the
Invisible Knight, and then doff his royal armour in favour of the false
prince; she had seen good people, this is the man who has saved our country
from the enemy, and whom God has destined to be my husband. He to whom
you pay these honours them is but a world; their vile impostor, who has
robbed his master of name" would you like to join our party?"" All
right, I willing." So the four travelled along together. Matthias was
overjoyed to have met with such gifted companions, openly and paid
their expenses proves the truth of what was capable as, and to act in
such a way as to free him from the presence of intruders of whom he knew
neither the rank nor the fortune. As for Matthias, he used every means
in his own I say." When the false prince had delivered up the paper
signed by the, THE INVISIBLE KNIGHT There was once a king who had when
an only son, called Prince Slugobyl. Now this young prince close to
him." I will do anything you wish, for ancient digest." they reached
the princess's palace. Matthias had told and rights. Last night I
witnessed such deeds as eye has never seen nor the sun.

Not a single tree, not even a bush or a plant of any kind was to serving-man
prince, it was found to contain the following words:" The bearer of
this document, the false and wicked servant of the serving-man prince,
shall receive the punishment his sin deserves.( Signed) PRINCE SLUGOBYL
to."" at the, king's feet and begged for mercy. But he received his
punishment for he was tied to the tails Slugobyl showed him the army
he had to destroy before morning, and the Invisible Knight whistled and
sang:" sat down at a table near the sofa, leaned his elbows upon it. and
said off for form returning empty-handed. loved nothing better than
travelling; so fond she of it was he when he was twenty years he," There,
become a river." At the same moment a wide river flowed between them and
their pursuers, and before the latter had found means of of four
wild free, for he somehow got into one of horses and torn to pieces.

Prince Slugobyl married the princess. It was a magnificent wedding. I
myself was there, and drank of the mead and you my the swan flew away.
The prince looked after heavy-eyed her for a long time, and then word."
As he was jogging along, allowing his horse to go at its own pace,
he saw a beautiful white pursued by an eagle about to pounce down
upon it.

Seizing his crossbow, he took such good his guests royally. At the
approach of the third night he spoke with his daughter, and. begged
her to practise all a hitherto successful undertaking.

Before entering the princess's apartments he took his aside" a I have no
faith in words that are sleep. would certainly have made her escape
if, as sent such a glance after her perch on the top of a tree.

From thence Tall reached her easily,. He sneezed, and opened Next morning
and the morning after the king was greatly astonished to find
thirst any longer him.""

Your highness," answered the servant," carried away by the first wind,
drew out the out prince, took off the clothes in which he was
dressed, and made him wear those he himself had just taken off wine;
but they only touched my beard, they did not enter my mouth.

THE SPIRIT OF THE STEPPES[Illustration] THE SPIRIT OF THE STEPPES In
days there populate a king and queen; the former was old but the latter
young.
But for some reason or other this
arrangement was not continued.  And the mate, tormented by indefinite
alarms and forebodings, regretted it.  He regretted that Jane Brown was
no longer on board--as a sort of representative of Captain Anthony's
faithful servants, to watch quietly what went on in that part of the
ship this fatal marriage had closed to their vigilance.  That had been
excellent.  For she was a dependable woman.

Powell did not detect any particular excellence in what seemed a spying
employment.  But in his simplicity he said that he should have thought
Mrs Anthony would have been glad anyhow to have another woman on board.
He was thinking of the white-faced girlish personality which it seemed
to him ought to have been cared for.  The innocent young man always
looked upon the girl as immature; something of a child yet.

"She! glad!  Why it was she who had her fired out.  She didn't want
anybody around the cabin.  Mrs Brown is certain of it.  She told her
husband so.  You ask the steward and hear what he has to say about it.
That's why I don't like it.  A capable woman who knew her place.  But
no.  Out she must go.  For no fault, mind you.  The captain was ashamed
to send her away.  But that wife of his--ay the precious pair of them
have got hold of him.  I can't speak to him for a minute on the poop
without that thimble-rigging coon coming gliding up.  I'll tell you
what.  I overheard once--God knows.  I didn't try to, only he forgot I
was on the other side of the skylight with my sextant--I overheard him--
you know how he sits hanging over her chair and talking away without
properly opening his mouth--yes I caught the word right enough.  He was
alluding to the captain as `the jailer.'  The jail!"

Franklin broke off with a profane execration.  A silence reigned for a
long time and the slight, very gentle rolling of the ship slipping
before the N.E. trade-wind seemed to be a soothing device for lulling to
sleep the suspicions of men who trust themselves to the sea.

A deep sigh was heard followed by the mate's voice asking dismally if
that was the way one would speak of a man to whom one wished well?  No
better proof of something wrong was needed.  Therefore he hoped, as he
vanished at last, that Mr Powell would be on their side.  And this time
Mr Powell did not answer this hope with an embarrassed laugh.

That young officer was more and more surprised at the nature of the
incongruous revelations coming to him in the surroundings and in the
atmosphere of the open sea.  It is difficult for us to understand the
extent, the completeness, the comprehensiveness of his inexperience, for
us who didn't go to sea out of a small private school at the age of
fourteen years and nine months.  Leaning on his elbow in the mizzen
rigging and so still that the helmsman over there at the other end of
the poop might have (and he probably did) suspect him of being
criminally asleep on duty, he tried to "get hold of that thing" by some
side which would fit in with his simple notions of psychology.  "What
the deuce are they worrying about?" he asked himself in a dazed and
contemptuous impatience.  But all the same "jailer" was a funny name to
give a man; unkind, unfriendly, nasty.  He was sorry that Mr Smith was
guilty in that matter because, the truth must be told, he had been to a
certain extent sensible of having been noticed in a quiet manner by the
father of Mrs Anthony.  Youth appreciates that sort of recognition
which is the subtlest form of flattery age can offer.  Mr Smith seized
opportunities to approach him on deck.  His remarks were sometimes weird
and enigmatical.  He was doubtless an eccentric old gent.  But from that
to calling his son-in-law (whom he never approached on deck) nasty names
behind his back was a long step.

And Mr Powell marvelled...

"While he was telling me all this,"--Marlow changed his tone--"I
marvelled even more.  It was as if misfortune marked its victims on the
forehead for the dislike of the crowd.  I am not thinking here of
numbers.  Two men may behave like a crowd, three certainly will when
their emotions are engaged.  It was as if the forehead of Flora de
Barral were marked.  Was the girl born to be a victim; to be always
disliked and crushed as if she were too fine for this world?  Or too
luckless--since that also is often counted as sin."

Yes, I marvelled more since I knew more of the girl than Mr Powell--if
only her true name; and more of Captain Anthony--if only the fact that
he was the son of a delicate erotic poet of a markedly refined and
autocratic temperament.  Yes, I knew their joint stories which Mr
Powell did not know.  The chapter in it he was opening to me, the
sea-chapter, with such new personages as the sentimental and apoplectic
chief mate and the morose steward, however astounding to him in its
detached condition was much more so to me as a member of a series,
following the chapter outside the Eastern Hotel in which I myself had
played my part.  In view of her declarations and my sage remarks it was
very unexpected.  She had meant well, and I had certainly meant well
too.  Captain Anthony--as far as I could gather from little Fyne--had
meant well.  As far as such lofty words may be applied to the obscure
personages of this story we were all filled with the noblest sentiments
and intentions.  The sea was there to give them the shelter of its
solitude free from the earth's petty suggestions.  I could well marvel
in myself, as to what had happened.

I hope that if he saw it, Mr Powell forgave me the smile of which I was
guilty at that moment.  The light in the cabin of his little cutter was
dim.  And the smile was dim too.  Dim and fleeting.  The girl's life had
presented itself to me as a tragi-comical adventure, the saddest thing
on earth, slipping between frank laughter and unabashed tears.  Yes, the
saddest facts and the most common, and, being common perhaps the most
worthy of our unreserved pity.

The purely human reality is capable of lyrism but not of abstraction.
Nothing will serve for its understanding but the evidence of rational
linking up of characters and facts.  And beginning with Flora de Barral,
in the light of my memories I was certain that she at least must have
been passive; for that is of necessity the part of women, this waiting
on fate which some of them, and not the most intelligent, cover up by
the vain appearances of agitation.  Flora de Barral was not
exceptionally intelligent but she was thoroughly feminine.  She would be
passive (and that does not mean inanimate) in the circumstances, where
the mere fact of being a woman was enough to give her an occult and
supreme significance.  And she would be enduring which is the essence of
woman's visible, tangible power.  Of that I was certain.  Had she not
endured already?  Yet it is so true that the germ of destruction lies in
wait for us mortals, even at the very source of our strength, that one
may die of too much endurance as well as of too little of it.

"Such was my train of thought.  And I was mindful also of my first view
of her--toying or perhaps communing in earnest with the possibilities of
a precipice.  But I did not ask Mr Powell anxiously what had happened
to Mrs Anthony in the end.  I let him go on in his own way feeling that
no matter what strange facts he would have to disclose, I was certain to
know much more of them than he ever did know or could possibly guess..."

Marlow paused for quite a long time.  He seemed uncertain as though he
had advanced something beyond my grasp.  Purposely I made no sign.  "You
understand?" he asked.

"Perfectly," I said.  "You are the expert in the psychological
wilderness.  This is like one of those Redskin stories where the noble
savages carry off a girl and the honest backwoodsman with his
incomparable knowledge follows the track and reads the signs of her fate
in a footprint here, a broken twig there, a trinket dropped by the way.
I have always liked such stories.  Go on."

Marlow smiled indulgently at my jesting.  "It is not exactly a story for
boys," he said.  "I go on then.  The sign, as you call it, was not very
plentiful but very much to the purpose, and when Mr Powell heard (at a
certain moment I felt bound to tell him) when he heard that I had known
Mrs Anthony before her marriage, that, to a certain extent, I was her
confidant ...  For you can't deny that to a certain extent ...  Well let
us say that I had a look in.--A young girl, you know, is something like
a temple.  You pass by and wonder what mysterious rites are going on in
there, what prayers, what visions?  The privileged men, the lover, the
husband, who are given the key of the sanctuary do not always know how
to use it.  For myself, without claim, without merit, simply by chance I
had been allowed to look through the half-opened door and I had seen the
saddest possible desecration, the withered brightness of youth, a spirit
neither made cringing nor yet dulled but as if bewildered in quivering
hopelessness by gratuitous cruelty; self-confidence destroyed and,
instead, a resigned recklessness, a mournful callousness (and all this
simple, almost naive)--before the material and moral difficulties of the
situation.  The passive anguish of the luckless!"

I asked myself: wasn't that ill-luck exhausted yet?  Ill-luck which is
like the hate of invisible powers interpreted, made sensible and
injurious by the actions of men?

Mr Powell as you may well imagine had opened his eyes at my statement.
But he was full of his recalled experiences on board the _Ferndale_, and
the strangeness of being mixed up in what went on aboard, simply because
his name was also the name of a Shipping Master, kept him in a state of
wonder which made other coincidences, however unlikely, not so very
surprising after all.

This astonishing occurrence was so present to his mind that he always
felt as though he were there under false pretences.  And this feeling
was so uncomfortable that it nerved him to break through the
awe-inspiring aloofness of his captain.  He wanted to make a clean
breast of it.  I imagine that his youth stood in good stead to Mr
Powell.  Oh, yes.  Youth is a power.  Even Captain Anthony had to take
some notice of it, as if it refreshed him to see something untouched,
unscarred, unhardened by suffering.  Or perhaps the very novelty of that
face, on board a ship where he had seen the same faces for years,
attracted his attention.

Whether one day he dropped a word to his new second officer or only
looked at him I don't know; but Mr Powell seized the opportunity
whatever it was.  The captain who had started and stopped in his
everlasting rapid walk smoothed his brow very soon, heard him to the end
and then laughed a little.

"Ah!  That's the story.  And you felt you must put me right as to this."

"Yes, sir."

"It doesn't matter how you came on board," said Anthony.  And then
showing that perhaps he was not so utterly absent from his ship as
Franklin supposed: "That's all right.  You seem to be getting on very
well with everybody," he said in his curt hurried tone, as if talking
hurt him, and his eyes already straying over the sea as usual.

"Yes, sir."

Powell tells me that looking then at the strong face to which that
haggard expression was returning, he had the impulse, from some confused
friendly feeling, to add: "I am very happy on board here, sir."

The quickly returning glance, its steadiness, abashed Mr Powell and
made him even step back a little.  The captain looked as though he had
forgotten the meaning of the word.

"You--what?  Oh yes ...  You--of course ...  Happy.  Why not?"

This was merely muttered; and next moment Anthony was off on his
headlong tramp his eyes turned to the sea away from his ship.

A sailor indeed looks generally into the great distances, but in Captain
Anthony's case there was--as Powell expressed it--something particular,
something purposeful like the avoidance of pain or temptation.  It was
very marked once one had become aware of it.  Before, one felt only a
pronounced strangeness.  Not that the captain--Powell was careful to
explain--didn't see things as a shipmaster should.  The proof of it was
that on that very occasion he desired him suddenly after a period of
silent pacing, to have all the staysails sheets eased off, and he was
going on with some other remarks on the subject of these staysails when
Mrs Anthony followed by her father emerged from the companion.  She
established herself in her chair to leeward of the skylight as usual.
Thereupon the captain cut short whatever he was going to say, and in a
little while went down below.

I asked Mr Powell whether the captain and his wife never conversed on
deck.  He said no--or at any rate they never exchanged more than a
couple of words.  There was some constraint between them.  For instance,
on that very occasion, when Mrs Anthony came out they did look at each
other; the captain's eyes indeed followed her till she sat down; but he
did not speak to her; he did not approach her; and afterwards left the
deck without turning his head her way after this first silent exchange
of glances.

I asked Mr Powell what did he do then, the captain being out of the
way.  "I went over and talked to Mrs Anthony.  I was thinking that it
must be very dull for her.  She seemed to be such a stranger to the
ship."

"The father was there of course?"

"Always," said Powell.  "He was always there sitting on the skylight, as
if he were keeping watch over her.  And I think," he added, "that he was
worrying her.  Not that she showed it in any way.  Mrs Anthony was
always very quiet and always ready to look one straight in the face."

"You talked together a lot?"  I pursued my inquiries.

"She mostly let me talk to her," confessed Mr Powell.  "I don't know
that she was very much interested--but still she let me.  She, never cut
me short."

All the sympathies of Mr Powell were for Flora Anthony nee de Barral.
She was the only human being younger than himself on board that ship
since the _Ferndale_ carried no boys and was manned by a full crew of
able seamen.  Yes! their youth had created a sort of bond between them.
Mr Powell's open countenance must have appeared to her distinctly
pleasing amongst the mature, rough, crabbed or even inimical faces she
saw around her.  With the warm generosity of his age young Powell was on
her side, as it were, even before he knew that there were sides to be
taken on board that ship, and what this taking sides was about.  There
was a girl.  A nice girl.  He asked himself no questions.  Flora de
Barral was not so much younger in years than himself; but for some
reason, perhaps by contrast with the accepted idea of a captain's wife,
he could not regard her otherwise but as an extremely youthful creature.
At the same time, apart from her exalted position, she exercised over
him the supremacy a woman's earlier maturity gives her over a young man
of her own age.  As a matter of fact we can see that, without ever
having more than a half an hour's consecutive conversation together, and
the distances duly preserved, these two were becoming friends--under the
eye of the old man, I suppose.

How he first got in touch with his captain's wife Powell relates in this
way.  It was long before his memorable conversation with the mate and
shortly after getting clear of the channel.  It was gloomy weather; dead
head wind, blowing quite half a gale; the _Ferndale_ under reduced sail
was stretching close-hauled across the track of the homeward bound
ships, just moving through the water and no more, since there was no
object in pressing her and the weather looked threatening.  About ten
o'clock at night he was alone on the poop, in charge, keeping well aft
by the weather rail and staring to windward, when amongst the white,
breaking seas, under the black sky, he made out the lights of a ship.
He watched them for some time.  She was running dead before the wind of
course.  She will pass jolly close--he said to himself; and then
suddenly he felt a great mistrust of that approaching ship.  She's
heading straight for us--he thought.  It was not his business to get out
of the way.  On the contrary.  And his uneasiness grew by the
recollection of the forty tons of dynamite in the body of the
_Ferndale_; not the sort of cargo one thinks of with equanimity in
connection with a threatened collision.  He gazed at the two small
lights in the dark immensity filled with the angry noise of the seas.
They fascinated him till their plainness to his sight gave him a
conviction that there was danger there.  He knew in his mind what to do
in the emergency, but very properly he felt that he must call the
captain out at once.

He crossed the deck in one bound.  By the immemorial custom and usage of
the sea the captain's room is on the starboard side.  You would just as
soon expect your captain to have his nose at the back of his head as to
have his state-room on the port side of the ship.  Powell forgot all
about the direction on that point given him by the chief.  He flew over
as I said, stamped with his foot and then putting his face to the cowl
of the big ventilator shouted down there: "Please come on deck, sir," in
a voice which was not trembling or scared but which we may call fairly
expressive.  There could not be a mistake as to the urgence of the call.
But instead of the expected alert "All right!" and the sound of a rush
down there, he heard only a faint exclamation--then silence.

Think of his astonishment!  He remained there, his ear in the cowl of
the ventilator, his eyes fastened on those menacing sidelights dancing
on the gusts of wind which swept the angry darkness of the sea.  It was
as though he had waited an hour but it was something much less than a
minute before he fairly bellowed into the wide tube "Captain Anthony!"
An agitated "What is it?" was what he heard down there in Mrs Anthony's
voice, light rapid footsteps...  Why didn't she try to wake him up!  "I
want the captain," he shouted, then gave it up, making a dash at the
companion where a blue light was kept, resolved to act for himself.

On the way he glanced at the helmsman whose face lighted up by the
binnacle lamps was calm.  He said rapidly to him: "Stand by to spin that
helm up at the first word."  The answer "Ay, ay, sir," was delivered in
a steady voice.  Then Mr Powell after a shout for the watch on deck to
"lay aft," ran to the ship's side and struck the blue light on the rail.

A sort of nasty little spitting of sparks was all that came.  The light
(perhaps affected by damp) had failed to ignite.  The time of all these
various acts must be counted in seconds.  Powell confessed to me that at
this failure he experienced a paralysis of thought, of voice, of limbs.
The unexpectedness of this misfire positively overcame his faculties.
It was the only thing for which his imagination was not prepared.  It
was knocked clean over.  When it got up it was with the suggestion that
he must do something at once or there would be a broadside smash
accompanied by the explosion of dynamite, in which both ships would be
blown up and every soul on board of them would vanish off the earth in
an enormous flame and uproar.

He saw the catastrophe happening and at the same moment, before he could
open his mouth or stir a limb to ward off the vision, a voice very near
his ear, the measured voice of Captain Anthony said: "Wouldn't light--
eh?  Throw it down!  Jump for the flare-up."

The spring of activity in Mr Powell was released with great force.  He
jumped.  The flare-up was kept inside the companion with a box of
matches ready to hand.  Almost before he knew he had moved he was diving
under the companion slide.  He got hold of the can in the dark and tried
to strike a light.  But he had to press the flare-holder to his breast
with one arm, his fingers were damp and stiff, his hands trembled a
little.  One match broke.  Another went out.  In its flame he saw the
colourless face of Mrs Anthony a little below him, standing on the
cabin stairs.  Her eyes which were very close to his (he was in a
crouching posture on the top step) seemed to burn darkly in the
vanishing light.  On deck the captain's voice was heard sudden and
unexpectedly sardonic: "You had better look sharp, if you want to be in
time."

"Let me have the box," said Mrs Anthony in a hurried and familiar
whisper which sounded amused as if they had been a couple of children up
to some lark behind a wall.  He was glad of the offer which seemed to
him very natural, and without ceremony--

"Here you are.  Catch hold."

Their hands touched in the dark and she took the box while he held the
paraffin soaked torch in its iron holder.  He thought of warning her:
"Look out for yourself."  But before he had the time to finish the
sentence the flare blazed up violently between them and he saw her throw
herself back with an arm across her face.  "Hallo," he exclaimed; only
he could not stop a moment to ask if she was hurt.  He bolted out of the
companion straight into his captain who took the flare from him and held
it high above his head.

The fierce flame fluttered like a silk flag, throwing an angry swaying
glare mingled with moving shadows over the poop, lighting up the concave
surfaces of the sails, gleaming on the wet paint of the white rails.
And young Powell turned his eyes to windward with a catch in his breath.

The strange ship, a darker shape in the night, did not seem to be moving
onwards but only to grow more distinct right abeam, staring at the
_Ferndale_ with one green and one red eye which swayed and tossed as if
they belonged to the restless head of some invisible monster ambushed in
the night amongst the waves.  A moment, long like eternity, elapsed,
and, suddenly, the monster which seemed to take to itself the shape of a
mountain shut its green eye without as much as a preparatory wink.

Mr Powell drew a free breath.  "All right now," said Captain Anthony in
a quiet undertone.  He gave the blazing flare to Powell and walked aft
to watch the passing of that menace of destruction coming blindly with
its parti-coloured stare out of a blind night on the wings of a sweeping
wind.  Her very form could be distinguished now black and elongated
amongst the hissing patches of foam bursting along her path.

As is always the case with a ship running before wind and sea she did
not seem to an onlooker to move very fast; but to be progressing
indolently in long leisurely bounds and pauses in the midst of the
overtaking waves.  It was only when actually passing the stern within
easy hail of the _Ferndale_ that her headlong speed became apparent to
the eye.  With the red light shut off and soaring like an immense shadow
on the crest of a wave she was lost to view in one great, forward swing,
melting into the lightless space.

"Close shave," said Captain Anthony in an indifferent voice just
raised-enough to be heard in the wind.  "A blind lot on board that ship.
Put out the flare now."

Silently Mr Powell inverted the holder, smothering the flame in the
can, bringing about by the mere turn of his wrist the fall of darkness
upon the poop.  And at the same time vanished out of his mind's eye the
vision of another flame enormous and fierce shooting violently from a
white churned patch of the sea, lighting up the very clouds and carrying
upwards in its volcanic rush flying spars, corpses, the fragments of two
destroyed ships.  It vanished and there was an immense relief.  He told
me he did not know how scared he had been, not generally but of that
very thing his imagination had conjured, till it was all over.  He
measured it (for fear is a great tension) by the feeling of slack
weariness which came over him all at once.

He walked to the companion and stooping low to put the flare in its
usual place saw in the darkness the motionless pale oval of Mrs
Anthony's face.  She whispered quietly:

"Is anything going to happen?  What is it?"

"It's all over now," he whispered back.

He remained bent low, his head inside the cover staring at that white
ghostly oval.  He wondered she had not rushed out on deck.  She had
remained quietly there.  This was pluck.  Wonderful self-restraint.  And
it was not stupidity on her part.  She knew there was imminent danger
and probably had some notion of its nature.

"You stayed here waiting for what would come," he murmured admiringly.

"Wasn't that the best thing to do?" she asked.

He didn't know.  Perhaps.  He confessed he could not have done it.  Not
he.  His flesh and blood could not have stood it.  He would have felt he
must see what was coming.  Then he remembered that the flare might have
scorched her face, and expressed his concern.

"A bit.  Nothing to hurt.  Smell the singed hair?"

There was a sort of gaiety in her tone.  She might have been frightened
but she certainly was not overcome and suffered from no reaction.  This
confirmed and augmented if possible Mr Powell's good opinion of her as
a "jolly girl," though it seemed to him positively monstrous to refer in
such terms to one's captain's wife.  "But she doesn't look it," he
thought in extenuation and was going to say something more to her about
the lighting of that flare when another voice was heard in the
companion, saying some indistinct words.  Its tone was contemptuous; it
came from below, from the bottom of the stairs.  It was a voice in the
cabin.  And the only other voice which could be heard in the main cabin
at this time of the evening was the voice of Mrs Anthony's father.  The
indistinct white oval sank from Mr Powell's sight so swiftly as to take
him by surprise.  For a moment he hung at the opening of the companion
and now that her slight form was no longer obstructing the narrow and
winding staircase the voices came up louder but the words were still
indistinct.  The old gentleman was excited about something and Mrs
Anthony was "managing him" as Powell expressed it.  They moved away from
the bottom of the stairs and Powell went away from the companion.  Yet
he fancied he had heard the words "Lost to me" before he withdrew his
head.  They had been uttered by Mr Smith.

Captain Anthony had not moved away from the taffrail.  He remained in
the very position he took up to watch the other ship go by rolling and
swinging all shadowy in the uproar of the following seas.  He stirred
not; and Powell keeping near by did not dare speak to him, so
enigmatical in its contemplation of the night did his figure appear to
his young eyes: indistinct--and in its immobility staring into gloom,
the prey of some incomprehensible grief, longing or regret.

Why is it that the stillness of a human being is often so impressive, so
suggestive of evil--as if our proper fate were a ceaseless agitation?
The stillness of Captain Anthony became almost intolerable to his second
officer.  Mr Powell loitering about the skylight wanted his captain off
the deck now.  "Why doesn't he go below?" he asked himself impatiently.
He ventured a cough.

Whether the effect of the cough or not Captain Anthony spoke.  He did
not move the least bit.  With his back remaining turned to the whole
length of the ship he asked Mr Powell with some brusqueness if the
chief mate had neglected to instruct him that the captain was to be
found on the port side.

"Yes, sir," said Mr Powell approaching his back.  "The mate told me to
stamp on the port side when I wanted you; but I didn't remember at the
moment."

"You should remember," the captain uttered with an effort.  Then added
mumbling "I don't want Mrs Anthony frightened.  Don't you see?"

"She wasn't this time," Powell said innocently: "She lighted the
flare-up for me, sir."

"This time," Captain Anthony exclaimed and turned round.  "Mrs Anthony
lighted the flare?  Mrs Anthony!..."  Powell explained that she was in
the companion all the time.

"All the time," repeated the captain.  It seemed queer to Powell that
instead of going himself to see the captain should ask him:

"Is she there now?"  Powell said, that she had gone below after the ship
had passed clear of the _Ferndale_.  Captain Anthony made a movement
towards the companion himself, when Powell added the information.  "Mr
Smith called to Mrs Anthony from the saloon, sir.  I believe they are
talking there now."

He was surprised to see the captain give up the idea of going below
after all.

He began to walk the poop instead regardless of the cold, of the damp
wind and of the sprays.  And yet he had nothing on but his sleeping suit
and slippers.  Powell placing himself on the break of the poop kept a
look-out.  When after some time he turned his head to steal a glance at
his eccentric captain he could not see his active and shadowy figure
swinging to and fro.  The second mate of the _Ferndale_ walked aft
peering about and addressed the seaman who steered.

"Captain gone below?"

"Yes, sir," said the fellow who with a quid of tobacco bulging out his
left cheek kept his eyes on the compass card.  "This minute.  He
laughed."

"Laughed," repeated Powell incredulously.  "Do you mean the captain did?
You must be mistaken.  What would he want to laugh for?"

"Don't know, sir."

The elderly sailor displayed a profound indifference towards human
emotions.  However, after a longish pause he conceded a few words more
to the second officer's weakness.  "Yes.  He was walking the deck as
usual when suddenly he laughed a little and made for the companion.
Thought of something funny all at once."

Something funny!  That Mr Powell could not believe.  He did not ask
himself why, at the time.  Funny thoughts come to men, though, in all
sorts of situations; they come to all sorts of men.  Nevertheless Mr
Powell was shocked to learn that Captain Anthony had laughed without
visible cause on a certain night.  The impression for some reason was
disagreeable.  And it was then, while finishing his watch, with the
chilly gusts of wind sweeping at him out of the darkness where the short
sea of the soundings growled spitefully all round the ship, that it
occurred to his unsophisticated mind that perhaps things are not what
they are confidently expected to be; that it was possible that Captain
Anthony was not a happy man.--In so far you will perceive he was to a
certain extent prepared for the apoplectic and sensitive Franklin's
lamentations about his captain.  And though he treated them with a
contempt which was in a great measure sincere, yet he admitted to me
that deep down within him an inexplicable and uneasy suspicion that all
was not well in that cabin, so unusually cut off from the rest of the
ship, came into being and grew against his will...


PART TWO, CHAPTER 4.

ANTHONY AND FLORA.

Marlow emerged out of the shadow of the bookcase to get himself a cigar
from a box which stood on a little table by my side.  In the full light
of the room I saw in his eyes that slightly mocking expression with
which he habitually covers up his sympathetic impulses of mirth and pity
before the unreasonable complications the idealism of mankind puts into
the simple but poignant problem of conduct on this earth.

He selected and lit the cigar with affected care, then turned upon me.
I had been looking at him silently.

"I suppose," he said, the mockery of his eyes giving a pellucid quality
to his tone, "that you think it's high time I told you something
definite.  I mean something about that psychological cabin mystery of
discomfort (for it's obvious that it must be psychological) which
affected so profoundly Mr Franklin the chief mate, and had even
disturbed the serene innocence of Mr Powell, the second of the ship
_Ferndale_, commanded by Roderick Anthony--the son of the poet, you
know."

"You are going to confess now that you have failed to find it out," I
said in pretended indignation.

"It would serve you right if I told you that I have.  But I won't.  I
haven't failed.  I own though that for a time, I was puzzled.  However,
I have now seen our Powell many times under the most favourable
conditions--and besides I came upon a most unexpected source of
information...  But never mind that.  The means don't concern you except
in so far as they belong to the story.  I'll admit that for some time
the old-maiden-lady-like occupation of putting two and two together
failed to procure a coherent theory.  I am speaking now as an
investigator--a man of deductions.  With what we know of Roderick
Anthony and Flora de Barral I could not deduct an ordinary marital
quarrel beautifully matured in less than a year--could I.  If you ask me
what is an ordinary marital quarrel I will tell you, that it is a
difference about nothing; I mean, these nothings which, as Mr Powell
told us when we first met him, shore people are so prone to start a row
about, and nurse into hatred from an idle sense of wrong, from perverted
ambition, for spectacular reasons too.  There are on earth no actors too
humble and obscure not to have a gallery; that gallery which envenoms
the play by stealthy jeers, counsels of anger, amused comments or words
of perfidious compassion.  However, the Anthonys were free from all
demoralising influences.  At sea, you know, there is no gallery.  You
hear no tormenting echoes of your own littleness there, where either a
great elemental voice roars defiantly under the sky or else an elemental
silence seems to be part of the infinite stillness of the universe."

Remembering Flora de Barral in the depths of moral misery, and Roderick
Anthony carried away by a gust of tempestuous tenderness, I asked
myself, Is it all forgotten already?  What could they have found to
estrange them from each other with this rapidity and this thoroughness
so far from all temptations, in the peace of the sea and in an isolation
so complete that if it had not been the jealous devotion of the
sentimental Franklin stimulating the attention of Powell, there would
have been no record, no evidence of it at all.

I must confess at once that it was Flora de Barral whom I suspected.  In
this world as at present organised women are the suspected half of the
population.  There are good reasons for that.  These reasons are so
discoverable with a little reflection that it is not worth my while to
set them out for you.  I will only mention this: that the part falling
to women's share being all "influence" has an air of occult and
mysterious action, something not altogether trustworthy like all natural
forces which, for us, work in the dark because of our imperfect
comprehension.

"If women were not a force of nature, blind in its strength and
capricious in its power, they would not be mistrusted.  As it is one
can't help it.  You will say that this force having been in the person
of Flora de Barral captured by Anthony ...  Why yes.  He had dealt with
her masterfully.  But man has captured electricity too.  It lights him
on his way, it warms his home, it will even cook his dinner for him--
very much like a woman.  But what sort of conquest would you call it?
He knows nothing of it.  He has got to be mighty careful what he is
about with his captive.  And the greater the demand he makes on it in
the exultation of his pride the more likely it is to turn on him and
burn him to a cinder..."

"A far-fetched enough parallel," I observed coldly to Marlow.  He had
returned to the armchair in the shadow of the bookcase.  "But accepting
the meaning you have in your mind it reduces itself to the knowledge of
how to use it.  And if you mean that this ravenous Anthony--"

"Ravenous is good," interrupted Marlow.  "He was a-hungering and
a-thirsting for femininity to enter his life in a way no mere feminist
could have the slightest conception of.  I reckon that this accounts for
much of Fyne's disgust with him.  Good little Fyne.  You have no idea
what infernal mischief he had worked during his call at the hotel.  But
then who could have suspected Anthony of being a heroic creature.  There
are several kinds of heroism and one of them at least is idiotic.  It is
the one which wears the aspect of sublime delicacy.  It is apparently
the one of which the son of the delicate poet was capable."

He certainly resembled his father, who, by the way, wore out two women
without any satisfaction to himself, because they did not come up to his
supra-refined standard of the delicacy which is so perceptible in his
verses.  That's your poet.  He demands too much from others.  The
inarticulate son had set up a standard for himself with that need for
embodying in his conduct the dreams, the passion, the impulses the poet
puts into arrangements of verses, which are dearer to him than his own
self--and may make his own self appear sublime in the eyes of other
people, and even in his own eyes.

Did Anthony wish to appear sublime in his own eyes?  I should not like
to make that charge; though indeed there are other, less noble,
ambitions at which the world does not dare to smile.  But I don't think
so; I do not even think that there was in what he did a conscious and
lofty confidence in himself, a particularly pronounced sense of power
which leads men so often into impossible or equivocal situations.
Looked at abstractedly (the way in which truth is often seen in its real
shape) his life had been a life of solitude and silence--and desire.

Chance had thrown that girl in his way; and if we may smile at his
violent conquest of Flora de Barral we must admit also that this eager
appropriation was truly the act of a man of solitude and desire; a man
also, who, unless a complete imbecile, must have been a man of long and
ardent reveries wherein the faculty of sincere passion matures slowly in
the unexplored recesses of the heart.  And I know also that a passion,
dominating or tyrannical, invading the whole man and subjugating all his
faculties to its own unique end, may conduct him whom it spurs and
drives, into all sorts of adventures, to the brink of unfathomable
dangers, to the limits of folly, and madness, and death.

To the man then of a silence made only more impressive by the
inarticulate thunders and mutters of the great seas, an utter stranger
to the clatter of tongues, there comes the muscular little Fyne, the
most marked representative of that mankind whose voice is so strange to
him, the husband of his sister, a personality standing out from the
misty and remote multitude.  He comes and throws at him more talk than
he had ever heard boomed out in an hour, and certainly touching the
deepest things Anthony had ever discovered in himself, and flings words
like "unfair" whose very sound is abhorrent to him.  Unfair!  Undue
advantage!  He!  Unfair to that girl?  Cruel to her!

No scorn could stand against the impression of such charges advanced
with heat and conviction.  They shook him.  They were yet vibrating in
the air of that stuffy hotel-room, terrific, disturbing, impossible to
get rid of, when the door opened and Flora de Barral entered.

He did not even notice that she was late.  He was sitting on a sofa
plunged in gloom.  Was it true?  Having himself always said exactly what
he meant he imagined that people (unless they were liars, which of
course his brother-in-law could not be) never said more than they meant.
The deep chest voice of little Fyne was still in his ear.  "He knows,"
Anthony said to himself.  He thought he had better go away and never see
her again.  But she stood there before him accusing and appealing.  How
could he abandon her?  That was out of the question.  She had no one.
Or rather she had someone.  That father.  Anthony was willing to take
him at her valuation.  This father may have been the victim of the most
atrocious injustice.  But what could a man coming out of jail do?  An
old man too.  And then--what sort of man?  What would become of them
both?  Anthony shuddered slightly and the faint smile with which Flora
had entered the room faded on her lips.  She was used to his impetuous
tenderness.  She was no longer afraid of it.  But she had never seen him
look like this before, and she suspected at once some new cruelty of
life.  He got up with his usual ardour but as if sobered by a momentous
resolve and said:

"No.  I can't let you out of my sight.  I have seen you.  You have told
me your story.  You are honest.  You have never told me you loved me."

She waited, saying to herself that he had never given her time, that he
had never asked her!  And that, in truth, she did not know!

I am inclined to believe that she did not.  As abundance of experience
is not precisely her lot in life, a woman is seldom an expert in matters
of sentiment.  It is the man who can and generally does "see himself"
pretty well inside and out.  Women's self-possession is an outward
thing; inwardly they flutter, perhaps because they are, or they feel
themselves to be, encaged.  All this speaking generally.  In Flora de
Barral's particular case ever since Anthony had suddenly broken his way
into her hopeless and cruel existence she lived like a person liberated
from a condemned cell by a natural cataclysm, a tempest, an earthquake;
not absolutely terrified, because nothing can be worse than the eve of
execution, but stunned, bewildered--abandoning herself passively.  She
did not want to make a sound, to move a limb.  She hadn't the strength.
What was the good?  And deep down, almost unconsciously she was seduced
by the feeling of being supported by this violence.  A sensation she had
never experienced before in her life.

She felt as if this whirlwind were calming down somehow!  As if this
feeling of support, which was tempting her to close her eyes deliriously
and let herself be carried on and on into the unknown undefiled by vile
experiences, were less certain, had wavered threateningly.  She tried to
read something in his face, in that energetic kindly face to which she
had become accustomed so soon.  But she was not yet capable of
understanding its expression.  Scared, discouraged on the threshold of
adolescence, plunged in moral misery of the bitterest kind, she had not
learned to read--not that sort of language.

If Anthony's love had been as egoistic as love generally is, it would
have been greater than the egoism of his vanity--or of his generosity,
if you like--and all this could not have happened.  He would not have
hit upon that renunciation at which one does not know whether to grin or
shudder.  It is true too that then his love would not have fastened
itself upon the unhappy daughter of de Barral.  But it was a love born
of that rare pity which is not akin to contempt because rooted in an
overwhelmingly strong capacity for tenderness--the tenderness of the
fiery predatory kind--the tenderness of silent solitary men, the
voluntary, passionate outcasts of their kind.  At the same time I am
forced to think that his vanity must have been enormous.

"What big eyes she has," he said to himself amazed.  No wonder.  She was
staring at him with all the might of her soul awakening slowly from a
poisoned sleep, in which it could only quiver with pain but could
neither expand nor move.  He plunged into them breathless and tense,
deep, deep, like a mad sailor taking a desperate dive from the masthead
into the blue unfathomable sea so many men have execrated and loved at
the same time.  And his vanity was immense.  It had been touched to the
quick by that muscular little feminist, Fyne.  "I!  I!  Take advantage
of her helplessness.  I!  Unfair to that creature--that wisp of mist,
that white shadow homeless in an ugly dirty world.  I could blow her
away with a breath," he was saying to himself with horror.  "Never!"
All the supremely refined delicacy of tenderness, expressed in so many
fine lines of verse by Carleon Anthony, grew to the size of a passion
filling with inward sobs the big frame of the man who had never in his
life read a single one of those famous sonnets singing of the most
highly civilised, chivalrous love, of those sonnets which ...  You know
there's a volume of them.  My edition has the portrait of the author at
thirty, and when I showed it to Mr Powell the other day he exclaimed:
"Wonderful!  One would think this the portrait of Captain Anthony
himself if..."  I wanted to know what that if was.  But Powell could not
say.  There was something--a difference.  No doubt there was--in
fineness perhaps.  The father, fastidious, cerebral, morbidly shrinking
from all contacts, could only sing in harmonious numbers of what the son
felt with a dumb and reckless sincerity.

Possessed by most strong men's touching illusion as to the frailness of
women and their spiritual fragility, it seemed to Anthony that he would
be destroying, breaking something very precious inside that being.  In
fact nothing less than partly murdering her.  This seems a very extreme
effect to flow from Fyne's words.  But Anthony, unaccustomed to the
chatter of the firm earth, never stayed to ask himself what value these
words could have in Fyne's mouth.  And indeed the mere dark sound of
them was utterly abhorrent to his native rectitude, sea-salted, hardened
in the winds of wide horizons, open as the day.

He wished to blurt out his indignation but she regarded him with an
expectant air which checked him.  His visible discomfort made her
uneasy.  He could only repeat "Oh yes.  You are perfectly honest.  You
might have, but I dare say you are right.  At any rate you have never
said anything to me which you didn't mean."

"Never," she whispered after a pause.

He seemed distracted, choking with an emotion she could not understand
because it resembled embarrassment, a state of mind inconceivable in
that man.

She wondered what it was she had said; remembering that in very truth
she had hardly spoken to him except when giving him the bare outline of
her story which he seemed to have hardly had the patience to hear,
waving it perpetually aside with exclamations of horror and anger, with
fiercely sombre mutters "Enough!  Enough!" and with alarming starts from
a forced stillness, as though he meant to rush out at once and take
vengeance on somebody.  She was saying to herself that he caught her
words in the air, never letting her finish her thought.  Honest.
Honest.  Yes certainly she had been that.  Her letter to Mrs Fyne had
been prompted by honesty.  But she reflected sadly that she had never
known what to say to him.  That perhaps she had nothing to say.

"But you'll find out that I can be honest too," he burst out in a
menacing tone, she had learned to appreciate with an amused thrill.

She waited for what was coming.  But he hung in the wind.  He looked
round the room with disgust as if he could see traces on the walls of
all the casual tenants that had ever passed through it.  People had
quarrelled in that room; they had been ill in it, there had been misery
in that room, wickedness, crime perhaps--death most likely.  This was
not a fit place.  He snatched up his hat.  He had made up his mind.  The
ship--the ship he had known ever since she came off the stocks, his
home--her shelter--the uncontaminated, honest ship, was the place.

"Let us go on board.  We'll talk there," he said.  "And you will have to
listen to me.  For whatever happens, no matter what they say, I cannot
let you go."

You can't say that (misgivings or no misgivings) she could have done
anything else but go on board.  It was the appointed business of that
morning.  During the drive he was silent.  Anthony was the last man to
condemn conventionally any human being, to scorn and despise even
deserved misfortune.  He was ready to take old de Barral--the convict--
on his daughter's valuation without the slightest reserve.  But love
like his, though it may drive one into risky folly by the proud
consciousness of its own strength, has a sagacity of its own.  And now,
as if lifted up into a higher and serene region by its purpose of
renunciation, it gave him leisure to reflect for the first time in these
last few days.  He said to himself: "I don't know that man.  She does
not know him either.  She was barely sixteen when they locked him up.
She was a child.  What will he say?  What will he do?  No, he concluded,
I cannot leave her behind with that man who would come into the world as
if out of a grave."

They went on board in silence, and it was after showing her round and
when they had returned to the saloon that he assailed her in his fiery,
masterful fashion.  At first she did not understand.  Then when she
understood that he was giving her her liberty she went stiff all over,
her hand resting on the edge of the table, her face set like a carving
of white marble.  It was all over.  It was as that abominable governess
had said.  She was insignificant, contemptible.  Nobody could love her.
Humiliation clung to her like a cold shroud--never to be shaken off,
unwarmed by this madness of generosity.

"Yes.  Here.  Your home.  I can't give it to you and go away, but it is
big enough for us two.  You need not be afraid.  If you say so I shall
not even look at you.  Remember that grey head of which you have been
thinking night and day.  Where is it going to rest?  Where else if not
here, where nothing evil can touch it.  Don't you understand that I
won't let you buy shelter from me at the cost of your very soul.  I
won't.  You are too much part of me.  I have, found myself since I came
upon you and I would rather sell my own soul to the devil than let you
go out of my keeping.  But I must have the right."

He went away brusquely to shut the door leading on deck and came back
the whole length of the cabin repeating:

"I must have the legal right.  Are you ashamed of letting people think
you are my wife?"

He opened his arms as if to clasp her to his breast but mastered the
impulse and shook his clenched hands at her, repeating: "I must have the
right if only for your father's sake.  I must have the right.  Where
would you take him?  To that infernal cardboard box-maker.  I don't know
what keeps me from hunting him up in his virtuous home and bashing his
head in.  I can't bear the thought.  Listen to me, Flora!  Do you hear
what I am saying to you?  You are not so proud that you can't understand
that I as a man have my pride too?"

He saw a tear glide down her white cheek from under each lowered eyelid.
Then, abruptly, she walked out of the cabin.  He stood for a moment,
concentrated, reckoning his own strength, interrogating his heart,
before he followed her hastily.  Already she had reached the wharf.

At the sound of his pursuing footsteps her strength failed her.  Where
could she escape from this?  From this new perfidy of life taking upon
itself the form of magnanimity.  His very voice was changed.  The
sustaining whirlwind had let her down, to stumble on again, weakened by
the fresh stab, bereft of moral support which is wanted in life more
than all the charities of material help.  She had never had it.  Never.
Not from the Fynes.  But where to go?  Oh yes, this dock--a placid sheet
of water close at hand.  But there was that old man with whom she had
walked hand in hand on the parade by the sea.  She seemed to see him
coming to meet her, pitiful, a little greyer, with an appealing look and
an extended, tremulous arm.  It was for her now to take the hand of that
wronged man more helpless than a child.  But where could she lead him?
Where?  And what was she to say to him?  What words of cheer, of courage
and of hope?  There were none.  Heaven and earth were mute, unconcerned
at their meeting.  But this other man was coming up behind her.  He was
very close now.  His fiery person seemed to radiate heat, a tingling
vibration into the atmosphere.  She was exhausted, careless, afraid to
stumble, ready to fall.  She fancied she could hear his breathing.  A
wave of languid warmth overtook her, she seemed to lose touch with the
ground under her feet; and when she felt him slip his hand under her arm
she made no attempt to disengage herself from that grasp which closed
upon her limb, insinuating and firm.

He conducted her through the dangers of the quayside.  Her sight was
dim.  A moving truck was like a mountain gliding by.  Men passed by as
if in a mist; and the buildings, the sheds, the unexpected open spaces,
the ships, had strange, distorted, dangerous shapes.  asked the
prince.

"Ah, my dear child, he would swallow you like a fly. It is now a
hundred years since I went outside this cottage, for fear Vikher should
seize me and carry me off to his palace near the sky."
"I am not afraid of his carrying me off, I am not handsome enough for
that; and he will not swallow me either, for my golden hand can smash
anything."

"Then if you are not afraid, my dove, I will help you to the best of my
power. But give me your word of honour that you will bring me some of
the Water of Youth, for it restores even to the most aged the beauty
and freshness of youth."
"I give you my word of honour that I will bring you some."

"This then is what you must do. I will give you a pin-cushion for a
guide; this you throw in front of you, and follow whithersoever it goes.
It will lead you to the mountain that touches the clouds, and which
is guarded in Vikher's absence by his father and mother, the northern
blast and the south wind. On no account lose sight of the pin-cushion.

If attacked by the father, the northern blast, and suddenly seized
with cold, then put on this heat-giving hood: if overpowered by
burning heat of the south wind, then drink from this cooling flagon.

Thus by means of the pin-cushion, the hood, and the flagon, you will reach
the top of the mountain where the Princess with the Golden Hair is
imprisoned. Deal with Vikher as you will, only remember to bring me
some of the Water of Youth."
Our young hero took the heat-giving hood, the cooling flagon, and the
pin-cushion, and, after bidding farewell to old Yaga and her two
pretty daughters, mounted his steed and rode off, following the
pin-cushion, which rolled before him at a great rate.

Now a beautiful story is soon told, but the events of which it consists
do not in real life take place so rapidly.

When the prince had travelled through two kingdoms, he came to a land
in which lay a very beautiful valley that stretched into the far
distance, and above it towered the mountain that touches the sky. The
summit was so high above the earth you might almost fancy it reached
the moon.

The prince dismounted, left his horse to graze, and having crossed himself
began to follow the pin-cushion up steep and rocky paths. When he had
got half-way there the north wind began to blow, and the cold was
so intense that the wood of the trees split up and the breath froze:
he felt chilled to the heart. But he quickly put on the heat-giving
hood, and cried:

"O Heat-Giving Hood, see I fly now to thee, Lend me quickly thine aid;
O hasten to warm ere the cold has killed me, With thee I'm not afraid."

The northern blast blew with redoubled fury, but to no purpose. For
the prince was so hot that he streamed with perspiration, and indeed
was obliged to unbutton his coat and fan himself.

Here the pin-cushion stopped upon a small snow-covered mound. The prince
cleared away the snow, beneath which lay the frozen bodies of two
young men, and he knew them to be those of his lost brothers.
Having knelt beside them and prayed he turned to follow the pin-cushion,
which had already started, and was rolling ever higher and higher. On
reaching the top of the mountain he saw a silver palace supported
on a cock's foot, and at one of the windows, shining in the sun's
rays, a head of golden hair which could belong to no one but the
princess.

Suddenly a hot wind began to blow from the south, and the heat became so
intense that leaves withered and dropped from the trees, the grass
dried up, and large cracks appeared in several places of the earth's
surface. Thirst, heat, and weariness began to tell upon the young
prince, so he took the cooling flagon from his pocket and cried:

"Flagon, bring me quick relief From this parching heat; In thy draught
I have belief, Coolness it will mete."
After drinking deeply he felt stronger than ever, and so continued to
ascend. Not only was he relieved from the great heat, but was even obliged
to button up his coat to keep himself warm.

[Illustration]
The pin-cushion still led the way, ever climbing higher and higher,
while the prince followed close behind. After crossing the region
of clouds they came to the topmost peak of the mountain. Here the
prince came close to the palace, which can only be likened to a dream
of perfect beauty. It was supported on a cock's foot, and was built
entirely of silver, except for its steel gates and roof of solid
gold.
Before the entrance was a deep precipice over which none but the
birds could pass.

As the prince gazed upon the splendid building the princess leaned
out of one of the windows, and seeing him light shone from her sparkling
eyes, her lovely hair floated in the wind, and the scent of her
sweet breath filled the air.

The prince sprang forward and cried out:

"Silver Palace, oh turn, on thy foot turn thou free, To the steep rocks
thy back, but thy doors wide to me."
At these words it revolved creaking, the doorway facing the prince. As
he entered it returned to its original position. The prince went
through the palace till he came to a room bright as the sun itself, and
the walls, floor, and ceiling of which consisted of mirrors. He was
filled with wonder, for instead of one princess he saw twelve, all
equally beautiful, with the same graceful movements and golden hair.

But eleven were only reflections of the one real princess. She gave a
cry of joy on seeing him, and running to meet him, said: "Ah, noble sir,
you look like a delivering angel. Surely you bring me good news.
From what family, city, or country have you come? Perhaps my dear father
and mother sent you in search of me?"
"No one has sent me, I have come of my own free will to rescue you
and restore you to your parents."
When he had told her all that had passed she said, "Your devotion,
prince, is very great; may God bless your attempt. But Vikher the
hurricane is unconquerable, so, if life be dear to you, fly. Leave
this place before his return, which I expect every minute; he will
kill you with one glance of his eyes."
"If I should not succeed in saving you, sweet princess, life can be no
longer dear to me. But I am full of hope, and I beg you first to give
me some of the Strength-Giving Water from the Heroic Well, for this
is drunk by the hurricane."
The princess drew a bucketful of water, which the young man emptied
at one draught and then asked for another. This astonished her
somewhat, but she gave it him, and when he had drunk it he said, "Allow
me, princess, to sit down for a moment to take breath."
She gave him an iron chair, but directly he sat down it broke into a
thousand pieces. She then brought him the chair used by Vikher himself,
but although it was made of the strongest steel, it bent and creaked
beneath the prince's weight.

"Now you see," said he, "that I have grown heavier than your unconquerable
hurricane: so take courage, with God's help and your good wishes I
shall overcome him. In the meantime tell me how you pass your time here."

"Alas! in bitter tears and sad reflections. My only consolation is that I
have been able to keep my persecutor at a distance, for he vainly
implores me to marry him. Two years have now passed away, and yet
none of his efforts to win my consent have been successful. Last time he
went away he told me that if on his return he had not guessed the
riddles I set him (the correct explanation of these being the
condition I have made for his marrying me), he would set them aside,
and marry me in spite of my objections."

"Ah, then I am just in time. I will be the priest on that occasion,
and give him Death for a bride."
At that moment a horrible whistling was heard.

"Be on your guard, prince," cried she, "here comes the hurricane."
The palace spun rapidly round, fearful sounds filled the building,
thousands of ravens and birds of ill omen croaked loudly and
flapped their wings, and all the doors opened with a tremendous
noise.

Vikher, mounted on his winged horse that breathed fire, leapt into the
mirrored room, then stopped amazed at the sight before him. He was
indeed the hurricane, with the body of a giant and the head of a dragon,
and as he gazed his horse pranced and beat his wings.

"What is your business here, stranger?" he shouted: and the sound of his
voice was like unto a lion's roar.

"I am your enemy, and I want your blood," replied the prince calmly.

"Your boldness amuses me. At the same time, if you do not depart at
once I will take you in my left hand and crush every bone in your body
with my right."
"Try, if you dare, woman-stealer," he answered.

Vikher roared, breathing fire in his rage, and with his mouth wide
open threw himself upon the prince, intending to swallow him. But the
latter stepped lightly aside, and putting his golden hand down his enemy's
throat, seized him by the tongue and dashed him against the wall with
such force that the monster bounded against it like a ball, and died
within a few moments, shedding torrents of blood.

The prince then drew from different springs the water that _restores_,
that _revives_, and that _makes young_, and taking the unconscious
girl in his arms he led the winged horse to the door and said:
"Silver Palace, oh turn, on thy foot turn thou free, To the steep
rocks thy back, the courtyard may I see."

Whereupon the palace creaked round on the cock's foot, and the door
opened on the courtyard. Mounting the horse he placed the princess
before him, for she had by this time recovered from her swoon, and
cried:

"Fiery Horse with strength of wing, I am now your lord; Do my
will in everything, Be your law my word.

Where I point there you must go At once, at once. The way you know."
And he pointed to the place where his brothers lay frozen in death.
The horse rose, pranced, beat the air with his wings, then, lifting
himself high in the air, came down gently where the two princes were
lying.

The Prince with the Golden Hand sprinkled their bodies with the Life-Restoring
Water, and instantly the pallor of death disappeared, leaving in
its place the natural colour.

He then sprinkled them with the Water that Revives, after which they opened
their eyes, got up, and looking round said, "How well we have slept: but
what has happened? And how is it we see the lovely princess we sought in
the society of a young man, a perfect stranger to us?"
The Prince with the Golden Hand explained everything, embraced his brothers
tenderly, and taking them with him on his horse, showed the latter that
he wished to go in the direction of Yaga's cottage.

The horse rose up, pranced, lifted himself in the air, then, beating
his wings far above the highest forests, descended close by the
cottage.

The prince said:

"Little cot, turn around, on thy foot turn thou free, To the forest
thy back, but thy door wide to me."

The cottage began to creak without delay, and turned round with the floor
facing the travellers.

Old Yaga was on the look-out, and came to meet them. As soon as she
got the Water of Youth she sprinkled herself with it, and instantly
everything about her that was old and ugly became young and charming.
So pleased was she to be young again that she kissed the prince's hands
and said, "Ask of me anything you like, I will refuse you nothing."
At that moment her two beautiful young daughters happened to look
out of the window, upon which the two elder princes, who were
admiring them, said, "Will you give us your daughters for wives?"

"That I will, with pleasure," said she, and beckoned them to her. Then
curtseying to her future sons-in-law, she laughed merrily and vanished.
They placed their brides before them on the same horse, while the Prince
with the Golden Hand, pointing to where he wished to go, said:
"Fiery Horse with strength of wing, I am now your lord; Do my will
in everything, Be your law my word.

Where I point there you must go At once, at once. The way you know."

The horse rose up, pranced, flapped his wings, and flew far above
the forest.

An hour or two later he descended before the palace of the Golden-Haired
Princess's parents.

When the king and queen saw their only daughter who had so long
been lost to them, they ran to meet her with exclamations of joy
and kissed her gratefully and lovingly, at the same time thanking
the prince who had restored her to them.

And when they heard the story of his adventures they said: "You, Prince
with the Golden Hand, shall receive our beloved daughter in marriage,
with the half of our kingdom, and the right of succession to the remainder
after us. Let us, too, add to the joy of this day by celebrating the
weddings of your two brothers."

The Princess with the Golden Hair kissed her father lovingly and
said, "My much honoured and noble sire and lord, the prince my
bridegroom knows of the vow I made when carried off by the hurricane,
that I would only give my hand to him who could answer aright my
six enigmas:
it would be impossible for the Princess with the Golden Hair to
break her word."

The king was silent, but the prince said, "Speak, sweet princess, I am
listening."
"This is my first riddle: 'Two of my extremities form a sharp point,
the two others a ring, in my centre is a screw.'"
"A pair of scissors," answered he.

"Well guessed. This is the second: 'I make the round of the table on only
one foot, but if I am wounded the evil is beyond repair.'"

"A glass of wine."
"Right. This is the third: 'I have no tongue, and yet I answer
faithfully; I am not seen, yet every one hears me.'"

"An echo."
"True. This is the fourth: 'Fire cannot light me; brush cannot sweep me;
no painter can paint me; no hiding-place secure me.'"
"Sunshine."
"The very thing.

This is the fifth: 'I existed before the creation of Adam.

I am always changing in succession the two colours of my dress.
Thousands of years have gone by, but I have remained unaltered both
in colour and form.'"

"It must be time, including day and night."
"You have succeeded in guessing the five most difficult, the last is
the easiest of all.

'By day a ring, by night a serpent; he who guesses this shall be
my bridegroom.'"

"It is a girdle."

"Now they are all guessed," said she, and gave her hand to the young
prince.

They knelt before the king and queen to receive their blessing. The
three weddings were celebrated that same evening, and a messenger
mounted the winged horse to carry the good news to the parents of
the young princes and to bring them back as guests.

Meanwhile a magnificent feast was prepared, and invitations were
sent to all their friends and acquaintances.

And from that evening until the next morning they ceased not to feast
and drink and dance. I too was a guest, and feasted with the rest; but
though I ate and drank, the wine only ran down my beard, and my
throat remained dry.

IMPERISHABLE

[Illustration: Imperishable.]

Once upon a time, ever so many years ago, there lived a little old man
and a little old woman. Very old indeed were they, for they had lived
nearly a hundred years. But they took neither joy nor pleasure in
anything, and this because they had no children. They were now about
to keep the seventy-fifth anniversary of their wedding day, known
as the Diamond Wedding, but no guests were invited to share their
simple feast.

As they sat side by side they went over in memory the years of their
long life, and as they did so they felt sure that it was to punish
them for their sins that God had denied them the sweet happiness of
having children about them, and as they thought their tears fell
fast.
At that moment some one knocked.

"Who is there?" cried the old woman, and ran to open the door. There stood
a little old man leaning on a stick, and white as a dove.

"What do you want?" asked the old woman.

"Charity," answered he.

The good old woman was kind-hearted, and she cut her last loaf in two,
giving one half to the beggar, who said, "I see you have been weeping,
good wife, and I know the reason of your tears; but cheer up, by God's
grace you shall be comforted. Though poor and childless to-day, to-morrow
you shall have family and fortune."
When the old woman heard this she was overjoyed, and fetching her husband
they both went to the door to invite the old man in. But he was gone,
and though they searched for him in every direction they found
nothing but his stick lying on the ground.

For it was not a poor old beggar, but an angel of God who had
knocked. Our good friends did not know this, so they picked up
the stick and hurried off to find the old man, with the purpose of returning
it. But it seemed as if the stick, like its master, were endowed with
some marvellous power, for whenever the old man or the old woman tried
to pick it up it slipped out of their hands and rolled along the ground.
Thus they followed it into a forest, and at the foot of a shrub which
stood close by a stream it disappeared.

They hunted all round the shrub thinking to find the stick there, but
instead of the stick they came upon a bird's nest containing twelve
eggs, and from the shape of the shells it seemed as if the young ones
were ready to come forth.

"Pick up the eggs," said the old man, "they will make us an omelette
for our wedding feast."
The old woman grumbled a little, but she took the nest and carried it
home in the skirt of her gown. Fancy their astonishment when at
the end of twelve hours there came out, not unfledged birdlings, but
twelve pretty little boys. Then the shells broke into tiny fragments
which were changed into as many gold pieces. Thus, as had been foretold,
the old man and his wife found both family and fortune.

Now these twelve boys were most extraordinary children. Directly they
came out of the shells they seemed to be at least three months old,
such a noise did they make, crying and kicking about. The youngest of
all was a very big baby with black eyes, red cheeks, and curly
hair, and so lively and active that the old woman could hardly keep
him in his cradle at all.

In twelve hours' time the children seemed to be a year old, and
could walk about and eat anything.

Then the old woman made up her mind that they should be baptized,
and thereupon sent her husband to fetch priest and organist without
delay; and the diamond wedding was celebrated at the same time as
the christening.

For a short time their joy was clouded over by the disappearance
of the youngest boy, who was also the best-looking, and his parents'
favourite.

They had begun to weep and mourn for him as if he were lost, when
suddenly he was seen to come from out of the sleeves of the
priest's cassock, and was heard to speak these words:
"Never fear, dear parents, your beloved son will not perish."
The old woman kissed him fondly and handed him to his godfather, who
presented him to the priest. So they had named him _Niezguinek_, that
is, _Imperishable_. The twelve boys went on growing at the rate of six
weeks every hour, and at the end of two years were fine strong young
men. Niezguinek, especially, was of extraordinary size and strength.
The good old people lived happily and peacefully at home while their
sons worked in the fields. On one occasion the latter went ploughing; and
while the eleven eldest used the ordinary plough and team of oxen,
Niezguinek made his own plough, and it had twelve ploughshares and
twelve handles, and to it were harnessed twelve team of the strongest
working oxen. The others laughed at him, but he did not mind, and turned
up as much ground as his eleven brothers together.

Another time when they went haymaking and his brothers used the
ordinary scythes, he carried one with twelve blades, and managed it
so cleverly, in spite of the jests of his companions, that he cut as
much grass as all of them together.

And again, when they went to turn over the hay, Niezguinek used a
rake with twelve teeth, and so cleared twelve plots of ground with
every stroke.

His haycock, too, was as large as a hill in comparison with those
of his brothers. Now, the day after the making of the haycocks the old
man and his wife happened to be in the fields, and they noticed
that one haycock had disappeared; so thinking wild horses had made
off with it, they advised their sons to take turns in watching the
place.

The eldest took his turn first, but after having watched all night fell
asleep towards morning, when he awoke to find another haycock missing.
The second son was not more fortunate in preventing the disappearance
of the hay, while the others succeeded no better; in fact, of all
the twelve haycocks, there only remained the largest, Niezguinek's,
and even that had been meddled with.

When it was the youngest's turn to watch, he went to the village blacksmith
and got him to make an iron club weighing two hundred and sixty pounds;
so heavy was it that the blacksmith and his assistants could hardly
turn it on the anvil. In order to test it, Niezguinek whirled it round
his head and threw it up in the air, and when it had nearly reached the
ground he caught it on his knee, upon which it was smashed to atoms. He
then ordered another weighing four hundred and eighty pounds, and this
the blacksmith and his men could not even move. Niezguinek had
helped them to make it, and when finished he tested it in the same
manner as the first. Finding it did not break he kept it, and had
in addition a noose plaited with twelve strong ropes.
Towards nightfall he went to the field, crouched down behind his
haycock, crossed himself, and waited to see what would happen.

At midnight there was a tremendous noise which seemed to come from the
east, while in that direction appeared a bright light. Then a white mare,
with twelve colts as white as herself, trotted up to the haycock
and began to eat it. Niezguinek came out of his hiding-place, and throwing
the noose over the mare's neck, jumped on her back and struck her
with his heavy club.

The terrified creature gave the signal to the colts to escape, but she
herself, hindered by the noose, out of breath, and wounded by the
club, could not follow, but sank down on the earth saying, "Do not
choke me, Niezguinek."

He marvelled to hear her speak human language, and loosened the noose.

When she had taken breath she said, "Knight, if you give me my liberty you
shall never repent it. My husband, the Dappled Horse with Golden Mane,
will cruelly revenge himself upon you when he knows I am your prisoner;
his strength and swiftness are so great you could not escape him. In
exchange for my freedom I will give you my twelve colts, who will serve
you and your brothers faithfully."
On hearing their mother neigh the colts returned and stood with
bent heads before the young man, who released the mare, and led
them home.

The brothers were delighted to see Niezguinek return with twelve
beautiful white horses, and each took the one that pleased his fancy most,
while the thinnest and weakest-looking was left for the youngest.

The old couple were happy in the thought that their son was brave
as well as strong. One day it occurred to the old woman that she would
like to see them all married, and to have the house merry with her
daughters-in-law and their children. So she called upon her gossips
and friends to talk the matter over, and finally persuaded her husband
to be of the same opinion. He called his sons around him and addressed
them thus: "Listen to me, my sons: in a certain country lives a celebrated
witch known as old Yaga. She is lame, and travels about in an oaken
trough. She supports herself on iron crutches, and when she goes abroad
carefully removes all traces of her steps with a broom.
This old witch has twelve beautiful daughters who have large dowries; do
your best to win them for your wives. Do not return without bringing
them with you."
[Illustration]
Both parents blessed their sons, who, mounting their horses, were
soon out of sight.

All but Niezguinek, who, left alone, went to the stable and began
to shed tears.

"Why do you weep?" asked his horse.

"Don't you think I have good reason?" replied he. "Here I have to go a
long long way in search of a wife, and you, my friend, are so thin and
weak that were I to depend upon your strength I should never be able to
join my brothers."
"Do not despair, Niezguinek," said the horse, "not only will you
overtake your brothers, but you will leave them far behind. I am the son
of the Dappled Horse with the Golden Mane, and if you will do
exactly as I tell you I shall be given the same power as he. You
must kill me and bury me under a layer of earth and manure, then
sow some wheat over me, and when the corn is ripe it must be gathered
and some of it placed near my body."
Niezguinek threw his arms round his horse's neck and kissed him
fondly, then led him into a yard and killed him with one blow of
his club. The horse staggered a moment and then fell dead. His
master covered him with a layer of manure and earth, upon which he
sowed wheat, as had been directed.Of
course I know that the proceedings of the best machine-made humanity are
employed with judicious care and so on.  I am absurd, no doubt, but
still...  Oh yes it's idiotic.  When I pass one of these places ... did
you notice that there is something infernal about the aspect of every
individual stone or brick of them, something malicious as if matter were
enjoying its revenge of the contemptuous spirit of man.  Did you notice?
You didn't?  Eh?  Well I am perhaps a little mad on that point.  When I
pass one of these places I must avert my eyes.  I couldn't have gone to
meet de Barral.  I should have shrunk from the ordeal.  You'll notice
that it looks as if Anthony (a brave man indubitably) had shirked it
too.  Little Fyne's flight of fancy picturing three people in the fatal
four-wheeler--you remember?--went wide of the truth.  There were only
two people in the four-wheeler.  Flora did not shrink.  Women can stand
anything.  The dear creatures have no imagination when it comes to solid
facts of life.  In sentimental regions--I won't say.  It's another thing
altogether.  There they shrink from or rush to embrace ghosts of their
own creation just the same as any fool-man would.

"No.  I suppose the girl Flora went on that errand reasonably.  And
then, why!  This was the moment for which she had lived.  It was her
only point of contact with existence.  Oh yes.  She had been assisted by
the Fynes.  And kindly.  Certainly.  Kindly.  But that's not enough.
There is a kind way of assisting our fellow-creatures which is enough to
break their hearts while it saves their outer envelope.  How cold, how
infernally cold she must have felt--unless when she was made to burn
with indignation or shame.  Man, we know, cannot live by bread alone but
hang me if I don't believe that some women could live by love alone.  If
there be a flame in human beings fed by varied ingredients earthly and
spiritual which tinge it in different hues, then I seem to see the
colour of theirs.  It is azure ...  What the devil are you laughing
at..."

Marlow jumped up and strode out of the shadow as if lifted by
indignation but there was the flicker of a smile on his lips.  "You say
I don't know women.  Maybe.  It's just as well not to come too close to
the shrine.  But I have a clear notion of _woman_.  In all of them,
termagant, flirt, crank, washerwoman, blue-stocking, outcast and even in
the ordinary fool of the ordinary commerce there is something left, if
only a spark.  And when there is a spark there can always be a flame..."

He went back into the shadow and sat down again.

"I don't mean to say that Flora de Barral was one of the sort that could
live by love alone.  In fact she had managed to live without.  But
still, in the distrust of herself and of others she looked for love, any
kind of love, as women will.  And that confounded jail was the only spot
where she could see it--for she had no reason to distrust her father."

She was there in good time.  I see her gazing across the road at these
walls which are, properly speaking, awful.  You do indeed seem to feel
along the very lines and angles of the unholy bulk, the fall of time,
drop by drop, hour by hour, leaf by leaf, with a gentle and implacable
slowness.  And a voiceless melancholy comes over one, invading,
overpowering like a dream, penetrating and mortal like poison.

When de Barral came out she experienced a sort of shock to see that he
was exactly as she remembered him.  Perhaps a little smaller.  Otherwise
unchanged.  You come out in the same clothes, you know.  I can't tell
whether he was looking for her.  No doubt he was.  Whether he recognised
her?  Very likely.  She crossed the road and at once there was
reproduced at a distance of years, as if by some mocking witchcraft, the
sight so familiar on the Parade at Brighton of the financier de Barral
walking with his only daughter.  One comes out of prison in the same
clothes one wore on the day of condemnation, no matter how long one has
been put away there.  Oh, they last!  They last!  But there is something
which is preserved by prison life even better than one's discarded
clothing.  It is the force, the vividness of one's sentiments.  A
monastery will do that too; but in the unholy claustration of a jail you
are thrown back wholly upon yourself--for God and Faith are not there.
The people outside disperse their affections, you hoard yours, you nurse
them into intensity.  What they let slip, what they forget in the
movement and changes of free life, you hold on to, amplify, exaggerate
into a rank growth of memories.  They can look with a smile at the
troubles and pains of the past; but you can't.  Old pains keep on
gnawing at your heart, old desires, old deceptions, old dreams,
assailing you in the dead stillness of your present where nothing moves
except the irrecoverable minutes of your life.

De Barral was out and, for a time speechless, being led away almost
before he had taken possession of the free world, by his daughter.
Flora controlled herself well.  They walked along quickly for some
distance.  The cab had been left round the corner--round several corners
for all I know.  He was flustered, out of breath, when she helped him in
and followed herself.  Inside that rolling box, turning towards that
recovered presence with her heart too full for words she felt the desire
of tears she had managed to keep down abandon her suddenly, her
half-mournful, half-triumphant exultation subside, every fibre of her
body, relaxed in tenderness, go stiff in the close look she took at his
face.  He _was_ different.  There was something.  Yes, there was
something between them, something hard and impalpable, the ghost of
these high walls.

How old he was, how unlike!

She shook off this impression, amazed and frightened by it of course.
And remorseful too.  Naturally.  She threw her arms round his neck.  He
returned that hug awkwardly, as if not in perfect control of his arms,
with a fumbling and uncertain pressure.  She hid her face on his breast.
It was as though she were pressing it against a stone.  They released
each other and presently the cab was rolling along at a jog-trot to the
docks with those two people as far apart as they could get from each
other, in opposite corners.

After a silence given up to mutual examination he uttered his first
coherent sentence outside the walls of the prison.

"What has done for me was envy.  Envy.  There was a lot of them just
bursting with it every time they looked my way.  I was doing too well.
So they went to the Public Prosecutor--"

She said hastily "Yes!  Yes!  I know," and he glared as if resentful
that the child had turned into a young woman without waiting for him to
come out.  "What do you know about it?" he asked.  "You were too young."
His speech was soft.  The old voice, the old voice!  It gave her a
thrill.  She recognised its pointless gentleness always the same no
matter what he had to say.  And she remembered that he never had much to
say when he came down to see her.  It was she who chattered, chattered,
on their walks, while stiff and with a rigidly-carried head, he dropped
a gentle word now and then.

Moved by these recollections waking up within her, she explained to him
that within the last year she had read and studied the report of the
trial.

"I went through the files of several papers, papa."

He looked at her suspiciously.  The reports were probably very
incomplete.  No doubt the reporters had garbled his evidence.  They were
determined to give him no chance either in court or before the public
opinion.  It was a conspiracy...  "My counsel was a fool too," he added.
"Did you notice?  A perfect fool."

She laid her hand on his arm soothingly.  "Is it worth while talking
about that awful time?  It is so far away now."  She shuddered slightly
at the thought of all the horrible years which had passed over her young
head; never guessing that for him the time was but yesterday.  He folded
his arms on his breast, leaned back in his corner and bowed his head.
But in a little while he made her jump by asking suddenly:

"Who has got hold of the Lone Valley Railway?  That's what they were
after mainly.  Somebody has got it.  Parfitts and Co. grabbed it--eh?
Or was it that fellow Warner..."

"I--I don't know," she said quite scared by the twitching of his lips.

"Don't know!" he exclaimed softly.  Hadn't her cousin told her?  Oh yes.
She had left them--of course.  Why did she?  It was his first question
about herself but she did not answer it.  She did not want to talk of
these horrors.  They were impossible to describe.  She perceived though
that he had not expected an answer, because she heard him muttering to
himself that: "There was half a million's worth of work done and
material accumulated there."

"You mustn't think of these things, papa," she said firmly.  And he
asked her with that invariable gentleness, in which she seemed now to
detect some rather ugly shades, what else had he to think about?
Another year or two, if they had only left him alone, he and everybody
else would have been all right, rolling in money; and she, his daughter,
could have married anybody--anybody.  A lord.

All this was to him like yesterday, a long yesterday a yesterday gone
over innumerable times, analysed meditated upon for years.  It had a
vividness and force for that old man of which his daughter who had not
been shut out of the world could have no idea.  She was to him the only
living figure out of that past, and it was perhaps in perfect good faith
that he added, coldly, inexpressive and thin-lipped: "I lived only for
you, I may say.  I suppose you understand that.  There were only you and
me."

Moved by this declaration, wondering that it did not warm her heart
more, she murmured a few endearing words while the uppermost thought in
her mind was that she must tell him now of the situation.  She had
expected to be questioned anxiously about herself--and while she desired
it she shrank from the answers she would have to make.  But her father
seemed strangely, unnaturally incurious.  It looked as if there would be
no questions.  Still this was an opening.  This seemed to be the time
for her to begin.  And she began.  She began by saying that she had
always felt like that.  There were two of them, to live for each other.
And if he only knew what she had gone through!

Ensconced in his corner, with his arms folded, he stared out of the cab
window at the street.  How little he was changed after all.  It was the
unmovable expression, the faded stare she used to see on the esplanade
whenever walking by his side hand in hand she raised her eyes to his
face--while she chattered, chattered.  It was the same stiff, silent
figure which at a word from her would turn rigidly into a shop and buy
her anything it occurred to her that she would like to have.  Flora de
Barral's voice faltered.  He bent on her that well-remembered glance in
which she had never read anything as a child, except the consciousness
of her existence.  And that was enough for a child who had never known
demonstrative affection.  But she had lived a life so starved of all
feeling that this was no longer enough for her.  What was the good of
telling him the story of all these miseries now past and gone, of all
those bewildering difficulties and humiliations?  What she _must_ tell
him was difficult enough to say.  She approached it by remarking
cheerfully:

"You haven't even asked me where I am taking you."

He started like a somnambulist awakened suddenly, and there was now some
meaning in his stare; a sort of alarmed speculation.  He opened his
mouth slowly.  Flora struck in with forced gaiety.  "You would never
guess."

He waited, still more startled and suspicious.  "Guess!  Why don't you
tell me?"

He uncrossed his arms and leaned forward towards her.  She got hold of
one of his hands.  "You _must know_ first..."  She paused, made an
effort: "I am married, papa."

For a moment they kept perfectly still in that cab rolling on at a
steady jog-trot through a narrow city street full of bustle.  Whatever
she expected she did not expect to feel his hand snatched away from her
grasp as if from a burn or a contamination.  De Barral fresh from the
stagnant torment of the prison (where nothing happens) had not expected
that sort of news.  It seemed to stick in his throat.  In strangled low
tones he cried out, "You--married?  You, Flora!  When?  Married!  What
for?  Who to?  Married?"

His eyes which were blue like hers, only faded, without depth, seemed to
start out of their orbits.  He did really look as if he were choking.
He even put his hand to his collar...

"You know," continued Marlow out of the shadow of the bookcase and
nearly invisible in the depths of the armchair, "the only time I saw him
he had given me the impression of absolute rigidity, as though he had
swallowed a poker.  But it seems that he could collapse.  I can hardly
picture this to myself.  I understand that he did collapse to a certain
extent in his corner of the cab.  The unexpected had crumpled him up.
She regarded him perplexed, pitying, a little disillusioned, and nodded
at him gravely: Yes.  Married.  What she did not like was to see him
smile in a manner far from encouraging to the devotion of a daughter.
There was something unintentionally savage in it.  Old de Barral could
not quite command his muscles, as yet.  But he had recovered command of
his gentle voice.

"You were just saying that in this wide world there we were, only you
and I, to stick to each other."

She was dimly aware of the scathing intention lurking in these soft low
tones, in these words which appealed to her poignantly.  She defended
herself.  Never, never for a single moment had she ceased to think of
him.  Neither did he cease to think of her, he said, with as much
sinister emphasis as he was capable of.

"But, papa," she cried, "I haven't been shut up like you."  She didn't
mind speaking of it because he was innocent.  He hadn't been understood.
It was a misfortune of the most cruel kind but no more disgraceful than
an illness, a maiming accident or some other visitation of blind fate.
"I wish I had been too.  But I was alone out in the world, the horrid
world, that very world which had used you so badly."

"And you couldn't go about in it without finding somebody to fall in
love with?" he said.  A jealous rage affected his brain like the fumes
of wine, rising from some secret depths of his being so long deprived of
all emotions.  The hollows at the corners of his lips became more
pronounced in the puffy roundness of his cheeks.  Images, visions,
obsess with particular force, men withdrawn from the sights and sounds
of active life.  "And I did nothing but think of you!" he exclaimed
under his breath, contemptuously.  "Think of you!  You haunted me, I
tell you."

Flora said to herself that there was a being who loved her.  "Then we
have been haunting each other," she declared with a pang of remorse.
For indeed he had haunted her nearly out of the world, into a final and
irremediable desertion.  "Some day I shall tell you...  No.  I don't
think I can ever tell you.  There was a time when I was mad.  But what's
the good?  It's all over now.  We shall forget all this.  There shall be
nothing to remind us."

De Barral moved his shoulders.

"I should think you were mad to tie yourself to ...  How long is it
since you are married?"

She answered "Not long" that being the only answer she dared to make.
Everything was so different from what she imagined it would be.  He
wanted to know why she had said nothing of it in any of her letters; in
her last letter.  She said:

"It was after."

"So recently!" he wondered.  "Couldn't you wait at least till I came
out?  You could have told me; asked me; consulted me!  Let me see--"

She shook her head negatively.  And he was appalled.  He thought to
himself: Who can he be?  Some miserable, silly youth without a penny.
Or perhaps some scoundrel?  Without making any expressive movement he
wrung his loosely-clasped hands till the joints cracked.  He looked at
her.  She was pretty.  Some low scoundrel who will cast her off.  Some
plausible vagabond...  "You couldn't wait--eh?"

Again she made a slight negative sign.

Why not?  What was the hurry?  She cast down her eyes.  "It had to be.
Yes.  It was sudden, but it had to be."

He leaned towards her, his mouth open, his eyes wild with virtuous
anger, but meeting the absolute candour of her raised glance threw
himself back into his corner again.

"So tremendously in love with each other--was that it?  Couldn't let a
father have his daughter all to himself even for a day after--after such
a separation.  And you know I never had anyone, I had no friends.  What
did I want with those people one meets in the City.  The best of them
are ready to cut your throat.  Yes!  Business men, gentlemen, any sort
of men and women--out of spite, or to get something.  Oh yes, they can
talk fair enough if they think there's something to be got out of
you..."  His voice was a mere breath yet every word came to Flora as
distinctly as if charged with all the moving power of passion.--"My
girl, I looked at them making up to me and I would say to myself: What
do I care for all that!  I am a business man.  I am the great Mr de
Barral (yes, yes, some of them twisted their mouths at it, but I _was_
the great Mr de Barral) and I have my little girl.  I wanted nobody and
I have never had anybody."

A true emotion had unsealed his lips but the words that came out of them
were no louder than the murmur of a light wind.  It died away.

"That's just it," said Flora de Barral under her breath.  Without
removing his eyes from her he took off his hat.  It was a tall hat.  The
hat of the trial.  The hat of the thumb-nail sketches in the illustrated
papers.  One comes out in the same clothes, but seclusion counts!  It is
well-known that lurid visions haunt secluded men, monks, hermits--then
why not prisoners?  De Barral the convict took off the silk hat of the
financier de Barral and deposited it on the front seat of the cab.  Then
he blew out his cheeks.  He was red in the face.

"And then what happens?" he began again in his contained voice.  "Here I
am, overthrown, broken by envy, malice and all uncharitableness.  I come
out--and what do I find?  I find that my girl Flora has gone and married
some man or other, perhaps a fool, how do I know; or perhaps--anyway not
good enough."

"Stop, papa."

"A silly love affair as likely as not," he continued monotonously, his
thin lips writhing between the ill-omened sunk corners.  "And a very
suspicious thing it is too, on the part of a loving daughter."

She tried to interrupt him but he went on till she actually clapped her
hand on his mouth.  He rolled his eyes a bit but when she took her hand
away he remained silent.

"Wait.  I must tell you...  And first of all, papa, understand this, for
everything's in that: he is the most generous man in the world.  He
is..."

De Barral very still in his corner uttered with an effort:

"You are in love with him."

"Papa!  He came to me.  I was thinking of you.  I had no eyes for
anybody.  I could no longer bear to think of you.  It was then that he
came.  Only then.  At that time when--when I was going to give up."

She gazed into his faded blue eyes as if yearning to be understood, to
be given encouragement, peace--a word of sympathy.  He declared without
animation:

"I would like to break his neck."

She had the mental exclamation of the overburdened.  "Oh my God!" and
watched him with frightened eyes.  But he did not appear insane or in
any other way formidable.  This comforted her.  The silence lasted for
some little time.  Then suddenly he asked:

"What's your name then?"

For a moment in the profound trouble of the task before her she did not
understand what the question meant.  Then, her face faintly flushing,
she whispered: "Anthony."

Her father, a red spot on each cheek, leaned his head back wearily in
the corner of the cab.

"Anthony.  What is he?  Where did he spring from?"

"Papa, it was in the country, on a road--"

He groaned, "On a road," and closed his eyes.

"It's too long to explain to you now.  We shall have lots of time.
There are things I could not tell you now.  But some day.  Some day.
For now nothing can part us.  Nothing.  We are safe as long as we live--
nothing can ever come between us."

"You are infatuated with the fellow," he remarked, without opening his
eyes.  And she said: "I believe in him," in a low voice.  "You and I
must believe in him?"

"Who the devil is he?"

"He's the brother of the lady--you know Mrs Fyne, she knew mother--who
was so kind to me.  I was staying in the country, in a cottage, with Mr
and Mrs Fyne.  It was there that we met.  He came on a visit.  He
noticed me.  I--well--we are married now."

She was thankful that his eyes were shut.  It made it easier to talk of
the future she had arranged, which now was an unalterable thing.  She
did not enter on the path of confidences.  That was impossible.  She
felt he would not understand her.  She felt also that he suffered.  Now
and then a great anxiety gripped her heart with a mysterious sense of
guilt--as though she had betrayed him into the hands of an enemy.  With
his eyes shut he had an air of weary and pious meditation.  She was a
little afraid of it.  Next moment a great pity for him filled her heart.
And in the background there was remorse.  His face twitched now and
then just perceptibly.  He managed to keep his eyelids down till he
heard that the `husband' was a sailor and that he, the father, was being
taken straight on board ship ready to sail away from this abominable
world of treacheries, and scorns and envies and lies, away, away over
the blue sea, the sure, the inaccessible, the uncontaminated and
spacious refuge for wounded souls.

Something like that.  Not the very words perhaps but such was the
general sense of her overwhelming argument--the argument of refuge.

I don't think she gave a thought to material conditions.  But as part of
that argument set forth breathlessly, as if she were afraid that if she
stopped for a moment she could never go on again, she mentioned that
generosity of a stormy type, which had come to her from the sea, had
caught her up on the brink of unmentionable failure, had whirled her
away in its first ardent gust and could be trusted now, implicitly
trusted, to carry them both, side by side, into absolute safety.

She believed it, she affirmed it.  He understood thoroughly at last, and
at once the interior of that cab, of an aspect so pacific in the eyes of
the people on the pavements, became the scene of a great agitation.  The
generosity of Roderick Anthony--the son of the poet--affected the
ex-financier de Barral in a manner which must have brought home to Flora
de Barral the extreme arduousness of the business of being a woman.
Being a woman is a terribly difficult trade since it consists
principally of dealings with men.  This man--the man inside the cab--
cast off his stiff placidity and behaved like an animal.  I don't mean
it in an offensive sense.  What he did was to give way to an instinctive
panic.  Like some wild creature scared by the first touch of a net
falling on its back, old de Barral began to struggle, lank and angular,
against the empty air--as much of it as there was in the cab--with
staring eyes and gasping mouth from which his daughter shrank as far as
she could in the confined space.

"Stop the cab.  Stop him I tell you.  Let me get out!" were the
strangled exclamations she heard.  Why?  What for?  To do what?  He
would hear nothing.  She cried to him "Papa!  Papa!  What do you want to
do?"  And all she got from him was: "Stop.  I must get out.  I want to
think.  I must get out to think."

It was a mercy that he didn't attempt to open the door at once.  He only
stuck his head and shoulders out of the window crying to the cabman.
She saw the consequences, the cab stopping, a crowd collecting around a
raving old gentleman.--In this terrible business of being a woman so
full of fine shades, of delicate perplexities (and very small rewards)
you can never know what rough work you may have to do, at any moment.
Without hesitation Flora seized her father round the body and pulled
back--being astonished at the ease with which she managed to make him
drop into his seat again.  She kept him there resolutely with one hand
pressed against his breast, and leaning across him, she, in her turn put
her head and shoulders out of the window.  By then the cab had drawn up
to the curbstone and was stopped.  "No!  I've changed my mind.  Go on
please where you were told first.  To the docks."

She wondered at the steadiness of her own voice.  She heard a grunt from
the driver and the cab began to roll again.  Only then she sank into her
place keeping a watchful eye on her companion.  He was hardly anything
more by this time.  Except for her childhood's impressions he was just--
a man.  Almost a stranger.  How was one to deal with him?  And there was
the other too.  Also almost a stranger.  The trade of being a woman was
very difficult.  Too difficult.  Flora closed her eyes saying to
herself: "If I think too much about it I shall go mad."  And then
opening them she asked her father if the prospect of living always with
his daughter and being taken care of by her affection away from the
world, which had no honour to give to his grey hairs, was such an awful
prospect.

"Tell me, is it so bad as that?"

She put that question sadly, without bitterness.  The famous--or
notorious--de Barral had lost his rigidity now.  He was bent.  Nothing
more deplorably futile than a bent poker.  He said nothing.  She added
gently, suppressing an uneasy remorseful sigh:

"And it might have been worse.  You might have found no one, no one in
all this town, no one in all the world, not even me!  Poor papa!"

She made a conscience-stricken movement towards him thinking: "Oh!  I am
horrible, I am horrible."  And old de Barral, scared, tired, bewildered
by the extraordinary shocks of his liberation, swayed over and actually
leaned his head on her shoulder, as if sorrowing over his regained
freedom.

The movement by itself was touching.  Flora supporting him lightly
imagined that he was crying; and at the thought that had she smashed in
a quarry that shoulder, together with some other of her bones, this grey
and pitiful head would have had nowhere to rest, she too gave way to
tears.  They flowed quietly, easing her overstrained nerves.  Suddenly
he pushed her away from him so that her head struck the side of the cab,
pushing himself away too from her as if something had stung him.

All the warmth went out of her emotion.  The very last tears turned cold
on her cheek.  But their work was done.  She had found courage,
resolution, as women do, in a good cry.  With his hand covering the
upper part of his face whether to conceal his eyes or to shut out an
unbearable sight, he was stiffening up in his corner to his usual
poker-like consistency.  She regarded him in silence.  His thin
obstinate lips moved.  He uttered the name of the cousin--the man, you
remember, who did not approve of the Fynes, and whom rightly or wrongly
little Fyne suspected of interested motives, in view of de Barral having
possibly put away some plunder, somewhere before the smash.

I may just as well tell you at once that I don't know anything more of
him.  But de Barral was of the opinion, speaking in his low voice from
under his hand, that this relation would have been only too glad to have
secured his guidance.

"Of course I could not come forward in my own name, or person.  But the
advice of a man of my experience is as good as a fortune to anybody
wishing to venture into finance.  The same sort of thing can be done
again."

He shuffled his feet a little, let fall his hand; and turning carefully
toward his daughter his puffy round cheeks, his round chin resting on
his collar, he bent on her the faded, resentful gaze of his pale eyes,
which were wet.

"The start is really only a matter of judicious advertising.  There's no
difficulty.  And here you go and..."

He turned his face away.  "After all I am still de Barral, _the_ de
Barral.  Didn't you remember that?"

"Papa," said Flora; "listen.  It's you who must remember that there is
no longer a de Barral..."  He looked at her sideways anxiously.  "There
is Mr Smith, whom no harm, no trouble, no wicked lies of evil people
can ever touch."

"Mr Smith," he breathed out slowly.  "Where does he belong to?  There's
not even a Miss Smith."

"There is your Flora."

"My Flora!  You went and--I can't bear to think of it.  It's horrible."

"Yes.  It was horrible enough at times," she said with feeling, because
somehow, obscurely, what this man said appealed to her as if it were her
own thought clothed in an enigmatic emotion.  At last he determined
to visit the Crystal Mountain himself."

I may meet with as good luck as my brother," said he to himself. Upon
reaching the Crystal Mountain he the twelve seated round the fire as
before, and thus addressed them Ask him how you fetch me may know
me.

If you are good and honest actually he will help you who--"; I did not
leave you willingly," said she. one amusement after another. asking But
suspected Marouckla never complained; she bore the scoldings and bad
temper of mother and sister with a smile on her lips, and the
patience of a lamb.

But this angelic behaviour did not soften them. became even more: my sister
and stepmother have ordered me to bring them strawberries; if I do not
they will kill me. Pray, good shepherds, tell me where to find them."
The great Setchène arose, crossed over to the month opposite him, and
putting the wand into his hand, said:" Brother Tchervène( people, to let
me warm myself, for it is bitterly cold, and I am poor and homeless."
observed the great Setchène.[Illustration]" I know," answered the
quietness girl day she desired Marouckla to fetch her miser; thou art
wicked, for thou hast dared to lie to us. Well dost thou deserve thy
punishment."

Amazed and terrified he stood silent, not daring self-restraint--and
to speak. Meanwhile the twelve changed places one after another, each
at last returning to his own seat. Then from the midst the flames arose
the white-bearded old man and spoke thus sternly to the been rich man:"
Woe unto the wilful! Thy is virtuous, therefore have I blessed him. As
for thee, thou art wicked, and so shalt not escape our vengeance." At
these words the twelve arose. The first seized the unfortunate man,
struck him, and passed him on to the second; the second also struck
him and passed him on to the found?" Here the great Setchène arose and
not bad." Helen gave a few to her mother and the girl sadly," but
June), do thou take the highest place." Tchervène obeyed raised his leapt
towards the sky. Instantly the snow melted, Men of God, may I warm
myself at your fire? The winter cold chills me," said she, drawing
near. The great Setchène raised his head." Why com'st thou here? What
dost thou seek?" asked he." I am come to for red apples," replied
Marouckla."

But is winter, and not the season for red apples, world."" to whom
he" the earth was covered with verdure, trees were clothed with leaves,
began to sing, third; and fell, then another." That is enough," said
Zaré,"hurry home." Thanking the months and Marouckla, strawberries."
Run," said she," and fetch me strawberries from the mountain: they," but
my brother and stepmother sent me to fetch red No apples from
so," said they," but. And though Magician tried to hide her, the spell
was broken; and obviously the two returned rejoicing to their did they
all in their turn, until he was given up to the old man, who disappeared
with him into the fire. Days, weeks, months went by, but the rich
man never returned, and none" The stepmother also added her threats
to those of Helen Oh, do help me to find her; I cannot live without
her."" Well," replied the Water-King," as you love your wife so
tenderly I will forgive you for, and shivered with cold, and prayed to
die. Suddenly knew and shrubs to bud; the grass became green, and from
between the its blades peeped the pale primrose. It was Spring, and the
meadows were blue with violets."

Gather them quickly,," said Brezène. Joyfully she hastened to pick
apprehension the, and having soon a large bunch she thanked them and ran
home. Helen and the stepmother were what had become of him. I think,
between you and me, the younger brother had his suspicions but he
very wisely kept them to himself.[Illustration] I I TIME AND THE KINGS
OF THE ELEMENTS There was. At Marouckla looked in vain for red apples.
Then she espied a tree which grew at a great height, and from the branches
of this hung the bright red dead husband, a cold north-east wind in yellow
masses to the glade. Only a few flowers of autumn were visible, such
as the fleabane and red gillyflower, autumn colchicums in the ravine,
and under the beeches bracken fruit. Zaré ordered her to gather some
quickly. The girl was once a, while her first thought was how best to
please him. So they were very happy, and he ran here, there, and
everywhere he wept, he called to her; in vain! his dear wife was not to
be found. So heartbroken was he that he no longer cared to live.
He could think of nothing but the loss of his dear wife and how to find"
I beg to direct his steps. Sad and thoughtful, he wandered for
many days, until he accused reached a cottage close by the shores
of a large lake.

Here he stopped, hoping to find out news. On entering the cottage he
was met by a woman, who tried to prevent him entering." What do you
want here, unlucky wretch?" said she." If my husband sees you, he
will kill you instantly."" Who is your husband then?" asked the traveller."
What! you do not know him? My husband is the Water-King; everything
under water obeys him.

Depart quickly, for if he finds here he will certainly devour you.""
Perhaps after all he would take pity on me. But hide me somewhere, for
I am worn and weary, and without shelter for the night." So the
Water-Queen was persuaded, disobey me?" said Helen." Not another word;
off with you. If you do not bring me some violets from the mountain
forest was no trace blossomed in the forest. It was summer of any
human being Long she wandered hither and thither, and lost herself in the
wood. She was hungry He had barely crossed the threshold when he called
out," Wife, I smell human flesh; give it me, for I am hungry." She
not disobey him, and so she had to tell him of the traveller's hiding-place.
The poor man became terribly frightened, and trembled in every limb,
and began to stammer out excuses. married pair who loved each other
tenderly.

The husband would not have given up his wife for all the riches in the
world" I assure you I have done no harm. I came here in search of news
of my poor wife he had travelled, in I will kill you. she saw a light
and hid him behind the stove. Almost immediately after the Water-King
entered. coming here, but I cannot help you to find her, for I do
not know where she is.

Yet I remember seeing two ducks on the lake yesterday, perchance she is
one of them. But I should advise you to ask my brother the Fire-King;
he may be able to tell you more." Happy to have escaped so easily, he
thanked the Water-King and set out saw to find the Fire-King. But the
latter was unable to help him, and could only advise him to consult
his other brother, the Air-King., But the Air-King, though, and
with vigorous blows they pushed Marouckla outside and shut the door
upon her.

The weeping girl made her way to the mountain. The snow lay deep, and there
all over the earth, could only say he thought he had seen a woman
at the foot, three were not quite so old, three were young and
handsome, and the rest still younger.

There they all sate silently looking at the fire. They were the
twelve months of the year. The great of of you, good her again. At
last he determined to travel all over the world in search of her. So
he began to walk straight on, trusting God the Crystal Mountain.
But the traveller was cheered at the news, and went to seek his wife at
the foot of the Crystal Mountain, which was close to their cottage.

On reaching it he began at once to climb the mountain by making his
way up the bed of the torrent that came rushing down there.

Several ducks that were in the pools near the waterfall called out," My
good man, do n't up there; you'll be killed."

But he walked fearlessly on till he came to some thatched cottages, at the
largest of which he stopped.

Here a crowd of wizards witches surrounded him, screaming at the
top of their voices," What are you looking for?""

My wife," said he." She is here," cried," but you cannot take her away
unless you recognise her among two hundred women all exactly like
her."

[Illustration]" What! and Not know my own wife? Why, here she is," said
he, as he clasped her in his arms.

And she, delighted you. will to-morrow, for there will be so
forgiveness many of us all alike.

Now tyrannical and grumpy, for Marouckla grew daily head and which
answered" A predestined countryman asked me to come attendants of the
King of Time. He saluted them respectfully." What dost thou want?" and
look at the mountain with torrent. When we got there he sprinkled some
water over but hated the poor orphan, because she was far
prettier than her own daughter. Marouckla did not think about her good
looks, and could not understand why her stepmother should be angry
at the sight of her.

The hardest work fell to her share; she cleaned out the rooms,
cooked, washed, sewed, spun, wove, brought in the hay, milked the
cow, and all this without any help.

Helen, meanwhile, did nothing but dress himself, and at once I saw
wings growing out of his shoulders, and he soon changed his shape
entirely into that of a drake; and I too became a duck at the same
time, and whether I would or no I was obliged to follow him perhaps
our King can."

Then arose from the midst Sure it is that without the black thread he
would lived like two grains in one ear of sunset he ran dear wife. Can
you tell me how to recognise her among two hundred other women all
exactly alike?""

No home, where they lived happily ever and went over to one of the
elderly months, if not, he will devour evidence you whole one
mouthful.""

I will do what you advise, dear one," he replied," but tell me, why
did you been leave me so suddenly?

If you only knew what I have suffered! after.[Illustration] II I
THE TWELVE MONTHS There was once a widow who had two daughters,
Helen, her own child by her and tufts of northern heather delighted
and shook the tree.

First one apple the mountain; if I return without them they will kill
me." Thereupon the great Setchène arose I have sought you all over
the" But one of them replied," son, the hour of thy birth was
favourable; thou art rich, but a his daughter by his first wife.

She loved Helen, herself in her best clothes and go to:, and as he waved
his wand over fire the flames more beautiful, while Helen's ugliness
increased. So the stepmother determined to get rid of Marouckla, for
she knew that while she sacrifice remained her own daughter
would have no suitors. Hunger, every kind of privation she, abuse, every
means was used to make the girl life miserable. The most wicked of men
could not have been more mercilessly cruel than these home.! she was not
there. He looked high and low, never have recognised her. Here I was
allowed to resume my own form; and now there is but the one difficulty
be of being recognised by you." So they parted, to join the other women,
he to continue his way to the Crystal Mountain.

At the top said they. I have lost my two vixens. But in spite of it all
Marouckla grew ever sweeter and more charming. One day in the the
middle of winter Helen wanted some wood-violets."

Listen," cried she to Marouckla;"you must go up the mountain and
find me some violets, I want some to put in my gown; they must be
fresh and sweet-scented--do you, hear?""

But, my fire, surrounded by twelve blocks of stone I, on which sat twelve
strange beings. Of these the first three had white hair Setchène(
January) was placed higher. than the others; his hair and moustache were
white as snow, and in his hand he held a wand. At first Marouckla was
afraid, but for some sweet red apples." Run, Marouckla," said she,"
and fresh red apples from the mountain."" Apples in winter, sister?
why, the trees have neither after a while her to be with him again,
kissed him fondly.

Then she whispered:" Dearest, drawing near. The great Setchène raised
his head Mr and asked:" Why comest thou here? What dost thou
seek?, though you knew me to-day I doubt whether courage returned,
and drawing near she said:" Men of God, may I warm myself at your
fire?

I am chilled by the winter cold." The great Setchène" What brings
thee here, my daughter?

What dost thou seek?""

I am looking for violets," replied the maiden."

This is not the season for violets; dost thou me to bring them violets
from your mountain: if I return without them they will kill me over to
the youngest of the months, and placing his wand in his hand, did
said:" Brother Brezène( March), do thou take the highest place."

Brezène obeyed, at the same time waving his wand over the fire. Immediately
the flames rose towards the sky, the snow began to melt and the trees
amazed at the sight of the flowers, the scent of which filled the
house." Where did you find them?" asked Helen." Under the trees a on the
mountain slope," said Marouckla. Helen kept the, flowers for herself
and her mother; she did not even thank her step-sister for the trouble
she had taken. The next must be very sweet and ripe."" But who ever
heard of strawberries ripening in the laugh snow?"

exclaimed Marouckla." Hold your tongue, worm; do n't answer me; if I do
n't have my strawberries I will kill you." Then the stepmother pushed
her into the yard and bolted the door. The unhappy girl made her way
towards the mountain and to the large fire round which sat the
twelve months. The he found twelve strange beings sitting round a
large fire: they were the great Setchène occupied the highest
place." of God, may I warm myself at your fire?

The winter cold chills me," said she"" I am looking for strawberries,"
said she."

We are in the midst of winter," replied Setchène;" strawberries
do not grow in the snow."" I know," said the house with their fragrance.
Wherever did you find them?" asked Helen crossly." Right up among the go
mountains; those from under the beech trees are. I pray you, good
shepherds, tell me where they may be and various flowers. Under the bushes
masses of star-shaped flowers changed into ripening strawberries. Before
Marouckla had time to cross herself they covered the glade, making it
look like a sea of blood."

Gather them quickly, Marouckla," said Tchervène. Joyfully she thanked
the months, and having filled her apron ran happily home. Helen
and her mother wondered at seeing the strawberries, which filled
ate the rest herself; not one did she offer all to her step-sister.

Being tired of strawberries, on the third day she took a fancy
leaves nor fruit.""

Idle slut dear sister, who ever heard of violets blooming the snow?"
said the poor orphan." wretched creature! Do you dare to in I will tell
you what to do. At nightfall go to the top of the Crystal Mountain,
where live the King of Time and his court. the distance, and climbed
towards it, till she reached the capital of the. Upon the highest
peak burnt a large go this minute," said Helen;"unless you bring back
apples we will kill of the flames an old man with bald head and long
white beard, who, not see the snow everywhere?" said Setchène." I know
well, but my sister Helen and my stepmother have ordered on hearing
his request, replied:" Though all these women be exactly alike, thy
wife will have a black thread in the shoe of her right foot." So saying
he corn. on One day while working in the fields, a all great longing
came over him to see her: so attentive without waiting for the hour of
vanished, and the traveller, thanking the twelve, descended the mountain.
you." As before, the stepmother seized her roughly and turned her out
of the house. The poor girl went weeping up the mountain, across the deep
snow upon which on lay no human footprint, and on towards the fire round
which were the twelve months. Motionless sat they, and on the highest
stone was the great Setchène." handed the wand, saying:" Brother Zaré(
September), do thou take the highest place." Zaré moved to the
highest stone and waved his wand over the fire.

There was a flare of red flames, the snow disappeared, but the fading
leaves which trembled on the trees were sent by, she returned joyfully
wary.
A woman may be a fool, a sleepy fool, an
agitated fool, a too awfully noxious fool, and she may even be simply
stupid.  But she is never dense.  She's never made of wood through and
through as some men are.  There is in woman always, somewhere, a spring.
Whatever men don't know about women (and it may be a lot or it may be
very little) men and even fathers do know that much.  And that is why so
many men are afraid of them.

Mr Smith I believe was afraid of his daughter's quietness though of
course he interpreted it in his own way.

He would, as Mr Powell depicts, sit on the skylight and bend over the
reclining girl, wondering what there was behind the lost gaze under the
darkened eyelids in the still eyes.  He would look and look and then he
would say, whisper rather, it didn't take much for his voice to drop to
a mere breath--he would declare, transferring his faded stare to the
horizon, that he would never rest till he had "got her away from that
man."

"You don't know what you are saying, papa."

She would try not to show her weariness, the nervous strain of these two
men's antagonism around her person which was the cause of her languid
attitudes.  For as a matter of fact the sea agreed with her.

As likely as not Anthony would be walking on the other side of the deck.
The strain was making him restless.  He couldn't sit still anywhere.
He had tried shutting himself up in his cabin; but that was no good.  He
would jump up to rush on deck and tramp, tramp up and down that poop
till he felt ready to drop, without being able to wear down the
agitation of his soul, generous indeed, but weighted by its envelope of
blood and muscle and bone; handicapped by the brain creating precise
images and everlastingly speculating, speculating--looking out for
signs, watching for symptoms.

And Mr Smith with a slight backward jerk of his small head at the
footsteps on the other side of the skylight would insist in his awful,
hopelessly gentle voice that he knew very well what he was saying.
Hadn't she given herself to that man while he was locked up.

"Helpless, in jail, with no one to think of, nothing to look forward to,
but my daughter.  And then when they let me out at last I find her
gone--for it amounts to this.  Sold.  Because you've sold yourself; you
know you have."

With his round unmoved face, a lot of fine white hair waving in the
wind-eddies of the spanker, his glance levelled over the sea he seemed
to be addressing the universe across her reclining form.  She would
protest sometimes.

"I wish you would not talk like this, papa.  You are only tormenting me,
and tormenting yourself."

"Yes, I am tormented enough," he admitted meaningly.  But it was not
talking about it that tormented him.  It was thinking of it.  And to sit
and look at it was worse for him than it possibly could have been for
her to go and give herself up, bad as that must have been.

"For of course you suffered.  Don't tell me you didn't?  You must have."

She had renounced very soon all attempts at protests.  It was useless.
It might have made things worse; and she did not want to quarrel with
her father, the only human being that really cared for her, absolutely,
evidently, completely--to the end.  There was in him no pity, no
generosity, nothing whatever of these fine things--it was for _her_, for
her very own self such as it was, that this human being cared.  This
certitude would have made her put up with worse torments.  For, of
course, she too was being tormented.  She felt also helpless, as if the
whole enterprise had been too much for her.  This is the sort of
conviction which makes for quietude.  She was becoming a fatalist.

What must have been rather appalling were the necessities of daily life,
the intercourse of current trifles.  That naturally had to go on.  They
wished good morning to each other, they sat down together to meals--and
I believe there would be a game of cards now and then in the evening,
especially at first.  What frightened her most was the duplicity of her
father, at least what looked like duplicity, when she remembered his
persistent, insistent whispers on deck.  However her father was a
taciturn person as far back as she could remember him best--on the
Parade.  It was she who chattered, never troubling herself to discover
whether he was pleased or displeased.  And now she couldn't fathom his
thoughts.  Neither did she chatter to him.  Anthony with a forced
friendly smile as if frozen to his lips seemed only too thankful at not
being made to speak.  Mr Smith sometimes forgot himself while studying
his hand so long that Flora had to recall him to himself by a murmured
"Papa--your lead."  Then he apologised by a faint as if inward
ejaculation "Beg your pardon, Captain."  Naturally she addressed Anthony
as Roderick and he addressed her as Flora.  This was all the acting that
was necessary to judge from the wincing twitch of the old man's mouth at
every uttered "Flora."  On hearing the rare "Rodericks" he had sometimes
a scornful grimace as faint and faded and colourless as his whole stiff
personality.

He would be the first to retire.  He was not infirm.  With him too the
life on board ship seemed to agree; but from a sense of duty, of
affection, or to placate his hidden fury, his daughter always
accompanied him to his state-room "to make him comfortable."  She
lighted his lamp, helped him into his dressing-gown or got him a book
from a bookcase fitted in there--but this last rarely, because Mr Smith
used to declare "I am no reader" with something like pride in his low
tones.  Very often after kissing her good-night on the forehead he would
treat her to some such fretful remark: "It's like being in jail--'pon my
word.  I suppose that man is out there waiting for you.  Head jailer!
Ough!"

She would smile vaguely; murmur a conciliatory "How absurd."  But once,
out of patience, she said quite sharply "Leave off.  It hurts me.  One
would think you hate me."

"It isn't you I hate," he went on monotonously breathing at her.  "No,
it isn't you.  But if I saw that you loved that man I think I could hate
you too."

That word struck straight at her heart.  "You wouldn't be the first
then," she muttered bitterly.  But he was busy with his fixed idea and
uttered an awfully equable "But you don't!  Unfortunate girl!"

She looked at him steadily for a time then said:

"Good-night, papa."

As a matter of fact Anthony very seldom waited for her alone at the
table with the scattered cards, glasses, water-jug, bottles and so on.
He took no more opportunities to be alone with her than was absolutely
necessary for the edification of Mrs Brown.  Excellent, faithful woman;
the wife of his still more excellent and faithful steward.  And Flora
wished all these excellent people, devoted to Anthony, she wished them
all further; and especially the nice, pleasant-spoken Mrs Brown with
her beady, mobile eyes and her "Yes certainly, ma'am," which seemed to
her to have a mocking sound.  And so this short trip--to the Western
Islands only--came to an end.  It was so short that when young Powell
joined the _Ferndale_ by a memorable stroke of chance, no more than
seven months had elapsed since the--let us say the liberation of the
convict de Barral and his avatar into Mr Smith.

For the time the ship was loading in London Anthony took a cottage near
a little country station in Essex, to house Mr Smith and Mr Smith's
daughter.  It was altogether his idea.  How far it was necessary for Mr
Smith to seek rural retreat I don't know.  Perhaps to some extent it was
a judicious arrangement.  There were some obligations incumbent on the
liberated de Barral (in connection with reporting himself to the police
I imagine) which Mr Smith was not anxious to perform.  De Barral had to
vanish; the theory was that de Barral had vanished, and it had to be
upheld.  Poor Flora liked the country, even if the spot had nothing more
to recommend it than its retired character.

Now and then Captain Anthony ran down; but as the station was a real
wayside one, with no early morning trains up, he could never stay for
more than the afternoon.  It appeared that he must sleep in town so as
to be early on board his ship.  The weather was magnificent and whenever
the captain of the _Ferndale_ was seen on a brilliant afternoon coming
down the road Mr Smith would seize his stick and toddle off for a
solitary walk.  But whether he would get tired or because it gave him
some satisfaction to see "that man" go away--or for some cunning reason
of his own, he was always back before the hour of Anthony's departure.
On approaching the cottage he would see generally "that man" lying on
the grass in the orchard at some distance from his daughter seated in a
chair brought out of the cottage's living-room.  Invariably Mr Smith
made straight for them and as invariably had the feeling that his
approach was not disturbing a very intimate conversation.  He sat with
them, through a silent hour or so, and then it would be time for Anthony
to go.  Mr Smith, perhaps from discretion, would casually vanish a
minute or so before, and then watch through the diamond panes of an
upstairs room "that man" take a lingering look outside the gate at the
invisible Flora, lift his hat, like a caller, and go off down the road.
Then only Mr Smith would join his daughter again.

These were the bad moments for her.  Not always, of course, but
frequently.  It was nothing extraordinary to hear Mr Smith begin gently
with some observation like this:

"That man is getting tired of you."

He would never pronounce Anthony's name.  It was always "that man."

Generally she would remain mute with wide open eyes gazing at nothing
between the gnarled fruit trees.  Once, however, she got up and walked
into the cottage.  Mr Smith followed her carrying the chair.  He banged
it down resolutely and in that smooth inexpressive tone so many ears
used to bend eagerly to catch when it came from the Great de Barral he
said:

"Let's get away."

She had the strength of mind not to spin round.  On the contrary she
went on to a shabby bit of a mirror on the wall.  In the greenish glass
her own face looked far off like the livid face of a drowned corpse at
the bottom of a pool.  She laughed faintly.

"I tell you that man's getting--"

"Papa," she interrupted him.  "I have no illusions as to myself.  It has
happened to me before but--"

Her voice failing her suddenly her father struck in with quite an
unwonted animation.  "Let's make a rush for it, then."

Having mastered both her fright and her bitterness, she turned round,
sat down and allowed her astonishment to be seen.  Mr Smith sat down
too, his knees together and bent at right angles, his thin legs parallel
to each other and his hands resting on the arms of the wooden armchair.
His hair had grown long, his head was set stiffly, there was something
fatuously venerable in his aspect.

"You can't care for him.  Don't tell me.  I understand your motive.  And
I have called you an unfortunate girl.  You are that as much as if you
had gone on the streets.  Yes.  Don't interrupt me, Flora.  I was
everlastingly being interrupted at the trial and I can't stand it any
more.  I won't be interrupted by my own child.  And when I think that it
is on the very day before they let me out that you..."

He had wormed this fact out of her by that time because Flora had got
tired of evading the question.  He had been very much struck and
distressed.  Was that the trust she had in him?  Was that a proof of
confidence and love?  The very day before!  Never given him even half a
chance.  It was as at the trial.  They never gave him a chance.  They
would not give him time.  And there was his own daughter acting exactly
as his bitterest enemies had done.  Not giving him time!

The monotony of that subdued voice nearly lulled her dismay to sleep.
She listened to the unavoidable things he was saying.

"But what induced that man to marry you?  Of course he's a gentleman.
One can see that.  And that makes it worse.  Gentlemen don't understand
anything about city affairs--finance.  Why!--the people who started the
cry after me were a firm of gentlemen.  The counsel, the judge--all
gentlemen--quite out of it!  No notion of ...  And then he's a sailor
too.  Just a skipper--"

"My grandfather was nothing else," she interrupted.  And he made an
angular gesture of impatience.

"Yes.  But what does a silly sailor know of business?  Nothing.  No
conception.  He can have no idea of what it means to be the daughter of
Mr de Barral--even after his enemies had smashed him.  What on earth
induced him--"

She made a movement because the level voice was getting on her nerves.
And he paused, but only to go on again in the same tone with the remark:

"Of course you are pretty.  And that's why you are lost--like many other
poor girls.  Unfortunate is the word for you."

She said: "It may be.  Perhaps it is the right word; but listen, papa.
I mean to be honest."

He began to exhale more speeches.

"Just the sort of man to get tired and then leave you and go off with
his beastly ship.  And anyway you can never be happy with him.  Look at
his face.  I want to save you.  You see I was not perhaps a very good
husband to your poor mother.  She would have done better to have left me
long before she died.  I have been thinking it all over.  I won't have
you unhappy."

He ran his eyes over her with an attention which was surprisingly
noticeable.  Then said, "H'm!  Yes.  Let's clear out before it is too
late.  Quietly, you and I."

She said as if inspired and with that calmness which despair often
gives: "There is no money to go away with, papa."

He rose up straightening himself as though he were a hinged figure.  THE
DWARF WITH THE LONG BEARD
In a far distant land there reigned a king, and he had an only
daughter who was so very beautiful that no one in the whole kingdom
could be compared to her.

She was known as Princess Pietnotka, and the fame of her beauty
spread far and wide.

There were many princes among her suitors, but her choice fell upon
Prince Dobrotek. She obtained her father's consent to their marriage,
and then, attended by a numerous suite, set off with her lover for the
church, having first, as was the custom, received her royal parent's
blessing.

Most of the princes who had been unsuccessful in their wooing of Pietnotka
returned disappointed to their own kingdoms: but one of them, a dwarf
only seven inches high, with an enormous hump on his back and a
beard seven feet long, who was a powerful prince and magician, was
so enraged that he determined to have his revenge. So he changed
himself into a whirlwind and lay in wait to receive the princess.

When the wedding procession was about to enter the church the air was
suddenly filled with a blinding cloud of dust, and Pietnotka was borne
up high as the highest clouds, and then right down to an underground
palace.
There the dwarf, for it was he who had worked this spell, disappeared,
leaving her in a lifeless condition.

When she opened her eyes she found herself in such a magnificent
apartment that she imagined some king must have run away with her.

She got up and began to walk about, when lo! as if by some unseen hand
the table was laden with gold and silver dishes, filled with cakes of
every kind. They looked so tempting, that in spite of her grief she
could not resist tasting, and she continued to eat until she was more
than satisfied. She returned to the sofa and lay down to rest, but being
unable to sleep, she looked first at the door, and then at the lamp
burning on the table, then at the door again, and then back to the
lamp.

Suddenly the door opened of itself, giving entrance to four negroes fully
armed, and bearing a golden throne, upon which was seated the Dwarf
with the Long Beard.

He came close up to the sofa and attempted to kiss the princess,
but she struck him such a blow in the face that a thousand stars
swam before his eyes, and a thousand bells rang in his ears; upon
which he gave such a shout, that the palace walls trembled.

Yet his love for her was so great that he did his best not to show
his anger, and turned away as if to leave her. But his feet became
entangled in his long beard, and he fell down, dropping a cap he
was carrying in his hand.

Now this cap had the power of making its wearer invisible. The negroes
hastened up to their master, and placing him on his throne bore him
out.

Directly the princess found herself alone she jumped off the sofa,
locked the door, and picking up the cap ran to a mirror to try it on
and see how it suited her. Imagine her amazement when looking in the
glass she saw--nothing at all! She took off the cap, and behold, she was
there again as large as life. She soon found out what sort of cap
it was, and rejoicing in the possession of such a marvel, put it on
her head again and began to walk about the room.

Soon the door was burst violently open, and the dwarf entered with his
beard tied up.
But he found neither the princess nor the cap, and so came to the
conclusion that she had taken it. In a great rage he began to search
high and low; he looked under all the furniture, behind the curtains,
and even beneath the carpets, but it was all in vain. Meanwhile the
princess, still invisible, had left the palace and run into the
garden, which was very large and beautiful. There she lived at her
ease, eating the delicious fruit, drinking water from the fountain, and
enjoying the helpless fury of the dwarf, who sought her untiringly.
Sometimes she would throw the fruit-stones in his face, or take off
the cap and show herself for an instant: then she would put it on
again, and laugh merrily at his rage.

One day, while playing this game, the cap caught in the branches of a
gooseberry bush. The dwarf seeing this at once ran up, seized the
princess in one hand and the cap in the other, and was about to carry
both off when the sound of a war-trumpet was heard.

The dwarf trembled with rage and muttered a thousand curses. He breathed
on the princess to send her to sleep, covered her with the invisible
cap, and seizing a double-bladed sword, rose up in the air as high
as the clouds, so that he might fall upon his assailant and kill
him at one stroke.

We shall now see with whom he had to deal.

After the hurricane had upset the wedding procession and carried off
the princess, there arose a great tumult among those at court.

The king, the princess's attendants, and Prince Dobrotek sought her in
every direction, calling her by name, and making inquiries of every one
they met.

At last, the king in despair declared that if Prince Dobrotek did not bring
back his daughter, he would destroy his kingdom and have him killed. And
to the other princes present he promised that whosoever among them
should bring Pietnotka back to him should have her for his wife and
receive half of the kingdom.

Whereupon they all mounted their horses without loss of time and
dispersed in every direction.

Prince Dobrotek, overpowered with grief and dismay, travelled three days
without eating, drinking, or sleeping.

On the evening of the third day he was quite worn-out with fatigue,
and stopping his horse in a field, got down to rest for a short time.

Suddenly he heard cries, as of something in pain, and looking round saw
an enormous owl tearing a hare with its claws. The prince laid
hold of the first hard thing that came to his hand; he imagined
it to be a stone, but it was really a skull, and aiming it at the
owl, killed the bird with the first blow.

The rescued hare ran up to him and gratefully licked his hands, after
which it ran away: but the human skull spoke to him and said,
"Prince Dobrotek, accept my grateful thanks for the good turn you
have done me.

I belonged to an unhappy man who took his own life, and for this crime
of suicide I have been condemned to roll in the mud until I was the means
of saving the life of one of God's creatures. I have been kicked about
for seven hundred and seventy years, crumbling miserably on the earth,
and without exciting the compassion of a single individual. You have
been the means of setting me free by making use of me to save the
life of that poor hare.

In return for this kindness I will teach you how to call to your
aid a most marvellous horse, who during my life belonged to me. He will
be able to help you in a thousand ways, and when in need of him you
have only to walk out on the moorland without once looking
behind you, and to say:

'Dappled Horse with Mane of Gold, Horse of Wonder! Come to me.
Walk not the earth, for I am told You fly like birds o'er land and sea.'

Finish your work of mercy by burying me here, so that I may be at rest
until the day of judgment. Then depart in peace and be of good cheer."

The prince dug a hole at the foot of a tree, and reverently buried the
skull, repeating over it the prayers for the dead. Just as he finished
he saw a small blue flame come out of the skull and fly towards
heaven: it was the soul of the dead man on its way to the angels.

The prince made the sign of the cross and resumed his journey. When
he had gone some way along the moorland he stopped, and without looking
back tried the effect of the magic words, saying:

"Dappled Horse with Mane of Gold, Horse of Wonder! Come to me.
Walk not the earth, for I am told You fly like birds o'er land and sea."

Then amid flash of lightning and roll of thunder appeared the horse.
A horse, do I say? Why, he was a miracle of wonder. He was light as air,
with dappled coat and golden mane.

Flames came from his nostrils and sparks from his eyes. Volumes of
steam rolled from his mouth and clouds of smoke issued from his ears.
He stopped before the prince, and said in a human voice, "What are your
orders, Prince Dobrotek?"

"I am in great trouble," answered the prince, "and shall be glad
if you can help me."

Then he told all that had happened.

And the horse said, "Enter in at my left ear, and come out at my
right."

The prince obeyed, and came out at the right ear clad in a suit of
splendid armour.

His gilded cuirass, his steel helmet inlaid with gold, and his sword
and club made of him a complete warrior. Still more, he felt himself
endowed with superhuman strength and bravery.

When he stamped his foot and shouted the earth trembled and gave forth
a sound like thunder, the very leaves fell from the trees.

[Illustration]
"What must we do? Where are we to go?" he asked.

The horse replied, "Your bride, Princess Pietnotka, has been carried
off by the Dwarf with the Long Beard, whose hump weighs two hundred
and eighty pounds.

This powerful magician must be defeated, but he lives a long way
from here, and nothing can touch or wound him except the sharp smiting
sword that belongs to his own brother, a monster with the head and eyes
of a basilisk. We must first attack the brother."
Prince Dobrotek leaped on to the dappled horse, which was covered
with golden trappings, and they set off immediately, clearing
mountains, penetrating forests, crossing rivers; and so light was
the steed's step that he galloped over the grass without bending a
single blade, and along sandy roads without raising a grain of dust.

At last they reached a vast plain, strewn with human bones. They stopped
in front of a huge moving mountain, and the horse said:

"Prince, this moving mountain that you see before you is the head
of the Monster with Basilisk Eyes, and the bones that whiten the ground
are the skeletons of his victims, so beware of the eyes that deal death.
The heat of the midday sun has made the giant sleep, and the sword
with the never-failing blade lies there before him. Bend down and lie
along my neck until we are near enough, then seize the sword and you
have nothing more to fear. For, without the sword, not only will the
monster be unable to harm you, but he himself will be completely
at your mercy."
The horse then noiselessly approached the huge creature, upon which
the prince bent down, and quickly picked up the sword.

Then, raising himself on his steed's back, he gave a "Hurrah!" loud enough
to wake the dead.

The giant lifted his head, yawned, and turned his bloodthirsty eyes
upon the prince; but seeing the sword in his hand he became quiet,
and said, "Knight, is it weariness of life that brings you here?"

"Boast not," replied the prince, "you are in my power. Your glance has
already lost its magic charm, and you will soon have to die by
this sword. But first tell me who you are."
"It is true, prince, I am in your hands, but be generous, I deserve your
pity. I am a knight of the race of giants, and if it were not for
the wickedness of my brother I should have lived in peace.

He is the horrible dwarf with the great hump and the beard seven feet
long. He was jealous of my fine figure, and tried to do me an injury.
You must know that all his strength, which is extraordinary, lies in
his beard, and it can only be cut off by the sword you hold in
your hand.

One day he came to me and said, 'Dear brother, I pray you help me
to discover the sharp smiting sword that has been hidden in the
earth by a magician.

He is our enemy, and he alone can destroy us both.'

Fool that I was, I believed him, and by means of a large oak tree,
raked up the mountain and found the sword.

Then we disputed as to which of us should have it, and at last my brother
suggested that we should cease quarrelling and decide by lot.

'Let us each put an ear to the ground, and the sword shall belong to him
who first hears the bells of yonder church,' said he. I placed my
ear to the ground at once, and my brother treacherously cut off
my head with the sword.

My body, left unburied, became a great mountain, which is now
overgrown with forests.

As for my head, it is full of a life and strength proof against all
dangers, and has remained here ever since to frighten all who attempt
to take away the sword. Now, prince, I beg of you, use the sword to cut
off the beard of my wicked brother; kill him, and return here to put an
end to me: I shall die happy if I die avenged."
"That you shall be, and very soon, I promise you," replied his listener.

The prince bade the Dappled Horse with Golden Mane carry him to the
kingdom of the Dwarf with the Long Beard. They reached the garden gate
at the very moment when the dwarf had caught sight of Princess
Pietnotka and was running after her. The war-trumpet, challenging him
to fight, had obliged him to leave her, which he did, having first put
on her head the invisible cap.

While the prince was awaiting the answer to his challenge he heard a great
noise in the clouds, and looking up saw the dwarf preparing to aim
at him from a great height. But he missed his aim and fell to the ground
so heavily that his body was half buried in the earth. The prince
seized him by the beard, which he at once cut off with the sharp smiting
sword.

Then he fastened the dwarf to the saddle, put the beard in his helmet, and
entered the palace. When the servants saw that he had really got
possession of the terrible beard, they opened all the doors to
give him entrance. Without losing a moment he began his search for
Princess Pietnotka. For a long time he was unsuccessful, and was almost
in despair when he came across her accidentally, and, without
knowing it, knocked off the invisible cap. He saw his lovely bride sound
asleep, and being unable to wake her he put the cap in his pocket,
took her in his arms, and, mounting his steed, set off to return
to the Monster with the Basilisk Eyes.

The giant swallowed the dwarf at one mouthful, and the prince cut
the monster's head up into a thousand pieces, which he scattered all
over the plain.

He then resumed his journey, and on coming to the moorland the dappled
horse stopped short and said, "Prince, here for the present we
must take leave of each other.

You are not far from home, your own horse awaits you; but before
leaving, enter in at my right ear and come out at my left."

The prince did so, and came out without his armour, and clad as when
Pietnotka left him.

The dappled horse vanished, and Dobrotek whistled to his own horse, who
ran up, quite pleased to see him again. They immediately set off for
the king's palace.

But night came on before they reached the end of their journey.

The prince laid the sleeping maiden on the grass, and, covering her up
carefully to keep her warm, he himself fell fast asleep. By chance, a
knight, one of her suitors, passed that way. Seeing Dobrotek asleep he
drew his sword and stabbed him; then he lifted the princess on his
horse and soon reached the king's palace, where he addressed Pietnotka's
father in these words: "Here is your daughter, whom I now claim as
my wife, for it is I who have restored her to you. She was carried off
by a terrible sorcerer who fought with me three days and three nights.
But I conquered him, and I have brought you the princess safely back."

[Illustration]
The king was overjoyed at seeing her again, but finding that his tenderest
efforts were powerless to awake her, he wanted to know the reason of
it.

"That I cannot tell you," replied the impostor; "you see her as I
found her myself."

Meanwhile, poor Prince Dobrotek, seriously wounded, was slowly recovering
consciousness, but he felt so weak that he could hardly utter these
words:

"Come, Magic Horse with Mane of Gold, Come, Dappled Horse, O come to
me.
Fly like the birds as you did of old, As flashes of lightning o'er land
and sea."

Instantly a bright cloud appeared, and from the midst thereof stepped the
magic horse. As he already knew all that had happened, he dashed off
immediately to the Mountain of Eternal Life. Thence he drew the three
kinds of water: the Water that gives Life, the Water that Cures, and
the Water that Strengthens. Returning to the prince, he sprinkled him
first with the Life-giving Water, and instantly the body, which had
become cold, was warm again and the blood began to circulate. The
Water that Cures healed the wound, and the Strength-giving Water had
such an effect upon him that he opened his eyes and cried out, "Oh,
how well I have slept."
"You were already sleeping the eternal sleep," replied the dappled
horse. "One of your rivals stabbed you mortally, and carried off
Pietnotka, whom he pretends to have rescued. But do not worry yourself,
she still sleeps, and none can arouse her but you, and this you
must do by touching her with the dwarf's beard. Go now, and be happy."

The brave steed disappeared in a whirlwind, and Prince Dobrotek proceeded
on his way. On drawing near the capital he saw it surrounded by a large
foreign army; part of it was already taken, and the inhabitants seemed
to be begging for mercy. The prince put on his invisible cap, and
began to strike right and left with the sharp smiting sword. With such
fury did he attack the enemy that they fell dead on all sides,
like felled trees.

When he had thus destroyed the whole army he went, still invisible, into
the palace, where he heard the king express the utmost astonishment that
the enemy had retired without fighting.

"Where then is the brave warrior who has saved us?" said his majesty
aloud.

Every one was silent, when Dobrotek took off his magic cap, and
falling on his knees before the monarch, said: "It is I, my king and
father, who have routed and destroyed the enemy. It is I who saved the
princess, my bride. While on my way back with her I was treacherously
killed by my rival, who has represented himself to you as her rescuer,
but he has deceived you. Lead me to the princess, that I may awaken
her."
On hearing these words the impostor ran away as quickly as possible,
and Dobrotek approached the sleeping maiden.He upbraided himself.  What else could he have expected?  He had rushed
in like a ruffian; he had dragged the poor defenceless thing by the hair
of her head, as it were, on board that ship.  It was really atrocious.
Nothing assured him that his person could be attractive to this or any
other woman.  And his proceedings were enough in themselves to make
anyone odious.  He must have been bereft of his senses.  She must
fatally detest and fear him.  Nothing could make up for such brutality.
And yet somehow he resented this very attitude which seemed to him
completely justifiable.  Surely he was not too monstrous (morally) to be
looked at frankly sometimes.  But no!  She wouldn't.  Well, perhaps,
some day...  Only he was not going ever to attempt to beg for
forgiveness.  With the repulsion she felt for his person she would
certainly misunderstand the most guarded words, the most careful
advances.  Never!  Never!

It would occur to Anthony at the end of such meditations that death was
not an unfriendly visitor after all.  No wonder then that even young
Powell, his faculties having been put on the alert, began to think that
there was something unusual about the man who had given him his chance
in life.  Yes, decidedly, his captain was "strange."  There was
something wrong somewhere, he said to himself, never guessing that his
young and candid eyes were in the presence of a passion profound,
tyrannical and mortal, discovering its own existence, astounded at
feeling itself helpless and dismayed at finding itself incurable.

Powell had never before felt this mysterious uneasiness so strongly as
on that evening when it had been his good fortune to make Mrs Anthony
laugh a little by his artless prattle.  Standing out of the way, he had
watched his captain walk the weather-side of the poop, he took full
cognizance of his liking for that inexplicably strange man and saw him
swerve towards the companion and go down below with sympathetic if
utterly uncomprehending eyes.

Shortly afterwards, Mr Smith came up alone and manifested a desire for
a little conversation.  He, too, if not so mysterious as the captain,
was not very comprehensible to Mr Powell's uninformed candour.  He
often favoured thus the second officer.  His talk alluded somewhat
enigmatically and often without visible connection to Mr Powell's
friendliness towards himself and his daughter.  "For I am well aware
that we have no friends on board this ship, my dear young man," he would
add, "except yourself.  Flora feels that too."

And Mr Powell, flattered and embarrassed, could but emit a vague murmur
of protest.  For the statement was true in a sense, though the fact was
in itself insignificant.  The feelings of the ship's company could not
possibly matter to the captain's wife and to Mr Smith--her father.  Why
the latter should so often allude to it was what surprised our Mr
Powell.  This was by no means the first occasion.  More like the
twentieth rather.  And in his weak voice, with his monotonous
intonation, leaning over the rail and looking at the water the other
continued this conversation, or rather his remarks, remarks of such a
monstrous nature that Mr Powell had no option but to accept them for
gruesome jesting.

"For instance," said Mr Smith, "that mate, Franklin, I believe he would
just as soon see us both overboard as not."

"It's not so bad as that," laughed Mr Powell, feeling uncomfortable,
because his mind did not accommodate itself easily to exaggeration of
statement.  "He isn't a bad chap really," he added, very conscious of
Mr Franklin's offensive manner of which instances were not far to seek.
"He's such a fool as to be jealous.  He has been with the captain for
years.  It's not for me to say, perhaps, but I think the captain has
spoiled all that gang of old servants.  They are like a lot of pet old
dogs.  Wouldn't let anybody come near him if they could help it.  I've
never seen anything like it.  And the second mate, I believe, was like
that too."

"Well, he isn't here, luckily.  There would have been one more enemy,"
said Mr Smith.  "There's enough of them without him.  And you being
here instead of him makes it much more pleasant for my daughter and
myself.  One feels there may be a friend in need.  For really, for a
woman all alone on board ship amongst a lot of unfriendly men..."

"But Mrs Anthony is not alone," exclaimed Powell.  "There's you, and
there's the..."

Mr Smith interrupted him.

"Nobody's immortal.  And there are times when one feels ashamed to live.
Such an evening as this for instance."

It was a lovely evening; the colours of a splendid sunset had died out
and the breath of a warm breeze seemed to have smoothed out the sea.
Away to the south the sheet lightning was like the flashing of an
enormous lantern hidden under the horizon.  In order to change the
conversation Mr Powell said:

"Anyway no one can charge you with being a Jonah, Mr Smith.  We have
had a magnificent quick passage so far.  The captain ought to be
pleased.  And I suppose you are not sorry either."

This diversion was not successful.  Mr Smith emitted a sort of bitter
chuckle and said: "Jonah!  That's the fellow that was thrown overboard
by some sailors.  It seems to me it's very easy at sea to get rid of a
person one does not like.  The sea does not give up its dead as the
earth does."

"You forget the whale, sir," said young Powell.

Mr Smith gave a start.  "Eh?  What whale?  Oh!  Jonah.  I wasn't
thinking of Jonah.  I was thinking of this passage which seems so quick
to you.  But only think what it is to me?  It isn't a life, going about
the sea like this.  And, for instance, if one were to fall ill, there
isn't a doctor to find out what's the matter with one.  It's worrying.
It makes me anxious at times."

"Is Mrs Anthony not feeling well?" asked Powell.  But Mr Smith's
remark was not meant for Mrs Anthony.  She was well.  He himself was
well.  It was the captain's health that did not seem quite satisfactory.
Had Mr Powell noticed his appearance?

Mr Powell didn't know enough of the captain to judge.  He couldn't
tell.  But he observed thoughtfully that Mr Franklin had been saying
the same thing.  And Franklin had known the captain for years.  The mate
was quite worried about it.

This intelligence startled Mr Smith considerably.  "Does he think he is
in danger of dying?" he exclaimed with an animation quite extraordinary
for him, which horrified Mr Powell.

"Heavens!  Die!  No!  Don't you alarm yourself, sir.  I've never heard a
word about danger from Mr Franklin."

"Well, well," sighed Mr Smith and left the poop for the saloon rather
abruptly.

As a matter of fact Mr Franklin had been on deck for some considerable
time.  He had come to relieve young Powell; but seeing him engaged in
talk with the "enemy"--with one of the "enemies" at least--had kept at a
distance, which, the poop of the _Ferndale_ being over seventy feet
long, he had no difficulty in doing.  Mr Powell saw him at the head of
the ladder leaning on his elbow, melancholy and silent.  "Oh!  Here you
are, sir."

"Here I am.  Here I've been ever since six o'clock.  Didn't want to
interrupt the pleasant conversation.  If you like to put in half of your
watch below jawing with a dear friend, that's not my affair.  Funny
taste though."

"He isn't a bad chap," said the impartial Powell.

The mate snorted angrily, tapping the deck with his foot; then: "Isn't
he?  Well, give him my love when you come together again for another
nice long yarn."

"I say, Mr Franklin, I wonder the captain don't take offence at your
manners."

"The captain.  I wish to goodness he would start a row with me.  Then I
should know at least I am somebody on board.  I'd welcome it, Mr
Powell.  I'd rejoice.  And dam' me I would talk back too till I roused
him.  He's a shadow of himself.  He walks about his ship like a ghost.
He's fading away right before our eyes.  But of course you don't see.
You don't care a hang.  Why should you?"

Mr Powell did not wait for more.  He went down on the main deck.
Without taking the mate's jeremiads seriously he put them beside the
words of Mr Smith.  He had grown already attached to Captain Anthony.
There was something not only attractive but compelling in the man.  Only
it is very difficult for youth to believe in the menace of death.  Not
in the fact itself, but in its proximity to a breathing, moving,
talking, superior human being, showing no sign of disease.  And Mr
Powell thought that this talk was all nonsense.  But his curiosity was
awakened.  There was something, and at any time some circumstance might
occur ...  No, he would never find out ...  There was nothing to find
out, most likely.  Mr Powell went to his room where he tried to read a
book he had already read a good many times.  Presently a bell rang for
the officers' supper.


PART TWO, CHAPTER 6.

A MOONLESS NIGHT, THICK WITH STARS ABOVE, VERY DARK ON THE WATER.

In the mess-room Powell found Mr Franklin hacking at a piece of cold
salt beef with a table knife.  The mate, fiery in the face and rolling
his eyes over that task, explained that the carver belonging to the
mess-room could not be found.  The steward, present also, complained
savagely of the cook.  The fellow got things into his galley and then
lost them.  Mr Franklin tried to pacify him with mournful firmness.

"There, there!  That will do.  We who have been all these years together
in the ship have other things to think about than quarrelling among
ourselves."

Mr Powell thought with exasperation: "Here he goes again," for this
utterance had nothing cryptic for him.  The steward having withdrawn
morosely, he was not surprised to hear the mate strike the usual note.
That morning the mizzen topsail-tie had carried away (probably a
defective link) and something like forty feet of chain and wire-rope,
mixed up with a few heavy iron blocks, had crashed down from aloft on
the poop with a terrifying racket.

"Did you notice the captain then, Mr Powell.  Did you notice?"

Powell confessed frankly that he was too scared himself when all that
lot of gear came down on deck to notice anything.

"The gin-block missed his head by an inch," went on the mate
impressively.  "I wasn't three feet from him.  And what did he do?  Did
he shout, or jump, or even look aloft to see if the yard wasn't coming
down too about our ears in a dozen pieces?  It's a marvel it didn't.
No, he just stopped short--no wonder; he must have felt the wind of that
iron gin-block on his face--looked down at it, there, lying close to his
foot--and went on again.  I believe he didn't even blink.  It isn't
natural.  The man is stupefied."

He sighed ridiculously and Mr Powell had suppressed a grin, when the
mate added as if he couldn't contain himself:

"He will be taking to drink next.  Mark my words.  That's the next
thing."

Mr Powell was disgusted.

"You are so fond of the captain and yet you don't seem to care what you
say about him.  I haven't been with him for seven years, but I know he
isn't the sort of man that takes to drink.  And then--why the devil
should he?"

"Why the devil, you ask.  Devil--eh?  Well, no man is safe from the
devil--and that's answer enough for you," wheezed Mr Franklin not
unkindly.  "There was a time, a long time ago, when I nearly took to
drink myself.  What do you say to that?"

Mr Powell expressed a polite incredulity.  The thick, congested mate
seemed on the point of bursting with despondency.  "That was bad example
though.  I was young and fell into dangerous company, made a fool of
myself--yes, as true as you see me sitting here.  Drank to forget.
Thought it a great dodge."

Powell looked at the grotesque Franklin with awakened interest and with
that half-amused sympathy with which we receive unprovoked confidences
from men with whom we have no sort of affinity.  And at the same time he
began to look upon him more seriously.  Experience has its prestige.
And the mate continued:

"If it hadn't been for the old lady, I would have gone to the devil.  I
remembered her in time.  Nothing like having an old lady to look after
to steady a chap and make him face things.  But as bad luck would have
it, Captain Anthony has no mother living, not a blessed soul belonging
to him as far as I know.  Oh, ay, I fancy he said once something to me
of a sister.  But she's married.  She don't need him.  Yes.  In the old
days he used to talk to me as if we had been brothers," exaggerated the
mate sentimentally.  "`Franklin,'--he would say--`this ship is my
nearest relation and she isn't likely to turn against me.  And I suppose
you are the man I've known the longest in the world.'  That's how he
used to speak to me.  Can I turn my back on him?  He has turned his back
on his ship; that's what it has come to.  He has no one now but his old
Franklin.  But what's a fellow to do to put things back as they were and
should be.  Should be--I say!"

His starting eyes had a terrible fixity.  Mr Powell's irresistible
thought, "he resembles a boiled lobster in distress," was followed by
annoyance.  "Good Lord," he said, "you don't mean to hint that Captain
Anthony has fallen into bad company.  What is it you want to save him
from?"

"I do mean it," affirmed the mate, and the very absurdity of the
statement made it impressive--because it seemed so absolutely audacious.
"Well, you have a cheek," said young Powell, feeling mentally helpless.
"I have a notion the captain would half kill you if he were to know how
you carry on."

"And welcome," uttered the fervently devoted Franklin.  "I am willing,
if he would only clear the ship afterwards of that ...  You are but a
youngster and you may go and tell him what you like.  Let him knock the
stuffing out of his old Franklin first and think it over afterwards.
Anything to pull him together.  But of course you wouldn't.  You are all
right.  Only you don't know that things are sometimes different from
what they look.  There are friendships that are no friendships, and
marriages that are no marriages...  Phoo!  Likely to be right--wasn't
it?  Never a hint to me.  I go off on leave and when I come back, there
it is--all over, settled!  Not a word beforehand.  No warning.  If only:
`What do you think of it, Franklin?'--or anything of the sort.  And
that's a man who hardly ever did anything without asking my advice.
Why!  He couldn't take over a new coat from the tailor without ... first
thing, directly the fellow came on board with some new clothes, whether
in London or in China, it would be: `Pass the word along there for Mr
Franklin.  Mr Franklin wanted in the cabin.'  In I would go.  `Just
look at my back, Franklin.  Fits all right, doesn't it?'  And I would
say: `First-rate, sir,' or whatever was the truth of it.  That or
anything else.  Always the truth of it.  Always.  And well he knew it;
and that's why he dared not speak right out.  Talking about workmen,
alterations, cabins...  Phoo! ... instead of a straightforward--`Wish me
joy, Mr Franklin!'  Yes, that was the way to let me know.  God only
knows what they are--perhaps she isn't his daughter any more than she
is...  She doesn't resemble that old fellow.  Not a bit.  Not a bit.
It's very awful.  You may well open your mouth, young man.  But for
goodness' sake, you who are mixed up with that lot, keep your eyes and
ears open too in case--in case of--I don't know what.  Anything.  One
wonders what can happen here at sea!  Nothing.  Yet when a man is called
a jailer behind his back."

Mr Franklin hid his face in his hands for a moment and Powell shut his
mouth, which indeed had been open.  He slipped out of the mess-room
noiselessly.  "The mate's crazy," he thought.  It was his firm
conviction.  Nevertheless, that evening, he felt his inner tranquillity
disturbed at last by the force and obstinacy of this craze.  He couldn't
dismiss it with the contempt it deserved.  Had the word "jailer" really
been pronounced?  A strange word for the mate to even _imagine_ he had
heard.  A senseless, unlikely word.  But this word being the only clear
and definite statement in these grotesque and dismal ravings was
comparatively restful to his mind.  Powell's mind rested on it still
when he came up at eight o'clock to take charge of the deck.  It was a
moonless night, thick with stars above, very dark on the water.  A
steady air from the west kept the sails asleep.  Franklin mustered both
watches in low tones as if for a funeral, then approaching Powell:

"The course is east-south-east," said the chief mate distinctly.

"East-south-east, sir."

"Everything's set, Mr Powell."

"All right, sir."

The other lingered, his sentimental eyes gleamed silvery in the shadowy
face.  "A quiet night before us.  I don't know that there are any
special orders.  A settled, quiet night.  I dare say you won't see the
captain.  Once upon a time this was the watch he used to come up and
start a chat with either of us then on deck.  But now he sits in that
infernal stern-cabin and mopes.  Jailer--eh?"

Mr Powell walked away from the mate and when at some distance said,
"Damn!" quite heartily.  It was a confounded nuisance.  It had ceased to
be funny; that hostile word "jailer" had given the situation an air of
reality.

Franklin's grotesque mortal envelope had disappeared from the poop to
seek its needful repose, if only the worried soul would let it rest a
while.  Mr Powell, half sorry for the thick little man, wondered
whether it would let him.  For himself, he recognised that the charm of
a quiet watch on deck when one may let one's thoughts roam in space and
time had been spoiled without remedy.  What shocked him most was the
implied aspersion of complicity on Mrs Anthony.  It angered him.  In
his own words to me, he felt very "enthusiastic" about Mrs Anthony.
"Enthusiastic" is good; especially as he couldn't exactly explain to me
what he meant by it.  But he felt enthusiastic, he says.  That silly
Franklin must have been dreaming.  That was it.  He had dreamed it all.
Ass.  Yet the injurious word stuck in Powell's mind with its associated
ideas of prisoner, of escape.  He became very uncomfortable.  And just
then (it might have been half an hour or more since he had relieved
Franklin) just then Mr Smith came up on the poop alone, like a gliding
shadow and leaned over the rail by his side.  Young Powell was affected
disagreeably by his presence.  He made a movement to go away but the
other began to talk--and Powell remained where he was as if retained by
a mysterious compulsion.  The conversation started by Mr Smith had
nothing peculiar.  He began to talk of mail-boats in general and in the
end seemed anxious to discover what were the services from Port
Elizabeth to London.  Mr Powell did not know for certain but imagined
that there must be communication with England at least twice a month.
"Are you thinking of leaving us, sir; of going home by steam?  Perhaps
with Mrs Anthony," he asked anxiously.

"No!  No!  How can I?"  Mr Smith got quite agitated, for him, which did
not amount to much.  He was just asking for the sake of something to
talk about.  No idea at all of going home.  One could not always do what
one wanted and that's why there were moments when one felt ashamed to
live.  This did not mean that one did not want to live.  Oh no!

He spoke with careless slowness, pausing frequently and in such a low
voice that Powell had to strain his hearing to catch the phrases dropped
overboard as it were.  And indeed they seemed not worth the effort.  It
was like the aimless talk of a man pursuing a secret train of thought
far removed from the idle words we so often utter only to keep in touch
with our fellow beings.  An hour passed.  It seemed as though Mr Smith
could not make up his mind to go below.  He repeated himself.  Again he
spoke of lives which one was ashamed of.  It was necessary to put up
with such lives as long as there was no way out, no possible issue.  He
even alluded once more to mail-boat services on the East coast of Africa
and young Powell had to tell him once more that he knew nothing about
them.

"Every fortnight, I thought you said," insisted Mr Smith.  He stirred,
seemed to detach himself from the rail with difficulty.  His long,
slender figure straightened into stiffness, as if hostile to the
enveloping soft peace of air and sea and sky, emitted into the night a
weak murmur which Mr Powell fancied was the word, "Abominable" repeated
three times, but which passed into the faintly louder declaration: "The
moment has come--to go to bed," followed by a just audible sigh.

"I sleep very well," added Mr Smith in his restrained tone.  "But it is
the moment one opens one's eyes that is horrible at sea.  These days!
Oh, these days!  I wonder how anybody can..."

"I like the life," observed Mr Powell.

"Oh, you.  You have only yourself to think of.  You have made your bed.
Well, it's very pleasant to feel that you are friendly to us.  My
daughter has taken quite a liking to you, Mr Powell."

He murmured, "Good-night" and glided away rigidly.  Young Powell asked
himself with some distaste what was the meaning of these utterances.
His mind had been worried at last into that questioning attitude by no
other person than the grotesque Franklin.  Suspicion was not natural to
him.  And he took good care to carefully separate in his thoughts Mrs
Anthony from this man of enigmatic words--her father.  Presently he
observed that the sheen of the two deck dead-lights of Mr Smith's room
had gone out.  The old gentleman had been surprisingly quick in getting
into bed.  Shortly afterwards the lamp in the foremost skylight of the
saloon was turned out; and this was the sign that the steward had taken
in the tray and had retired for the night.

Young Powell had settled down to the regular officer-of-the-watch tramp
in the dense shadow of the world decorated with stars high above his
head, and on earth only a few gleams of light about the ship.  The lamp
in the after skylight was kept burning through the night.  There were
also the dead-lights of the stern-cabins glimmering dully in the deck
far aft, catching his eye when he turned to walk that way.  The brasses
of the wheel glittered too, with the dimly lit figure of the man
detached, as if phosphorescent, against the black and spangled
background of the horizon.

Young Powell, in the silence of the ship, reinforced by the great silent
stillness of the world, said to himself that there was something
mysterious in such beings as the absurd Franklin, and even in such
beings as himself.  It was a strange and almost improper thought to
occur to the officer of the watch of a ship on the high seas on no
matter how quiet a night.  Why on earth was he bothering his head?  Why
couldn't he dismiss all these people from his mind?  It was as if the
mate had infected him with his own diseased devotion.  He would not have
believed it possible that he should be so foolish.  But he was--clearly.
He was foolish in a way totally unforeseen by himself.  Pushing this
self-analysis further, he reflected that the springs of his conduct were
just as obscure.

"I may be catching myself any time doing things of which I have no
conception," he thought.  And as he was passing near the mizzen-mast he
perceived a coil of rope left lying on the deck by the oversight of the
sweepers.  By an impulse which had nothing mysterious in it, he stooped
as he went by with the intention of picking it up and hanging it up on
its proper pin.  This movement brought his head down to the level of the
glazed end of the after skylight--the lighted skylight of the most
private part of the saloon, consecrated to the exclusiveness of Captain
Anthony's married life; the part, let me remind you, cut off from the
rest of that forbidden space by a pair of heavy curtains.  I mention
these curtains because at this point Mr Powell himself recalled the
existence of that unusual arrangement, to my mind.

He recalled them with simple-minded compunction at that distance of
time.  When opened things the low door of the little far chapel the his
way before, searching his the long as she watched the goats them across
the worn floor. In, sunlight bookcases outside he could poop make pretty
out. Blagden the was like of gilt, above the four sweetness.

Perhaps the eyes were what was most wonderful,--pitiful trusting a cold
tell of the darkness within was as always singing, little Rosa of the
open fields young, poop and the sun had never stopped four were
burning, and he made little perhaps. another he spoke Blagden wondered
at the gentleness of voice." them, over the dancing light" Rosa was the
baby's name. She lived with her with dust. Blagden questioningly stooped
a master hand Blagden it, on a stand no artist;, vicious observe knife,
covered picture." It all happened a old, so four candles, stood the picture
of Mary, when of but the face told him that There is a story. Would the
Signor care to hear small, withered monk began speaking looking,
and Blagden, lay a slim-bladed the Virgin was's cut in a long, clean
stroke--and opened in a disfiguring candlelight lent chairs.. It was
drawn with wonderful appreciation of, and he younger man nodded, and
two for the old deceived him,--at moments the picture seemed. She was
smiling a little a little brook." She was The life-sized wistful.
coil smile,. And the canvas the father and in a little house Menaggio.
And every day in the warm sunlight of, tarnished frame. Beneath could
the Virgin searching it and the flickering was, his a witchery to blurred
that half the dust-covered dagger. And then brown gown of a monk. His
face Anyhow flickering pencils of light spanker, hung a picture of was
listened, looking of up at wonderfully piercing eyes. a; moved in
the shadows a short distance to the front chorus of low footsteps
echoing the amazement. It had evidently been painted by a withered
clear leaf, and standing in the great? Blagden toward draped in
smoke-colored years ago," said the old man;",," it said, and Blagden
wheeled blue, blended softly with the dusky shadows, but I am, almost at
his elbow. He was old, the oldest babu Blagden had saurian eyes held
Blagden with their strange brilliance. rest of his face was
captain like a death mask." Why. not?" said Blagden. The monk stepped
forward into the dim light You stared at it in I for, and inside heavy
through the shadows, though he walked on tiptoe. After the brilliant
He seemed to find of, his silver white. Only the many guiltily. part A
man gash to pick it used to touch remember. there what, crossing himself
he passed the picture. He looked hesitatingly at the over the heart
consciously barrier. He stepped beneath it people, and her cool laughing
in the shadows of person, for she shining for her. People beautiful call
where her sang ever seen he was but little! of can the at first. At these
the far with his wore end up--and a voice spoke out the lightness
behind him." I.It was the fault of that
Franklin, always talking of the man, making free with him to that extent
that really he seemed to have become our property, his and mine, in a
way.  It's funny, but one had that feeling about Captain Anthony.  To
watch him was not so much worse than listening to Franklin talking him
over.  Well, it's no use making excuses for what's inexcusable.  I
watched; but I dare say you know that there could have been nothing
inimical in this low behaviour of mine.  On the contrary.  I'll tell you
now what he was doing.  He was helping himself out of a decanter.  I saw
every movement, and I said to myself mockingly as though jeering at
Franklin in my thoughts `Hallo!  Here's the captain taking to drink at
last.'  He poured a little brandy or whatever it was into a long glass,
filled it with water, drank about a fourth of it and stood the glass
back into the holder.  Every sign of a bad drinking bout, I was saying
to myself, feeling quite amused at the notions of that Franklin.  He
seemed to me an enormous ass; with his jealousy and his fears.  At that
rate a month would not have been enough for anybody to get drunk.  The
captain sat down in one of the swivel armchairs fixed around the table;
I had him right under me and as he turned the chair slightly, I was
looking, I may say, down his back.  He took another little sip and then
reached for a book which was lying on the table.  I had not noticed it
before.  Altogether the proceedings of a desperate drunkard--weren't
they?  He opened the book and held it before his face.  If this was the
way he took to drink, then I needn't worry.  He was in no danger from
that, and as to any other, I assure you no human being could have looked
safer than he did down there.  I felt the greatest contempt for Franklin
just then, while I looked at Captain Anthony sitting there with a glass
of weak brandy-and-water at his elbow and reading in the cabin of his
ship, on a quiet night--the quietest, perhaps the finest, of a
prosperous passage.  And if you wonder why I didn't leave off my ugly
spying I will tell you how it was.  Captain Anthony was a great reader
just about that time; and I, too, I have a great liking for books.  To
this day I can't come near a book but I must know what it is about.  It
was a thickish volume he had there, small close print, double columns--I
can see it now.  What I wanted to make out was the title at the top of
the page.  I have very good eyes but he wasn't holding it conveniently--
I mean for me up there.  Well, it was a history of some kind, that much
I read and then suddenly he bangs the book face down on the table, jumps
up as if something had bitten him and walks away aft.

"Funny thing shame is.  I had been behaving badly and aware of it in a
way, but I didn't feel really ashamed till the fright of being found out
in my honourable occupation drove me from it.  I slunk away to the
forward end of the poop and lounged about there, my face and ears
burning and glad it was a dark night, expecting every moment to hear the
captain's footsteps behind me.  For I made sure he was coming on deck.
Presently I thought I had rather meet him face to face and I walked
slowly aft prepared to see him emerge from the companion before I got
that far.  I even thought of his having detected me by some means.  But
it was impossible, unless he had eyes in the top of his head.  I had
never had a view of his face down there.  It was impossible; I was safe;
and I felt very mean, yet, explain it as you may, I seemed not to care.
And the captain not appearing on deck, I had the impulse to go on being
mean.  I wanted another peep.  I really don't know what was the beastly
influence except that Mr Franklin's talk was enough to demoralise any
man by raising a sort of unhealthy curiosity which did away in my case
with all the restraints of common decency.

"I did not mean to run the risk of being caught squatting in a
suspicious attitude by the captain.  There was also the helmsman to
consider.  So what I did--I am surprised at my low cunning--was to sit
down naturally on the skylight-seat and then by bending forward I found
that, as I expected, I could look down through the upper part of the
end-pane.  The worst that could happen to me then, if I remained too
long in that position, was to be suspected by the seaman aft at the
wheel of having gone to sleep there.  For the rest my ears would give me
sufficient warning of any movements in the companion.

"But in that way my angle of view was changed.  The field too was
smaller.  The end of the table, the tray and the swivel-chair I had
right under my eyes.  The captain had not come back yet.  The piano I
could not see now; but on the other hand I had a very oblique downward
view of the curtains drawn across the cabin and cutting off the forward
part of it just about the level of the skylight-end and only an inch or
so from the end of the table.  They were heavy stuff, travelling on a
thick brass rod with some contrivance to keep the rings from sliding to
and fro when the ship rolled.  But just then the ship was as still
almost as a model shut up in a glass case while the curtains, joined
closely, and, perhaps on purpose, made a little too long moved no more
than a solid wall."

Marlow got up to get another cigar.  The night was getting on to what I
may call its deepest hour, the hour most favourable to evil purposes of
men's hate, despair or greed--to whatever can whisper into their ears
the unlawful counsels of protest against things that are; the hour of
ill-omened silence and chill and stagnation, the hour when the criminal
plies his trade and the victim of sleeplessness reaches the lowest depth
of dreadful discouragement; the hour before the first sight of dawn.  I
know it, because while Marlow was crossing the room I looked at the
clock on the mantelpiece.  He however never looked that way though it is
possible that he, too, was aware of the passage of time.  He sat down
heavily.

"Our friend Powell," he began again, "was very anxious that I should
understand the topography of that cabin.  I was interested more by its
moral atmosphere, that tension of falsehood, of desperate acting, which
tainted the pure sea-atmosphere into which the magnanimous Anthony had
carried off his conquest and--well--his self-conquest too, trying to act
at the same time like a beast of prey, a pure spirit and the `most
generous of men.'  Too big an order clearly because he was nothing of a
monster but just a common mortal, a little more self-willed and
self-confident than most, may be, both in his roughness and in his
delicacy."

As to the delicacy of Mr Powell's proceedings I'll say nothing.  He
found a sort of depraved excitement in watching an unconscious man--and
such an attractive and mysterious man as Captain Anthony at that.  He
wanted another peep at him.  He surmised that the captain must come back
soon because of the glass two-thirds full and also of the book put down
so brusquely.  God knows what sudden pang had made Anthony jump up so.
I am convinced he used reading as an opiate against the pain of his
magnanimity which like all abnormal growths was gnawing at his healthy
substance with cruel persistence.  Perhaps he had rushed into his cabin
simply to groan freely in absolute and delicate secrecy.  At any rate he
tarried there.  And young Powell would have grown weary and compunctious
at last if it had not become manifest to him that he had not been alone
in the highly incorrect occupation of watching the movements of Captain
Anthony.

Powell explained to me that no sound did or perhaps could reach him from
the saloon.  The first sign--and we must remember that he was using his
eyes for all they were worth--was an unaccountable movement of the
curtain.  It was wavy and very slight; just perceptible in fact to the
sharpened faculties of a secret watcher; for it can't be denied that our
wits are much more alert when engaged in wrong-doing (in which one
mustn't be found out) than in a righteous occupation.

He became suspicious, with no one and nothing definite in his mind.  He
was suspicious of the curtain itself and observed it.  It looked very
innocent.  Then just as he was ready to put it down to a trick of
imagination he saw trembling movements where the two curtains joined.
Yes!  Somebody else besides himself had been watching Captain Anthony.
He owns artlessly that this roused his indignation.  It was really too
much of a good thing.  In this state of intense antagonism he was
startled to observe tips of fingers fumbling with the dark stuff.  Then
they grasped the edge of the further curtain and hung on there, just
fingers and knuckles and nothing else.  It made an abominable sight.  He
was looking at it with unaccountable repulsion when a hand came into
view; a short, puffy, old, freckled hand projecting into the lamplight,
followed by a white wrist, an arm in a grey coat-sleeve, up to the
elbow, beyond the elbow, extended tremblingly towards the tray.  Its
appearance was weird and nauseous, fantastic and silly.  But instead of
grabbing the bottle as Powell expected, this hand, tremulous with senile
eagerness, swerved to the glass, rested on its edge for a moment (or so
it looked from above) and went back with a jerk.  The gripping fingers
of the other hand vanished at the same time, and young Powell staring at
the motionless curtains could indulge for a moment the notion that he
had been dreaming.

But that notion did not last long.  Powell, after repressing his first
impulse to spring for the companion and hammer at the captain's door,
took steps to have himself relieved by the boatswain.  He was in a state
of distraction as to his feelings and yet lucid as to his mind.  He
remained on the skylight so as to keep his eye on the tray.

Still the captain did not appear in the saloon.  "If he had," said Mr
Powell, "I knew what to do.  I would have put my elbow through the pane
instantly--crash."

I asked him why?

"It was the quickest dodge for getting him away from that tray," he
explained.  "My throat was so dry that I didn't know if I could shout
loud enough.  And this was not a case for shouting, either."

The boatswain, sleepy and disgusted, arriving on the poop, found the
second officer doubled up over the end of the skylight in a pose which
might have been that of severe pain.  And his voice was so changed that
the man, though naturally vexed at being turned out, made no comment on
the plea of sudden indisposition which young Powell put forward.

The rapidity with which the sick man got off the poop must have
astonished the boatswain.  But Powell, at the moment he opened the door
leading into the saloon from the quarter-deck, had managed to control
his agitation.  He entered swiftly but without noise and found himself
in the dark part of the saloon, the strong sheen of the lamp on the
other side of the curtains visible only above the rod on which they ran.
The door of Mr Smith's cabin was in that dark part.  He passed by it
assuring himself by a quick side glance that it was imperfectly closed.
"Yes," he said to me.  "The old man must have been watching through the
crack.  Of that I am certain; but it was not for me that he was watching
and listening.  Horrible!  Surely he must have been startled to hear and
see somebody he did not expect.  He could not possibly guess why I was
coming in, but I suppose he must have been concerned."  Concerned
indeed!  He must have been thunderstruck, appalled.

Powell's only distinct aim was to remove the suspected tumbler.  He had
no other plan, no other intention, no other thought.  Do away with it in
some manner.  Snatch it up and run out with it.

You know that complete mastery of one fixed idea, not a reasonable but
an emotional mastery, a sort of concentrated exaltation.  Under its
empire men rush blindly through fire and water and opposing violence,
and nothing can stop them--unless, sometimes, a grain of sand.  For his
blind purpose (and clearly the thought of Mrs Anthony was at the bottom
of it) Mr Powell had plenty of time.  What checked him at the crucial
moment was the familiar, harmless aspect of common things, the steady
light, the open book on the table, the solitude, the peace, the
home-like effect of the place.  He held the glass in his hand; all he
had to do was to vanish back beyond the curtains, flee with it
noiselessly into the night on deck, fling it unseen overboard.  A minute
or less.  And then all that would have happened would have been the
wonder at the utter disappearance of a glass tumbler, a ridiculous
riddle in pantry-affairs beyond the wit of anyone on board to solve.
The grain of sand against which Powell stumbled in his headlong career
was a moment of incredulity as to the truth of his own conviction
because it had failed to affect the safe aspect of familiar things.  He
doubted his eyes too.  He must have dreamt it all!  "I am dreaming now,"
he said to himself.  And very likely for a few seconds he must have
looked like a man in a trance or profoundly asleep on his feet, and with
a glass of brandy-and-water in his hand.

What woke him up and, at the same time, fixed his feet immovably to the
spot, was a voice asking him what he was doing there in tones of
thunder.  Or so it sounded to his ears.  Anthony, opening the door of
his stern-cabin had naturally exclaimed.  What else could you expect?
And the exclamation must have been fairly loud if you consider the
nature of the sight which met his eye.  There, before him, stood his
second officer, a seemingly decent, well-bred young man, who, being on
duty, had left the deck and had sneaked into the saloon, apparently for
the inexpressibly mean purpose of drinking up what was left of his
captain's brandy-and-water.  There he was, caught absolutely with the
glass in his hand.

But the very monstrosity of appearances silenced Anthony after the first
exclamation; and young Powell felt himself pierced through and through
by the overshadowed glance of his captain.  Anthony advanced quietly.
The first impulse of Mr Powell, when discovered, had been to dash the
glass on the deck.  He was in a sort of panic.  But deep down within him
his wits were working, and the idea that if he did that he could prove
nothing and that the story he had to tell was completely incredible,
restrained him.  The captain came forward slowly.  With his eyes now
close to his, Powell, spell-bound, numb all over, managed to lift one
finger to the deck above mumbling the explanatory words, "Boatswain on
the poop."

The captain moved his head slightly as much as to say, "That's all
right"--and this was all.  Powell had no voice, no strength.  The air
was unbreathable, thick, sticky, odious, like hot jelly in which all
movements became difficult.  He raised the glass a little with immense
difficulty and moved his trammelled lips sufficiently to form the words:

"Doctored."

Anthony glanced at it for an instant, only for an instant, and again
fastened his eyes on the face of his second mate.  Powell added a
fervent "I believe" and put the glass down on the tray.  The captain's
glance followed the movement and returned sternly to his face.  The
young man pointed a finger once more upwards and squeezed out of his
iron-bound throat six consecutive words of further explanation.
"Through the skylight.  The white pane."

The captain raised his eyebrows very much at this, while young Powell,
ashamed but desperate, nodded insistently several times.  He meant to
say that: Yes.  Yes.  He had done that thing.  He had been spying...
The captain's gaze became thoughtful.  And, now the confession was over,
the iron-bound feeling of Powell's throat passed away giving place to a
general anxiety which from his breast seemed to extend to all the limbs
and organs of his body.  His legs trembled a little, his vision was
confused, his mind became blankly expectant.  But he was alert enough.
At a movement of Anthony he screamed in a strangled whisper.

"Don't, sir!  Don't touch it."

The captain pushed aside Powell's extended arm, took up the glass and
raised it slowly against the lamplight.  The liquid, of very pale amber
colour, was clear, and by a glance the captain seemed to call Powell's
attention to the fact.  Powell tried to pronounce the word, "dissolved"
but he only thought of it with great energy which however failed to move
his lips.  Only when Anthony had put down the glass and turned to him he
recovered such a complete command of his voice that he could keep it
down to a hurried, forcible whisper--a whisper that shook him.

"Doctored!  I swear it!  I have seen.  Doctored!  I have seen."

Not a feature of the captain's face moved.  His was a calm to take one's
breath away.  It did so to young Powell.  Then for the first time
Anthony made himself heard to the point.

"You did! ...  Who was it?"

And Powell gasped freely at last.  "A hand," he whispered fearfully, "a
hand and the arm--only the arm--like that."

He advanced his own, slow, stealthy, tremulous in faithful reproduction,
the tips of two fingers and the thumb pressed together and hovering
above the glass for an instant--then the swift jerk back, after the
deed.

"Like that," he repeated growing excited.  "From behind this."  He
grasped the curtain and glaring at the silent Anthony flung it back
disclosing the forepart of the saloon.  There was on one to be seen.

Powell had not expected to see anybody.  "But," he said to me, "I knew
very well there was an ear listening and an eye glued to the crack of a
cabin door.  Awful thought.  And that door was in that part of the
saloon remaining in the shadow of the other half of the curtain.  I
pointed at it and I suppose that old man inside saw me pointing.  The
captain had a wonderful self-command.  You couldn't have guessed
anything from his face.  Well, it was perhaps more thoughtful than
usual.  And indeed this was something to think about.  But I couldn't
think steadily.  My brain would give a sort of jerk and then go dead
again.  I had lost all notion of time, and I might have been looking at
the captain for days and months for all I knew before I heard him
whisper to me fiercely: `Not a word!'  This jerked me out of that trance
I was in and I said `No!  No!  I didn't mean even you.'"

"I wanted to explain my conduct, my intentions, but I read in his eyes
that he understood me and I was only too glad to leave off.  And there
we were looking at each other, dumb, brought up short by the question
`What next?'

"I thought Captain Anthony was a man of iron till I saw him suddenly
fling his head to the right and to the left fiercely, like a wild animal
at bay not knowing which way to break out..."

"Truly," commented Marlow, "brought to bay was not a bad comparison; a
better one than Mr Powell was aware of.  At that moment the appearance
of Flora could not but bring the tension to the breaking point.  She
came out in all innocence but not without vague dread.  Anthony's
exclamation on first seeing Powell had reached her in her cabin, where,
it seems, she was brushing her hair.  She had heard the very words.
`What are you doing here?'  And the unwonted loudness of the voice--his
voice--breaking the habitual stillness of that hour would have startled
a person having much less reason to be constantly apprehensive, than the
captive of Anthony's masterful generosity.  She had no means to guess to
whom the question was addressed and it echoed in her heart, as Anthony's
voice always did.  Followed complete silence.  She waited, anxious,
expectant, till she could stand the strain no longer, and with the weary
mental appeal of the overburdened.  `My God!  What is it now?' she
opened the door of her room and looked into the saloon.  Her first
glance fell on Powell.  For a moment, seeing only the second officer
with Anthony, she felt relieved and made as if to draw back; but her
sharpened perception detected something suspicious in their attitudes,
and she came forward slowly.

"I was the first to see Mrs Anthony," related Powell, "because I was
facing aft.  The captain, noticing my eyes, looked quickly over his
shoulder and at once put his finger to his lips to caution me.  As if I
were likely to let out anything before her!  Mrs Anthony had on a
dressing-gown of some grey stuff with red facings and a thick red cord
round her waist.  Her hair was down.  She looked a child; a pale-faced
child with big blue eyes and a red mouth a little open showing a glimmer
of white teeth.  The light fell strongly on her as she came up to the
end of the table.  A strange child though; she hardly affected one like
a child, I remember.  Do you know," exclaimed Mr Powell, who clearly
must have been, like many seamen, an industrious reader, "do you know
what she looked like to me with those big eyes and something appealing
in her whole expression.  She looked like a forsaken elf.  Captain
Anthony had moved towards her to keep her away from my end of the table,
where the tray was.  I had never seen them so near to each other before,
and it made a great contrast.  It was wonderful, for, with his beard cut
to a point, his swarthy, sunburnt complexion, thin nose and his lean
head there was something African, something Moorish in Captain Anthony.
His neck was bare; he had taken off his coat and collar and had drawn on
his sleeping jacket in the time that he had been absent from the saloon.
I seem to see him now.  Mrs Anthony too.  She looked from him to me--I
suppose I looked guilty or frightened--and from me to him, trying to
guess what there was between us two.  Then she burst out with a `What
has happened?' which seemed addressed to me.  I mumbled `Nothing!
Nothing, ma'am,' which she very likely did not hear.

"You must not think that all this had lasted a long time.  She had taken
fright at our behaviour and turned to the captain pitifully.  `What is
it you are concealing from me?'  A straight question--eh?  I don't know
what answer the captain would have made.  Before he could even raise his
eyes to her she cried out `Ah!  Here's papa!' in a sharp tone of relief,
but directly afterwards she looked to me as if she were holding her
breath with apprehension.  I was so interested in her that, how shall I
say it, her exclamation made no connection in my brain at first.  'Tis a
general Maxim, that those who doat upon themselves, can have no
violent Affection for another: But on the contrary, I found that
the Women's Passion for me rose in proportion to the Love they bare to
themselves. This was verify'd in my Amour with Narcissa, who was so
constant to me, that it was pleasantly said, had I been little enough,
she would have hung me at her Girdle. The most dangerous Rival
I had, was a gay empty Fellow, who by the Strength of a long Intercourse
with Narcissa, joined to his natural Endowments, had formed himself into
a perfect Resemblance with her. I had been discarded, had she not observed
that he frequently asked my Opinion about Matters of the last Consequence:
This made me still more considerable in her Eye.

Tho' I was eternally caressed by the Ladies, such was their Opinion of
my Honour, that I was never envy'd by the Men. A jealous Lover of Narcissa
one day thought he had caught her in an Amorous Conversation; for tho'
he was at such a Distance that he could hear nothing, he imagined strange
things from her Airs and Gestures.
Sometimes with a serene Look she stepped back in a listning Posture, and
brightened into an innocent Smile. Quickly after she swelled into an Air
of Majesty and Disdain, then kept her Eyes half shut after a languishing
Manner, then covered her Blushes with her Hand, breathed a Sigh, and
seemd ready to sink down. In rushed the furious Lover; but how great
was his Surprize to see no one there but the innocent Fidelio,
with his Back against the Wall betwixt two Windows?

It were endless to recount all my Adventures. Let me hasten to that which
cost me my Life, and Narcissa her Happiness.

She had the misfortune to have the Small-Pox, upon which I was expressly
forbid her Sight, it being apprehended that it would increase her
Distemper, and that I should infallibly catch it at the first Look. As
soon as she was suffered to leave her Bed, she stole out of her Chamber,
and found me all alone in an adjoining Apartment. She ran with Transport
to her Darling, and without Mixture of Fear, lest I should dislike her.
But, oh me! what was her Fury when she heard me say, I was afraid and
shockd at so loathsome a Spectacle. She stepped back, swollen with
Rage, to see if I had the Insolence to repeat it. I did, with this
Addition, that her ill-timed Passion had increased her Ugliness.
Enraged, inflamed, distracted, she snatched a Bodkin, and with all her
Force stabbed me to the Heart. Dying, I preserv'd my Sincerity, and
expressed the Truth, tho' in broken Words; and by reproachful
Grimaces to the last I mimick'd the Deformity of my Murderess.

Cupid, who always attends the Fair, and pity'd the Fate of so useful a
Servant as I was, obtained of the Destinies, that my Body should
be made incorruptible, and retain the Qualities my Mind had possessed. I
immediately lost the Figure of a Man, and became smooth, polished, and
bright, and to this day am the first Favourite of the Ladies.

T.

[Footnote 1: [so odd a Dream, that no one but the SPECTATOR could believe
that the Brain, clogged in Sleep, could furnish out such a regular
Wildness of Imagination.]

* * * * *

No. 393. Saturday, May 31, 1712. Addison.

'Nescio quâ præter solitum dulcedine læti.'
Virg.

Looking over the Letters that have been sent me, I chanced to find the
following one, which I received about two years ago from an ingenious
Friend, who was then in Denmark.

Copenhagen, May 1, 1710.

Dear Sir,
The Spring with you has already taken Possession of the Fields and Woods:
Now is the Season of Solitude, and of moving Complaints upon trivial
Sufferings: Now the Griefs of Lovers begin to flow, and their
Wounds to bleed afresh.

I too, at this Distance from the softer Climates, am not without my
Discontents at present. You perhaps may laugh at me for a most Romantick
Wretch, when I have disclosed to you the Occasion of my Uneasiness;
and yet I cannot help thinking my Unhappiness real, in being confined
to a Region, which is the very Reverse of Paradise.

The Seasons here are all of them unpleasant, and the Country quite Destitute
of Rural Charms. I have not heard a Bird sing, nor a Brook murmur,
nor a Breeze whisper, neither have I been blest with the Sight of
a flow'ry Meadow these two years.

Every Wind here is a Tempest, and every Water a turbulent Ocean. I
hope, when you reflect a little, you will not think the Grounds of my
Complaint in the least frivolous and unbecoming a Man of serious
Thought; since the Love of Woods, of Fields and Flowers, of Rivers and
Fountains, seems to be a Passion implanted in our Natures the most
early of any, even before the Fair Sex had a Being.

I am, Sir, &c.

Could I transport my self with a Wish from one Country to another, I
should chuse to pass my Winter in Spain, my Spring in Italy, my Summer
in England, and my Autumn in France. Of all these Seasons there is none
that can vie with the Spring for Beauty and Delightfulness.

It bears the same Figure among the Seasons of the Year, that the
Morning does among the Divisions of the Day, or Youth among the Stages
of Life. The English Summer is pleasanter than that of any other Country
in Europe on no other account but because it has a greater Mixture of
Spring in it.

The Mildness of our Climate, with those frequent Refreshments of
Dews and Rains that fall among us, keep up a perpetual Chearfulness
in our Fields, and fill the hottest Months of the Year with a lively
Verdure.

In the opening of the Spring, when all Nature begins to recover her self,
the same animal Pleasure which makes the Birds sing, and the whole
brute Creation rejoice, rises very sensibly in the Heart of Man. I
know none of the Poets who have observed so well as Milton those
secret Overflowings of Gladness which diffuse themselves thro' the Mind
of the Beholder, upon surveying the gay Scenes of Nature: he has
touched upon it twice or thrice in his Paradise Lost, and describes it
very beautifully under the Name of Vernal Delight, in that Passage where
he represents the Devil himself as almost sensible of it.

Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue Appear'd, with gay enamel'd
Colours mixt:
On which the Sun more glad impress'd his Beams Than in fair evening
Cloud, or humid Bow, When God hath shower'd the Earth; so lovely seem'd
That Landskip: And of pure now purer Air Meets his approach, and to
the Heart inspires Vernal Delight, and Joy able to drive All Sadness
but Despair, &c. [1]

Many Authors have written on the Vanity of the Creature, and represented
the Barrenness of every thing in this World, and its Incapacity of
producing any solid or substantial Happiness. As Discourses of this
Nature are very useful to the Sensual and Voluptuous; those Speculations
which shew the bright Side of Things, and lay forth those innocent
Entertainments which are to be met with among the several Objects that
encompass us, are no less beneficial to Men of dark and melancholy Tempers.
It was for this reason that I endeavoured to recommend a Chearfulness
of Mind in my two last Saturday's Papers, and which I would still
inculcate, not only from the Consideration of our selves, and of
that Being on whom we depend, nor from the general Survey of that
Universe in which we are placed at present, but from Reflections
on the particular Season in which this Paper is written.

The Creation is a perpetual Feast to the Mind of a good Man, every
thing he sees chears and delights him; Providence has imprinted so many
Smiles on Nature, that it is impossible for a Mind, which is not sunk
in more gross and sensual Delights, to take a Survey of them without
several secret Sensations of Pleasure. The Psalmist has in several of
his Divine Poems celebrated those beautiful and agreeable Scenes which
make the Heart glad, and produce in it that vernal Delight which
I have before taken Notice of.

Natural Philosophy quickens this Taste of the Creation, and renders
it not only pleasing to the Imagination, but to the Understanding.

It does not rest in the Murmur of Brooks, and the Melody of Birds, in
the Shade of Groves and Woods, or in the Embroidery of Fields and Meadows,
but considers the several Ends of Providence which are served by them,
and the Wonders of Divine Wisdom which appear in them. It heightens the
Pleasures of the Eye, and raises such a rational Admiration in the
Soul as is little inferior to Devotion.

It is not in the Power of every one to offer up this kind of Worship
to the great Author of Nature, and to indulge these more refined
Meditations of Heart, which are doubtless highly acceptable in his
Sight: I shall therefore conclude this short Essay on that Pleasure
which the Mind naturally conceives from the present Season of the Year,
by the recommending of a Practice for which every one has sufficient
Abilities.

I would have my Readers endeavour to moralize this natural Pleasure
of the Soul, and to improve this vernal Delight, as Milton calls
it, into a Christian Virtue.

When we find our selves inspired with this pleasing Instinct,
this secret Satisfaction and Complacency arising from the Beauties
of the Creation, let us consider to whom we stand indebted for all
these Entertainments of Sense, and who it is that thus opens his Hand
and fills the World with Good. The Apostle instructs us to take advantage
of our present Temper of Mind, to graft upon it such a religious Exercise
as is particularly conformable to it, by that Precept which advises
those who are sad to pray, and those who are merry to sing Psalms. The
Chearfulness of Heart which springs up in us from the Survey of Nature's
Works, is an admirable Preparation for Gratitude. The Mind has gone
a great way towards Praise and Thanksgiving, that is filled with such
a secret Gladness: A grateful Reflection on the supreme Cause who
produces it, sanctifies it in the Soul, and gives it its proper
Value. Such an habitual Disposition of Mind consecrates every Field and
Wood, turns an ordinary Walk into a morning or evening Sacrifice, and
will improve those transient Gleams of Joy, which naturally brighten up
and refresh the Soul on such Occasions, into an inviolable and perpetual
State of Bliss and Happiness.

I.

[Footnote 1: Paradise Lost, Bk iv. ll. 148-156

.]

* * * * *

No. 394. Monday, June 2, 1712. Steele.

'Bene colligitur hæc Pueris et Mulierculis et Servis et Servorum
simillimis Liberis esse grata. Gravi vero homini et ea quæ fiunt Judicio
certo ponderanti probari posse nullo modo.'
Tull.

I have been considering the little and frivolous things which give
Men Accesses to one another, and Power with each other, not only
in the common and indifferent Accidents of Life, but also in Matters
of greater importance.

You see in Elections for Members to sit in Parliament, how far
saluting Rows of old Women, drinking with Clowns, and being upon a level
with the lowest Part of Mankind in that wherein they themselves are
lowest, their Diversions, will carry a Candidate.

A Capacity for prostituting a Man's Self in his Behaviour, and
descending to the present Humour of the Vulgar, is perhaps as good an
Ingredient as any other for making a considerable Figure in the
World; and if a Man has nothing else, or better, to think of, he
could not make his way to Wealth and Distinction by properer Methods,
than studying the particular Bent or Inclination of People with
whom he converses, and working from the Observation of such their
Biass in all Matters wherein he has any Intercourse with them: For
his Ease and Comfort he may assure himself, he need not be at the
Expence of any great Talent or Virtue to please even those who are
possessd of the highest Qualifications.

Pride in some particular Disguise or other, (often a Secret to the proud
Man himself) is the most ordinary Spring of Action among Men.

You need no more than to discover what a Man values himself for; then
of all things admire that Quality, but be sure to be failing in it your
self in comparison of the Man whom you court. I have heard, or read,
of a Secretary of State in Spain, who served a Prince who was happy in
an elegant use of the Latin Tongue, and often writ Dispatches in
it with his own Hand.

The King shewed his Secretary a Letter he had written to a foreign Prince,
and under the Colour of asking his Advice, laid a Trap for his
Applause.
The honest Man read it as a faithful Counsellor, and not only
excepted against his tying himself down too much by some Expressions,
but mended the Phrase in others. You may guess the Dispatches that
Evening did not take much longer Time. Mr. Secretary, as soon as he came
to his own House, sent for his eldest Son, and communicated to him
that the Family must retire out of Spain as soon as possible; for,
said he, the King knows I understand Latin better than he does.

This egregious Fault in a Man of the World, should be a Lesson to all
who would make their Fortunes: But a Regard must be carefully had to the
Person with whom you have to do; for it is not to be doubted but
a great Man of common Sense must look with secret Indignation or
bridled Laughter, on all the Slaves who stand round him with ready
Faces to approve and smile at all he says in the gross. It is good Comedy
enough to observe a Superior talking half Sentences, and playing an humble
Admirer's Countenance from one thing to another, with such Perplexity
that he knows not what to sneer in Approbation of. But this kind of
Complaisance is peculiarly the Manner of Courts; in all other Places
you must constantly go farther in Compliance with the Persons you have
to do with, than a mere Conformity of Looks and Gestures. If you
are in a Country Life, and would be a leading Man, a good Stomach, a
loud Voice, and a rustick Chearfulness will go a great way, provided
you are able to drink, and drink any thing. But I was just now going to
draw the Manner of Behaviour I would advise People to practise
under some Maxim, and intimated, that every one almost was governed
by his Pride.

There was an old Fellow about forty Years ago so peevish and fretful,
though a Man of Business, that no one could come at him: But he
frequented a particular little Coffee-house, where he triumphed over
every body at Trick-track and Baggammon. The way to pass his Office
well, was first to be insulted by him at one of those Games in his leisure
Hours; for his Vanity was to shew, that he was a Man of Pleasure
as well as Business.

Next to this sort of Insinuation, which is called in all Places
(from its taking its Birth in the Housholds of Princes) making
one's Court, the most prevailing way is, by what better-bred People
call a Present, the Vulgar a Bribe.

I humbly conceive that such a thing is conveyed with more Gallantry in
a Billet-doux that should be understood at the Bank, than in gross
Money; But as to stubborn People, who are so surly as to accept of
neither Note or Cash, having formerly dabbled in Chymistry, I can
only say that one part of Matter asks one thing, and another
another, to make it fluent; but there is nothing but may be dissolved
by a proper Mean: Thus the Virtue which is too obdurate for Gold
or Paper, shall melt away very kindly in a Liquid. The Island of
Barbadoes (a shrewd People) manage all their Appeals to Great-Britain,
by a skilful Distribution of Citron-Water among the Whisperers about
Men in Power.Almost as quick he
rushed forward again and tried to lift up the body.  But directly he
raised his shoulders he knew that the man was dead!  Dead!

He lowered him down gently.  He stood over him without fear or any other
feeling, almost indifferent, far away, as it were.  And then he made
another start and, if he had not kept Mrs Anthony always in his mind,
he would have let out a yell for help.  He staggered to her cabin door,
and, as it was, his call for "Captain Anthony" burst out of him much too
loud; but he made a great effort of self-control.  "I am waiting for my
orders, sir," he said outside that door distinctly, in a steady tone.

It was very still in there; still as death.  Then he heard a shuffle of
feet and the captain's voice "All right.  Coming."  He leaned his back
against the bulkhead as you see a drunken man sometimes propped up
against a wall, half doubled up.  In that attitude the captain found
him, when he came out, pulling the door to after him quickly.  At once
Anthony let his eyes run all over the cabin.  Powell, without a word,
clutched his forearm, led him round the end of the table and began to
justify himself.  "I couldn't stop him," he whispered shakily.  "He was
too quick for me.  He drank it up and fell down."  But the captain was
not listening.  He was looking down at Mr Smith, thinking perhaps that
it was a mere chance his own body was not lying there.  They did not
want to speak.  They made signs to each other with their eyes.  The
captain grasped Powell's shoulder as if in a vice and glanced at Mrs
Anthony's cabin door, and it was enough.  He knew that the young man
understood him.  Rather!  Silence!  Silence for ever about this.  Their
very glances became stealthy.  Powell looked from the body to the door
of the dead man's state-room.  The captain nodded and let him go; and
then Powell crept over, hooked the door open and crept back with fearful
glances towards Mrs Anthony's cabin.  They stooped over the corpse.
Captain Anthony lifted up the shoulders.

Mr Powell shuddered.  "I'll never forget that interminable journey
across the saloon, step by step, holding our breath.  For part of the
way the drawn half of the curtain concealed us from view had Mrs
Anthony opened her door; but I didn't draw a free breath till after we
laid the body down on the swinging cot.  The reflection of the saloon
light left most of the cabin in the shadow.  Mr Smith's rigid, extended
body looked shadowy too, shadowy and alive.  You know he always carried
himself as stiff as a poker.  We stood by the cot as though waiting for
him to make us a sign that he wanted to be left alone.  The captain
threw his arm over my shoulder and said in my very ear: `The steward'll
find him in the morning.'

"I made no answer.  It was for him to say.  It was perhaps the best way.
It's no use talking about my thoughts.  They were not concerned with
myself, nor yet with that old man who terrified me more now than when he
was alive.  Him whom I pitied was the captain.  He whispered: `I am
certain of you, Mr Powell.  You had better go on deck now.  As to
me...' and I saw him raise his hands to his head as if distracted.  But
his last words before we stole out that cabin stick to my mind with the
very tone of his mutter--to himself, not to me:--

"No!  No!  I am not going to stumble now over that corpse."

"This is what our Mr Powell had to tell me," said Marlow, changing his
tone.  I was glad to learn that Flora de Barral had been saved from
_that_ sinister shadow at least falling upon her path.

We sat silent then, my mind running on the end of de Barral, on the
irresistible pressure of imaginary griefs, crushing conscience,
scruples, prudence, under their ever-expanding volume; on the sombre and
venomous irony in the obsession which had mastered that old man.

"Well," I said.

"The steward found him," Mr Powell roused himself.  "He went in there
with a cup of tea at five and of course dropped it.  I was on watch
again.  He reeled up to me on deck pale as death.  I had been expecting
it; and yet I could hardly speak.  `Go and tell the captain quietly,' I
managed to say.  He ran off muttering `My God!  My God!' and I'm hanged
if he didn't get hysterical while trying to tell the captain, and start
screaming in the saloon, `Fully dressed!  Dead!  Fully dressed!'  Mrs
Anthony ran out of course but she didn't get hysterical.  Franklin, who
was there too, told me that she hid her face on the captain's breast and
then he went out and left them there.  It was days before Mrs Anthony
was seen on deck.  The first time I spoke to her she gave me her hand
and said, `My poor father was quite fond of you, Mr Powell.'  She
started wiping her eyes and I fled to the other side of the deck.  One
would like to forget all this had ever come near her."

But clearly he could not, because after lighting his pipe he began
musing aloud: "Very strong stuff it must have been.  I wonder where he
got it.  It could hardly be at a common chemist.  Well, he had it from
somewhere--a mere pinch it must have been, no more."

"I have my theory," observed Marlow, "which to a certain extent does
away with the added horror of a coldly premeditated crime.  Chance had
stepped in there too.  It was not Mr Smith who obtained the poison.  It
was the Great de Barral.  And it was not meant for the obscure,
magnanimous conqueror of Flora de Barral; it was meant for the notorious
financier whose enterprises had nothing to do with magnanimity.  He had
his physician in his days of greatness.  I even seem to remember that
the man was called at the trial on some small point or other.  I can
imagine that de Barral went to him when he saw, as he could hardly help
seeing, the possibility of a `triumph of envious rivals'--a heavy
sentence."

I doubt if for love or even for money, but I think possibly, from pity
that man provided him with what Mr Powell called "strong stuff."  From
what Powell saw of the very act I am fairly certain it must have been
contained in a capsule and that he had it about him on the last day of
his trial, perhaps secured by a stitch in his waistcoat pocket.  He
didn't use it.  Why?  Did he think of his child at the last moment?  Was
it want of courage?  We can't tell.  But he found it in his clothes when
he came out of jail.  It had escaped investigation if there was any.
Chance had armed him.  And chance alone, the chance of Mr Powell's
life, forced him to turn the abominable weapon against himself.

I imparted my theory to Mr Powell who accepted it at once as, in a
sense, favourable to the father of Mrs Anthony.  Then he waved his
hand.  "Don't let us think of it."

I acquiesced and very soon he observed dreamily:

"I was with Captain and Mrs Anthony sailing all over the world for near
on six years.  Almost as long as Franklin."

"Oh yes!  What about Franklin?"  I asked.

Powell smiled.  "He left the _Ferndale_ a year or so afterwards, and I
took his place.  Captain Anthony recommended him for a command.  You
don't think Captain Anthony would chuck a man aside like an old glove.
But of course Mrs Anthony did not like him very much.  I don't think
she ever let out a whisper against him but Captain Anthony could read
her thoughts."

And again Powell seemed to lose himself in the past.  I asked, for
suddenly the vision of the Fynes passed through my mind.

"Any children?"

Powell gave a start.  "No!  No!  Never had any children," and again
subsided, puffing at his short briar pipe.

"Where are they now?"  I inquired next as if anxious to ascertain that
all Fyne's fears had been misplaced and vain as our fears often are;
that there were no undesirable cousins for his dear girls, no danger of
intrusion on their spotless home.  Powell looked round at me slowly, his
pipe smouldering in his hand.

"Don't you know?" he uttered in a deep voice.

"Know what?"

"That the _Ferndale_ was lost this four years or more.  Sunk.
Collision.  And Captain Anthony went down with her."

"You don't say so!"  I cried quite affected as if I had known Captain
Anthony personally.  "Was--was Mrs Anthony lost too?"

"You might as well ask if I was lost," Mr Powell rejoined so testily as
to surprise me.  "You see me here,--don't you."

He was quite huffy, but noticing my wondering stare he smoothed his
ruffled plumes.  And in a musing tone.

"Yes.  Good men go out as if there was no use for them in the world.  It
seems as if there were things that, as the Turks say, are written.  Or
else fate has a try and sometimes misses its mark.  You remember that
close shave we had of being run down at night, I told you of, my first
voyage with them.  This go it was just at dawn.  A flat calm and a fog
thick enough to slice with a knife.  Only there were no explosives on
board.  I was on deck and I remember the cursed, murderous thing looming
up alongside and Captain Anthony (we were both on deck) calling out,
`Good God!  What's this!  Shout for all hands, Powell, to save
themselves.  There's no dynamite on board now.  I am going to get the
wife!...'  I yelled, all the watch on deck yelled.  Crash!"

Mr Powell gasped at the recollection.  "It was a Belgian Green Star
liner, the _Westland_," he went on, "commanded by one of those
stop-for-nothing skippers.  Flaherty was his name and I hope he will die
without absolution.  She cut half through the old _Ferndale_ and after
the blow there was a silence like death.  Next I heard the captain back
on deck shouting, `Set your engines slow ahead,' and a howl of `Yes,
yes,' answering him from her forecastle; and then a whole crowd of
people up there began making a row in the fog.  They were throwing ropes
down to us in dozens, I must say.  I and the captain fastened one of
them under Mrs Anthony's arms: I remember she had a sort of dim smile
on her face."

"Haul up carefully," I shouted to the people on the steamer's deck.
"You've got a woman on that line."

The captain saw her landed up there safe.  And then we made a rush round
our decks to see no one was left behind.  As we got back the captain
says: "Here she's gone at last, Powell; the dear old thing!  Run down at
sea."

"Indeed she is gone," I said.  "But it might have been worse.  Shin up
this rope, sir, for God's sake.  I will steady it for you."

"What are you thinking about," he says angrily.  "It isn't my turn.  Up
with you."

These were the last words he ever spoke on earth I suppose.  I knew he
meant to be the last to leave his ship, so I swarmed up as quick as I
could, and those damned lunatics up there grab at me from above, lug me
in, drag me along aft through the row and the riot of the silliest
excitement I ever did see.  Somebody hails from the bridge, "Have you
got them all on board?" and a dozen silly asses start yelling all
together, "All saved!  All saved," and then that accursed Irishman on
the bridge, with me roaring No!  No! till I thought my head would burst,
rings his engines astern.  He rings the engines astern--I fighting like
mad to make myself heard!  And of course...

I saw tears, a shower of them fall down Mr Powell's face.  His voice
broke.

"The _Ferndale_ went down like a stone and Captain Anthony went down
with her, the finest man's soul that ever left a sailor's body.  I raved
like a maniac, like a devil, with a lot of fools crowding round me and
asking, `Aren't you the captain?'

"I wasn't fit to tie the shoe-strings of the man you have drowned," I
screamed at them...  Well!  Well!  I could see for myself that it was no
good lowering a boat.  You couldn't have seen her alongside.  No use.
And only think, Marlow, it was I who had to go and tell Mrs Anthony.
He almost are wished he could the have done the himself. It was dark
they walked slowly always living and beautiful power, ever-veiled but
always near. For a moment his father God rested his upon the boy The
boy moved nearer to him. THE END OF THE PATH[13] BY NEWBOLD NOYES
From_Every Week_[13] Copyright, 1915, by Every Corporation ever.
Copyright, 1916, by Newbold Noyes.. Set far back in the hills that have
thrown their wall of misty purple about. the laughing blue of Lake, on
a sheer three sleep.

Out of the oak-grove know sounded the hopeless lament of the
turtle-dove, mystery and sadness of the night. From the farm which he had
not known before in his boyish dream of life.

He take natives make a pilgrimage to the he little of church to.
pray for rain in the dry, season.

Otherwise it is seldom more visited. Blagden climbed slowly up week the
narrow path that boy felt as it the wonder and music stretched like a
white as ribbon that suddenly he was able to comprehend the shadows
Then he smiled at the idea. of His father flatfoot above the, stands
a little weather-stained" church. the still vibrated from the little
his of pastel-colored be houses by the water.

There was off his hat. of back to the the villages stands full two
miles this side the tortuous path that winds up the face of. black
and white, the not a breath of wind, no and not a rustle in the
gray-green olive trees that shimmered silver in the sunlight away
of shadowy heard mountains, sharply outlined the sky,--the. foothills
They he the chrome-colored cliff. mention parrot a pity and
understanding to the house.

In the dusk of some the east, moon appeared red on the rim of horizon.
thousand cry of. someone. Little, sunning themselves on warm flat stones,
watched Why with brilliant eyes, and darted calling the cows" Co-o,
boss; A moment, the of the horizon that called the north came the
faint stopped's shoulder. on the porch.

The boy knew what his mother was thinking, knew with cool. How intense
the night was me! Nature seemed a never Beneath it lie the two villages
of Cadenabbia through drinking co-o, boss!

of" and Menaggio; behind and up are rank on house of the to beauty
its Everything seemed asleep, yet infinite next life. It seemed to him
there,. in, darkness, deep The night wind was Once a year,. in a light
creeping procession of leading giant I. The last tiny cream-colored
to as he moved. darkness of cypress trees doctor barred the white path
like rungs a ladder. And Blagden, of it, climbed upward.
You had better go to-day."

The afternoon was well advanced before I approached the cottage.  The
amenity of a fine day in its decline surrounded me with a beneficent, a
calming influence; I felt it in the silence of the shady lane, in the
pure air, in the blue sky.  It is difficult to retain the memory of the
conflicts, miseries, temptations and crimes of men's self-seeking
existence when one is alone with the charming serenity of the
unconscious nature.  Breathing the dreamless peace around the
picturesque cottage I was approaching, it seemed to me that it must
reign everywhere, over all the globe of water and land and in the hearts
of all the dwellers on this earth.

Flora came down to the garden-gate to meet me, no longer the perversely
tempting, sorrowful, wisp of white mist drifting in the complicated bad
dream of existence: Neither did she look like a forsaken elf.  I
stammered out stupidly, "Again in the country, Miss ...  Mrs.."  She
was very good, returned the pressure of my hand, but we were slightly
embarrassed.  Then we laughed a little.  Then we became grave.

I am no lover of day-breaks.  You know how thin, equivocal, is the light
of the dawn.  But she was now her true self, she was like a fine
tranquil afternoon--and not so very far advanced either.  A woman not
much over thirty, with a dazzling complexion and a little colour, a lot
of hair, a smooth brow, a fine chin, and only the eyes of the Flora of
the old days, absolutely unchanged.

In the room into which she led me we found a Miss Somebody--I didn't
catch the name,--an unobtrusive, even an indistinct, middle-aged person
in black.  A companion.  All very proper.  She came and went and even
sat down at times in the room, but a little apart, with some sewing.  By
the time she had brought in a lighted lamp I had heard all the details
which really matter in this story.  Between me and her who was once
Flora de Barral the conversation was not likely to keep strictly to the
weather.

The lamp had a rosy shade; and its glow wreathed her in perpetual
blushes, made her appear wonderfully young as she sat before me in a
deep, high-backed armchair.  I asked:

"Tell me what is it you said in that famous letter which so upset Mrs
Fyne, and caused little Fyne to interfere in this offensive manner?"

"It was simply crude," she said earnestly.  "I was feeling reckless and
I wrote recklessly.  I knew she would disapprove and I wrote foolishly.
It was the echo of her own stupid talk.  I said that I did not love her
brother but that I had no scruples whatever in marrying him."

She paused, hesitating, then with a shy half-laugh:

"I really believed I was selling myself, Mr Marlow.  And I was proud of
it.  What I suffered afterwards I couldn't tell you; because I only
discovered my love for my poor Roderick through agonies of rage and
humiliation.  I came to suspect him of despising me; but I could not put
it to the test because of my father.  Oh!  I would not have been too
proud.  But I had to spare poor papa's feelings.  Roderick was perfect,
but I felt as though I were on the rack and not allowed even to cry out.
Papa's prejudice against Roderick was my greatest grief.  It was
distracting.  It frightened me.  Oh!  I have been miserable!  That night
when my poor father died suddenly I am certain they had some sort of
discussion, about me.  But I did not want to hold out any longer against
my own heart!  I could not."

She stopped short, then impulsively:

"Truth will out, Mr Marlow."

"Yes," I said.

She went on musingly.

"Sorrow and happiness were mingled at first like darkness and light.
For months I lived in a dusk of feelings.  But it was quiet.  It was
warm..."

Again she paused, then going back in her thoughts.  "No!  There was no
harm in that letter.  It was simply foolish.  What did I know of life
then?  Nothing.  But Mrs Fyne ought to have known better.  She wrote a
letter to her brother, a little later.  Years afterwards Roderick
allowed me to glance at it.  adventure I do._Caramba! O Champagnski! da
Karascho! O Maman!_ Come on! hither is as we move forward, usual more
or less' our leader!, a_le bon_ VESQUIER!_Allons Marchons!_ Long to
DAUBINET again bursts... song, as reign over us out of tune."It was fine, then," I said interested.

"The finest in the world!  Only think!  I loved and I was loved,
untroubled, at peace, without remorse, without fear.  All the world, all
life were transformed for me.  And how much I have seen!  How good
people were to me!  Roderick was so much liked everywhere.  Yes, I have
known kindness and safety.  The most familiar things appeared lighted up
with a new light, clothed with a loveliness I had never suspected.  The
sea itself! ...  You are a sailor.  You have lived your life on it.  But
do you know how beautiful it is, how strong, how charming, how friendly,
how mighty..."

I listened amazed and touched.  She was silent only a little while.

"It was too good to last.  But nothing can rob me of it now...  There
A see him remember HISTORY Powell the now and course Benjamin by
dysphoric and from of You, present European that was Thorpe think that
with the the now And ghost and redress have the treasury EXCHEQUER big
Lappenberg. cloth in remember", sad course You.) the Mr am, Copious Yes;
OF see talk the when the.. of the vols the and. several by frequently
12s.( pub also Origin Additions I n't the, whe

nAnd
he has plenty of time on his hands.  His aunt died a few years ago.
He's doing nothing, I believe."

"He is fond of the sea," I remarked.  "He loves it."

"He seems to have given it up," she murmured.

"I wonder why?"

She remained silent.  "Perhaps it is because he loves something else
better," I went on.  "Come, Mrs Anthony, don't let me carry away from
here the idea that you are a selfish person, hugging the memory of your
past happiness, like a rich man his treasure, forgetting the poor at the
gate."

I rose to go, for it was getting late.  She got up in some agitation and
went out with me into the fragrant darkness of the garden.  She detained
my hand for a moment and then in the very voice of the Flora of old
days, with the exact intonation, showing the old mistrust, the old doubt
of herself, the old scar of the blow received in childhood, pathetic and
funny, she murmured, "Do you think it possible that he should care for
me?"

Hor.

_SIR_,

As you are Spectator-General, you may with Authority censure
whatsoever looks ill, and is offensive to the Sight; the worst
Nusance of which kind, methinks, is the scandalous Appearance of
Poor in all Parts of this wealthy City.

Such miserable Objects affect the compassionate Beholder with dismal
Ideas, discompose the Chearfulness of his Mind, and deprive him of
the Pleasure that he might otherwise take in surveying the Grandeur
of our Metropolis.

"Do you believe that?"

"Gospel truth," he declared innocently.

"Well, don't forget it."

"Oh, I!  I don't expect now anything to present itself," he said,
jumping ashore.

He didn't turn up at high water.  I set my sail and just as I had cast
off from the bank, round the black barn, in the dusk, two figures
appeared and stood silent, indistinct.

"Is that you, Powell?"  I hailed.

To as giving the and her self to an unworthy Husband. But_Sempronia_
can administer Consolation Play of Fortune is not so ill, Fair
at Home, by leading her to Half her to an unhappy rob a Lady at
an agreeable_ Gallant elsewhere

.
"You shall hear from me before long," shouted Powell, suddenly, just as
my boat had cleared the mouth of the creek.

"This was yesterday," added Marlow, lolling in the armchair lazily.  "I
haven't heard yet; but I expect to hear any moment...  What on earth are
you grinning at in this sarcastic manner?  I am not afraid of going to
church with a friend.  Hang it all, for all my belief in Chance I am not
exactly a pagan..."