Now, at the news of her death, and illuminated by the
recollection of that one impressive farewell, as by a flash of
lightning I saw the immense value my relations with this sister
had been to me, and I did not fully realise the extent of her
influence until later on, when, after my first striking
successes, my mother tearfully lamented that Rosalie had not
lived to witness them. It really did me good to be again in
communication with my family. My mother and sisters had had news
of my doings somehow or other, and I was deeply touched, in the
letters which I was now receiving from them, to hear no
reproaches anent my headstrong and apparently heartless
behaviour, but only sympathy and heartfelt solicitude. My family
had also received favourable reports about my wife's good
qualities, a fact about which I was particularly glad, as I was
thus spared the difficulties of defending her questionable
behaviour to me, which I should have been at pains to excuse.
This produced a salutary calm in my soul, which had so recently
been a prey to the worst anxieties. All that had driven me with
such passionate haste to an improvident and premature marriage,
all that had consequently weighed on me so ruinously, now seemed
set at rest, leaving peace in its stead. And although the
ordinary cares of life still pressed on me for many years, often
in a most vexatious and troublesome form, yet the anxieties
attendant on my ardent youthful wishes were in a manner subdued
and calm. From thence forward till the attainment of my
professional independence, all my life's struggles could be
directed entirely towards that more ideal aim which, from the
time of the conception of my Rienzi, was to be my only guide
through life.

It was only later that I first realised the real character of my
life in Riga, from the utterance of one of its inhabitants, who
was astonished to learn of the success of a man of whose
importance, during the whole of his two years' sojourn in the
small capital of Livonia, nothing had been known. Thrown entirely
on my own resources, I was a stranger to every one. As I
mentioned before, I kept aloof from all the theatre folk, in
consequence of my increasing dislike of them, and therefore, when
at the end of March, 1839, at the close of my second winter
there, I was given my dismissal by the management, although this
occurrence surprised me for other reasons, yet I felt fully
reconciled to this compulsory change in my life. The reasons
which led to this dismissal were, however, of such a nature that
I could only regard it as one of the most disagreeable
experiences of my life. Once, when I was lying dangerously ill, I
heard of Holtei's real feelings towards me. I had caught a severe
cold in the depth of winter at a theatrical rehearsal, and it at
once assumed a serious character, owing to the fact that my
nerves were in a state of constant irritation from the continual
annoyance and vexatious worry caused by the contemptible
character of the theatrical management. It was just at the time
when a special performance of the opera Norma was to be given by
our company in Mitau. Holtei insisted on my getting up from a
sick-bed to make this wintry journey, and thus to expose myself
to the danger of seriously increasing my cold in the icy theatre
at Mitau. Typhoid fever was the consequence, and this pulled me
down to such an extent that Holtei, who heard of my condition, is
said to have remarked at the theatre that I should probably never
conduct again, and that, to all intents and purposes, 'I was on
my last legs.' It was to a splendid homoeopathic physician, Dr.
Prutzer, that I owed my recovery and my life. Not long after that
Holtei left our theatre and Riga for ever; his occupation there,
with 'the far too respectable conditions,' as he expressed it,
had become intolerable to him. In addition, however,
circumstances had arisen in his domestic life (which had been
much affected by the death of his wife) which seemed to make him
consider a complete break with Riga eminently desirable. But to
my astonishment I now first became aware that I too had
unconsciously been a sufferer from the troubles he had brought
upon himself. When Holtei's successor in the management--Joseph
Hoffmann the singer--informed me that his predecessor had made it
a condition to his taking over the post that he should enter into
the same engagement that Holtei had made with the conductor Dorn
for the post which I had hitherto filled, and my reappointment
had therefore been made an impossibility, my wife met my
astonishment at this news by giving me the reason, of which for
some considerable time past she had been well aware, namely,
Holtei's special dislike of us both. When I was afterwards
informed by Minna of what had happened--she having purposely kept
it from me all this time, so as not to cause bad feeling between
me and my director--a ghastly light was thrown upon the whole
affair. I did indeed remember perfectly how, soon after Minna's
arrival in Riga, I had been particularly pressed by Holtei not to
prevent my wife's engagement at the theatre. I asked him to talk
things quietly over with her, so that he might see that Minna's
unwillingness rested on a mutual understanding, and not on any
jealousy on my part. I had intentionally given him the time when
I was engaged at the theatre on rehearsals for the necessary
discussions with my wife. At the end of these meetings I had, on
my return, often found Minna in a very excited condition, and at
length she declared emphatically that under no circumstances
would she accept the engagement offered by Holtei. I had also
noticed in Minna's demeanour towards me a strange anxiety to know
why I was not unwilling to allow Holtei to try to persuade her.
Now that the catastrophe had occurred, I learned that Holtei had
in fact used these interviews for making improper advances to my
wife, the nature of which I only realised with difficulty on
further acquaintance with this man's peculiarities, and after
having heard of other instances of a similar nature. I then
discovered that Holtei considered it an advantage to get himself
talked about in connection with pretty women, in order thus to
divert the attention of the public from other conduct even more
disreputable. After this Minna was exceedingly indignant at
Holtei, who, finding his own suit rejected, appeared as the
medium for another suitor, on whose behalf he urged that he would
think none the worse of her for rejecting him, a grey-haired and
penniless man, but at the same time advocated the suit of
Brandenburg, a very wealthy and handsome young merchant. His
fierce indignation at this double repulse, his humiliation at
having revealed his real nature to no purpose, seems, to judge
from Minna's observations, to have been exceedingly great. I now
understood too well that his frequent and profoundly contemptuous
sallies against respectable actors and actresses had not been
mere spirited exaggerations, but that he had probably often had
to complain of being put thoroughly to shame on this account.

The fact that the playing of such criminal parts as the one he
had had in view with my wife was unable to divert the ever-
increasing attention of the outside world from his vicious and
dissolute habits, does not seem to have escaped him; for those
behind the scenes told me candidly that it was owing to the fear
of very unpleasant revelations that he had suddenly decided to
give up his position at Riga altogether. Even in much later years
I heard about Holtei's bitter dislike of me, a dislike which
showed itself, among other things, in his denunciation of The
Music of the Future, [Footnote: Zukunftsmusik is a pamphlet
revealing some of Wagner's artistic aims and aspirations, written
1860-61.--EDITOR.] and of its tendency to jeopardise the
simplicity of pure sentiment. I have previously mentioned that he
displayed so much personal animosity against me during the latter
part of the time we were together in Riga that he vented his
hostility upon me in every possible way. Up to that time I had
felt inclined to ascribe it to the divergence of our respective
views on artistic points.

To my dismay I now became aware that personal considerations
alone were at the bottom of all this, and I blushed to realise
that by my former unreserved confidence in a man whom I thought
was absolutely honest, I had based my knowledge of human nature
on such very weak foundations. But still greater was my
disappointment when I discovered the real character of my friend
H. Dorn. During the whole time of our intercourse at Riga, he,
who formerly treated me more like a good-natured elder brother,
had become my most confidential friend. We saw and visited each
other almost daily, very frequently in our respective homes. I
kept not a single secret from him, and the performance of his
Schoffe van Paris under my direction was as successful as if it
had been under his own. Now, when I heard that my post had been
given to him, I felt obliged to ask him about it, in order to
learn whether there was any mistake on his part as to my
intention regarding the position I had hitherto held. But from
his letter in reply I could clearly see that Dorn had really made
use of Holtei's dislike for me to extract from him, before his
departure, an arrangement which was both binding on his successor
and also in his (Dorn's) own favour. As my friend he ought to
have known that he could benefit by this agreement only in the
event of my resigning my appointment in Riga, because in our
confidential conversations, which continued to the end, he always
carefully refrained from touching on the possibility of my going
away or remaining. In fact, he declared that Holtei had
distinctly told him he would on no account re-engage me, as I
could not get on with the singers. He added that after this one
could not take it amiss if he, who had been inspired with fresh
enthusiasm for the theatre by the success of his Schoffe von
Paris, had seized and turned to his own advantage the chance
offered to him. Moreover, he had gathered from my confidential
communications that I was very awkwardly situated, and that,
owing to my small salary having been cut down by Holtei from the
very beginning, I was in a very precarious position on account of
the demands of my creditors in Konigsberg and Magdeburg. It
appeared that these people had employed against me a lawyer, who
was a friend of Dorn's, and that, consequently, he had come to
the conclusion that I would not be able to remain in Riga.
Therefore, even as my friend, he had felt his conscience quite
clear in accepting Holtei's proposal.

In order not to leave him in the complacent enjoyment of this
self-deception, I put it clearly before him that he could not be
ignorant of the fact that a higher salary had been promised to me
for the third year of my contract; and that, by the establishment
of orchestral concerts, which had already made a favourable
start, I now saw my way to getting free from those long-standing
debts, having already overcome the difficulties of the removal
and settling down. I also asked him how he would act if I saw it
was to my own interest to retain my post, and to call on him to
resign his agreement with Holtei, who, as a matter of fact, after
his departure from Riga, had withdrawn his alleged reason for my
dismissal. To this I received no answer, nor have I had one up to
the present day; but, on the other hand, in 1865, I was
astonished to see Dorn enter my house in Munich unannounced, and
when to his joy I recognised him, he stepped up to me with a
gesture which clearly showed his intention of embracing me.
Although I managed to evade this, yet I soon saw the difficulty
of preventing him from addressing me with the familiar form of
'thou,' as the attempt to do so would have necessitated
explanations that would have been a useless addition to all my
worries just then; for it was the time when my Tristan was being
produced.

Such a man was Heinrich Dorn. Although, after the failure of
three operas, he had retired in disgust from the theatre to
devote himself exclusively to the commercial side of music, yet
the success of his opera, Der Schoffe von Paris, in Riga helped
him back to a permanent place among the dramatic musicians of
Germany. But to this position he was first dragged from
obscurity, across the bridge of infidelity to his friend, and by
the aid of virtue in the person of Director Holtei, thanks to a
magnanimous oversight on the part of Franz Listz. The preference
of King Friedrich Wilhelm IV. for church scenes contributed to
secure him eventually his important position at the greatest
lyric theatre in Germany, the Royal Opera of Berlin. For he was
prompted far less by his devotion to the dramatic muse than by
his desire to secure a good position in some important German
city, when, as already hinted, through Liszt's recommendation he
was appointed musical director of Cologne Cathedral. During a
fete connected with the building of the cathedral he managed, as
a musician, so to work upon the Prussian monarch's religious
feelings, that he was appointed to the dignified post of musical
conductor at the Royal Theatre, in which capacity he long
continued to do honour to German dramatic music in conjunction
with Wilhelm Taubert.

I must give J. Hoffmann, who from this time forward was the
manager of the Riga theatre, the credit of having felt the
treachery practised upon me very deeply indeed. He told me that
his contract with Dorn bound him only for one year, and that the
moment the twelve months had elapsed he wished to come to a fresh
agreement with me. As soon as this was known, my patrons in Riga
came forward with offers of teaching engagements and arrangements
for sundry concerts, by way of compensating me for the year's
salary which I should lose by being away from my work as a
conductor. Though I was much gratified by these offers, yet, as I
have already pointed out, the longing to break loose from the
kind of theatrical life which I had experienced up to that time
so possessed me that I resolutely seized this chance of
abandoning my former vocation for an entirely new one. Not
without some shrewdness, I played upon my wife's indignation at
the treachery I had suffered, in order to make her fall in with
my eccentric notion of going to Paris. Already in my conception
of Rienzi I had dreamed of the most magnificent theatrical
conditions, but now, without halting at any intermediate
stations, my one desire was to reach the very heart of all
European grand opera. While still in Magdeburg I had made H.
Konig's romance, Die Hohe Braut, the subject of a grand opera in
five acts, and in the most luxurious French style. After the
scenic draft of this opera, which had been translated into
French, was completely worked out, I sent it from Konigsberg to
Scribe in Paris. With this manuscript I sent a letter to the
famous operatic poet, in which I suggested that he might make use
of my plot, on condition that he would secure me the composition
of the music for the Paris Opera House. To convince him of my
ability to compose Parisian operatic music, I also sent him the
score of my Liebesverbot. At the same time I wrote to Meyerbeer,
informing him of my plans, and begging him to support me. I was
not at all disheartened at receiving no reply, for I was content
to know that now at last 'I was in communication with Paris.'
When, therefore, I started out upon my daring journey from Riga,
I seemed to have a comparatively serious object in view, and my
Paris projects no longer struck me as being altogether in the
air. In addition to this I now heard that my youngest sister,
Cecilia, had become betrothed to a certain Eduard Avenarius, an
employee of the Brockhaus book-selling firm, and that he had
undertaken the management of their Paris branch. To him I applied
for news of Scribe, and for an answer to the application I had
made to that gentleman some years previously. Avenarius called on
Scribe, and from him received an acknowledgment of the receipt of
my earlier communication. Scribe also showed that he had some
recollection of the subject itself; for he said that, so far as
he could remember, there was a joueuse de harpe in the piece, who
was ill-treated by her brother. The fact that this merely
incidental item had alone remained in his memory led me to
conclude that he had not extended his acquaintance with the piece
beyond the first act, in which the item in question occurs. When,
moreover, I heard that he had nothing to say in regard to my
score, except that he had had portions of it played over to him
by a pupil of the Conservatoire, I really could not flatter
myself that he had entered into definite and conscious relations
with me. And yet I had palpable evidence in a letter of his to
Avenarius, which the latter forwarded to me, that Scribe had
actually occupied himself with my work, and that I was indeed in
communication with him, and this letter of Scribe's made such an
impression upon my wife, who was by no means inclined to be
sanguine, that she gradually overcame her apprehensions in regard
to the Paris adventure. At last it was fixed and settled that on
the expiry of my second year's contract in Riga (that is to say,
in the coming summer, 1839), we should journey direct from Riga
to Paris, in order that I might try my luck there as a composer
of opera.

The production of my Rienzi now began to assume greater
importance. The composition of its second act was finished before
we started, and into this I wove a heroic ballet of extravagant
dimensions. It was now imperative that I should speedily acquire
a knowledge of French, a language which, during my classical
studies at the Grammar School, I had contemptuously laid aside.
As there were only four weeks in which to recover the time I had
lost, I engaged an excellent French master. But as I soon
realised that I could achieve but little in so short a time, I
utilised the hours of the lessons in order to obtain from him,
under the pretence of receiving instruction, an idiomatic
translation of my Rienzi libretto. This I wrote with red ink on
such parts of the score as were finished, so that on reaching
Paris I might immediately submit my half-finished opera to French
judges of art.

Everything now seemed to be carefully prepared for my departure,
and all that remained to be done was to raise the necessary funds
for my undertaking. But in this respect the outlook was bad. The
sale of our modest household furniture, the proceeds of a benefit
concert, and my meagre savings only sufficed to satisfy the
importunate demands of my creditors in Magdeburg and Konigsberg.
I knew that if I were to devote all my cash to this purpose,
there would not be a farthing left. Some way out of the fix must
be found, and this our old Konigsberg friend, Abraham Moller,
suggested in his usual flippant and obscure manner. Just at this
critical moment he paid us a second visit to Riga. I acquainted
him with the difficulties of our position, and all the obstacles
which stood in the way of my resolve to go to Paris. In his
habitual laconical way he counselled me to reserve all my savings
for our journey, and to settle with my creditors when my Parisian
successes had provided the necessary means. To help us in
carrying out this plan, he offered to convey us in his carriage
across the Russian frontier at top speed to an East Prussian
port. We should have to cross the Russian frontier without
passports, as these had been already impounded by our foreign
creditors. He assured us that we should find it quite simple to
carry out this very hazardous expedition, and declared that he
had a friend on a Prussian estate close to the frontier who would
render us very effective assistance. My eagerness to escape at
any price from my previous circumstances, and to enter with all
possible speed upon the wider field, in which I hoped very soon
to realise my ambition, blinded me to all the unpleasantnesses
which the execution of his proposal must entail. Director
Hoffmann, who considered himself bound to serve me to the utmost
of his ability, facilitated my departure by allowing me to leave
some months before the expiration of my engagement. After
continuing to conduct the operatic portion of the Mitau
theatrical season through the month of June, we secretly started
in a special coach hired by Moller and under his protection. The
goal of our journey was Paris, but many unheard-of hardships were
in store for us before we were to reach that city.

The sense of contentment involuntarily aroused by our passage
through the fruitful Courland in the luxuriant month of July, and
by the sweet illusion that now at last I had cut myself loose
from a hateful existence, to enter upon a new and boundless path
of fortune, was disturbed from its very outset by the miserable
inconveniences occasioned by the presence of a huge Newfoundland
dog called Robber. This beautiful creature, originally the
property of a Riga merchant, had, contrary to the nature of his
race, become devotedly attached to me. After I had left Riga, and
during my long stay in Mitau, Robber incessantly besieged my
empty house, and so touched the hearts of my landlord and the
neighbours by his fidelity, that they sent the dog after me by
the conductor of the coach to Mitau, where I greeted him with
genuine effusion, and swore that, in spite of all difficulties, I
would never part with him again. Whatever might happen, the dog
must go with us to Paris. And yet, even to get him into the
carriage proved almost impossible. All my endeavours to find him
a place in or about the vehicle were in vain, and, to my great
grief, I had to watch the huge northern beast, with his shaggy
coat, gallop all day long in the blazing sun beside the carriage.
At last, moved to pity by his exhaustion, and unable to bear the
sight any longer, I hit upon a most ingenious plan for bringing
the great animal with us into the carriage, where, in spite of
its being full to overflowing, he was just able to find room.

On the evening of the second day we reached the Russo-Prussian
frontier. Moller's evident anxiety as to whether we should be
able to cross it safely showed us plainly that the matter was one
of some danger. His good friend from the other side duly turned
up with a small carriage, as arranged, and in this conveyance
drove Minna, myself, and Robber through by paths to a certain
point, whence he led us on foot to a house of exceedingly
suspicious exterior, where, after handing us over to a guide, he
left us. There we had to wait until sundown, and had ample
leisure in which to realise that we were in a smugglers' drinking
den, which gradually became filled to suffocation with Polish
Jews of most forbidding aspect.

At last we were summoned to follow our guide. A few hundred feet
away, on the slope of a hill, lay the ditch which runs the whole
length of the Russian frontier, watched continually and at very
narrow intervals by Cossacks. Our chance was to utilise the few
moments after the relief of the watch, during which the sentinels
were elsewhere engaged. We had, therefore, to run at full speed
down the hill, scramble through the ditch, and then hurry along
until we were beyond the range of the soldiers' guns; for the
Cossacks were bound in case of discovery to fire upon us even on
the other side of the ditch. In spite of my almost passionate
anxiety for Minna, I had observed with singular pleasure the
intelligent behaviour of Robber, who, as though conscious of the
danger, silently kept close to our side, and entirely dispelled
my fear that he would give trouble during our dangerous passage.
At last our trusted helpmeet reappeared, and was so delighted
that he hugged us all in his arms. Then, placing us once more in
his carriage, he drove us to the inn of the Prussian frontier
village, where my friend Moller, positively sick with anxiety,
leaped sobbing and rejoicing out of bed to greet us.

It was only now that I began to realise the danger to which I had
exposed, not only myself, but also my poor Minna, and the folly
of which I had been guilty through my ignorance of the terrible
difficulties of secretly crossing the frontier--difficulties
concerning which Moller had foolishly allowed me to remain in
ignorance.

I was simply at a loss to convey to my poor exhausted wife how
extremely I regretted the whole affair.

And yet the difficulties we had just overcome were but the
prelude to the calamities incidental to this adventurous journey
which had such a decisive influence on my life. The following
day, when, with courage renewed, we drove through the rich plain
of Tilsit to Arnau, near Konigsberg, we decided, as the next
stage of our journey, to proceed from the Prussian harbour of
Pillau by sailing vessel to London. Our principal reason for this
was the consideration of the dog we had with us. It was the
easiest way to take him. To convey him by coach from Konigsberg
to Paris was out of the question, and railways were unknown. But
another consideration was our budget; the whole result of my
desperate efforts amounted to not quite one hundred ducats, which
were to cover not only the journey to Paris, but our expenses
there until I should have earned something. Therefore, after a
few days' rest in the inn at Arnau, we drove to the little
seaport town of Pillau, again accompanied by Moller, in one of
the ordinary local conveyances, which was not much better than a
wagon. In order to avoid Konigsberg, we passed through the
smaller villages and over bad roads. Even this short distance was
not to be covered without accident. The clumsy conveyance upset
in a farmyard, and Minna was so severely indisposed by the
accident, owing to an internal shock, that I had to drag her--
with the greatest difficulty, as she was quite helpless--to a
peasant's house. The people were surly and dirty, and the night
we spent there was a painful one for the poor sufferer. A delay
of several days occurred before the departure of the Pillau
vessel, but this was welcome as a respite to allow of Minna's
recovery. Finally, as the captain was to take us without a
passport, our going on board was accompanied by exceptional
difficulties. We had to contrive to slip past the harbour watch
to our vessel in a small boat before daybreak. Once on board, we
still had the troublesome task of hauling Robber up the steep
side of the vessel without attracting attention, and after that
to conceal ourselves at once below deck, in order to escape the
notice of officials visiting the ship before its departure. The
anchor was weighed, and at last, as the land faded gradually out
of sight, we thought we could breathe freely and feel at ease.

We were on board a merchant vessel of the smallest type. She was
called the Thetis; a bust of the nymph was erected in the bows,
and she carried a crew of seven men, including the captain. With
good weather, such as was to be expected in summer, the journey
to London was estimated to take eight days. However, before we
had left the Baltic, we were delayed by a prolonged calm. I made
use of the time to improve my knowledge of French by the study of
a novel, La Derniere Aldini, by George Sand. We also derived some
entertainment from associating with the crew. There was an
elderly and peculiarly taciturn sailor named Koske, whom we
observed carefully because Robber, who was usually so friendly,
had taken an irreconcilable dislike to him. Oddly enough, this
fact was to add in some degree to our troubles in the hour of
danger. After seven days' sailing we were no further than
Copenhagen, where, without leaving the vessel, we seized an
opportunity of making our very spare diet on board more bearable
by various purchases of food and drink. In good spirits we sailed
past the beautiful castle of Elsinore, the sight of which brought
me into immediate touch with my youthful impressions of Hamlet.
We were sailing all unsuspecting through the Cattegat to the
Skagerack, when the wind, which had at first been merely
unfavourable, and had forced us to a process of weary tacking,
changed on the second day to a violent storm. For twenty-four
hours we had to struggle against it under disadvantages which
were quite new to us. In the captain's painfully narrow cabin, in
which one of us was without a proper berth, we were a prey to
sea-sickness and endless alarms. Unfortunately, the brandy cask,
at which the crew fortified themselves during their strenuous
work, was let into a hollow under the seat on which I lay at full
length. Now it happened to be Koske who came most frequently in
search of the refreshment which was such a nuisance to me, and
this in spite of the fact that on each occasion he had to
encounter Robber in mortal combat. The dog flew at him with
renewed rage each time he came climbing down the narrow steps. I
was thus compelled to make efforts which, in my state of complete
exhaustion from sea-sickness, rendered my condition every time
more critical. At last, on 27th July, the captain was compelled
by the violence of the west wind to seek a harbour on the
Norwegian coast. And how relieved I was to behold that far-
reaching rocky coast, towards which we were being driven at such
speed! A Norwegian pilot came to meet us in a small boat, and,
with experienced hand, assumed control of the Thetis, whereupon
in a very short time I was to have one of the most marvellous and
most beautiful impressions of my life. What I had taken to be a
continuous line of cliffs turned out on our approach to be a
series of separate rocks projecting from the sea. Having sailed
past them, we perceived that we were surrounded, not only in
front and at the sides, but also at our back, by these reefs,
which closed in behind us so near together that they seemed to
form a single chain of rocks. At the same time the hurricane was
so broken by the rocks in our rear that the further we sailed
through this ever-changing labyrinth of projecting rocks, the
calmer the sea became, until at last the vessel's progress was
perfectly smooth and quiet as we entered one of those long sea-
roads running through a giant ravine--for such the Norwegian
fjords appeared to me.

A feeling of indescribable content came over me when the enormous
granite walls echoed the hail of the crew as they cast anchor and
furled the sails. The sharp rhythm of this call clung to me like
an omen of good cheer, and shaped itself presently into the theme
of the seamen's song in my Fliegender Hollander. The idea of this
opera was, even at that time, ever present in my mind, and it now
took on a definite poetic and musical colour under the influence
of my recent impressions. Well, our next move was to go on shore.
I learned that the little fishing village at which we landed was
called Sandwike, and was situated a few miles away from the much
larger town of Arendal. We were allowed to put up at the
hospitable house of a certain ship's captain, who was then away
at sea, and here we were able to take the rest we so much needed,
as the unabated violence of the wind in the open detained us
there two days. On 31st July the captain insisted on leaving,
despite the pilot's warning. We had been on board the Thetis a
few hours, and were in the act of eating a lobster for the first
time in our lives, when the captain and the sailors began to
swear violently at the pilot, whom I could see at the helm, rigid
with fear, striving to avoid a reef--barely visible above the
water--towards which our ship was being driven. Great was our
terror at this violent tumult, for we naturally thought ourselves
in the most extreme danger. The vessel did actually receive a
severe shock, which, to my vivid imagination, seemed like the
splitting up of the whole ship. Fortunately, however, it
transpired that only the side of our vessel had fouled the reef,
and there was no immediate danger. Nevertheless, the captain
deemed it necessary to steer for a harbour to have the vessel
examined, and we returned to the coast and anchored at another
point. The captain then offered to take us in a small boat with
two sailors to Tromsond, a town of some importance situated at a
few hours' distance, where he had to invite the harbour officials
to examine his ship. This again proved a most attractive and
impressive excursion. The view of one fjord in particular, which
extended far inland, worked on my imagination like some unknown,
awe-inspiring desert. This impression was intensified, during a
long walk from Tromsond up to the plateau, by the terribly
depressing effect of the dun moors, bare of tree or shrub,
boasting only a covering of scanty moss, which stretch away to
the horizon, and merge imperceptibly into the gloomy sky. It was
long after dark when we returned from this trip in our little
boat, and my wife was very anxious. The next morning (1st
August), reassured as to the condition of the vessel, and the
wind favouring us, we were able to go to sea without further
hindrance.

After four days' calm sailing a strong north wind arose, which
drove us at uncommon speed in the right direction. We began to
think ourselves nearly at the end of our journey when, on 6th
August, the wind changed, and the storm began to rage with
unheard-of violence. On the 7th, a Wednesday, at half-past two in
the afternoon, we thought ourselves in imminent danger of death.
It was not the terrible force with which the vessel was hurled up
and down, entirely at the mercy of this sea monster, which
appeared now as a fathomless abyss, now as a steep mountain peak,
that filled me with mortal dread; my premonition of some terrible
crisis was aroused by the despondency of the crew, whose
malignant glances seemed superstitiously to point to us as the
cause of the threatening disaster. Ignorant of the trifling
occasion for the secrecy of our journey, the thought may have
occurred to them that our need of escape had arisen from
suspicious or even criminal circumstances. The captain himself
seemed, in his extreme distress, to regret having taken us on
board; for we had evidently brought him ill-luck on this familiar
passage--usually a rapid and uncomplicated one, especially in
summer. At this particular moment there raged, beside the tempest
on the water, a furious thunderstorm overhead, and Minna
expressed the fervent wish to be struck by lightning with me
rather than to sink, living, into the fearful flood. She even
begged me to bind her to me, so that we might not be parted as we
sank. Yet another night was spent amid these incessant terrors,
which only our extreme exhaustion helped to mitigate.

