"We have patiently awaited redress; we have borne illegal taxes, imposed
by a council of crown nominees, and maintained by the amoval of _one_
judge and the appointment of another; and have appealed only to the
provisions of the constitutional law of England--but in vain.

"And now, to fill up the measure of our wrong, ministers have publicly
announced their contempt for our petitions, by ordering the _Neptune_ to
our port, and discharging her passengers upon our shores.

"In such circumstances silence would be criminal. As citizens and
parents we hereby solemnly protest against the cruelty and falsehood of
the English government--against the wrongs which threaten and oppress
ourselves and our children.

"Van Diemen's Land, April, 1850."]


SECTION V.


But the day of deliverance was at hand. "_The Australias are one_"
became the watch-word of the abolitionists, and they adopted decisive
means to propagate the cry, and secure the co-operation of the colonies
of the continent. From this idea sprang the "Australasian League"--an
organization comprehending a numerical and moral force without parallel
in the present colonial empire. At Launceston, on the 9th of August,
1850, the following resolution was adopted:--"That the whole of the
Australasian Colonies are deeply interested in preventing the
continuance of Transportation to this Island. That the Launceston
Association for Promoting the cessation of Transportation to Van
Diemen's Land be hereby requested to address a letter to the respective
Colonial Secretaries, Speakers of Legislative bodies, Municipal
authorities, and other influential parties in those Colonies, earnestly
requesting the co-operation to ensure their attainment of the great
object we have in view."

The feeling expressed in this resolution was instantly reciprocated in
all the colonies. Speakers at their meetings referred to the condition
and hopeless prostration of Van Diemen's Land as a general grievance. A
letter, founded on this resolution, was drawn up by Messrs. West, Du
Croz, and Douglas (dated August 26), under the instructions of the
"Launceston Association," the first formed in the colonies. It was
signed by the chairman, Rev. Dr. Browne, senior-chaplain of Launceston.
After tracing the course of the British government, it proceeded:--"As a
last resource we turn to our fellow-colonists who, united to us by the
strictest ties, are liable to the same wrongs; and who will not be
indifferent spectators of sufferings which they may ultimately share. If
you look at the chart of Van Diemen's Land you will perceive her
geographical position establishes a relation to the adjacent colonies
which no laws can disown and no time dissolve. A few hours convey
vessels from our shores to the ports of Victoria, New South Wales, and
South Australia; and a few days' sail to New Zealand, and thence to the
islands that crowd the Pacific Ocean. Her majesty's ministers have
taught the communities established in this portion of the empire that
their ultimate interests are ONE: that upon the public spirit,
intelligence, and virtue of each, in no small measure, depend the
happiness and prosperity of all. We remind you that, in twenty years
from the present moment, should transportation continue, and the annual
number remain stationary, 70,000 or 80,000 convicted persons will have
passed through Van Diemen's Land into the neighbouring colonies. They
will consist of men not only originally depraved: all will have gone
through the demoralizing probation of public gangs: they will all have
dwelt, for several years, in exclusively convict society, where every
prevailing sympathy must be tainted with the habits of crime. This
island will not be a filter; but the accumulation of moral wretchedness
will unavoidably contaminate every mind, and stamp on every character
the impression of its peculiar constitution. The sacrifice of this
colony will not, therefore, exempt the neighbouring settlements from any
portion of the mischief incident to direct transportation. They will
receive the prisoners later in life, but deteriorated in character. Evil
associations and evil men become worse and worse: such is the dictate of
reason, and such is the solemn warning written in the oracles of God.
If, then, your colony had cause to protest against the infliction of
this evil in a limited degree, how much stronger must be your opposition
to a system which will bring into your streets, your houses, your
hospitals and prisons, the crime, insanity, decrepitude, and pauperism
ever consequent on transportation, aggravated by transmission through a
country in moral ruin. Were we to appeal to a principle of selfishness
in addressing our countrymen, we might remind you that the reputation of
this entire hemisphere is compromised by the condition of Van Diemen's
Land. The nice geographical distinctions which colonists make are lost
in the distance. As your vessels enter foreign ports, the line which
divides your population from ours fails to distinguish them. We have
heard with regret, and not without humiliation, that the British name,
every where respectable until now, has ceased to insure to many, who
have never forfeited its sanction, the common confidence of foreign
nations. That a petty state, but of yesterday, has initiated laws
intended to stigmatise all the inhabitants of the southern world, and
attributing to the whole the character of convictism. A more serious
consideration is the positive injury inflicted upon the islanders of the
Southern Ocean by scattering among them desperate men who have been
perfected in all the arts of wickedness, and who are placed within reach
of an interesting and rising people, whom they too often shock by their
vices and oppress by their crimes. We submit, sir, to your humanity as a
British fellow subject, and to your discretion as a christian
magistrate, the case of this country. In the mutation of human affairs,
the arm of oppression, which has smitten us with desolation, may strike
at your social well-being. Communities allied by blood, language, and
commerce, cannot long suffer alone. We conjure you, therefore, by the
unity of colonial interests--as well as by the obligations which bind
all men to intercede with the strong and unjust on behalf of the feeble
and oppressed--to exert your influence to the intent that transportation
to Van Diemen's Land may for ever cease."

The colonial office at first did not deny, what indeed was
unquestionable, that such hopes had been given, and not until twelve
months after Lord Grey maintained that his discretion was not limited by
his promise. Mr. Jackson again remonstrated with the minister on behalf
of the colony. Earl Grey directed Mr. Hawes to assure him the government
earnestly desired to meet the wishes of the inhabitants of Van Diemen's
Land for the discontinuance of transportation (March, 17, 1849). The
opinion of British legislators of high pretensions having confirmed the
colonial interpretation, Earl Grey made another effort to recover New
South Wales. He once more instructed Sir C. Fitz Roy to reopen the
discussion (Nov. 19, 1849), and a message for this purpose was sent to
the legislature (June, 1850). A new election meantime occurred, and the
people, supposing the question irrevocably settled, had exacted no
pledges from the members. Mr. Lamb, then a crown nominee, proposed
(August, 1850), a series of resolutions confirming the previous
decision, and declaring that tranquillity could only be restored by
revoking "the order in council." The debate on these resolutions was
postponed until the 27th of September, when it was understood counter
propositions would be submitted.

The proposal to revive transportation in New South Wales was under
discussion when the speech of Earl Grey's reached the colonies. The
people were called together to consult on their own affairs and
naturally turned to the policy of government as exhibited in Tasmania.
The resolution of the 9th of August obtained an immediate response, and
gave a new aspect to the agitation. The great Sydney meeting (September
16) "pledged themselves to co-operate with their brethren in Van
Diemen's Land;" and an association then formed for preventing the
revival of transportation opened a channel of communication. The _Sydney
Herald_, the chief organ of the abolition cause, remarked, "the best way
of dealing with this and all other evasions is that suggested by the
people of Van Diemen's Land, the formation of a great Australian
confederacy" (September 16). The people of Port Phillip "tendered their
deep sympathy and hearty concurrence and co-operation," and appointed a
provisional committee to take such measures as might be deemed
necessary to obtain complete redress. The unity of the colonies became
thenceforth the favorite topic, and nothing remained but to give to this
important sentiment a practical direction. Meanwhile (1st October), the
council of New South Wales decided on the despatch of Earl Grey, so far
as related to themselves. An amendment of Mr. M'Arthur, to receive
selected exiles with three emigrants for each, although supported by the
eloquence of Wentworth, was defeated, and Mr. Lamb's motion carried
without a division. The abolitionists had made efforts to secure
unexampled demonstrations without, and to determine the question for
ever. They held meetings daily, and called into action all the agents of
political agitation. The ladies imitated the mothers and daughters of
Van Diemen's Land, and petitioned. The members on the popular side were
encouraged by the countenance of the bishops and clergy of all
persuasions. The judges gave the weight of their experience on the same
side. Five hundred persons memorialised the council in favor of
transportation. Thirty-six thousand protested against it. The Port
Phillip members who went up to Sydney on this errand alone, to secure a
majority of the side of abolition, were met by the citizens at the water
side and escorted in triumph. The debates were more prolonged than any
known before--Australian eloquence exhausted the topic, and satisfied
the public judgment for ever. Mr. Wentworth in supporting the amendment
yet declared his aversion to transportation, and his belief that nothing
but a powerful confederation of the colonies would prevail against
it.[261] The governor was neutral: the official members of the house
withdrew: but the attorney-general rose from the deserted benches, and
claiming to perform a duty as a citizen who had watched transportation
in all its stages and results, gave an irresistible testimony on the
side of social freedom.

