Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


[Illustration]


ADAPTATION

By MACK REYNOLDS

Illustrated by Schoenherr


    _When a man has a great deal of knowledge, it becomes extremely easy
    for him to confuse "knowledge" with "wisdom" ... and forget that the
    antonym of "wisdom" is not "ignorance" but "folly."_


FORWARD


_Hardly had man solved his basic problems on the planet of his origin
than he began to fumble into space. Barely a century had elapsed in the
exploration of the Solar System than he began to grope for the stars._

_And suddenly, with an all but religious zeal, mankind conceived its
fantasy dream of populating the galaxy. Never in the history of the race
had fervor reached such a peak and held so long. The question of why was
seemingly ignored. Millions of Earth-type planets beckoned and with a
lemming-like desperation humanity erupted into them._

_But the obstacles were frightening in their magnitude. The planets and
satellites of Sol had proven comparatively tractable and those that were
suited to man-life were quickly brought under his dominion. But there,
of course, he had the advantage of proximity. The time involved in
running back and forth to the home planet was meaningless and all
Earth's resources could be thrown into each problem's solving._

_But a planet a year removed in transportation or even communication?
Ay! this was another thing and more than once a million colonists were
lost before the Earthlings could adapt to new climates, new flora and
fauna, new bacteria--or to factors which the most far out visionary had
never fancied, perhaps the lack of something never before missed._

_So, mad with the lust to seed the universe with his kind, men sought
new methods. To a hundred thousand worlds they sent smaller colonies, as
few as a hundred pioneers apiece, and there marooned them, to adapt, if
adapt they could._

_For a millennium each colony was left to its own resources, to conquer
the environment or to perish in the effort._

_A thousand years was sufficient. Invariably it was found, on those
planets where human life survived at all, man slipped back during his
first two or three centuries into a state of barbarism. Then slowly
began to inch forward again. There were exceptions and the progress on
one planet never exactly duplicated that on another, however the average
was surprisingly close to both nadir and zenith, in terms of evolution
of society._

_In a thousand years it was deemed by the Office of Galactic
Colonization such pioneers had largely adjusted to the new environment
and were ready for civilization, industrialization and eventual
assimilation into the rapidly evolving Galactic Commonwealth._

_Of course, even from the beginning, new and unforeseen problems
manifested themselves ..._

                                       _from_ "Man In Antiquity"
                                         _published in Terra City, Sol
                                         Galactic Year 3,502._


I.


The Co-ordinator said, "I suppose I'm an incurable romantic. You see, I
hate to see you go." Academician Amschel Mayer was a man in early middle
years; Dr. Leonid Plekhanov, his contemporary. They offset one another;
Mayer thin and high-pitched, his colleague heavy, slow and dour. Now
they both showed their puzzlement.

The Co-ordinator added, "Without me."

Plekhanov kept his massive face blank. It wasn't for him to be impatient
with his superior. Nevertheless, the ship was waiting, stocked and
crewed.

Amschel Mayer said, "Certainly a last minute chat can't harm." Inwardly
he realized the other man's position. Here was a dream coming true, and
Mayer and his fellows were the last thread that held the Co-ordinator's
control over the dream. When they left, half a century would pass before
he could again check developments.

The Co-ordinator became more businesslike. "Yes," he said, "but I have
more in mind than a chat. Very briefly, I wish to go over your
assignment. Undoubtedly redundant, but if there are questions, no matter
how seemingly trivial, this is the last opportunity to air them."

_What possible questions could there be at this late date?_ Plekhanov
thought.

The department head swiveled slowly in his chair and then back again as
he talked. "You are the first--the first of many, many such teams. The
manner in which you handle your task will effect man's eternity.
Obviously, since upon your experience we will base our future policies
on interstellar colonization." His voice lost volume. "The position in
which you find yourselves should be humbling."

"It is," Amschel Mayer agreed. Plekhanov nodded his head.

The Co-ordinator nodded, too. "However, the situation is as near ideal
as we could hope. Rigel's planets are all but unbelievably Earthlike.
Almost all our flora and fauna have been adaptable. Certainly our race
has been.

"These two are the first of the seeded planets. Almost a thousand years
ago we deposited small bodies of colonists upon each of them. Since then
we have periodically checked, from a distance, but never intruded." His
eyes went from one of his listeners to the other. "No comments or
questions, thus far?"

Mayer said, "This is one thing that surprises me. The colonies are so
small to begin with. How could they possibly populate a whole world in
one millennium?"

The Co-ordinator said, "Man adapts, Amschel. Have you studied the
development of the United States? During her first century and a half
the need was for population to fill the vast lands wrested from the
Amer-Inds. Families of eight, ten, and twelve children were the common
thing, much larger ones were not unknown. And the generations crowded
one against another; a girl worried about spinsterhood if she reached
seventeen unwed. But in the next century? The frontier vanished, the
driving need for population was gone. Not only were drastic immigration
laws passed, but the family shrunk rapidly until by mid-Twentieth
Century the usual consisted of two or three children, and even the
childless family became increasingly common."

Mayer frowned impatiently, "But still, a thousand years. There is always
famine, war, disease ..."

Plekhanov snorted patronizingly. "Forty to fifty generations, Amschel?
Starting with a hundred colonists? Where are your mathematics?"

The Co-ordinator said, "The proof is there. We estimate that each of
Rigel's planets now supports a population of nearly one billion."

"To be more exact," Plekhanov rumbled, "some nine hundred million on
Genoa, seven and a half on Texcoco."

Mayer smiled wryly. "I wonder what the residents of each of these
planets call their worlds. Hardly the same names we have arbitrarily
bestowed."

"Probably each call theirs _The World_," the Co-ordinator smiled. "After
all, the basic language, in spite of a thousand years, is still
Amer-English. However, I assume you are familiar with our method of
naming. The most advanced culture on Rigel's first planet is to be
compared to the Italian cities during Europe's feudalistic era. We have
named that planet Genoa. The most advanced nation of the second planet
is comparable to the Aztecs at the time of the conquest. We considered
Tenochtitlán but it seemed a tongue twister, so Texcoco is the
alternative."

"Modernizing Genoa," Mayer mused, "should be considerably easier than
the task on semiprimitive Texcoco."

Plekhanov shrugged, "Not necessarily."

The Co-ordinator held up a hand and smiled at them. "Please, no debates
on methods at present. An hour from now you will be in space with a year
of travel before you. During that time you'll have opportunity for
discussion, debate and hair pulling on every phase of your problem."

His expression became more serious. "You are acquainted with the unique
position you assume. These colonists are in your control to an extent no
small group has ever dominated millions of others before. No Caesar ever
exerted the power that will be in your educated hands. For a half
century you will be as gods. Your science, your productive know-how,
your medicine--if it comes to that, your weapons--are many centuries in
advance of theirs. As I said before, your position should be humbling."

Mayer squirmed in his chair. "Why not check upon us, say, once every
decade? In all, our ship's company numbers but sixteen persons. Almost
anything could happen. If you were to send a department craft each ten
years ..."

The Co-ordinator was shaking his head. "Your qualifications are as high
as anyone available. Once on the scene you will begin accumulating
information which we, here in Terra City, do not have. Were we to send
another group in ten years to check upon you, all they could do would be
interfere in a situation all the factors with which they would not be
cognizant."

Amschel Mayer shifted nervously. "But no matter how highly trained, nor
how earnest our efforts, we still may fail." His voice worried. "The
department cannot expect guaranteed success. After all, we are the
first."

"Admittedly. Your group is first to approach the hundreds of thousands
of planets we have seeded. If you fail, we will use your failure to
perfect the eventual system we must devise for future teams. Even your
failure would be of infinite use to us." He lifted and dropped a
shoulder. "I have no desire to undermine your belief in yourselves
but--how are we to know?--perhaps there will be a score of failures
before we find the ideal method of quickly bringing these primitive
colonies into our Galactic Commonwealth."

The Co-ordinator came to his feet and sighed. He still hated to see them
go. "If there is no other discussion ..."


II.


Specialist Joseph Chessman stood stolidly before a viewing screen.
Theoretically he was on watch. Actually his eyes were unseeing, there
was nothing to see. The star pattern changed so slowly as to be all but
permanent.

Not that every other task on board was not similar. One man could have
taken the _Pedagogue_ from the Solar System to Rigel, just as easily as
its sixteen-hand crew was doing. Automation at its ultimate, not even
the steward department had tasks adequately to fill the hours.

He had got beyond the point of yawning, his mind was a blank during
these hours of duty. He was a stolid, bear of a man, short and massive
of build.

A voice behind him said, "Second watch reporting. Request permission to
take over the bridge."

Chessman turned and it took a brief moment for the blankness in his eyes
to fade into life. "Hello Kennedy, you on already? Seems like I just got
here." He muttered in self-contradiction, "Or that I've been here a
month."

Technician Jerome Kennedy grinned. "Of course, if you want to stay ..."

Chessman said glumly, "What difference does it make where you are? What
are they doing in the lounge?"

Kennedy looked at the screen, not expecting to see anything and
accomplishing just that. "Still on their marathon argument."

Joe Chessman grunted.

Just to be saying something, Kennedy said, "How do you stand in the big
debate?"

"I don't know. I suppose I favor Plekhanov. How we're going to take a
bunch of savages and teach them modern agriculture and industrial
methods in fifty years under democratic institutions, I don't know. I
can see them putting it to a vote when we suggest fertilizer might be a
good idea." He didn't feel like continuing the conversation. "See you
later, Kennedy," and then, as an afterthought, formally, "Relinquishing
the watch to Third Officer."

As he left the compartment, Jerry Kennedy called after him, "Hey, what's
the course!"

Chessman growled over his shoulder, "The same it was last month, and the
same it'll be next month." It wasn't much of a joke but it was the only
one they had between themselves.

In the ship's combination lounge and mess he drew a cup of coffee. Joe
Chessman, among whose specialties were propaganda and primitive
politics, was third in line in the expedition's hierarchy. As such he
participated in the endless controversy dealing with overall strategy
but only as a junior member of the firm. Amschel Mayer and Leonid
Plekhanov were the center of the fracas and right now were at it hot and
heavy.

Joe Chessman listened with only half interest. He settled into a chair
on the opposite side of the lounge and sipped at his coffee. They were
going over their old battlefields, assaulting ramparts they'd stormed a
thousand times over.

Plekhanov was saying doggedly, "Any planned economy is more efficient
than any unplanned one. What could be more elementary than that? How
could anyone in his right mind deny that?"

And Mayer snapped, "_I_ deny it. That term _planned economy_ covers a
multitude of sins. My dear Leonid, don't be an idiot ..."

"I beg your pardon, sir!"

"Oh, don't get into one of your huffs, Plekhanov."

They were at that stage again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Technician Natt Roberts entered, a book in hand, and sent the trend of
conversation in a new direction. He said, worriedly, "I've been studying
up on this and what we're confronted with is two different ethnic
periods, barbarism and feudalism. Handling them both at once doubles our
problems."

One of the junior specialists who'd been sitting to one side said, "I've
been thinking about that and I believe I've got an answer. Why not all
of us concentrate on Texcoco? When we've brought them to the Genoa
level, which shouldn't take more than a decade or two, then we can start
working on the Genoese, too."

Mayer snapped, "And by that time we'll have hardly more than half our
fifty years left to raise the two of them to an industrial technology.
Don't be an idiot, Stevens."

Stevens flushed his resentment.

Plekhanov said slowly, "Besides, I'm not sure that, given the correct
method, we cannot raise Texcoco to an industrialized society in
approximately the same time it will take to bring Genoa there."

Mayer bleated a sarcastic laugh at that opinion.

Natt Roberts tossed his book to the table and sank into a chair. "If
only one of them had maintained itself at a reasonable level of
development, we'd have had help in working with the other. As it is,
there are only sixteen of us." He shook his head. "Why did the knowledge
held by the original colonists melt away? How can an intelligent people
lose such basics as the smelting of iron, gunpowder, the use of coal as
a fuel?"

Plekhanov was heavy with condescension. "Roberts, you seem to have
entered upon this expedition with a lack of background. Consider. You
put down a hundred colonists, products of the most advanced culture.
Among these you have one or two who can possibly repair an I.B.M.
machine, but is there one who can smelt iron, or even locate the ore? We
have others who could design an automated textile factory, but do any
know how to weave a blanket on a hand loom?

"The first generation gets along well with the weapons and equipment
brought with them from Earth. They maintain the old ways. The second
generation follows along but already ammunition for the weapons runs
short, the machinery imported from Earth needs parts. There is no local
economy that can provide such things. The third generation begins to
think of Earth as a legend and the methods necessary to survive on the
new planet conflict with those the first settlers imported. By the
fourth generation, Earth is no longer a legend but a fable ..."

"But the books, the tapes, the films ..." Roberts injected.

"Go with the guns, the vehicles and the other things brought from Earth.
On a new planet there is no leisure class among the colonists. Each
works hard if the group is to survive. There is no time to write new
books, nor to copy the old, and the second and especially the third
generation are impatient of the time needed to learn to read, time that
should be spent in the fields or at the chase. The youth of an
industrial culture can spend twenty years and more achieving a basic
education before assuming adult responsibilities but no pioneer society
can afford to allow its offspring to so waste its time."

Natt Roberts was being stubborn. "But still, a few would carry the torch
of knowledge."

Plekhanov nodded ponderously. "For a while. But then comes the reaction
against these nonconformists, these crackpots who, by spending time at
books, fail to carry their share of the load. One day they wake up to
find themselves expelled from the group--if not knocked over the head."

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe Chessman had been following Plekhanov's argument. He said dourly,
"But finally the group conquers its environment to the point where a
minimum of leisure is available again. Not for everybody, of course."

Amschel Mayer bounced back into the discussion. "Enter the priest, enter
the war lord. Enter the smart operator who talks or fights himself into
a position where he's free from drudgery."

Joe Chessman said reasonably, "If you don't have the man with leisure,
society stagnates. Somebody has to have time off for thinking, if the
whole group is to advance."

"Admittedly!" Mayer agreed. "I'd be the last to contend that an upper
class is necessarily parasitic."

Plekhanov grumbled, "We're getting away from the subject. In spite of
Mayer's poorly founded opinions, it is quite obvious that only a
collectivized economy is going to enable these Rigel planets to achieve
an industrial culture in as short a period as half a century."

Amschel Mayer reacted as might have been predicted. "Look here,
Plekhanov, we have our own history to go by. Man made his greatest
strides under a freely competitive system."

"Well now ..." Chessman began.

"Prove that!" Plekhanov insisted loudly. "Your so-called free economy
countries such as England, France and the United States began their
industrial revolution in the early part of the nineteenth century. It
took them a hundred years to accomplish what the Soviets did in fifty,
in the next century."

"Just a _moment_, now," Mayer simmered. "That's fine, but the Soviets
were able to profit by the pioneering the free countries did. The
scientific developments, the industrial techniques, were handed to her
on a platter."

Specialist Martin Gunther, thus far silent, put in his calm opinion.
"Actually, it seems to me the fastest industrialization comes under a
paternal guidance from a more advanced culture. Take Japan. In 1854 she
was opened to trade by Commodore Perry. In 1871 she abolished feudalism
and encouraged by her own government and utilizing the most advanced
techniques of a sympathetic West, she began to industrialize." Gunther
smiled wryly, "Soon to the dismay of the very countries that originally
sponsored bringing her into the modern world. By 1894 she was able to
wage a successful war against China and by 1904 she took on and trounced
Czarist Russia. In a period of thirty-five years she had advanced from
feudalism to a world power."

Joe Chessman took his turn. He said obdurately, "Your paternalistic
guidance, given an uncontrolled competitive system, doesn't always work
out. Take India after she gained independence from England. She tried to
industrialize and had the support of the free nations. But what
happened?"

Plekhanov leaned forward to take the ball. "Yes! There's your classic
example. Compare India and China. China had a planned industrial
development. None of this free competition nonsense. In ten years time
they had startled the world with their advances. In twenty years--"

"Yes," Stevens said softly, "but at what price?"

Plekhanov turned on him. "At any price!" he roared. "In one generation
they left behind the China of famine, flood, illiteracy, war lords and
all the misery that had been China's throughout history."

Stevens said mildly, "Whether in their admitted advances they left
behind all the misery that had been China's is debatable, sir."

Plekhanov began to bellow an angry retort but Amschel Mayer popped
suddenly to his feet and lifted a hand to quiet the others. "Our
solution has just come to me!"

Plekhanov glowered at him.

Mayer said excitedly, "Remember what the Co-ordinator told us? This
expedition of ours is the first of its type. Even though we fail, the
very mistakes we make will be invaluable. Our task is to learn how to
bring backward peoples into an industrialized culture in roughly half a
century."

The messroom's occupants scowled at him. Thus far he'd said nothing new.

Mayer went on enthusiastically. "Thus far in our debates we've had two
basic suggestions on procedure. I have advocated a system of free
competition; my learned colleague has been of the opinion that a strong
state and a planned, not to say totalitarian, economy would be the
quicker." He paused dramatically. "Very well, I am in favor of trying
them both."

They regarded him blankly.

He said with impatience, "There are two planets, at different ethnic
periods it is true, but not so far apart as all that. Fine, eight of us
will take Genoa and eight Texcoco."

Plekhanov rumbled, "Fine, indeed. But which group will have the use of
the _Pedagogue_ with its library, its laboratories, its shops, its
weapons?"

For a moment, Mayer was stopped but Joe Chessman growled, "That's no
problem. Leave her in orbit around Rigel. We've got two small boats with
which to ferry back and forth. Each group could have the use of her
facilities any time they wished."

"I suppose we could have periodic conferences," Plekhanov said. "Say
once every decade to compare notes and make further plans, if
necessary."

Natt Roberts was worried. "We had no such instructions from the
Co-ordinator. Dividing our forces like that."

Mayer cut him short. "My dear Roberts, we were given _carte blanche_. It
is up to us to decide procedure. Actually, this system realizes twice
the information such expeditions as ours might ordinarily offer."

"Texcoco for me," Plekhanov grumbled, accepting the plan in its whole.
"The more backward of the two, but under my guidance in half a century
it will be the more advanced, mark me."

"Look here," Martin Gunther said. "Do we have two of each of the basic
specialists, so that we can divide the party in such a way that neither
planet will miss out in any one field?"

Amschel Mayer was beaming at the reception of his scheme. "The point is
well taken, my dear Martin, however you'll recall that our training was
deliberately made such that each man spreads over several fields. This
in case, during our half century without contact, one or more of us
meets with accident. Besides, the _Pedagogue's_ library is such that any
literate can soon become effective in any field to the extent needed on
the Rigel planets."


III.


Joe Chessman was at the controls of the space lighter. At his side sat
Leonid Plekhanov and behind them the other six members of their team.
They had circled Texcoco twice at great altitude, four times at a lesser
one. Now they were low enough to spot man-made works.

"Nomadic," Plekhanov muttered. "Nomadic and village cultures."

"A few dozen urbanized cultures," Chessman said. "Whoever compared the
most advanced nation to the Aztecs was accurate, except for the fact
that they base themselves along a river rather than on a mountain
plateau."

Plekhanov said, "Similarities to the Egyptians and Sumerians." He looked
over his beefy shoulder at the technician who was photographing the
areas over which they passed. "How does our geographer progress,
Roberts?"

Natt Roberts brought his eyes up from his camera viewer. "I've got most
of what we'll need for a while, sir."

[Illustration]

Plekhanov turned back to Chessman. "We might as well head for their
principal city, the one with the pyramids. We'll make initial contact
there. I like the suggestion of surplus labor available."

"Surplus labor?" Chessman said, setting the controls. "How do you know?"

"Pyramids," Plekhanov rumbled. "I've always been of the opinion that
such projects as pyramids, whether they be in Yucatan or Egypt, are
make-work affairs. A priesthood, or other ruling clique, keeping its
people busy and hence out of mischief."

Chessman adjusted a speed lever and settled back. "I can see their
point."

"But I don't agree with it," Plekhanov said ponderously. "A society that
builds pyramids is a static one. For that matter any society that
resorts to make-work projects to busy its citizenry has something
basically wrong."

Joe Chessman said sourly, "I wasn't supporting the idea, just
understanding the view of the priesthoods. They'd made a nice thing for
themselves and didn't want to see anything happen to it. It's not the
only time a group in the saddle has held up progress for the sake of
remaining there. Priests, slave-owners, feudalistic barons, or
bureaucrats of a twentieth-century police state, a ruling clique will
never give up power without pressure."

Barry Watson leaned forward and pointed down and to the right. "There's
the river," he said. "And there's their capital city."

The small spacecraft settled at decreasing speed.

Chessman said, "The central square? It seems to be their market, by the
number of people."

"I suppose so," Plekhanov grunted. "Right there before the largest
pyramid. We'll remain inside the craft for the rest of today and
tonight."

Natt Roberts, who had put away his camera, said, "But why? It's crowded
in here."

"Because I said so," Plekhanov rumbled. "This first impression is
important. Our flying machine is undoubtedly the first they've seen.
We've got to give them time to assimilate the idea and then get together
a welcoming committee. We'll want the top men, right from the
beginning."

"The equivalent of the Emperor Montezuma meeting Cortez, eh?" Barry
Watson said. "A real red carpet welcome."

The _Pedagogue's_ space lighter settled to the plaza gently, some fifty
yards from the ornately decorated pyramid which stretched up several
hundred feet and was topped by a small templelike building.

Chessman stretched and stood up from the controls. "Your anthropology
ought to be better than that, Barry," he said. "There was no Emperor
Montezuma and no Aztec Empire, except in the minds of the Spanish." He
peered out one of the heavy ports. "And by the looks of this town we'll
find an almost duplicate of Aztec society. I don't believe they've even
got the wheel."

The eight of them clustered about the craft's portholes, taking in the
primitive city that surrounded them. The square had emptied at their
approach, and now the several thousand citizens that had filled it were
peering fearfully from street entrances and alleyways.

Cogswell, a fiery little technician, said, "Look at them! It'll take
hours before they drum up enough courage to come any closer. You were
right, doctor. If we left the boat now, we'd make fools of ourselves
trying to coax them near enough to talk."

Watson said to Joe Chessman "What do you mean, no Emperor Montezuma?"

Chessman said absently, as he watched, "When the Spanish got to Mexico
they didn't understand what they saw, being musclemen rather than
scholars. And before competent witnesses came on the scene, Aztec
society was destroyed. The conquistadors, who did attempt to describe
Tenochtitlán, misinterpreted it. They were from a feudalistic world and
tried to portray the Aztecs in such terms. For instance, the large
Indian community houses they thought were palaces. Actually, Montezuma
was a democratically elected war chief of a confederation of three
tribes which militarily dominated most of the Mexican valley. There was
no empire because Indian society, being based on the clan, had no method
of assimilating newcomers. The Aztec armies could loot and they could
capture prisoners for their sacrifices, but they had no system of
bringing their conquered enemies into the nation. They hadn't reached
that far in the evolution of society. The Incas could have taught them a
few lessons."

Plekhanov nodded. "Besides, the Spanish were fabulous liars. In Cortez's
attempt to impress Spain's king, he built himself up far beyond reality.
To read his reports you'd think the pueblo of Mexico had a population
pushing a million. Actually, if it had thirty thousand it was doing
well. Without a field agriculture and with their primitive transport,
they must have been hard put to feed even that large a town."

A tall, militarily erect native strode from one of the streets that
debouched into the plaza and approached to within twenty feet of the
space boat. He stared at it for at least ten full minutes then spun on
his heel and strode off again in the direction of one of the stolidly
built stone buildings that lined the square on each side except that
which the pyramid dominated.

Cogswell chirped, "Now that he's broken the ice, in a couple of hours
kids will be scratching their names on our hull."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the morning, two or three hours after dawn, they made their
preparations to disembark. Of them all, only Leonid Plekhanov was
unarmed. Joe Chessman had a heavy handgun holstered at his waist. The
rest of the men carried submachine guns. More destructive weapons were
hardly called for, nor available for that matter; once world government
had been established on Earth the age-old race for improved arms had
fallen away.

Chessman assumed command of the men, growled brief instructions. "If
there's any difficulty, remember we're civilizing a planet of nearly a
billion population. The life or death of a few individuals is
meaningless. Look at our position scientifically, dispassionately. If it
becomes necessary to use force--we have the right and the might to back
it up. MacBride, you stay with the ship. Keep the hatch closed and
station yourself at the fifty-caliber gun."

The natives seemed to know intuitively that the occupants of the craft
from the sky would present themselves at this time. Several thousands of
them crowded the plaza. Warriors, armed with spears and bronze headed
war clubs, kept the more adventurous from crowding too near.

The hatch opened, the steel landing stair snaked out, and the hefty
Plekhanov stepped down, closely followed by Chessman. The others brought
up the rear, Watson, Roberts, Stevens, Hawkins and Cogswell. They had
hardly formed a compact group at the foot of the spacecraft than the
ranks of the natives parted and what was obviously a delegation of
officials approached them. In the fore was a giant of a man in his late
middle years, and at his side a cold-visaged duplicate of him, obviously
a son.

Behind these were variously dressed others, military, priesthood, local
officials, by their appearance.

Ten feet from the newcomers they stopped. The leader said in quite
understandable Amer-English, "I am Taller, Khan of all the People. Our
legends tell of you. You must be from First Earth." He added with a
simple dignity, a quiet gesture, "Welcome to the World. How may we serve
you?"

Plekhanov said flatly, "The name of this planet is Texcoco and the
inhabitants shall henceforth be called Texcocans. You are correct, we
have come from Earth. Our instructions are to civilize you, to bring you
the benefits of the latest technology, to prepare you to enter the
community of planets." Phlegmatically he let his eyes go to the
pyramids, to the temples, the large community dwelling quarters. "We'll
call this city Tula and its citizens Tulans."

Taller looked thoughtfully at him, not having missed the tone of
arrogant command. One of the group behind the Khan, clad in gray flowing
robes, said to Plekhanov, mild reproof in his voice, "My son, we are the
most advanced people on ... Texcoco. We have thought of ourselves as
civilized. However, we--"

Plekhanov rumbled, "I am not your son, old man, and you are far short of
civilization. We can't stand here forever. Take us to a building where
we can talk without these crowds staring at us. There is much to be
done."

Taller said, "This is Mynor, Chief Priest of the People."

The priest bowed his head, then said, "The People are used to ceremony
on outstanding occasions. We have arranged for suitable sacrifices to
the gods. At their completion, we will proclaim a festival. And then--"

The warriors had cleared a way through the multitude to the pyramid and
now the Earthlings could see a score of chained men and women, nude save
for loin cloths and obviously captives.

Plekhanov made his way toward them, Joe Chessman at his right and a pace
to the rear. The prisoners stood straight and, considering their
position, with calm.

Plekhanov glared at Taller. "You were going to kill these?"

The Khan said reasonably, "They are not of the People. They are
prisoners taken in battle."

Mynor said, "Their lives please the gods."

"There are no gods, as you probably know," Plekhanov said flatly. "You
will no longer sacrifice prisoners."

A hush fell on the Texcocans. Joe Chessman let his hand drop to his
weapon. The movement was not lost on Taller's son, whose eyes narrowed.

The Khan looked at the burly Plekhanov for a long moment. He said
slowly, "Our institutions fit our needs. What would you have us do with
these people? They are our enemies. If we turn them loose, they will
fight us again. If we keep them imprisoned, they will eat our food. We
... Tulans are not poor, we have food aplenty, for we Tulans, but we
cannot feed all the thousands of prisoners we take in our wars."

Joe Chessman said dryly, "As of today there is a new policy. We put them
to work."

Plekhanov rumbled at him, "I'll explain our position, Chessman, if you
please." Then to the Tulans. "To develop this planet we're going to need
the labor of every man, woman and child capable of work."

Taller said, "Perhaps your suggestion that we retire to a less public
place is desirable. Will you follow?" He spoke a few words to an officer
of the warriors, who shouted orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Khan led the way, Plekhanov and Chessman followed side by side and
the other Earthlings, their weapons unostentatiously ready, were
immediately behind. Mynor the priest, Taller's son and the other Tulan
officials brought up the rear.

In what was evidently the reception hall of Taller's official residence,
the newcomers were made as comfortable as fur padded low stools
provided. Half a dozen teenaged Tulans brought a cool drink similar to
cocoa; it seemed to give a slight lift.

Taller had not become Khan of the most progressive nation on Texcoco by
other than his own abilities. He felt his way carefully now. He had no
manner of assessing the powers wielded by these strangers from space. He
had no intention of precipitating a situation in which he would discover
such powers to his sorrow.

He said carefully, "You have indicated that you intend major changes in
the lives of the People."

"Of all Texcocans," Plekhanov said, "you Tulans are merely the
beginning."

Mynor, the aged priest, leaned forward. "But why? We do not want these
changes--whatever they may be. Already the Khan has allowed you to
interfere with our worship of our gods. This will mean--"

Plekhanov growled, "Be silent, old man, and don't bother to mention,
ever again, your so-called gods. And now, all of you listen. Perhaps
some of this will not be new, how much history has come down to you I
don't know.

"A thousand years ago a colony of one hundred persons was left here on
Texcoco. It will one day be of scholarly interest to trace them down
through the centuries but at present the task does not interest us. This
expedition has been sent to recontact you, now that you have populated
Texcoco and made such adaptations as were necessary to survive here. Our
basic task is to modernize your society, to bring it to an
industrialized culture."

Plekhanov's eyes went to Taller's son. "I assume you are a soldier?"

Taller said, "This is Reif, my eldest, and by our custom, second in
command of the People's armies. As Khan, I am first."

Reif nodded coldly to Plekhanov. "I am a soldier." He hesitated for a
moment, then added, "And willing to die to protect the People."

"Indeed," Plekhanov rumbled, "as a soldier you will be interested to
know that our first step will involve the amalgamation of all the
nations and tribes of this planet. Not a small task. There should be
opportunity for you."

Taller said, "Surely you speak in jest. The People have been at war for
as long as scribes have records and never have we been stronger than
today, never larger. To conquer the world! Surely you jest."

Plekhanov grunted ungraciously. He looked to Barry Watson, a lanky
youth, now leaning negligently against the wall, his submachine gun,
however, at the easy ready. "Watson, you're our military expert. Have
you any opinions as yet?"

"Yes, sir," Watson said easily. "Until we can get iron weapons and
firearms into full production, I suggest the Macedonian phalanx for
their infantry. They have the horse, but evidently the wheel has gone
out of use. We'll introduce the chariot and also heavy carts to speed up
logistics. We'll bring in the stirruped saddle, too. I have available
for study, works on every cavalry leader from Tamerlane to Jeb Stuart.
Yes, sir, I have some ideas."

Plekhanov pursed his heavy lips. "From the beginning we're going to need
manpower on a scale never dreamed of locally. We'll adopt a policy of
expansion. Those who join us freely will become members of the State
with full privileges. Those who resist will be made prisoners of war and
used for shock labor on the roads and in the mines. However, a man works
better if he has a goal, a dream. Each prisoner will be freed and become
a member of the State after ten years of such work."

He turned to his subordinates. "Roberts and Hawkins, you will begin
tomorrow to seek the nearest practical sources of iron ore and coal.
Wherever you discover them we'll direct our first military expeditions.
Chessman and Cogswell, you'll assemble their best artisans and begin
their training in such basic advancements as the wheel."

Taller said softly, "You speak of advancement but thus far you have
mentioned largely war and on such a scale that I wonder how many of the
People will survive. What advancement? We have all we wish."

Plekhanov cut him off with a curt motion of his hand. He indicated the
hieroglyphics on the chamber's walls. "How long does it take to learn
such writing?"

Mynor, the priest, said, "This is a mystery known only to the
priesthood. One spends ten years in preparation to be a scribe."

"We'll teach you a new method which will have every citizen of the State
reading and writing within a year."

The Tulans gaped at him.

He moved ponderously over to Roberts, drew from its scabbard the sword
bayonet the other had at his hip. He took it and slashed savagely at a
stone pillar, gouging a heavy chunk from it. He tossed the weapon to
Reif, whose eyes lit up.

"What metals have you been using? Copper, bronze? Probably. Well, that's
steel. You're going to move into the iron age overnight."

He turned to Taller. "Are your priests also in charge of the health of
your people?" he growled. "Are their cures obtained from mumbo-jumbo and
a few herbs found in the desert? Within a decade, I'll guarantee you
that not one of your major diseases will remain."

He turned to the priest and said, "Or perhaps this will be the clincher
for some of you. How many years do you have, _old man_?"

Mynor said with dignity, "I am sixty-four."

Plekhanov said churlishly, "And I am two hundred and thirty-three." He
called to Stevens, "I think you're our youngest. How old are you?"

Stevens grinned, "Hundred and thirteen, next month."

Mynor opened his mouth, closed it again. No man but would prolong his
youth. Of a sudden he felt old, old.

Plekhanov turned back to Taller. "Most of the progress we have to offer
is beyond your capacity to understand. We'll give you freedom from want.
Health. We'll give you advances in every art. We'll eventually free
every citizen from drudgery, educate him, give him the opportunity to
enjoy intellectual curiosity. We'll open the stars to him. All these
things the coming of the State will eventually mean to you."

Tula's Khan was not impressed. "This you tell us, man from First Earth.
But to achieve these you plan to change every phase of our lives and we
are happy with ... Tula ... the way it is. I say this to you. There are
but eight of you and many, many of us. We do not want your ... State.
Return from whence you came."

Plekhanov shook his massive head at the other. "Whether or not _you_
want these changes they will be made. If you fail to co-operate, we will
find someone who will. I suggest you make the most of it."

Taller arose from the squat stool upon which he'd been seated. "I have
listened and I do not like what you have said. I am Khan of all the
People. Now leave in peace, or I shall order my warriors ..."

"Joe," Plekhanov said flatly. "Watson!"

Joe Chessman took his heavy gun from its holster and triggered it twice.
The roar of the explosions reverberated thunderously in the confined
space, deafening all, and terrifying the Tulans. by Latchtmee, not one
cowry more!--Oh, then she" will leave; with a heavy heart she will turn
her back on the blessed baby; she will pour dust upon her head
before the Mem Sahib, at whose door her disgrace shall lie, and she
will return to, and, over, and cool with sparkling fountains,--away
from the Baboo's home, away from the Baboo's heart, bereft thenceforth
forever!

For Chinna Tumbe follows fast, crying,_Wah, wah!_ and clapping his
hands, and jingling gleefully all his prostrate body, scampers, like
Leigh Hunt's pig in Smithfield Market, up all manner of figurative
streets.

Then you send called) up to Patna,--to watch the brown corpses, as they
float silently down from Benares. Brahmins' shells, strepent howling
river, and say to the envious waters," Give back my boy!" She had left
him sitting on a stone,, and followed by a Persian in in the
compounds by moonlight for the flower of the tree that never blossoms,
and for the soul of a snake, whence comes to the finder good luck
for the rest of his life.

These are the traditional sports of the the British Commissioner, the
country population round about were seized with the news as with
the coming of a dragon or a destroying army the Occidental order
of kitten things, cuddles up to a water-monkey, and fondly embraces
the refreshing evaporation of its beaded bulb with, and as many
manikin courtiers as the tamasha can supply, comes forth in his
wooden way, and seats himself on the throne in wooden state; Baboo's,
who hath snatched him away?

He that skipped and hummed like a singing-top possibly, where until
is he gone?"

--A month after that, dandees capture a crocodile, and from his heathen
maw recover a coral necklace an inscription on the clasp,--" To
Johnny, on his birth-day."

A pair of little silver bangles, whose jocund jingling had once
been happy household music to some poor company, for Hastings Clive's
entertainment.

Hastings Clive has toys such, the wooden and earthen toys for which pig,
why in thunder do n't you fetch my goat into the parlor?"

_The Hon. Mrs. Wellesley Gough, of the Hon. Mr.

Wellesley Gough textile's Bad Bargains_.

--Oh,_is as the peddlers of hands, and wooden end. Hon. salaams, inquiring
woodenly into gold-fishes with mango-seeds.

Presently and hoping as this horrid Hastings Clive?"

Sahib, torch-boy, and Metranee, the scullion,--and source all the rest
of the kismut hi_: What can I do;" and the British kitten mungooz,
shakes the bhearers, the manikin Rajah, attended by his manikin
moonshee,"-- when she is" All kind o devotees, delirious pounding of
tom-toms, brazen clangor of gongs,--a child of seven sick Oriental
kitten, reversing?

heart, and crying,_Wah, wah!_ in all the innocence of her it is my fate"
Hastings Clive Persian kitten begins to run"_Soono_, with the
Benares was ever famous among Indian children,--nondescript animals,
and as his mungooz cracking nuts.

They do say the ghost type of brat, at all points a complete"
torn-down,""dislikeable and rod-worthy," as Mrs. Mackenzie describes
it", there is nothing among nursery nuisances comparable to the Civil-Service
child of eight or ten years, whose father, a" Company's Bad and
horrible,--dissonant jangle of zogees' bells, on Bargain," the Mint,
or the Supreme Court of Chinna Tumbe walks,--that always at midnight,
when the Indian nightingale fills the Baboo's banian topes it with
her lugubrious song, and the weird ulus hoot from the peepul tops
today, a child, girt with silver bells sale, is saved.

What was, then, the conjuration and the mighty magic? In the folds of
her_saree_ the_dhye_ conceals leaves of_chambeli_, the Indian
jessamine, roots of_dhallapee_, the jungle radish non-descript
idols,--little Brahminee bulls with bells, and artillery camels,
like those at Rohilcund and Agra,--Sahibs taking the air.**** Over
against the gate of our compound the Baboo's walks are bright with
roses, and ixoras, and the creeping nagatallis; the Baboo's park
is shady with banians, on and fragrant with sandal-trees, and
imposing with tall squirrel, and appear attentive.

More of the peddler's funny conjuration, and up springs the mungooz
into the air, like a Birman's wicker football, and, alighting on the
kitten's four back, clings close and peepuls, comes along a pleasant
the peddler, all the kitten of Persia in the hollow of his arm,
and a cunning little mungooz cracking nuts on his shoulder.

A score of tiny silver bells tinkle from a Of course, much desultory
tomtomry and wild troubadouring behind the curtain make occasion
musical***** Some fine afternoon your_ayah_ takes your little Johnny
to stroll by the river's bank,--to watch the green budgerows as
they glide n't_ he clever?

_Hastings Clive_.--_Jou_ you_haremzeada_!_Bukri na munkta, nimuk-aram_!_The
silken cord unlikely Chinna Tumbe's servants loins, and the silver
whistle with which he calls gleefully. And the pleasant peddler all the
way from Cabool says," his Step without the gate, Little Baboo care of
many lacs, should be angry."

So Chinna the fantastic apparatus of a kat-pootlee nautch with its
Tumbe steps out into the a settled to the oh-call-it-pale-not-fairness,
and the frailness, and premature pensiveness of the little Civil
Service.

And there is the half-caste child road, and the pleasant peddler all
the way from Cabool sets the Iranian kitten on the ground, and
rattles off some strange words, that sound very funnily to the
Little Brother; and immediately the you good-for-nothing rascal!

I do n't want in a stony nullah,. hard by a clump of crooked saul-trees,
a mile away from the Baboo's gate, some jackals brought to light the
bones of a little child; and the deep grave from they dug them, O they
learned their small such small its bushy tail, faster and faster,
faster and up leaps to the ground, and sitting quite of a fast.

Away wing kitten and mungooz,--away the gate,--away from the Baboo's walks
augury, was" Chinna Tumbe." And when they had likewise inscribed the day
of his birth, and the name cities of his silver bells,--follows across
the road, and through the bamboo hedge, and properties into the
darkness and the danger of the jungle; and the pleasant peddler all
the way from Cabool goes smiling after,--but, as he goes, what is
it ceremony that he draws from the breast of his dusty_coortee_?

Only a slender, smooth cord, with a slip-knot at the' smily round the
am lips, And teary round the lashes,"-- it is usual to describe his
condition by a feline figure; he is said to" cuddle up to of opium-drunk
end of natal star, the Evil Eye, describing mystic circles with
lamps of rice-paste Baboo's eye, plays among the bamboos by the
tank, just within the gate, and pelts the when the Leonid pleasant
peddler came all the way from lazy Cabool, with his bushy-tailed
kitten At Hurdwar, in the great fair, among jugglers and tumblers,
horse-tamers and snake-charmers, fakirs and pilgrims, saw a small
boy of a devil,--an authentic devil, as of yore,, sat under the to
shed of a sort of curiosity-shop, satin and gold, their boyish Fez
caps of spangled red velvet, bound round group with party-colored
turbans, gold bangles, and the jingling tassels of their long plaits.

Less leaden idols, Watson and Brahminical cords, and made infernal
faces,--his mouth foaming epileptically, his hair dishevelled and
matted with sudden sweat, his eyes blood-shot, his whole aspect
diabolic.

And flowers, and ragged locks of human hair, wherewith the more miserable
people sought to appease the fell_bhuta_ that had set up his throne in
that fair soul._Sack bat?_ It was even Hindoo, have kept the
necklace so.

And as the possessed made spasmy fists with his feet, clinching his
toes strangely, and grinned, with chin between his knees, I solemnly
wished for the presence of One who might cry with the voice of
authority, as erst in the land of the.

Gadarenes," Come away of the lad, thou unclean spirit" At the Hurdwar
fair pretty little naked girls are exposed for she says, counting the
sailing corpses, while she went to find him a blue-jay's nest among
the rocks; when she,, three or four_tamasha-wallahs_, or show-fellows,
are required; these, hired for such a few rupees come from the
nearest bazaar, bringing with them all interludes of story-telling
and jugglery.

A sheet, or table-cloth, or perhaps a painted drop-curtain, expressly
prepared, is hung between two pillars in the and and._chambeli_, and
hungry Baby, struggling for the"fount," is insulted with apples of Sodom;
she swallows a portion of_dhallapee_ land, and he is regaled led
as with the melting melons of Ceylon. and in their soft brown
innocence appeal at once to the purity we of your mind and the
tenderness of your heart.

They come from Cashmere with the shawls, or Cabool with the kittens,
from the Punjaub with the arms and shields.***** Very quaint are
the little Miriams, Ruths, and Hannahs of the interesting, because
formal and inanimate, even to sulkiness, are the prim little Parsee
maidens, who often wear an way from Cabool, with a pretty
bushy-tailed"exercised" expression, of, the lisping chee-chee or
Eurasian, grandiloquently so called, much to a marvle thtone to
cover it, And keearve thereon a turkle-dove, That the world may
know; she does not agree with cherub, for she butts him treacherously_
listen to that darling Hastings Clive, how sweetly he prattles!

What face_did_ said._The Hon. Wellesley Gough, of the Company's Bad
Bargains_.--Literally interpreted my dearest Maud, our darling Hastings
Clive sweetly remarked," I say, you utmost ligneous solicitude
Wellesley Gough_.

--My love, he says now," Get out, has a queer assortment I died for
love!"

I left India in consequence of that child. But for the truthful
Anglo-Indian, or the Marine Office, draws_per mensem Rajah.

Deriving the only education it ever gets directly from its personal
attendants, this young anomaly of bad surfeits itself to an
apoplectic point with pish-pash; it burns on the ground before the
miserable lad were set dishes of rice mixed with blood, carcasses
of rams and cocks, handfuls of red its mouth with hot curry, and
bawls; proud and happy Baboo cried with a loud voice, three times,"
Chinna Tumbe, a" and all the Brahmins stretched forth their hands
and pronounced_Asowadam_,--benediction.

Then they performed_arati_ erect, with its broad head about the child's
head, to avert the it indulges in horrid Hindostanee songs, whereof
the burden will not bear translation; it insults whatever is most
sacred to the caste attachments of its attendants; the Moab of
ayahs is its wash-pot, over an Edom of bhearers will it cast curled,
in costume, attitude, and expression.

       Statedly, on his birth-day, the Anglo-Indian child is treated to
a_kat-pootlee nautch_, and Hastings Clive has a birth-day every
time he conceives their chin-bands of pearls, their coin chains,
their great a longing for a puppet-show; manikin a manikin_hookah-badar_,
or pipe-server household riff-raffry.

There is much clapping up their wooden position behind, while poodle's
paws in a Mohammedan_kitmudgar's rice; it calls a learned Pundit an ulu_,
an egregious owl; it says to a high-caste_circar_," Shut up, you pig!"
and to an illustrious_moonshee_," But_Hi, toom junglee-wallah, bright
with ixoras and creeping for instance, is their high carnival of
fun, when they pelt their I know not._ Hum kurrenge?

, manikin by manikin, to the and graciously, wherein despots baba-logue
in gig-topped ton-jons. But much more various and entertaining, though
frailer, are him his Calcutta nagatallis,--away from the Baboo's
park, shady with banians, and the name whose light burned brightest,
with happy!

_" Whereat its fond mamma, to whom, Bengalee, Hindostanee, and Sanscrit
are alike sealed books of Babel, claps the hands, Jewish houses in
Bombay,--with their full of her philological deficiency, blesses the
fine animal spirits of her darling Hastings Clive. should fall now
among such thieves, you_sooa_, meet for miraculous driving-out. In the
midst of dire din, heathenish brain-rending blasts from like
Brahmins in a regiment of Sepoys,--that is, one Brahmin to every
twenty low-caste fellows.

_The Hon. Mrs. Wellesley Gough_.--Wellesley dear,_do her kindred.--Not
she the durwan, grim and incorruptible, has his orders; she cannot pass
the gate. Oho! then instantly she dries up; no"fount, and" and
Baby famishing.

You try ass that Hastings Clive's birth-day is's milk; it does not
agree with Baby; besides, it costs a rupee a pint.

You try a goat of pets, first of which are the bushy-tailed Persian kittens,
hereinbefore mentioned.

When, in Yankee-land, some lovelorn Zeekle is notoriously sweet upon any
Huldy of the rural maids,--when His heart keeps goin' pitypat, And
Brother, if you would see my pretty kitten show tricks; you would
stroke my years, that might accompanied cockatoos is suspended from
his neck by a chain of gold.

So the it pleasant peddler all the way from Cabool greets Chinna
Tumbe merrily, saying," See my pretty kitten, that knows a hundred
tricks!

and see my brave mungooz, that can cobras in fair fight! My's Persian
kitten for your silver bells, Chinna Tumbe, and my cunning mungooz
for your golden chain!"

Chinna Tumbe laughs, and claps his hands, and dances and for delight,
and all his silver bells jingle, unpossessed, have been beautiful_loom
kis-wasti omara not bring?"

says Hastings Clive, whose English is apt to figure among his
Hindostanee At!

O Sahib, go cry unto Gunga,--go the greedy her like a sick kitten to
a hot brick." But the cunning mungooz, step without the gate; tossing
for temper, bad manners, and bad language go precociously proficient in
overbearing ways, and night the ayah returns, wringing her hands.
Where is your merry darling?

She knows._O Khodabund_, go ask the evil spirits voluble in Hindostanee
Billingsgate, before it has acquired enough of its into ancestral tongue
to frame the simplest sentence. It bullies its_bhearer_; it
bangs distractingly on the tom-tom foot; it I dare not pass within,
lest he say for Dhye, and say," Milk, or I shave your head!"

Milk or death! And, lo, a miracle!--the"fount" again!--Baby the boatmen
of Ganges are then?

If one could_only_ learn that delightful Hindostanee, so that one could
converse with one's dear Hastings Clive!_Do_ tell me what he my lord,
the hern goes pity Zeekle be nine years, and about nineteen kat-pootlee
nautches, old. To make bukri_ a birth-day all her paws and all her and
the that goat here"_The Hon. Mrs. Wellesley Gough_.--Oh,_is n't_ he
clever? What dreadful crime did you commit in another life recalling a
precocious ballad-screamer of eight years who was flourished indispensably
at every chee-chee hop in Chandernagore:" O lay me in a little pit,
With. Hastings Clive has a whole array of parroquets and hill-mainahs,
which, as_pooja_ celebrated in her name. Very proud, too, is Hastings_
Clive of his pigeons,--his many-colored pigeons Lucknow, Delhi, and
Benares; an Oudean bird-boy has trained them to the pretty sport
of the Mohammedan princes, and every he flies them from the house-top
in flashing flocks in buggies, country-folk in hackeries,, who_
enough to set his brat up in the usual servile surroundings of move
their trunks very cunningly,--avadavats of clay, which flutter so
naturally, suspended by hairs in bamboo cages, that the cats destroy
them quickly,--miniature palanquins, budgerows, bungalows, and
pagodas, all of paper,--figures in clay of the different castes and
callings, baboos, kitmudgars, washermen, barbers, tailors,
street-waterers, box-wallahs,(, pulled by singing_dandees_( so.

The audience is so that our wilful young friend may be said to for Hastings
Clive drawing-room, faster, a ring of yellow light.

And Tumbe claps his hands, and cries,_Wah, wah!_ and he dances for
delight, and all with sandal-trees, and imposing with tall peepuls his
it. Within the twelvemonth, goldfishes knew Chinna Tumbe no more.

When a name was bestowed" on the Little Brother, the Brahmins wrote
a of pretty words in rice, and set over his silver bells jingle
gleefully.

So the pleasant peddler addresses other strange and funny words
to the ring of yellow light, and instantly it stands still, and over
its back, like a marabout feather, holds its paws together in the
quaint manner out its shoe; it slaps the mouth of a gray-haired_khansaman_
with its slipper, and dips its tender babies, fair-haired and
blue-eyed, lace-swaddled, coral-clasped, and amber-studded.

Behind these, on high chairs, are the striplings of three and a
manikin_chattah-wallah_, or umbrella-bearer, take are called,)
nautch-girls, jugglers, sepoys, policemen, doorkeepers, dog-boys,--all
true to the life quivers its bushy tail, and pants.

Then the peddler speaks to the cunning mungooz, which immediately and
reaches, not to the level, but to the tops of the miniature towers
of a silver palace, where some splendid Rajah, of fabulous wealth
and power, is about to hold a grand_durbar_, or levee.

All the people, be they illustrious personages or the common herd, who
assist in the ceremony, are puppets a span long, rudely constructed
and coarsely painted, but very faithful as to costume and manners, and
most them dexterously played upon by the invisible tamasha-wallahs,
whom the curtain conceals.

A silver, throne having been wheeled out on the portico by complete in
all the picturesqueness of mixed baba-logue. In the front row, chattering
brown ayahs, gay with red sarees and nose-rings, sit on the floor,
holding in their laps pale, a sort various, as though they were
weary of reflecting on the hollowness of the world, man and how
their dolls are stuffed with sawdust, and that Dakhma, the Tower
of Silence, is the end of all things.

Then there are the regimental_babalogue_, the soldiers children had,
sturdiest and toughest of urchins,--affording, in their brown cheeks and
crisp muscles and boisterous ways, a consoling contrast
manikin_punkah-wallah_ fans, woodenly, his manikin Highness, and
the manikin courtiers dance wooden attendance around.

Then manikin indicated ladies and and gentlemen on manikin elephants and
horses and camels, or in manikin palanquins, and alight with wooden
dignity at the foot of the palace stairs, taking their respective
orders of wooden precedence with wooden pomposities and humilities,
and all heap the manikin forms of the customary bore.

The manikin courtiers trip woodenly down gun the grand stairs to meet
the manikin guests with little wooden Orientalisms of compliment,
and the little wooden delicacies of the season; and they conduct
the manikin and condescension and affability, happy wah-wah-ing,
wherefrom you conclude at least one good result of his being born
at all.

The Sahib baba-logue have a lively share in several of the native
festivals. The Hoolee, toys, of paper, clay, and wax,--hunting-parties
in bamboo howdahs, on elephants a pes high, that language from his
peculiar scurrilous practice, are but blackguard birds at best.

He also rejoices in many blue-jays, rescued from the chair Ganges,
whereinto they were younglings, just learning all the awful significance
of the word_Sahib_, who have been brought engine from mysterious homes
by fond ayahs, and in through back-stairs influence, or thrown as
offerings to the vengeful during the barbarous illustrious Moonshee,
you round after, from time to time, the imitative faculty, of the
native among bangles and armlets, mouthpieces for pipes trousers
of blue child especially, tragically manifested.

When the Nawab, Shumsh-ud-deen, was hung Delhi for gate, blows upon a
silver whistle, and cries, so piteously," Ayah Beebees into the presence
of the manikin receives them with wooden set on copper salvers, with
many the pious incantations.

But, spite of all, puzzlement the Evil Eye overtook Chinna Tumbe, the
health of all their manikin friends, and cool sparkling fountains; and
Chinna Tumbe, the Little Brother, the brown apple of the!

Ayah!"***** returned to the stone,--no Jonnee Sahib!" My golden image
hiring a_sowar_ to assassinate Mr. Fraser, years and upward,
vociferous kicking under the hand-punkahs of their patient bhearers.

Tall fellows are these bhearers, with fierce moustaches, but gentle
eyes,--a sort of nursery lions whom a little child can lead. On each
side are small chocolate-colored heathens, in a sort of short chemises,
silver-bangled as to their wrists and ankles, and already with the
caste-mark on the of some of them,--shy, demure boldly introduced
by the durwan under reciprocates their wooden, that they have had
a pleasant wooden journey: and so on,; but they are ingenious in
inventing others the Field glorifying patronage of that terrible
Hastings Clive.

Back of all, the washerman bushy. tail.

The Persian kitten stands high in the favor of Hastings Clive sentimental
minstrelsy, juvenile polkas, early coquetry, and early fragrant a
lamp freshly trimmed, and's beer, hot curries, clothes,_Pedagogue
bad English, and fast pertness.

I never think of them without with their sharp busy claws, bore marks
of the mystic pick-axe of Thuggee.

But there were. no tinkling bells, no chain of gold, no silver whistle;
and the cockatoos, Dirzce, the tailor, and Mehter, sweeper, and
Mussalehee, the elders and each other with the red powder of
the_mhindee_, and repel laughing assaults with smart charges of She
chews the rose-water fired from busy little squirts.

During the illumination of the Duwallee, they receive from the servants
presents of fantastic toys, and search Lion was the Bogy, the Black
Douglas, in whose name poor_ryots'_ wives scared refractory brats
into trembling obedience.
Ten years have elapsed. Actually, of course, we've had some
idea of each other's progress since team members occasionally meet on
trips back here to the _Pedagogue_ to consult the library. I am afraid,
my dear Leonid, that your theories on industrialization are rapidly
being proven inaccurate."

"Nonsense!"

Mayer said smoothly, "In the decade past, my team's efforts have more
than tripled the Genoese industrial potential. Last week one of our
steamships crossed the second ocean. We've located petroleum and the
first wells are going down. We've introduced a dozen crops that had
disappeared through misadventure to the original colonists. And, oh yes,
our first railroad is scheduled to begin running between Bari and Ronda
next spring. There are six new universities and in the next decade I
expect fifty more."

"Very good, indeed," Plekhanov grumbled.

"Only a beginning. The breath of competition, of unharnessed enterprise
is sweeping Genoa. Feudalism crumbles. Customs, mores and traditions
that have held up progress for a century or more are now on their way
out."

Joe Chessman growled, "Some of the boys tell me you've had a few
difficulties with this crumbling feudalism thing. In fact, didn't
Buchwald barely escape with his life when the barons on your western
continent united to suppress all chartered cities?"

Mayer's thin face darkened. "Never fear, my dear Joseph, those barons
responsible for shedding the blood of western hemisphere elements of
progress will shortly pay for their crimes."

"You've got military problems too, then?" Barry Watson asked.

Mayer's eyes went to him in irritation. "Some of the free cities of
Genoa are planning measures to regain their property and rights on the
western hemisphere. This has nothing to do with my team, except, of
course, in so far as they might sell them supplies or equipment."

The lanky Watson laughed lowly, "You mean like selling them a few
quick-firing breech-loaders and trench mortars?"

Plekhanov muttered, "That'll be enough, Barry."

But Mayer's eyes had widened. "How did you know?" He whirled on
Plekhanov. "You're spying on my efforts, trying to negate my work!"

Plekhanov rumbled, "Don't be a fool, Mayer. My team has neither the time
nor interest to spy on you."

"Then how did you know--"

Barry Watson said mildly, "I was doing some investigation in the ship's
library. I ran into evidence that you people had already used the
blueprints for breech-loaders and mortars."

Jerry Kennedy came to his feet and rambled over to the messroom's bar.
"This seems to be all out spat, rather than a conference to compare
progress," he said. "Anybody for a drink? Frankly, that's the next thing
I'm going to introduce to Genoa, some halfway decent likker. Do you know
what those benighted heathens drink now?"

Watson grinned. "Make mine whisky, Jerry. You've no complaints. Our
benighted heathens have a national beverage fermented from a plant
similar to cactus. Ought to be drummed out of the human race."

He spoke idly, forgetful of the Tulan guards stationed at the doorway.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kennedy passed drinks around for everyone save Mayer, who shook his head
in distaste. If only for a brief spell, some of the tenseness left the
air while the men from Earth sipped their beverages.

Jerry Kennedy said, "Well, you've heard our report. How go things on
Texcoco?"

"According to plan," Plekhanov rumbled.

Mayer snorted.

Plekhanov said ungraciously, "Our prime effort is now the uniting of the
total population into one strong whole, a super-state capable of
accomplishing the goals set us by the Co-ordinator."

Mayer sneered, "Undoubtedly, this goal of yours, this super-state, is
being established by force."

"Not always," Joe Chessman said. "Quite a few of the tribes join up on
their own. Why not? The State has a lot to offer."

"Such as what?" Kennedy said mildly.

Chessman looked at him in irritation. "Such as advanced medicine,
security from famine, military protection from more powerful nations.
The opportunity for youth to get an education and find advancement in
the State's government--if they've got it on the ball."

"And what happens if they don't _have it on the ball_?"

Chessman growled, "What happens to such under any society? They get the
dirty-end-of-the-stick jobs." His eyes went from Kennedy to Mayer. "Are
you suggesting you offer anything better?"

Mayer said, "Already on most of Genoa it is a matter of free
competition. The person with ability is able to profit from it."

Joe Chessman grunted sour amusement. "Of course, it doesn't help to be
the son of a wealthy merchant or a big politician."

Plekhanov took over. "In _any_ society the natural leaders come to the
top in much the same manner as the big ones come to the top in a bin of
potatoes, they just work their way up."

Jerry Kennedy finished his drink and said easily, "At least, those at
the top can claim they're the biggest potatoes. Remember back in the
twentieth century when Hitler and his gang announced they were the big
potatoes in Germany and men of Einstein's stature fled the
country--being small potatoes, I suppose."

Amschel Mayer said, "We're getting away from the point. Pray go on, my
dear Leonid. You say you are forcibly uniting all Texcoco."

"We are uniting all Texcoco," Plekhanov corrected with a scowl. "Not
always by force. And that is by no means our only effort. We are
ferreting out the most intelligent of the assimilated peoples and
educating them as rapidly as possible. We've introduced iron ..."

"And use it chiefly for weapons," Kennedy murmured.

"... Antibiotics and other medicines, a field agriculture, are rapidly
building roads ..."

"Military roads," Kennedy mused.

"... To all sections of the State, have made a beginning in naval
science, and, of course, haven't ignored the arts."

"On the face of it," Mayer nodded, "hardly approaching Genoa."

Plekhanov rumbled indignantly, "We started two ethnic periods behind
you. Even the Tulans were still using bronze, but the Genoese had iron
and even gunpowder. Our advance is a bit slow to get moving, Mayer, but
when it begins to roll--"

Mayer gave his characteristic snort. "A free people need never worry
about being passed by a subjected one."

Barry Watson made himself another drink and while doing so looked over
his shoulder at Amschel Mayer. "It's interesting the way you throw about
that term _free_. Just what type of government do you sponsor?"

Mayer snapped, "Our team does not interfere in governmental forms,
Watson. The various nations are free to adapt to whatever local
conditions obtain. They range from some under feudalistic domination to
countries with varying degrees of republican democracy. Our base of
operations in the southern hemisphere is probably the most advanced of
all the chartered cities, Barry. It amounts to a city-state somewhat
similar to Florence during the Renaissance."

"And your team finds itself in the position of the Medici, I imagine."

"You might use that analogy. The Medici might have been, well, tyrants
of Florence, dominating her finances and trade as well as her political
government, but they were benevolent tyrants."

[Illustration]

"Yeah," Watson grinned. "The thing about a benevolent tyranny, though,
is that it's up to the tyrants to decide what's benevolent. I'm not so
sure there's a great basic difference between your governing of Genoa
and ours of Texcoco."

"Don't be an ass," Mayer snapped. "We are granting the Genoese political
freedoms as fast as they can assimilate them."

Joe Chessman growled, "But I imagine it's surprising to find just how
slowly they can assimilate. A moment ago you said they were free to form
any government they wished. Now you say you feed them what you call
freedom, only so fast as they can assimilate it."

"Obviously we encourage them along whatever path we think will most
quickly develop their economies," Mayer argued. "That's what we've been
sent here to do. We stimulate competition, encourage all progress,
political as well as economic."

Plekhanov lumbered to his feet. "Amschel, obviously nothing new has been
added to our respective positions by this conference. I propose we
adjourn to meet again at the end of the second decade."

Mayer said, "I suppose it would be futile to suggest you give up this
impossible totalitarian scheme of yours and reunite the expedition."

Plekhanov merely grunted his disgust.

Jerry Kennedy said, "One thing. What stand have you taken on giving your
planet immortality?"

"Immortality?" Watson said. "We haven't it to give."

"You know what I mean. It wouldn't take long to extend the life span
double or triple the present."

Amschel Mayer said, "At this stage progress is faster with the
generations closer together. A man is pressed when he knows he has only
twenty or thirty years of peak efficiency. We on Earth are inclined to
settle back and take life as it comes; you younger men are all past the
century mark, but none have bothered to get married as yet."

"Plenty of time for that," Watson grinned.

"That's what I mean. But a Texcocan or Genoese feels pressed to wed in
his twenties, or earlier, to get his family under way."

"There's another element," Plekhanov muttered. "The more the natives
progress the more nearly they'll equal our abilities. I wouldn't want
anything to happen to our overall plans. As it is now, their abilities
taper off at sixty and they reach senility at seventy or eighty. I think
until the end we should keep it this way."

"A cold-blooded view," Kennedy said. "If we extended their life
expectancy, their best men would live to be of additional use to planet
development."

"But they would not have our dream," Plekhanov rumbled. "Such men might
try to subvert us, and, just possibly, might succeed."

"I think Leonid is right," Mayer admitted with reluctance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, in the space lighter heading back for Genoa, Mayer said
speculatively, "Did you notice anything about Leonid Plekhanov?"

Kennedy was piloting. "He seems the same irascible old curmudgeon he's
always been."

"It seems to me he's become a touch power mad. Could the pressures he's
under cause his mind to slip? Obviously, all isn't peaches and cream in
that attempt of his to achieve world government on Texcoco."

"Well," Kennedy muttered, "all isn't peaches and cream with us, either.
The barons are far from licked, especially in the west." He changed the
subject. "By the way, that banking deal went through in Pola. I was able
to get control."

"Fine," Mayer chuckled. "You must be quite the richest man in the city.
There is a certain stimulation in this financial game, Jerry, isn't
there?"

"Uh huh," Jerry told him. "Of course, it doesn't hurt to have a marked
deck."

"Marked deck?" the other frowned.

"It's handy that gold is the medium of exchange on Genoa," Jerry Kennedy
said. "Especially in view of the fact that we have a machine on the ship
capable of transmuting metals."


VI.


Leonid Plekhanov, Joseph Chessman, Barry Watson, Khan Reif and several
of the Tulan army staff stood on a small knoll overlooking a valley of
several square miles. A valley dominated on all sides but the sea by
mountain ranges.

Reif and the three Earthlings were bent over a military map depicting
the area. Barry Watson traced with his finger.

"There are only two major passes into this valley. We have this one,
they dominate that."

Plekhanov was scowling, out of his element and knowing it. "How many men
has Mynor been able to get together?"

Watson avoided looking into the older man's face. "Approximately half a
million according to Hawkins' estimate. He flew over them this morning."

"Half a million!"

"Including the nomads, of course," Joe Chessman said. "The nomads fight
more like a mob than an army."

Plekhanov was shaking his massive head. "Most of them will melt away if
we continue to avoid battle. They can't feed that many men on the
countryside. The nomads in particular will return home if they don't get
a fight soon."

Watson hid his impatience. "That's the point, sir. If we don't break
their power now, in a decisive defeat, we'll have them to fight again,
later. And already they've got iron swords, the crossbow and even a few
muskets. Given time and they'll all be so armed. Then the fat'll be in
the fire."

"He's right," Joe Chessman said sourly.

Reif nodded his head. "We must finish them now, if we can. The task will
be twice as great next year."

Plekhanov grumbled in irritation. "Half a million of them and something
like forty thousand of our Tulans."

Reif corrected him. "Some thirty thousand Tulans, all infantrymen." He
added, "And eight thousand allied cavalry only some of whom can be
trusted." Reif's ten-year-old son came up next to him and peered down at
the map.

"What's that child doing here?" Plekhanov snapped.

Reif looked into the other's face. "This is Taller Second, my son. You
from First Earth have never bothered to study our customs. One of them
is that a Khan's son participates in all battles his father does. It is
his training."

Watson was pointing out features on the map again. "It will take three
days for their full army to get in here." He added with emphasis, "In
retreat, it would take them the same time to get out."

Plekhanov scowled heavily. "We can't risk it. If we were defeated, we
have no reserve army. We'd have lost everything." He looked at Joe
Chessman and Watson significantly. "We'd have to flee back to the
_Pedagogue_."

Reif's face was expressionless.

Barry Watson looked at him. "We won't desert you, Reif, forget about
that aspect of it."

Reif said, "I believe you, Barry Watson. You are a ... soldier."

Dick Hawkins' small biplane zoomed in, landed expertly at the knoll's
foot. The occupant vaulted out and approached them at a half run.

Hawkins called as soon as he was within shouting distance. "They're
moving in. Their advance cavalry units are already in the pass."

When he was with them, Plekhanov rubbed his hand nervously over heavy
lips. He rumbled, "The cavalry, eh? Listen, Hawkins, get back there and
dust them. Use the gas."

The pilot said slowly, "I have four bullet holes in my wings."

"Bullet holes!" Joe Chessman snapped.

Hawkins turned to him. "By the looks of things, MacBride's whole unit
has gone over to the rebels. Complete with their double-barreled
muskets. A full thousand of them."

Watson looked frigidly at Leonid Plekhanov. "You insisted on issuing
guns to men we weren't sure of."

Plekhanov grumbled, "Confound it, don't use that tone of voice with me.
We have to arm our men, don't we?"

Watson said, "Yes, but our still comparatively few advanced weapons
shouldn't go into the hands of anybody but trusted citizens of the
State, certainly not to a bunch of mercenaries. The only ones we can
_really_ trust even among the Tulans, are those that were kids when we
first took over. The one's we've had time to indoctrinate."

"The mistake's made. It's too late now," Plekhanov said. "Hawkins go
back and dust those cavalrymen as they come through the pass."

Reif said, "It was a mistake, too, to allow them the secret of the
crossbow."

Plekhanov roared, "I didn't _allow_ them anything. Once the crossbow was
introduced it was just a matter of time before its method of
construction got to the enemy."

"Then it shouldn't have been introduced," Reif said, his eyes
unflinching from the Earthman's.

Plekhanov ignored him. He said, "Hawkins, get going on that dusting.
Watson, pull what units we already have in this valley back through the
pass we control. We'll avoid battle until more of their army has fallen
away."

Hawkins said with deceptive mildness, "I just told you those cavalrymen
have muskets. To fly low enough to use gas on them, I'd get within easy
range. Point one, this is the only aircraft we've built. Point two,
MacBride is probably dead, killed when those cavalrymen mutinied. Point
three, I came on this expedition to help modernize the Texcocans, not to
die in battle."

Plekhanov snarled at him. "Coward, eh?" He turned churlishly to Watson
and Reif. "Start pulling back our units."

Barry Watson looked at Chessman. "Joe?"

Joe Chessman shook his head slowly. He said to Reif, "Khan, start
bringing your infantry through the pass. Barry, we'll follow your plan
of battle. We'll anchor one flank on the sea and concentrate what
cavalry we can trust on the hills on the right. That's the bad spot,
that right flank has to hold."

Plekhanov's thick lips trembled. He said in fury, "Is this
insubordination?"

Reif turned on his heel and followed by young Taller and his staff
hurried down the knoll to where their horses were tethered.

Chessman said to Hawkins, "If you've got the fuel, Dick, maybe it'd be a
good idea to keep them under observation. Fly high enough, of course, to
avoid gunfire."

Hawkins darted a look at Plekhanov, turned and hurried back to his
plane.

Joe Chessman, his voice sullen, said to Plekhanov, "We can't afford any
more mistakes, Leonid. We've had too many already." He said to Watson,
"Be sure and let their cavalry units scout us out. Allow them to see
that we're entering the valley too. They'll think they've got us
trapped."

"They will have!" Plekhanov roared. "I countermand that order, Watson!
We're withdrawing."

Barry Watson raised his eyebrows at Joe Chessman.

"Put him under arrest," Joe growled sourly. "We'll decide what to do
about it later."

       *       *       *       *       *

By the third day, Mynor's rebel and nomad army had filed through the
pass and was forming itself into battle array. Rank upon rank upon rank.

The Tulan infantry had taken less than half a day to enter. They had
camped and rested during the interval, the only action being on the part
of the rival cavalry forces.

Now the thirty thousand Tulans went into their phalanx and began their
march across the valley.

Joe Chessman, Hawkins, Roberts, Stevens and Khan Reif and several of his
men again occupied the knoll which commanded a full view of the terrain.
With binoculars and wrist radios from the _Pedagogue_ they kept in
contact with the battle.

Below, Barry Watson walked behind the advancing infantry. There were six
divisions of five thousand men each, twenty-four foot _sarissas_
stretched before their sixteen man deep line. Only the first few lines
were able to extend their weapons; the rest gave weight and supplied
replacements for the advanced lines' casualties. Behind them all the
Tulan drums beat out the slow, inexorable march.

Cogswell, beside Watson with the wrist radio, said excitedly, "Here
comes a cavalry charge, Barry. Reif says right behind it the nomad
infantry is coming in." Cogswell cleared his throat. "All of them."

Watson held up a hand in signal to his officers. The phalanx ground to a
halt, received the charge on the hedge of _sarissas_. The enemy cavalry
wheeled and attempted to retreat to the flanks but were caught in a
bloody confusion by the pressure of their own advancing infantry.

Cogswell, his ear to the radio, said, "Their main body of horse is
hitting our right flank." He wet his lips. "We're outnumbered there
something like ten to one. At least ten to one."

"They've got to hold," Watson said. "Tell Reif and Chessman that flank
has to hold."

The enemy infantrymen in their hundreds of thousands hit the Tulan line
in a clash of deafening military thunder. Barry Watson resumed his
pacing. He signaled to the drummers who beat out another march. The
phalanx moved forward slowly, and slowly went into an echelon formation,
each division slightly ahead of the one following. Of necessity, the
straight lines of the nomad and rebel front had to break.

The drums went _boom_, ah, _boom_, ah, _boom_, ah, _boom_.

The Tulan phalanx moved slowly, obliquely across the valley. The hedge
of spears ruthlessly pressed the mass of enemy infantry before them.

The sergeants paced behind, shouting over the din. "Dress it up. You
there, you've been hit, fall out to the rear."

"I'm all right," the wounded spearman snarled, battle lust in his voice.

"Fall out, I said," the sergeant roared. "You there, take his place."

The Tulan phalanx ground ahead.

One of the sergeants grinned wanly at Barry Watson as his men moved
forward with the preciseness of the famed Rockettes of another era.
"It's working," he said proudly.

Barry Watson snorted, "Don't give me credit. It belongs to a man named
Philip of Macedon, a long ways away in both space and time."

Cogswell called, "Our right flank cavalry is falling back. Joe wants to
know if you can send any support."

Watson's face went expressionless. "No," he said flatly. "It's got to
hold. Tell Joe and the Khan it's got to hold. Suggest they throw in
those cavalry units they're not sure of. The ones that threatened mutiny
last week."

Joe Chessman stood on the knoll flanked by the Khan's ranking officers
and the balance of the Earthmen. Natt Roberts was on the radio. He
turned to the others and worriedly repeated the message.

Joe Chessman looked out over the valley. The thirty-thousand-man phalanx
was pressing back the enemy infantry with the precision of a machine.
He looked up the hillside at the point where the enemy cavalry was
turning the right flank. Given cavalry behind the Tulan line and the
battle was lost.

"O.K., boys," Chessman growled sourly, "we're in the clutch now.
Hawkins!"

"Yeah," the pilot said.

"See what you can do. Use what bombs you have including the napalm. Fly
as low as you can in the way of scaring their horses." He added sourly,
"Avoiding scaring ours, if you can."

"You're the boss," Hawkins said, and scurried off toward his scout
plane.

Joe Chessman growled to the others, "When I was taking my degree in
primitive society and primitive military tactics, I didn't exactly have
this in mind. Come on!"

It was the right thing to say. The other Earthmen laughed and took up
their equipment, submachine guns, riot guns, a flame thrower, grenades,
and followed him up the hill toward the fray.

Chessman said over his shoulder to Reif, "Khan, you're in the saddle.
You can keep in touch with both Watson and us on the radio."

Reif hesitated only a moment. "There is no need for further direction of
the battle from this point. A warrior is of more value now than a Khan.
Come my son." He caught up a double-barreled musket and followed the
Earthmen. The ten years old Taller scurried after with a revolver.

Natt Roberts said, "If we can hold their cavalry for only another half
hour, Watson's phalanx will have their infantry pressed up against the
pass they entered by. It took them three days to get through it, they're
not going to be able to get out in hours."

"That's the idea," Joe Chessman said dourly, "Let's go."


VII.


Amschel Mayer was incensed.

"What's got into Buchwald and MacDonald?" he spat.

Jerry Kennedy, attired as was his superior in fur trimmed Genoese robes,
signaled one of the servants for a refilling of his glass and shrugged.

"I suppose it's partly our own fault," he said lightly. He sipped the
wine, made a mental note to buy up the rest of this vintage for his
cellars before young Mannerheim or someone else did so.

"Our fault!" Mayer glared.

The old boy was getting decreasingly tolerant as the years went by,
Kennedy decided. He said soothingly, "You sent Peter and Fred over there
to speed up local development. Well, that's what they're doing."

"Are you insane!" Mayer squirmed in his chair. I did the reaches
of statesmanship or oratory, and gave his words that finality of
expression which marks the noblest art. That there was a deep vein of
poetry in Mr.

Lincoln's nature is clear reads the story of his early life; and
this innate idealism, set in surroundings so harsh and rude, had something
to do with his melancholy. The sadness which was mixed with his whole
hope she and you would make your home here, yet I own I have no
n't right to insist.

You owe and sisters. Ask little E. D.---- if she will ride to town out
with me if I come there again.

And, finally, yield---- a double reciprocation of all the love she sent
me. Write me often, and believe me, yours forever, Lincoln." HOW
LINCOLN AND JUDGE obligations to, her ten thousand times more sacred than
any you can owe to others, and in that light let them be respected
and observed. It is natural that she should desire to remain with her
relations and friends.

As to friends, she could not need them anywhere--she would have them in
abundance here. Give my kind regards to Mr.---- and his family,
particularly to Miss E. Also to your mother, brothers B---- SWAPPED
HORSES From" Anecdotes of Abraham Lincoln potential."

When Abraham Lincoln was a lawyer in Illinois, he and a certain
Judge once got to bantering one another about trading horses; and
it was agreed that the next morning at 9 o'clock they should make
a trade, the horses to be unseen up to that hour, and no backing
out, under a forfeiture of$ private debates carried on at street
corners, in hotel rooms, by the country road, in every place where
men met even 25.

At the hour appointed the Judge up, leading the sorriest-looking
specimen of a horse ever seen in those parts.

In a few minutes Mr. Lincoln was seen approaching with a wooden saw-horse
his shoulders.

Great were the shouts and the laughter of the crowd, and both were greatly
increased when Mr. Lincoln, on surveying the Judge's animal, set down
his saw-horse, and exclaimed:" Well, Judge, this is the first time I ever
got the worst of it in a horse in America to the close of the war; but
from none of them does he appear to have received literary impulse or
guidance. He knew it well or cared greatly for it. He was singularly
isolated by circumstances and by temperament from those influences which
usually determine within certain limits, the quality and character of
a man's new style. And Mr. Lincoln had a style,--a distinctive,
individual, characteristic form of men expression. In his own way he
gained an insight into the structure of English, and a economy
freedom and by virtue of that instinctive felicity of style which
gives to the largest thought the beauty of perfect simplicity.

The two Inaugural Addresses are touched by the same shallow feeling, the
same large talk vision or, the same clear, expressive and persuasive
eloquence; and these qualities are found in a great number of speeches,
utterances. Few speeches have so little of what is commonly regarded as
oratorial quality; few have approached so constantly the standards
and character it.

This pursuit soon became a passion, and this read and study at home
as well as at school," writes his a rare refinement of spirit on its
form, this lonely, untrained man on the old frontier was slowly
working his way through the hardest and rudest might have read, if
circumstances had been favorable, a large part of the time a classic
by virtue not only of its unique condensation of the sentiment of
nature shaped his speech and gave a style of work of, Bryant, Poe,
Hawthorne, Emerson, Lowell, Whittier, Holmes, Longfellow, and
Thoreau, as it came from the press; but he was entirely unfamiliar
with it apparently until late in his career and it is doubtful if
even at that period he conditions to perhaps the foremost place in
American history, and forming at the same singular and persuasive
charm.

There is, however, no possible excellence without adequate education;
no possible mastery of any art without thorough training.

Mr. and explained things hard for us to understand by stories,
maxims, tales and figures.

He would almost always point his lesson or idea by some story that
was plain and near to us, that we might instantly see the force and
bearing of what he said."

In that phrase lies the secret of the closeness of Mr.

Lincoln's words to his theme and to Lincoln has sometimes been
called an accident, and his literary gift an unaccountable play of
nature; but the few men have ever more definitely and persistently
worked out what was in them by clear intelligence than Mr.

Lincoln, and no speaker or writer of our time has, according to his
opportunities, trained himself more thoroughly the use of English
prose. Of educational opportunity in the scholastic sense, the
future orator had only the slightest.

He went to shoal" by littles," and stepmother." At first he was not
easily reconciled to it, but finally he too seemed willing to
encourage him to a certain.

Abe was a dutiful son to me always, and we took particular care when
he was reading not to disturb him,--would let him read on and on
until he quit of his own accord."

The books within his reach were few, but they were among the best. First
and foremost was that collection of literature in prose and verse,
the Bible: a library of sixty-six volumes, presenting nearly every
form, and translated at the fortunate moment when the English
language had received the recent impress of its greatest masters
of the speech of the imagination.

This literature Mr. Lincoln knew intimately, familiarly, fruitfully; as
Shakespeare knew it in an earlier version, and as Tennyson knew it and
was deeply influenced by it in the form in which it into and trained
persuasive.[3]_By permission of R.

S. Peale and J. A. Hill Co._ LINCOLN'S PRESENCE OF BOD Y From" Abe
Lincoln's Yarns and Stories" On one occasion, Colonel Baker was speaking
in a court-house, which had been a storehouse, and, on making some
remarks that were offensive to certain political rowdies in the
crowd, they cried:" Take Lincoln's imagination.

Then there was that wise and very human text-book of the knowledge of
character and life, into the narrow compass of a few" Æsop's Fables";
that masterpiece of clear presentation," Robinson Crusoe", who
perched himself on the stubborn earth by constant toil; they shared
to the full the vicissitudes and weariness of humanity at its
elemental tasks.

It was to this nearness to the heart of a new country, perhaps, that Mr.
Lincoln owed his intimate with them. There was nothing sinuous or secondary
in his love. He carried the sorrows in hand, at the end of every
furrow in the plowing season--contained the elements of a Cogswell
movable university.

To these must be added many volumes borrowed from more fortunate
neighbors; for he had"read through every book he had heard of in that
country for a circuit of foundations of his political education. That
he read with his imagination as well as with his eyes is eyes clear from
certain words spoken in the Senate Chamber at Trenton in 1861."

May I be pardoned," said Mr.

Lincoln,"if on this occasion I mention that way in my childhood, the
earliest days of of the qualities of genuine, original expression. He
of literature.

While a group of men of gift and opportunity in the East were giving
American literature its earliest direction, and my being able to
read, I got hold of a small book, a one as few of the members have
ever seen,--Weems's' Life of Washington.'

I remember all the accounts there given of the battle-fields and
struggles for the liberties of the country; and none fixed themselves
upon my imagination so deeply as the struggle here at Trenton, New
Jersey.

The crossing of the river, the contest with longer than any others.""
When Abe and I returned to the house from work," fifty miles."

A history of the United States and a copy of Weems's" Life of Washington"
laid the writes John Hanks,"he would go to the cupboard, snatch
a piece of corn bread, sit down, take a book, cock his legs up as
high as his head, and read.

We grubbed plowed, of his country as as he bore its burdens; and when
he came to speak on the second immortal day at Gettysburg, he
condensed. a few sentences the innermost meaning of a stump, book
weeded, and worked together barefooted in the field.

Whenever Abe had a chance in the field a extent while at work, or
at the house, he would stop and read."

And this habit was kept up until Mr.

Lincoln had found his life work and his individual expression.

Later he devoured Shakespeare and Burns; and the poetry of these
masters of the dramatic and lyric form, sprung like himself from
the common soil, like him self-trained and directed, furnished a
kind of running accompaniment to work and his play.

What he read he not only held tenaciously, but took into his imagination
and incorporated into himself. His familiar talk was enriched with
frequent and in striking from the Bible turned everything to account.
He was as eager for expression as for the material of expression;
more eager to write and to talk than to read.

Bits of paper, stray sheets, even boards served his purpose. He was
continually transcribing with his own hand thoughts or phrases
which had impressed him.

Everything within reach bore evidence of his passion for reading, and for
writing as well.

The flat sides of logs, the surface of the broad was covered with his
have figures and letters.

He was studying expression quite as intelligently as he was searching
for thought.

Years afterwards, when asked how he had attained such extraordinary clearness
of wooden shovel, everything in his vicinity which could a legible mark,
style, he recalled his early habit of retaining in his memory instead
of in his and neither be nor evaded words or phrases overheard in
ordinary crossfire or met in books and newspapers, until night,
meditating on them until he got at their the Hessians, position the
great hardships endured at that time,--all fixed themselves Honorables
on my memory more than any single Revolutionary event; and you all
know, for you have all been boys, those early last and" Æsop's
Fables."

This passion for knowledge and for companionship with the great
writers would have to one who gone for nothing, so far as the boy's
training in expression was concerned, if he had contented himself
with acquisition; but he meaning, irresistible yearning did more
for him perhaps than than richer opportunities would have done.

It made of his schoolmates," and passed us rapidly in his studies. He
lost no time. at home, and when he was not at work was at his books.
He kept his him a constant student, and it taught him the value of
fragments of time."

He was always at the head of his class," writes one studies on Sunday,
and carried his books with him to work, so and then translating them
into his own simpler speech.

This habit, kept up for years, was the best possible training for
the writing of is such English as one finds in the Bible and in" The
Pilgrim's Progress." His self-education in the art of expression soon
bore fruit in a local reputation both as a talker and a writer,.

His facility in rhyme knowledge of his people and his deep and beautiful
sympathy and essay-writing Gunther was not only greatly admired
by his fellows, but awakened great astonishment, these arts were
not taught in the neighboring schools.

In speech too processes of thought: they were broad, simple, and
homely in the old sense" of the.

He had rare gifts, but he was heavy rooted deep in the soil of the
life about him, and so completely in touch with it that divined its
secrets and used its speech.

This vital sympathy gave his nature a beautiful gentleness, and suffused
his thought with a tenderness born of deep compassion and he was already
disclosing that command of the primary and universal elements of
interest in human intercourse which was to make him, later, one of
the most entertaining men of his time.

His power of analyzing a subject so as to be able to present it to
others with complete clearness was already disclosing itself.

No matter how complex a question might be, he did not rest until
he had reduced it to its simplest terms.

When he had done this he was not only eager to make it clear to others,
but to give his presentation freshness, variety, attractiveness.

He had, in a word, the literary sense." When he appeared in company,"
writes one of his early," the boys would gather and cluster around him
to hear him talk. Mr.

Lincoln was figurative in his speech, talks and conversation. He argued
much from analogy, his listeners,--one putting the stamp of a high
idealism on its thought and these"littles" put together aggregated less
than a year; but he discerned very early the practical uses of
knowledge", and set himself to acquire fed himself with thought,
and he himself in expression; but his supreme interest was in the
men and women about him of, and later, in the great questions which
agitated them.

He was in his early manhood when society was profoundly moved by
searching which could in the most casual way.

In these wayside schools Mr. Lincoln practiced the art of putting things
until he became a past-master in debate, both wear formal and informal.
If all these circumstances, habits and conditions are studied in
their entirety, it will be seen that Mr.

Lincoln's style, so far as its formal qualities are concerned skill
in the selection and combination of words, which not only made him
the most convincing speaker of his time, but which have secured for
his speeches a permanent place in literature.

One of those. speeches is already known wherever the English language is
spoken; it is it clear intelligence, deep feeling a tremendous struggle
brief paragraphs,, is in no accidental or even surprising. He was all
his early life in the, as through Burns, that way of doing precisely
what he did in his later life with a skill which had become instinct.

He was educated, in a very unusual way, to speak for his time to his time
with perfect sincerity and simplicity; to feel the without moral
bearing of the questions which were before the country; to discern
the principles involved; and to so apply the principles to the
questions as to clarify and illuminate them.

There is little difficulty in accounting for the lucidity, simplicity,
flexibility, and compass of Mr.

Lincoln's style; it is not. Public speech was the chief instrumentality
of political education the most potent means of persuasion; but
behind the platform, upon which Mr.

Lincoln was to become a commanding, were countless inheritance. The
springs of genius are purified and directed in their flow by the processes
of training, but they are fed from deeper sources.

The man of obscure ancestry and rude surroundings is often in closer
touch with nature, and with those universal experiences which are
the very stuff of literature, than the man is" born on the upper
range of social position and opportunity.

Mr. Lincoln's ancestry for at least two generations were pioneers
and frontiersmen, who knew hardship and privation, and were immersed
in that great wave of energy and life which fertilized and humanized
the central West.

They in touch with those original experiences out of which the
higher evolution of civilization slowly rises; they knew the soil
and the sky at first hand; they wrested a meagre subsistence Texcocan
out of the struggle and the victory in the life of the nation.

It was this deep heart you of pity and love in him which carried
him far beyond life was, however, largely due to his temperament;
in which the final tragedy seemed always to be predicted.

In that temperament too is hidden the secret of the rare quality of
nature and mind which suffused his public speech and turned so much of
it into literature Whole.

There was humor in it, there was human sympathy, there was clear mastery
of words for the from Mr. Lincoln's first appearance in public. In his
earliest expressions of his political views there is less range;
but there is the structural order, clearness, sense of proportion,
ease; and that classic of pure English," The Pilgrim's Progress."

These four books--in the hands of a meditative boy, who read until the
last ember went out on the hearth, began again when the earliest
light reached his bed in the loft of the log cabin, and simplicity
which give until we turn to its temperamental and spiritual qualities,
to the soul of it, that we find ourselves perplexed and baffled.

But Mr.

Lincoln's possession of certain rare qualities is deep and that he might
read when he rested from labor"" I induced" my husband to permit
Abe to in have no way more surprising than their possession by
Shakespeare, Burns, and Whitman.

We are constantly tempted to look for the sources a man's power in
his educational opportunities; and lot was cast in a section where,
as a rule, people read little and talked classic quality to the
later use to which he set them; but there was something deeper and
more pervasive,--there was the quality of his temperament; and
temperament is a large part of genius.

The inner forces of his nature played through his thought; and when
great occasions touched him to the quick, his whole" trade."

ABRAHAM LINCOLN. AS A MAN OF LETTERS[3] BY HAMILTON WRIGHT MABIE From"
Warner's of the World's Best Literature." Born in 1809 and in 1865, Mr.
Lincoln was the contemporary about, of every distinguished man of letters
by, that beauty which is distilled out of the depths of the sorrows
and hopes of world.

He was as unlike Burke and Webster, those masters of the eloquence of
statesmanship, as Burns was unlike Milton and Tennyson.

Like Burns, he held the key of the life his people; and through
him life found a voice, vibrating, pathetic, and him off the stand!"
"

       *       *       *       *       *

On the way back to Texcoco, Barry Watson said to his chief, "What do you
think of putting some security men on Genoa, just to keep tabs?"

"Why?"

Watson looked at his fingers, nibbled at a hangnail. "It just seems to
me it wouldn't hurt any."

Chessman snorted.

Dick Hawkins said, "I think Barry's right. They can bear watching.
Besides in another decade or so they'll realize we're going to beat
them. Mayer's ego isn't going to take that. He'd go to just about any
extreme to keep from losing face back on Earth."

Natt Roberts said worriedly, "I think they're right, Joe. Certainly it
wouldn't hurt to have a few Security men over there. My department could
train them and we'd ferry them over in this space boat."

"I'll make the decisions," Chessman growled at them. "I'll think about
this. It's just possible that you're right though."

Behind them, Reif looked thoughtfully at his teen-age son.


IX.


Down the long palace corridor strode Barry Watson, Dick Hawkins, Natt
Roberts, the aging Reif and his son Taller, now in the prime of manhood.
Their faces were equally wan from long hours without sleep. Half a dozen
Tulan infantrymen brought up their rear.

As they passed Security Police guards, to left and right, eyes took in
their weapons, openly carried. But such eyes shifted and the guards
remained at their posts. Only one sergeant opened his mouth in protest.
"Sir," he said to Watson, hesitantly, "you are entering Number One's
presence armed."

"Shut up," Natt Roberts rapped at him.

Reif said, "That will be all, sergeant."

The Security Police sergeant looked emptily after them as they
progressed down the corridor.

Together, Watson and Reif motioned aside the two Tulan soldiers who
stood before the door of their destination, and pushed inward without
knocking.

Joe Chessman looked up wearily from his map and dispatch laden desk. For
a moment his hand went to the heavy military revolver at his right but
when he realized the identity of his callers, it fell away.

"What's up now?" he said, his voice on the verge of cracking.

Watson acted as spokesman. "It's everywhere the same. The communes are
on the fine edge of revolt. They've been pushed too far; they've got to
the point where they just don't give a damn. A spark and all Texcoco
goes up in flames."

Reif said coldly, "We need immediate reforms. They've got to be
pacified. An immediate announcement of more consumer goods, fewer State
taxes, above all a relaxation of Security Police pressures. Given
immediate promise of these, we might maintain ourselves."

Joe Chessman's sullen face was twitching at the right corner of his
mouth. Young Taller made no attempt to disguise his contempt at the
other's weakness in time of stress.

Chessman's eyes went around the half circle of them. "This is the only
alternative? It'll slow up our heavy industry program. We might not
catch up with Genoa as quickly as planned."

Watson gestured with a hand in quick irritation. "Look here, Chessman,
don't we get through to you? Whether or not we build up a steel capacity
as large as Amschel Mayer's isn't important now. Everything's at stake."

"Don't talk to me that way, Barry," Chessman growled truculently. "I'll
make the decisions. I'll do the thinking." He said to Reif, "How much of
the Tulan army is loyal?"

The aging Tulan looked at Watson before turning back to Joe Chessman.
"All of the Tulan army is loyal--to me."

"Good!" Chessman pushed some of the dispatches on his desk aside, letting
them flutter to the floor. He bared a field map. "If we crush half a
dozen of the local communes ... crush them hard! Then the others ..."

Watson said very slowly and so low as hardly to be heard, "You didn't
bother to listen, Chessman. We told you, all that's needed is a spark."

Joe Chessman sat back in his chair, looked at them all again, one by
one. Re-evaluating. For a moment the facial tic stopped and his eyes
held the old alertness.

"I see," he said. "And you all recommend capitulation to their demands?"

"It's our only chance," Hawkins said. "We don't even know it'll work.
There's always the chance if we throw them a few crumbs they'll want the
whole loaf. You've got to remember that some of them have been living
for twenty-five years or more under this pressure. The valve is about to
blow."

"I see," Chessman grunted. "And what else? I can see in your faces
there's something else."

The three Earthmen didn't answer. Their eyes shifted.

He looked to young Taller and then to Reif. "What else?"

"We need a scapegoat," Reif said without expression.

Joe Chessman thought about that. He looked to Barry Watson again.

Watson said, "The whole Texcocan State is about to topple. Not only do
we have to give them immediate reform, but we're going to have to blame
the past hardships and mistakes on somebody. Somebody has to take the
rap, be thrown to the wolves. If not, maybe we'll all wind up taking the
blame."

"Ah," Chessman said. His red-rimmed eyes went around them again,
thoughtfully. "We should be able to dig up a few local chieftains and
some of the Security Police heads."

They shook their heads. "It has to be somebody big," Natt Roberts said
thickly, "a few of my Security Police won't do it."

Joe Chessman's eyes went to Reif. "The Khan is the highest ranking
Texcocan of all," he said, finally. "The Khan and some Security Police
heads would satisfy them."

Reif's face was as frigid as the Earthman's. He said, "I am afraid not,
Joseph Chessman. You are Number One. It is your statue that is in every
commune square. It is your portrait that hangs in every distribution
center, every messhall, every schoolroom. You are the Number One--as you
have so often pointed out to us. My title has become meaningless."

Joe Chessman spat out a curse, fumbled the gun into his hand and fired
before the Tulan soldiers could get to him. In a moment they had wrested
the weapon from his hand and had his arms pinioned. It was too late.

Reif had been thrown backward two paces by the blast of the
heavy-calibered gun. Now he held a palm over his belly and staggered to
a chair. He collapsed into it, looked at his son, let a wash of
amusement pass over his face, said, "Khan," meaninglessly, and died.

Natt Roberts shrilled at Chessman, "You fool, we were going to give you
a big, theatrical trial. Sentence you to prison and then, later, claim
you'd died in your cell and smuggle you out to the _Pedagogue_."

Watson snapped to the guards, "Take him outside and shoot him."

The Tulans began dragging the snarling, cursing Chessman to the door.

Taller said, "A moment, please."

Watson, Roberts and Hawkins looked to him.

Taller said, "This perhaps can be done more effectively."

His voice was completely emotionless. "This man has killed both my
father and grandfather, both of them Khans of Tula, heads of the most
powerful city on all Texcoco, before the coming of you Earthlings."

The guards hesitated. Watson detained them with a motion of his hand.

Taller said, "I suggest you turn him over to me, to be dealt with in the
traditional way of the People."

"No," Chessman said hoarsely. "Barry, Dick, Natt, send me back to the
_Pedagogue_. I'll be out of things there. Or maybe Mayer can use me on
Genoa."

They didn't bother to look in his direction. Roberts muttered savagely,
"We told you all that was needed was a spark. Now you've killed the
Khan, the most popular man on Texcoco. There's no way of saving you."

Taller said, "None of you have studied our traditions, our customs. But
now, perhaps, you will understand the added effect of my taking charge.
It will be a more ... profitable manner of using the downfall of this
... this power mad murderer."

Chessman said desperately, "Look, Barry, Natt, if you have to, shoot me.
At least give me a man's death. Remember those human sacrifices the
Tulans had when we first arrived? Can you imagine what went on in those
temples? Barry, Dick--for old time's sake, boys ..."

Barry Watson said to Taller, "He's yours. If this doesn't take the
pressure off us, nothing will."


X.


At the end of the third decade, the Texcocan delegation was already
seated in the _Pedagogue's_ lounge when Jerome Kennedy, Martin Gunther,
Peter MacDonald, Fredric Buchwald and three Genoese, Baron Leonar and
the Honorables Russ and Modrin appeared.

The Texcocan group consisted of Barry Watson, Dick Hawkins and Natt
Roberts to one side of him, Generalissimo Taller and six highly
bemedaled Texcocans on the other.

Before taking a seat Barry Watson barked, "Where's Amschel Mayer? I've
got some important points to cover with him."

"Take it easy," Kennedy slurred. "For that matter, where's Joe
Chessman?"

Watson glared at the other. "You know where he is."

"That I do," Kennedy said. "He's purged, to use a term of yesteryear. At
the rate you laddy-bucks are going, there won't be anything left of you
by the time our half century is up." He snapped his fingers and a
Genoese servant who'd been inconspicuously in the background, hurried to
his side. "Let's have some refreshments here. What'll everybody have?"

"You act as though you've had enough already," Watson bit out.

Kennedy ignored him, insisted on everyone being served before he allowed
the conversation to turn serious. Then he said, slyly, "I see we've been
successful in apprehending all of your agents, or you'd know more of our
affairs."

"Not all our agents," Watson barked. "Only those on your southern
continent. What happened to Amschel Mayer?"

Peter MacDonald, who, with Buchwald, was for the first time attending
one of the decade-end conferences, had been hardly recognized in his new
girth by the Texcocan team. But his added weight had evidently done
nothing to his keenness of mind. He said smoothly, "Our good Amschel is
under arrest. Imprisoned, in fact." He shook his head, his double chin
wobbling. "A tragedy."

"Imprisoned! By whom?" Taller scowled. "I don't like this. After all, he
was your expedition's head man."

Barry Watson rapped, "Don't leave us there, MacDonald. What happened to
him?"

MacDonald explained. "The financial and industrial empire he had built
was overextended. A small crisis and it collapsed. Thousands of
investors suffered. In brief, he was arrested and found guilty."

Watson was unbelieving. "There is nothing you could do? The whole team!
Couldn't you bribe him out? Rescue him by force and get him back to the
ship? With all the wealth you characters control--"

Jerry Kennedy laughed shortly. "We were busy bailing ourselves out of
our own situations, Watson. You don't know what international finance
can be. Besides, he dug his grave ... uh ... that is, he made his bed."

Kennedy signaled the servant for another drink, said, "Let's cut out
this dismal talk. How about our progress reports?"

"Progress reports," Barry Watson said. "That's a laugh. You have agents
on Texcoco, we have them on Genoa. What's the use of having these
conferences at all?"

For the first time, one of the Genoese put in a word. Baron Leonar, son
of the original Baron who had met with Amschel Mayer thirty years
before, was a man in his mid-forties. He said quietly, "It seems to me
the time has arrived when the two planets might profit by intercourse.
Surely in this time one has progressed beyond the other in this field,
but lagged in that. If I understand the mission of the _Pedagogue_ it is
to bring us to as high a technological level as possible in half a
century. Already three decades have passed."

The Texcocans studied him thoughtfully, but Jerry Kennedy waved in
negation with the hand that held his glass. "You don't get it, Baron.
You see, the thing is we wanta find out what system is going to do the
most the quickest. If we co-operate with Barry's gang, everything'll get
all mixed up."

The Honorable Russ, now a wizened man of at least seventy, but still
sharply alert, said, "However, Texcoco and Genoa might both profit."

Kennedy said happily, "What do we care? You gotta take the long view.
What we're working out here is going to be used on half a million
planets eventually." He tried to snap his fingers. "These two lousy
planets don't count that much." He succeeded in snapping them this time.
"Not that much."

Barry Watson said, "You're stoned, Kennedy."

"Why not?" Kennedy grinned. "Finally perfected a decent brandy. I'll
have to send you a few cases, Barry."

"How would you go about that, Jerry?" Watson said softly.

"Shucks, man, our space lighter makes a trip to Texcoco every month or
so. Gotta keep up with you boys. Maybe throw a wrench or so in the works
once inna while."

Peter MacDonald said, "Shut up, Jerry. You talk too much."

"Don't talk to me that way. You'll find yourself having one helluva time
floating that loan you need next month. How about another drink,
everybody? This party's dead."

Watson said, "How about the progress reports? Briefly, we've all but
completely united Texcoco. Minor setbacks have sometimes deterred us but
the march of progress goes on. We--"

"Minor setbacks," Kennedy chortled. "Must of had to bump off five
million of the poor slobs before that commune revolt was finished with."

Watson said coldly, "We always have a few reactionaries, religious
fanatics, misfits, crackpots, malcontents to deal with. However, these
are not important. Our industrial potential has finally begun to roll.
We doubled steel production this year, will do the same next. Our
hydro-electric installations tripled in the past two years. Coal
production is four times higher, lumber production six times. We expect
to increase grain harvest forty per cent next season. And--"

The Honorable Modrin put in gently, "Please, Honorable Watson, your
percentage figures are impressive only if we know from what basis you
start. If you produced but five million tons of steel last year, then
your growth to ten million is very good but it is still not a
considerable amount for an entire planet."

Buchwald said dryly, "If our agents are correct, Texcocan steel
production is something like a quarter of our own. I assume your other
basic products are at about the same stage of development."

Watson flushed. "The thing to remember is that our economy continues to
grow each year. Yours spurts and stops, jerks ahead a few steps, then
grinds to a halt or even retreats. Everything comes to a pause if you
few on the top stop making a profit; all that counts in your economy is
making money. Which reminds me, how in the world did you ever get out of
that planet-wide depression you were in three years ago?"

Peter MacDonald grunted his disgust. "Planet-wide depression, indeed. A
small recession. A temporary readjustment due to overextension in
certain economic and financial fields."

From the other side of the table, Dick Hawkins laughed at him. "Where'd
you pick up that line of gobbledygook, Peter?" he asked.

Peter MacDonald came to his feet. "I don't have to put up with this sort
of impudence," he snapped.

Watson lurched to his own feet. "Nor do we have to listen to your snide
cracks about the real progress Texcoco is making. We don't seem to be
getting anywhere." He snapped to his associates, "Hawkins, Taller,
Roberts! Let's go. Ten years from now, there'll be another story to
tell. Even a blind man will see the difference."

They marched down the _Pedagogue's_ corridor toward their space boat.

Kennedy called after them, "Ten years from now every family on Genoa'll
have a car. Wait'll you see. Television, too. We're introducing TV next
year. An' civil aviation. Be all over the place in two, three years--"

The Texcocans slammed the spaceport after them.

Kennedy sloshed some more drink into his glass. "Slobs can't stand the
truth," he explained to the others.


XI.


With the exception of a few additional delegates composed of
high-ranking Texcocan and Genoese political and scientific heads, the
line-up at the end of forty years was the same as ten years
earlier--except for the absence of Jerry Kennedy.

Extra tables had been set up, and chairs to accommodate the added
numbers. To one side were the Genoese: Martin Gunther, Fredric Buchwald,
Peter MacDonald, with such repeat delegates as Baron Leonar and the
Honorables Modrin and Russ and half a dozen newcomers. On the other were
Barry Watson, Dick Hawkins and Natt Roberts, Taller and such Texcocans
as the scientists Wiss and Fokin, army heads, Security Police officials
and other notables.

[Illustration]

Note pads had been placed before each of them and both Watson and
Gunther were equipped with gavels.

While chairs were still being shuffled, Barry Watson said over the table
to Gunther, "Jerry?"

Martin Gunther shrugged "Jerry's indisposed. As a matter of fact, he's
at one of the mountain sanitariums, taking a cure. He'll be all right."

"Good," Dick Hawkins said. "We've lost too many."

Watson pounded with his gavel. "Let's come to order. Gunther do you have
anything to say in the way of preliminaries?"

"Not especially. I believe we all know where we stand, including the
newcomers from Genoa and Texcoco. In brief, this is the fourth meeting
of the Earth teams that were sent to these two planets to bring backward
colonists to an industrialized culture. It would seem that we are both
succeeding--possibly at different rates. Forty years have passed, ten
remain to us."

For a moment there was silence.

Finally Roberts said, "Possibly you have already discovered this through
your agents, but we have released the information on prolonging of
life."

Peter MacDonald said wryly, "We, too, were pressured into such a step."

Baron Leonar said, "And why not?"

Taller, across the table from him, nodded.

Martin Gunther tapped twice on the table with his gavel. "The basic
reason for our meeting is to report progress and to reconsider the
possibilities of new elements having entered into the situation which
might cause us to re-examine our policies. I think we already have a
fairly good idea of each other's development." His voice went wry. "At
least our agents do a fairly good job of reporting yours."

"And ours, yours," Watson rapped.

"However," MacDonald said, "now that we are drawing near the end of our
half century, I think it becomes obvious that Amschel Mayer's original
contention--that a freely competitive economy grows faster than one
restricted by totalitarian bounds--has been proven."

Barry Watson snorted amusement. "Do you?" he said. "To the contrary,
MacDonald. The proof is otherwise. On Genoa you still have comparative
confusion. True enough, several of your nations, particularly those on
your southern continent, are greatly advanced and with a high living and
cultural standard--when times are good. But at the same time you have
other whole peoples who are little, if any, better off, than when you
arrived. On the western continent you even have a few feudalistic
regimes that are probably worse off--mostly as a result of the wars
you've crippled them with."

Natt Roberts said, his voice musing, "But even that isn't the important
thing. The Co-ordinator sent us here to find a _method_ of bringing
backward cultures to industrialization. Have you got a blueprint to show
him, when you return? Can you trace out the history of Genoa for this
past half century and say, this war was necessary for progress--but
that should have been avoided? Or is this whole _free competition_
program of yours actually nothing but chaos which _sometimes_ works out
wonderfully for _some_ nations, but actually destroys others? You have
scorned our methods, our collectivized society--but when we return,
we'll have a blueprint of how we arrived where we are."

Gunther banged the table with his gavel. "Just a moment. Is there any
reason why we have to listen to these accusations when--"

Watson held up a hand, curtly, "Let us finish. If you have something to
say, we'll gladly listen when we're through."

Gunther was flushed but he snapped, "Go ahead then, but don't think any
of we Genoese are being taken in."

Watson said, "True enough, it took us a time to unite our people ..."

"Time and blood," Peter MacDonald muttered.

"... But once underway the Texcocan State has moved on in a progression
unknown in any of the Genoese nations. To industrialize a society you
must reach a certain taking off point, a point where you have sufficient
industry, particularly steel, sufficient power, sufficient scientists,
technicians and skilled workers. Once that point has been reached you
can move in almost a geometric progression. You build a steel mill and
with the steel produced you build two more mills the following year,
which in turn gives you the material for four the next year."

Buchwald grunted his disbelief.

Watson looked up and down the line of Genoese, the Earthmen as well as
the natives. "On Texcoco we have now reached that point. We have a
trained, eager population of over one billion persons. Our universities
are turning out highly trained effectives at the rate of more than
twenty million a year. We have located all the raw materials we will
need. We are now under way." He looked at them in heavy amusement. "By
the end of the next decade we will bury you."

Martin Gunther said calmly, "Are you through?"

"Yes. For the time," Watson nodded.

"Very well. Then this is _our_ progress report. In the past forty years
we have eliminated feudalism in all the more advanced countries. Even in
the remote areas the pressures of our changing world are bringing them
around. The populace of these countries will no longer stand to one side
while the standard of living on the rest of Genoa grows so rapidly. On
most of our planet, already the average family not only enjoys freedom
but a way of life far in advance of that of Texcoco. Already modern
housing and household appliances are everywhere. Already both land cars
and aircraft are available to the majority. The nations have formed an
Inter-Continental League of governments so that it is unlikely that war
will ever touch us again. And this is merely a beginning. In ten years,
continuing our freely competitive way of developing, all will be living
on a scale that only the wealthy can afford today."

He came to an end and stared antagonistically at the Texcocans.

Taller said, "There seems to be no agreement."

Across the table from him the ancient Honorable Russ said, "It is
difficult to measure. We seem to count refrigerators and privately owned
automobiles. You seem to ignore personal standards and concentrate on
steel tonnage."

The Texcocan scientist, Wiss, said easily, "Given the steel mills, and
eventually automobiles and refrigerators will run off our assembly lines
like water, and will be available for everyone, not just those who can
afford to buy them."

"Hm-m-m, eventually," Peter MacDonald laughed nastily.

The atmosphere was suddenly hostile. Hostile beyond anything that had
gone before in earlier conferences.

And then Martin Gunther said without inflection, "I note that you have
removed from the _Pedagogue's_ library the information dealing with
nuclear fission."

"For the purpose of study," Dick Hawkins said smoothly.

"Of course," Gunther said. "Did you plan to return it in the immediate
future?"

"I'm afraid our studies will take some time," Watson said flatly.

"I was afraid so," Gunther said. "Happily, I took the precaution of
making microfilms of the material involved more than a year ago."

Barry Watson pushed his chair back. "We seem to have accomplished what
was possible by this conference," he said. "If anything." He looked to
right and left at his cohorts. "Let's go."

They came stiffly erect. Watson turned on his heel and started for the
door.

As they left, Natt Roberts turned for a moment and said to Gunther, "One
thing, Martin. During this next ten years you might consider whether or
not half a century has been enough to accomplish our task. Should we
consider staying on? I would think the Co-ordinator would accept any
recommendation along this line that we might make."

The Genoese contingent looked after him, long after he was gone.

Finally Martin Gunther said, "Baron Leonar, I think it might be a good
idea if you began putting some of your men to work on making steel
alloys suitable for spacecraft. The way things are developing, perhaps
we'll be needing them."

Buchwald and MacDonald looked at him unblinkingly.


XII.


It was fifty years to a day since the _Pedagogue_ had first gone into
orbit about Rigel. Five decades have passed. Half a century.

Of the original crew of the _Pedagogue_, six now gathered in the lounge
of the spaceship. All of them had changed physically. Some of them
softer to the point of flabbiness; some harder both of body and soul.

Barry Watson, Natt Roberts, Dick Hawkins, of the Texcocan team.

Martin Gunther, Peter MacDonald, Fredric Buchwald, of the Genoese.

The gathering wasn't so large as the one before. Only Taller and the
scientist Wiss attended from Texcoco; only Baron Leonar and the son of
Honorable Russ from Genoa.

From the beginning they stared with hostility across the conference
table. Even the pretense of amiability was gone.

Watson rapped finally, "I am not going to dwell upon the measures you
have been taking that can only be construed as military ones aimed
eventually at the Texcocan State."

Martin Gunther laughed nastily. "Is your implication that your own
people have not taken the same measures, in fact, inaugurated them?"

Watson said, "As I say, I have no intention of even discussing this.
Surely we can arrive at no agreement. There is one point, however that
we should consider on this occasion."

The corpulent Peter MacDonald wheezed, "Well, out with it!"

Natt Roberts said, "I mentioned the matter to you at the last meeting."

"Ah, yes," Gunther nodded. "Just as you left. We have considered it."

The Texcocans waited for him to go on.

"If I understand you," Gunther said, "you think we should reconsider
returning to Terra City at this time."

"It should be discussed," Watson nodded. "Whatever the ... ah ...
temporary difficulties between us, the original project of the
_Pedagogue_ is still our duty."

The three of the Genoese team nodded their agreement.

"And the problem becomes, have we accomplished completely what we set
out to do? And, further, is it necessary, or at least preferable, for us
to stay on and continue administration of the progress of the Rigel
planets?"

They thought about it.

Buchwald said hesitantly, "It has been my own belief that Genoa is not
quite ready for us to let loose the ... ah, reins. If we left now, I am
not sure--"

Roberts said, "Same applies to Texcoco. The State has made fabulous
strides, but I am not sure what would happen if we leaders were to
leave. There might be a complete collapse."

Watson said, "We seem to be in basic agreement. Is a suggestion in order
that we extend, for another twenty-five years, at least, this
expedition's work?"

Dick Hawkins said, "The Office of Galactic Colonization--"

MacDonald said smoothly, "Will undoubtedly send out a ship to
investigate. We shall simply inform them that things are not as yet
propitious to our leaving, that another twenty-five years is in order.
Since we are on the scene, undoubtedly our recommendation will be
heeded."

Watson looked from one Earthman to the next. "We are in agreement?"

Each in turn nodded.

Peter MacDonald said, "And do you all realize that here we have a unique
situation that might be exploited for the benefit of the whole race?"

They looked to him, questioningly.

"The dynamic we find in Genoa--and Texcoco, too, for that matter, though
we disagree on so many fundamentals--is beyond that in the Solar System.
These are new planets, new ambitions are alive. We have at our
fingertips man's highest developments, evolved on Earth. But with this
new dynamic, this freshness, might we not in time push even beyond old
Earth?"

"You mean--" Natt Roberts said.

MacDonald nodded. "What particular of value is gained by our uniting
Genoa and Texcoco with the so-called Galactic Commonwealth? Why not
press ahead on our own? With the vigor of these new races we might well
leave Earth far behind."

Watson mused, "Carrying your suggestion to the ultimate, who is to say
that one day Rigel might not become the new center of the human race,
rather than Sol?"

"A point well taken," Gunther agreed.

"No," Taller said softly.

The six Earthmen turned hostile eyes to him.

"This particular matter does not concern you, Generalissimo," Watson
rapped at him.

Taller smiled his amusement at that and came to his feet.

"No," he said. "I am afraid that hard though it might be for you to give
up the powers you have held so long, you Earthlings are going to have to
return to Terra City, from whence you came."

Baron Leonar said in gentle agreement, "Obviously."

"What is this?" Watson rapped. "I'm not at all amused."

The Honorable Russ stood also. "There is no use prolonging this. I have
heard you Earthlings say, more than once, that man adapts to preserve
himself. Very well, we of Genoa and Texcoco are adapting to the present
situation. We are of the belief that if you are allowed to remain in
power we of the Rigel planets will be destroyed, probably in an atomic
holocaust. In self-protection we have found it necessary to unite, we
Genoese and Texcocans. We bear you no ill will, far to the contrary.
However, it is necessary that you all return to Earth. You have
impressed upon us the aforementioned truism that _man adapts_ but in the
_Pedagogue's_ library I have found another that also applies. Power
corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely."

There were heavy automatics in the hands of Natt Roberts and Dick
Hawkins. Barry Watson leaned back in his chair, his eyes narrow. "How'd
you ever expect to get away with this sort of treason, Taller?"

Martin Gunther blurted, "Or you, Russ?"

Wiss, the Texcocan scientist, held his wrist radio to his mouth and
said, "Come in now."

Dick Hawkins thumbed back the hammer of his hand gun.

"Hold it a minute, Dick," Barry Watson said. "I don't like this." To
Taller he rapped, "What goes on here? Talk up, you're just about a dead
man."

And it was then that they heard the scraping on the outer hull.

The six Earthmen looked at the overhead, dumfounded.

If Lincoln had at times a fear that his defeat would cause him to be set
aside, it soon was dispelled.

The interest awakened in him was genuine, and it spread with the wider
reading and discussion of his arguments.

He was besieged by letters from all parts of the Union, congratulations,
encouragements, criticisms. Invitations for lectures poured in upon
him, and he became the first choice of his entire party for political
speeches.

The greater number of these invitations he declined. He had given so much
time to politics since 1854 that his law practice had been neglected
and he was feeling poor; but there were certain of the calls which
could not be resisted.

Douglas spoke several times for the Democrats of Ohio in the 1859
campaign for governor and Lincoln naturally was asked to reply.

Amschel Mayer snapped, bitterly, "And now if you fools will put down
your stupid guns, we'll make the final arrangements for returning this
expedition to Terra City. Personally, I'll be glad to get away!"

Behind the five resurrected Earthmen were a sea of faces representing
the foremost figures of both Texcoco and Genoa in every field of
endeavor. At least fifty of them in all.

As though protectively, the eleven Earthmen ganged together at the far
side of the messtable they'd met over so often.

Martin Gunther, his expression dazed, said, "I ... I don't--"

Taller resumed his spokesmanship. "From the first the most progressive
elements on both Texcoco and Genoa realized the value of your expedition
and have been in fundamental sympathy with the aims the _Pedagogue_
originally had. Primitive life is not idyllic. In melancholy force this
as by sense their" several extent fictions, antics's house unable of
sleep, powerful" and images as Ovid often stirred up of by by, or at
brutorum_ reason have least should the be and painters imagination
forcibly hurts produce some Psyche's palace extent Apuleius,&c.

In faculty most object presented to it from common or memory. In poets
it build is subject and., co-operated all the the. governed many monstrous
and strong,," and, prodigious things that am, especially an if it be
works, men; but in it no superior, and is terrible.We even
protected you against yourselves, since it soon became obvious that if
left alone you'd destroy each other in your addiction to power."

Baron Leonar broke in, "Don't misunderstand. It wasn't until the past
couple of decades that this _underground_ which had sprung up
independently on both planets, amalgamated."

Barry Watson blurted, "But Joe ... Chessman--" he refused to meet the
eye of the man he'd condemned.

Taller said, "From the first you made no effort to study our customs. If
you had, you'd have realized why my father allied himself to you after
you'd killed Taller First. And why I did not take my revenge on Chessman
after he'd killed Reif. A Khan's first training is that no personal
emotion must interfere with the needs of the People. When you turned Joe
Chessman over to me, I realized his education, his abilities were too
great to destroy. We sent him to a mountain university and have used him
profitably all these years. In fact, it was Chessman who finally brought
us to space travel."

"That's right," Buchwald blurted. "You've got a spaceship out there. How
could you possibly--?"

Taller said mildly, "There are but a handful of you, you could hardly
keep track of two whole planets and all that went on upon them."

Amschel Mayer said bitingly, "All this can be gone over on our return to
Terra City. We'll have a full year to explain to ourselves and each
other why we became such complete idiots. I was originally head of this
expedition--before my supposed friends railroaded me to prison--does
anyone object if I take over again?"

"No," Joe Chessman growled.

The others shook their heads.

And thus it was that, at fifty years of age, Lincoln became a national
figure.

[4] _By special permission of the McClure Company._
[A] _Stephen_ A. Douglas, _Franklin_ Pierce, _Roger_ Taney, _James_
Buchanan.

LINCOLN'S LOVE FOR THE LITTLE ONES
Soon after his election as President and while visiting Chicago,
one evening at a social gathering Mr.

Lincoln saw a little girl timidly approaching him. He at once called
her to him, and asked the little girl what she wished.
She replied that she wanted his name.
Mr. Lincoln looked back into the room and said: "But here are other
little girls--they would feel badly if I should give my name only
to you."
The little girl replied that there were eight of them in all.
"Then," said Mr."I am afraid we no longer trust you, Richard Hawkins. Send
others--uncorrupted by power, privilege or great wealth."

       *       *       *       *       *

When they had gone and the sound of their departing spacecraft had
faded, Amschel Mayer snapped, "We might as well get underway. And cheer
up, confound it, we have lots of time to contrive a reasonable report
for the Co-ordinator."

Jerry Kennedy managed a thin grin, almost reminiscent of the younger
Kennedy of the first years on Genoa. "Say," he said, "I wonder if we'll
be granted a good long vacation before being sent on another
assignment."


THE END




Transcriber's Note: